LETTERS OF Mounsieur de BALZAC. 1.2.3. and 4th parts.

Translated out of French into English.

BY Sr RICHARD BAKER Knight, and others.

Now collected into one Volume, with a methodicall table of all the letters.

LONDON, Printed for John Williams, and Francis Eaglesfield. At the Crown, and
Marigold in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1654.

portrait of Jean-Louis de Balzac LETTERS OF Mounseur de BALZAC, Translated
into English by Sr. RICHARD BAKER, and others.

LONDON. Printed for John Williams, and Francis E^glesfeild, at the Crown, and
Marigold in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1655.



To the Honorable the Lord OF NEVVBURGE, ONE OF HIS MAJESTY'S most honorable
Privy Council and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
MY Lord, I may perhaps be thought, besides the boldness, to be guilty of
absurdity, in offering a Translation to him who so exactly understands the
Original; and one who if he had a mind to see how it would look in English,
were able to set a much fairer gloss upon it, then I have done: yet my Lord,
this absurdity may have a good color; for it may not be unpleasing to you to
see your own perfection in the glass of another imperfection, seeing even the
best Diamonds seem to take a pleasure in having of foiles. Besides, I have my
choice of another color, for being to to pass a world of hazard in the
censure of the world, I am willing to pass the pikes at first, and account
this done, having once passed yours. And toward it, my Lord, I have two
comforts; one for the Reader, that the Authors gold is so much over weight,
that though much be lost in the melting, yet it holds out weight enough still,
to make it current: the other, for myself, that by this means I may have a
testimony remaining in the world, how much I honor you, and in how high a
degree I most affectionately am,

Your Lordships humble Servant RICHARD BAKER.

(...) TO THE LORD CARDINAL OF RICHELIEV.
My LORD,
I Here present you Mounsieur Balzac's Letters, which may well be termed new
ones, even after the eighth Edition; for though they have long since been in
possession of public favor, yet I may justly say, this is the first time
their Author has avouched them. The advantageous Judgment you have delivered
of him, and the ardor wherewith all France has followed your approbation, well
deserves his best endeavors toward the perfectionating so excellent things: I
have been solicitous to draw him to this labor, to the end the world might
know, that if I be not worthy the share I have in his respects, yet that I have
at least been wise enough to make right use of my good fortune, and to cause it
to become serviceable to the glory of my Country. But truly, were he master of
his body, or did his maladies afford him liberty of spirit, he would not suffer
any but himself to speak in this cause; and his pen performing no slight acts,
would have consecrated his own labors, and the wonders they have produced. But
since evils have no prefixed time of durance, and in that all the good interims
which hereafter may befall him, are wholly to be, employed in his Book, The
Prince; I esteemed it to small purpose to attend his health in this business,
and that it was now no longer any time to defer the purging of these curious
Letters from such blemishes as ill impressions had left upon them. They shall
therefore non appear in the parity wherein they were conceived, and with all
their natural ornaments: Besides, I have added diverse letters of his, not as
yet come to light, which may serve as a subject of greater satisfaction to all
men, and be as a recompense of the honor wherewith he has collected the
former. And truly (my Lord) had it been possible to place in the Frontispiece
of this Book, a more illustrous name then yours, or should Mounsieur de
Balzac's inclination and mine have been far from any such intention, yet
would not the order of things, or the law of decency have permitted any other
reflection, then what I now make: I speak not at this present, of that dazeling
greatness whereunto you are elevated, nor of that so rare and necessary
virtue, which rightly to recognize, the greatest King on earth has esteemed
himself not to be over able. I will only say, I had reason to submit an
eloquence produced in the shade, and formed in solitariness, to this other
eloquence quickened both with voice and action, causing you to reign in
sovereignity at all assemblies. Certainly, my Lord, you are more powerful by
this incomparable quality, then by the authority wherein the King has placed
you: The only accent of your voice has a hidden property, to charm all such as
hearken unto you; none can be possessed with any so wilful passions, who will
not be appeased by the reasons you propound; and after you have spoken, you
will at all times remain master of that part of man, no way subject to the
worlds order, and which has not any dependency upon lawful power, or
tyrannical usurpation. This is a truth, my Lord, as well known as your name,
and which you so solidly confirmed at the last assembly of the Notables; as
that in the great diversity of humors and judgments, whereof it was composed,
there was peradventure this only point well resolved on, That you are the most
eloquent man living. This being true, I can no way doubt, but the perusal of
this Book I offer unto you, will extraordinarily content you, and that you will
be pleased to retire thither, sometimes to recreate your spirits after
agitation, and to suspend those great thoughts, who have for their object the
good of all Europe. It is a book, my Lord, wherein you shall find no common
thing but the Title; (where entertaining some particular person) Mounsieur de
Balzac reads Lessons to all men; and where amidst the beauty of Complements
and dexterity of Jeasting, he often teaches of the most sublime point of
Philosophy: I mean not that wrangling part thereof which rejects necessary
verities, to seek after unprofitable ones, which cannot exercise the
understanding without provoking passions, nor speak of moderation without
distemper, and putting the soul into disorder: But of that, whereby Pericles
heretofore made himself master of Athens, and wherewith Epaminondas raised
himself to the prime place of Greece: which tempereth the manners of
particulars, regulateth the obligation of Princes, and necessarily brings
with it the felicity of all States where they command. This book will make it
apparent even to your enemies, that your life has been at all times equally
admirable, though not always alike glorious: How you have conserved the
opinion of your virtue, even in the time of your hardest fortunes, and how in
the greatest fury of the tempest, and in the most extreme violence of your
affairs, the integrity of your actions has never been reduced to the only
testimony of your conscience. To conclude, It is in this Book, my Lord, where I
suppose you will be pleased to read the presages of your present greatness,
and what has been foretold; not by Astrologicall Rules, or the aspect of some
Constellation, but by a true discourse founded upon the maxims of Reason, and
experience of things past; causing him to presume, that God has not conferred
such extraordinary endowments upon you, to be for ever encloistered within your
self: And that he has loved France better, then to deprive her of the good you
ought to procure her. But all these verities shall one day be comprised in that
work the King, by your mouth, my Lord, has commanded Mounsieur de Balzac to
undertake, and which one year of leisure will effect. There shall it be, where
he will cause all men to confess, that to have the pourtract of a perfect
Prince, the reign of so great a Monarch as ours, is to be attended; that the
Divine Providence never showed it self more apparently, then in the conduct of
his designs, and in the event of his enterprises; and how Heaven has so far
declared it self in his favor, that were his state assaulted on all sides, and
all ordinary means of defense should fail him; he has virtue sufficient to
save himself, and perform miracles. Now as you are the prime intelligence of
his Council, and your cogitations the first causes of the good resolutions
therein taken, you are not to doubt, my Lord, but you likewise possess the
principal place therein, after his Majesty; and that you participate more then
any other of his triumphs. There shall you be revenged of all those wretched
writings you have formerly slighted: There the spirits of all men shall be
satisfied in the justice of your deportments, and calumny it self will there be
so powerfully convinced, that to cry down so legal a government as yours, ill
affected Frenchmen, and those strangers enemies to this Crown, will find no
further pretext in affairs, nor credulity among men. And truly, when I (on the
one side) consider how fatal it is to those who govern, to be exposed to the
envy of great ones, and complaints of meaner persons, and how Public affairs
have this fatality, as how pure soever the administration of the rest be, they
still afford sufficient color to calumny, to disguise them and cause them to
appear unjust. And on the otherside: when I consider that to guide this State
is no less then to manage a body having no one sound part; and how there is no
sick person who does not sometimes murmr against his Physician; I dare be
confident (my Lord) that such a man as Monsieur de Balzac will not prove
unusefull unto you, and that the luster of your actions, and glory of your life
shall receive no diminution in his hands. I would say more, did I not fear to
disoblige him in commending him, or if I believed him to be so great a self
admirer as his enemies figure him unto us. But I who have sufficiently studied
him to know him, and who am acquainted with his most secret Inclinations, and
the most particular conceptions he has in his soul, and of a far different
opinion to theirs. I will therefore rest there (my Lord) and not to cause you
to loose more time, and to the end you may the sooner enjoy the entertainment,
this excellent Book prepares for you: I will satisfy my self in letting you
know, that I esteem not my self so unfortunate as formerly I did, since I have
happened upon so fair an occasion, to let you know that I am,

My Lord, Your thrice humble, and most obedient servant, SILBON.

THE PREFACE Upon the Letters of Mounsieur de BALZAC:
By Mounsieur de la MOTTE AIGRON.
I Doubt not but amongst those who shall see these Works some there are who
will esteem them worthy a more advantageous Title then that of Letters, as well
in regard of the greatness of those things therein frequently handled, as in
respect of the exactness wherewith they seem to have been composed: But as I
willingly excuse those, who with unapt complements imagine they have composed a
good Letter; nor do any more blame such as therein never digress from their
particular affairs; so must I likewise acknowledge, that such writings as
these, having not been made with any intention to be put in Print, the World
might well have passed without them: And that it is only allowed to the
Germans to give account to the age they live in, and to posterity forsooth,
concerning the affairs and fortunes of their particular families, and of the
silly acts of their Colleagues Truly it is an error to believe, that grave and
solemn subjects are to be banished out of all Letters, or that even eloquence
ought but slackly therein to appear; and that the Majesty of both these is
only reserved for Pulpits and Panegyric Orations; as though valor never
appeared save only in pitched Battles; and that in single Combats it were
lawful to run away, or that virtue therein were utterly unusefull, because it
has fewer witnesses, neither is so fully regarded: But besides that, we are no
longer in those times wherein the State government was publicly questioned,
where the Orators forced the Lieutenants general of armies to render account
of their several charges; and that consequently, there is no more any means
remaining to become eloquent in that kind: Yet are there reasons, whereby we
may understand the merit of Letters to be of no less regard then that of
Orations. Howbeit, if there be any necessity to find some difference between
these; this at least can neither be in regard of the dignity of the Subjects
the force of Reasons, the gracefulness of Discourses, nor in the sublimity of
Conceits. To speak truth, when I consider the Orations yet remaining among the
ruins of former ages, some whereof were publicly pronounced, others only
penned; I am so far from admiring any advantage they have over those Letters
now extant among us both of the same Authors and Ages, as I do not so much as
wonder at all, how the first having been armed with discourse and voice,
together with the gesture and motion of the body, have produced such prodigious
effects as we all know and have so often, as it were by main force, extorted
the consents of all hearers; yet the second, though they had not the like arms
and allurements have notwithstanding not been any way deficient. Those smooth
Exordiums whereby they prepare, and put themselves by easy accesses, as it
were into possession of the Readers, those straites and passages whereby they
conduct the spirits of men from pleasant to painful, and from grievous, to
gracious objects, to the end that having in a manner shaken and cast them out
of their former stations, they may afterward force them to fall on what side
they please. Surely all these advantages are so peculiar to Orations, as I
ingeniously confess, Letters do not so much as know what they mean. In these,
we enter at the first dash upon the matter, nor do we scarce at any time, quit
the same; the reasons go altogether alone without assistance, and all the
ornament allowed them, is only freedom of conceptions, the fecundity of
language, and that they pass not promiscuously. But as concerning the
Subjects, they are common to both kinds of writings, and it is an error to
imagine, there are some particular to the one, that the other cannot touch upon
the same without injury thereunto. Upon the matter, Panegyric discourses,
Apologies, Consultations, Judgments upon Moral actions, whether good or bad
opinions and censures upon occurrents of those which please, and those we ought
to detest, yea even indifferent accidents; briefly whatsoever may fall into
discourse, and under reason, are the objects of Letters: So we see, the
greatest and most important mysteries of our religion have been left unto us in
Letters. All the wisdom of the Pagans is contained in those of Seneca, and we
owe to those Cicero wrote to his friends, the knowledge of the secrets, and
certain inducements which caused the greatest revolutions the world has ever
known, to wit the shaking and subversion of the Roman Reipublicke, we are
therefore to confess Oratorical Treatises to have no other subject then
Letters: and that if there be any difference, it is none other then what is
observed between our ancient Seas, and those not discovered unto us till in our
fathers times. The latter are no less deep then the other; they are capable of
the like shipping; their ebbes, and floods are neither more just, nor less
uncertain; and all the difference discovered between them is only this, that
the winds toss not those in like sort as it does ours, and in that they are
seldom or never subject either to storms, or tempests. In like manner it
being within the power and capacity of Letters to treat of the same things, how
much more eminent and excellent soever one may conceive them to be then any
other kind of writings, yet do they not indeed receive those extraordinary
motions which appear in Orations, since neither the like height of excess, nor
the same Enthusiasmes or raptures are herein found; In a word, it is a more
middle beauty, and a more calm eloquence. And surely, if the subject we make
use of be as illustrious as the person before whom we are to handle it, were it
not as much as to abuse both the one and the other, to come short in our
expressions: Since the action ought neither to be public, nor general, if you
intend to perform it negligently, and not to allow it all the ornaments
whereof it is capable. And who can doubt that Cicero being to make an Oration
before Caesar, after the change of the Commonwealth, had not a greater
apprehension, and prepared not himself with more studious care, then if he had
only spoken to that beast with an hundred heads, he had so often led after his
own Fantasy, and whereof he was in so full possession so long before, as to
cause them to take the part best pleasing unto him. In these last occasions,
and in the presence of this man alone, he knew with whom he had to do: Now had
he been timorous, or fearful to fail before his Master, yet impute not this
apprehension of his to proceed either out of consideration he had of his
greatness, nor from the reflections upon those things he came to accomplish:
But it was in that he considered him as a man no less versed in the art of
well-speaking then himself, and who had heretofore contributed to the study of
this science, so many rare gifts of spirit, and so many fair endowments of
nature, that had he not afterward esteemed it more noble to conquer men by
arms, then to convince them by arguments, and if of the two most excellent
exercises this of his life, fortune, and the famousnesse of his courage, had
not caused him to make choice of the former, he might easily have disputed for
the glory of the latter with him. Or were it so that this excellent Orator
might at this day return into the world, and were personally, or by his Pen to
discourse with those two great Cardinals to whom the most part of these
Letters are addressed, it is not probable, coming to know them as we do, that he
would employ, and contribute a more exact study and solicitude, then when he
was only to please a multitude of ignorant Plebeians, and to speak to all that
rabble of ancient Rome, we shall yet again be amazed at the perfection of these
Letters, some whereof are written to the King, and appointed to be read (as in
truth they were) with admiration in full counsel, and a great part of the rest
addressed to the most eminent persons of our age. To speak truth we may justly
say, this is the first time any thing of perfection has appeared in our
language; so that if of all our ancient eloquence there be ought worthy of
esteem in any equality with this, it may be that with much labor you shall
produce some one Letter: For of all such who have hitherto written, we may
affirm, that the most fortunate among them, when they made choice of subjects
able to subsist of themselves, have not been absolutely condemnable, and that
amidst their writings, the solidity of learning, and the savagenesse of
language (to wit) the good and evil did equally appear. But when at any time
they fell upon subjects where eloquence only swayed the Scepter, there truly
it was where fortune forsook them, and where the feebleness of their proper
forces was manifestly perceived, if they were not some way assisted by strange
tongues. Some of them (to say the truth) have doubted what way they were to
take, and have striven to show it to others, though themselves were not in it.
In a word, the greatest glory those gained who have written with most
perfection and purity, is only that which nature has reserved for women, to
which sex eminent actions being denied, it seems they perform sufficient if
they abstain from evil doing. But to say that any has joined Art to abundance,
and mingled mildness with Majesty, or has raised his style without either
loosing himself, or straying from his subject, that is it which in truth we
could not see till this present. And questionless these brave and generous
forms of discourse, and those great and strange conceptions wherewith these
Letters were so curiously limed, and so plentifully graced, have been very
slenderly known in proceeding ages: This very order, and this number, whereof
every tongue is not capable, and wherein ours owes nothing to the Latin, and
which appears in all his words, though diversely, and as their gender requires,
do right happily appear in this place, though the most part of writers before him
have esteemed these perfections of small importance; yet notwithstanding,
without the help of these two great secrets, nether ornaments of Art, nor
graces of Nature, can be but in part pleasing; nor can all the reasons the
World can allege perswad a Very woman resolving to resist: And to speak
seriously, they are no less necessary among excellent discourses, and
conceits, then discipline amongst Soldiers, without which, courage is of no
effect, and valor most commonly proves unprofitable. As for me who have known
the Author from both our infancies, and who better then all others, can depose
in what fashion he effects his labors; besides, knowing the great advantage
he has over all those who write at this day: I have ever thought that if any
were able to raise our Language to the merit and reputation of such Eloquence,
werewith the Ancients were adorned* it should be to him alone to whom our age
owes this glory. Nor do I doubt, but the comparison coming in question at this
present, between these his writings, and those of others; the difference will
be easily discovered, assuring my self, that all spirits will dispose
themselves to be ranged herein to mine opinion and voluntarily to give way
thereunto. As for my self, who read the Ancients with all respect due unto
them, and the Moderns without any prejudicate opinion, do notwithstanding
confess, that all I can conceive in others is so far short of the merit of
these Letters, that abstracting from the passion I am possessed with, both for
them, and their Author, hardly could I dispose my self to frame this Preface
for them. And who is there will make any difficulty to give them their due?
Since he whose very faults have been esteemed so fair, that they caused a Sect
during his life, which yet continues after his death; having (at Meats) seen
certain discourses this Author composed in those miserable times, and which
stood in need of another age to be gratefully regarded, was astonished at his
beginnings, confessing it was with unwillingnesse, that the only thing he
supposed to possess by the general consent of all, was ravished from him by
one who as yet had lived but twenty years. But surely, it was in this strain
of writing which in that it is not restrained within so strict limits as that
of Letters, is capable of all the motions, and ornaments of Art; and of the
same sort as was the other discourse he addresseth to the Pope who now is, upon
the like subject, as that of Saint Bernards to Eugenius: And as God never chose
among men any so accomplished with all perfections, as this person to command
all others, so can I not conceive any thing either more great, or
extraordinary, then what appears in this work, nor more suitable to the
excellency of the subject, and to the Majesty of him to whom he dedicated his
discourse: But if (to return to the particulars of these letters) it were
necessary for the delivering an unpartiall judgment, to consider those of the
Ancients, I should seem more respectfull then were requisite, if (putting them
all together) I should undertake to make them so much as enter into comparison
with these; excepting only those of Seneca, yea even in those (which in truth
come not near these) there is so infinite abundance of matter, as can hardly be
imagined, and since all things therein appear so confusedly, that it seems they
were therein couched without choice, and to say truth, as it were at adventure,
some who will yet further tax his style will happily say, they are rather
matters then Works. But for my part, if there be any defects therein, I hold
they ought well to be borne with, in regard of so many rarities therein
concurring; and when we have said all, what appearance is there to undervalue
any thing we receive from a man who was worth seven Millions of Gold? and who
once in his life had the heart and ambition to aspire to the Empire of the
whole world? Let us therefore esteem all we receive from him, and from those
times, yet suffer us to commend our own, wherein this science which meddleth
with the commanding of spirits, and which was but formerly in it is infancy, is
now found to be in his full maturity, and as it were of ripe years. If
therefore you acknowledge any obligation due (as in truth there is) to these
excellent Letters, you shall in short time see so solid, and just a judgment
proceed from this Author, that the Parliament it self produced not any more
able; and his solitariness will be so satisfactory unto you, that you will
make no more difference then I do, to prefer the same before the magnificence
of Princely Courts, and the Pomp of most stateliest Cities.

A Table of the letters (as they lie in order) which are contained in the first
volume.
Lib. I.
A Letter from Cardinal of Richelieu, to the Signeur of Balzac Page 1. To the
Lord Cardinal of Richelieu Page 2 To the same Page 4 To the same Page 5 To the
same Page 6 To the same Page 8 To the same Page 9 To the Lord Bishop of Air
Page 11 To the same Page 14 To the same Page 16 To the same Page 17 To the same
Page 20 To the same Page 21 To the reverend Bishop of Air Page 22 To Mounsieur
de la Motts Aigron Page 26 To Mounsieur de bois Robert Page 29
Lib. 2. in the first vol.
To my Lord Cardinal de la Valete. Page 32 To the same Page 35 To the same
Page 36 To the same Page 37 To the same Page 39 To the same Page 42 To the same
Page 43 To the same Page 44 To the same Page 46 To the same Page 47 To the same
Page 49 To Mounsieur du Planty Page 50 To Mounsieur de la Magdelen Page 51 To
Mounsieur de Montigny Page 52 To the Duke of Espernon Page 53 To the same Page
55 To the same Page 56 The Duke of Espernon his letter to the French King,
penned by Balzac Page 59 To the same Page 61 To the same Page 63
Lib. 3. in the first vol.
To the Duke de la valete Page 65 To the Signeur of Plessis, governor of
Tollemount Page 67 To Hidasp Page 68 To Hidasp Page 72 To Signeur de la Roche.
Page 74 To Mounsieur de Bois Robert Page 75 To the same Page 76 To the same
Page 79 To the same Page 80 To the same Page 82 To Mounsieur Girard Secretary
to the Duke of Espernon Page 85 To the same Page 86 To Philander Page 87 To the
same Page 87 To Olympia Page 89 To Chrisolita Page 90 To Clorinda Page 91 To
the same Page 92 To the same Page 93 To the same Page 94 To the same Page 95 To
Lidia Page 96 To the Baron of Amblovile Page 97 To the Count of Schomberg Page
99 A letter from the Count of Schomberg to Mounsieur de Balzac Page 100
Lib. 4. in the fifth vol.
To my lord Marshal of Schomberg Page 101 To the Bishop of Angoulesme Page 103
To Father Garasso Page 104 To the Cardinal of Valete Page 106 Another Page 107
To the Lord Bishop of Nantes Page 109 To Mounsieur de la Marque Page 110 To
Mounsieur Tissandler Page 111 To Mounsieur de Faret Page 112 To Mounsieur
Coeffetean Bishop of Marseillis Page 113 To Mounsieur Pouzet Page 114 An answer
to a letter sent to Balzac from a learned old Lady Mademoiselle de Gourney Page
114 To Mounsieur Berniere Page 117 To Mounsieur de Voiture Page 117 To
Mounsieur de Vaugelas Page 118 To Mounsieur de Racan Page 120 To the Abbot of
S. Cyran Page 121 To Mounsieur Malherb Page 126 To Mounsieur de Vaugelas Page
127 To the same Page 128 To the same Page 129 To the same Page 130 To the same
Page 131 To Hydasp Page 132 Another Page 135 Another Page 136 Another Page 137
Another Page 138 Another Page 139 Another Page 141
A Table of the letters contained in the second volume.
Lib. I.
TO Mounsieur Moreau Page I. To Mounsieur R^gault Page 3 To Mounsieur da Moulin
Page 5 To Mounsieur the Abbot of Baume Page 8 To Mounsieur Bouthilier Page 10
To Mounsieur the Earl of Exceter Page 11 To Mounsieur de Boyssat Page 12 To
Mounsieur Huggens Page 14 To the Baron of S. Surin Page 16 To Cardinal de la
Valette Page 17 Another. Page 18 To Mounsieur de Bois Robert Page 19 To
Mounsieur de Soubran Page 22 To Mounsieur de la Nauue Page 24 To Mounsieur
Chaplain Page 25 To Mounsieur de Nesmond Page 26 To Mounsieur de Pontac.
Monpleisir Page 28 To Mounsieur Huggens Page 30 To Mounsieur de la Nauue Page
32 To Mounsieur Conrage Page 33 To -- Page 35 To Mounsieur Godeau Page 37 To
Mounsieur de Thibaudiere Page 38 To Mounsieur Gyrard Page 39 To my Lord the
Bishop of Nantes Page 43 Another Page 44 Another Page 45 To -- Page 46 To
Mounsieur du Pleix Page 47 To Mounsieur Maynard Page 48 To Mounsieur de
Descourades Page 49 To Mounsieur d' Andilly Page 50 To Mounsieur Conrart Page
52 To the same another Page 53 To my Lord the Mareschall Defiat Page 56 To
Mounsieur Grainer Page 57 To Mounsieur Gaillard Page 58 To Mounsieur the Master
Advocate in the Parliament. Page 58
Lib. 2. in the second vol.
To my Lord the Earl of Exceter Page 61 To my Lord the Arch Bishop of
Thoulouse Page 62 To Mounsieur Arnaut Abbot of S. Nicholas. Page 65 To
Mounsieur Ogier Page 67 To Mounsieur Sirmond Page 69 To Mounsieur Collombiers
Page 70 To -- Page 71 To Mounsieur Coeffeteau Page 72 To my Lord, the Earl of
Brassac Page 74 To Mounsieur de la Nauve Page 76 To Mounsieur Heinsius Page 77
To Mounsieur de la Pigionniere Page 79 To Mounsieur Chaplain Page 79 To
Mounsieur Maynard Page 81 To -- Page 81 To Mounsieur Arnaut Page 82 To
Mounsieur Nesmond Page 83 To Mounsieur de Borstell Page 85 Another Page 86
Another Page 86 Another Page 87 Another Page 88 Another Page 89 Another Page 89
Another Page 90 Another Page 91 Another Page 92 To Mounsieur de Bois Robert.
Page 93 To Mounsieur Descartes Page 94 To Mounsieur de la Motte Aigron Page 95
To Mounsieur de Grainer Page 96 To Mounsieur de la Nauve Page 97 Another Page
98 Another Page 99 Another Page 100 To Mounsieur Bardyn Page 101 To Mounsieur
de Aiguebere Page 103 Another Page 105 To Mounsieur de Bois Robert Page 106
Another Page 107 Another Page 108 To Mounsieur the master Advocate in the
Parliament Page 110 Another Page 112 Another Page 112 To Mounsieur de Caupeau
ville Page 113 To -- Page 114 To Mounsieur Trovillier Page 115 To Mounsieur
Gerard Page 116 To my Lord the Bishop of Nants Page 118 Another Page 118
A Table of all the letters in the third volume. lib. 1.
TO my Lord the Cardinal de la Valet. page I. To the same page 2 To Mounsieur
Godea page 2 3 To Mounsieur Conrart page 4 To my Lord the Bishop of Nantes page
5 Another page 6 To Mounsieur de la Nauve page 7 To Mounsieur de la Motte le
Voyer page 8 To Madam de Villesavin page 9 To Mounsieur de Gomberville page 10
To Mounsieur de Villiers Hottoman page 12 To Mounsieur de Borstell page 13 To
Madam -- page 15 To Mounsieur Hobbier page 17 To Mounsieur de Copiauville page
18 To Mounsieur de Forgues page 19 To Madam d'Anguitur page 20 To Mounsieur
Balthazar page 22 To Mounsieur de Serizai page 23 Another page 24 Another page
25 To Mounsieur Ogier page 26 Another page 27 To Madam Desloges page 28 Another
page 29 To -- page 30 To Madam Desloges page 31 Another page 32 Another page 35
Another page 36 Another page 37 Another page 38 To Mounsieur de la Nouve page
39 To Madam Desloges page 40 Another page 41 Another page 42 Another page 43
Another page 44 Another page 45 Another page 46 Another page 47 Another page 48
Another page 49 Another page 50 To -- page 51 To -- page 52 To -- page 53 To
Mounsieur de Coignet. page 54 To Mounsieur de Nuluic. page 55 To Madam Desloges
page 56 Another page 58 To Madam du Fos page 59 To Madam de Campagnole page 61
Another page 62 Another page 63 Another page 64
The second part of the third volume
To my Lord the Cardinal Duke of Richelieu. page 69 Another page 74 Another
page 75 To Mounsieur Cytois page 77 To Mounsieur de Chastelet page 78 To
Mounsieur de Bois Robert page 81 To Mounsieur Favereau page 83 Another page 86
To Mounsieur Girard page 87 To my Lord the Earl of Port page 88 To my Lord the
Bishop of Nantes page 89 To Mounsieur Senne page 90 The opinion of Cicero
concerning the style which Philosophers use in their writings. page 92 To
Mounsieur Granier page 92 To Mounsieur de Brye page 93 To Mounsieur de Silhon
page 94 To Mounsieur de S. Mart page 99 To Mounsieur D'Argenton page 100 To
the most Reverend Father Leon page 101 To Mounsieur Chaplain page 102 To
Mounsieur Bonnaud page 105 To Mounsieur Souchote page 106 To Mounsieur
Tissander page 106 The letter of Peter Bembo to Hercules Strotius page 108
Another page 108 Another page 109 To the Duke of Falete page 110 To the Bishop
of Poitiers page 112 To Mounsieur Guyet page 113 To Mounsieur de L'orme page
114 To my Lord -- page 115 To Mounsieur Senne page 115 To Mounsieur de Piles
Cleremont page 116 To Mounsieur de Voiture page 117 Another page 118 To
Mounsieur Mestivier page 119 To Mounsieur de Mesmes D'Auvur page 120 To
Mounsieur de Thure page 121 To Mounsieur de Vougelas page 122 To Mounsieur
Girard page 123 Another page 125 Clarissimo Balzacio, Facultas Theologiae
Pariensiensis. S. page 126 Another page 127 To Mounsieur Talon page 128 Another
page 129 To Mounsieur D'Espernon page 130 To Mounsieur Rous sines page 131 To
Mounsieur Breton page 133 Another page 134 Another page 136 To Mounsieur Gerard
page 137 To Mounsieur de Gues page 139 To Mouns. de Bois Robert page 143
A Table of the Letters contained in the fourth volume.
TO Mouns. Conrart page I. To Mounsieur du Moulin page 3 To Mouns. L'Huillier
page 4 To Mounsieur the Abbot of Bois Robert. page 6 To my Lord the Earl of
Exceter page 7 To my Lord the Duke de la Valett page 8 To Mouns. Drovet page 9
To Mouns. De-Bonair page 10 To Mouns. Huggens page 11 To Mouns. de Racan page
12 To Mouns. De St. Chartres page 13 To Mouns. Baudoin page 14 To Mouns. de
Coignet page 15 To Madam Cesloges page 16 To my Lord Keeper of the Seals
Seguier. page 17 To Mounsieur de Morins page 18 To Mouns. de Vaugulas page 19
To Mouns. de la Motte Aigron page 21 To Mouns. de Borstel. page 22 To Mouns.
the chief Advocate page 23 To Mounsieur de Maury page 24 To Mouns. de Mondory
page 24 To Mounsieur le Guay page 26 To Mouns. de Silhon page 26 To Mouns. de
la Fosse page 27 To Mouns. D'Espesses page 29 To the same page 30 To Mouns. de
Couurelles page 32 To -- page 32 To my Lord the Bishop of Angoulesme page 33 To
Mounsieur de -- page 34 To Mounsieur de Serizay page 39 To Mouns. Habert Abbot
of Cerizy page 40 To Mouns. de Galliard page 41 To the same page 42 To Madam
Desloges page 43 To Mouns. de -- page 44 To Mouns. Girard page 46 To the same
page 47 To the same page 48 To the same page 49 To Madamoisel de Campagnole
page 50 To Mouns. the Abbot of Bois Robert? page 51 To the same page 52 To the
same page 53 To Mouns. de Savignac page 54 To Mouns. Chaplain page 56 To the
same page 57 To the same page 58 To the same page 59 To the same page 60 To the
same page 62 To the same page 63 To the same page 64 To the same page 65 To the
same page 66 To Mounsieur de Silhon page 67 To Mouns Gerard Secretary to the
Duke of Espernon page 68 To the same page 69 To Mouns. de la Mothe le Vayer
page 70 To Mouns. de -- page 71
The Letters of MONSIEUR de BALZAC. The first Book.
A Letter from the Cardinal Richelieu, to the Signior of BALZAC. LETTER I.
SIR,
THough I have formerly delivered my opinion to a friend of yours, concerning
some of your letters he showed me; yet can I not satisfy my self before these
lines afford you a more Authentical approbation thereof. It is not any
particular affection I bear to your person, which inviteth me to this
allowance, but truth it self, carrying with it such a Prerogative, that it
compels all (who have their eyes and spirits rightly placed for the
delivering an unpartial opinion) to represent them without disguise: My censure
shall be seconded by many others, and if there be any of a contrary conceit, I
dare assure you, time will make them know, that the defects they find in your
Letters, proceed rather from their Spirits, than from your Pen; and how nearly
they resemble the Ictericks, who having the Jaundise in their eyes, see nothing
which seems not unto them to carry the same color: Heretofore mean Wits
admired all things above the pitch of their capacity; but now, their
judgments seconding their sufficiencies, they approve nothing but what is
within the compass of their Talent, and blame all whatsoever exceeds their
Studies. I dare (without presumption) say in what concerns you herein, that I
see things as they are, and declare them to be such as I see them: The
conceptions of your Letters are strong, and as transcendent above ordinary
imaginations, as they are conformable to the common sense of such who are of
sound judgment. The Language is pure, and the Words perfectly well chosen,
without affectation; the Sense is clear and neat, and the Periods accomplished
with all their numbers. This censure of mine, is by so much the more ingenuous,
as that approving whatsoever is your own in your Letters: I have not concealed
to a certain friend of yours, that I found some rectification to be desired,
concerning certain things you insert of other men's: fearing least the liberty
of your Pen should cause many to imagine that it is too often dipped in their
humors and manners; and draw such as are more acquainted with you by name,
than conversation, to be otherwise conceited of you, then you willingly could
wish. The manner, wherewith you have received this my Advise, causes me that
continuing my former freedom, I will conclude, in advertizing you, that you
shall be answerable before God, if you suffer your Pen to sleep, and that you
are obliged to employ it upon more grave and important Subjects; being
contented that you shall blame me, if in so doing you receive not the
satisfaction, to see, that what you perform herein, shall be praised and
esteemed, even by those who would willingly pick occasion to control them,
which is one of the most sure marks of the perfection of any Work. You shall
receive some in this kind out of my Affection, when I may have the opportunity
to assure you, that I am,

Your well affectionate to serve you, the Cardinal of Richelieu.
From Paris the 4. of February 1621.
To the Lord Cardinal of Richelieu from BALZAC. LETTER II.
MY LORD,
I Am as proud of the Letter you did me the Honor to write unto me, as if
there were a thousand Statues erected for me, or as if I were assured by
infallible authority of my works excellency. Truly, to be commended by that man
our Age opposes to all antiquity, and upon whose wisdom God might well entrust
the whole earths Government, is a favor I could not wish for without
presumption, and which I am yet doubtful, whether I have really received, or
only dreamed some such matter. But if it be so that my eyes have not deceived
me, and that you are he, who has bestowed that voice upon me, which has been
chosen by all France to present her Petitions to the King, and by the King him
self to convey his Commands into Cities and Armies: My Lord, I must humbly then
acknowledge you have already paid me before hand for all the services I can
ever possibly perform unto you: and I should show my self very ungrateful, if
I should hereafter complain of my fortunes: since upon the matter, the goods
and honors of this World are most ordinarily none other, than the inheritance
of Sots, or rewards of Vice, Estimation, and Commendation, being only reserved
for Virtue. Ought I not then to rest highly satisfied, having received from
your mouth the same prize, which Conquerours expect for their Victories? yea,
all that your self could hope for, in lieu of your great and immortal actions,
if there were another Cardinal of Richelieu to give them their due
commendations? But truly (my Lord) that is a thing which will always be
wanting to your glory; for when by your only presence you have appeased the
spirits of an incensed multitude; when by your powerful reasons you have
induced Christian Princes to set the Native Country of Jesus Christ at
liberty, and to undertake the Holy War, when you have gained whole Nations to
the Church, as well by the force of your Example, as by that of your Doctrine,
who is of ability to pay you the reputation which you in all right deserve? and
where shall you find so excellent a witness for all the mavelous Acts of
your life, as I have of my watchings and studies? I cannot choose but reiterate
this, and my joy is over-just to be concealed. Is it possible this great wit
and high spirit, which has been employed even from his first youth in
persuading Princes, in giving instructions to Ambassadors, and has been
listened unto by old men, who have seen four Reigns? Is it possible, I say, this
man should value me; on whose approbation all enemies agree? nor is there among
all men a contrary party, or diversity of belief in this point. If I had a
purpose to disquiet the repose of this Kingdom, I would seek for the consent of
slack spirits; and I should stand in need in my favor of all sorts of men,
were I to study for reputation in a popular State: but truly I never affected
confusion, or disorder, and my designs have ever aimed at the pleasing of a
few. For since you have declared your self in favor, as he likewise has done,
for whom France at this day envieth Italy: and since you carry after you the
most solid part of the Court, I am content to let the rest run astray with
Turks and Infidels, who make the greater number of mankind. Yet (my Lord) I
cannot think, that any hereafter will be so far in love with himself, or so
obstinate in his own opinion, as not to be a Convertite by the only reading
the Letter you honored me with, and who in conclusion will not subscribe to
your great judgment? And, if it be certain that truth it self could not be
strong enough against you, there is no question, but that side whereon you two
shall agree, ought to be universally followed. For my part (my Lord) let all
men say what they will, I fix my self with closed eyes there; and what enemies
soever the reputation you have allowed me procure me, yet knowing your
abilities, and what you are, I will be no farther solicitous for mine own
interest, or future benefit, since it is become your cause.

I am My Lord, Your most humble and most obedient servant, BALZAC.
The 10. of March, 1624.
To the Cardinal of Richelieu from BALZAC. LETTER III.
My Lord,
I Humbly entreat you to be pleased by these presents, to permit me to confirm
unto you the assurance of my most humble service, and that you would allow me
to crave some news from you: It is the only thing wherein I am now curious,
and which, in the very depth of my retiredness, obliges me to reflect
sometimes upon worldly affairs. But happen what can, I am most assured, you
will remain constant even amidst public ruins, and that Fortune cannot bereave
you of those advantages she never gave you. Yet could I wish, that your life
were somewhat more calm, and less glorious: And I suppose that Artimiza's
goodness, having so great Affinity to what is infinite, and which is of power
to procure love even amidst the most savage beasts, does in right deserve to
obtain truce, and repose among reasonable Creatures. It is not in us to be
Authors of hereafter, nor do our wishes rule the event of humane affairs. But
surely, if there be any Justice in Heaven, (whereof there is no doubt) and if
God have an eye to worldly matters; we must believe the tears of upright
persons shall not be shed in vain, or that your Queen shall wax old in her
misfortunes: yet at the least, since our cogitations be still within our own
compass, and we being not forbidden to hope well, let us make the best use we
may of this small portion of Liberty yet remaining. The virtue she has
hitherto made use of, in resisting her afflictions, will happily one day serve
to moderate her felicities. And if God struck a certain Madam Gabriella.
Woman with sudden death, for that she should have been seated in the place,
he destinated to this great Princess; he surely will not suffer that man to
live long, who has so highly injured her. However (my Lord) it is great honor
unto you, not to have failed her in her afflictions, and to have under-valued
all worldly Prerogatives, to be unfortunate with her. I know that herein you
satisfy your self with the testimony of a clear conscience, and that it is not
so much for opinion of men, you undertake Worthy actions, as for your own
private satisfactian. Nor are you a little to comfort your self, in that at
this present you are praised, even by your very enemies; and to see your
resolutions redoubtable to those, who have great Armies on foot, and the chief
forces of the State under their Command. I would say more, did I not fear you
might suppose I had some private design in my Discourse, or seek hereby to
prepare you to receive some kind of importunity from me: But I most humbly
beseech your Lordship to be confident, that I being of free condition, am
little acquainted with flattery; and that I am not so given over to gain, but
that notwithstanding you were still in Avignion, I would ever as really as at
this hour remain,

My Lord, Your most humble and most affectionate servant, BALZAC.
The 15. of May, 1623.
To the Cardinal of Richelieu from BALZAC. LETTER IV.
My Lord,
WEre I not well acquainted with my own insufficiency, I might well be
possessed with no small vanity, upon the Letter you did me the Honor to write
unto me, and might well imagine my self to be some other thing than I was the
day before I received it. But knowing it is no other than a mere favor you
pleased to afford me, I will not flatter my self in my good fortune, nor lessen
the Obligation due unto you, in presuming to merit the same. If Virtue required
any recompense out of her self, she would not receive it from other mouth than
yours: and your reputation is at this day so Just and General, as it is become
a Verity, wherein the Wise agree with the Vulgar. I do therefore account my
self very happy to be reputed of, by a Person who is able to give a value to
things of themselves worthless; and I attribute so much to your Judgment, that
I will no longer hold any mean opinion of my self, lest therein I should
contradict you. Truly, (my Lord) very difficultly will my parts any way answer
your expectation. The time, my Favor affoordeth me for rest, is so short, I
can hardly employ it to other purpose than to complain of its cruelty. I have
enough to do to live, and to make that good, I keep my self as carefully as
though I were composed of Crystal, or as if I were some necessary matter for
the good of all men. Yet (my Lord) you have so great power over me, that I will
strain my self to show my obedience, and to give you an account of my leisure,
since you please to think I ought not to deprive the World thereof. It is
better to utter glorious dreams, than to labor in gross designs, and there are
certain Acts of the spirit so excellent, that Princes are too poor, and their
power too slender to afford them their full merit. But, my Lord, you have often
given so great testimonies of me, that if I should not have some presumption,
it were fit I lost my memory; wherefore out of the assurance you give me that
my Style does not stray from that perfection, which men imagine, but never saw,
nor have attained unto; I will enter upon a design which shall amaze our vulgar
wits, and cause those, who have hitherto supposed they surmount others, to see
I have found what they seek for. Whatsoever I do, I will at least have you at
all times present to my thoughts, thereby to oblige my self not to come short
before so great an example, nor will I forget the place where at this present I
am, to the end not to omit any thing worthy the Ancient Rome. It is impossible
at once to have so glorious objects, and degenerous thoughts, or not to be
transported with all those Triumphs of times past, and with the glory of our
age. But this is not the place where I intend to speak, it being of too small
extent to receive so illimitable a subject: It shall therefore suffice in
conclusion of this my Letter to tell you, that since upon your advice all
posterity depends, and the whole Court expects from you what they are, or
are not to believe; I cannot choose (my Lord) but to esteem my self right happy,
even amidst my greatest miseries, if you still continue unto me your equal
Judgment with the honor of your favors.

BALZAC.
From Rome this 10. of April 1623.
To the Lord Cardinal of Richelieu, from Monsieur Balzac. LETTER V.
My Lord,
MY purpose was at my arrival in France to have presented my Service unto you,
in the place of your Residence, that I might have had the honor to see you;
but my health having not been such, as to afford me the free disposition of my
self: I am forced to defer my contentment, in that kind, and to entreat to
hear some news from you, till I be able to go to understand them from your
Self. In the interim, the better to cheer my Spirits, I will believe they are
as good as I wish them, and will imagine this Colic of yours, whereof I had
so great apprehension, shall be drowned in the fountain of Pougues. This truly
is so generally desired, and sought for at Gods hands, by so many mouths, that
I am confident he will not (in this point) leave the felicity he has prepared
for our times unperfect; and that he loves the World too well, to deprive it
of the good you are to Perform. Armies being defeated, new forces may be set on
foot, and a second Fleet may be rigged, after the first perish: But if we
should want your Lordship, the World would not last long enough to be able to
repair such a loss: And the King might have just cause to bewail the same in
the midst of his greatest Triumphs. He has indeed an inexhaustable Kingdom of
men. The Wars do daily afford him Captains. The number of Judges is not much
inferior to that of Criminals. It is only of wise men, and such as are
capable to guide the Stern of States, whereof the scarcity is great; and
without flattery to find out your Equal herein, all Nature had need put it
self into Action, and that God long promised the same to mankind before he be
pleased to produce him. I say nothing, (my Lord) I am not ready to swear in
verification of my belief; or which I confirm not by the Testimony of your very
Enemies. The authority of Kings is not so Sovereign, as that is, you exercise
over the Souls of such as hearken unto you. Your spirit is right powerful, and
daily employed in great affairs, and which refreshes it self in agitation of
ordinary occurrents: You are destinated to fill the place of that Cardinal,
which at this present, makes one of the beautiful parties of heaven, and who
has hitherto had no Successor, though he have had Heirs and Brothers. This
being thus, who will doubt that public Prayers are to be offered for so
precious and necessary a health as yours; or that your life ought to be dear
unto you, within you are to conserve the glory of our age. As for me (my Lord)
who am assaulted on all sides, and to whom nothing is remaining save hope,
being the only benefit of those who are deprived of all others: since my
misfortune will needs make me that public sacrifice, which is, to be charged
with the pains of all the people, and pay for all the World. I could be well
content you should send me your Colic, and that it come to accompany the
Fever, the Scyatica, and the Stone. Since of so many diseases, there can but
one Death be composed. Nor is it time any longer, to be a good husband of what
is already lost. But I will not enter further into this discourse, whereof I
shall find no end; and it were to small purpose to tell you, he is the most
wretched man in the World, who so much honors you, for fear you should
reject my affection, as some fatal thing, and least it avail me not at all to
protest that I am, my Lord,

Your most humble and most obedient Servant. BALZAC.
September. 4. 1622.
To the Lord Cardinal of Richelieu. LETTER VI.
MY LORD,
AFter the sealing of these presents, a messenger passed by this place, by whom
I understand that the Pope has created you a Cardinal; I make no question but
you received this news as a matter indifferent unto you: and that your spirit
being raised above the things of this World, you behold them with one and the
same Aspect. Yet since herein the public good meets with your particular
interest, and that for your sake the Church rejoices, even in all the most
irksome Prisons of Europe, it is not reasonable you should deprive your self of
a contentment no less chaste, than those heaven it self affords us? and which
proceeds from the same cause. All good men (my Lord) ought in these times to
desire great Dignities, as necessary means to undertake great matters. If they
do otherwise, besides that God will demand a strict account from them of those
his graces, whereof they have made no good use; the World has likewise just
subject of complaint, seeing them abandon it as a prey to the wicked, and that
their desire of ease causes them to forsake the public good. This (my Lord)
is to let you know, you are to reserve your humility for those actions, passing
between God and your self: But that in other cases you can neither have too
much Wealth, nor over great power; since obedience is due to wisdom; there
being certain virtues not practiseable by the poor. I do therefore infinitely
rejoice, to see you at this present raised to that eminent dignity, wherein you
fill the Universe with Splendour, and where your sole example will (I hope)
carry so great weight, as to cause the Church to return to the Purity of its
first Infancy. Truly, if there be any hope to expect this happiness, and to
see rebellious spirits persuaded, as we behold their Cities forced; you
doubtless are the man, from whom we are to expect this felicity; and who is
only able to finish the victories of Kings by the subversion of misbelievers:
To this effect does all Christendom exact these achievements at your hands, as
a last instruction, and the general peace of consciences: and my self, who have
thus long been in search after the Idea of Eloquence, without finding among us
any, which is not either counterfeit, or imperfect, am very confident you will
bring it to light in the same excellency as it was, when at Rome the Tyrants
were condemned, and when it defended the oppressed Provinces. Though Purple be
very refulgent, yet will it receive a farther luster by this your dignity,
carrying command wherever it comes; and which is particularly so proper for
the conduct of Souls, as it is only to that power whereto they will submit
themselves. My Lord, if I have any hope to be known in after ages, or that my
name may pass to posterity; they shall find this consideration to be the first
Obligation unto me of seeking the Honor of your acquaintance, and that having
heard you speak, you did so absolutely purchase both my thoughts and
affections, that since then, I have ever reflected upon you, as on an
extraordinary person, and have ever passionately remained,

My lord, Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
The 16. of December, 1622.
To the Cardinal of Richelieu from BALZAC. LETTER VII.
My Lord,
HAd the ways been safe, or if the good order you have taken for public
security, had not been subject to the like success as are wholesome Laws, which
are seldom well observed, I should not be necessitated to take a longer time
than you allotted me when I parted from Fountainebleau, nor had I till now been
constrained to spin out the time of my dispatch. But though your Commandments
are all powerful in me, yet you know necessity will first be obeyed, nor will
you (I hope) be displeased that I have made choice of a Prison, whereto I am
accustomed, to avoid another not so commodious for me. This has not happened but
to my extreme grief, since I have not been able to be a witness of the most
illustrious life of our age, and have thereby lost half a year of your Actions,
which (well nigh) fill up all our History. For though we are not so remote from
the World, that no news can come to us, yet they pass so many places, as it is
impossible they receive not diverse impressions, or that they should arrive here
in their purity, since they are often altered from the very Lover; yet I have
understood, and Fame has published, even in deserts, the great conflicts by
you undergone, and achieved for the Honor and reputation of France, and how
you have subdued the subtilties of strangers, being in truth more to be feared
than their Forces. I hear how Italy has spent all her practices without
hurting any, and how those Statesmen, who made account to Seignorize in all
Assemblies, and to be Masters in all reasons of State, were unable to defend
themselves against you, but with passion and choler: nor to complain of any
other thing, but that you persuaded them to whatsoever they were beforehand
resolved not to yield. So as (my Lord) those who termed us Barbarians, and by
their treaties commonly took revenge of our victories, have in the end found
wisdom on this side the Alps, and have well perceived there is a man, who has
abilities to hinder them from deceiving others. They stood amazed* to see a
Servant, who would not suffer there should be any Master greater than his
Sovereign. Who was as sensible of the least evils of his Country, as of his
proper sorrows, supposing himself to be wounded upon the least apprehension,
when any made show of trenching upon the dignity of this Crown. But when they
found you applied present remedies to all such inconveniences as they objected;
that you prevented the difficulties they offered to propose, that you dived
into their Souls, drawing thence their closest intentions, and how at the first
conference you made answer to what they reserved for a second: Then it was
indeed, when their Phlegm was turned into Choler, and when you put their humane
wisdoms and politic Maxims to a stand. So as we see it is sufficient only to
let Good appear, to cause it to be beloved: and truly if Reason had the like
power over the Will, as it has over the Understanding, all those Italians
doubtless, who heard you speak, had returned good French men, and the safety of
Christendom together with the security of her Princes, had been but one days
work. Foreign Wars had been ended in your Chamber; nor should we now have any
more than one business upon us, and the Kings Forces had at this present been
employed only in suppressing the Rebels of his own Kingdom. My Lord, I hope
you are persuaded (though I could not probably expect any slight occurrents
from the place where you are) yet that I received these with much emotion and
transport, it not being in my power to dissemble my joy, when I understood how
their Majesty's are not weary of your service, and how after having tried
diverse Councels, it was in conclusion thought fit to follow yours, and that you
precede in the affairs of Europe, by being conductour of the Fortune of France.
Truly, of all exterior contentments, there is not any whereof I am so
sensible as of that. But on the other side, when I understand that your health
is daily assaulted, or threatened by some accident, that the Tranquillity, your
conscience affords you, hinders you not from having ill nights: And how amidst
the happy successes befalling you, life it self is notwithstanding sometimes
tedious unto you; then indeed I must confess they touch me in the tenderest
part of my Soul. And whilst the Court makes thousands of feigned Protestations
unto you; there is an Hermit some hundred leagues from you, who mourns for
your maladies with unfeigned tears. I know not whether or no I may presume to
say, I love you: yet is it not probable you will take offense at a word,
wherewith you know God himself is well pleased. My Lord; I do in such manner
love you, as I am either sick upon the relation of your indisposition; or if
the news be current that you are recovered, yet have I still an apprehension of
what alteration each hour may bring upon you. Ought it then to be in the fits
of your Fever, and in your inquietude for want of sleep, that you understand
these public acclamations, and the due praises you have purchased: Shall the
Senses suffer, and the Spirits rejoice, or they continue tortured amidst these
Triumphs, or that you (at once) perform two contrary actions, and at the same
time have need, as well of moderation, as patience: If Virtue could be
miserable, or if that Sect, which acknowledges no other evil, but pain; nor
any greater good than pleasure, had not been generally condemned, the Divine
providence had received complaints from all parts of this Kingdom; nor had
there been an honest man known, who for your sake had not found something
farther to be desired in the conduct of this World. But (my Lord) you
understand much better than I do, that it is only touching the felicity of
beasts, we are to believe the body, and not concerning ours, residing only in
the supreme part of our selves, and which is as smally sensible of those
disorders committed below her, as those in Heaven can be offended by the
tempests of the Air, or vapors of the Earth. This being true: God forbid, that
by the estate of your present constitution, I should judge of that of your
condition; or that I should not esteem him perfectly happy, who is
superlatively wise. You may please to consider, that howbeit you have shared
with other men the infirmities of humane nature, yet the advantage rests soly
on your side: since (upon the matter) there is only some small pain remaining
with you, instead of an infinity of errors, passions, and faults falling to
our lots. Besides, I am confident that the term of your sufferings is well nigh
expired, and that the times hereafter prepares right solid and pure
contentments for you, and a youth after its season, as you are become old
before your time. The King, who has use of your long living, makes no
unprofitable wishes: Heaven hears not the prayers that the Enemies of this
State offer. We know no successor that is able to effect what you have not yet
finished: and it being true, that our Forces are but the Arms of your head, and
that your Counsels have been chosen by God to re-establish the affairs of this
age: we ought not to be apprehensive of a loss, which should not happen but to
our successors. It shall then be in your time (my Lord, I hope) that oppressed
Nations will come from the Worlds end to implore the protection of this Crown:
that by your means our Allies will repair their losses, and that the Spaniard
shall not be the sole Conqueror, but that we shall prove the Infranchizers of
the whole earth. In your time (I trust) the Holy Sea shall have her opinions
free, nor shall the inspirations of the Holy Ghost be oppugned by the artifice
of our Enemies, resolutions will be raised worthy the ancient Italy for defense
of the common cause. To conclude, it will be through your Prudence (my Lord)
that there shall no longer be any Rebellion among us, or Tyranny among men:
that all the Cities of this Kingdom shall be seats of assurance for honest men;
that novelties shall be no farther in request; save only for colors and
fashions of Attire: that the people will resign Liberty, Religion, and the
Commonwealth, into the hands of superiors, and that out of law-full
government, and loyal obedience, there will arise that felicity Politicians
search after, as being the end of civil life. My hope is (my Lord) that all
this will happen under your sage conduct, and that after you have settled our
repose, and procured the same for our Allies, you shall enjoy your good deeds
in great tranquillity, and see the estate of those things endure, whereof your
self have been a principal Author. All good men are confident these blessed
events will happen in your age, and by your advice. As for me, who am the
meanest among those, who justly admire your Virtues, I shall not (I hope) prove
the slackest in the expression of your Merits: Since therefore they (of right)
exact a general acknowledgement; if I should fail in my particular
contribution, I were for ever unworthy the Honor I so ambitiously aspire unto;
the height whereof is to be esteemed,

Your Lordships most humble and most obedient servant, BALZAC.

To the Lord Bishop of Air. LETTER VIII.
My Lord,
IF at the first sight, you know not my Letter, and that you desire to be
informed who writes unto you: It is one more old-like than his Father, and as
over-worn as a Ship, having made three voyages to the Indies; and who is no
other thing, than the Relics of him, whom you saw at Rome. In those days I
sometimes complained without cause, and happily there was then no great
difference between the health of others, and my infirmity. Howsoever, be it
that my imagination is crazed, or that my present pain does no longer admit of
any comparison, I begin to lament the Fever and Scyatica as lost goods, and as
pleasures of my youth now past: See here to what terms I am reduced, and how
(as it were) I live, if it may be called living, to be in a continual
contestation with death. True it is, there is not sufficient efficacy in all
the words whereof this World makes use, to express the miseries I endure; they
leave no place, either for the Physicians skill, or the sick man's patience; nor
has Nature ordained any other remedies for the same, save only poison and
precipices. But I much fear, least I suffer my self to be transported with
pain, or endure it less Christianly than beseems me, being a witness of your
Virtue; and having had the means to profit my self by your Example. My Lord, it
is now time (or never) I subdue this wicked spirit, which does forcibly
transport my will; and that the old Adam obey the other. Yet does it not a
little grieve me, to be indebted to my misery for my Souls health, and that I
much desire it were some other more noble consideration than nessitie, should
cause me to become an honest man. But since the means to save us are bestowed
upon us, and that we choose them not, it is fitting that reason convince our
sensibilities, causing us to agree to what is otherwise distastefull unto us.
At the worst, we must at all times confess, that we cannot be said to perish,
when we are safely cast on shore by some Shipwreck; and it may be, if God did
not drive me, as he does out of this life, I should never dream of a better. I
will refer the rest to be related unto you at your return from Italy, with
purpose to lay open my naked Soul unto you, together with my thoughts in the
same simplicity they spring in me: you are the only Person from whom I expect
relief; and I hold my self richer in the possession of your good opinion, than
if I enjoyed the favors of all earthly Princes, and all the wealth of their
Territories and Kingdoms. Truly this is the first time (since I writ unto you
from Lions) I have made use of my hands; and I have received a hundred Letters
from my Friends without answering one. Hereby (my Lord) you see, there is no
other consideration (your self excepted) of force to cause me to break silence,
since for all others I have lost the use of speaking. Yet I beseech you to
think (notwithstanding all this) my affection to be neither penurious, nor
ambitious. The riches I crave at your noble hands, are purely spiritual, and I
am at this present in an estate, wherein I have more need to settle some order
for the affairs of my Conscience, than to reflect upon the establishment of my
worldly Fortunes. But (my Lord) to change discourse, and a little to retire my
self from my pains, what do you thus long at Rome? Does the Pope dally with us?
and will he leave to his successor the glory of the best Election can be
made? Is he not afraid, lest it be given out he has some intelligence with
his Adversaries, and that he takes not the advice of the holy Ghost, in what
concerns the Churches Honor, for Gods cause bring us with speed this news,
provided it be the same the King demands, and all good men desire. I hope it
shall not be said, you have spoken Italian all this while to no purpose, or
that you can accuse his predictions, as erroneous, who never falsified his word
with you, and who is perfectly:

My Lord Your most humble servant, BALZAC.
The 2. of July 1622.
To the Lord Bishop of Air. For the true understanding of this Letter: it is
necessary to be acquainted with the Gibbrige the French, residing at Rome, use
to speak; who frame a new kind of Language to themselves, composed of Italian
words, having only French terminations. LETTER IX.
My Lord,
I Think you will never be weary of going to Cortege, and that you will for
ever have an apprehension of the Crepuscule all the days of your life; for it
is, that you have long enough caused the curtains of your Carroach to be drawn
in presence of those of Cardinals; and that you may well be (ere now)
acquainted with the Court of Rome, even from the Papale subjects, to those who
desire to be admitted into the first degrees of sacred Orders. For my part, I
should soon be weary in seeing daily one and the same thing, and in beginning
the day from the first hour of night? What can there be so pleasing in the
place where you are, that should deserve to stay you there? In fair weather the
Sun is dangerous: half the year they breath nothing but smoke, and in the rest,
it raineth so frequently, that it seems some Sea hangs over the City of
Rome. But it may be you take pleasure in seeing the Pope, a body over shaken,
and trembling with age and infirmities, who has no other thing than Ice in his
veins, and Earth in his Visage. I cannot imagine how this object can afford you
any great contentment; or that you are much taken with the society and Company
of the great multitude of my Lords his assistants, partaking of the one and the
other signature: Nor can it be Carriofile whom you so often overruled, who
should entreat you to stay there for the furtherance of his affairs. For being
(as he is) a Popeline, who, of the Family of the Cardinal Ludovisio, who
affords him his full share, it cannot be but well with him. I conclude
therefore (my Lord) that I cannot guess the cause of your stay, if you take not
the pains to tell me. For to imagine Monsieur de Luzon not to be as yet a
Cardinal, were no less than to wrong the Kings credit, and to judge amiss of
public acknowledgement. I am here at the Antipodes, where there is not any
thing but Air, the Earth, and a River; One had here need make above ten days
journeys to find a man: wherefore having in this place no other communication
but with the dead, I can relate no other news unto you, but of the other World.
Is it not true, that he, who would have burnt his shirt, had it known his
secrets, would hardly have been drawn to make his general confession? and that
Alexander the Great would with much difficulty have been induced to purchase
Paradise by humility? What say you of poor Brutus? who killed his Father,
thinking to confound a Tyrant, and no less to repent himself at his death, in
having loved Virtue, than if he had followed an unfaithful Mistress. Do you
not yet remember the first Consels, whose words smelt of Garlic and green
roasted meat? think you not they made use of their hands instead of feet, being
rough and durty as they were, and wore Shoes instead of Gloves? These men were
not acquainted either with Sugar, Musk, or Amber-greice. They had not (as then)
any gods of Gold, or Goblets of Silver. They were ignorant in all sorts of
sciences, save only to make War, and to have domination over men. I lately
read how in Venice (in former times) men of greatest quality, usually married
with common women, and that either the good Husbandry, or the mutual
correspondency was such among the Citizens, that one Wife served three
brothers. Think you that Francis the first is called Great, for having
vanquished the Swisses? or to distinguish him from his Grandchild? or by reason
of his great nose? Give me reason why Selim slew his Father, his Brothers, and
Nephews? and after all this died but once? Were it not that I fear to be
wearisom unto you, I should never make an end of my news, yea, I should be
sufficiently stored to entertain you my whole lifetime. But it is high time
that unprofitable speeches give place to Pious Cogitations; and that I leave
you among your Myrtles and Orange Trees, where you are never better
accompanied, than when you are alone. I will here conclude, rather out of
discretion, then for want of matter: But this shall not be till after I have
said, that of all those who have any share in your favors, there is not any
who is therein more proud of his good Fortune, than my self, or more really
than I am,

My Lord Your most humble and most affectionate servant, BALZAC.
The 25. of Sept. 1622.
To the Lord Bishop of Air from BALZAC. LETTER X.
My Lord,
THese times are fatal, for abating those heads appearing above others, and for
changing the face of things: and questionless, if this course still continue,
the King will either be forced to seek out a new people, or to resolve himself
for a solitary Reign: All the Court is black with mournings: there is not a
Frenchman who does not either weep, or is bewailed; and War causes only
slight sorrows; yet even among those, whose loss we lament, there are always
some we willingly leave, and whose Catastrophe may serve us as a consolation
for the rest. Without further ambiguity, the man is seized on, who grew lean by
the welfare of others, and who was one of those pale and sober persons, born
for the Ruin of States; there is some appearance he died as well of the
Purples of M. L. C. D. R. as of his own, and that you sent him his first
surfeit from Rome; where he truly considering how there was no longer any
favor to follow, nor Favorite to flatter, he would leave to live any longer,
as though he had no further affairs in this World. Howsoever it be, we are
herein to acknowledge the finger of God, and to confess, he does sometimes
punish Malefactors, without observing the forms of Justice; at least it cannot
be denied, but God loves the Queen extraordinarily, since he reserveth to
himself the revenge of all her injuries, nor will let any thing remain in the
World, which may prove distastefull unto her. If she desired the Sea should be
calm in the most stormy days of Winter; or two Autumnes to happen each year: I
am confident of Natures change, in conformity to her will: nor is there any
thing she cannot obtain of Heaven, which grants the very prayers she has not
as yet begun. I am here some hundred and fifty leagues from these fine things,
where I study to solace my self as much as possibly I can; and to this end, I
make my self drunk every day: But to free you from any sinister opinion of what
I say, I assure you it is only with the water of Pougues, which surely would
be Ink, were it black; so that I surfeit without sinning against the rules of
Sobriety, and any frolicks are as Austeer as the Minimes fastings. I have a
great desire to enter covenants with my Physicians, whereby it might be
granted, that all agreeable things should be wholesome, and that one might
speedily recover his health by the scent of flowers instead of their Medicines,
which are ordinarily second miseries succeeding the former: yet without
spending much time, or trouble; I have made all impossibilities passible with
me, and in the case I am, I would swallow fire, were it prescribed me for the
recovery of my health. It is no small advantage not to be reduced to these
terms, no more than you are, and not to know what it is to suffer, or
complain. So is it for the general good of the whole World, that GOD has given
you this vigorous health to employ it in the service of Kings, and in your
Vigilance over the conduct of people. As for me, who should not happily make so
good use thereof as I ought, and who am far more inclinable to Vice, than to
Virtue: I hold it convenient I be always crazie, and that GOD take from me the
means to offend him, whereof otherwise I should infallibly make but overmuch
use: I write not at this present to M. it is all I can do to finish this Letter
in have, and to tell you what you long since knew, that

I am my Lord, Your most humble passionate Servant, BALZAC.
October the 15. 1622.
To the Lord Bishop of Air, from BALZAC. LETTER XI.
MY LORD,
I Am infinitely glad to understand by your Letters, of your safe return into
France, and that you have now no further use of Ciphers, for the expression of
your mind to my Lord, the Cardinal of Richelieu. I shall at your pleasure (I
hope) understand the particulars of your Voyage, and what you have seen at
Naples and Venice, worthy your content. This is not out of any great curiosity
I have for these things, or that I admire dumb Marble, or Pictures being no
way so beautiful as the Persons: These trifles are to be left for the Vulgar,
with whom the same Objects limit their imagination and sight: and who (of all
times) reflect, merely upon the present, and (of all things) only upon the
appearance: but for my part I am of a contrary opinion. There are not in the
whole World any Palaces so sumptuous, or of so high a structure, which are not
far under my thoughts, and I conceive in my spirit a poor hermitage, to the
foundation whereof many more materials are projected, than were requisite for
establishing a Republic. You see here, my Lord, how in some sort I play the
Prince amidst my poverty, and with what insolency I scorn, what the World so
much admireth; I am as haughty, as though I were a Minister of State, or as if
this last change in the Kingdom had been made for me alone: yet you know well,
that I call not my self L.M.D.L.V. and how if there had been none but my self
to assault, my Lord the Comte of Schambergs Virtue, it still had continued in
the same place where it has been reverenced of all men. Each man has his
several censure concerning this great news, but whatsoever they can say, I
assure my self there can nothing befall that Lord, whereto he is not at all
times prepared, and that he has lived too long, not to know that Fortune,
takes special delight in dallying with the affairs of France, and has from
all Ages made choice of our Court, as the Theater of her follies. If he had not
been provided of the government of this City, and what time the King commanded
him to come thence, his fall had been more fearful then it was, but it is Gods
will that Augolesme should be the fatal retreat of the afflicted, and truly
all things well considered, it is no great down-come to light upon a Mountain:
Now truly if there be any thing amiss in the administration of the Kings
moneys, he cannot be taxed for introducing this error; for he found it there:
and besides, the necessity of the times have ever resisted his good intentions,
and have hindered the appearance of what he had in his heart, for the
reformation of disorders; It is now necessary the King undertake so glorious a
design, and set his hand to that part of the State, which has more need of
redress than all the rest. But, he is first to begin by the moderation of his
Spirit, and he shall after gain their loyalty, who serve him. If those Princes
our Elders have seen, had considered, that the Coin coming into their
Exchecquers, was no less than the blood, and tears of their poor Subjects, whom
they have often forced to fly into Forests, and pass the Seas to save
themselves from Taxes and impositions: they would have been more scrupulous and
cautelous how they had touched upon so dreadful undertakings: at least, they
would not have been at once both indigent and unjust, nor have amazed all the
Princes of Europe, who could never conceive why they borrowed their own moneys
of their Treasurers, who receive their revenews, as they purchase their own
strong places from their Governors, who command therein. Truly, it is very
strange the Great Turk can entrust his Wives to the vigilance of others, and
assure themselves their Chastity shall thereby be conserved; yet, that Kings
know not to whom they may safely encharge their Treasures. But the true reason
is, for that an honest man is by so much more difficultly found, then an
Eunuch, by how much Miracles are more rare than Monsters. Great Fortitude is
requisite for the attaining of honesty, but the will only suffices to become
covetous, and the most harmless have hands, and may happen to have temptations.
Were it my part to play the reformer, and to preach before the Prelates, I
would enlarge my self upon this Subject, but in the condition wherein I stand,
it is sufficient I approve not the ill, and have a good opinion of the present
State: provided, the report be current, that there is now no obstacle between
the King and the Queen his Mother, likely to hinder them from meeting; and that
things are reduced to those terms, wherein Nature has placed them: Then will
the face of the State shortly resume the same beauty the late King bestowed
thereon, and God will with a full hand pour his Graces upon so just a
Government. Though my Lord the Cardinal of Richelieu were only near public
affairs, without touching them, there is no question but he would bring a
blessing to all France, and though he intimated nothing to the King, yet that
he would at least inspire whatsoever were necessary for the good of his
Subjects, and Dignity of his Crown. I will reserve to speak as I ought of this
rare Virtue, till my great Work come to light. Where I will render every man
his right, and condemn even those as culpable, whom the Parliaments crouch
unto; There shall it be where I will canvass the Court of Rome, (which I always
separate from the Church) with as much force, and freedom as he used, from
whose mouth we have seen lightning to issue, and Thunder to be thrown out.
There is not any thing of so fair assemblance, whose deformities I unmask not.
There is nothing of eminency from one end of the World to the other, I
over-turn not. I will discover the defects of Princes and States. I will
expugne Vice wheresoever it is hidden, and with what Protection soever it is
palliated. To conclude, I will pass as severe a Judgment as was that of the
Areopagites in times past, or of the Inquisition at this present. Yet, my Lord,
in this my common censure, I will take a particular care of the Queen Mothers
reputation, and will let all the World see, that what heretofore others have
called Virtue, is the natural habitude of this great Princess. In the place for
others appointed for Afflictions and Calamities, She shall together with the
King, receive only Flowers and Crowns; and as her innocence had saved her
from the general deluge, had she then lived; so will it cause her to Triumph in
my Story amidst the ruins of others. I have not the faculty of Flattering, but
the Art only to speak the Truth in good terms; and the Actions you see, had
need be more eminent than those you have read of, if I equal them not by my
Words. This being thus (my Lord, as I hope, you doubt not;) imagine in what
terms I will Justify the R. D. L. R. and in what sort I will entreat her
Enemies: if I have a mind to it, I will make it one day appear that C. C. has
been as cruel a Monster as those who devour whole Cities, and denounce War
against all Humane and Divine things. One will imagine by the marks I give him,
that R. was a Magician, which daily pricked some Image of Wax with needles, and
who disturbed the repose of all Princes Courts of his time by the force of his
Charms. The truth is, I will do great matters, provided my courage quail not on
his part, whence I expect it should come* and to whom, by a kind of strict
Obligation, I am excited to undertake this Judgment, which will be no less
famous than that of Michael Angelo. At our next meeting I will more
particularly acquaint you with the whole design of my work, with its order,
ornaments, and artifice; you shall there see whether or no I make good use of
those hours I sometimes obtain from the Tyranny of my Physicians, and lingering
Maladies. In the interim do me the honor to love me still; nor think I speak
the Court-language, or that I complement with you, when I assure you I am more
than any man living,

My Lord, Your most humble servant, BALZAC.
The 28. of December, 1622.
Another Letter to the Lord Bishop of Air. LETTER XII.
My Lord,
IT must needs be, your Oath of Fealty does yet continue, and that the Ceremony
you are employed in, be longer than I imagined, since I have no news from you:
for I must freely confess unto you, I am not so slightly persuaded of my self,
as to have any thought, as that you neglect me. Besides, I am certain that
public Faith, and what has ever been sworn upon Altars and the Gospels, are
not more inviolable than your word, and that it will stand good, though Heaven
and Earth should start; Besides, I can less conjecture, that you are hindered by
want of health, whereof I hope you enjoy so large a treasure, as it is like to
continue as long as the World lasts. It were a wrong to me, should you
allege sickness, and no less than to wrangle with me for a thing in such
manner appropriated to my self, as I cannot communicate it to any other. I will
therefore imagine whatsoever you will have me to think; you may love me if you
please, without taking the pains to tell me so: But for my part, how
importunate soever I am herein, yet am I resolute to write unto you, till you
cut off my hands, and to publish so long as I have a tongue, that I am

Sir, Your most humble, and most affectionate servant, BALZAC.
The 16. of December, 1622.
To the Lord Bishop of Air from BALZAC. LETTER XIII.
My Lord,
YOu cannot loose me, how little care soever you take to keep me; The Heavens
must necessarily infuse new affections in me, and utterly alter my
inclinations, if they intend to inhibite me to be your servant. Yet does it not
a little grieve me, you do not testify what I know you believe; and that
having the power to make me happy by the least of your Letters, I have more
trouble to impetrate this favor, than I should find in the obtaining of three
Declarations from the King, and as many Briefs from his Holiness. But all this
notwithstanding, I cannot be persuaded you place me among matters of mere
indifferency, or that you no longer remember what you have promised with so
large protestations, which I hold to be most Authentical. I rather, for the
satisfaction of my thoughts, will be confident you have resolved to love me in
secret, thereby to avoid all jealousy; and will believe there is more cunning,
than coldness in your silence; were it otherwise, had I really lost your
Favors, certainly I would not survive so deep a discomfort, since there is not
any banishment, shipwreck, or sinister fortune, I could not rather require at
Gods hands, than such a loss: But these discourses are as much as to suppose
impossibilities, or to invent dreams: I will therefore leave them, to let you
understand some news from me. I can only say, the Air of this Country is not
offensive unto me: for to assure you that I am in health were too great a
boldness; I confess, I have now and then some pleasing pauses, and I enjoy
certain good hours, which make me remember my former health: But there is great
difference between this imperfect estate of mine, and a constitution comparable
to that of yours, who have life sufficient to vivifie thirty such worn bodies
as mine, which needs but one blast to blow it down. Howsoever, my Physicians
have promised to make me a new man, and to restore unto me what I have lost. I
should be well contented they were men of their words, and that I might at my
ease attend all occasions, to testify how passionately I am,

Your most humble and most affectionate Servant, BALZAC.
The 6. of Jan. 1623.
To the Reverend Bishop of Air from BALZAC. LETTER XIIII.
My Lord,
SInce you have as much care of me as of your Diocese, and in that I perceive
you would imagine some defect, even in the felicities you expect in Heaven,
should you be saved without me; I will use my utmost endeavors to cause that
your desire of my Spiritual good prove not unprofitable, and to make my self
capable of the good counsel you gave me by your Letter. True it is, I have been
so long habituated in vice, I have almost utterly forgotten my state of
Innocence, so as a particular Jubilee for my self only, were no more than
necessary: On the other side, the pious motions I have, are so poor and
imperfect, that of all the flames the Primative Christians have felt and
endured, I should hardly support the mere smoke. Yet (my Lord) even in this bad
state wherein I now stand, do I expect a Miracle from my Maker, who is only
able to raise Children out of the hardest Quarries; nor will I believe his
mercy has finished what he intends to effect for the good of Mortals: For
since he has placed Ports upon the shoars of most dangerous Seas, and given
some kind of dawning, even to the darkest nights; it may be there is yet
something reserved for me in the secrets of his Providence; and that if
hitherto I have ranged out of the right way, he will not any longer suffer me
to stray, or tire my self in the track of vice. And truly, I must here, though
much to my shame, acknowledge the truth unto you, with those few drops of
corrupt blood (which is all I have left) I am plunged in all those passions,
wherewith the soundest bodies are pressed: yea, Tyrants, who burn whole Cities
upon the first motion of rage, and choler, and who allow themselves to act
what unlawful thing soever, do nothing more than my self, save only to enjoy
those things I desire, and to execute those designs remaining only in my will,
I wanting their power to perpetrate the like: Nor can the Fever, the Stone,
nor the Scytica, as yet tame my rebellious spirit, or cause it to become
capable of Discipline; and if time had added years to the rest of my
infirmities, I verily think I should desire to behold unclean sights with
spectacles, such I mean as you utterly avoid, and cause my self to be carried
to those lewd places, whether alone I were unable to go: Insomuch that as there
are diverse paintings which are necessarily to be clean defaced, to take away
the defects; So I much fear, nothing but Death can stay the current of my
crimes, unless by your means I enter into a second life, more fruithfull than
the former. I therefore speak in good sadness, set your whole Clergy to
prayer, and command a public Fast in the same strictness, as though you were
to impetrate at the hands of God, the conversion of the great Turk, or of the
Persian Emperor. Propound to your self Monsters in my will to be mastred, and
an infinity of Enemies to overcome in my passions, and after all this you will
bear me witness, I have not made matters greater then they are, and save only
a certain imperfect desire I have to repent, and a kind of small resistance, I
sometimes make against the beginnings and buddings of vice, there is not any
difference at all between my self and the greatest sinnet living: But take not
(I beseech you) this I write, as a mark of my humility, for you never read a
truer relation: and what St. Paul spoke in the person of Mankind, accusing
himself of other men's offenses, is my own simple disposition, which I deliver
into the hands of the Divine Justice. I hate my self; yet true it is, I find
so great coldness in the performance of pious actions, that my mind seems to
be imprisoned when at any time my duty draws me to Church, and when I am
there, I rather seek diversions and temptations, then instruction or
edification: Even mental prayer being an Oblation for all hours, and which may
be performed without either burnt Incense, or bloody Sacrifices, and the
finishing whereof is so near the first motion; is to me as laborious, as the
Pilgrimage of Mount Serrat, or of our Lady of Loretta, would be to another. I
am always sad, but never penitent; I love solitariness, but hate austerity; I
side with honest men, but reside with the wicked: if at any time some small
rays of Devotion reflect upon my crazy conscience, they are of so short
continuance, and so weak, as they neither afford me light nor heat, so as all
this being but accident, and mere change, does not any way merit the name of
good, and it were great wrong to Virtue, to rank it in the number of casual
occurrents. You are therefore necessarily to labor for my conversion, which I
am unable to effect of my self, and that for my part, I only afford matter
whereon to make an honest man. If there be certain Saints whom we owe to the
tears and intercession of others, and if some Martyrs have made their very
Executioners Companions of their Glory, I may well hope you will be a
powerful means to save me with your self; and that one day (happily) I may be
mentioned among the rest of your Miracles. Sir, I know your life to be so
spotless, as though you were incorporeal, or never loved any other than that
Supreme beauty, from whence all others are derived: Wherefore there is no
question but so rare a Virtue may easily impetrate at Gods hands any
supplication you shall exhibit, nor is there any doubt he has (for you
allotted) other limits to his bounty, save his only omnipotency. You shall yet
at the least find in me Obedience and Docility, if I have not attained any
stronger habitudes. You shall have to do with one who amidst the corruption of
this Age, wherein well nigh all Spirits revolt from the Faith, cannot be drawn
to believe any truth to be greater, than what he has understood from his Nurse
or Mother. If in what concerns not Religion, I have sometimes had my private
sense and opinion, I do with my very heart leave the same, to the end, to
reconcile my self with the Vulgar; and least I should appear an enemy to my
Country for a slight word, or matter of small importance. If phphphph had held
himself to this Maxim, he might securely have lived among men, nor had he been
prosecuted with all extremity, as the most savage of all beasts: But he rather
chose to make a Tragical end, than to expect a death, wherewith the World was
unacquainted, or to execute only ordinary actions. So far as I can learn, or
if the report which passes be current, he had a conceit he might one day prove
to be that false Prophet, wherewith the declining age of the Church is
threatened: and though he be but of mean extraction, and poor fortunes, he was
notwithstanding so presumptuous, as to imagine himself to be the man, who is to
come with armed forces to disturb the quiet of consciences, and for whom the
infernal Ministers keep all the Treasures yet hidden in the earths entrails. So
long as he contented himself in committing only humane faults, writing as yet
with an untainted Pen, I often told him, his Verses were not passable; and that
he was in the wrong to esteem himself an understanding man. But he perceiving
that the rules I propounded to him, for bettering his abilities, to be
over-sharp and severe for him, and finding small hope of arriving whether I
desired to conduct him, he perhaps thought best to seek out some other way to
bring himself into a credit at Court, hoping of a mean Poet to become a mighty
Prophet: So that (as it is generally reported) after he had perverted a number
of silly Spirits, and long showed himself in the throng of the ignorant
multitude; he in conclusion did as one, who should cast himself into a
bottomless pit, on purpose to gain the reputation of being an admirable Jumper.
My Lord, you remember (I doubt not) what our joint opinion has been of such
like persons, and the weakness you showed there was in the principles of their
wicked Doctrine. Now truly how extravagant soever my Spirit has been, I have
yet ever submitted the same to the Authority of GODS Church, and to the consent
of Nations; and as I have always held, that a single drop of water, would more
easily corrupt, then the whole Ocean: So have I ever assured my self, that
particular opinions could never be either so sound, or sollid, as the general
Tenets. A silly man, who has no further knowledge of himself, than by the
relations of others, who is at his wits end, and wholly confounded in the
consideration, or reflection upon the meanest works of Nature; who after the
revolution of so many Ages, is not able to assign the cause of a certain Rivers
overflow; nor of the intervales, or good days of a Tertian Ague: How dare he
presume to speak confidently of that Infinite Majesty, in whose presence the
Angels themselves cover their faces with their Wings, and under whom the very
Heavens crouch, even to the Earths lowest concavities. There is no other thing
remaining for us, save the only glory of Humility, and Obedience, within the
limits whereof, we ought to contain our selves: And since it is most certain,
that Humane reason reaches not to so high a pitch as to attain the perfection
of Knowledge, we ought instead of disputing, or questioning points of Religion,
to rest satisfied in the adoration of the Mysteries: for doubtless, if we
strive to enter further thereinto, or search for a thing utterly unknown to all
Philosophy, and concealed from the Sages of this World, we shall by such
profane curiosity gain only the dazeling of our eyes, and confusion of our
senses: God by the light of his Gospel has revealed unto us diverse Truths,
whereof we were utterly ignorant; but he reserveth for us far greater
Mysteries, which we shall never comprehend, but only in that Kingdom, which he
has prepared for his chosen Servants, and by the only vision of his Face. In
the mean time: to the end, to augment the merit of our Faith, and the more to
perfectionate our Piety, his pleasure is, that Christians should become as
blind Lovers, and that they have not any other desires, or hopes, but for
those things above the reach of their understandings, and which they can no way
comprehend by Natural reason. So soon as the time you have prefixed me, shall
be expired, and the Prime-roses make the Spring appear, I will not fail to wait
upon you, and diligently to address my self to the collection of your grave and
important Discourses, and to become an honest man by hearing, since that is the
Sense appointed for the apprehension of Christian virtues, and whereby the Son
of God was conceived, and his Kingdom established among men. But it is needless
to use any artifice, or that you paint the place of your abode in so glorious
colors, thereby to invite me to come: For though you preached in the Desert,
or were you hidden in such a corner of the World, where the Sun did only shine
upon the steril Sands and steep Rocks: you well know, I should esteem my self
happy where you are. Your Company being of power to make either a prison, or
proscription pleasing unto me; and wherein I find the Loover and the whole
Court, will add (to the description you have made of Air) diverse beauties which
Geographers have not hitherto observed, as being far greater, than others,
though more secret. Those Mountains which will not allow France and Spain to be
one man's, and under which the Rain and Thunder are framed, will appear to me
more huge, than they formerly did, when I first saw them: your waters, which
heretofore cured diverse diseases, will even raise the dead, if you once bless
them; and doubtless this people, always bred up to bear Arms, and who as the
Fire and Iron is only destinated for the use of War, has (ere now) mollified
their fierce humor by the moderation of your mild conduct. For my part (Sir,)
I make account to become a new man under your hands, and to receive a second
Birth from you. Truly, it would be a thing right happy to me, and in it self
famous; if the like Spiritual health, proceeding from the garments and shadows
of the Apostles, might happen unto me by approaching so holy a person; and if
being your workmanship, and the Son of your Spirit, I should instantly resemble
a Father so happily endowed with all those rare qualities and perfections,
which are wholly deficient in me.

BALZAC.

To Mounsieur de la Motts Aigron. LETTER XV.
YEsterday was one of those Sunless days (as you term them) which resemble
that beautiful blind Maid, wherewith Philip the second fell in Love. Truly,
I never took more pleasure in so private a solitariness; and though I walked in
a large and open plain, whereof man could make no other use, but for two Armies
to fight in: yet the shade the Heavens cast on all sides, caused me little to
regard the shelter of Caves, or Forests. There was a general and quiet calm
from the highest Region of the Air, even to the Superficies of the Earth: the
waters of Rivers seemed as even and smooth as those of Lakes; and surely; if at
Sea such a calm should for ever surprise ships, they could never be either
safe, or sunk. This I say, on purpose to make you repent the loss of so a
pleasant a day, for not coming abroad out of the City, as also to draw you
sometimes out of your Angoulesme, where you tread levil with our Towers and
Steeples, to come and take part of those pleasures wherein the ancient Princes
of the World took delight: who usually refreshed themselves in Fountains, and
lived on those fruits which Forests afford. Your friends are here in a small
circle environed with Mountains, and where is yet remaining some few grains of
that fair Gold whereof the first Age was composed. In truth, when the fire of
War is flaming in the four corners of France, and that within a hundred paces
hence, the whole Earth is covered with adverse Troops and Armies; they with
mutual consent do always spare our Village. The Springtime in other places
producing the besiegings of Forts and Cities, with other enterprises of War,
and which for this dozen years has been less looked for, in respect of the
change of Seasons, then for any alteration of Affairs, suffers us to see no
other thing but Violets and Roses. Our people are not contained in their
primative innocence, either by fear of Laws, or Study of Sciences: They (to
live uprightly) do simply follow their natural Bounty, and draw more advantage
from their ignorance of Vice, then most of us do out of the knowledge of
Virtue: so as in this Territory of two miles, they know not how to cosen any,
save Birds and Beasts, and the pleading Language is as unknown here, as that of
America, or of other parts of the World, which have escaped the avarice of
Ferdinand, and the ambition of Isabella. Those things which hurt the health of
man, or offend their eyes, are generally banished hence; Snakes nor Lizards are
never seen here, and of creeping creatures we know no other but Mellons and
Strawberries. I intend not here to draw you the portrait of a palace, the
workmanship whereof has not been ordered according to the rules of
architecture, nor the matter so precious as Marble and Purphire. I will only
tell you that at the Gates there is a Grove, wherein at full noon there enters
no more day than needs must not to make it night, and to cause all colors not
to look black: so that between the Sun and the shade, there is a kind of third
temper composed, which may well be endured by the weakest eyes, and hide the
deformities of painted faces. The Trees here, are green to the very ground, as
well with their own leaves, as with Juy which invirons them: and as for the
fruits wherein they are deficient, their branches are all beset with
Turtle-Doves and Phesants, and this at all times in the year. From thence I
march into a Meddow, where I tread upon Tulipans and Anemons, having caused
them to be mingled among other Flowers, to confirm my opinion I brought from my
Travails, that French flowers are not so fair, as those of Foreign Countries.
I (sometimes walk down into that Valley, being the secret part of my Desert,
and which till now) was not known to any man: It is a Country to be wished for
and painted. I have made choice thereof for my most precious occupations, there
to pass the most pleasing hours of my life: The Trees and water never suffer
this place to want couldness and verdure. The Swans which covered the whole
River, are retired to this place of security: living in a Channel, which
causes the greatest talkers to take a nap, so soon as they come near; and on
whose Banks I am always happy; be I merry, or melancholy: How short a time
soever I stay there, I suppose I enter into my first innocence: my desires, my
fears and hopes stop in a trice: all the motions of my Soul slacken, nor have I
any passions remaining, or if I have any, I govern them as tame beasts. The Sun
conveys its light thither, but never its heat. The place is so low, as it can
only receive the last points of its beams: being therefore the more
beautiful, in that they are less burning, and the light thereof altogether
pure. But as it is my self who have discovered this new found Land; so do I
possess it without any partner, nor would I share it with my own Brother. But
in all other quarters under my command, there is not a man who Courts not his
Mistress without control, nor servant of mine who is not Master; each one
satisfying himself of what he loves, and spending the time at pleasure. And on
the other side, when I see the Grass trodden down; and on the other the Corn
full of Layers: I am well assured, it is neither Wind nor Hail, has made this
work, but only a Shepherd and his sweetheart. At which door soever I go out
of my house, or on what side soever I turn mine eyes, in this pleasant Pathmos,
I find the River of Charanton well meriting as much fame, as that of Tagus,
and wherein, when the Beasts go to drink, they see the Heavens as clear as we
do, and enjoy the same advantage, which elsewhere men have over them. Besides,
this pure water is so in love with this petty Province, that it divides it self
into a thousand branches, and makes an infinite of windings and turnings, as
loath to leave and deprive it self of so pleasing a lodging; and when at any
time it over-floweth, it is only to make the year more fertile, and to afford
us means to catch Trouts and Pikes, leaving them upon the levil; and which are
so great and excellent, as they equal the Sea Monsters; the Crocadiles of Nile,
and all the supposed Gold rolling in those feigned Rivers, so much spoken of by
Poets. The great Duke of Espernon comes hither sometimes for change of
felicity, and to lay aside that austere virtue and splendor, which dazeleth
the eyes of all men, to assume milder qualities, and a more accostable Majesty.
This Cardinal likewise, by whom Heaven intends to act so high designs, and of
whom you hear me daily speak, after the loss of his brother, who was such a
one, as if he might have chosen him among all men, he would not have taken any
other: after (as I say) having endured that loss, well deserving to draw tears
from the Queen, he made choice of this place, here to exercise his patience,
and to receive from Gods hands, who loves silence, and who is found in
solitary retirements, what Philosophy affoordeth not, nor is to be practiced
among the throng of people. I would enlarge my self upon other examples, to
show you how my Village has at all times been frequented by Heroical Hermits,
and how the steps of Princes and great Siegniours, art (as yet) newly trodden
in my ordinary paths. But the more to envite you to come hither; I suppose it
sufficient to say, that Virgil and my self do here attend you: if therefore you
be accompanied in this Voyage with your Muses; and other Manuscripts, we shall
not need to intertain the time with Court news, nor with the Germain troubles.
Let me not live, if ever I saw any thing comparable to your Spiritual
Meditations, and if the least part of the work you showed me, be not of more
worth than all Frankford Mart, and all those great Books which come to us from
the North, bringing cold weather and Frosts along with them. I assure you the
President of THOU, who was as worthy a Judge of Latin Eloquence, as of the
life and Fortunes of men; and who had left an exact History behind him, had he
pleased to retract some things; made no small esteem of these my Contrymen:
But I cannot as yet conceive what caused him to affect certain wits so contrary
to his own, and who never were acquainted, nor did so much as dream of that
Roman purity, you pursue with so great scrupulosity and exact diligence. You
will let these men see I assure my self; yea, and those wise Transalpines
themselves likewise, who think all such to be Scythians who are not Italians,
even in what fashion they spoke in Augustus his age; yea, and in a time more
clear from the corruption of good customs. In a word, besides the propriety of
terms, and chastity of style, which lends a luster to your elaborate
writings, your conceits are so sublime, and so full of courage, that it is very
probable the ancient Republic of Rome was adorned with the like, at what time
it was victorious over the world, and when the Senate conceived insemblable
terms, the Commandments they prescribed to greatest Princes, and the answers it
addressed to all Nations on earth: I will speak further, when you appear where
I expect you; and where instead of Flowers, Fruits, and Shades, which I prepare
for you, I hope to receive from you all the riches of Art and Nature. In the
interim (to use my Lord the Cardinal d'Ossats term) I bid you good night, and
let you know, that if you seek excuses not to come, I am no longer

Your most humble and faithful servant, BALZAC.
The 26. September, 1622.
To Mounsieur de bois Robert from BALZAC. LETTER XVI.
SIR,
I Was upon the point not to have written any more unto you, and to have
contented my self in sending you single commendations, since I see my Letters
procure you Enemies: and for that you are in daily contestation for defending
them; if therefore you desire continuance of our conference in this kind, live
hence-forward reposedly, and reconcile your self to choice wits, from whom I
should be sorry you should separate your self for my sake; it is far better to
conceal a small truth, than to disturb a general peace; and I should hold my
Eloquence as pernicious as the perfections of Helena, should it prove any cause
of your quarrels. Since there have been found men who have carped at the Worlds
composure, and spied spots in the Sun, it is very likely inferior things
cannot be more perfect; and that there is nothing so absolutely approved,
against which there has not been some thing disputed, and certain weak reasons
alleged. I confess I write as men build Temples and Palaces, and that I
sometimes fetch my Materials a far off, as we are to make a voyage of two
thousand Leagues, to transport the Treasures of America into Spain. But if
Pearls be not precious because they grow not in the sands of Seine; or if in
what I do, some condemn me, it suffices that I am not of their mind; if the
worst come, I appeal to my Lord the Cardinal of Richelieu, of whose approbation
I esteem more, than of popular favor, or applause of Theaters. It is long
since I understood from him that I exceeded others, not excepting even those
who strive to aspire to a kind of Tyranny, and to usurp a more absolute
Authority over wits, than is either lawful, or reasonable. This being so, I
should much wrong that great person, on whose books God has placed the Truth
we seek after, as well as the Eloquence all of us imagine we have attained
should I digress from his opinion, to regard what four or five of those
composers of Romand of the Rose say, who have no other Language but Legends: if
I would content my self with my Infant conceptions, or determined to write as
an honest Woman should speak, they would happily find their own facility in my
Works: though truly, if I take any pains therein, I assure my self they will
sooner guess at, then gain my conceptions. But truly, he who purposes to
himself the Idea of perfection, and who labors for Eternity, ought not to let
any thing escape his Pen, till after long and serious consultation with
himself. Yet will I tell you, and all the World may easily understand, that my
writings smell more of Musk and Amber, than of Oil, or sweat; whereas out of
that great labouriousness they so much frame to themselves, there will
infallibly arise obscurity, which none but the Blind can tax me with. But as
for those fellows, it is always night with them, and they are rather to accuse
their Mothers of their defects, and not colors, or the light: I endeavor (in
what I may) to make all my conceptions popular, and to be intelligible among
Women and Children, even when I speak of things beyond their Capacity: but if
your friends suppose certain of my conceits to be over-far fetched, let them
thoroughly observe, whether they transcend my subject, or their conceptions; or
whither I go astray, or they loose sight of me: There are diverse things above
reason, which yet are not contrary thereto. An Heroical virtue making use of
excesses and height of passions, goes as far beyond vulgar Virtue, as it
surmounteth Vice: we are not therefore to shut up all Wits within the same
limits, nor presently to censure that as Exorbitant, which is only
extraordinary: Otherwise we should resemble that poor Norvegian, who the first
time he saw Roses, durst not touch them for fear of burning his fingers, and
was much amazed to see (as he supposed,) Trees to bear fire: Surely as Novelty
is not of force to make Monsters well featured, so ought it not to hinder our
affections to excellent things, though unknown unto us. If for the
understanding my language, it were necessary to learn two, or that Anxietie,
Decrepitude, and the Irritaments of Despair, were familiar phrases with me; if
I made use of Waves instead of Water, and evil Fates for ill fortune, or the
Flower-de-luce for France; to the end to play the Poet in Prose; should I
immolate my self to public scorn, and sail upon the Ocean in the stormical
seasons of the year, if I should say, the Misericordious Justice of God, and
his just Misericord; or pluck comparisons from Pliny; and could I not commend
a King without the help of Alexander the Great, and Plutarcks Worthies; if
instead of well-speaking, I should translate Tacitus ill, and if in spite of
him I should force him to deliver his opinion concerning all the affairs of
this age, you then might rightly blame me from bringing follies so far off, and
for taking so much pains to make my self ridiculous. But surely I should be the
most innocent of all others, had I only offended therein; and I may safely say
without vanity, that even the follies of my Infancy, were more serious than
those sweet Rhetorical flowers: when all is said, since there is nothing but
Religion can force us to believe what she pleases, and that Kings themselves
have no power over Souls, I am well satisfied with the affection of my friends,
and do willingly leave their judgments free to themselves. One Goodnight is
more worth than all our Eloquence, and not to know the miseries of this life,
is to be more learned than the Scorbonists and Jesuits. For my part, (despising
the World as I do) I cannot much esteem my self, who make up one of the
sickliest parts thereof; and I have so poor an opinion of my own sufficiency,
as I little esteem the Talents of others. Think not then, I adore the
workmanship of my hands, though I take as much pains therein, as did the
ancient Carvers in counterfeiting their gods. But contrariwise, it is the
reason why I dislike them, and had I been a man of ten thousand Crowns rent, I
would have given the half of it to a Secretary, only to hire him not to indite
those Letters you have so much admired.

The 15. February, 1624.
The Letters of MONSIEUR de BALZAC. To my Lord Cardinal de la Valete; from
Mounsieur D' BALZAC. The second Book.
LETTER I.
My LORD,
WHilst you employ your hours in gaining hearts and Votes, and happily lay the
foundation of some eminent enterprise: I here enjoy a reposedness not unlike
that of the dead, and which is never rouzed but by Clorinda's kisses. If the
Duke of Ossuna be chosen King of Naples, (as you write the report runs) I
find no strangeness in it. The World is so old, and has seen so much, it can
hardly spy any new matter; nor is there at this day any lawful Authority,
whose Origin (for the most part) has not been unjust. And on the other side
the ill success of revolts are far more frequent than are the changes of
States: and the same action, which has no less than a Diadem for the aim,
has often an ignominious death for its end. Howsoever this happens, it shall
not much trouble me, since the issue cannot be other than advantageous to this
State. For God herein will either make it appear, that he is protector of
Kings: or it falling out otherwise, yet at least it will weaken the Enemies to
this Crown. But I hope you will not advise me to beat my brains upon those
politic considerations; for should I do so, it were no less than to retract
the resolution I had taken to look upon things passing among us and our
neighbors, as I do on the History Japon, or the affairs of another World. I
ought to surrender this humor to vulgar spirits, who interest themselves in
all the quarrels of States and Princes, and who will always be parties, on
purpose to put themselves into choler, and be miserable in the misfortunes of
others. Truly we shall never have done, if we will needs take all the affairs
of the World to heart, and be passionate for the public; whereof we make but a
small part. It may be at this very instant wherein I write, the great Indian
Fleet suffers shipwreck within two leagues of Land: happily the great Turk
has surprised some Province from the Christians, and taken thence some twenty
thousand Souls, to convey them to their City of Constantinople: It may be the
Sea has exceeded its limits, and drowned some City in Zealand. If we send
for mischiefs so far off, there will not an hour pass, wherein some
disconsolation, or other will not come upon us. If we hold all the men in the
World to be of our affinity, let us make account to wear Mournings all our
life. As mine experience is not great, so are my years not many: yet since I
came into the World, I have seen so many strange accidents, and have understood
from my Father such store of incredible occurrents, as I suppose there can
nothing now happen, able to cause admiration in me. The Emperor Charles the
fifth his Grandchild, born to the hopes of so many Kingdoms, was condemned to
death, for having over-soon desired them. The natural subjects of the King of
Spain, do at this day dispute with him for the Empire of the Sea; nor will they
rest satisfied with their usurped liberty. Surely, we should hardly be drawn to
believe these things upon the credit of others, and those in succeeding ages
will with much difficulty be persuaded to receive them for truths; yet are
these the ordinary recreations of Fortune, taking pleasure in deceiving
Mankind, by events far opposite to all appearance; yea, and contrary to their
judgments. Has she not delivered over to the peoples fury, the man whom she
had formerly raised above the rest, to the end, we should not presume in
greatest prosperities? And has she not at the same time taken out of the
Bastile, a Prisoner, to make him General of a Royal Army, thereby to oblige us
not at any time to despair? I do here consider all this with a reposed spirit,
and as Fables presented on the Stage; or Pictures in a Gallery. Now since the
late Comet had like to have been as fatal unto me, as to the Emperor
Rodolphus, in that my curiosity to see it, caused me to rise in my shirt, which
gave me a cold all the Winter after, I am hereafter resolved not to meddle with
any thing above my reach; but to refer all to GOD and Nature. So as Clarinda
suffer me to serve her, and that I understand from her own mouth that she loves
me, I will hearken to no other news, nor search a second Fortune. I therefore
most humbly beseech your Lordship to excuse me, if upon these occasions lately
presented, I cannot afford you my personal attendance, or refuse to follow you
whither your resolution leads you; my Mistress having commanded me, to render
her an account how I shed my blood, and enjoining me never to go the Wars, but
when Muskets are charged with Cypres powder; I am rather contented you should
accuse me of Cowardice, than she justly to charge me with disobedience. And
after all this, tell me whether, or no, you think me to be in my right wits,
and that I have not lost my reason, together with the respect I owe you. I
herein do as a Delinquent; who fearing he should not be soon enough punished,
puts himself into the hands of Justice, not staying either for the rack, or
examination of Judges, for the discovery of a crime whereof he was never
accused. I am well assured, that of all passions you have only those of Honor
and Glory, and that your Spirits are so replenished therewith, as there is no
place left either for love, hate, or fear. Yet do I withal consider, that it
is a part of a wise man's felicity to reflect upon other men's follies:
howsoever, if any word has escaped me, which may offend your eyes, take it, I
beseech you, as a means sent you from GOD for your farther mortification, in
causing you to read things so distastefull unto you. You are necessarily to
endure far greater crosses amidst the corruption of this Age: if you cannot
live among the wicked, you must seek for another kind of World than this, and
for more perfect creatures than Mortals. There will ever be poysnings beyond
the Alps, Treasons at Court, and revolts in this Realm. Howsoever (my Lord)
there will be love even in spite of you, so long as there are eyes and beauties
in the World; yea, the Wise themselves will love, if they find Clorindaes,
Dianaes, and Cassandra's to be beloved. Fire seizes sometimes on Churches and
Palaces. God has framed Fools and Philosophers of one and the same matter: And
that cruel Sect which seeks to bereave us of the one half of our selves, in
seeking to free us from our passions and affections, instead of making a wise
man, have only raised a Statue. I must therefore once again tell you that I
love, since Nature will have it so; and that I am of the progeny of our first
Parents: but I must withal inform you, that all my affections spring not from
the distempers and diseases of my Soul; my inclination to serve you, having
immortal reason, not momentary pleasure for its foundation, one day happily I
shall no more be amorous, but will always remain

My Lord, Your most humble and most affectionate servant, BALZAC.

To the Lord Cardinal of Valete, Son to the Duke of Espernon. LETTER II.
MY LORD,
AT length they have done you right, and you now enjoy what you deserved from
the first day of your Nativity: if there could be any thing added to man, who
reckons Kings among his Predecessors, and whose inclinations happily are
overgreat to live under the power of another; I should advise you to rejoice
at this news; but being extracted as you are, from one of the most illustrious
Origins on earth, and begotten by a Father, whose life is laden with miracles;
it suffices that you pardon Fortune, since it has so happened that present
necessity has gained of her what she in right owed to your name. I know well
that some will tell you, you are created Prince of such an Estate, as is
bounded neither by Seas nor Mountains, and how the extent of your Jurisdiction
is so illimitable, as were there many Worlds, they ought all of them to depend
thereon as well as this. But I, who suffer not mine eyes to be dazeled by any
other luster than that of Virtue, and who do not so much as bestow the looking
on, what most men admire; if I should esteem you either more great, or happy
than you were, I should not have sufficiently profited under you, in the true
understanding of you. Doubtless in the opinion of the Vulgar, it is an
extraordinary Honor to be a prime person in a Ceremony, and to wear a Hat of
equal esteem to Crowns and Diadems. Yet I presume you will pardon me, if I make
bold to tell you, it is an honor can never oblige a wise man to envy you. For
had you this point only above me, I should still be my own Master: Nor had I
for your sake renounced that liberty, which was as dear to me as the
Commonwealth of Venice. Upon the matter, to have none other Judge on Earth
save only your reputation and conscience, and to have a great train of
followers, some whereof are employed in the procuring your spiritual pleasures,
others in the conduct of your temporal affairs, all this shall be still the
same with you, and diverse others whom you slight; but to perform good and
virtuous actions, when you are assured they shall never come to the Worlds eye;
to fear nothing but dishonest things; to believe death to be neither good nor
bad in it self; but that if the occasion to embrace it be honorable, it is
always more valuable than a long life: to have the reputation of integrity in
your promises, in a time, when the most credulous have enough to do to confide
on public Faith: This is it which I admire in you my Lord; and not your red
Hat, and your fifty thousand Crowns rent; yet I will say, that for the honor
of Rome, you ought to esteem of what she sends you. The time has been when she
would have erected Statues for you, and afforded you sufficient subject to have
merited Tryumphs: but those days being past, and since that Empire is no longer
maintained by such means, yet ought you to rest satisfied with Honors of
Peace, and accept (as a high favor) a Dignity the King of Spaine's Son has
made suite for. If there were nothing else in it, but that it causes you to
quit your Mourning-robes, to revest your self with the color of Roses, you can
do no less than rejoice at such a change. Howsoever the nearest objects to your
eyes, will not be so doleful as formerly they were, since there will be nothing
upon you, which shall not be resplendent and glorious. I would willingly dilate
this discourse, but the speedy departure of the Post will not suffer me; and
besides, I being well assured, that if you esteem any thing in my Letters, it
is not the multitude of words; I ought to be contented to end this, after my
humble suite unto you, to love me always, since I am passionately

My Lord, Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servant, BALZAC.

To the Cardinal de Valette, from BALZAC. I here send you two Letters which
were delivered me, to be conveyed unto you, the one from the Duke of Bavaria,
the other from the Cardinal of Lerma. My Lord, you shall thereby perceive that
your proposition has afforded joy, both to the Victorious, and to the
afflicted; and that the World receives a notable interest therein. since it
augmenteth the contentment of Triumphs, and sweetneth the harshnes of
retirement. LETTER III.
My Lord,
I Suppose you have understood of the Election of the Pope, some two days
journies from Paris; and that you will make no great haste to add your
approbation to a thing already dispatched: I had sent a Post on purpose to
advertise you thereof; but my Lord Ambassador thought it not fit, but has
encharged his own Messenger to advertise you of all things in your Voyage this
way, and to give you account of all occurrents. This makes me think that the
subject of your voyage ceasing, and the time of year being as yet somewhat
troublesome, for the undertaking thereof, you will rather reserve it for a
fitter season, when you may perform it with less disorder, and more
advantagiously for the Kings service. My meaning is, that I would have you set
forward about the end of Autumn, that you may spend here with us, one of these
warm and springing Winters, laden with Roses, wholly reserved for our admirable
Italic. And my Lord, though herein the consideration of my private interest may
seem to make me speak thus, rather than my affection to your service; yet would
I willingly tell you, that all kind of contentments attend you here, and if
your great Spirit aspire to glorious things for the keeping it in action, it
shall infallibly find them at Rome. In the interim, how short a while soever
you stay here, you shall have the contentment to see France change some five,
or six times. At your return you will hardly find any thing answerable to what
you left there; they shall not be the same men you formerly saw, and all things
will appear unto you, as the affairs of another Kingdom. But before the matter
be grown to that head, it is fitting you reign here in Sovereigntie, and become
the Supreme Judge of three, or four Conclaves: And truly, it might so happen
(my Lord) that I should do you some acceptable service in those great
occasions, if I had my health; but to my great grief it is a happiness, for
which I envy my Grandmother, and howsoever I have heretofore been little, or
much estimable: I confess, that at this present, I am but the half of what I
was. It is therefore in vain to expect works of any great value from me, or
that you importune me to take pains for the Public; for in Conscience what
high designs can a man have, between the affliction of diseases, and the
apprehension of Death? The one whereof does never forsake me, and the other
daily affrights me; or how can you imagine I should conceive eminent matters,
who am ready to die at every instant. True it is, that the necessity to obey
you, which I have always before mine eyes, is an extraordinary strong motive:
but (not to dissemble) the impossibility of my performance is yet more
forcible; and so long as I continue in the state I now am, I cannot promise you
so much as the History of the Kingdom of A little principality in France.
Yuelot; nor that of the Papacy of Campora, though it continued only one half
quarter of an hour.

From Rome this 27. of February 1622.
Another Letter unto Cardinal de la Valette from BALZAC. LETTER IV.
My Lord,
YOur Cash-keeper has newly brought me the sum you commanded him to deliver
unto me. I would willingly show sufficient thankfulness for this high favor:
but besides that your benefits are boundless, and that you are so gracious an
obliger, that it does even augment the value of your bounty, I should seem
over-presumptuous to think any words of mine valuable to the least of your
actions. It shall therefore suffice me to protest unto you, that the bounty,
wherewith the Letter I received from you, is so stored, (being of force to
infuse Love and Fidelity in the hearts of very Barbarians,) shall work no less
effect in the spirit of a person, who has learned both by Nature and
Philosophy not to be ungrateful. Since I find my interest within my duty, I
must necessarily love you (if I hate not my self) and be an honest man by the
very Maxim of the wicked. Yet is not this last consideration the cause chiefly
obliging me to your service: For though I acknowledge diverse defects in my
self, yet may I without vanity affirm, I was never besotted with so base an
attraction as that of gain. I therefore reflect upon your favors in their
naked purity, and the esteem you make of me, is to me by so much a more strong
obligation, than all others, in that it regards my merit, and not my instant
poverty, and proceeds from your judgment, which is far more excellent, then
your fortunes are eminent. Herein (my Lord,) it is manifest, that all your
inclinations are magnificent: for you knowing me neither to be fit to make the
Father of a Family, nor to solicit causes at the Counceltable, nor well to
ride post: you make it appear, you are of the right blood of Kings, who are
only rich in superfluous things. Truly, it were a hard matter to guess what
in this World is the true use of Pearls and Diamonds; or why a Picture should
cost more than a Palace; but only pleasure, which to satisfy the inventions
of Art, are daily employed, and nature to that end produces whatsoever is
rare, being indeed a thing more noble than necessiy, she being contented with
small matters, ever preferring profit before pleasure. And I will here stop,
lest I speak too much to my own advantage: And if I have already incurred that
crime, I beseech you to believe it has not been with purpose to praise my
self, but only to extol your liberality: Yet will I make bold to acquaint
you, how I employ your money, and yield you a more particular account of the
affairs I dispatch for you here at Rome: First, in this hot Month I seek all
possible remedies against the violence of the Sun. I have a Fan which wearieth
the hands of four Grooms, and raises a wind in my Chamber, which would cause
shipwreck in the main Sea; I never die but I die Snow in the Wine of Naples,
and make it melt under Mellons. I spend half my time under water, and the rest
on Land: I rise twice a day, and when I step out of my bed, it is only to
enter into a Grove of Orange Trees, where I slumber with the pleasant purling
of some twelve Fountains: but if occasion be offered to go further once in a
week, I cross not the street but in a Carroach, passing still in the shade
between Heaven and Earth: I leave the smell of sweetest flowers unto the
Vulgar, as having found the invention to eat and drink them. The Spring time
never parts with me all the year, either in variety of distilled waters, or in
Conserves. I change perfumes according to the diversity of seasons; some I have
sweeter, others stronger: And though the Air be a thing Nature bestows for
nothing, and whereof the poorest have plenty, yet that, I breath in my Chamber,
is as costly unto me as my house-rent. Besides all this, I in quality of my
Lord your Agent, am almost daily feasted: and there whilst others fill
themselves with substantial and most ponderous cates; I, who have no great
appetite, make choice of such Birds as are crammed with Sugar and nourish my
self with the spirit of Fruits, and with a meat called jelly. My Lord, these
are all the services I yield you in this place, and all the functions of my
residence near his holiness; and I hold my self particularly obliged now the
second time to thank you for this favor: for by your means I enjoy two things
seldom suiting together; a Master and Liberty; and the great rest you allow me,
is not the least present you please out of your Nobleness to afford me.

Your Graces most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
From Rome 15. of July, 1621.
To the Lord Cardinal de Valette from BALZAC. LETTER V.
My Lord,
WIthin the Deserts of Arabia, nor in the Seas intrails, was there ever so
furious a Monster found, as is the Sciatica: And if Tyrants, whose memories are
hateful unto us, had been stored with such instruments for effecting their
cruelties; surely I think it had been the Sciatica the Martyrs had endured for
Religion, and not the fire, and biting of wild beasts. At every sting it
carries a poor sick person even to the borders of the other World, and causes
him sensible to touch the extremities of life. And surely, to support it long,
a greater remedy than Patience is no less than requisite, and other forces than
those of man. In the end GOD has sent me some ease, after the receipt of an
infinite of remedies, some whereof sharpened my grief, and the rest assuaged it
not. But the violence of my pain being now past, I begin to enjoy such rest, as
weariness and weakness affoordeth to over-tired bodies. And though I be in a
state of health, far less perfect than those who are found, yet measuring it by
the proximity of the misery I have endured, and the comparison of those pains I
have suffered: I am right glad of my present Fortune, nor am I so hardy, to
dare as yet complain of my great weakness remaining. To speak truth, I have no
better legs than will serve to make a show; and should I undertake to walk the
length of my Chamber, my trouble would be no less, than if I were to pass the
Mountains, and cross all Rivers I encounter. But, to the end to change
Discourse, and to let you see things in their fair shape; you are to
understand, that in this plight wherein I stand, (being sufficient to cause you
to pity me four hundred leagues off:) I am on the one side become so valiant,
as not to fly, though I were pursued by a whole Army; and on the other, so
stately, that if the Pope should come to visit me, I would not conduct him so
far as the Gates. This is the advantage I draw from my bad legs, and the
remedies arising in my bed, wherewith I endeavor to comfort my self without
the help of Physics. You will (I fear) say, I might well have forborne to
entertain you with these impertinencies; nor am I ignorant that perfect
felicities, such as yours, desire not to be disquieted, either by the
complaints of the distressed, or by the consideration of distastefull things:
But it is likewise true, that the first loss we endure in pain falls upon our
judgment, and the body has such a proximity with the Soul, that the miseries
of the one, do easily slide into the other. But what reason soever I have to
defend my evil humor, yet must it necessarily give way to your contentment;
and of the two passions wherewith I am assaulted, obey the stronger. I will
therefore be no longer sad, but for others, and will hold it fit I make you
laugh upon the subject of XXXXX. to whom you lately addressed your Letters. You
may please to remember one of their names to be A. the other B; yet it is not
sufficient only to know so much, but I must likewise inform you somewhat of
their shape and stature. The first I speak of, is so gross, as I verily think
he will instantly die of an Apoplexy; and the other so little, as I would
swear that since he came into the World he never grew, but at the hairs end:
before any indifferent Judges, an Ape would sooner pass for a man than this
Pigmy; nor will I believe he was made after the image of God, left therein I
should wrong so excellent a Nature. Besides, it were an easier task to raise
the dead, than to make this man's teeth white; he has a Nose at enmity with all
others: and against which there is no possible defense but Spanish Gloves. What
can I say more, there is no part of his body that is not shameful, or wherein
Nature has not been defective. Yet notwithstanding one of the fairest
Princesses of Italy, is by a solemn contract condemned to lodge night by night
with this Monster. When you chance to see this man together with the other
great bellied beast, who stuffs a whole Carroach, you will presently suppose
God never made them to be Princes; and that it is not only as much as to abuse
the obedience of free persons, but even to wrong the meanest Grooms, to give
them Masters of this stamp. Now though the party you wot of, do in some sort
represent the latter person, yet is there still some small difference between
his actions and the others. The great VVV. is newly parted from this Court,
where he has not received from his Holiness his expected contentment. His
design was to break the Marriage his Brother has contracted, upon some slight
appearance of Sorcery, wherewith he deemed to dazzle the Worlds eye, and ground
the nullity of an action, which was by so much the more free, in that the
parties, who performed it, sought not the consent of any to approve it. In
conclusion, after the loss of much time, and many words, he is gone without
obtaining any thing, save only the Popes benediction; and as for me, I remain
much satisfied to see Justice so exact at Rome, that they will not condemn the
Devil himself wrongfully. I have heard how in some places half hour Marriages
are made, the conditions whereof are neither digested into writing, nor any
memory thereof reserved; but of these secret mysteries, there are no other
witnesses, save only the Night and Silence: And though the Court of Rome
approves them not, yet does she shut her eyes, fearing to see them. I am
resolved not to be long in the description of K.K.K. whom you know much better
than my self: Yet thus much I will say, that since Neroes death, there never
appeared in Italy a Comedian of more honorable extraction: And surely to make
the Company at this present in France complete, his personage were sufficient:
He makes Verses, he has read Aristotle, and understands Music, and in a word
he has all the excellent qualities unnecessary in a Prince. I know here a
German, called S. to whom he gives an annual pension of a thousand Crowns,
assigned unto him upon an Abbey during life; this he has done, not that he
intends to use his service in his counsel, or with purpose to employ him in
any important negotiation for the good of his affairs: his only ambition is to
have him make a book, whereby it might appear how those of M M M. are lineally
descended from Julius Caesar. I should be glad he would yet aim at some higher,
or more eminent race, and that he would purchase a second fable at the like
rate he paid for the first. I would willingly give him his choice of the
Medes, Persians, Greeks, or Trojans, which of these he would have of his
Kindred, and without the relying upon the Authority of tradition, or testimony
of Stories: I would draw his descent from Hector, or Achilles, which he best
liked. There are certain Princes who are necessarily to be deceived, if you
mean to do them acceptable service, being far better pleased to be entertained
with a plausible lie, than to be advertised of an important truth. I hold my
self right happy you are not of this humor: for whatsoever I say, I suppose it
would be very hard for me to be of a fools mind, though he were a Monarch. I
intend not to steal your favors, but to purchase them legally: and having ever
believed flattery to be as mischievous a means to gain affection as charms, and
sorcery: I cannot speak against my conscience, and were not this true I tell
you, I would not assure you, that I am

Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
From Rome this 10. of December 1622.
To the Lord Cardinal de Valette, from BALZAC. Letter VI.
My Lord,
HOw great soever the subject of my sorrows be, yet do I find in your Letters
sufficient to make me happy in my hard fortune. The last I received has so
much obliged me, that, but for the displeasing news coming unto me, which
tempered my joy, my reason had not been of sufficient force to moderate it. But
at this time the death of my poor Brother being incessantly before mine eyes,
takes from me the taste of all good tidings: and the prosperity even of the
Kings affairs seem displeasing unto me, finding my self to bear upon me the
mournings of his Victory. Yet since in this fatal agitation of Europe it is
not I alone who bewail some loss, and since your self have not been able to
preserve all that was dear unto you; I should seem very uncivil, if I presumed
to prefer my private interest before yours, or reflect upon my particular
affliction, having one common with yours. It is long since I have not measured
either the felicities, or fatalities of this World, but by your contentments,
or discomforts; and that I behold you as the whole workmanship God has made.
Wherefore my Lord, I willl lay aside whatsoever concerns my self, to enter into
your resentments, and to tell you, since you cannot make unworthy elections, it
must needs be that in death of your Friends you can suffer no small losses.
Notwithstanding as you transcend sublunary things, and in that all men draw
examples out of the meanest actions of your life: I assure my self they have
acknowledged upon this occasion, that there is not any accident to surmount,
against which you have use of all your virtue. Afflictions are the gifts of
God, though they be not of those we desire in our prayers; and supposing you
should not approve this proposition, yet have you at all times so little
regarded death, as I cannot believe you will bewail any; for being in a
condition your self esteems not miserable. My Lord, it suffices you conserve
the memory of those you have loved, in consequence of the protestation you
pleased to make unto me by your Letter: And truly if the dead be any thing, (as
none can doubt) they cannot grieve for ought in this World, wherein they still
enjoy your favors. In the mean time I take this to my self, and am most happy
in having conferred my dutiful affections upon a man, who sets so high a
value upon those things he has lost. For any thing (my Lord) I perceive, there
is small difference between good works, and the services we offer you; they
having their rewards both in this life, and the other; your goodness being
illimitable, as is the desire I have to tell you, I am

Your most humble, and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
From Rome the 29. of December. 1621.
To the Lord Bishop of Valette from BALZAC. LETTER VII.
MY LORD,
THough I be not in state, either to perform any great exploit upon the person
of any man; nor have any great force to defend my self, yet cannot I touch upon
the Count Mansfield without taking it to heart, and joining my good affections
to the Kings forces. If this were the first time the Germans had exceeded their
limits, and sent their Armies to be overthrown in France; the novelty of these
Barbarous faces, and of those great lubberly swat-rutters, might easily have
affrighted us: But upon the matter, we have to do with known enemies, and who
will suffer us to take so sufficient advantages over them, besides those we
naturally enjoy, as without being forced to make use of Arms, we may defeat
them only by their own evil conduct. I do not wonder there are men, who
willingly forsake Frost and Snow, to seek their living under a more pleasing
and temperate climate than their own; and who quit bad Countries, as being well
assured, the place of their banishment shall be more blissful unto them than
that of their birth. Only herein it vexes me, in the behalf of the Kings
honor, to see him constrained to finish the remainder of the Emperors
victories, upon a sort of beaten Soldiers, and who rather fly the fury of
Marquis Spinola, than follow us. These great Bulwarks, whose neighbor I am,
seeming rather the Fabrics of Giants, than the fortifications of a
Garrison-Town, will not ever be looked upon with amazement; one day (I hope)
there will appear nothing in their places but Cabbins for poor Fishermen; or if
it be requisite the works of Rebellion should still remain, and the memory of
these troublesome people endure yet longer, we shall in the upshot see them
remove Mountains, and dive into the Earths foundations to provide themselves a
Prison at their own charge. But withal (my Lord) I beseech you, let there be
no further speech made of occasions, or expeditions, and let a Peace be
concluded, which may continue till the Worlds end; let us leave the War to the
Turk, and King of Persia, and cause (I beseech you) that we may lose the
memory of these miserable times, wherein Fathers succeed their Children, and
wherein France is more the Country of Lans ^^ghts and Swisses than ours.
Though Peace did not turn the very Desarrs into profitable dwellings, as it
does, or caused not the quarries, or flints to become fruitful, though it came
unaccompanied, without being seconded with security and plenty, yet were it
necessary, only to refresh our forces; thereby to enable us the longer to
endure War. As I was ending this last word, I heard a voice which desired my
dispatch, obliging me to end what I supposed I had but begun. It is with much
reluctation (my Lord) I am deprived of the only contentment your absence
affords me. But since you could not receive this Letter, were it any longer,
I am resolved to lose one part of my content, to enjoy the other; and to say
sooner then I supposed, that I am even absolutely,

Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
The 16. of Sept. 1622.
To the Lord Cardinal de Valette from BALZAC. LETTER VIII.
My Lord,
YOu should oftener receive Letters from me, could I over-master my pain; but to
say truth, it leaves me not one thought free to reflect upon any thing else;
and what desire soever I have to give you content, yet am I not able to do any
thing, but at the Physicians good pleasure, and at the Feavours leisure;
whilst the Court affords you all content, and prepares whatsoever is
pleasant for you, reserving distrusts and jealousies for others: I here endure
torments, such as wherewith one would make conscience to punish Parricides, and
which I would not wish to my worst enemies. If notwithstanding all this (in
obedience to the Counsel you give me in the Letter, you did me the honor to
write unto me) I should make my self merry, I were necessarily to take my self
for some other body, and become a deeper dissembler than an honest man ought to
be. My Melancholy is merely corporeal, yet does my spirit give place, though
not consent thereto; and of the two parts whereof I am composed, the more
worthy is overborn by the more weighty. Wherefore if the whole World should
act Comedies to make me laugh, and though St. Germans Fair were kept in all the
streets where I pass, the object of death ever present before my eyes, bereaving
me of sight, would likewise bar me of content, and I should remain disconsolate
amidst the public Jubilations, Yea, if the stone I so much dread, were a
Diamond, or the Philosophers Elixar, I should therein take small comfort, but
would rather beseech God to leave me poor, if he please to bestow no better
Riches upon me. But when I have said all, be it unto me as he shall please to
appoint, since I am well assured, my maladies will either end, or I shall not
for ever hold out: yet should I die with some discontent, if it happen before I
testify my dutiful affection toward you, and the sensibility I have of your
noble favors. But howsoever it fare with me, I would willingly make a journey
to Rome, there to finish the work I promised you, and which you command me to
undertake for the honor of this Crown. Certainly if I be not the cause to make
you in love with our language, and to prefer it in your estimation before our
Neighbor Tongues; I am afraid you will be much troubled to revolt from the
Roman Empire, and that it will not be for the History of Matthew, or of
Hallian, you will change that of Salust and Livie. I will not deceive you, nor
delude my self; yet may I tell you, that my head is full of inventions and
designs, and if the Spring (for which I much long) would afford me the least
glimpse of health, I would contest with any who should produce the rarest
things. I have an infinite of loose flowers, which only want binding up into
Nosegays; and I have suffered others to speak any time these six years, on
purpose to be think my self what I have to say. But I well perceive the public
shall have only desires and hopes; and truly, if I spring not afresh with the
Trees, in stead of so many books you expect from me, you shall not read any
thing of mine, save only the end of this Letter, and the protestation I here
make unto you, to die

Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful Servant, BALZAC.
The 7. of January 1623.
To the Lord Cardinal de Vallette from BALZAC. LETTER IX.
My Lord,
THe hope which any time this three Months, I have had of your determination
to come into this Country, has hitherto hindered me from writing unto you, or
to make use of the only means remaining for me to be near your person: But
since you have supposed the speedy quitting the Court, to be as fatal as to die
a sudden death, and that no less fortitude, or time is requisite to resolve to
wean our selves from pleasing things, than to surmount painful ones, I will by
your permission resume the commerce the common rumor caused me to surcease,
and will not hereafter believe you can with any less difficulty get out Paris,
than can the Arsenac, or Loover. Were it not a place all stored with
enchantments and chains, and which is of such power to attract and retain men,
as it has been necessary to hazard diverse battles, to drive the Spaniards
further off: one might well wonder at the difficulty you find to convey your
self thence. But in truth all the World does there find both habitations and
affairs: and for you my Lord, since in that Country our Kings both enter into
their first infancy, and grow old, as being the seat of their Empire; no man
can justly blame you for making overlong abode there, without accusing you of
overmuch love to your Master, and for desiring to be near his person. At Rome
you shall tread upon stones, formerly the gods of Caesar and Pompey, and shall
contemplate the ruins of those rare workmanships, the antiquity whereof is yet
amiable, and shall daily walk among Histories and Fables: But these are the
pastimes of weak spirits, which are pleased with trifles, and not the
employments of a Prince, who delighted in sailing on rough Seas, and who is not
come into the World to let it rest idle: When you have seen the Tyber, on whose
banks the Romans have performed the Apprentiships of their rare victories, and
begun that high design, which they ended not, but at the extreme limits of the
Earth. When you shall ascend the Capitol, where they supposed God was as well
present as in Heaven; and had there enclosed the fatality of the universal
Monarchy: After you have crossed that great Circus, dedicated to show pleasures
to the people, and where the blood of Martyrs has been often mingled with that
of Malefactors and bruit beasts. I make no doubt but after you have seen those
and diverse other things, you will grow weary of the repose and tranquillity of
Rome: and will say they are two things more proper for the Night and
Churchyards, than for the Court and the Worlds eye. Yet have I not any purpose
to give you the least distaste of a Voyage the King has commanded you to
undertake, and whereof I well hoped to have been the guide, if my crazy body
would have seconded the motion of my Will. But truly my Lord, I am deeply
engaged in this business, and when I look upon my self single, I sometimes have
a desire to make you suspicious of those felicities, I fear, I shall not be
able to enjoy with you; yet whatsoever I say, I am not so far in love with my
self, as to prefer my private content before the general desires of all men,
and the Churches necessities. It is requisite for infinite considerations of
importance, you should be present at the first Conclave, and that you appear at
a War not therefore less considerable, in being composed of disarmed persons,
or for that it makes no Widows nor Orphans. I am certain you have elsewhere
seen more dangerous encounters, and have often desired more bloody Victories.
But how great soever the object of your ambition be, yet can it not conceive
any thing of such Eminency, as at once to give a Successor to Consuls, to
Emperors, and Apostles; and to make with your breath the man, who over-toppeth
Kings, and who commands overall reasonable Souls: Though my health be so
uncertain, as I cannot promise my self three days continuance thereof, yet have
I not lost all hope to see you (one day) in this Country, the prescriber of
Laws to inferiors, and of examples to Commanders. My Lord, it may be, God
reserveth me for your sake, that nothing be wanting to your glory, and to the
end there might be yet one man in the World, able to afford you the praises
proper to your merits,

My Lord, Your most humble, and most faithful Servant, BALZAC.
The 29. of June 1623.
To my Lord Cardinal de Valette. LETTER X.
My Lord,
IT must necessarily be the greatest affair at this present in agitation on
Earth, that could oblige you to leave Paris; nor had you parted thence upon any
slighter condition, than to make a head for all Christendom. If you arrive
there opportunely to have your part in this great Election, and that the
Conclave attend your Presence, on purpose to afford a more full Reputation and
Authority, to what shall there be resolved upon: I do no way doubt but you will
maintain the same advantage over the Italian wits, as you have obtained over
ours; or that their policies will not be as impertinent in your Presence, as
the Charms of Magicians are frivolous, being confronted with Divine matters.
You have sufficient of their patience to put off affairs when occasion is
offered: but you have a courage they come short of, to carry matters by strong
hand, if necessity require. Therefore my Lord, to what part soever your opinion
shall incline, you will carry that with you which gains victories, and
causes the greater party to side with the founder; yea, if matters should pass
without contestation, yet should you at least take notice, that you are
entreated to that action, wherein God permits you to supply his place, and
intrusteth to your care the most important matter of all his works. To speak
seriously, his providence is never in so high employment, as when he is to
choose the man who has power to use well, or abuse all the Riches of Heaven,
and who is to exercise a power nearest approaching to Divinity. Heretofore God
made use of Thunder and Tempests, when he purposed to denounce any thing to
men, declaring his Will by other than ordinary means. But since he has caused
Oracles to cease, and suffers the Thunder to work only natural effects: It
is only by the voice of Cardinals he causes his desires to be manifested, and
ordains concerning the Worlds Conduct. When you please (my good Lord) I shall
have some notice of these inspirations he has sent you, and of the election
you have made: For to force me (so soon) to inform my self thereof in the place
where it was performed, this Kingdom had need be over hot for me, and that I
were not so well acquainted as I am with the Sun at Rome. That which blacks the
Moors, and burns Lybia, is not so dangerous at this Season; and were you not
stored with treasures of Snow, and provided of Halls of Marble, to desend you
from the scorching Air, I should as soon choose to be condemned to the fire, as
to be forced to reside where you are at this present. But your Grace I know can
not be affrighted with all these apprehensions of heat; you are none of those
who will find fault with the Air, which all that ancient Republic breathed,
or with the Sun, which has helped to make so many Conquerours, and given light
to so many glorious Triumphs. Yet for my part, I who have none of these
considerations, and who have wholly put my self into the power of Physic, it is
requisite I avoid the very shadow of danger, and live with as great
apprehension of fear in this World, as though I were in an Enemies Country, or
in a Forest of wild beasts. It is therefore out of pure necessity I attend
your commands in this place, and a more seasonable time, to testify unto you,
without running the hazard of my life, that I am with all my Soul

My Lord, Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, BALZAC.
The 2. of AuAugust 1623.
To the Lord Cardinal de Valete, from BALZAC. LETTER XI.
My Lord,
I Verily believed I could never have been so unfortunate, as to be forced to
search in the Gazettes for what you do, and to hear no other news from you,
then what common brute bestows in all parts of the World, and which the
English and Germans may as well know as I. This punishment is by so much the
more wounding, in that I have heretofore been enriched with those benefits,
whereof you now seem to bereave me; and in that the time was, when you pleased
so far to descend from the rank whence you are derived, as to lay aside all
those lusters which incompass you, to converse freely with me: But (my Lord)
since one word of your mouth has often cured my decayed spirits, and has many
times made me happy without the help of Fortune: I freely confess unto you, I
cannot resolve to change condition, as knowing the loss of the least of your
favors cannot be little; Yet being so innocent that I can no way imagine my
offense, and not acknowledging among men, other more assured verity then your
word, I have a great reluctation to be diffident of a thing, upon the certainty
whereof half the Court is engaged for War, and the besieged would make small
difficulty to surrender themselves. My Lord, you have pleased to promise you
would love me always; therefore I beseech you not to be offended, if I put you
in mind, that as the ancient Gods of the Country where now you are, submitted
themselves to Destinies, after they had once assigned them: So you, though
above all other Laws, are yet subject to your word. I am confident it cannot be
revoked so long as the order of sublunary things change not, and the Decrees of
Gods providence remain immovable: and if you repent any one action in your
whole life, you therein do more then your very Enemies, who never as yet called
the least of them in question. For my part, I am far from thinking I have
totally lost your favors, left I should wrong your judgment, which conferred
them upon me, and blame the best eyes in the World, for having heretofore been
blind. I will rather suppose, if you send me no news, it is because you think
I know what will be done some ten years hence, and that I am brimfull of the
Roman Court, and of the Italian affairs. Truly I know the present Pope, and I
have ever believed, there is not any humane wit more capable to carry so
ponderous a felicity, or to let us again behold the primitive beauty of
religion, and the golden age of Gods Church, I know how at Rome idleness is day
and night in action and that the complements and ceremonies there, put you to
more trouble then you should find in governing the whole World, if God had
less it to your conduct. Me thinks I yet see this great Tyrant with so many
heads, (I mean the Signoury of Venice) together with all those petty
Sovereigns, who would hazard more men in hanging one single person, then the
King would venture: in two battails, or at the taking in of four Cities. But my
Lord all this with the rest does but slightly touch my spirit, and as you are
the sole worldly cause, which affoordeth me either joy, or discomfort, so it is
from you only I expect good, or ill news: I have made your affection in such
sort necessary for my life's contentment, that without it I should find defects
even in felicity it self, and should have an imperfect feeling of the most
happy successes could befall me. Restore therefore, if so you please, or
continue this your ancient favor toward me, which I cannot possibly forbear.
And since you are part of that body to which God has given infalibility, and
snce it is forbidden to call the certainty of your wisdom into the least
question: condemn not I beseech you, what you have formerly made as though your
Italian favors were some other things then your French ones.

Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
The 10. of December. 1623.
Balzac his Letter to Mounsieur du Planty. LETTER XII.
SIR,
SInce you cannot be here till after the Feast, and for that I presume you have
no purpose to oppose the Election of the Pope, being cannonically chosen. I
will advise you to stay your journey till the Spring be past, and the Snows
melted; yet truly you are in such esteem here, as if you come not the sooner,
I verily think you will be sent for, and and that the Court of Rome will
commence suite with the Loover, to have my Lord the Cardinals presence. It is
therefore fitting (if so he please) that he undertake this voyage, and put of
State business, and the War to others, to live here in the midst of Glory and
Triumphs. In the mean time, I may (so near as I can) inform my self both of men
and affairs, thereby to give you the better instructions at your coming. Now to
the end to afford you a taste of what I know, observe what I say, for I will
tell you strange things. There is a certain great man here, who entertaineth
six Astrologers in Pension, to let him understand from time to time who shall
be Pope: Another takes large fees on both sides, finding it the only way to
bring his Clients to composition: A third has the most extravagant virtue you
ever heard of, he leads a far more pleasant life then the Duke of Ossuna; and
having read in holy Writ, how the wisdom of the World is folly in Gods sight,
he imagines he should offend his conscience, if he were over wise. Here are
Princes in this place, who in full peace pardon neither Age nor Sex. There are
others who keep their beds, though they be well able to ride post; and who use
all Physic possible to look pale, to be feverish, and full of Cathars, and
who make use of all the secrets in Physic to have a megar aspect. In
conclusion, the highest place in this World, is that, whether the more easily
to arrive, it is necessary to be lame, and take short steps; so as a sound Pope
is commonly made out of a sickly Cardinal. At our next meeting I will inform
you of the rest, and will in one half hour infuse into you all the experience I
have hitherto gotten: But if I have not this contentment so soon as I desire,
fail not I pray you, to let me here news of your health, and the rest of our
good friends. But especially I beseech you to assure Mounsieur de Mauroy, that
I am passionatly his servant, and that I find here much subtility and
dissimulation, but not many so pure and true virtues, as his are

BALZAC.
From Rome 10. of February 1621.
A Letter to Mounsieur de la Magdelene from BALZAC. LETTER XIII.
SIR,
I Am extremely glad you are not of the number of those whom the King has lost
before S. John d' Angely: Conserve your self therefore so far forth as your
Honor and Courage will suffer, or permit, and content your self to have tasted
what War is; which if you please to be advised by me, you should do well never
more to behold but with Flanders spectacles. You are bound to execute good
Actions, but you are to perform many, and permanently; and to be a better
husband of a worthy man's life, than that of an ordinary Soldier of the Guards.
At leastwise so long as you continue at the assembly of the Clergy, you shall
be serviceable to the Church at your own ease, and there shall commonly be ten
days journey between you and danger. Though I were not any more of this World
then those who lived before the late King, or who are to come into the World
after the decease of this, yet should I not fear to hazard my self in this
sort; and to keep all my blood for the Public, as readily as the most valiant
Jesuit of France. It is in this sort I have learned to speak in this Court,
where honest men are so wedded to their particular interests, and do so little
reflect upon the general affairs, as they think there is nothing beyond the
tips of their upmost hairs, and suppose the World ends at their feet. The C.
I. dreams of no other thing, but how to fortify himself with men and money
against the C. B. whom he takes for the Turk an Heretic: And say what you
will, the fifty Abbeys he has gotten in one year, is that portion of the
Church which pleases him better then all the rest. Behold in what terms we
stand at this present: instead of procuring the conversion of Nations, and to
seek the means to set the Levant at liberty: a P. thinks he has worthily
acquitted himself of his charge, so long as he provides to make his Nephew a
greater man then his Predecessors was. But that I fear lest my zeal should
over-far transport me, or that you should become as weary of my discourse as of
a tedious Preacher, I would dilate my self upon this Subject; but I know the
affairs in these parts are very indifferent unto you, I will therefore refer
the further relation wherewith I intended to acquaint you, to my Lord, the
Marquis of Caeuvre. In brief, there are none but himself and the Council, who
can cause the Pope to incline to our reasonable demands, and I will tell you
without flattering him, that so long as he is here, the King may glory that he
reigns at Rome. As for other things, what beautiful objects soever Rome
presents to my view, and what pleasure soever each man finds there
conformable to his humor and inclination, yet cannot I receive any, being so
remote from persons so dear unto me, and shall esteem my self unhappy, so long
as I am necessitated to write Letters unto you, and only say, what is not as
yet in my power to cause to appear, that I am

Mounsieur, Your most faithful servant BALZAC.

To Mounsieur de Montigny from BALZAC. LETTER. XIV.
SIR,
THough you use me ill, and that I have reason to be sensible of your neglects,
yet I am resolved to suffer from you with an obstinate patience, and to acquire
your favors by force, since I cannot obtain them otherwise. But I am assured
you are not so uncivil, as not to suffer your self to be beloved, nor so tied
to your own fancies, as that there remains no affection in you for whatsoever
is separate: Otherwise I should think your humor were as much changed as are
the affairs of France, or that you were suddenly become quite another man. I
will therefore rest confident in the opinion most pleasing unto me, and imagine
you are sufficiently my friend in your thoughts; but that you are over loyal a
French man to have any intelligence out of the Kingdom. It may be the example
of the Duke of Biron affrights you and that you take all such as are in Italic
for Don Pedros, or Countes of Fuentes: in this case in truth you have reason,
and it is far better to write no Letters at all, then to be forced to explain
them before the Cour^ of Parliament. But if you were of my humor, and that you
would refer the whole State, and all the affairs therein to Mounsieur Lumes; me
thinks our Amity could not pass for conspiracy, and you might safely let me
have news from your self, and the rest of our friends, without any hazard at
all. I desire only to know what you do, and wherein you employ the fairest
season of your life. Do you never part from the lips of Opala; whose breath is
so sweet as it seems she seedeth only on Pinks and Perfumes? are you in as
high esteem in your Mistresses thoughts as your merits and service deserves,
and as your loyalty obliges her unto? Is Clitorhon still in his generous
musings? does he daily take Towns at Table? and does he yet frame foreign
designs between his Bed-curtains? Is there any good inclination in the Court
for our great Cardinal? and are they not persuaded that if he were Pope, the
Church would soon be as well Mistress in Germany as at Rome? After you have
satisfied me in all these points, I am contented to be at truce with you as
long as you please; and if need be, will suffer you to wax old upon the bosom
of Opala, without ever asking you what you do there.

Yours, BALZAC.

BALZAC his Letter to the Duke of Espernon. LETTER XV.
My Lord,
WEre I not born (as I am) your most humble servant, yet should I show my self
a very degenerate Frenchman, if I did not much rejoice in the happiness of
your Family, since it is a public Felicity. I have heard the prosperous
success of the voyage you made into Beam, and of the great beginnings you have
given, to what the King desires there to undertake. And truly, the Election he
has made of you, to serve him in an occasion of such importance, has been so
generally approved, that, if heretofore there has been any defects pretended
in the conduct of our Affairs, we must necessarily avow, that this last Action
has sufficiently justified all the former; it appearing plainly, that it is
not only favor which sets the difference between men. I no way doubt, but
right, and power sideing together, that the event of things will be suitable to
our desires: But, howsoever it happen, you have already the glory of having
facilitated the victory, and made it appear how the Enemies of the State have
no other force, but what they draw out of our weakness. It is now time (my
Lord) you take notice of those advantages God has given you above the rest of
men: You ought at least to remember, how being tried with worldly affairs, and
retired from Court, public necessity had not sought you out in your private
reposedness at home, to put the Kings royal Armies into your hands, if you were
not the only man from whom all men expect the re-establishment of these
affairs. I will not so far rely upon my own opinion, as to answer for the
future: Yet when I consider the actions of your life, which are so eminent,
that we find difficulty to believe them, even after they have been performed;
and those in such, number, that stranger may well imagine you have lived from
the very beginning of our Monarchy: I suppose I might boldly affirm, that, if
there be yet any great matter remaining to be achieved in the World, there is
none but your self must attempt it. You have possessed the favor of Kings, as
Fortunes which might fail you, and have not feared that their passions could
out-last your innocence. This virtue we so much admire, has succeeded the
same authority, our Fathers have adored. You have made no use of your power in
State, which you have not ever since conserved by the force of your courage.
You have at all times preserved the liberty of France amidst the miseries of
times, and the usurpation upon lawful power. Who is there can say this of
himself? where are they that have stood firm between rebellion and servitude?
where was there ever known an old age so necessary for the World, or so much
good and bad Fortune equally glorious? My Lord, you know your self too well, to
suspect me of flattery; and my humor is so aliene from any servile actions, as
the Court has not sufficient hopes to cause me to do any thing against my
conscience. I then speak as I do now; for the only interest of virtue; and if
that were not on your side, I would seek for it among our enemies to do it
right: None will suspect I have any pretentions at Madrill; or that I intend to
make a Furtune in Holland; yet to hear me speak of the Prince of Orange, and
the Marquess Spinola, one would say that I did at once expect Abbeys from the
Hollanders, and were a pensioner to Spain, In sum, I hold, my self obliged to
those, who afford me matter and means to reconcile the two rarest things in
this world, to wit; virtue and eloquence. And as their reputation has need of
my Pen, to make it immortal; so are their lives and actions right useful unto
me, when I employ my pains on excellent subjects. You have ever done me the
honor to wish me well, and I have received innumerable favors from my Lord
the Cardinal your Son; but howsoever, I humbly beseech you to be confident that
my affections are absolutely pure, and that my particular interests have not
any alliance therewith. I am so happy as to have served you in a troublesome
time, and to have been of the weaker side; as judging it to be the more honest.
I have not since been of another mind; and the reasons drawing me to do what I
did, being still the same, I am really, as I ever have been,

My Lord, Your most humble and thrice obedient servant, BALZAC.

To the Duke of Espernon from BALZAC. LETTER XVI.
My Lord,
THe Letter I lately received from you, makes me know I am happier then I
supposed, since I have the honor to be sometimes in your memory. It is a place
so taken up with high thoughts, and which the public good does in such measure
make use of, as I had not the ambition to imagine, there could be any room left
for a man of so small importance as my self. But I see, that as you never had
any so potent enemies as to exceed your courage, so have you not any servants
of so slight consideration, whom you esteem not worthy your care. Herein my
Lord, you make it appear that the meanest matters change their nature into more
noble subjects, so soon as they become yours: and how of all men, you have
conquered part, and acquired the rest. I am verily persuaded it were no less
then to offend God, to deny obedience to a person so high in his favor as you
are, and that his meaning is, this commanding spirit he has conferred upon
you, should be master of all others. The honor therefore to you appertaining,
being little inferior to what we owe to sacred things; and that besides the
ordinary providence which governs the World, there being a particular one in
Heaven, designed merely for the conduct of your life, to make it admired in all
after ages: it is neccessary as well in contemplation of this common
consideration, as for others particularly concerning myself, I should
perpetually remain,

My Lord, Your most humble and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
The 5. of April 1622.
To the Duke of Espernon from BALZAC. LETTER XVII.
My LORD,
IN this general calm of the State, (wherein the affairs of this Kingdom seem
to be asleep, and the Worlds occurrents to be at a stand) all France expects
your presence at Court, to be the Author of the desired news, and to draw from
the Kings breast the good intentions wherewith it is so richly stored. The
reduction of Beam not stained with any drop of blood: the truth wherein you
have instructed all men, concerning the possibility of taking Rochel, and the
order you have now lately left in Guiene, where you have reduced the Factions
to such a point, as their only power consists in their perverse humors;
puts us in hope, that if God should defer the safety of our State till
another age, it could be no man (your self excepted) for whom he has reserved
so glorious enterprise. My Lord, it is certain he never showed more miracles in
those places himself has consecrated to his glory and public piety, and which
he has chosen on purpose there to manifest his power, then he has done in
your person. And when I consider how often he has protected you, contrary to
all humane appearance; and the opposition you have encountered, in arriving to
this height by so many rocks and precipices; I cannot but constantly believe
you have over-passed the time of dying; and that for the Worlds general good,
it is fitting you endure as long as the Sun, or Stars. To stop here, were to
praise you imperfectly, and only to make it appear you are able to affoard
long services. I will therefore say more: on which side soever I turn mine eyes,
be it that I convey them beyond the Seas, or make them pass those mountains
which separate us from our Neighbors, I find not that person in any place,
who can justly dispute for glory with you; or whose life is so illustrious as
yours. I have seriously considered all whatsoever might give value, or
reputation to the Courts of stranger Princes, and there truly I find men who
are well seen in Military affairs, and who have gained to themselves no small
experience by means of an infinity of rules and maxims: But the difference
between those men and your self, is, that they cannot stir, nor make themselves
awful without the Indies, Armies, and Cannons; whereas you are redoubtable all
alone, and unarmed; yea, your very stilness terrifieth the greatest enemies of
France. This being absolutely true (as no man can doubt) it is high time the
King do really make use of a man whom the necessity of his state requires of
him, and that he no longer employ those improsperous persons, under whose hands
opportunities wax old, and his good fortune will fail him. It is sufficient
that the Rhine and Alps have formerly been French, and that our language is
spoken in neighboring Provinces, without suffering a strange kind of people
still to remain in the very bowels of our Kingdom, who will not allow of our
ancient Laws. There is now no longer means to cover this skar which dishonoreth
the face of State, or to suffer that Rebellion and Loyalty live together. To
speak truth, what kind correspondency can be expected between the Mistress of
the house, and the Concubine? what a monstrous production would that prove
between a Monarchy and a popular government? and what kind of Sovereign should
he be, who were dependent on his subjects, and his Council subordinate to the
Townhouse? Truly, if Catholics should demand Cities of the King,
proportionable to their number, as others do, he should be forced hence-forward
to remain all his life time at Fountain-bleau and S. Germins: nor would there
remain unto him any more then the bare title of a King, and the common fields
of his Country. But it shall not always be so if predictions prove true: And
reason as well as nature requires that things should be reduced to their
ancient form. It were no less then to injure him, who has promised to France a
longer continuance then to all her diseases, to think that he having given
remedies against the Goths and Moors, he will suffer it to die at this day by
the hands of a small pack of Rebels: Provided, that face which I rather call
immortal, then ancient, do still assure us of the great source of life you
retain in your courageous heart, and that heaven please to preserve for the
Worlds benefit, the blessing it conferred upon us at your Nativity; we require
not a more certain presage of the end of our evils; nor is there any so sick,
or far stricken in years, who hops not to survive these intestine troubles:
But we are not to imagine that victory and peace are two opposite things,
though they be different; for is the one which assures the other, and setleth
it in state not to be any further either troubled, or threatened by any. When
all is done, I find it were much to oblige these malcontents, to give a sure
repose to their distrustful spirits, and at once to rid them of all their
hopes and fears: when they shall no longer need to trouble themselves with
making assemblies, and that their lives shall be free from the fear of
punishments. When I say, both they and we shall enjoy common security, it is
not to be doubted but their condition will be much bettered, it being a much
fairer fortune to be cast on shore by a storm in a craised Vessel, then to be
still in the power of winds and Sea-wracks. The word of Kings ought not to
contradict the functions of Regality, nor can they oblige themselves to leave
their Subjects in miserable estate, or to do contrary to what they ought. And
in conscience since the ruin of Rebellion is written in Heaven, in the same
sort as is the day of Judgment, and the Worlds dissolution; were it not as
much as to resist Gods will, and to oppugn his providence, should we so soon
grow weary of well-doing, or refuse to finish a work, the event whereof is
infallible? There is nothing so easy for a great Prince, as either to find or
conceive faults, nor does any man doubt that dissimulation is just, when it
tends to the advantage and avail of the deceived. If a mad man were capable of
remedies, were it not lawful to cure him without asking his consent? were it
fit a Father should suffer his Son to be drowned for fear of pulling him out by
the hair? Are we to suffer the State to perish, for that we cannot preserve it
by ordinary ways? No, (my Lord) we ought not; there is no consideration can
cause that thing to change its nature, which of it self it just; and the Laws
of necessity do dispense with us for those of formality. Now to return to my
first discourse, and to what particularly regards your Lordship; seeing your
absence from Court has at all times threatened more miseries unto us, then the
apparition of Comets and other irregularities in Nature, and since to be
miserable, it is sufficient to be at odds with you. There is not any of your
enemies can escape the Divine justice, nor is there any doubt, but you will
generally find all those spirits favorable unto you, whom you have formerly
convinced; or that your propositions shall not be received as assured
Conquests. The best is, there are now no more any usurpers near the King, who
seek to ingross his favors to their own advantages, and bereave men of those
benefits which ought to be as common to them as the fire, or air. His
Majesty's heart is open to all his subjects, he receives truth at what hand
soever it comes unto him. This being so (my Lord) may we not rest confident you
shall not lose one word, and that your virtue whereof the World is incapable,
shall at length be found the only means the King has to redress and
re-establish his affairs. Neither time, travail, nor cost, ought divert him
from this design: It is a work will be nothing so costly as to raise a
Favorite, and it being a thing all Christendom exacteth of him, as an
Hereditary debt the King his Father has left to be discharged. And truly, it
is most certain that the face of States has been changed, and whole Provinces
conquered, with less cost then diverse Pagan Princes have employed in erecting
of Idols, and causing them to be adored by their people. But to leave this
Italian severity you formerly reproved in me, and lest you should accuse me for
warring against the dead, I will for your sake pardon their memory; nor will I
farther dilate my self upon so odious a Subject. Yet is this but half of what I
intended to speak unto you at Coignac; if in that short abode you made there,
and the continual press hindering the freedom of my Speech unto you, it had been
permitted me to have had a longer audience. But (my Lord) what I could not
perform by word of mouth, I will continue by my Letters, if you please to do me
the honor as to command them; or if my words which you have heretofore made
choice of for the conception of your High thoughts, in bewailing present
miseries and public ingratitude, be, as pleasing unto you, as I am perfectly

Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
The 18. of Nov. 1623.
The Duke of Espernon his Letter to the French King: penned by BALZAC. LETTER
XVIII.
SIR,
I Understand by the Letter it pleased your Majesty to do me the honor to
write unto me, that upon the opinion wherewith some have possessed you
concerning the continuance of the German Wars, you judge it expedient for the
good of your service, I should not (as yet) leave this Frontire. Whereunto Sir,
I can give your Majesty no other answer, but that having at all times gathered
out of your commands, what my duty obliged me unto, and having never proposed
other end to my actions, then the good of your state, I should be careful of
straying from that design in an occasion wherein I might imagine your service
depended on my obedience. But at this present (Sir) the tranquillity of France
grows to be so general, your affairs so powerfully established, and the
honor of your Amity so precious among all your neighboring Princes; that as
there is nothing in this Kingdom which does not bend under your Authority; so
is there not any Prince abroad, who does not respect your power, or who
conserveth not himself by your Justice. And as concerning the troubles of
Bohemia; besides, that time has evaporated the first heat of spirits, and that
they begin to retire from those extremities wherein formerly they involved
themselves: the imagined danger is so far removed hence, as we cannot conceive
the least apprehension, even for those who are not our next neighbors that
way. It is certain (Sir) that on this side the Rhine all things seem to be at
rest under the shade of your State, and the ancient Allies of this Crown who
are nearest any danger, expect the end of War without fearing it should come
any further toward them, or that out of all this noise, there will arise any
more then one War. These considerations then do no way oblige me to stay in
these parts, where things are in so good estate, as they may well nigh subsist
of themselves: besides the residence my Son of Valette shall make there in my
absence, being sufficient to give order to all occurrents concerning the good
of your affairs. I assure my self your Majesty will be so impartial as to be
pleased to reflect upon the necessity of my particular occasions, and that
suffering me to retire my self to my own house, you will at least permit me to
enjoy a favor, usually inflicted on others as a punishment. I doubt not (Sir)
but you will condescend to the desire I have to undertake this voyage, and I
presume you will be pleased to consider, that I being engaged in two hundred
thousand Crowns for your service; after the sight of your royal bounty in all
sorts of hands, it were small reason (I receiving nothing) should still in this
place stand as a mere cipher for the honor of France; or that I ruin my self
with a rich show, only to continue strangers in the opinion they have of the
magnificent greatness of your Crown. Yet (Sir) having never believed I could
sustain any great detriment by the loss of a thing I so slightly esteem, as I
do worldly substance, I intend not in this place to complain of my poverty: But
(to speak truth) since all my words and actions are by many mis-interpreted;
and that having affoarded my dutiful attendance to the service of three great
Kings, I yet find much difficulty to defend my so long a loyalty against
Calumny: I am with much sorrow constrained to say, that if I stood firm in my
duty, even when disobedience was crowned with rewards; and have maintained your
Authority, when by some it was abused, by others contemned: It is no small
injury to me, to imagine I will now begin to fail in my loyalty at this age
wherein I am, or suffer my self to be reproached by posterity, whereto I study
to annex the last actions of my life. But I see well (Sir) it is long since the
hatred of dishonest Frenchmen has been fatal unto me, and that it has been
born with me inseparably. From the first hour I appeared in the World, there
was never either peace or truce unviolated to my prejudice; and as though I
were excepted out of all treaties, though War be ended, yet that made against
me endures. At this present (Sir) it suffices not I perform my charge without
omitting or forgetting any thing due to your service; or that the innocence of
my actions be generally acknowledged; but I am driven to those streights, as to
be forced to give account of my very thoughts, there being not any (my self
excepted) from whom satisfaction is required for the fault he has not as yet
committed. If we lived in a Country where virtue were avoided, as not
concurrent with the times, or adverse to the State, and where a great
reputation were more dangerous then an inglorious one, I should not need to
make much search for the cause of my misfortunes: but I well know the conduct
you use, has more honorable and honest grounds, and that your Majesty has no
pretention to reign with more assurance then the King your Father did before
you. It is from him (Sir) you may learn how you are to distinguish wounded
innocence from wicked impudency: and to know it is ordinary to draw honest
men into suspicion, thereby to make them unserviceable. In following his
example, you shall find out the truth, though never so closely hidden, or what
shadow soever they cast over the same to disguise it. And truly (Sir) since
this great Prince in bestowing your Origin upon you, has together therewith
conferred his most Royal inclinations, I will never believe, that to follow a
stranger passion, you will lose those perfections so proper, and natural unto
you; or that for me alone your Majesty has any other spirit then for the rest
of men. Truly, if when you were not yet at your own liberty, such has been
the natural goodness of your gracious disposition, as you have at all times
resisted violent counsels, nor have ever permitted your Authority should be
employed to the ruin of your subjects: there is small appearance, that having
now by public and solemn act obliged your self to reign alone, and your
bounty finding not any obstacle to hinder the same, you would disturb the old
age of one of your best servants, or deny to his gray hairs that rest nature
requires at your hands, I ought to hope (at least) for this recompense for my
long and faithful services, since your Majesty may bestow it without
incommodateing your affairs, and besides, I having never expected other reward
of worthy actions, then the only contentment to have performed them, I shall
hold my self sufficiently happy, to receive from my conscience the testimonies,
which whilst I live it will affoard me, that I have been, really am, and ever
will to the end remain,

Sir, Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful subject and servant,
Espernon.
From Mets 7. of Jan. 1619.
Another Letter to the French King from the Duke of Espernon, penned by the
same BALZAC. LETTER XIX.
SIR,
HAving long attended at Mets, the occasions not to be unusefully there, and
not finding any thing either in the conduct of my present life, or in the
memory of my fore-passed time, which might justly cast me into a worse
condition then the rest of your subjects: I have presumed that the Laws of this
Kingdom, and my Births prerogative might permit me to make use of public
liberty, and to partake of that peace you have purchased to the rest of your
subjects. Nevertheless, (Sir) your Majesty's will, does so regulate mine, that
I had not removed, had not the cause of my stay there ceased, and the
difficulties of the Bohemian War been utterly removed. But having had perfect
intelligence by the relations the Duke of Lorain has received from those
parts, that the affairs there begin to be well settled, the overture thereof
beginning with the suspension of War on both sides; I could not imagine the
good of your service did any way oblige me to remain longer in a place out of
all danger in time of peace, and which will make good use of the Empires
weakness if the War continue: considering likewise that if there be any part of
your State less sound then the rest, and where your Authority had need with
more then ordinary care to be conserved, it is questionless in the Province
whither I am going, which bordering upon such neighbors as all honest men may
justly suspect; and being a people composed of diverse parts, have at all times
been either troubled, or threatened with changes: yea, at this present (Sir) the
most common opinion is, that the assembly now holden at Rochel, is no way
pleasing unto you, and that if you have been drawn to give any asscent thereto,
it has rather been a connivency to the necessity of time, then conformable to
your will. Whereupon (Sir) if your Majesty please to reflect upon the miseries
of your State, where out at least you have drawn this advantage, that even in
the very spring of your age, you have attained great experience: You shall
plainly see that all the miseries which befell your Majesty in your minority,
have been begun upon the like occasions. I therefore using my best endeavors,
if the intentions of those of Rochel be good; to hinder that the events be not
evil; therein I hope I shall no way disobey you Majesty's commands; but do
rather explain them according to the true sense, allowing them the best
interpretation, since it is most profitable for your service. Truly (Sir) no
man is ignorant, that as the conservation of your Authority is the principle
Law of your State: so likewise that the most express and important part of your
commands, is the good of your affairs. This being undoubtedly true, what
appearance is there, it being in my power to preserve the affections of a
divided Province in due obedience to your Majesty, and to pacify by my
presence those affections easily drawn to revolt, if none did confirm them in
their loyalty: I should (for the interrupting so necessary a voyage,) propound
to my self so frivolous considerations, and those so far fetched as the Wars of
Bohemia. I live not in an age (Sir) wherein I am permitted to feed my self with
vanity; but I do not withal suppose your Majesty does so slightly esteem of my
service, as not to make any farther use of me, save only to see the packets
from Germany safely conveyed; nor do I find my self so un-usefull, as to be
forced instead of better employments; only to let you know what news is
stirring, and to give you an account of ordinary rumors. I must humbly
beseech your Majesty, to suffer me to die in this opinion I have of my self,
and to allow me to make free use of my leisure; if you please not to impose
more honorable employments upon me for your service. Howsoever it happen,
(Sir) or how badly soever I be entreated, I am determined to continue resolute
in well-doing. And your Majesty may be most assured, that neither Time, which
affoordeth occasions to the most miserable to raise their fortunes, nor Place
often favoring their resentments, nor Necessity which causes their actions to
seem just; shall ever transport me from remaining with the same affection I
ever have done to be

Sir, Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful subject and servant,
Espernon.
From Pont de Vichij, the 7. of Feb. 1619.
Another Letter from the Duke of Espernon to the French King, penned by the
same BALZAC. LETTER XX.
SIR,
IF your Majesty have misconceived mine intentions before you were clearly
informed of them; I am persuaded, I have at this present in such sort justified
the same by my proceedings, as there is no further need to defend them by my
words. Truly, I may justly say, that the Conduct I have used, has been such:
the Queen your Mother, having done me the honor to make use of my service in a
business, she deemed much to import the good of your State; as not making use
of the advantages which might arise by causing mischief to continue, or by
giving way to such designs, the event whereof would have sufficiently commended
the resolution, had they not been disadvantagious unto you: I have contented my
self to testify to all France, that I had respect to your Authority even in
the hands of mine enemies: whereby (Sir) I trust I have caused my actions to
appear so pure and unspotted before your Majesty, that you remain fully
satisfied; nor will you I hope judge I have erred, in following a cause I might
probably suppose could not be well separated from yours. Now therefore since it
has pleased your Majesty to supply what seemed deficient in the felicity of
your Reign, and to settle peace in your State: All your true subjects (Sir) are
by so much the more obliged to rely on your Royal word; in that it is the Rock
whereon all Christendom rests confident: And the same having been given to the
Queen your Mother, besides your obligation thereto by God and Nature, your very
reputation confirms the same unto her upon this sacred and inviolable
assurance, after having dedicated my sensibilities and interests to public
peace, and taken your Majesty's memory as witness, that I have at all times
served you faithfully, though it has not always been by ordinary and common
ways; I assure my self you will be pleased to permit me hence forward to pass
the rest of my days in peace; and now at length to leave me in the Haven
whereinto I have been cast by so many violent Tempests. Sir, I have but a short
time to stay in this World, and surely I should suppose my life overlong,
could I find my self culpable of one single cogitation repugnant to the
Allegiance I owe to your Majesty: I therefore most humbly beseech you (Sir) to
be pleased to consider, that I desiring no other thing of you, but either some
small repose after my great pains, or an honorable death in your service: I
can no way herein allot more moderate limits to my ambition, nor wish a more
innocent end to my old age: Howsoever, I shall esteem it right happy, may I end
it in this sort; and if in loosing it, I conserve the quality I have ever
hitherto inviolably kept of

Your Majesty's most humble, most obedient, and most faithful subject and
servant, ESPERNON.
From Angoulosme the 10. of June, 1619.
The Letters of MOUNSIEUR de BALZAC. The third Book.
To my Lord the Duke de la Valete; from Mounsieur De BALZAC. LETTER I.
My LORD,
IN acquittance of my promise when I parted from Mets, I am to let your
Lordship know, we are at this instant beyond ten Rivers, and how all things
have been propitious to my Lord your Fathers voyage. To be diffident the
conclusion will not correspond to these fair beginnings: were either to make
doubt of Gods providence, or to distrust his grace; but it has pleased his
Divine Majesty at all times to take so particular care for the conservation of
your Family, that he will as soon permit his Altars and images to be
irreverently entreated, as persons, who are so high in his favor as all of you
are. Howsoever it happen (my Lord) if none but the prosperous can lose by
alterations; you will, I hope, confess no such change can any way happen,
whereout we shall not draw some advantage; and what interpretations soever they
give to my Lord your Fathers intentions, yet will all honest men judge
favorably thereof, nor will any man apprehend failing after so eminent an
example. All France attends his resolution to be rightly informed in the truth
of the Kings affairs, and all men know he is of such consideration in this
State, as his least discontentments are to be reckoned among public miseries.
I will persuade my self they will not proceed to any extremity, and that there
is not impudency enough in our Enemies to transport them to so dangerous
counsels. If the worst come, yet must this voyage necessarily produce the one
of two things, equally necessary in a troublesome time, War, or Liberty. I am
not so clear sighted in future events, as to answer for what shall happen; yet
since the order of seasons are framed to facilitate our passage, and that all
things have changed more succesfully unto us then we presumed to desire; there
is small appearance that Heaven will declare it self in favor of the less
supportable cause. But that which does the rather fortify my confidence, is
the vigorous estate wherein I find my Lord your Father, he has no show of old
age, save only experience and Authority. The late Ligue, the Rebels, the
Sword, nor poison have not been of power to kill him, nor was there ever man so
awful in his adverse fortune. As for you (my Lord) who are the object of his
hopes and fears; and who are to perform one of the principal parts in his
designed action: The City of Mets.
remember you have the command of a place which has been the dishonor of
Charles the fifth, and which affoardeth France a revenge for all the affronts he
offered thereto. He who defended it against him had no more then two arms as
you have, and one single life, nor was he made of any other matter then other
men are. It is true, he fought by the Kings succors, but it suffices you
fight for his service, and that all men know you are resolved not to survive
your fortunes. Were you born to perform ordinary actions, I should hold it fit
to speak unto you in another strain; but since you purpose not to exercise any
idle dignity in this World, nor are at this present in case to make use of the
hands of a great Army, or expect reputation in your bed; speak as high as you
please, provided you act accordingly; and that out of your particular forces
(since those of the State fail you) you make good unto the King, the last
conquest of his Ancestors. One only worthy man has heretofore been the whole
Republic of Rome, and has resisted the fury of a victorious Army. So though
there were no more true Frenchmen, but my Lord your Father, your self, and my
Lords your brothers, I could no way despair of public affairs, nor of the
furtune of this Kingdom. My Lord, I am so weary, that I am forced to defer the
continuation of this discourse till another time, and to rest a while to make a
more ample relation. I will content my self for the present, to pass my promise
unto you of that History, the subject whereof I require at your hands, and to
assure you it is impossible to be more then I am

Your most humble, most obedient, and most affectionate servant, BALZAC.
The 9. of Febr. 1619.
To the Signiour of Plessis, Governor of Tollemount, from BALZAC. LETTER II.
SIR,
SInce it appears you have a will to lose every hour what you can in truth
spend but once, and that you so slightly esteem your life, as though it were
another man's; me thinks the War has dealt very kindly with you, in being
contented to leave you half a face, and that you may well account what is left,
as gotten goods. The Duke de Main, and the rest were not quit at so easy a
rate: and it has pleased God to show examples in this kind, to make it appear
that he approves not vanity; nor that he heedeth the advice of men for the
defense of his own and his Churches cause. Truly, if these men had practiced
with the enemy, they could not have been more confident; nor have gone more
naked to War, had they fought against women: And in truth I am so far from
praising their desperate courses, as I do not so much as pardon them their
deaths; and if my opinion had passed, I should have thought it fit to have
accused them as culpable of their own deaths, and as such who had committed the
greatest Parricides. It becomes me ill in this place to prescribe rules to my
Master; for should I attempt to teach your courage how far it should extend it
self, I might seem to do no less then prescribe Laws to what is illimitable.
Yet be pleased (I pray you) to be informed, that valor is so tender and
delicate a virtue, that if it be not sometimes well shielded and concerved by
some others, it becomes more hurtful to him who has it, then healthful for
the State, often endamaged by it, or to the Prince who makes use thereof. And
surely without the assistance of reason, which ought to be its Governness, and
Prudence as a guide unto it: there is not any passion more blind, nor which
does less differ from the fury of beasts, and the brutish ferocity of
Barbarians: The latter of these think it cowardice to quit the place, though
the breach of a River roll upon them; or not to stand firm though they see a
house falling on their heads. But these wretches, and we, have not the same
pretentions; for as they propound to themselves, only to kill, and to die, so
should we only aim at victory, and neglect the rest; otherwise to what end is
the knowledge of virtue unto us, and of the limits which boundeth it, or to be
born under a more happy Climate, then that of Polonia and Muscovia: if we draw
no advantage either from the excellency of our institutions, or extractions; I
do not at all wonder, why there are men who prefer death before indigence, and
who not finding any contentment in their own Countries, are well pleased to
pass beyond the Ice of their natural air, as willing to forgo the infelicity of
their fortunes. But a man of worth, who at all hours injoyeth both perfect and
pure contents, and who has a great share of this ages virtue to lose, is a
Traitor to the Public, and a Tyrant to himself, if he forsake all this for a
mere fancy, and deprive the World thereof, only for a flash of Fame and vain
Glory. You know this better then I can tell it you, and if you suppose the
Philosophy you have heretofore so highly esteemed, be yet wise enough to
instruct you, she will tell you that Life is the groundwork of all other good
that can here befall us; since by means thereof one may recover Kingdoms,
though utterly lost, and remain Victor, after having been defeated in four
battails. There is no question but a dead Lion is less worth than a living Dog,
or that the most part of those Princes of whom there has been so much speech,
and those valiant Captains with whose Heroic acts so many Histories are
stored, would not willingly change their Laurels for our lives. Rejoice
therefore (good Sir) together with Nature: in that you are as yet in the number
of men; and comfort your self with Hanibal, and the Father of Alexander the
great, for the loss you have received: whatsoever you can say, you have yet
sight enough to cause you to turn lovesick, and to contemplate the beauties of
Heaven and Earth. But suppose you were wholly blind, yet is it true, that the
Night has its pleasures as well as the Day; yea, and such as you best love.

Yours, BALZAC.
The 18. of December. 1622.
Another Letter to Hidasp from BALZAC. LETTER III.
MY dear Hidasp, thou can not imagine the content I take in thy Letter, and
in the good news it brings me, it is the only way to cause me to contradict my
self, when I account my estate miserable, since I hear thou art in health, and
love me. Were I not confident thereof, I should the next day drink poison; or
if not valiant enough to attempt so hardy an enterprise, I should die with
sorrow. Thou art (then) as necessary for my living as life it self; so as if
thou desire my estate, thou need not for that any other means, than to
deprive me of thy good opinion: But truly I never had the least apprehension
of such a loss, and I assure my self if I were dead, thou should be double
as rich as thou desire to be. I have long since been assured, thy thoughts
are not inthralled to the earth, or that thy passions only exceed those of the
vulgar. Let me entreat thee to cherish them, my dear Hydasp; and though I be
continually sad, and at all times ill affected in my health; yet remember that
the very ravings of my Fever are sometimes more prizeable then Phylosophycal
Meditations; and we see beautiful faces often weep so gracefully, that some
have been enamoured of their tears. I have fully acquainted thee with our
occurrents here, by my last Letters, nor will I let any opportunity pass
without giving my self the content of discoursing with thee in that kind;
bind me so much unto thee, as to do the like on thy part: But if thy Letters
be so short, as usually they are, I will now betimes tell thee, I will read
them so often, as they shall become long enough in spite of thee. I know well
how in the place where thou art, thou ought not lose any minute of time,
since opportunities last no longer; and resolve thy self to take a thousand
unprofitable journeys to thy Lords Chamber, before thou make one to purpose.
Great men use not to keep Registers of the absent, nor remembrancers of them
they usually forget: but rather to the contrary; they imagining there is no
other thing on earth but themselves, and what concerns them: (provided, they
find any who look like men) they never trouble themselves to enquire for
others, since with them assiduity often works more than service; yea, and those
whom they would not affect for me^i^, they will love by custom: It is therefore
necessary you be still in sight, and always at hand for the entertainment of
Fortune: It is a tradition the subtle Gascoyns at their deaths leave to their
Children: and truly as choler assumeth Arms out of whatsoever it encounters;
so is it true, that occasion takes hold of all such as present themselves. We
ought to contract perfect love with honest men, but yet not to be at odds with
others. Poisons themselves are necessary in some cases; and since we are forced
to live among savage creatures, we had need have the industry either to
familiarise, or force them. I advise thee not to look before thee, behind
thee, and on every side when thou sp^ahes^; or to be in so great fear to be
taken at thy word, as thou dare not tell what a clock it is if one asks thee.
Thou shall gain much by being silent, the dumb shall at all times therein
exceed thee: For my part. I never make question of speaking, when I have any
thing in my head better than silence. I do not hereby mean that we ought to
discover our intentions by our looks, or that our intetiour conceptions appear
outwardly with all their passions, namely, of fear, hatred, or distemper. This
were to betray our selves, and to give ill examples to others. But herein you
are to make election of place, and persons, and not wilfully to deprived the
self of the most pleasing fruit of man's life, there being not any, in whose
breast we may securely deposite either our griefs, or joys. Besides, I would
not have thee of that Spaniards humor, who took for his device Que si que no;
but consider with thy self that reason is a sacred thing, whereto thou art to
yield, where ever it appears. I confess that most things are involved in
uncertainties, and that humane sciences have very slender and uncertain
foundations; yet are there some truths so perspicuous, and so absolutely
received into the Worlds approbation, as it were no less then to lack common
sense, to call them into question; for he who should say, my Lord the Constable
d' Esdiguiers were not valiant, or my Lord the Cardinal of Richelieu, were not
a man of able parts: doubtless all men would wonder at him, as at one who
sought to introduce some new Sect, or endeavor to overthrow the fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom. Nay, I tell you yet more; you are pyously to believe
diverse sots to be sufficient men, since the World will have it so; and that
Kings are not the only men who desire complasencie; since if we mean to live
among others, we must sometimes necessarily flatter, and frame our selves to
their opinions. Let us then follow the judgment of the wise, and the customs
of the vulgar; let us keep our thoughts to our selves, and allow them our
actions and outsides. As I have advised thee not to be over silent, so would I
not have thee over talkative, nor to weary any one with thy discourse of
Mountauban, or the exploits thou have there seen performed. I assure thee to
avoid the company of these boasting companions; I would take post, go to Sea,
or fly to the Worlds end. They seem to me to have gotten a patent for prateing,
and that it were no less then to take their purse, if one should offer to speak
a word in their presence: But above all, it is very death to me, when these
fellows come fresh out of Holland, or when they begin to study the
Mathematics. From Millan to Sienna I was haunted with one of these Chapmen;
whose company I shall so long as I have life, reckon among my greatest
misfortunes. He would needs reform all the fortifications of those strong
places we passed by; he trod on no earth at which he carped not, nor travailed
over any Mountain, on which he had not some design; he set upon all the Cities
in the Dukedom of Florence; he desired only a certain short prefixed time, to
take in all the States of Medena, Parma, and Urbin: yea, I had much ado to draw
him from casting his designs upon the lands of the Church, and S. Peter's
Patrimony. These be diseases the roots whereof are not to be cut up, without
taking away the tongue withal: Nay, I fear when all this is done, there will
be yet need to pass further into the cure, and to use means to bereave them of
voice, for the general good of such as can hear. There is yet another sort of
importunate people, whose number does so multiply in France, it is almost
arrived to an infinity: These have not one half hours intertainment for thee,
without telling thee the King is raising puissant forces; how such a one is out
of credit with his faction; another is a great searcher into, and medler in
State-matters, and how a third diveth into all the intricacies of
Court-businesses. If you can have the patience to bear them yet a while longer,
you shall strait understand how the President Jannin was the man who had the
truest intentions of all the Ministers of Justice: That it is expedient to show
a Masterpiece of State, to give reputation to the present current of affairs:
That the Kings Authority was interessed in this action: and that those who
sought to cry down the present government, rather aimed at their particular
advantages, then redress of disorders See here the style wherewith they
persecute me even to my poor Vi^lage, and which is a cause I loath State, and
public affairs. Tire (...) therefore my cars at thine arrival, lest you turn
mine adversary with intention to assault me with these huge words. If you know
not that the^e follies have not always the same aspect, and that the^e are as
well serious follies, as slight ones, I would admonish thee in this place: Now
though a men at twenty can have no great experience of the World, yet have you
a sufficient clear judgment to keep your self from being deluded, by the
appearance of good, or by the outward luster of evil. I had need of more time
then the bearer allows me, and of more words then a Letter is capeable of,
sufficiently to instruct thee what thou ought to do, and what to avoid; or
to learn thee a Science wherein my self do study in teaching thee. I will
therefore only say, since I am hastened to make an end, that before all other
things thou art to offer thy whole will to God, if thou be not able to give
the rest; and to have (at least) good designs, if it be not as yet in thy power
to do any good deeds. I well know it is no slender task, to undertake to guard
our selves from evil, where inticements are extraordinary, and the danger
extreme, and where (thou will tell me) that if God will hinder thee from loving
beauty, he had need make thee blind. I having no pleasing answer to make thee
hereto my dear Hydaspe, I refer thee to thy Confessor: entreating thee to
consider, how if the King in the flower of his age wherein we see him, and in
the midst of an infinity of objects offering themselves to give him content, is
yet notwithstanding so firm in the resolution to virtue, that he as easily
surmounteth all voluptuous irregularities, as he does his most violent rebels,
and is not any way acquainted with forbidden pleasures, nor does glut himself
even with lawful ones: If as I say, this truth be generally avowed, I beseech
thee tell me why continency may not be placed among things possible? But I much
fear, there is no means to gain this for granted at thy hands; since thou
believe as others do, that to be chaste, were no less then to usurp upon the
possession of married wives. Yet at the least Hydaspe, if this body of thine,
being of sufficient ability to send Collonies into each corner of the World,
and to people the most desert places, will needs be employed; I entreat thee to
stay there, without being transported with the debauches of the mouth, which
have no other limits then the loss of reason, and ruin of health. I should be
in utter despair were it told me, that my brother drinks as much as though he
were in a continual Fever, and were as great a purveyer for his panch, as if
he were to enter into a besieged City. I confess thy inclination does of it
self sufficiently divert thee from these Germain virtues, and that thou art not
much less sober than my felf, who have passed over three years without suppers,
and who would willingly feed only upon Fennill and pick-tooths, if I thought I
could thereby recover health. Yet truly this does not hinder me from having
some apprehension, when I consider how the examples of great ones does often
give Authority to vice: and that to keep our selves upright in the midst of
corruption, is not an effect of the ordinary force of men: Consider then once
again (Hydasp) that we are powerfully to resist temptations. Have an eye to the
interest thou have to contain thy self within the limits of an orderly life;
and be well advised, whether thou could be contented to be of the proportion
of those good fellows, whose spirits are choked in their own grease, and who
become such comely creatures, that if their bodies were pierced, there would
nothing pass forth of their wounds but Wine and Porridge. Besides, ^aking
profession as thou do, to be a man of thy word, be not offended (...) I
summon thee to observe what thou have promised me: or that I ^^^ly tell thee,
that if thou fallest again to the old game, I shall have (...) subject to
assure my self of thy fidelity in other thy former pro^^^^s. Were thou the King
of the Indies, or thy life endless, I would not ^^rbid thee this exercise; but
since we have scarce leisure enough in (...) World to attain virtue, nor over
great possessions to secure us from ^^^verty; believe me Hydasp, it is very
dangerous to suffer shipwreck on (...); and besides, the expense of money,
(which we esteem as dear (...) ^s as life) to lose our senses likewise, and our
time, the last where^^^^ ^^recoverable, is both shameful and sinful. Having
here admo^^^^ thee well near, though confusedly and scatteredly of those things
(...) ^^ghtest to fly, it were requisite I should likewise advise thee of
(...) fit for thee to follow, and to cause if I could, good laws to (...) ^^vil
manners. But it is fit to take time to deliberate upon a (...) of such
importance, and truly to speak herein to purpose, all the wit I have, joined
with that of others, were no more than sufficient.

Yours, BALZAC.
The 1. of Jan. 1624.
To Hydasp from BALZAC. LETTER IV.
MY dear Hidasp, if God had conferred a Kingdom upon me, with condition not to
have me sleep more than I do: I should prove the most vigilant Prince living,
nor should I need either Guards, or Sentinels about my person. Surely there is
not any (my self excepted) for whom night was not made, since when the winds
are calm, and all nature quiet, I alone watch with the Stars. But I much fear
lest God will not be satisfied herewith, since I foresee so many miseries
ready to roll upon me, as I have no small apprehension to become more wretched
to morrow, than I am at this present. The only countenance of Hydasp would
refresh me, and cause my pain to be in some sort pleasing. But since there are
now at least a dozen great Cities, and a hundred leagues of Snow between us, I
have much ado to forbear dying, and to support my self upon my weakest part.
Yet my meaning is not to have thee return hither; for (were it possible for me)
I had much rather come to thee, and continually to gaze on that face whereof I
have drawn so many fair poutraicts. It is true, there are few men living, whose
love we should prefer before liberty. But assure thy self thy Master is of
those; be not therefore more proud then Henry the third, who first obeyed him.
For my part, though I be naturally refractory, yet have I ever had a special
inclination to his service; yea, when all things went cross with him, and that
his best friends forsook him, I took pleasure in perishing, on purpose to
affoard him some consolation in his calamities. Many desire a dependency on him
out of their particular ends, but me thinks we should have more noble designs,
since his only virtue deserves to be followed, and to cause a press
wheresoever it passes. In truth, the service we yield to so great a person,
ought to hold the rank of the chief recompenses we are to expect; yet after
this, there follows another seldom failing any of good parts; yea, or those
who have but patience. If thou heest of the one, or other sort of such men,
remember this maxim; and do not as those honest persons, who think they do
good service to the State, when they betray their Masters. Beasts themselves
are capeable of acknowledgement; and that Italian had some small show of
reason, who called those Devils, who cured Agues, good Angels. Yet truly it is
no less than to be over mannerly to go so far, nor would I thank Gods enemies
for those gracious favors I indeed receive from him only. But as touching the
rest of worldly affairs, there is no question, but we are to reflect upon the
nearest occasions Fortune affoardeth us; and those who seek after more remote
means, shall in conclusion find from one degree to another, that it is to Hugh
Capete to whom they are obliged. I was afraid lest I should have left my
fingers upon this paper, and have disenabled my self for ever writing more
Letters after this, had I any longer continued my discourse. I tell thee no lie
Hydasp, this is the third Winter we have had this year, and the greatest
irregularity I ever observed in nature, For Gods love inquire the cause of
Father Joseph, and entreat him from me, if your self be not acquainted with
him, that he would be pleased to employ the credit he has in Heaven, to cause
the return of warmer weather.

BALZAC.
The 25. of Jan. 1624.
To the Seigneur de la Roche from BALZAC. LETTER V.
SIR,
I Cannot conceive your meaning, when you speak of my friendship, as of a
favor, or predestination, or in being so prodigal of your complements and
commendations. There was sufficient in the Letter you lately sent, to bereave
me of speech, and to make me fly to the Indies, were I forced to frame you a
punctual answer. But since you are usually victorious, be pleased, I beseech
you, to permit your courtesy to work the same effects, as does your courage;
and suffer me to yield unto you in this occasion, as I would do in those of
Rochel, or Mountuban. I only entreat you, hence forward to love me with less
ostentation and luster then you have done hitherto; and since it is not in my
power to hinder you from having me in estimation, let me at the least entreat
you to carry the matter so, as though you had committed some sin; that is,
without calling witness, or confirming the fact: otherwise, doubtless the World
will suppose your affection to be injurious to your judgment; and I much fear,
lest I should be blamed for blinding you, and for being more wicked then the
late War, which was contented only to make diverse of our friends, blinkards.
Truly that so complete a person, whose acquaintance you commend unto me; not
finding me suitable to the pourtraict you showed him, may well say, you are not
only satisfied in being singly seduced, but seek to raise Heresies out of your
errors, and a contagion out of your crazy constitution. This being so, I see
not how I can better make good, either mine own reputation, or your report,
then by voluntarily banishing my self from the place where you are, and not by
my presence, to overthrow all the Honor you have hitherto acquired for me. If
therefore you will not appear a deceiver, nor declare your self my adversary,
leave me I pray you, to my retiredness, where I study only to maintain health,
and take no other pains then to procure my own repose, nor have any conference,
but with my self.

Your most humble servant, BALZAC.
The 10. of April 1623.
To Mounsieur de Bois Robert from BALZAC. LETTER VI.
SInce the dead never return but they affright us: I was persuaded I should do
you no small pleasure, nor a little oblige you, in forbearing to appear so much
as in Paper before you, suffering you purely to enjoy your accustomed
pleasures, without the mixture of any thing that might be distastefull unto
you. But since at this present you come to disturb the quiet of Churchyards,
and to find out a man, in affecting whose memory you might well be satisfied;
I am forced to tell you, that the party you so highly esteem, is wholly
remaining beyond the Alps, and how this is only his Ghost lately returned into
France. I break all the Looking-glasses I meet with, I blunder the water of all
Rivers I cross, I avoid the sight of all Painters in any place where I come,
lest they show me the pattern of my pale visage. Yet if in the crazy case
wherein I am, I were any way capeable of consolation, I beseech you to be
assured, I should take it as proceeding from the good success of your affairs,
nor would I desire of my disease any long respite, then what were requisite to
rejoice with you. But truly, it is an enemy who knows not how to admit of
conditions of peace, or truce, and I am so happy as not to be suffered to quit
my pains to resume them. The meat I here eat for sustenance, is to me as
pleasing as poison, and I endure life out of penance, whereas you (in the
place where you live) spend the remainder of the Golden age, refusing nothing
to your senses you lawfully may allow them. Though the Queens Court be so
chaste, as it were easier to drink drunk of a fountain, then to take any
dishonest pleasures there, and that to gain admittance, it is requisite to be
first purified at the Porters lodge; yet are you allowed even there to have
pleasing temptations, and going elsewhere, to seek out more solid
contentments. But as for me in the case I am, I make no difference at all
between lovely creatures, and well limmed pictures: and the misery I endure,
having bereaved me of action, my wretched virtue is as much constrained, as the
sobriety of the poor is necessary. In all this I add not one word to the bare
truth; and if the Count of Pountgibaut had his pardon to let you know how it is
with me, he would tell you that I am more withered then the last years Roses,
and how all the Ingeniers in an Army, were no more then sufficient to remove
me. But my discourse will be more pleasing, if I speak of that head which
deserves to fill a Diadem, then in continuing this wretched complaint. When at
the first I saw concurrent in him so much valor, and so great beauty, I
neither took him for man nor woman; but after having recollected my self, I
supposed him to be the Amazonian Queen: and doubtless in the Worlds infancy, it
was to such faces only, whereto all people yielded willing obedience, none
quitting their service, every man's duty being conformable to his inclination;
so as the only means then to be rebellious, was to be blind. When this young
Lord came to Rome at his return from te battle of Prague, I can well witness
the jealousy he a^ once affoarded both to men and their wives, and of the
great Prognostics all such gave of him, who presumed to have any experience in
future occurrents, either by the aspect of Stars, or some more sublime
understanding: besides, to consider how at twenty years of age, there is scarce
any corner of the known World he has not traced, to encounter honorable
actions; nor any sort of combat wherein for the most part he has not been
Conqueror; that he has born Arms against Turks, and Infidels, that he has
appeared both in battails and sieges of Cities; that he has given life to some
enemies, and taken it from others. This (to speak truth) is a thing God
suffers as rarely to be seen as deluges, and other great effects of his
power, or justice, in a long process of time the meerest Cowards may become
Masters; were it by no other means, but that by seeing all men die before them,
they may inherit the whole World. Diverse likewise have performed great
exploits, who have begun their actions either with gross errors, of mean
adventures. But as there are very few Rivers navigable even from their first
fountains, nor Countries where the Sun sends forth his full heat from the
very dayspring: so are such men (doubtless) very rare and singular, who have
not any need either of growth, or years; nor are subject either to the order of
times, or rules of nature. But I have no purpose to fold up a book in a Letter:
for though my grief do sometimes permit me to spend some small time upon
pleasing subjects, yet will it not allow me to make thereon any long stay. I
must therefore leave off, during my short good day, lest I fall sick again in
your presence, and once more clogg you with my complaints, instead of thanking
you for your kind remembrance, and assuring you of the great desire I have to
remain so long as I live,

Your most humble servant, BALZAC.
The 4. August 1615.
A Letter from Balzac to Mounsieur de Bois Robert. LETTER VII.
THough I receive no news from you, and howbeit those from Paris are generally
naught: yet am I so confident of your excellent constitution, as I cannot
imagine it can be endamaged by that contagious air; Surely if it be not in
such sort infected, that birds fall down dead, and that the Springs be not
corrupted, you have small cause to fear; and I have heretofore seen you of so
perfect a composition, and so strong a substance, that an ordinary infection (I
suppose) is unable to seize upon you: And rather than I will have any
apprehension of your being carried away with the current of those who die of
this great mortality; I shall sooner believe that God reserveth you to make the
worlds Epitaph, and those last Songs appointed for the Catastrophe of all
humane joys. Yet ere it comes to this point, remember your promise, I pray you,
and send me something to rid me of the Megreme I have taken in reading the
sotteries of these times. I cannot counterfeit the matter, but must confess I
taste Verses as I do Mellons; so as if these two sorts of Fruits have not a
relish near approaching to perfection, I know not how to commend them though on
the Kings Table, or in Homers works. Whatsoever you do, yet at the least permit
nothing to your spirit which may wound your reputation; and above all, let me
entreat you not to be the man who may justly be taxed of having violated the
chastity of our language, or for instructing the French in foreign vices,
utterly unknown to their Predecessors. Poetry, which God has sometimes made
choice of, for the uttering of Oracles, and to unfold his secrets to mankind,
ought at the least to be employed in honest uses: Nor is it a less offense to
make use thereof in vicious matters, than to violate a Virgin. This I speak
upon the subject of our friend, whose end I fear will hardly be natural, if he
die not the sooner of his fourth Pox. This is the second time he has issued
out of Paris by a breach, having escaped as furious a flame as that of Troy.
For my part, I cannot conceive what should be his design. For to war against
Heaven; besides, that he shall be but slackly accompanied in such an
expedition, nor has a hundred hands as it is said of Giants; he ought to
understand, it was an action they could never atchieve: and how in Cicilia
there are Mountains yet smoking with their Massacre. We come not into this
World to prescribe Laws, but to submit our selves to those we find, and to
content our selves with the wisdom of our forefathers, as with their Land and
Sun. And truly, since in matters indifferent, novelties are ever
reprehensible, and that our Kings quit not their Lillies to quarter Tulipans in
their arms: by how much greater right are we obliged to conserve the ancient,
and fundamental points of religion, which are by so much the more pure, in that
by their antiquity they approach nearer to the Origin of things, and for that
between them, and the beginning of all good, there is the less time subject to
corruption. To speak plainly, there is small appearance that truth has from
the beginning of the World attended this man, on purpose to discover it self
unto him in a Brothell, or Tavern; and to be sent forth of a mouth which comes
short in sobriety to that of a Suisse. I intend not to intermeddle with the
Courts of Parliament, nor to prevent their decrees by mine opinion: And to
think to make this man more culpable then he is, were as much as to cast Ink on
an Ethiopians face; I owe so much to the memory of our fore-past acquaintance,
as I rather pity him as a diseased person, then pursue him as an enemy. I
confess he has parts in him not absolutely ill, nor do I deny I have much
pleased my self with his freedom of speech, so long as he proposed only men
for his object, and spared to speak of holy things. But when I heard say, he
exceeded the bounds of inferior matters, and banded himself even against what
is transcendent to Heaven, I instantly quitted all acquaintance with him, and
thought the only pleasure I could do him, was to pray to God to restore him to
his right senses, and to take pity on him as he did of the Jews, who crucified
our Savior. Hereafter I will be better advised then to weary you with so long
a discourse, or to tire my self in troubling you: But truly I thought I could
do no less after three years silence, esteeming this not to be over much for a
man who is so slow a play master, for so many Letters he owes you. Yet cannot I
conclude, before I inform you of some particulars touching the place where I am
at this present, and of my employments here. First there is no day passes
wherein I see not the rising and setting of the Sun, and how during that time,
I withdraw my self from all other distractions, to enjoy the purity of that
fair light. Behold here in this present state wherein I am, all the Courtship I
use, and the only subjection I oblige my self unto. When I desire to take the
air at other hours of the day, I must indeed confess my eyes have no objects so
vast as the Sea, or Appenines, not do I behold Rome under my feet as formerly I
have done: Yet do I on all sides discover so pleasing a prospect, as thouge it
fill not the capacity of my spirit so much as did the other, yet does it far
more content me. Painters come forty days journeys hence, to study in my
Chamber, and if nature cause her greatness to appear, even from the bottom of
the deepest Abysses, and darkest downfalls, she has no less placed her rarest
perfections under my windows. Moreover, I am plunged in abundance up to the
eyes, but my riches are tacked to the twigs and branches of Trees; for as Summer
has made me plentiful, so will Winter reduce me to my former poverty. In the
mean time, I make Feasts of Figgs and Mellons, yea, out of the very Muscadine
Grapes I eat, there issues liquor enough to make half a Kingdom drunk; and the
thing whereat happily you will wonder, is, that I put all this into a sick man's
stomach, to whom well-nigh all good things are forbidden: yet have I found a
means to reconcile my surfets with my Physical receipts, and in one and the same
day I both enjoy pleasure, and endure pain; for I nourish my Fever with
excellent fruits, and purge it with Rubarbe: but howsoever I cannot hazard my
health in more innocent debauches, since I perform them without troubling the
tranquillity either of earth or air, or without bereaving any thing of life. The
first men the World produced, attained to extreme age with such pure cates as
mine are; for as of all bloody meats they only used Cherries and Mulberries;
so was the simplicity of their lives accompanied with a perfect reposedness;
Nature as yet being void of all Monsters: There was as then no mention either
of Geryon, or Minotaure, nor of phphphph. The Inquisition and Parliament were
only in the Idea of things; and of the two parts of Justice, there was that
only known which gave merits their due rewards.

BALZAC.
From BALZAC, 1623.
Another Letter from Balzac to Mounsieur de Bois Robert. LETTER VIII.
YOur Letter of the fifteenth of the last Month, came to my hands as I was
ready to seal these Presents. You might have just cause to tax me, should I let
them go unanswered, or if this dead man appearing in your presence, did not
give you thanks for the many excellent words you have used in the adorning his
Funeral Oration. I should be but too proud if others were of your opinion, or
were infected with the like error you are; but I much fear you will not for
the present herein find a party equal to that of the League, and do much doubt
if all of a contrary conceit, should be declared Criminals, there would hardly
be any acquitted in this Kingdom. Howsoever, I hold my self much obliged unto
you, in conferring so liberally that upon me, you so well know I want, and for
bestowing all your colors and mercurial mixtures to make me seem beautiful: I
will be well advised how I fall out with him who flatters me, and in the love I
bear my self, I shall at all times suffer a rival with much satisfaction. Since
a certain Gentleman in Germany pleases himself in being styled King of
Jerusalem, and since those who have no real Patrimonies, tickle themselves with
mere Titles and Arms: by the like reason may I imagine my self to be the man
you will needs have me, and receive from your courtesy the qualities my
Nativity has not affoarded me. But to disblame both of us, I beseech you
hereafter to have more care of my modesty, and not to put me in danger either
to lose it, or not to believe you. It is no less then to wrong the Angels, to
call other spirits then theirs divine; yea, all the Celestial Court is sensible
of suffering that name to fall to ground. For my part, I am so far from freeing
my self of humane defects, as I do absolutely avow, there is not any more
imperfect than I am, no not so much as blinkards and maimed persons. I epsy
faults enough, on which side soever I see my self, and my wit is so
disfurnished of foreign perfections, as I hold no man for learned, if he be
not adorned with those abilities whereof I am ignorant; yea, even in that
whereof you suppose me to have a perfect understanding: I have in truth no more
than mere doubts and conjectures, so as if there were a man of perfect
Eloquence to be found at the Worlds end, I would go in pilgrimage on purpose to
see one contrary to N. N. To speak truly, there is great difference between
filling the ear with some pleasing sound, and expressing the fancies of
Artizans and Clowns according to Grammatical rules; and in reigning over the
spirits of men by force of reason; and to share the government of the World
with Conquerours and Lawful Kings. I have not the presumption to suppose I am
arrived at this point; but I likewise think few have attained thereto, and the
Philosophers Stone were with more ease to be extracted, than the Eloquence I
propose to my self. It is as yet a kind of Terra incognita, and which has not
been discovered together with the Indies. The Romans themselves could only
recover the bare image, as they did of those Territories, over which they
Triumphed by a false Title: Yea, Greece her self how vainly soever she boasted
thereof, yet seized she only upon the shadow, not seeing the substance: So as
upon the matter diverse have possessed others with that conceit, being first
deceived themselves; and are obliged to the restitution of an ill acquired
reputation. Many of our friends have fallen into the like errors; I will not
name them, fearing to astonish at the first sight, all such to whom you shall
show this Letter; or least I should publish odious truths. It shall suffice I
tell you by the way, that if to attain perfect Eloquence, it sufficed only to
weary our hands with Writing, none could therein any way compare with our
Practitioners and Pen-clerks. Yet is there not any reason why those, who
perform poor things, should draw their weakness to their own advantage, or
imagine I flatter them. A man is as well damned for one single deadly sin, as
for a thousand without repentance; nor is it the strength of their judgment,
which hinders them from committing many faults, but the only barrenness of
their wits which enables them not to write many books. I might enlarge my self
upon this subject, and discover diverse secrets unto you, the world is not yet
acquainted with. But I have neither time nor paper left, save only to tell you
that I am

Sir, Your most humble servant, BALZAC.

Another Letter from BALZAC to the same man. LETTER IX.
I Understand some have taxed me for saying (in my last Letter unto you) the
spirits of Angels; since Angels being all spirits, it seemed unto them to be
two inseparable terms: But to let such men see how ill grounded their Objection
is, (and I suppose our judgments will herein agree) it may please them to
remember, that we call Angels spirits, to distinguish them from bodies, being a
far different signification from what the word Spirit imports, when we take
it for that part of the Soul which understands, reasons, and imagines, and
which causes so different effects in the Soul of a fool, and that of a
discreet person. Questionless (even among Angels themselves) there may be a
difference found between the spirits of some, and othersome of them, to wit, in
the faculty of Ratiotination and Comprehension: Since those of the last order
are not illuminated, but by means of them of the precedent ranks, and so of the
rest even to the first; which have a far more sublime intelligence then the
inferior Orders, which as no man (how smally soever seen in the Metaphysics
will doubt of) come as far short of the understanding the first Order is endued
with, as they do of their degree. We are therefore to admit of this difference,
and say, that an Angel is doubtless a Spirit, to wit, he is not a body: but
withal that an Angel has moreover a spirit, namely, this faculty of knowing,
and conceiving either lesser, or more large, according to the privilege of his
Order. So as if a spirit has no other signification then a simple and
incomposed substance, this inequality were not to be found among the Angels,
being equally simple, and far from all composition and mixture. When then I say
it was a wrong done to Angels to call any other spirits divine save only
theirs: I take the word Spirit in its second signification, and thereby
separate it from the Angel, and distinguish the simple substance, and nature
Angellical from that faculty of the Soul termed the understanding. But that one
may not say, the spirit of Angels, because they are all spirit, is a reason
very reproveable, and whereto there wants nothing but verity to make it no
untruth; for that besides the spirit, or understanding affoarding to Angels so
eminent a knowledge of divine things, they are likewise endued with will,
causing them to love what they know, and with memory daily adding something to
their natural intellect. But admitting I should yield to whatsoever these my
reprehendors would have, and that I limit the word spirit within the bounds of
its first signification, I should still have the better of it. For in truth our
ordinary manner of conception cannot possibly represent Angels without bodies,
yea, and the Church it self affoardeth them so fair, beatifull, and perfect
ones, that from thence the best Poets ordinarily pick their Comparisons to
pourtraite the rarest beauties. Besides, if in holy writ, mention be often made
of the spirit of God, even before he assumed our corporal substance, and in a
sense which could not be understood of the third person in Trinity, why may not
I as justly speak of the spirits of Angels, being in comparison of Gods spirit,
no better then earth, and material; and which approaches not by many degrees
unto the simplicity and purity of this majesterial cause, being as the Mother
to all the rest. You see here, that (howsoever) it is very dangerous to study
by half parts, or to understand some small matter more then those who never
were at School; yet is it out of such men as these, that Novelists and
superstitious persons are raised; yea, and all the rest, who have reason enough
to doubt, but not science sufficiently to determine rightly.

BALZAC.

To Mounsieur de Bois Robert from BALZAC. LETTER X.
SIR,
YOu have anticipated what I intended to say, and have not left for me in all
Rhetoric, either complement or commendations to return you. This is to force
ingratitude by excess of obligation, and to reduce me to the necessity of being
indebted unto you after I be dead. In truth it were necessary I had the power
to promise you felicity and Paradise, in requital of the vows and sacrifices
you offer unto me, and that I were in case to be your advocate, instead of
being thus put to a stand to answer you. It may be you have a mind in such
sort to disguise me to my self, as I shall not hereafter know who I am, but be
forced to forget my own name, by causing me to imagine I am not the same man I
was yesterday. Proceed at your pleasure to deceive me in this sort, for I am
resolved not to contest with you in this kind, to the Worlds end: nor to arm
my self against an enemy, who only throws Roses at my head. I should be very
glad all my life would pass in such pleasing dreams, and that I might never
awake, for fear of knowing the truth to my prejudice. But for the attaining
this happiness, it is necessary I do quite contrary to your advice, and never
quit my Countrey-house, where none comes to enter into comparisons, or contest
with me, for the advantage I have over bruit beasts, or my Lackeys. I agree
with you that it is the Court-voice which either approves or condemns all,
and that out of its light, things though never so perfect, have no appearance:
But I know not whether it were my best, to make that my own case; since I fear
left my presence there, will rather prejudice my reputation and your judgment,
then make good your position. Upon the matter, if there be any tolerable parts
in me, they appear so little outwardly, as I had need have my breast opened to
discover them: And in conclusion you will find a sufficient obligation for me,
to have you think my Soul is more eloquent then my discourse, and that the
better part of my virtue is concealed: Yet since my promise is past, I must
resolve for Paris, though it prove as strange a place unto me, as if I were out
of the World, or as though they should chase raw Courtiers thence, as they do
corrupt Statesmen. To tell you plainly how the case stands, I am none of those
who study the slightest actions of their lives, and who use Art in all they do,
or do not. I cannot light upon that accent, wherewith they authorize their
follies, nor make of every mean matter a mystery by whispering it in the ear:
And less do I know how to palliate my faults; or make show of an honest man, if
really I be not so: Now though I could make my self capable of these Arts, yet
would it anger me shrewdly, if after having passed nine Ports, and abidden many
back-casts to get thither, to be at last stayed at the Tenth: Nay, should I
chance to get admittance; what a Hell were it for me to come into a Country
where Hats are not made to cover heads, and where all men grow crooked with
extreme cringeing. Consider therefore, whether this humor of mine would sure
with the place where you are; or if a man whose points and garters seem
ponderous unto him, and who finds it a difficult matter to obey Gods
Commandments, and the Kings Edicts, can be drawn to be obliged to new Laws, or
procure to himself a third servitude. In the stare wherein I now am, all the
Princes in the World act Comedies to make me sport. I enjoy all the Riches of
Nature, from the Heavens to River-waters, and I easily obtain of my moderate
spirit, what I cannot attain unto by the liberality of Fortune. This being
thus, will you persuade me to change those benefits none envy, with your fears,
hopes, and suspicions; or not think it fit I value liberty, for which the
Hollanders have made War (now this fifty years) against the King of Spain? But
since I have passed my word, I am not resolved to revoke it; yet when I must
needs bid adieu to my Woods and solitary places, which have thaught me so many
good things, and quit this enchanted Palace of mine, where all my thoughts are
real inspirations; I shall have a great conflict within me, to keep my word
with you. I will believe none but your self, who best know whether or no I have
reason to love this prison my Father builded for me, or this little spot of
Land, where there is no defect but a Fountain of Gold and other unnecessary
things; there being else sufficient here to satisfy a sober Person; I must
confess the last great rains have blemished all the beauty abroad: And Winter
which by right should be condemned never to depart from Swedland, is already
come to cross the content I formerly enjoyed: But howsoever, there are yet
pleasing remedies to avoid these present incommodities. The perfumes I burn,
and whereof I am as prodigal, as though I exacted tribute from the Countries
from whence they come, makes me the less to miss the sweetness of the Spring:
And a great fire resembling the brightest beauty, which I term the Sun of the
night, and dark days, watches at all hours in my Chamber, and gives light to
my rest, as well as to my Studies. Before this witness (which I never loose
sight of) all Nature is the subject of my meditation; and I conceive works,
which happily may merit a place in your Library, and to be chosen Citizens of
that Divine Republic. I know not what men do most esteem in books, but I am
confident, that in this I compose, Justice and Majesty, shall appear so evenly
tempered, as none shall therein find any thing either favoring of cowardice or
cruelty. I take and make use of the art of Ancients; as they would have done
from me, had I been the first man living. But I have no servile dependancy upon
their conceptions, nor am I born their vassal, to follow no other laws or
examples, save theirs: To the contrary (if I deceive not my self) my invention
is far more happy then my imitation; and as there have been in our age diverse
new Stars discovered, till this present unperceived; so I in matter of
Eloquence, seek out singularities, hitherto unknown to any. It is certain, and
you know it as well as my self, you who know good things when you see them, and
who are the Author of diverse; that there are none so severe Muses as the
French, nor any tongue more hating affectation, and bare appearances of things
then ours. All kind of ornaments therefore are not propper for her: and her
purity is at such odds with the exorbitant license of other languages, that a
French vice in this kind, is often made a foreign virtue. But (in this case)
we are to take advice of the understanding and care; and for my part, I have
for my pattern herein, the Idea of the great Cardinal of Richelieu, as though
he were present and privy to my conceptions, or as if he at all times received
or rejected them, as they happen to be either good or otherwise: But to tell
you the truth, I know not well which way I pass by this tedious and untroden
path, or what use I intend to make of these so many impertinent speeches. But I
am as often out of my way, in the allies of my hermitage, and I have many times
much use of a man, to let me know whether it be day, or night, and to order my
times and actions; yet would I have you know, I do not usually fall into such
errors, but only before such as I love and honor, as I do you; at all other
times, be it in my visits, or in my Letters, I will be well advised, how I
suffer the end to come far short of the Exordium; and from the first word, I
make all the haste I may to come to

Your most humble servant BALZAC.
The 11. of Feb. 1624.
To Mounsieur Girard, Secretary to the Duke of Espernon. LETTER XI.
LEt me entreat you, that we may deface out of our intended History whatsoever
has passed these last four Months, let us imagine that time to have happened in
some fibulous age, and (for our mutual content) let us herein learn the Art of
Oblivion. Had I been constrained to quit our ancient acquaintance, being of
equal age to either of us, and whereof I make as great account as of my Fathers
inheritance; surely I had been driven to the like streights, as he who with one
hand should be forced to cut off the other. It is then the necessity of my
inclination, which forces me to affect Ph^lander, though he were mine enemy:
and this passion does so please me, that should any man cure me thereof, I
would commense suit with him for my former melody. I will not accuse any man
for the fault committed: Let us both imagine it to be a Child without a
Father, and to clear all men, let us lay it up among the present miseries, and
impute it to the power of Fortune. I will rather suppose it to be the last
effect of the Commer, then impute it to any act of your spirit, or that you
contrived the discontent I have endured. I swear upon whatsoever is August or
Sacred amongst men, I have no less loved you then my self, and have equally
shared my self between my brother and Philander. Henceforward I desire to do
the like. But let us leave all these fair words, and petty nicities to poor
spirits, and hereafter confer together with such liberty as Philosophy
affoardeth us. But above all things I entreat you not to suffer a supposed
wisdom to restrain you within particular respects and petty considerations,
which may hinder you from speaking high in what concerns me. Fear not to show
your self my sure friend, for it is neither theft, nor throat-cutting; and of
the two extreamities of defect and excess, it is better to fall into the
fairest and least faculty. Otherwise if friendship should never appear, but
remain at all times as a recluse, what better use can we draw thence then of
hatred alike hidden? and at the most what use is there to be made thereof, but
only for the pleasure of conversation, and necessity of commerce? But I will
leave this discourse whereof I hope you have no use, to ask you some news of
the little man you sometimes see, and who imagines the King bereaveth him of
all such Offices as he bestows upon Mounsieur de Luines. I make no question
but he daily tormenteth both Soul and body, for that he is not always at his
Masters elbow, nor is so ordinarily seen at the Loover, as the steps of the
great stairs, or the Swisses Hall. Threescore and ten years of experience have
not sufficed to settle his spirit, and he who should observe his discourse
without knowing him, instead of supposing his beard to be silver-haired, would
rather think he had cast flower on his face; yet are we to confess he is one of
the rarest Court-pieces, and that it is no small sport to see him in a chafe
against the State, and the age we live in, which he maliceth more then he does
his creditors. Make quiet use of so pleasing a diversion, and remember the
World could not end, nor Nature be perfect, if there were not as well such men
as there are Apes and Monkies.

The 13. of Nov. 1623.
To the same from BALZAC. LETTER XII.
SIR,
I Beseech you reserve your counsel for those who are not as yet resolved; and
go persuade the Count Maurice to marry, and beget Captains for another age. As
for me, I love both solitariness and society, but will not be continually tied
to either. If my Father had been of my mind, I had remained where I was before
he got me. I imagine the party you desire to bestow on me, is fair; but stay
awhile, and she will not be so: She is no fool; but happily more witty then is
necessary for an honest woman to be: She is rich, bun my liberty is
unprizeable. So as to make me alter my resolution, there is no other means then
an express commandment from God, with this proposition, either of death, or a
wife. Those creatures at Paris are ordinarily so cunning, and well practiced,
they find nothing strange the first night they are married: and here, they
have not wit enough to give their bodies right motion; but in all places they
make men alike miserable, as do Fevers, War, or Poverty. To tell you freely
how the matter stands, I will not daily disturb my self in telling my
Mistresses hairs, for fear she should bestow them as favors upon her
familiars; or to be jealous lest all the women who come to see her, were young
men disguised. I cannot endure, that in my absence she and her gallant drink to
the health of their Cuckold, and that I be the subject of all their chat. And
on the other side, it were far worse, were she chaste, yet a scowld, and to be
troubled with an enemy to assault me day and night. I rather affect a tractable
vice, then a tyrannical virtue: But if there be any other remedy, I will not be
reduced to such straights, as to choose the least of evils; since there is not
any of this nature, I esteem not unsufferable. In a word Philander, my
Neighbors example does not a little terrify me: he has begotten so many
dumb, blind, and deformed creatures, he is able to furnish a reasonable
Hospital. I will not be bound to love Monsters, because they are mine, and were
I assured not to be defective in this kind, I could well forbear having
children; who if they be wicked, will desire my death; if wise, expect it, if
the honestest living, yet will they now and then reflect upon it. But it may be
(you will say) if my resolution were generally received, the Sea should be no
longer charged with ships, and the Land would become desert. To this Philander
I answer, that since the world is not always to endure, it were far better to
have virtue become its Catastrophe, then any thing else; since it cannot find
a more fair and honest conclusion, then a general abstinence in this kind.

BALZAC.
The 7. of April 1625.
To Philander from BALZAC. LETTER XIII.
SIR,
SInce these be the particular days appointed for Devotion: we being now in
the season of public Ecclesiastical mourning, and it importing every man to
apply himself in the affairs of his conscience; you must excuse me, if I be
short in my conversation with you in this kind, and keep all my discourse for
my Confessor. It were strange we should herein do less then the Bells, who are
now all dumb, or trouble the commerce contracted between God and man, only to
tell idle stories. Let us therefore (I pray you) surcease all sorts of news,
and not mingle any profane matter with this holy week, which desires to be as
pure as a Virgin. The high Feast we are falling upon, will set us at liberty,
after which, instead of three Letters you have written unto me, I am contented
to return you six answers.

BALZAC.
On Goodfriday.
To the same from BALZAC. LETTER XIV.
YOur plaints are both right eloquent, and very unjust: I can at least well
assure you, my thoughts are not so often here, as where you are, and if my
Letters come not so far, it is because they can find none to carry them. But
by these presents I purpose rather to rejoice with you for the recovery of your
health, then to afflict my self unseasonably. Things past are to be reckoned as
nothing, and what happened yesterday, is as far from us as the life of
Charlemain. Wherefore, I who have a perfect experience of worldly affairs,
would as soon comfort you for the loss you received by the death of your great
Grandfather, (so many years dead before you were born) as for the late danger
of your Fever, since it is now gone. The best is, the Phisicians have not so
far exhausted you, but there yet remains blood sufficient, to bestow part
thereof in your Mistresses service, and to fill the World with your offenses;
so long as the ruins of your head may be repaired, and your beauty budd again
with the next Roses, there is nothing lost hitherto; but indeed if instead of
your former head, you carried the figure of a rusty Murrion, or rotten Pumpian,
I should much pity you in such a plight, and would presently add you to the
number of decayed buildings. Now when all is done Philander, it is but a little
water and earth mingled together, we study to conserve with all the maxims of
wisdom, and all the rules of Physic. Let us reflect I pray you, upon our
better part, and hereafter labor as well to cure our selves of Vice, as of the
Fever. It is that image of God we defaced by our own hands, we ought to
repair; and our first innocence is the thing it behooves us to ask at his
hands, rather then our former health. For my part, I am absolutely resolved to
lead a new life, and to take no other care but for my Souls health, and to
procure the same for others. And truly it were far better to consecrate this
great Eloquence of ours to his glory, who gave it us, then t^ ^mploy it in
commending fools, and in making our selves to be p^^^^d among Children. The P.
E. whom happily you know, and w^^ ^ath one of the best, and most polite wits of
all his company, (...)ms me all he can in this my design, and every hour of his
com^^^y is as much to me, as eight days of reformation; yet is he not a (...)
who professes that pale virtue which affrighteth all men, and is ^^^patible
with humane infirmities: but quite contrary, he flatter^^ me in reprehending my
errors, and instead of the penance I (...) he is contented to enjoin me
honest recreations. Your bro^^^^ (...) you more about eight days hence, and
will give you (...) ^cc^mpt both of my actions and intentions; believe him as
truth it (...), and besides, assure your self further upon my word, he is worth
^ome Doctor and an half, and has a good wit, without speaking of his zeal and
virtue.

BALZAC.
The 17. of January 1623.
To Olympa from BALZAC. LETTER XV.
I Am much troubled to find the cause of your tears; to impute them to the
death of your Husband, is happily but the bare pretext. It is not to be
imagined that death which causes the most beautiful things to become
offensive to the days brightness, and affrighteth those who formerly admired
them; should make that man pleasing unto you, who was never so to any. Yet you
seem with him to have lost all, and do so cunningly counterfeit the afflicted,
I can hardly believe what I see: Can it be possible, you should be thus
pestered to support your good fortune with patience, or be really so sorrowful
for the loss of a poor gouty fellow, for whose overlong living I should rather
have thought it fit to comfort you? But if this be not thus, what do you with
all this great mourning, wherein you plunge your self, and this midnight never
removing from your Chamber? I must confess I was never more astonished, then to
find such an Equipage of sadness about you, accompanied with such elaborate
actions, and so constrained countenances; and without jesting Olympa, (after
this I have seen) there remains nothing for the full expression of a fained
passion, but only to wear black smocks, and to be attended by Moors. Yet is it
time, or never to return to your right senses, and to conclude your Comedy, let
me entreat you to leave off all these sower faces to fools. Cast off this black
vail which hinders me from seeing you, and consider that five foot of ground,
is worth you two thousand pounds by the year. To raise such a rent, the
revenues of half some Kingdom were hardly sufficient; nor can you tax me for
not speaking herein the truth, since I have it from your own mouth. Is it not
almost incredible, so small a corner of earth, should yield so large a revenew.
I doubt not but diverse will suppose it bears Pearls or Diamonds. But I had
almost forgot the most important business I am to impart unto you, and
whereupon I first intended to write. I must therefore say, you are to have a
special care, never to repair the loss you have lately received, assuring your
self there is no one man in the World worthy to enjoy you privatively: you
shall be answerable for those excellent qualities Nature and Art have conferred
upon you for the commanding of men, if you say you cannot live without
submitting your self to one. Herein Olympa, you ought not suffer the vain
ambition to be wise to a great Signiour to transport you, or the advantage of
entering into the Loover in Carroch, to cause you quit the happiness you have to
be Queen of your self. How much Gold soever one bestow in fetters, and how
glorious soever the servitude be, yet assure your self they are but a couple of
bad matters. Of late there was not any part of your body, whereof another was
not master, he would examine your very dreams and thoughts: It was not in your
power to dispose of one single hair, nay he robbed you of your very name. See
here Olympa, what it is to have a Husband, and what you torment your self for
with such prodigal tears. Me thinks it were all you could, or ought to do were
he revived; or if the news of his death were doubtful.

Yours, BALZAC.
The 22. of July 1622.
To Crysolita from BALZAC. LETTER XVI.
I Must needs disabuse you Crysolita, and inform you better in the History of
that old Haxtris, you supposed to be a very Saint. First, you are to
understand, she is extracted out of her Mothers sins, nor was ever any
Yirginity so britle, as that she brought into this World. It is very likely she
has lost all remembrance of any such matter: But people of those days, stick
not openly to affirm, that the first time she had liberty to go abroad, (at her
coming home) she mist her Gloves and Maidenhead. After this, her beauty
augmenting with riper years, she drew the eyes of all Italy upon her; and sold
than fifty times at Court, she had formerly lost at School: But since then, she
is arrived to an experience, far surpassing that of the Lord Chancellor, or
the Popes Datary: and when I shall tell you, she knows whether there be more
pleasure in a circumcised Courtizan, then in a Christian; and that she has
experienced the activity of Indians and Muscovites, yet shall I relate but half
the story. So it is, that now after she has filled Limbo with her paricidial
leachery, and been threescore years a Lectoress in vice, she would make you
confident of her conversion: Yet am I credibly informed, that not having now
any thing worth the losing, she is turned Solicitress, to entice others to
vice; nor is there any chastity can escape her, if it take not sanctuary in the
Carmelites. She cannot endure there should be one honest Woman in the whole
City; this angering her as much, as though she robbed her, or had declared her
self her enemy. Yet is this the Saint you so much talk of Crysolita, and the
very same old Madame, from whom you promised me so many miracles. Now I, who
know her very heart, write unto you, what hereafter you ought to believe: for
let her make what show she will, yet I know she is as far from her conversion,
as from her youth. The Capuchins themselves could not cause her to pass her
word to turn honest Woman the next grand Jubilee; for instead of a better
answer, she plainly told them, she had not as yet dispatched her business, and
could well stay till another, which will happen about eight and twenty years
hence.

BALZAC.
From Rome the 5. of February 1622.
To Clorinda from BALZAC. LETTER XVII.
Clorinda,
FOr that I am not in your conceit sufficiently punished with my Fever, you
belike think it fitting, I should yet be further afflicted with Love; so as
there is nothing wanting to end my good fortune, but only a law-suite and a
quarrel. In this very place, designed for repose and joy, I continually burn, I
tell each hour, and my dreams are full of distractions. Yet after all this, you
suppose you much oblige me in wishing me every night good rest, as though it
were not in your power to give it me. I had once a Master of your humor: he
had means enough to procure my advancement, yet he supposed it sufficient to
wish me well, and that I ought to rest satisfied, so long as he said, I
deserved a good fortune. I know not whether it be your intention to use me in
this manner: but howsoever I cannot take it ill, though you mock me, since you
do it so handsomely. Advise me if you think good, to seek for a quiet life in
Germany; cast me headlong down some Cliffe, and then say God guide me; wish me
a good night out of your Chamber, all this concerns not me Clorinda. If I
receive injuries from you, I am no longer in state to take notice of them. Yet
I should think you might be somewhat more sensible of my sorrows, and at least
to show your self pitiful toward me, though you reserve your affections for
some other. It is no generous act to kill a sick person, there is not any so
common a Quack-salver but can do as much And in conclusion Clorinda, all the
honor you will attain unto herein after my death, is only to have had some
small force more then my lingering Fever.

BALZAC.
In my bed the 20 fit of my Fever.
Another Letter to Clorinda from BALZAC. LETTER XVIII.
WE are not separated either by Seas or Mountains: your lodging and mine touch,
yet find I it an impossibility to see you. If you were at Japan, or in the
Kingdom of China, I would resolve my self for those places, and I should find
some Bark, or other bound for that voyage: think not I dissemble, there is not
any shelve in all the Sea, not hazard to undergo in so dangerous a voyage,
whereof I have not less apprehension, then the meeting this little brother of
yours. But if may be it is yourself, who make these difficulties, I suppose, to
arise elsewhere. You are glad you want no pretext, on purpose to vex me when
you please. If it be so Clorinda, let me be so much obliged unto you, as to
conceal it. I had far rather be deceived, then know the truth to my prejudice:
Either my company is troublesome unto you, or you reserve your favors for some
other friend. Howsoever, I am contented to believe your Mother is sick, and
that you cannot quit her Chamber: there are no excuses so counterfeit, I accept
not for current, so long as they relieve my spirits: Considering the power you
have over me, it is a small matter to satisfy your self in making me conceive
the best. Yet must I thank you Clorinda, for violating Justice so formerly, and
faining reasons with purpose to err punctually. By this means you will not
suffer me so much as to seem miserable, and you cozen me so cunningly, I can
neither bemoan my self, nor beshrew you. Yet is it impossible I can for ever
conceal my sensibilities: What violence soever I offer to my humor, it can no
longer be contained. To be short Clorinda, if you loved me as you say, you
would not live with me in the fashion you do; but I should receive from you
real favors, not vain appearances; and say what you will, we shall meet alone
once in our lives: I beseech you let not this word affright you, for if any
should find us in this manner, none will imagine we conspire against the King,
or suspect I read Magic to you. Innocent actions carry their warrant with
them, nor is there any necessity that two cannot be together without making a
third. Believe me Clorinda, if we shut our selves for three hours into a
private Chamber, the most slanderous will only imagine, I either let you see
the errors you are in, or that you administer some Medicine unto me for my
Fever.

BALZAC.
The 15. April 1620.
To Clorinda from BALZAC. LETTER XIX.
I Know not whether I should term it slackness, or patience, the small
resistance I make against the displeasures you do me; it may be, you are
resolved to see how far my fidelity will extend, and to extort the utmost
proofs thereof: yet is it better Clorinda to endure injustice, then to act it,
and to be rather the Martyr, then the Tyrant. Show your wit, I beseech you by
inflicting daily new torments upon me, and avoid all occasions of obliging me,
with as much care as I seek those to serve you. I have prepared my spirits
against all the bad occ^^rents can happen that way. There is nothing I cannot
endure, if it comes from you, your slighting me only excepted: But herein I
must tell you, I am so tender, as I am wounded with the least touch. I would
not purchase the Kings favor, if he affoard it me in rough terms; nor would I
accept of his Graces, were I forced to gain them in with the forgoing the thing
I affect more then his Kingdom. You understand me sufficiently what I mean
hereby, and the just occasion I have to complain; but still you will have me in
the wrong, nor do I doubt, but you will accuse me of your crime: But speak
truly, have you no apprehension, that he whom you have so often injured, shall
at length grow weary of his sufferings, and lest he should lose all fear,
together with his hopes. You might consider Clorinda, that I am not possessed
with slight passions, and how your self has told me ere now; that if God
should arm me with thunder when I am angry, within four and twenty hours there
would be neither Towers nor Pavillions standing in any place: Wherefore to
second your conceit; know (if that were) one while the fire should fall upon
all jealous persons, and by and by burn all the Mothers and little brothers in
a whole Province. And doubtless, if I did you no harm, yet would I put you into
such a fright, you should be forced to hide your self under ground, and come to
meet me in some Cave. But I gain much by these glorious brags, or by my seeming
severity: I assure my self, you mock me and my threats. It is long since I have
showed you the way how to catch me, and you know the means how to reduce me to
my former duty: I must confess I am not of sufficient force to contest with
Clorinda: her kisses have power to expel all spleen, even out of the spirit of
an Italian Prince, for the greatest injury can be offered him. Nay, they would
force the Duke de Main to forsake his Arms in the hottest of his Martial
conflicts: Wherefore I pray you, let us agree upon a business, which of
necessity must be concluded: how disadvantagious soever the peace be I treat of
with you, yet shall I at all times gain that which otherwise I should lose in
your absence. I have therefore presented my complaints, with purpose to receive
satisfactions: I am angry only to the end you may appease me. I will tell you
to morrow, that I am come to oblige you, to take the pains to receive me.

BALZAC.
The 17. of April 1620.
To Clorinda from BALZAC. LETTER XX.
I See well Clorinda, I do but lose my labor, and that if were an easier
matter to return Ice into Coals, then to kindle love in you: All I can say,
makes no impression in your thoughts, you will not so much as hear reason,
because it rests on my side. Well Clorinda, I must resolve my self for the
worst of events, and stay the time till your wrinkles affoard me revenge for
all the wrongs you have done me. Think not this tyrannical power of your
beauty, will last to the Worlds end. Time which overturneth Empires, and
prescribes limits to all things, will use you as it does the rest of fair
workmanships. I pray have patience, if I take upon me to tell you this bad
news; for I am not to day in the humor to flatter any. Though it would raise
choler in you, yet must I say, you will grow stale, and be then no more what
you now are. I doubt not of your sighs when you reflect upon this change, or
that your very imagination is not sensible of some sorrow; yet shall this
happen Clorinda, there is not an hour passes, which impaires not some part of
your face. But the time will come, when your Looking-glass will more scare you,
then a Judge does a Fellon: your forehead will fly to the Crown of your head;
your cheeks will fall beneath your chinne, and your eyes of those days, shall
turn of the same color your lips are at this hour. I could willingly wish out
of my love unto you, my relation were not so true as it is. But since I have
quitted all complacency, there is no means to make me silent. Clorinda, the Sun
is still beautiful, though ready to set; and the Autumn agreeable, though
sprinkled with some Snow, but we enjoy no happy years, but the first of youth:
And be as careful of your self as is possible, yet can you not conserve your
complexion, and acquire experience. Will you have me say more, and acquaint you
with what I understood by a stranger, with whom I have conversed all this day?
You are to know there is not any part of the World so remote, which his
curiosity has not carried him, nor rarity in Nature, he has not carefully
observed: He has seen Mountains which burn perpetually without diminishing; he
has landed in Islands, never resting in one place; he has seen natural
Seamen; but he swore unto me, who among all these miracles, he never yet saw a
beautiful old Woman. The Moral hereof is, that you must make use of your
youth, and gather Nose-gayes before the Roses wither. None knows better then
your self, that to be fair, is to reign without having need either of Guards or
Forts. You see you are the Worlds ambition, no man desiring further happiness
then Clorinda: But think not to continue this absolute authority, or this
general esteem, by other means then you compassed them; and assure your self,
that when you have no further attractions then an eloquent tongue, no man will
seek for them among the surrowes of your face. A Woman had need be perfectly
provided of virtue, to repair the ruins of her beauty. All the wit and
experience in the World is fruitless, when she falls into this state, nor can
any thing hinder her from being hated, but only to change Sex. Remember then
Clorinda, not to expect to live, when you are as good as dead; nor do not spend
that time in deliberating, which should be employed in doing. You are now of
years both to give, and receive contentment, and we are in the Month, wherein
each Creature turns amorous; not excepting Lions, Tigers, or Philosophers. I
entreat you therefore, not to show your self the sole insensible creature in
the World: suffer your self to be convinced by reason, since you cannot resist
the same but to your own disadvantage: You have no subject to be suspicious of
what I say; for I advise you to nothing Clorinda, wherein I would not willingly
join with you in the accomplishment.

BALZAC.
The 3. of May 1620.
Another Letter to Clorinda from BALZAC. LETTER XXI.
CLorinda, your Religion must needs be amiss, otherwise I should see you now
and then at Church: But I think it were an easier matter to convert a whole
Nation, then to dispose you to give me content. The cause why you persist in
your own opinion, is, because it is opposite to mine. Well then, I must depart
without speaking with you, and am barred from affoarding to my affection, what
good manners would have exacted of me, though I had not loved you: Truly I
know not in what manner to suffer so wounding a displeasure, nor am I so well
acquainted with my self, as to pass my word for him I speak of in this
occasion. All I can say unto you Clorinda, is, that the only way to rid me out
of my pain, is to perform the thing I have so often proposed unto you, and to
make your self capable of a strong resolution. Never did any Prince enterprise
a more glorious voyage, then mine shall be, if you will make one: and truly, I
see not why you should make any difficulty herein, the longer your journey is,
the further shall you be removed from tyranny. It is a Monster you ought to fly
from, even to the Worlds end, and with whom to be in peace, is dangerous: Will
you fear to come into the Country of Comedies, Painting, and Music, or into a
place where Women are by many as highly esteemed as Saints; without flattering
you, I must affirm, you shall seem over much to neglect your own quiet, if you
let slip to favorable an occasion to procure it. It is time Clorinda, you make
it appear what you are, and that we begin the History of our adventures. If
you love, all things will be easy for you; there is no more difficulty to
pass the Alps, then to go up into your Chamber: Nor doubt you that the
Seawaters will become sweet, if you be not satisfied in that they be smooth.
But I am much afraid I shall not receive from you the satisfaction I expect.
You will tell me (as you use) we must let Nature work, and that she will soon
revenge us of our enemies. I suppose Clorinda, all this may happen, but it is
no reason we should be obliged to the Tyrants death for our liberty, but to our
own resolutions.

The 30. of July 1620. BALZAC.

To Lydia from BALZAC. LETTER XXII.
I Am almost mad to understand thou were seen laugh to day. Is this true love
Lydia to be merry in my absence? and to be the same woman thou art, when I am
with thee? Yet should I have been satisfied, had thou been contented only to
have made thy self merry with thy looking-glass, so the man in iron had not
been in my place. I never saw him but once, and surely he is either a Sor, or
else all the rules of Physiognomy are false: yet because he calls himself
Captain, thou permits him to persecute thee with his complements, and art at
the point to yield. If he touch thee Lydia, all the water in the Sea is little
enough to purify thee; and if thou allowest him the rest, have a care, least
in his sleep, he take thee for an Enemy, and instead of his embraces, strangle
thee.

To the Baron of Amblovile from BALZAC. LETTER XXIII.
My Lord,
I Attend you here in the season of Jasmins and Roses, and do send you a taste
of the pleasures of Rome, for fear you be poisoned therewith, upon your first
approach. We are here in the Country of curiosities, and to be happy in this
place, it suffices not to be blind. The Sun has yet heat enough to ripen us
Reasins, and to affoard us Flowers: all the Winter falls upon the neighboring
Mountains, to the end we may not want Snow in August. But if you desire I
should divert my discourse unto more serious matters, and conceal nothing from
you: I must tell you, there is no place under Heaven, where Virtue is so near a
Neighbor to Vice, or where good is so mingled with Evil: We here behold
miracles on the one side, and monsters on the other; and at the same time when
some Discipline themselves, others run to debauches of all kinds. Besides,
there is as profound a peace here, as in that part of the Air elevated above
the Winds and Storms. Idleness in this place, is an honest man's ordinary
vocation; and to save half the World, no man will rise hastily from Table, for
fear of troubling digestion. If you chance to see any with skars in their
faces, do not thereupon imagine they have purchased them either in Wars, or in
defense of their honor, for these are only their Mistresses favors; but in
recompense of such refractory humors, you shall see that here, the sanctity
whereof does illustrate the whole Church. It is their fervent prayers which
impetrate all advantages over Enemies: It is their fastings which cause
fruitfulness to flow upon the Earth: It is their innocence which conserveth the
culpable from Eternal ruin. In a word, there are here such excellent examples
of Virtue, and so intising allurements to Vice, that I will not marvel if you
turn honest man here, and I will likewise willingly pardon you, if you do not
so. Truly, as new Spain is the Province of Gold; and as Afric affoards Lions,
and France Soldiers; so is Italy the mother of those things you best love.
When you shall see these Female Creatures in their own Country, and compare
their beauty with the bad fashion of the masculine Italians, I doubt not, but
it will seem to you as well as to my self, these Divine Women to have been
created by themselves, or to be Queens who have married their Grooms. The most
part of those beyond the Mounts have no more beauty then needs must, to excuse
them from being esteemed ugly; and if there be some one whose face you could
fancy, this shall happily be some desolate Palace, or some well favored beast.
But here (for the most part) they are born Eloquent; and I will tell you before
hand, that in one and the same person, you shall find both your Master and
Mistress. For my part, I ingeniously confess, I do no longer live under
Clorinda's regency, and all that is permitted me in this place, is only
sometimes to honor her memory. I expect you should at this passage accuse me
of levity and disloyalty, and that you could willingly revile me. But do you
not think my sighs must needs be surbated, in going every day four hundred
leagues? Besides, being so far from her as I am, what know I, whether I love a
dead body, or an Infidel. I have not received any favors from her, which are
not rather marks of her virtues, then demonstrations of her love. And had she
lost all her liberality in that kind, she could hardly miss it. I am therefore
only obliged to my word, not to her affection. And as for that, I should
over-esteem her, if I made more reckoning thereof, then some Princes do of
theirs, and I should show my self over superstitious, if I valued what I only
whispered in her ear, to be of greater efficacy then Letters Pattents and
Edicts. It is a point decided in Ovids Theology, that an hundred false Oaths
from an amorous person, amount not to half a deadly sin, and that it is only
the God of Poets whom we offend by our perjury in that point. Now I will be
judged by her self, whether I having bestowed my service upon her, she should
take it ill if another did reward me; or that I love rather to be happy, then
otherwise; or desire rather to possess Lucretia, then to desire Clorinda. Will
she have her tyranny extend even to the Churches patrimony, and that the Pope
share his temporal Authority with her? I do not believe she has any such
pretentions. For my part, I would she knew I can no longer behold any beauty
but naked, nor recive any but warm and moist kisses. I will tell you the rest
upon the banks of Tyber, and in these precious ruins whither I go to muse once
a day, and to tread in their steps who have led Kings in Triumph. If there were
any means there to find a little of Sylla's good fortune, or of Pompeis
greatness, instead of the Medals we now and then meet with, I should have a
farther subject to invite you hither. Notwithstanding, if you be yet your self,
and that by solemn vow you have forsaken the World, and the vanities thereof,
assure your self, that it is in this Country where felicity does attend you:
and that being once in this place, you will esteem all those as banished
persons, whom you have left behind you in France.

BALZAC.
The 25. of December 1621.
To the Count of Schomberg from BALZAC. LETTER XXIV.
My LORD,
I Send you the papers you have formerly seen, and whereto you have attributed
so much, as I should be ashamed to assent thereto, were it not that I hold it
less presumption to believe I have merited the same, then to imagine I can have
a flatterer of your fashion. I had need be elevated to a more sovereign fortune
then the state of Kings, to expect complacency from a man, who could never be
procured to approve evil: and of whose disfavour one can hardly find other
cause, then the only truth he has declared. Howsoever it be, since you are
now in Lymosin, and take not any journey in those parts, without having a
thousand old debates to reconcile, and as many new ones to prevent, it is very
propable, that after so painful an employment, and so great disquiet of mind,
my book will fall into your hands, just at such time as you cannot find any
thing more tedious unto you, then what you come from treating of: For should I
presume that in your pleasant walks of Duretal, where all your minutes are
pleasing, and all your hours precious, there could be any time spare for me,
and my works; it were as much as to be ignorant of the diversions there
attending you; or not to be acquainted with the great affluence of noble
company, daily repairing thither, to visit you. But were it so, that you had
none with you, save only the memory of your fore-passed actions, your
solitariness has no need of books to make it more pleasing; nay, if all this
were not, yet if you desire to seek contentment out of your self, you cannot
find any more pleasing, then in the presence of your Children, and
particularly of that Divine daughter of yours, from whom I daily learn some
miracle. It is therefore in her absence, and in solitary walks, where I have
the ambition to find entertainment, and to receive gracious acceptance. In all
other places (without presuming either to pass for Orator or Poet:) it shall
highly suffice me in being honored with the assurance that I am

My Lord, Your most humble servant, BALZAC.
The 25. of May 1624.
A Letter from the Count of Schomberg, to Mounsieur de BALZAC. LETTER XXV.
SIR,
THe style you travail in, causes the Pens of all such who attempt an answer,
to fall out of their hands, and Eloquence may so properly be called yours, that
it is no marvel though others have but a small share therein. I would therefore
have you know, that if I understand any thing in Letters, yours do obscure
whatsoever has hitherto been esteemed of in our Language: and that (without
flattering you) there can be no diversion so pleasing, which ought not to give
place to the perusing of those Lines you sent me. This occupation is worthy the
Cabinets of Kings, and of the richest Ear curtins of France; and not (as you
would have it) of my solitary retirements in Lymosin, from whence I am ready
to be gone, with resolution never to retire from the affection I have promised
you, whence you shall at all times draw effectual proofs, whenever you please
to employ them for your service.

Sir, Your most affectionate servant SCHOMBERG.
The 1. of June 1624.
The Letters of MOUNSIEUR de BALZAC. The fourth Book.
To my Lord Mashall of Schomberg. LETTER I.
My Lord,
I Should be insensible of public good, and an enemy to France, had I not (as
I ought) a true taste of the good news your Footman brought me. I will not
mention the Obligations I owe you, being no small ones, if that be not a slight
matter to be esteemed by you: But since I make profession to honor virtue even
in the person of one departed, or an enemy; and at all times to side with the
right, were there only my self and Justice for it, you may please to believe,
I complain in your behalf for the miseries of our times, and that I am most
joyful to see you at this present, where all the World mist you: Certainly
your retirement from Court, has been one of the fairest pieces of your life,
during which, you have made it apparent you are the same in both fortunes:
since I can witness, that no one word then passed from you unsuitable to your
resolution. Yet this rare virtue being there hidden, in one of the remote
corners of the World, having but a very small circuit to dilate it self, must
necessarily be contented with the satisfaction of your conscience and slender
testimonies: In the mean time the authority of your enemies has been obnoxious
to all honest eyes. There was no means to conceal from strangers the States
infirmities, or what reason to affoard them for the disgrace of so
irreproachable a Minister; nor was there any who grieved not, that by your
absence the King lost so many hours and services. For my part, (my Lord)
(reflecting upon you in that estate, it seemed to me I saw Phidias, or some
other of those ancient Artists, their hands bound, and their costly materials,
as Marble, Gold, or Ivory taken from them. But now that better time succeed,
each thing being again reduced to its place, it is time to rejoice with all
good French men, that you shall no more want matter, and that the King has at
length found how unusefull your absence has been to his affairs: Truly, be it
that he content himself to govern his people wisely, or that the afflictions of
his poor Neighbors set near his heart, and that his Justice extend further
then his Jurisdiction: No man doubts whatsoever he does, but you shall be one
of the principal instruments of his designs, and that as well Peace as War have
equal use of your conduct. All men have well perceived, you have not
contributed any thing to the administration of the Kings treasure, save only
your pure spirit, to wit, that part of the Soul separated from the terrestrial
part, being free from passions, which reasons without either loving or
desiring; and that you have managed the Riches of the State with as great
fidelity, as one ought to govern another man's goods, with as much care as you
conserve your own, and with as great scruple as we ought to touch sacred
things. But in truth it is no great glory for that man to have been faithful
to his Master, who knows not how to deceive any: And did I believe you were
only able to abstain from ill, I would barely commend in you the Commencements
of virtue. I therefore pass further, and am assured, that neither the fear of
death, which you have slighted in all shapes, and under the most dreadful
aspects it could possibly appear, nor complacency which often overpasseth the
best Counsels, to transport it self to the most pleasing ones; nor any private
interest which makes us rather regard our selves, then the Public; shall at
all hinder you either from purposing, undertaking, or executing eminent
matters, Posterity which will peradventure judge of our age upon the report I
shall make, will see more elsewhere then I can here relate, and I shall rest
sufficiently satisfied, if you please to do me the honor, as to remember that
mine affection is no Child of your prosperity, and how in two contrary seasons
I have been equally

My Lord, Your most humble and most faithful servant, BALZAC.

To the Bishop of Angoulesme. LETTER II.
SIR,
I Will no longer complain of my poverty, since you have sent me ^easures of
Roses, Ambergreece, and Sugar; it being of such pleasing commodities, I pretend
to be Rich, leaving necessary wealth to the Vulgar. Two Elements have jointly
contributed the best they have, to furnish matter for your Liberality: and
smally valuing either Gold, or Pearls as I do, I could wish for nothing either
from Sea, or Land, I find not among your presents. You have bestowed with a
full hand what is offered upon Altars, but sparingly, which men reckon by
grains, and whereof none (the King of Tunnis excepted) is so prodigal as your
self* In a word, this profusion of foreign odours you have cast into your
Comfitures, obliges me to speak as I do, and to tell you if you feed all your
flock as this rate, there will not be any one in all your Diocese, who will not
cost you more by the day, then the Elephant does his Master. I see therefore
Sir, I am the dearest Child you have under your conduct, nor should I receive
so delicate and precious nourishment from you, did not your affection force you
to believe, my life to be more worth then ordinary, and consequently, that it
deserves more carefully to be preserved then any other. But to return you
complements for such excellent things, were as much as to under value their
worth, should I strive to acquit my self that way; our Language is too poor and
unable to lend me wherewith to pay you: And since in Homers judgment the words
of the most eloquent among the Grecians, were esteemed little better then
Honey, (the food of Shepherds) there is small probability mine should be
comparable to Ambergreece and Sugar, the delicacies of Princes. I therefore
fear I shall be forced to be all my life time indebted unto you, for the
favors I have received from you, and that it must be only in my heart, where
I can be as liberal as your self. But I well know, you are so generous, as to
content your self with this secret acknowledgement, and that in me you affect
my naked good-meaning, which must supply the place of those other more fine,
and subtle virtues I cannot learn at Court. Truly, as I expect no
commendations, being the second perfumes you present me, in that I hold my self
unworthy thereof: so do I suppose you cannot refuse me your affection, since it
is a kind of deserving it, to be passionately as I am

Sir, Your most humble, and most faithful servant BALZAC.
The 25. of December. 1626.
To Father Garrasso. LETTER III.
Father,
YOu have found the place whereat I confess I am the most easily surprised, and
to oblige me to yield, your Courtesy has left nothing for your courage to
perform: since therefore you employ all your Muses to require my friendship,
and have already paid of your own; I can no longer keep it to my self, but as
another man's goods. But if this were not so, my resentments are not of such
value with me, as not often to bestow them upon more slender considerations
then those were which produced them; nor do my passions so transport me, but
that I will at all times remain in the power of Religion and Philosophy.
Hitherto I can defend a just cause, but in farther resisting what you desire, I
should force right it self to be in the wrong, were it on my side: And out of
bare enmity which in some Common wealths has been tolerated, I should even
pass to Tyranny, a thing odious to all men. Since our lives are momentary, it
is no reason our passions should be immortal, or that men should glut
themselves with revenge, whereof God has as well forbidden the use, as the
excess. It is a thing he has soly reserved to himself; and since none but he
truly knows how to use this part of Justice, he would no more put it into
the hands of men, then he does Thunder and Tempests. Let us therefore stop in
our first motions, for it is already too much to have begun. Let us not term
the hardness of our hearts, Courage: and if you have prevented me in the
overture of the peace we treat of, repent not your self, since you have thereby
bereaved me of all the honor there had been in acquiring it. Heretofore
Magnanimity and Humility might have been esteemed two contrary things, but
since the Maxims of Morality have been changed by the principles of Divinity,
and that Pagan vices are become Christian virtues, there are even weak actions
a man of courage ought to practice; nor is true glory any longer due to those
who have triumphed over innocents, but to those Martyrs they have made, and to
such persons whom they have oppressed. But to pass from general considerations,
to what is particular between you and me, it is no way likely, a religious man
would disturb the tranquillity of his thoughts, or quit his conversation with
God and Angels, to intermeddle with wicked Mortals, and to make himself a party
in our disorders. I should likewise have less reason to seek for an enemy out
of the World, wherein there are so many adversaries to dislike, and so many
Rebels to subdue. Now (Father) whatsoever opinion you have had, and
notwithstanding any thing I have said in the beginning of this Letter, I never
intended to commence any real War against you: I have not at all felt the
emotion I showed; all my choler being but artificial, when at any time certain
of my speeches seemed disadvantagious unto you; so as I freely consent, that
what was written to Hydasp, shall pass as a flash of my brain, and not as any
testimony of my belief, only to let men know, I had a desire to show how able
I was to contest with truth, if I had no mind to side with it. This science
having been sufficiently daring to undertake to persuade, that a Quartan Ague
was better then health: Rhetoric I say, which has invented praises for
Busiris, made Apologies for Nero, and obliged all the people of Rome to doubt
whether Justice were a good, or a bad thing, may yet in these days exercise it
self upon subjects wholly separated from common opinions, and by graceful
fictions, rather excite admiration in men's spirits, then exact any credence. It
raises Fantomes with purpose to deface them. It has paintings and
disguisements, to alter the purity of all worldly things: It changes sides
without levity, it accuses innocence without calumny: And to say truth,
Painters and Stage Players are no way culpable of those murders we see
represented in Pictures, or presented upon Theaters; since therein the most
cruel is the most just. None can justly accuse those of falsity, who make
certain glasses which show one thing for another: Error in some cases being
more graceful then truth. In a word, the life even of the greatest Sages, is
not altogether serious, all their sayings are not Sermons, nor is all they
write, either their last Testament, or the confession of their Faith. What can
I say more? Can you imagine me to be so curious, as to condemn the gust of all
that great multitude, who flock to hear you every morning? Are you persuaded
that I and the people can never be of one mind? That will oppose my self to
the belief of honest men? to the approbation of Doctors? and to their authority
who are eminent above others? No Father; I allow no such liberty to my spirit:
assure your self, I esteem you as I ought. I commend your zeal and learning,
yea, were it truer then ever it was, that to compose tedious Volumnes, is no
less then to commit great sins: Yet if you oblige me to judge of yours by that
you sent unto me, I say it is very excellent in its kind, and that I will no
way hinder you from obtaining a Rank among the Fathers of these modern ages.
But my testimony will not (I hope) become the only fruit of your labors; I
wish with all my heart the conversion of Turks and Infidels may crown your
endeavors. I am persuaded, all the honor this World can affoard, ought to be
esteemed as nothing by those who only seek for the advancement of Gods glory.
I will therefore no farther dilate my self upon this Subject, nor wrong holy
things by profane praises; my intention is only to let you know, I assume not
so poor a part in the Churches interest, as not to be extraordinarily well
pleased with those who are serviceable thereto, and that I am right glad
besides the propension I have to esteem your amity, so powerful a persuasion
as Religion is, does yet further oblige me.

Yours, BALZAC.

To the Cardinal of Vallette. LETTER IV.
My Lord,
THe Letter you pleased to send me from Rome, caused me to forget I was sick,
and I presumed to solace my self after three years of saddess, ever since news
was brought me of Lucidors death, and the success of that fatal combat,
wherein you could not but be a loser, on which side soever the advantage
happened. My Lord, I doubt not but your spirit though altogether stout and
courageous, to support your proper misfortunes, is yet mollified by the
relation of their miseries who love you, and where there is question rather of
showing your good nature, or your constancy, you will quit one virtue to
acquire another. I know well, that in the number of your goods, you reckon your
friends in the first rank, allowing only the second place to your dignities,
and to fifty thousand Crowns rent which accompanies them; and consequently I
assure my self, you believe you are, as it were, grown poor by the loss of a
man who had relation unto you. But I am likewise most certain, how after the
passing certain unpleasant days out of the love you bare him; and having
affoardeth him sufficient Testimonies of your affection, he now expecting no
further acknowledgement or service, you will at length call to mind, that it
is the public to whom you owe your cares and passions, and that you are not
permitted farther to afflict a spirit which is no longer yours. Since the
misery of this age is so general, as it leaves no one house without tears, nor
any one part of Europe without trouble; and since Fortune is not of power to
conserve even her own workmanships, who are many of them fallen to ground: it
must needs so happen (my Lord) that being of the World, you are to taste of the
fruits it produces, and that you purchase at some hard rate, the good
successes daily attending you. But truly, the place where you are, and the
great designs taking you up, may well furnish you with so strong and solid
consolations, as they need leave no work for others; and my Eloquence would
come too late, should I employ it after your reason, which has formerly
persuaded you, there being now neither precept nor Counsel in all humane wisdom
unproposed to your view; and since neither Seneca, nor Epiotetus can say any
thing save only your thoughts; I had much rather send you divertisements no
way distastefull, then to present you any remedies which doubtless will prove
importunate. These writings (my Lord) here enclosed, shall not enter as
strangers into your Cabinet, they will not talk unto you of the five
Praedicables of Porphiry, nor of Justinians Novelles, or the numbers of
Algebra. But you may there recreate and repose your spirits at your return from
Audiences, Congregations, and the Consistory. I could well have bestowed upon
them a more eminent title, then what they have. I could out of these composures
have framed Apologies, Accusations, and politic discourses; yea, had I pleased
never so little to have extended some of my Letters, they might have been
called books. But besides, my design, aiming rather to please, then importune,
and that I tend to the height of conceptions, and not at the abundance of
words: When I treat with you, (my Lord) I suppose my self to be before a full
assembly, and do propose to my self never to write any thing unto you, which
Posterity ought not to read. Now if sometimes from your person I pass to
others, or if I commend those whom I conceive are deserving, I assure my self,
I therein performing an act of Justice, and not of subjection: you will be no
way displeased with what I do, and well hope, I may conserve your favors
without violating humane Laws, or separating my self from civil society.

Your most humble servant BALZAC.
The 15. of July 1629.
To the Cardinal of Vallete. LETTER V.
My LORD,
THough innocence be the felicity of the afflicted, and that I find in my self
the satisfaction, he can expect who has not offended, yet can I not so easily
comfort my self: And the remedies my Philosophy affoard me, are for meaner
misfortunes then the loss of your favors. All I can contribute to my
consolation out of the assurance I have of mine innocence, is the liberty I
have taken to tell you so, and to complain of the injustice you have done me,
if you have so much as suffered any to accuse me. I need not seek colors to
palliate my actions or words: it is sufficiently known, their principal objects
have ever been the glory of your name, and the desire to please you: I beseech
you likewise to call to remembrance, that hard times have not hindered me from
imbarking my self where my inclination called me; and that I have served my
Lord your Father, when most of his followers were in danger to become his
Martyrs. It should seem perchance, I stand in need of the memory of what is
past, and that I make my precedent, good Offices appear, to the end to cause
them to over-way my present offenses. No (my Lord) I intend not to make use of
what now is not, for the justification of mine actions, nor am I ignorant that
never any woman was so vicious, who has not heretofore been a Virgin, nor
criminal, who cannot prescribe some time preceding his bad life. I speak of to
day, as well as of heretofore, and do protest unto you, with all the Oaths able
to make truth appear holy, and inviolably, that I never had one single
temptation against my duty, and that my fidelity is spotless, as (if you so
pleased) it might be without suspicion: I must confess that you having declared
your self no way desirous to trench upon my liberty, and that you left it wholly
to my self, I have sometimes made use thereof, imagining that without wronging
that first resolution, I vowed to your service, it might be lawful for me to
have second affections. I will not expect the rack to force me to confess it; I
have loved a man whom the misfortunes of Court, and the diverse accidents
happening in worldly affairs, have separated from some friends of yours, and
have cast him into other interests then theirs. But besides, that he was
extracted from a Father, who did not more desire his own good, then your
contentment; and since I am most assured how amidst all the fore-passed broils,
he at all times conserved his inclinations for you. I must needs tell you, I
was in such sort obliged unto him, as had he declared War against my King, and
against my Country, I could not have chosen any side which had not been
unjust: I therefore at this day bewail him with warm tears, and if ever I take
comfort in the loss I have sustained, I shall esteem my self the most unworthy,
and ungrateful person living. Your self (my Lord) knowing (as you do) how much
I owe unto his amity, would sooner adjudge me to die with him, then blame my
resentments. I assure my self all my actions are disguised unto you, on purpose
to cause you to dislike them: Howsoever I will not despair, but the time to
come will right me for what is past. You will one day see the wrong you offer
to my innocence, in admitting false witnesses in prejudice thereof, and what
you now term my fault, you will then be pleased to say; it was my unhappy fate,
or my hard fortune: in the interim, I am resolved to continue in well doing,
and though there were no other but my conscience to acknowledge my fidelity
yet inviolably to remain

Your most humble and most faithful servant BALZAC.
The 30. of December. 1626.
To the Lord Bishop of Nantes. LETTER IV.
SIR,
AS the bearer hereof can testify the obligations I owe you, so may he bear
witness of my perpetual resentments, and will tell you, that were I born your
Son, or subject, you could have but the same power over me you now possess:
nay, I am persuaded, I yet owe somewhat more to your virtue, then to the right
of Nations, or nature. If power has made Princes, and chance Parents, reason
well deserves a further kind of obedience: It was that which overcame me upon
the first conference I had with you, causing me to prostrate all my presumption
at your feet, after having rightly presented to my thoughts, how impossible it
is to esteem my self, and know you: I am sure this language is no way pleasing
to you, and that you will look awry at my Letter; but do what you please, I am
more a friend to truth, then to your humor, and my spirits are so replenished
with what I have seen, and heard, as I can no longer conceal my thoughts: I
must tell you (Sir) you are the greatest Tyrant this day living; your
authority becomes awful to all Souls, and when you speak, there is no further
means to retain private opinions, if they be not conformable to yours. I speak
this seriously, and with my best sense; you have often reduced me to such
extreamities, that coming from you, without knowing what to answer you, I have
been ready to exclaim and say, (in the rapture wherein I was) Restore me my
opinion which you have violently forced from me, and take not from me the
liberty of conscience the King has given me. But truly, it is no small
pleasure to be constrained to be happy, and to fall into his hands, who uses
no violence; but to their avail who suffer. For my part, I have at all times
departed your presence, fully persuaded in what I ought to believe: I never
gave you a visit which cured me not of some passion: I never came into your
chamber so honest a man, as I went forth: How often with one short speech have
you elevated me above my self, and bereaved me of whatsoever was fleshly and
profane in me: How often hearing you discourse of the World to come, and of
true felicity have I longed after it, and would willingly have purchased it at
the price of my life? How often could I have followed you, (would you have
conducted me) to a higher pitch of perfection, then all ancient Philosophers
ever attained? So it is, that you only have bestowed the love of invisible
things upon me, causing me to distaste my first and most violent affections: I
should still have been buried in flesh, had not you drawn me forth, nor had my
spirit been other then a part of my body, had not you taken the pains to
unloose it from sensual objects, and to sever the eternal from the perishable
part. You caused me at the first encounter to become suspicious to the wicked,
and to favor the better side, before I was of it; you have made those remedies
pleasing, which all others affrighted me with, and in the midst of vice, you
have constrained me to confess virtue to be the most beautiful thing on earth.
Think not therefore, that either the pomp of the Roman Court, or the glitter of
that of France, can dazel those eyes of my Soul, whereto you have showed so
many excellent things. It is the beams and lightning of those eminent Virtues
you have discovered unto me, which cast so forceable reflections upon the eyes
of my Soul, and which cause me, (though I formerly resolved to slight all
things,) yet at least now to admire something. But yet (Sir) assure your self,
it is not the World I admire, for I rather reflect upon it, as on that which
has deceived me these eight and twenty years I have been in it, and wherein I
scarce ever saw any thing, but how to do evil, and counterfeit to be good. In
all places on earth, whether my curiosity has transporteth me, beyond Seas, or
on the other side the Alps, in free States, or in Kingdoms of Conquest, I have
observed among men only a fare of flatteries, fools, and cheaters; of Old men
corrupted by their Ancestors, and who corrupt their children: Of slaves who
cannot live out of Servitude: of poverty among virtuous persons, and ambitious
covetousness in the Souls of great persons. But now that you have broken the
bars, through which I could only receive some light impression of truth, I
distinctly see this general corruption, and do humbly acknowledge the injury I
offered to my Creator, when I made Gods of his creatures; and what glory I
sought to bereave him of, etc.

BALZAC.
The 12. of January 1626.
To Mounsieur de la Marque. Letter VII.
I Know not what right use to make of your praises; if I receive them, I lose
all my humility, and in rejecting them, I give that as granted which I am taxed
for. Upon the edge of these two extreamities, it is more laudable to suffer my
self to fall on my friends side, and to join in opinion with honest men, then
to lean to that of Lysander, since all men agree, that his censure is ever
opposite to the right; and that he is the wisest man in France, who resembles
him the least. There would be some error in the reputation I aim at, were I
not condemned by him. Think it not therefore strange, that injuries are blown
upon me by the same mouth which utters blasphemies against the memory of
rrr, and remember this old Maxim, that fools are more unjust then some sinners:
The best is, that for one Enemy my Reputation raises against me, it procures
me a thousand protectors; so as without stirring hence, I get victories at
Paris; nor find I any Harmony so pleasing, as what is composed of one
particular murmr, mingled with general acclamations. There are sufficient in
your Letter to cause me to retract the Maxims of my ancient Philosophy: At the
least they oblige me to confess, that all my felicity is not within my self,
things without me entering toward the composition of perfect happiness. I must
freely confess unto you mine infirmity: I should grow dumb, were I never so
short a time to live among deaf persons, and were there no glory, I should
have no eloquence. But it is time I return to the task I have undertaken; and
that instead of so many excellent words you have addressed unto me, I only
answer you, that I am

Your most humble servant BALZAC.

To Mounsieur Tissandier. LETTER VIII.
AT my return from Poiton, I found your packet attending me at my house; but
thinking to peruse your Letters, I perceived I read my ^anegyrick; I dare not
tell you, with what transport and excess of joy I was surprised thereupon,
fearing to make it appear, I were more vain then usually women are, and affect
praises with the like intemperance as I do persumes. Without dissembling, those
you sent me, were so exquisite, as be it you deceive me, or I you, there never
issued fairer effects, either from injustice or error. I beseech you to
continue your fault, or to persevere in your dissimulation: For my part, I am
resolute to make you full payment of what I owe you, and to yield so public a
testimony of the esteem I hold of you, as my reputation hereafter shall be
only serviceable to yours, oblige me so far, as to accept this Letter, for
assurance of what I will perform; and if you find me not so serviceable as I
ought to be, blame those troublesome persons who are always at my Throat,
forcing me to tell you sooner then I resolved, that I am

Your most humble and faithful servant BALZAC.
The 5. of August. 1625.
To Mounsieur de Faret. LETTER IX.
THere is not any acknowledgement answerable to my Obligations unto you: If I
owe you any honor, I am farther indepted unto you then my life comes to.
Truly, to be sensible of another man's sufferings sooner then himself, or to
assume a greater share in his interests, then he does; I must confess, is as
much as not to love in fashion, or not to live in this age. It is likewise a
long time since I have been acquainted, that the corruption environing you,
does not at all infect you; and how among the wicked, you have conserved an
integrity suiting the Reign of Jews the twelfth: Nay, happily we must search
further, and pass beyond the Authentic History. It is only under the Poets
Charlemain, where a man of your humor is to be found, and that the combat of
Roger has been the victory of Leon. Without more particularly explaining my
self, you understand what I would say; and I had much rather be indebted to
your support, then to the merit of my cause, or to the favorable censure I
have received from the Public. Certainly, truth it self cannot subsist, or
find defense without assistance; yea, even that concerning the Religion; and
which more particularly appertains to God then the other, seaseth not on our
Souls, but by the entermise of words; and has need to be persuaded to have it
believed. You may hereby judge whether the good Offices you affoarded me, were
not useful unto me, or whether or no my just cause happened succesfully into
your hands. But I must defer the thanks due unto you upon this occasion, till
our meeting at Paris, to the end, to animate them by my personal expression. Be
confident in the interim; though pity it self would stay me in my Cell, yet
you are of power to cause me to infringe my heremetical vow: besides, you have
set such a luster upon that great City, and have punctuated unto me so many
remarkable things, and novelties thereof, in the Letter you pleased to send me,
as I should show my self insensible of rarities, and not possessed with an
honest curiosity, had I not a desire to return thither. I therefore only
attend some small portion of health to strengthen me, to part hence; and to go
to enjoy with you our mutual delights, I mean the conversation of Mounsieur de
Vaugelas, who is able to make me find the Court in a Cottage, and Paris in the
plains of Bordeaux: Adieu Mounsieur, love me always, since I am with all my
Soul

Your most humble and affectionate servant BALZAC.
The 12. of December. 1625.
To Mounsieur Coeffeteau, Bishop of Marseilles. LETTER X.
IT is now fifteen days since I received any news from you, yet will I believe
the change of air has cured you; and if you (as yet) walk with a staff, it is
rather I hope for some mark of your authority, then for any support of your
infirmity: If this be so, I conjure you to make good use of this happy season
yet remaining, and not to lose these fair days, hastening away, and which the
next Clouds will carry from us. I give yon this advice, as findeing it good;
and because there is not any thing does more fortify feeble persons then the
Sun of this month, whose heat is as innocent as its light. Adamantus has had
his share of the unwholesom influence reigning in these parts. The Fever has
not born him the respect due to a person of his quality, having so rudely
entreated him, as he is scarce to be known: Yet has he some kind of
obligation to his sickness, in having acquainted him with such pleasures, as
were not made for those who are over fortunate, and which formerly he knew nor.
At this present he can never be weary in praising the benefits of Liberty, nor
in admiring the beauty of day, and the diversities of Nature: so as to hear him
speak you would suppose all things to be Novelties unto him; and that he is
entered into another World, or new born again in this. Besides, they pass their
time merrily at N. and of two hundred calling themselves Virgins, I verily
think there is not one who speaks truth, if she have not recovered her
Maidenhead. It may be their intention is not ill, and that in suffering
themselves to be courted, they have no other design, then to raise servants to
God. But since Godly intentions do not always produce good effects, if you
suffer things to run on in the same course which they do, I greatly apprehend
in your regard, that Antichrist will shortly take his beginning in your
Diocese; and lest you by consequence should be the first object of his
persecution. I suppose you-have a greater interest then any man, to oppose this
accident which now threatens us, and that to divert a mischief which is to be
followed by the Worlds ruin, you ought not to spare the fulminations of Rome;
nor make use only of half your power. There are not any will be averse to this
good work, save only our young Gallants. But you cannot procure their
disaffections upon a better subject then this, nor do greater service to the
jealious God, then to conserve the honor of those creatures he loves, I am

Your most humble and most affectionate servant, BALZAC.
The 7. of October. 1618.
To Mounsieur Pouzet. LETTER XI.
IF you will not return from Court, we are resolved to send Deputies on purpose
to require you of the King, and to beseech him to restore us our good company:
I know well, that in the place where you are, there are prisons both for the
innocent, and most happy; and that no man can blame you for your overlong
abode there, without accusing you for being fortunate. But it were likewise
small Justice, your absence should make this City a Village, and that Paris
should usurp all the affections you owe me. As I perfectly love you, so do I
expect to be reciprocally respected by you; nor would you I should herein have
any advantage over you, though I yield unto you in all other things: Neither of
us therefore can enjoy solid contentments, so long as we are separated; and I
pretend you do me wrong, if you take satisfaction where I am not. Take Post
therefore with speed, to be here quickly, grow not old either by the way, or at
your Inn, for by this means I shall get the advantage of that time, and you
shall gain me four days out of the loss of three Months. I have seen what you
willed me concerning l l l, But I would you knew, I have no resentments against
forceless enemies, nor have I any mind to put my self into passion, when these
petty Doctors please. Should these fellows speak well of me, I would instantly
examine my conscience, to know whether I were guilty of any fault; and as
Hippolitus suspected his own innocence, because he was esteemed spotless in
his stepdames eye: So should not I have any good opinion of my own
sufficiency, were I gracious in their sights, who can have no other then bad
affections. Howsoever, they cause me once a day to think my self some greater
matter then I am, when I reflect upon their number, and the miracle I work, in
interessing in one and the same cause supersticious persons, Atheists, and evil
Monks Adieu.

Yours, BALZAC.
The 14. April 1625.
An answer to a Letter sent to BALZAC, from a learned Old Lady, Mademoiselle de
Gournay. LETTER XII.
Madam,
I Do here at the first tell you, I have no other opinion of you, then your
self gives me, and I have at all times had a more strong and sound notion of
the inward qualities by the speech, then by the Physiogmony. But if after the
Letter you did me the honor to write unto me, it were necessary to seek any
foreign proofs; the testimony of those two great personages, who have admired
your virtue even in the bud, and left the pourtrait thereof under their own
hands, may well serve as an Antidote, to secure me from the impressions and the
painted shadows of calumny. I who know that Asia, Africa, and a great part of
the World besides, believe Fables as fundamental points of Religion, do not at
all wonder (if in what concerns your particular) there be some who side not
with the truth, which is sure to find enemies in all places where there are
men. This is an effect of that error, now grown old in popular opinion; that
it is fit an honest woman be ignorant of many things, and that, to maintain her
reputation, it is not requisite all the World commend her; but that she be
unknown to all men. Nay, I say further: The vulgar does ordinarily cast an
injurious eye, and with some tax of extravagancie, upon great and Heroical
qualities, if they appear in that sex, to which they conceive it ought not to
appertain. Now though to speak generally, and to reflect rightly upon the order
of earthly things, and the grounds of policy, I must confess, I should lean to
the first of these opinions: Yet will I be well advised, how I think that
Nature has not so much liberty left her, as to pass (upon occasion) the limits
she ordinarily allows her self; or sometimes to exceed her bounds without
blame, to the end, to produce certain things, far surpassing the rest in
perfection. It is no good Argument to aver, that because you are adorned with
the virtues of our sex, you therefore have not reserved those of your own; or
that it is a sin for a woman to understand the Language which heretofore the
Vestals made use of. I will therefore leave these calumnious persons, who
desire to bereave Lillies of their beauty, and Crystal of its clearness, to
return to the Letter I have received from you; where without flattery I will
affirm, that Meaning himself.
this man who has been described unto you, for so vainglorious a person; who
despises times past, who mocketh the modern, and prejudicateth the future;
has found out diverse things in your works well pleasing unto him: so as if my
approbation be at this present of any weight with you, you may for your own
advantage, add this Encomion to that of Lipsius and Montagnio, and boldly
affirm you have this advantage over Kings and Emperors, that the tastes of two
different ages have agreed in your favor. Since you were first commended, the
face of Christendom has changed ten times: Neither our manner, attire, or
Court, are cognisible to what you have seen them. Men have made new Laws, yea,
and the virtues of our forefathers age, are esteemed the vices of ours: yet
shall it appear, how amidst so many changes and strange revolutions, you have
brought even to our times one and the same reputation; and that your beauty (I
speak of what enamoreth the Capucins Friars, and old Philosophers) has not
left you, with your youth. I shall in mine own regard be very glad, the World
should take notice how much I honor virtue, by what name soever it passes,
and under what shape soever it is shrouded: and I esteem my party stronger by
the half, then it has been, since you have vouchsafed to enter thereinto. But
if without offending against Grammatical rules, and those of Decorum: I durst
take you for my second, I assure my self if we were to denounce war against
these petty Authors, who are ingendered by error, and disclosed out of the
corruption of this age, you should not have over many in talking half a dozen
of them to task for your part. As the least, you would put those Pedants to
silence, who brag they have taught me to speak. Yet will I tell you, before I
proceed any further, and to the end they may know as much (if you please) that
my Mother is not resolved to give this for granted, and how if there be any
glory to be gotten in so poor an exploit, she is determined to dispute the
matter against all these bookmakers. I have ever been hitherto of opinion, that
in what concerns the choice of words, I ought to suffer my self to be
governed by the common acceptance thereof, without adhering to any one man's
single example; and that instead of acknowledging the authority of any
particular, I am to follow the public consent. But howsoever, it is not the
praise of a great Orator to speak our language well, but rather the mark of a
true Frenchman; Nor do I pretend applause from any, for not being born in
Holland, or Germany. It is true, I attribute much to Elocution, and know that
high things stand in need of the help of words, and that after those have been
rightly conceived, they are as happily to be expressed. It only angers me,
that out of the poorest part of Rhetoric received among the ancients, they
will needs extract all ours. And that to please mean spirits, it is fitting (as
they think) our works should resemble those sacrifices, whereout they take the
heart, and where, of all the head, nothing is left save only the tongue. I
would make answer to the other advertisements you did me the honor to give me,
if they had not relation to a matter I reserve my self fully to treat in L.
being a work I am in hand with, and which I hope shortly to present unto you at
Paris. There it shall be, where I will make it appear unto you, that reason
cannot have an easier task, then to persuade a spirit of the like making mine
is, and that I equally love the truth, whether I receive it from any other, or
that I find it my self.

BALZAC.
The 3. of August 1624.
To Mounsieur Berniere, President in the Parliament of ROAN. LETTER XIII.
THe mean compliment I am to offer you, is the first effect of the fuming
drinks I received from you. I have no means to find out my right senses to
entertain you; they are lost in your excellent liquors, and I had need be more
valiant then I am, to defend my self against Spain and Normandy, with their
united forces: I verily think, that what should have been drunk at Barniere
betwixt this and Easter, is overflown in my Chamber: If my Friends come not to
my aid, I am in danger to suffer shipwreck, or not to become sober again till
next year: yet will you needs have me even in this plight wherein I am, to act
a sober man's part; and my Soul to execute those functions you have suspended.
It is impossible, not being my self, I should speak my ordinary language; I
cannot give you two words of thanks without taking one for another; and my head
is so full of your Spanish Wine, and Normandy Cider, that my wits give place; I
will therefore content my self, to assure you with this small portion of sense
yet left me, that supposing your friendship produced nothing, and were as
barren, as it is fruitful, I would sue for it out of a more noble
consideration, then that of particular interest, and would testify unto you,
that it is your self I love, and and not your fortunes: Believe, I beseech you,
the truest of all men: you gained my heart the first time I had the honor to
see you; I then gave my self wholly as yours, and said within my self, what I
have often since reiterated, that you being rich enough to purchase a
Sovereignty beyond the Alps, if that should ever happen, I esteemed you a
sufficient worthy person, to deserve to have me live under your Regency, and
that I was

Your most humble servant and subject BALZAC.
At Paris the 5. of March 1627.
To Mounsieur de Voiture. LETTER XIV.
THough the half of France divide us, yet are you as present to my spirit, as
the objects I see, and you have part in all my thoughts and dreams. Rivers,
Plains, and Towns may well oppose themselves to my content: they cannot hinder
my memory from taking entertainment with you, or from the frequent taste of
those excellent discourses wherewith you have graced me, till I be so happy as
again to hear you. Though you should grow proud, yet must I confess, I conceive
not any thing either great or sublime, save only those Seeds you have
scattered in my Soul; and that your company, which at first, was right
pleasing, is now become absolutely necessary for me: You may therefore well
think it is not willingly I leave you thus long in your Mistresses hands, or
that I suffer her to enjoy my goods, without giving me account: Every moment
she obliges you to allow her, are so many usurpations she makes upon me; all
you whisper unto her, are secrets you conceal from me; and to have your
conversation in mine absence, is to enrich her self by my losses. But there is
no reason I should malice so fair a Rival, in that both of you are happy; or
that I frame mine afflictions upon your mutual contents; provided (at my
coming) I find four Months absence not to have blotted me out of your
remembrance, and that Love has there reserved some place for friendship, I
shall still have for mine advantage the time passing to attend the hour
assigned; and you will come to comfort me sometimes, concerning the miseries of
this Age, and the injustice of men. In the interim, in the place where now I
am, as I have but slender joys, so have I not any great discontents: I am in
equal distance removed from disfavour and good fortune, and that unconstant
Goddess, who is ever employed in depopulating Cities, and subverting States,
has no leisure to work mischief in mean places. I see Shepheardesses who can
only say, yea and nay, and who are too gross witted to be deceived by
understanding persons; yet is painting as little known among them as Eloquence;
and because I am their Master, they would suffer me to show them, if I so
pleased, how small a distance there is between power and Tyranny: instead of
the fine words and quaint discourses wherein your Ladies abound, there issues
from their mouths a pure and innocent breath, which incorporates it self with
their kisses, and gives them a taste, you ordinarily find not among those of
the Court. Supposing therefore you make not any better choice there, then I
happen on here by chance, I make over particular profession, to rely on your
judgment, and of being

Your most humble servant BALZAC.
The 7. of October 1625.
To Mounsieur de Vaugelas. LETTER XV.
THe good opinion you have of me, makes up more then half my merit, and you
herein resemble the Poets Epicts, who out of small truths frame incredible
fixions; howsoever, if you loved me not, but according to the rigor or Law and
Reason, I should much fear to be but of indifferent esteem with you. It is then
much better for me, the affection you bear me, appear rather a passion then a
virtue. Extremities in all other things are reproveable, in this laudable; and
as certain Rivers are never so useful as when they overflow: so has
Friendship nothing more excellent in it then excess; and does rather offend in
her moderation, then in her violence. Continue therefore in observing neither
rule, nor measure, in the favors you afford me, and to the end I may be
lawfully ungrateful, being infinitely obliged, leave me not so much as words
wherewith to thank you. Truly your last Letters have taken from me all the
terms I should employ in this occasion, and instead of the good Offices I
incessantly receive from you, it seems you will only have new importunies in
payment. Since it is thus, fear not my niceness, or that in matters of great
consequence, I make not use of your affection, and in slight ones I abuse it
not; henceforward it is requisite, you recover all my Law-sutes, compose all my
quarrels, and correct all my errors: For to undertake to cure all my diseases,
I suppose you would not, in prejudice of Mounsieur de Lorime. It shall
therefore suffice, you will be pleased to let him at this passage read how I
require my life at his hands; and if the only obeying him, will preserve me, I
will place his precepts immediately after Gods Commandments. There is no receipt
distastefull, if his Eloquence affoard the preparative, nor pain unasswaged by
his words, before it be expelled by his Art: Remotest causes are as visible to
him, as the most ordinary effects; and if nature should discover herlself
naked unto him, he could not thereby receive any further communication of her
secrets, then he has acquired by former experience. Let him therefore bestow
better nights on me, then those I have had these six years, wherein I have had
no sleep; entreat him to make a peace between my Liver and Stomach, and to
compose this civil War, which disturbs the whole inside of my body, if he
desire I should no longer live, but for his glory; and to persuade the World,
he is nothing indebted to those Arabian Princes, who practiced Physic, or to
the gods themselves who invented it. Truly if mere Humanists, whom diverse of
his profession have sometimes scorned, seem of slight consideration with him;
or if he be not contented with a civil acknowledgement, I am ready to call him
my preserver, and to erect Altars, and offer sacrifice unto him: Yea, to
compass this, I will quit the better part of what I implore; It shall suffice
he hinder me from dying, and that he cause my diseases and plaints to endure
some threescore years. I would likewise know (if you please) what his good
Cozen does, that Citizen of all Commonwealths, that man who is no more a
stranger in Persia, then in France, and whose knowledge has the same extent,
as has all the Turkish Empire, and all the ancient Roman Monarchy. I have at
the least three hundred questions to ask him, and a whole Volumne of doubts to
propose unto him; I expect at our first meeting, to resolve hith him upon the
affairs of former ages, and concerning the different opinions of Baromus and
Genebrard on the one side, and of Escales and Casaubon on the other. I am in
the mean time resolved to pass ten or twelve days with Mounsieur de Racan, to
the end to see him in that time work miracles, and write things which God must
necessarily reveal unto him. Truly Conquerours have no greater advantage over
Masters of Fence, then he has over Doctors; and he is at this day one of the
great workmanships of Nature. If all wits were like his, there would be a great
deal of time lost at School: Universities would become the most unprofitable
parts of the Commonwealth, and Latin as well as Millan Parchment, with other
foreign Merchandises, would be rather marks of our vanity, then any effects of
our necessity.

The 10. of October 1625.
To Mounsieur de Racan. LETTER XVI.
WEre my health better then it is, yet the roughness of the season we are
entering into, and which I hoped to prevent, makes me over apprehensive, to stir
out of my Chamber, or to hazard my self in a long voyage: A Sunless day, or one
night in a bad Host-house, were sufficient to finish the work of my death; and
in the state wherein I am, I should much sooner arrive in the next World, then
at Chastelleraut. I must therefore entreat you to hold me excused, if I keep
not promise with you, or if I take some longer time to make provision of
strength, to prepare my self for so hardy an enterprise. At our return from
Court, we are to come to your delicate House, and to see the places where the
Muses have appeared unto you, and dictated the Verses we have so much admired.
Those wherewith you honored me, do overmuch engage me, to leave my judgment
at liberty; I will only content my self, to protest that you were never so
very a Poet, as when you spoke of me; and that you have Art enough to invent
new Fables, as incredible as ancient fictions: it seems Divinity cost you
nothing; and because your Predecessors have furnished Heaven with all sorts of
people, and since Astrologers have there placed Monsters, you suppose it may be
likewise lawful for you, at least, to get entrance there for some of your
friends. You may do Sir what you please; nor have I any cause to blame the
height of you affection, since I hold he loves not sufficiently, who loves not
excessively. It will only be the good wits of our age who will not pardon you;
and will take it impatiently, to see my name in your Verses with as great
Splendour and Pomp as that of Artemisa and Ydalia. But as you employ not other
men's passions either in matter of hate or love; so I suppose you make less use
of their eyes in judging the truth of things. In this case, I am sufficiently
confident of my Retorick, to assure my self I shall at all times persuade you,
that I am more estimable then mine Enemies: and that they have no other
advantage over me, who am sick, but only health, if they enjoy it. Besides,
you need not make any Apology in excuse of your tediousness: I well perceive by
the Excellency of your labors, the time you have therein employed, and know
that perfection is not presently to be attained. A Crafts-man may easily in a
short time finish diverse Statues of Clay, or Plaster; but these are but for a
days use, or to serve as Ornaments at a Cities triumph, not to continue many
Kings raigns: Those who carve in Brass or Marble, wax old upon their works, and
doubtless, matters ever to endure are long to be meditated: if my Megreme would
permit me, I could say more unto you, but all I can obatin of it, is to sign
this Letter, and to assure you that I am perfectly

Your most humble and affectionate servant, BALZAC.
The 20. of November. 1625.
To the Abbot of St. Cyran. LETTER XVII.
SInce you desire to see in what Style I begun to write; and how sufficient a
fellow I was at nineteen: I here send you my errors of that age, and the first
faults I committed: it were much better to condemn their memory, then to fall
into them afresh, by renewing them in this place. But you will be absolutely
obeyed, and I have no resistance against your force: See here then the
remainder of many things now lost, and what I have saved from ship wrack, being
neither valuable to the Diamonds, or lumps of Ambergreece, the Sea has lately
cast upon the Coast of Bayone.

I advise you for your honors sake, not to refresh the memory of what is past,
nor to seek for examples of your fidelity in our Civil wars, since you have not
therein conserved it. You may hereupon say what you please, and try (if you
can) to make things seem to us contrary to what they are; yet am I well
assured, you were engaged in a faction, wherein you have not been useful to
the King, no, not where you could serve him as an honest man ought; so as if
you desire I should (to do you a favor) forget things past; or if you will
allege that the tranquillity we now enjoy, and the good order used in
mannaging Public affairs, were the effects of your prudent conduct; besides,
that this glory is not absolutely due unto you, and there remaining others who
suppose they have as large a share therein as your self. You must not take it
ill, if I freely tell you, there is not any thing therein worthy of admiration.
You entered upon the State-government in a peaceable time, you therein found
all things so well disposed, as they seemed of themselves to work the wished
effects; and the most of the French so inclined to subjection, as it was no
hard matter to bring them to due obedience. And herein you are necessarily to
confess, you owe much to C C C, and that he passed the last years of his life
for your instructions, as he since then died for the general good of this
Kingdom. If there has been any obstacle to remove, which at this present may
be troublesome unto you, he has before his death rid his hands thereof, with
as much good fortune as resolution. If it may be esteemed a benefit, to
understand the nature of the people, thereby to deal with them according to
their humors, he has made it appear unto you, there was not any thing above
his patience; since without resentment, he was able to suffer the loss of his
liberty; and if so it were, that he was forced to make use of some violent act,
which nevertheless was necessary; neither hatred, nor envy have ever been of
power to hinder his undertakings. In a word, he has tamed the most stubborn
spirits, he has left the parties who most perplexed this poor Kingdom, either
absolutely ruined, or so weakened, as they are utterly unable to rise again. He
has accustomed all men to patience, and has performed so strange things, as
we now find not any thing extraordinary; and (what I most esteem) he has made
the World see how great things the Kings Authority was able to do, though
sometimes he did this for the establishing his own. I therefore do not at all
now wonder, if having found affairs disposed to receive such impressions as you
pleased to put upon them, you have hitherto caused them to fall out
indifferently well, or if you have not as yet committed any considerable
errors in the mannaging of State Affairs, as not having any matter of
difficulty to overcome, you have only herein suffered your self to be guided
by common and ordinary presidents. But what is all this? that your endeavors
should deserve to be preferred before all those services the D. and P. with
their Predecessors have performed. Had you any imagination, when you spoke in
so high terms, you could cause us to believe so great improbabilities; or had
you so poor an opinion of all men's judgments, as to suppose we more valued
your fears and continual distrusts, then so many generous actions performed by
them in the eye of all Christendom, for the glory and reputation of this
Crown. I will not touch upon the merits of the living, lest you should impute
that to a desire of complacency, or some particular obligation, which the only
interest of truth exacteth of me. I only require justice for the dead, whom
you have dared to wrong in the Kings presence, against all rules of piety,
obliging you to respect their memory. Doubt not, but that they are yet sensible
of things in this World, and that amidst the glory and contentments they
possess, their care to live in the good odor of men, does yet continue: You
may therefore well imagine, they have just cause to think, those lives they
have lost in their Princes service, and for the defense of their Country had
been ill employed, and might justly complain of our ingratitude, should we
suffer before our eyes their reputations to be questioned, without testifying
any distaste. In vain had they triumphed over the most beautiful parts of the
earth, and carried their victorious Arms where the name of France was not yet
arrived. To small purpose had they recluded the power of strangers, wherein the
limits of Nature prescribed unto them. In vain likewise, even in our memory
had they conserved State and Religion, when those of your faction did diversely
labor the ruin of both; should you now be suffered to enter into comparison
with them; or as though the possession of that glory wherein they always
remained, were unjustly controverted in their case. But the mischief herein is,
that we have only right on our side, and that all things are so averse unto
us, as it will be very hard to cause reason to be so much as regarded, because
it favors us; so as I get nothing by disputing with a man who is above Laws,
and in whose behalf the King has received so advantageous impressions, as he
may securely exercise his passions, under pretext of his Authority, and
confound his particular enmities, together with the interests of the
Commonwealth. I should be very loath to say you are grown to such extremities,
or that out of vanity and presumption, two imperfections purely humane, you
should so suddenly be stepped into Cruelty and Tyranny, two Diabolical Errors.
Nevertheless, if having great power in the Kings breast, (as indeed you may do
much) you cause a general diffidence therein of all things, and endeavor to
bring his best servants into suspicion with him, thereby to make them
unusefull: If you intend by imaginary jealousies to divert his inclination
from that goodness, whereto at all times it has had an extraordinary
propention; or if you hinder him from the free use of his natural debonarity
toward her, who brought him into this World. Do you not think men will begin to
say, it is not vanity alone has spoiled you? and that it will not be generally
wished, that the Maxims you make use of, were somewhat more Christian, and less
contrary to Gods Commandments. I know we have a Prince of such perfection, as
Heaven it self cannot without miracle make farther addition, then Experience.
So timely a wise man has scarce ever been; all his inclinations do wholly aim
at good, and Virtue is to him so natural, as I verily believe he would be much
troubled to do ill. But you are not ignorant that one cannot give poison to any
man so easily, as to him whom in taking it, supposes he receives wholesome
Physic, and that ill counsels have never so great power over our spirits, as
when we embrace them without distrust. Surely the uttermost of evils is that,
whereof we have neither knowledge nor apprehension; nor is there any fault more
dangerous, then when we make use of reason it self in our errors. I have no
purpose to offend any with my discourse, and do entreat you to believe, I think
it very well you make use of all the means, you suppose, may conduce to the
causing the Kings authority to become more awful to all men, and public peace
further confirmed. These are two so delicate matters, as they cannot be touched
without danger, not conserved with over much care. Yet must you pardon me, if I
say you are to be very circumspect, lest in thinking to strengthen this
authority, you abuse it not to the prejudice of your own conscience; and you
are withal to consider, that Peace cannot be of any long continuance, if it be
pleasing to God, who has never suffered without resentment, that the Laws of
Nature should be violated. These Laws the Barbarians themselves allow of, have
not been established either by force or necessity, as others are: The first
thing we can do, is to follow them, and the obedience we yield them, can
neither be milder, nor more easy: They are not engraven upon Marble, but are
born with us; they are not peculiar to one people or Country, but are common
to all men: They have not ordained any punishment for those who will not
observe them, so was it not probable, that any could be found so much their own
enemies, as to be inclined to such extreamities. To conclude, they were not
made for the mean and vulgar people only, but for all the World: and those are
the more strictly thereto obliged, who owe most to their extraction. If this be
true (as you cannot but know) should not Heaven be injured? things both Divine
and Moral, should they not be openly despised, would not Nature her self cry
vengeance against you, should you by your crafts and disguisements animate a
young Prince against that person, who of all the World, ought to be most dear
unto him, and deface out of his royal Soul by your servile fears (ill founded)
his first and most innocent affections? I will not believe for mine own
content, and the honor of our age, that this mischief can happen; but I am
much perplexed to know who it is, that causes all honest men to sigh, who
hinders us the perfect feeling of that felity peace affoards, and which
compassionateth even strangers, who are least interessed in our affairs. Will
you have so savage a Soul, as to dread the fairest thing the World affoardeth?
or can you be so pusillanimous, as to have any timorous reflection upon an
afflicted person? Can you imagine goodness it self should do hurt, or that the
Court cannot without danger behold what it has heretofore seen with so great
contentment? For my part, if this be thus, I find no difference between a lost
state, and one concerning it self in this sort; and it must needs be, those
miseries you apprehend are very violent, if they exceed your remedies. Alas, if
we have forgotten we are Christians, shall we not at least remember we are men?
if we be almost insensible, even to brutality, shall we not yet affoard
something to appearance? Be satisfied in being in estimation and favor with the
King: Govern alone, (if you can) all his affairs; administer Justice without
any assistant; take all his authority into your own hands; yet suffer his
Mother to see him, give way that he refuse her not a favor, which he cannot
hinder, even his very enemies, sometimes from enjoying. Affoard, since it is in
your power, this favor to all France; appease in time those public complaints
ready to rise against you, and slackning some part of your rigorous counsels,
add this only point deficient in the felicity of this Kings reign. If you can
procure so pious a thing, and so pleasing to God and Man; this great reputation
of Honesty you have shrewdly hazarded, will return with more glitter, and
luster then ever it had; we will not believe our own eyes, if they show us any
thing opposite thereunto: We will suppose it is some other who had a desire to
outstrip the D. and P. and how there is not any appearance, that a man in whom
age ought to finish, what the study of Wisdom had happily left unperfect,
should still be subject to enter into errors. But if on the other side, you go
on in abusing our good Kings facility, and unprofitably to perplex his spirits
with perpetual distrusts, if you disguise all things unto him, on purpose to
cause him to perceive nothing, but what you please, nor to take notice of ill,
being hidden under the appearance of its contrary; persuade not your self, that
God will long suffer Truth to be unknown. Do not think, but things will shortly
return to the same terms wherein Nature placed them; or that the King having
once discovered the bad designs of his Favorites, will not easily be induced
once again to amaze the whole World, by a second example of his Justice, and to
satisfy his peoples complaints, by abandoning them to public vengeance. Then
will you over-late reflect upon this Worlds vanity: you will then consider,
that when we esteemed you happy, you were mounted to a place from whence there
is not any who have not fallen, and how Fortune envious of your felicity, drew
you from that sweet and peaceable life, wherein you were entered; fearing lest
thereby you might conserve your Virtue, or therein avoid your ruin.

To Mounsieur Malherb. LETTER XVIII.
AFter I have told you how dear the testimonies I have received from your
remembrance are unto me; I can do no less then thank you for the good Justice
you affoarded me. If the like Integrity were to be found among those, who have
the life and fortunes of men in their hands, I should take pleasure in
pleading, and by the same reason Laws punish offenders, I might hope to be
rewarded. It may be I flatter my self, but I suppose my interest is the same
with all honest men, and that they can no longer live in security, since I am
fallen upon, for the virtues I value in them. Surely, if the World suffer ill
tongues to touch upon my labors, it is very probable, they will not spare
other men's; and that hereafter there will not be any thing so excellent, which
shall not be hated, nor so holy, some Lysander will not violate. These ill
examples therefore are not to be suffered, nor is it to be tolerated, that one
particular person forsake public belief, to rely upon his own peculiar sense:
and should this disorder continue, Artificers and Farmers would (at length)
prove reformers of State. I pretend not hereby to lessen the favor I received
from you: But on the contrary, I am so easy to oblige, as I suppose my friends
give me all whatsoever they take not from me; you will yet avouch thus much,
that supporting my side, you do in some sort fight in your own defense: For if
to day they say, my Style is not good, to morrow they will maintain your Rimes
to be naught. But it is now time, after I have thanked you, that I wrangle with
you, and complain for having been injured in the person of Mounsieur de Racan,
whom you tax for a disease, whereof I have been dead this ten years. I doubt
not, but that part of us whereby we are men, as well as by reason, has
heretofore acquired you Honor; and that our History ought to yield a glorious
testimony of your fore-passed virtues in that kind: But since you can no
longer be happy therein, but by memory; and that your courage will now stand
in need of your Sons assistance; me thinks, it is unseemly for you to scoff at
our weakness; for howsoever in accusing us, for not having continued young so
long as your self, you can only tax us for arriving at the Haven sooner then
you have done. There is none but M. F. who may boldly laugh at the debility of
others, and make jests at our charge; but he has reason so to do, since his
merit herein is generally acknowledged; as being little less valiant in those
feats, then that ancient Heroes, who subdued Monsters, and in one night was
fifty times Son in Law to one of his Hosts. I infinitely esteem the eminent
qualities wherewith he is adorned, and find nothing in him which is not
perfectly pleasing. But when I consider that he is capeable to cause us to be
despised by a whole Sex, and to make us ridiculous to the most beautiful part
of the World, I have great contestation within my self, to forbear to wish him
ill; and what part soever I take, touching the glory all men allow him: Yet
does it not a little anger me, that my Eloquence is not so masculine as his.

The 15. of Aug. 1625.
To Mounsieur de Vaugelas. LETTER XIX.
WEre it not for the Letter you wrote me, I should have stood in need of all my
Philosophy to comfort my self for the loss I have received. But since you have
sent me the counterfeit of that divine company I left at Paris, having thereby
something, representing my forepassed good fortune; take it not ill, I begin to
have less apprehension then formerly I had, of the discomfort I suffer in being
removed from you; or if I say, you have caused your absence to become thereby
the less irksome unto me, which otherwise would have proved insupportable.
Lucidor does overmuch oblige me in retaining me in his memory, and in desiring
my company in his enchanted Palace. I beseech you to tell him, I shall never
forget the happy day we there spent, and that I cannot believe, there is a more
excellent Structure even in the Roman Kingdom, though builded by the very hands
of Tasso or Ariosto: in sadness my thoughts stayed there, when I parted thence,
I still walk in his Allies; I wander in his Woods, and slumber upon the banks
of the Fairies Fountain, whereof I need only drink a drop to turn Poet: That
infinity of different beauties discovering themselves to our eyes, at the
opening of the Gates, caused me instantly to hate Rome, Paris, and all Cities;
and I termed the Duke of Venice miserable, in that he is condemned never to
remove from the place where he is, and consequently never to see what I there
beheld. The Foot-post, who is to carry this Letter, does much press my
dispatch, telling me, he shall hazard, to remain still in this place, if I make
it any longer. This is equally my misery, and your good fortune; for as I am
constrained to deprive my self of the contentment to entertain time with you,
so will this free you from diverse impertinent speeches, wherewith happily I
should otherwise have importuned you.

The 4. of August 1625.
LETTER XX. To the same.
I Can no longer live without receiving news from you, and understanding from
your self, the good success of your voyage. My brother writ unto me, they have
done you some kind of justice, wherewith you were reasonable well pleased; but
if this content be not absolute, I am resolved not to rejoice, and I do already
condemn the State, and all those who govern it. It is a shame to see the
bounties of Princes in the hands of such persons who can neither be useful nor
pleasing unto them; and that honest men must still satisfy themselves with the
only testimony of a good conscience, and in the content they receive in
well-doing: For my part, I will not complain of Fortune, provided, you occasion
to commend her. Now if the Ministers of State understood my secret, and that
for satisfying of two, it were only necessary to oblige one; by acquitting
themselves of what they owe you, they might easily spare what they have
promised me. We have newly received tidings of the Defeat given to the Enemies
naval Army; but having lost one of my near friends in that Conflict, I cannot
forbear to be a bad Frenchman till to morrow, and to grieve for the Victory,
whereat all others rejoice: Besides, I being of a profession only exercised in
private, and repose, I assure you the report of Cannons begins to trouble me;
for of all Wars, those of Germany please me best, in that I am thirty days
journeys off: Our Doctors say no less then I do: the most zealous among them,
longingly expect a more quiet season, fearing the ruin of the adverse part,
for the interest of their Arguments and Schollership: and in very truth, I
cannot conceive what they should do with their controversies, where there no
longer any against whom they could contend. I write you this from the bank of
the most beautiful River of the World; but being so far from you, I taste all
pleasures imperfectly; and were my Kinsman revived, not seeing you, there would
still remain a kind of affliction upon me, which nothing but your presence is
able to ease. Without playing the Poet, I can assure you, I have taught your
name to all the Rocks in my wilderness: and it is written upon the Barks of all
our Trees: but you are no way obliged unto me, in that I love you
extraordinarily. It is an action independent on my will or free election, it
being at this present as necessary for me, as all other things are, without
which I cannot subsist: And it is requisite I suffer my self to be transported
by the force of my inclination, which another would call his Destiny. Be
therefore when you please mine enemy; you are assured I shall never be but.

Your most humble and most faithful servant BALZAC.
The 21. of September 1615.
To the same. LETTER XXI.
A Lame Footman would have made more haste then the Messenger did, who
delivered me your two Letters, fifteen days after the latter of them was
written: Yet notwithstanding was he very wellcom, and had it been Lysander
himself, bringing news from you, he had been inviolable to all my Lackies; and
I had received him as my friend. Truly, there is not any discontent which is
not lost, in the joy I receive to be beloved by you, and if the small
displeasure they have done me, were of power to offend me, I should in your
favors find the remedy others seek for revenge. I have as unmovedly read the
Satyr made against me, as I write this Letter; and have only accused my bad
fortune, which has at all times chosen the most infamous of all men for mine
enemies: you cannot imagine how much I am ashamed of this unlucky accident, and
of the wrong I suppose I receive, when at any time they give me the advantage
in a comparison wherein Lysander cannot enter without having the better of it.
Yet Sir, I am resolved to have patience, provided, the War you raise against
me, be only feigned, and that you speak not seriously; for surely I would burn
all my papers, were they culpable of one single word displeasing unto you; and
my thoughts should be far different from my intention, had I done any thing
disgustfull unto you; howsoever, I crave pardon for the fault whereof you
accuse me, though I suppose I have not done you any so ill Offices to fair
Ladies, as it seems you would persuade me: On the contrary, if my testimony be
seconded by their ascents, there will not be hereafter any among them, who will
not look upon you, as at one of their chiefest felicities; and who will not
sell all her Pearls, to purchase one of your Nights. Queens will come from the
remotest parts of the World, to taste the pleasure of your conversation; and
you shall be the third after Solomon and Alexander, who shall cause them to
come at the report of your Virtue. As for devout persons, I do not think they
will rank Health and Strength in the number of Vices; for by that reason they
should hold all those for Saints, whom the Courts of Parliament have declared
as impotent, and so fill Heaven with sick folks. To say truth, I cannot deny,
but I have given the Alarm to married men, and I must say, your visits will be
suspicious to those who know you not: but when they shall understand what I
intend to publish in all places, that you had rather die, then violate with so
much as one single thought, the laws of true Friendship, and that your fidelity
is irreproveable: In stead of avoiding you, as an object of scandal, they will
propound you to their Wives as an example of Continency. I could allege
diverse other things for my Justification, but if you think I have been faulty,
I will not presume to imagine I am innocent; and rather then contradict you, I
will sign the decree of my Death with mine own hand.

The 10. of October. 1625.
To the same. LETTER XXII.
THere is no other means to exceed the height of what you have written, not to
answer the civilities of your Letter, but only by rendering you all your own
words: I know not your meaning: but to take the most unprofitable of your
friends for your benefactor, and to thank me for the ill I do you, is no less
then strangely to abuse the propriety of words, especially for a man so
perfectly acquainted with our language, as your self; or questionless it must
needs be, you suffer my persecutions with the like patience, as good men
receive those afflictions God lays upon them. For as losses and diseases are
presents and favors in terms of devotion; so do you bestow pompous names upon
poor matters, and you make your self believe, you shall draw some advantage out
of my Amity, though in truth you extract nothing thence but charge; nor does it
produce any better effects, then Thorns: And upon the matter, what else are the
pains and affairs, I perpetually put upon you? or what difference is there
between the hatred of an Enemy, and so troublelom an affection as mine? It is I
who disturb your rest, who usurp your liberty, who will not suffer you to have
any leisure, though that be the true possession of the wise. It is no want of
goodwill in me, that I change not all your kindeness into choler, and make not
a pleader and wrangler of the best tempered spirit Philosophy ever received
from Nature; I lay Ambushes for you at Paris, at Fontainbleau, and at S.
Germains: Yea, should you think to hide your self at the Worlds end to avoid
importunities, I would undertake the voyage of Magellan, to seek you out there:
yet are you well pleased with all this, and I receive thanks instead of
expecting ill words. The care you have to oblige me, exceeds all I can desire:
Good Offices come thick upon me, when they proceed from your side; and they are
actions it seems you are pleased to convert into habitudes. Without entering
into infinities, do I not of recent memory owe to your testimony, all the
good opinion your excellent friend can have of me; and if he imagine I am
worthy any estimation, is it not you who sets a value upon my defects, and who
have assisted me in deceiving him? But in what sort soever you have procured me
these favors, be it that therein you have either committed theft, or made an
acquisition, I am still right happy to be beloved by a man, who has the
reputation not to affect ill things, and to please whom, it is as much as to be
reckoned in the number of honest men. The day before I parted from Court, I had
the leisure to observe him at Mounsieur the Marshal of Schambergs house; but I
assure you, I could spy nothing of slender consideration, either in his words
or aspect; and though I have always used to be diffident of my first opinion;
nor ever to judge without long deliberation, I have notwithstanding herein,
sinned against my own rules; and was not ashamed to say, that a wit of twenty
years had amazed mine: But the Sermon bell rings, which calls and forceably
draws me from you: my contentment therefore must give place to my duty, which
commands me to make an end, after I have required news from you, concerning a
Woman, to whom I am extraordinarily and particularly obliged; of a Woman I say,
who is more worth then all our books, and in whose conversation there is
sufficient to make one an honest man, without either the help of Greeks or
Romans: How old a Courtier soever you are, you understand not French, if you
understand not Madame de Deftoges.

On Christmas day, 1625.
To the same. LETTER XXIII.
I Hope very shortly to follow these few lines, and to come to court you with
as much assiduity and subjection, as though you were to be the founder of my
fortunes. I have no other business at Paris, but this; though I frame many
pretexts for that voyage, but I swear seriously you are the only cause. My
melancholy is of late become so black, and my spirits are so beclouded, as I
must of necessity see you, to dissipate them. It is to small purpose to speak
well of me in the place where you are, they do me no good though; this is as
much as to cast incense upon a dead body, and to strew flowers upon his grave,
but this is no reviving of him. I no longer receive any comfort in the news you
send me, and I am well assured my misfortune is constant, what alteration
soever happen in the World: it remains then, that I seek for my consolation
in your presence, and power forth all my complaints into your bosom; this I
will do at the first sight of the Sunbeams, beseeching you to believe, that as
in the midst of felicity, I should have need of you to make me happy; so also
having such a friend as your self, I shall never esteem my self absolutely
miserable.

BALZAC.
The 20. of November 1625.
BALZAC his Letter to Hidasp. LETTER XXIV.
I Do far more esteem the Carthusians silence, then the Eloquence of such
Writers, and am persuaded, (excepting in Church service, and for the necessity
of Commerce) the Pope and the King should do well to forbid them Latin and
French; whereof they seek to make two barbarous languages. I know well, that
French spirits are sworn Enemies to all sorts of bondage, and that twelve
hundred years of Monarchy, has not been of power to make them lose their
liberty, it being as natural to them as life it self. Whatsoever ugly face they
frame to the Inquisition, and how full of Tigers and Serpents soever they paint
the same, yet do I find it right necessary in this Kingdom: For besides that,
it would cause (as in Spain and Italy) even the wicked in some sort, to
resemble the upright, and vice not at all to offend the public eye: it would
besides hinder Fools from filling the world with their bastardly books, and the
faults of School masters from being as frequent as those are of Magistrates,
and Generals of Armies. Truly it is a shame there are Laws against those who
counterfeit Coins and falsify Mercandizes; yet that such are freely permitted
who corrupt Philosophy and Eloquence, and who violate those things, the Vulgar
ought no more to meddle with then with State government, or Religious
Mysteries. The late great plague was of small consideration in comparison of
this, which checks all the World: and surely, if speedy order be not taken, the
multiplicity of our Authors will make a Library as big as Paris, wherein there
shall scarcely be found one good word, or reasonable conceit. These be the
fruits arising out of inordinate idleness, and the third scourge caused by
Peace, sent to afflict this poor Realm after Duels, and Lawsuits. There are
hardly any to be found, who are contented to keep their faults and follies to
themselves, or to sin in secret; but are also doting upon their own follies, as
they do desire to engrave them in Marble and Brass, thereby to eternize their
memory, and to make them past retracting. Now to return to the party of whom
you particularly required my opinion, and who indeed is the first subject of
this Letter. I must ingeniously confess unto you, that next to Beer and
Physic, I never found any thing so distastefull as his works: he wants
(almost throughout) even natural Logic, yea, that part thereof which proves
men to be reasonable creatures. In three words he speaks four bad ones, and as
he always strayeth from the subject whereof he treats, so does he ordinarily
talk in an unknown language, though he intend to speak French: Besides, Ice it
self is not more cold then his conceits, and when he desires to be facetious
(as at every turn he fain would) he had need to be in fee with his Reader to
make him laugh, as at Funerals in Paris, weepers are usually hired for money.
There is no question but truth were of far more force, and disarmed, then it
can be with the assistance this simple fellow would strive to affoard her: Now
supposing such men were engaged in the right, without any treacherous design,
yet is it as much as to abandon Gods cause, to suffer it to be supported by so
weak and unworthy Pens. The Renegadoes have not so much wronged* Christianity,
as those who have not valiantly defended themselves against the Turks, and such
who through defect of conduct and skill, though they wanted neither zeal, nor
affection, suffer themselves to be surprised by the same advantages, they
otherwise might have had over their enemies. Truly the Empire of the wicked
does much more maintain it self by our pusillanimity, then by its own power or
forces; nor does any thing cause virtue to be so badly followed, as does the
weak and unskilful teaching and explanation thereof. It were therefore
requisite, some wise man, who had been in this Country, where there is
continual debate, and where there is never either peace or truce, (called the
College of Sarbon,) and who besides had the art to make good things grateful,
and could bring matters to atonement by a sweet hand; should come to cleanse
the Court from those opinions lately introduced, and cure Souls instead of
wounding them with injuries. It was that great Cardinal who triumphed over all
humane spirits, and whose memory shall ever be sacred, so long as there remain
any Altars, or that oblation is offered on earth. It was I say the Cardinal of
Perron, who was able to show Epicurus himself, something more sublime and
transcendent then this life, and cause his fleshly Soul to be capeable of the
greatest secrets of Christian Religion. Though this man had a dignity equal in
height to the greatest Conquerors and Monarchs: Yet had he (in what concerned
Religion) an heart as humble as that of decreped men and Infants. How often
has he (with those two different qualities) imposed silence upon all
Philosophy, and spoken of Divine matters, with as great perspicuity as though
he had already been in Heaven; or had seen the same Devine verity wholly
discovered, whereof here on earth, we have only a confused understanding, and
imperfect knowledge. To tell you in plain terms, but for the works of this
Devine person, which I as highly esteem as the victories of the late King his
Master, and wherein I desire always to leave mine eyes, when I am necessitated
to give over reading: I had been much troubled to retire my self from the
tracing the book you sent me, since any mischief does so easily catch hold of
me, when I come near it, as I can hardly look upon a beggar without taking the
itch, and my imagination is so tender and delicate, as it is sensible, and
afflicted at the sight of any base object; yet thanks be to God, and the
Antidote I continually take, I am the better armed against the conspiracy you
intended against me: and have yet life in me, after having been under a fools
hands longer then I desired. But by what I can gather, he is notwithstanding in
good repute in the place where you are, and likely enough to find store of
such as will follow him, in that he is head of an evil party. I can hereunto
answer you nothing, save only that between this place and the Pyrenean
Mountains, good wits do sometimes stray from common opinion, as from a thing
too vulgar; and do often take counterfeit virtues, yea, even those who have not
any resemblance to the right, for perfect verities: But when I consider, how
there is scarce any kind of beast which has not heretofore been adored among
Idolaters, nor any disease incident either to the body, or mind of man,
whereunto Antiquity has not erected Temples. I do not at all marvel, why
diverse men do sometimes esteem of those, who are no way deserving; or why
simple people should hold Sots in high reputation, since they have addressed
incense to Apes and Crocadiles. The thing I most vex at herein, is, that both
your self and I, are in some sort obliged to the Author of the book you sent
me, and that I have received the beginnings of my studies, and first tincture
of Learning from the last, and least estimable of all men. For my part, I
protest before all the World, I am not for all that guilty, either of the
follies he will fall into, or of any such as he has formerly committed: and
that having had much ado to purify my understanding from the ordures of the
College, and to quit my self from perverse studies; I have now no other
pretention, but to follow such as can no way be reproachable unto me.
Howsoever, I should not reject Chastity, though my Nurse had died of the Pox;
and it may sometimes happen, that a bungling Mason may lay some few stones in
the building of the Loover, or at the Queen-mothers Palace.

LETTER XXV.
THe Letter newly delivered unto me from you, is but three months and an half
old: it is an age wherein men are yet young, yet some Popes have not reigned so
long, and in the state wherein the Churches affairs have often stood. You might
have written unto me at the beginning of one Papacy, and I had received yours
at the end of another; howsoever, I can no way better employ my patience, then
in attending my good fortune; and as it was the use to be invited a year
beforehand to the Sybarites Feasts, so is it fitting you make me long attend
the most perfect content I enjoy in this World. I doubt not but T. T. seeks
all occasions to do me ill offices, and that my absence affoardeth him much
advantage to wrong me; but on the other side, I cannot think men will more
readily believe mine enemies words, then mine own actions; or that it is
sufficient only to slander an honest man, to make him presently wicked. It is
true what he says, that I am not very useful for A^amanta's service, I will
at all times readily yield that quality to his Coach-horses, and to the Mules
that carry his Coffers: Yet am I too well acquainted with the Generositie of
that Signiour, to think he does more esteem the body, then the Soul, or to
suppose that a Farmer should be of higher consideration with him, then a man of
worth. What confession of Faith soever R. makes, I will not imagine he can ever
be really altered: I had rather both for mine own contentment and his honor
belive, it is only a voyage he has made into the Adversaries Country, to the
end to bring us some news, and to give us account of what passes at Charenton:
Surely, I suppose, I should not wrong him so much in holding him for a Spy
among Enemies, as to call him a forsaker of his side, and a Fugitive from that
Church, whereto he has at least this obligation, (if he will confess no other)
that it is she who made him a Christian. You may do me a courtesy, to make me
acquainted with the cause moving him to forsake us, and to go from those Maxims
he has so often preached unto me; That a wise man dies in the Religion of his
Mother: That he never alters his opinion: That he never repents himself of his
sorepassed life therein: That all Novelties are to him suspicious.

It is long since I knew, that no man's cause can be bad in the hands of
Mounsieur d' Andilly, and that he betters all the affects: he interessed
himself in my protection, the 1. day he saw my works; so as it is not any more
my self whom he commends, but his own judgment, which he is bound to defend:
Yet will I not desist from being much obliged unto him: For I supposing one
affoards me a favor, when at any time he does me Justice, you may well think.
I have right particular, and most tender sensibilities for those courtesies I
receive, but they are in special regard with me, when they come from a person
of so high estimation in my thoughts as he is, and of whom I should still have
much to say, after I had related, how amidst the corruption of this age, and in
the authority Vice therein has gained, he has notwithstanding the fortitude,
to continue an upright man, and blusheth not at Christian virtues, nor vanteth
of Moral ones. I hope to see him within few days, and to take possession of
some small corner in his House at Pompona, which he has provided for me, there
to breath at mine ease, and to set my spirits sometimes at liberty. In the
interim you must needs know, about what I busy my self, and that I tell you, I
entertain a fool, in whom I find all the Actors in a Comedy, and all sorts of
extravagancies incident to the spirit of man. After my books have busied me all
the morning, and that I am weary of their company, I spend some part of the
afternoon with him, partly to divert my thoughts from serious things, which do
but nourish my Melancholy. Ever since I came into this World, I have been
perpetually troublesome to my self, I have found all the hours of my life
tedious unto me; I have done nothing all day, but seek for night. Wherefore if
I desire to be merry, I must necessarily deceive my self, and my felicity is so
dependant upon exterior things, that without Painting, Music, and diverse other
divertisements, how great a Muser soever I am, I have not sufficient wherewith
to entertain my self, or to be pleased. Think not therefore, that either my
fool, or my books are sufficient to settle my contentment; nay, rather if you
have any care of me, or if you desire I should have no leisure to be sad, make
me partaker of all the news happening in the place where you are; let me see the
whole Court by your eyes, cause me to assist at all Sermons by your ears, give
me account of the good and bad passages happening this Winter, and that there
part not a post, uncharged with a Gazetto of your style, as there shall not any
go hence, who shall not bring you some vision of my retiredness.

There runs a rumor in these parts, that Mounsieur de Boudeville is slain, but
since there are not many more hard achievements to be wrought, then that, it
is too great a death to be believed upon the first report.

The 1. of November 1625.
LETTER XXVI.
WEre I not confined to my bed, I should my self have solicited the business I
have recommended unto you; nor should I have suffered you thus far to oblige me
in my absence. But since I cannot possibly part hence, and am here constrained
to take ill rest, being far more grievous unto me then agitation; I humbly
beseech you, to suffer these Lines to salute you in my stead, and to put you in
remembrance of the request I made unto you. Sir, I am resolved not to be
beholding to any but your self, for the happy success whereof the goodness of
our cause assures us, and in case your integrity should be interessed, I would
owe the whole to your favor: For besides, that you are born perfectly
generous, I do not at all doubt, but the commerce you have with good books, and
particularly with Seneca, has taught you the Art, To do good to all men. But
to the end the obligation I desire to owe you, may be wholly mine own, instead
of referring it to the study of Morality, to your bountiful inclination, or to
the Justice of my request: I will rather imagine, I shall be the sole cause of
this effect, and that you will act without any other assistance, out of the
love you bear me, who am passionately

Your most humble and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
Paris the 2. of May 1627.
LETTER XXVII.
G X. X. is resolved to leave all worldly affairs in the state he found them,
and these great cares which should have extended themselves over the most
remote parts of Christendom, have not as yet passed the limits of his house: He
preserves his old age, and prolongs his life by all the possible means he can
imagine: But it is thought he will not long make his successor attend, and that
his death will be the first news in the Gazetto. Phisicians and Astrologers
have concluded upon this point, that he shall not see the end of Autumn. For my
part, I never made any great difference between a dead person, and an
unprofitable one; and if things less perfect, ought to be post posed to more
excellent ones; it were a mockery to make choice of sick folks, and cause them
to be adored by those who are in health, or to put sovereign power into their
hands, to the end only to have them leave it to others. But it is not my part
to reform all things displeasing me in this World, and I should be very
ungrateful, if I blamed that form of government, wherein I find my self very
well: In effect (Sir) speak no more to me of the North, nor its neighbors; I
declare my self for Rome against Paris, nor can I any longer imagine, how a man
can live happily under your Climate, where Winter takes up nine Months of the
Year, and after that the Sun appears, only to cause the Plague, and (weak as
it is) forbears not to kill men: There is not any place* (Rome excepted) where
life is agreeable, where the body finds its pleasures, and the spirit his,
where men are at the source of singular things. Rome is the cause you are
neither Barbarian nor Pagan, since she has taught you the civility of
Religion: She has given you those Laws which Arm you against error, and those
examples whereto you owe the good actions you perform. It is from hence
inventions and Arts are come to you, and where you have received the Science of
of Peace and War. Painting, Music, and Comedies are strangers in France, but
natural in Italy: that great Virtue it self you so much admire in your Court,
is she nor Roman? That Martchioness, of whom so many marvels are related, is
she not Countrey-woman to the Mother of the Graches, and the Wife of Brutus?
and in truth, to possess all those perfections the World acknowledges in her,
was it not fitting she should be born in a place whereon Heaven defuseth all
its Graces? Truly, I never ascend Mount Palatin, or the Capitole, but I change
spirit, and others then my ordinary cogitations seize upon me. This air
inspireth me with some great and generous thing I formerly had not; and if I
muse but two hours upon the Banks of Tyber, I am as understanding, as if I had
studied eight days. It is a thing I wonder at, that being so far off, you make
so excellent Verses, and so near the Majesty of Virgils. I suppose herefore,
none will blame me, for having chosen Rome for the place of my abode, or for
preferring flowers before Snow and Ice. If men choose Popes of threescore and
ten years old, and not of five and twenty, the days are therefore neither
sadder nor shorter, nor have we any subject to complain of our Masters
debility, since we are thereto obliged for our quiet.

From Rome the 25. of March 1621.
LETTER XXVIII.
IT is not to answer your excellent Letter, I write you this, but only to let
you know, you have so absolutely acquired me to your service, as you have left
me no liberty to do what I desire, when there is any question of performing
your pleasure. Since therefore you and your Printers have conspired against my
quiet, and that you determine to make my infirmities as public, as though you
meant to lead me to the Hospitals, or Church-porches; I am contented with
closed eyes to obey you, and to put my reputation to adventure, rather then
seem to refuse a thing you have demanded of me. Mounsieur the Priour of Chives,
to whom I communicate my most secret thoughts, and in whose person you shall
see that I know how to make good elections, (in delivering you this Letter) may
conclude it, and acquaint you with the power I have given you over all my
desires; truly, it has no other bounds then impossibilities. Since as for
those which are only unjust, I believe I should make small scruple, to violate
the Laws for your sake, and to testify unto you, that virtue it self is not
more dear unto me then your friendship; this is

Your most humble and most affectionate servant BALZAC.
The 4. of January 1624.
LETTER XXIX.
BEing now ready to alter my course of life, and part hence to come to Court, I
held my self obliged to advertise you, that herein I do, what I have no mind
unto, and that they have pulled me out from a soil, where I suppose I had taken
Root. It much afflicts me, that I must forsake the company of my Trees, and
part from that pleasing solitude my good Fortune had chosen for me, before I
was born: But since all the World drives me out, and because what I call
repose, my friends term Pusillanimity; I must suffer my self to be carried away
with the press, and to err with others, since they will not let me do well by
my self. Upon my Conscience it is not out of my own ambition that I am
high-minded, but out of my Fathers; and if people of his time had not measured
things by the events, and had not believed those only to be wise, who are
fortunate, I should not have busied my self in searching at Paris, for what I
ought to have found in my self: But truly I have so great obligation to so
good a Father, and the care he has taken to husband the good grain he has
cast into me, and to finish me after he had framed me; have been so great and
passionate, as there is no reason, I should follow my private inclination, by
resisting his intention. I go therefore since it is his pleasure, to live among
wild beasts, and to expose my self to hatred and calumny, as though the Fever
and Sciatica were not sufficient to make me miserable. At my first approach the
Grammarians will call me into question, because I put not the French word
Mensonge into the feminine gender, and do not believe the Jurisdiction they
have over words, is powerful enough, to cause this word to change Sex. Those
who have not as yet written, will set pen to paper against me, and the new
Bridge will Echo nothing but my name and their injuries. I shall be much
distasted to hear I am become an Author, and that I perform indifferent good
pieces. The meaner sort of spirits will be much moved, in that I have set so
high a rate upon Eloquence, and being unable to follow me, they will throw
stones to stay me. The truth I have not dissembled, will at once offend our
adversaries and ill Priests; debaucht persons will never forgive me the P. P.
they have seen in my books; and Hypocrites will wish me ill, because I set upon
vice even within the Sanctuary. See here (my dear friend) the persecution
prepared for me, and of what sorts of people the Army of mine Enemies is
composed. In all appearance there is not any valor able to surmount so great a
multitude; and I should do much better to enjoy the peace of my village, and to
eat Mellons in security, then to cast my self into this incensed troup, and to
engage my self in an endless War: yet since all Grammarians are not worth one
Philosopher, and in that the better part has often the advantage over the
greater; I am in hope, Authority and Reason siding with me, I shall easily get
the upper hand of multitudes and injustice. To tax me in these times wherein we
are, is as much as to give the lie to his Master, and to condemn the opinion
of the prime men of our age. Those who govern at Rome, and at Paris, make my
labors their delights; and when at any time they lay aside the weight of the
whole World, they refresh themselves with my Works. But if some bad Monks who
in religious houses, as Rats, and other imperfect creatures may happily have
been in the Ark, seek to gnaw my reputation; Mounsieur de Nantes, and Mounsieur
de Berille will conserve it; and you know them for two men, whom the Church in
this age beholds, as two Saints dis^interred out of the memory of her
Annals, or two of those Primative Fathers, whose Souls were wholly replenished
with Jesus Christ, and who have established the Truth as well by their Blood,
as Doctrine. I have besides, as an opposite to my Calumniators, one of the most
perfect Religious this day living; I mean Father Joseph, whose great Zeal is
guided by as eminent an understanding, and who has the same passions for the
general good of Christendom, as Courtiers have for their particular interests.
This irreproachable witness knows, I reverence in others the Piety I find not
in my self; and if I perform not all the actions of a perfectly virtuous
person, yet have I at least all the sensibilities and desires. Mounsieur the
Abbot of St. Cyran, who is not ignorant of any thing falling within the compass
of humane understanding, besides the more sublime gifts and illuminations
wherewith he is adorned, and who in a right profound Litterature, has yet a
more resigned humility, will answer for me in the same case; and though all
these strange forces should fail me; have I not sufficient in the protection of
the Bishop of Air, and Mounsieur Bouthilier, who do both of them love me, as
though I had the honor to be their Brother; and who are so sage, so judicious,
and so understanding in all things, as it is not probable, they would begin to
err by the good opinion they have of me; I suppose that hereupon I may venture
to go to Court, and that with so powerful assistance, there are no enemies I
need fear. Yet will I once again tell you, and I beseech you believe me, I
would not part hence, were I permitted to stay; and that it does not a little
trouble me, to lose the sight of my paths and allies wherein I walk, without
being enforced to wear Boots, or have any apprehension of Carroaches.

From Balzac, the 18. of October 1624.
LETTER XXX.
I Am doubtful to believe you speak in earnest in your Letter, and that he, of
all men, who has most cause to be satisfied with himself, should need the
assistance of any other to comfort him. This is as much as to be distasted
amidst the abundance of all things, and to be ungrateful toward your good
fortune, since in the height of those favors you receive, and expectation of
those prepared for you; you notwithstanding seek for foreign pleasures, and
are sensible of petty contentments among great felicities. My writings are no
objects but for sick and sad eyes; yea, of such as will be neither cured, nor
comforted: They may indeed flatter melancholy, and affoard a man (in despair)
poison not unpleasing unto him; but to contribute any thing to the satisfaction
of a contented spirit, and to mingle themselves with the pleasures of his life,
without corrupting all the sweetness, is a thing I can hardly be drawn to
believe: And I herein imagine you have rather a design to tell me some good
news, then to write a true History unto me. At the age of 0 0 0 0 0. you are
seated upon Flower-de-luces, and can you lie down upon Roses? You are wise, and
have not acquired the same with loss of your best years; you are born the same
we desire to be at the best: on what side soever you cast your eyes, you find
present felicities, and certain hopes; and were there neither Loover nor
Palace to promise you preferments or Offices, the house where you are, may
alone make you happy. There it is, where virtue has no cause to complain of
the injustice of Fortune, and where she is more commodiously lodged, then among
Philosophers; without going thence; you possess whatsoever we desire in our
wishes, and what we imagine in our dreams. The days which to me are so long,
and whose each moment I reckon, pass over swiftly at Villesavin; nor can riches
annoy you in a society capable to make even poverty pleasing. What likelihood
is it then, this being so, you should be of your Letters opinion, and that you
cannot be without me? It suffices me, you sometimes have me in your thoughts
as those in Heaven behold what they left on Earth: and that you receive the
votes and prayers I shall hereafter address unto you, after the solemn
protestation I am about to make, to remain whilst I live

Your most humble and most faithful servant BALZAC.
From Paris the 15. of September 1617.
The end of the first Book.
LETTERS OF MOUNSIEUR DE BALZAC. The second Volumne, Englished by Sr. RICHRD
BAKER.

LONDON, Printed by W. B. for F. E. and I. C. 1654.

The Letters of MOUNSIEUR de BALZAC.
To Mounsieur Moreau, Counselor to the King, and Lieutenant of PARIS. LETTER
I.
SIR,
I Come to renew my old importunity, and require your Authority, to call the
Printers of Paris to account: They have set forth, in my name, certain Letters,
which I acknowledge to be mine, and deny not to father; but yet they ought to
have been counsel to them, considering I never meant they should gadd about the
streets. By this means, when I think I am in my Closer, I find my self upon
the Stage; they carry me abroad, when I desire to be private, and what I
intended an enclosure to my friends, they lay in common for all the Country.
You know Sir, that this kind of writing has always been privileged; and
that many things are entrusted to the bosom of Letters, which neither
curiosity, nor hatred ought to prye into: nor ever will, if that be any thing
discreet; This, any thing generous. An Enemy in War, that neither spares men's
goods nor lives, yet makes a conscience of opening Letters: the Law of secrets
prevailing against the desire of revenge: Yet so unfortunate am I, that what an
Enemy will not offer in War, I suffer in peace; and that by men, that have no
cause to wish me ill. I have nothing so properly mine, which they think not as
properly theirs; Nothing kept so close, which they bring not to light. If hold
could be laid on intellectual things, they would dive (I think) into the very
thoughts of my heart: but since their arms are too short for this, they snatch
them from me as soon as ever I have made them sensible, and given them a body
upon Paper; in such sort Sir, that I should not dare to write my very Auricular
Confession, for fear they should put it in Print, and make it be cried upon the
Exchange; and I must be forced at last, either to renounce all commerce in this
kind, or at least to invent some strange unknown Characters to speak in
secret, and to preserve my conceits from their arresting. They arrogate to
themselves a more sovereign power than Princes do, who always leave to private
men, the free use of that which is theirs, and never offer to make a highway of
my Garden, nor a thorough-fare of my Courtyard. This is a disorder, where of
the consequence reflects upon you, and wherein you are more interested than my
self; for I do not believe you would be willing to see those excellent
discourses, which I have heard you make at the opening of your Courts; and be
disfigured by an uncorrected impression; and it would grieve you that profane
hands should touch them without choice or discretion, and thereby mar their
luster, and defile their purity. I therefore humbly entreat you in this point
to take care of your self, and to do your self right: The boldness of these
mercenary persons is not restrained by respect, it must have a stronger bridle;
and if you give it not a stop by fear of punishment; neither our Closets, nor
our Beds will have any thing so secret, which will not be cried upon the Market
place, and to speak in the Comedians phrase, That which Jupiter speaks to Juno
in her ear, shall be made Table talk for all the people. You being as you are,
the censor of manners and Pylot of the state; it belongs to your place to
restrain this so Tyrannical an usurpation upon the liberty of men's spirits, and
whilst you defend from violence our fortunes and our lives; you must not
expose to the same violence other of our goods, no less dear to us than those.
And herein I promise to my self some consideration of my own particular, and
that for my sake, you will let your courtesy go further than your Justice. And
having obliged me to you already upon the like occasion; I doubt not but you
will maintain that first favor with a second, and make the Printers know that
you have taken my name and writings into your protection, to defend them
against all their practices. This shall be to me a singular favor, and which
shall bind me all my life to seek out means to testify, that I am

Sir, Your most humble and most affectionate servant, BALZAC.

To Mounsieur Rigault. LETTER II.
SIR,
HAving adventured to speak Latin, I feared my boldness might have had but ill
success; and I doubted whether in a foreign Country I might pass for an
enemy, or for a friend. But your Letter has given me assurance of my
condition. I account it as the Letters Pattents of my naturalizing; and where I
was afraid to be held a Barbarian, I see my self suddenly become a Roman. For
since there is now no more use that can serve for the Law; nor people that can
serve for the Judge of a dead language; I have therefore recourse to you Sir,
in whom I seem to see the very face of the most pure antiquity; and who, after
the dissolution of the body of the Commonwealth, does yet preserve the spirit.
The Goths and Vandals have boasted falsely that they left in it nothing
remarkable: I find still the full Majesty of the language in your writings;
and your style has in it, not only the Air and Garb of that good time; but
the very courage and the virtue. You draw your opinions from the same Well, and
I see no cause that any man can have to contradict them. It is certain, that to
gain belief, one must keep himself within the bounds of likelihood; and present
to posterity examples, which it may follow; and not Prodigies, with which it
may be frighted. Words that are disproportionable to the matter, seem to savor
of that Mountibanks strain; who would have it believed, he could make a statue
of a Mountain, and would persuade us, that a man were a mile long. There are
some men's works, not much less extravagant than this Mountibanks design; and
most men seem to write with as little seriousness; and with as little care to
be believed. And though men make a conscience in dealing with particular
persons; yet when they come to deal with the public, they seem to think
themselves dispensed with; and that they owe more respect to one neighbor than
to whole Nations, and to all ages to come. You know notwithstanding, that this
is no new vice; and not to make a troublesome enumeration of the ancient adorers
of favor: Is not that base flattering of Velleim come even to us? and was he
not a Bond slave, that desired one should know he was in love with his Chain? I
could curse the ill fortune of good Letters, that has bereft us of the book
which Brutus writ of virtue; and in lieu has left us the infamous possession,
which that villain makes of his looseness, and how he had more care of the dregs
of a corrupted Court; than of upholding the main structure of the Latin
Philosophy. If it had been his fortune to have outlived Sejanus; I doubt not,
but he would have taken from him all the praises he had given him to make a
present of them to his successor Macron: and if the gaps and breaches of his
book were filled up, one should see he had not forgotten so much as a Groom in
all Tiberius house of whom he had not written Encomiums. We live in a
Government much more just, and therefore much more commendable; the reign of
our King is not barren of great examples. It is impossible the carriage of M.
the Cardinal should be more dextrous, more sage, more active than it is: yet
who knows not that he has found work enough to do for many ages, and Battails
enough to fight for many Worthies: That he has met with difficulties worthy of
the transcendent forces of himself, far exceeding the forces of any other; it
is necessary, that time it self should join in labor with excellent
Master-workmen to produce the perfection of excellent works. The recovery of a
wasted body, is not the work of only one potion; or once opening a vein: the
reviving a decayed estate, requires a reiteration of endeavors, and a
constancy of labors. The salving of desperate cases goes not so swift a pace,
as Poets descriptions, or Figures of Orators. We must therefore keep the
extension of our subject within certain bounds; and not say, that the victory
is perfected, as long as it leaves us the evils of War, and that there remains
any Monster to be vanquished, seeing even poverty is yet remaining, which is
one of the greatest Monsters; and in comparison whereof, those which Hercules
subdued, were but tame and gentle. With time, our Redeemer will finish his
work; and he that has given us security, will give us also no doubt abundance.
But seeing the order of the world, and the necessity of affairs affords us not
yet to taste this happiness; it shall be a joy unto me, to see at least, the
Image of it in your History: to return and re-enter by your means into these
three, so rich and flourishing years, after which the peace has showed it self
but by fits; and the Sun it self has been more reserved of his beams, and not
ripened our fruits but on one side. You shall bind me infinitely unto you, to
grant me a sight of this rare Piece, and to allow me a Key of that Temple,
which you keep shut to all the World besides, I assure my self I shall see
nothing there but that which is stately and Magnificent; specially I doubt not
but the roof it self is admirable, and that your words do Parallel the
subject, when you come to speak of the last Designs of our deceased King; and
of the undoubted revolution he had brought upon the state of the World, if he
had lived. And though in this there be more of divination than of knowledge;
and that to speak of such things be to expound Riddles; yet in such cases it is
not denied to be Speculative; and I do not believe that Lyvie recounting the
death of Caesar, did lightly pass over the Voyage he intended against the
Parthians; and that he stayed not a little to consider the new face he would
have put upon the Commonwealth, if death had not prevented him. If all my
affairs lay here, yet I would make a journey to Paris, expressly for this; and
to read a discourse, made after the fashion of this Epitaph, which pleased me
exceedingly. He had a design to win Rhodes and overcome Italy. I should have
much ado to hold in my Passion till then; but now I stand waiting for your
Tertullian, that I may learn of him that patience, which he teaches, that I
saint not in waiting till it be printed; what a crowd there will be to see him,
when he shall be in state to be seen; and when he shall come abroad under your
corrections; like to those glorious bodies, which being cleansed from all
impurity of matter, do glister and shine on every side. This is an Author with
whom your Preface would have made me friends, if I had otherwise been fallen
out; and that the hardness of his phrase, and the vices of his age had given me
any distaste from reading him. But it is long since that I have held him in
account; and as sad and thorny as he is, yet he has not been unpleasing to me.
Me thinks I find his writings, that dark light; or lightsom darkness, which an
ancient Poet speaks off; and I look upon the obscurity of his writing, as I
should look upon a piece of Ebone that were well wrought and polished. This
has been ever my opinion of him. As the beauties of Africa, do not therefore
leave to be Amiable, because they are not like to ours; and as Sophonisbe would
have carried the prize from many Italian faces; so the wits of the same
Country do not leave to please, though their eloquence be a forreiner: and for
my part I prefer this man before many that take upon them to be imitators of
Cicero. Let it be granted to delicate ears, that his style is of Iron: but then
let it be granted also, that of this Iron, many excellent Armours have been
forged; that with it he has defended the honor and innocence of Christianity;
with it he has put the Valentinians to flight, and has pierced the very heart
of Marcion. You see I want not much of declaiming in his praise; but to avoid
this inconvenience, I think best to break off abruptly. I am neither good at
making Orations, nor at venting of Complements; I am a bad Advocate, and as bad
a Courtier: yet I entreat you to believe that I very truly am

Sir, Your, etc.

To Mounsieur du Moulin. LETTER III.
SIR, no modesty is able to resist the praises that come from you, And I vow
unto you, I took a pleasure to suffer my self to be corrupted, with the first
lines of your Letter. But it must be one that knows himself less then I do,
that dwells long in this error. After a pleasing dream, one is willing to
awake; and I see well enough, that when you speak so much in the praise of my
work; you make not use of the whole integrity of your judgment. You do me a
favor, I cannot say you do me justice; you seem to have a will to oblige me to
you, by hazarding to incur the displeasure of truth. Now that you are your
self at the Goal, you encourage with all your forces those that are in the
race; and to persuade them to follow you; make them believe they shall go
beyond you. An admirable trick of Art, I must confess; and which at first I did
not discover. But whatsoever it be, and from what ground soever this wonderful
commendation of yours proceeds; I esteem it not less than an ambitious man does
a Crown; and without piercing into your purpose, I take a joy in my good
fortune: which is not small Sir, to be loved of you, whom I have always
exceedingly esteemed: and whom I have a long time looked upon in the Huguenot
party, as an excellent Pylot that affronts a great Fleet, being himself but in
Pinnace. The right and authority is on our side; the plots and Stratagems on
yours, and you seem not less confident in your courage, than we in our cause.
It is certain, that this is the way to give a sedition the show of a just War:
and to a multitude of mutiners the face of a well ordered Army. By this you
keep many in a good opinion of that which has now lost the attractive grace of
Novelty; and though it be now bending to its declination; yet it cannot be
denied, but that it holds still some color, and some appearance, by the Varnish
of your writings; and that never man has more subtly covered his cause from
show of weakness; nor more strongly upheld his side from ruin than your self:
Si Pergama Dextra
Defendi possent, etiam hac Defensa fuissent.


This is my ordinary language, when it comes in my way to speak of you. I am
not of the passionate humor of the vulgar; which blancheth the liberty of
their judgment; and finds never any fault in their own side, nor virtue in
the opposite. For my self, from what cloud soever the day break; I account it
fair; and assure my self that at Rome honest men commended Hannibal; and none
but Porters and base people spoke basely of him. It is indeed a kind of
sacrilege to divest any man, whatsoever he be, of the gifts of God, and if I
should not acknowledge that you have received much; I should be injurious to
him that has given you much; and in a different cause wrong an indifferent
Benefactour. It is true, I have not always flattered the ill disposed French;
and was put in some choler against the Authors of our last broils; but
observing in your writings that our Tenets are alike; and that the subjection
due to Princes is a part of the Religion you profess; I have thought I might
well speak by your consent, as much as I said: and in so doing, be but your
Interpreter. Whether the tempest rise from the Northern wind, or from the
Southern; it is to me equally unpleasing; and in that which concerns my duty; I
neither take Counsel from England, nor yet from Spain. My humor is not to
wrestle with the time; and to make my self an Antagonist of the present; it is
pain enough for me only to conceive the Idea of Cato, and Cassius; and being
to live under the command of another, I find no virtue more fitting than
obedience. If I were a Switzer, I would think it honor enough to be the Kings
Gossip; and would not be his subject, nor change my liberty for the best Master
in the World; but since, it has pleased God to have me born in chains, I bear
them willingly; and finding them neither cumbersom nor heavy, I see no cause I
should break my teeth, in seeking to break them. It is a great argument, that
Heaven approves that government, which has continued its succession now a
dozen ages: an evil that should last so long, might in some sort seem to be
made Legitimate, and if the age of men be venerable, certainly that of states
ought to be holy. These great spirits which I speak of in my work, and which
have been of your party, should have come in the beginning of the World, to
have given Laws to new people; and to have settled an establishment in the
politic estate; but as it is necessary to invent good Laws, so certainly it is
dangerous to change even those that are bad. These are the most cruel thoughts
that I entertain against the heads of your party: in this sort I handle the
adverse side; and take no pleasure to insult upon your miseries, as you seem
civilly to charge me, who have written that the King should be applauded of all
the World, if after he has beaten down the pride of the Rebels, he would not
tread upon the calamity of the afflicted. The persecutors of those, who submit
themselves, are to me in equal execration with the violatours of Sepulchers;
and I have not only pity of their affliction, but in some sort reverence. I
know that places stricken with lightning, have sometimes been held Sacred. The
finger of God has been respected in them, whom it has touched; and great
adversities have sometimes rather given a Religious respect, than received a
reproach. But thus to speak of the good success of the Kings armies were to
speak properly: Both sides have gained by his victory. All the penalty that
has been imposed upon you; has been but this, to make you as happy as our
selves, and you are now in quiet possession of that happiness, for which before
your Towns were taken, you were but suppliants. Our Prince will put no yoke
upon the consciences of his subjects; he desires not to make that to be
received by force; which cannot be received but by persuasion; nor to use such
remedies against the French, which are not good, but against the Moors. If the
King of Sweden use his prosperity in this manner, and soil not so pure a grace
with proscriptions and punishments; I make you a faithful promise to do that
which you desire me to do; to employ all my cunning and all my Engines to erect
a statue to the memory of his name. You touch the right string of my
inclination, when you pray me to praise and to magnify that Prince, If all the
Crowns that are wrought upon his Scarf should be changed into so many Kingdoms,
they could never in my opinion sufficiently recompense so rare a virtue; not be
able to fill so vaste a Spirit as his is: As I expect nothing but great from
his valor, so from his honesty I hope for nothing but good; and although in
Spain it be current that he is the true Antichrist; yet I am neither so devout
to believe such a fable, nor so fearful to be afraid of such a dream. I only
answer some scrupulous persons, who question me about this Prince; that our
King has in him a second to stand by him; and such a one as a fitter could
never be found, to strike an amusement into the house of Austria; and to divert
it from the care it takes of our affairs. But I will stay my self here for this
time; and not enter upon a subject, which I reserve for the dearest hours of my
leisure, it is better to make a stand at the porch of holy places, than to
enter into them without preparation. Besides, my discourse may seem already
long, if not too long, for a beginning of acquaintance; pardon I beseech you,
the contentment I take to be this way with you, which makes me forget both your
employments, and my own custom: which is not to be troublesome to any, much less
to make Sermons to my friends; but your self gave me the Text I have handled,
and I cannot doubt, but that having opened unto you the bottom of my heart,
without dissimulation; you will give my liberty the credit of your belief, and
with this I solemnly assure you that I truly am,

Sir, Your, etc.

To Mounsieur the Abbot of Baume. LETTER IV.
SIR,
I Am true, if not liberal; and I send you that I promised, though I cannot
send you what I would. This is neither a moveable for the use of your house,
nor an ornament to beautify your closet; it is matter of discourse only for
two or three days at your table; and a Novelty that will quickly grow stale.
But if your self have any better opinion of it, and that you account it of any
value, I am contented that you leave my style to the mercy of any that will
arrest it; so you please to justify my intentions to men that are reasonable,
and not suffer in the Country where you are, that an honest man should be
oppressed with the hatred against his side. If I were a revolted Spaniard, and
that the words I write did come from the mouth of a Fugitive, they might with
good reason be taken in ill part; and we find that a Grecian at Athens, was
once punished for serving the Persians to be their Interpreter: but I desire
you to consider, that the cause I maintain is the cause of my Prince and
Country, which I could not maintain coldly, without a kind of treason. We
punish Prevaricatours and Traitors, but true and lawful enemies we praise, and
I cannot think that M. the Cardinal of ^^^va, will think the worse of my
passion, for the public liberty, who has showed himself the like passion, for
one particular man's Regency. I am not afraid that a good action should make me
lose his favor, or that being himself extremely just, he should not more
esteem of my zeal, which is natural and honest; than the choler of Doctor
Bou^her, a mercenary man, and a Pentioner to a stranger. It will be no Novelty
to say that of Spain, which has been always said of great Empires, and that
rapine and cruelty is a reproach even to Eagles and Lions. To be a Tyrant and
an Usurper, is it not in other terms to be a Grandee, and a Conqueror? And are
no^ violence and severity vices that exceed the reach of virtue, and which
makes our morality ridiculous; I blame sometimes the counsels of Kings, but I
never lay hands upon their royalty, and if I seek to cut off superfluities and
excesses, it cannot therefore be justly said, I tear that off which I seek to
prune. Crowns are to me sacred, even upon Idolaters heads; and I adore the mark
of God in the person of the great Cham, and of the great Mogoll. Having now
made this Declaration, which yet is more expressly delivered in my book: I hope
there will be no place left for calumny, and I promise to my self, that for my
sake you will whip the Spaniards in point of generousness, and show them that
she has showed her self principally to do a favor to enemies, and to mingle
things, which seem hard to be mingled, courtesy and war together, I demand not
these good Offices from you, I expect them from your friendship, and I doubt
not but you will continue it to me in spite of all the spightfulness and
bitterness of the opposites, seeing I know you are free from those petty
passions of vulgar spirits, and that you know I am

Sir, Your, etc.

To Mounsieur Bouthillier, Counselor of the King in his Counsels, and
Secretary of his commands. LETTER V.
SIR,
I Vow I am one of the worst Courtiers of France, and to justify fortune, for
having little favored me, I will accuse my self for having little courted her;
yet for the love of you, I have used an extraordinary endeavor. My affection
has gone beyond my action, and I have put my self to the venture to go as far
as Gascogny to seek you out. If you had gone by Cadillac, as I was told you
would, you had found me at the waters side at your disinbarking, and I should
have put hard with the best of the Country to have had the honor to offer you
my service first of any, but God did not think me worthy of my desires. It was
his pleasure I should make a journey of fifty leagues not to see you, and I
conceive my happiness to be such, that if I should go to Paris with the like
intention, God would presently inspire the Kings heart to send you away in some
Embassage: Be pleased therefore, Sir, to spare me this travail; I dare
undertake no second voyage, for fear least such a thought only should remove
you from the station where all the good of life is seated, and out of which a
man can have no contentment, but what he can get by the force of reason and
Philosophy. It suffices me that I have this one way left me, to present you my
complements; and that from time to time I can make you read that your Idea is
the dear company of my solitude, and your reputation, the comfortable trouble
of my repose. In the estate I now am in, this in effect, is all the part I
claim in the affairs of the World; these are the news for which I retain still
my whole enquiry; I profess unto you the public prosperities would be less
dear unto me, if yours were not bound up in one volume with them. It does not
trouble* me I confess that our affairs are prosperous, and that our armies have
glorious success, but to think that you are one of the instruments of so
flourishing a Kingdom, and that the King makes use of your Pen to communicate
himself to his own people, and to strangers, and to distribute both good and
evil to all Europe, this is that which ravisheth me with extremity of joy. From
your words are framed the Oracles that are at this day given to all Nations,
you trouble not your brains any more with the petty interests of Tytius and
Maevius; Italy and Germany are now your clients; and the Princes that either
fear or suffer oppression, expect their destinies from your answers. I had the
pleasure Sir to see all these things before they were visible; I saw the fruit
when it was but in the budde, I knew the Gold when it was yet in the Mine, I
remember your happy entrance into the World, and that you have not needed a
time of probation for being perfectly an honest man, you said things to me in
your infancy, which I make use of now in my old age; and I keep for a Monument
a Letter you once writ to me from Villesavin as a seed of all the dispatches,
and of all the instructions you shall ever make. At that time I was proud of my
fortune, and you gave me leave to boast of your friendship, I dare not now use
the privacy of such terms; it is fit my ambition should be more modest and more
moderate. I crave now only an acknowledging and a protection, and this I hope,
Sir, you will not deny me; but take me for one of the charges descended upon
you, with the inheritance of Mounsieur d' Air your deceased Uncle; Bear with
my passion as a thing of your own, and which you cannot put away, since in
effect I am and never be other.

Sir, Than your, etc.

To Mounsieur the Earl of Excester. LETTER XVI.
SIR,
IF I had made a vow of humility, you give me here a fair occasion to be proud
for not breaking it, yet this should not be an effect of the love of wisdom;
it should be a mark of aversion from goodness, If I did not testify the joy of
the news I have received. I could never expect from Fame; a more sweet
recompense of my travail than this, which is presented to me by your hands, and
when I see the Son of the great Cecile let down his spirits so low as to mine,
and make himself less than he is by representing me in his Country; I cannot
forbear to vow unto you that it has touched the most sensible part of my Soul,
and that with joy thereof my miseries have given me a comfortable breathing
time. For your self Sir, all the stain you can take herein is but this, that it
may be said, you have your sports as well as your businesses, and that all the
hours of your life are not equally serious, but seeing the gods in times past
have changed their shapes, and disguised themselves in a thousand fashions; I
conceive it may be justly allowed to you to give us the moral sense of those
fables, you are able without any wrong to your self to show us, that great
persons cloyed with their felicity are glad sometimes to imitate the actions of
private men, and to put on Masks to save themselves from the importunity of
their greatness. Whatsoever your design were I cannot but turn it to my
advantage, for by this means I am certainly an honester man in England than in
France: seeing I speak there by your mouth; I therefore most humbly thank you
for the favor you have done me, in making me better than I was; and I joy in
this, that by your means I am improved in value, which inables me to make you
the more worthy present, in presenting you my affection, and the desire I have
to be all my life

Sir, Your, etc.

To Mounsieur de Boyssat. LETTER VII.
Sir,
WHat occasion soever if be that brings me your Letters, it cannot be but very
pleasing, I feel a joy at the only sight of your name, and the honor you do
me to remember me is so dear unto me, that though perhaps it be fortune that
does it, yet I cannot but thank you for it. You are one of those whose least
favors are Obligatorie, and you never cast them from you so carelessly, but
that they deserve to be carefully gathered. When others bear you affection and
hold you dear, it is but to be just, and to pay debts; but when you do the like
to others, it is to be liberal, and to bestow favors. You may then imagine
what glory I account it, that the meanners of my spirit has the approbation of
your judgment, and I am not a little glad that my inclination has so good
success, not to be hated of one whom I should love, though he hated me. For a
train to this first favor I require from you a second; be pleased Sir that I
ask you, if it be in truth my self whom you exhort to moderation, whether you
think in your conscience that I am fallen into the vice contrary to this
virtue? It is now four years that I suffer outrages; they think it not enough
to do me wrongs unless they print them too; they do me hurt, and would have me
think my self beholding to them for it; an infinite Army of Enemies are come
into the Field against me, under the Colors of Philarque; it is not two or
three private men, it is whole Companies, whole Troops that set upon me: I am
the Martyr of a thousand Tyrants, and if this unhappy influence pass not over,
or abate not, I shall come at last to be the object of persecution for all the
World. They have painted me out a public sinner amongst honest men; a man that
cannot read amongst Scholars; a mad man amongst the sober: These good Offices
they have done me hitherto without any revenging; I am as yet a debtour of
these charities to them that have lent them to me; I have taken these blows
with hardiness in stead of repelling them with force; and my patience has been
such, that many have called it want of courage: If this be so, you will grant
me Sir, that you trouble your self about that which cannot be; that another
man's praises should be insupportable to me, when I have not been sensible of my
own Calumnies: I am not like to be in haste to hinder by my violence the making
of friendship, who have by my remisseness as it were consented to my own
hatred. There is no color to think that I should complain of words seigned,
and such as declaimers use in sport, who have not so much as spoken a word of
the most cruel action, that ever the most premeditated malice could bring
forth. Let our friend, if he please, make an Epitaph or a deifying of -- let
him employ all his Mortar and all his Art to build him either a Sepulcher or a
Temple, and to speak after the manner of -- let him erect him a shrine, and
place him amongst his household saints: I say nothing against all this, nor
condemn his proceeding, whether it be that he honor the memory and merit of
the dead, or that he stand in awe of the credit and faction of his heirs. I
easily bear with these small spots in my friends, and exact no more of them
than they can well spare. I know that Greek and Latin make not men valiant,
nor are things that descended to the bottom of the Soul, they scarce reach to
the uttermost superficies: they stay commonly in the memory and in the
imagination, and polish the tongue without fortifying the heart: I should
therefore desire too much, if I should desire at all that these goodly
knowledges should get a new virtue for my sake, and should work a greater
effect in the spirit of -- than they wrought in the Poet Lucan, whom fear
constrained to accuse his Mother, and to praise a Tyrant. If it stay but upon
me that this dear Child should see the light, after so many sower looks and so
many throws, I am ready my self to serve for a Midwife. I am content it shall
be published to day, and to morrow be translated into all languages, that the
Author may not lose a day in his glory, and that his glory be not bounded
within River or Mountain. Never fear that I will impair his ill nights, or add
the care of one process to his ordinary watchings; if he have no other
unquietness but what he is like to have from me, he may be sure to enjoy a
perpetual calm, and a perfect tranquillity; if he be not awaked but by the noise
you think I will make him, he may sleep as long as Epimenides, who going to bed
a young man was fifty years elder when he rose. Besides, I have too much care
of my own quiet, to go about to trouble his; and I love his contentmens too
well, not to procure it, being to cost me nothing, but the dissembling his
weakness, And this I entreat you Sir, to assure him from me. But knowing you to
be wise and virtuous in the degree you are, I doubt not, but of your own head,
you will tell him, that it becomes not a man of his gravity, to countenance
such petty things; and in a point of Schollarship to use as much formality and
ceremony, as if it were the Negotiation of an Ambassador; but much more, that
it is a base quality to juggle with his friends; and after having said a truth,
which was not for all men's taste; to make a Comment upon it, of a Sophister. I
have read Tacitus, and the books of -- and therefore should know the style of
Tyberius; and the Art of Equivocation; but I should be loath to seem ingenious,
to the prejudice of mine honor; and to make use of poison, though I had one so
subtle that would kill without leaving any mark to be seen; I have loved man in
affliction; and have made use of men in misery: Lightning has not driven me
from places, which it has made frightfull; I have given testimony of my
affection, not only where it could not be acknowledged, but where it was in
danger to be punished. I am not now so dealt withal my self; and yet if the
justice of my cause were not as it is to be regarded, me thinks the violence of
my adversaries ought to procure me some favor; does not even honor oblige
those that have any feeling of it, not to join with the multitude which casts
it self upon a single man? Oppression has always been a sufficient ground for
protection; and noble minds never seek better Title for defending the weak,
than the need there is of them; and to take part with a stranger, it is cause
enough that many assault him, and few assist him, and such also I doubt not is
your mind: I am not less persuaded of the generousness of your mind; than of
the greatness of your spirit, and assure my self you are not the less on my
side, because I have many persecutors, as because also, I am firmly,

Sir, Your, etc.

To Mounsieur Huggens, Secretary to my Lord, the Prince of Orange. LETTER VIII.
SIR,
I Complain no more of fortune, she has done me at least some courtesy
amongst her many injuries, and since she suffers that you love me, it is a sign
she has some care of amidst her persecutions; this good news I have learned by
a Letter of yours to M. the Baron of Saint Surin, who will bear me witness,
that after I had read it, I desired nothing more for perfecting my joy, but
that I might be such a one as you make me, and be like my picture. If this be
the coal of Holland with which you make such draughts, it surpasses all the
colors that we use here to paint withal, and yet the beauty costs you
nothing; but you shall hardly make me believe it; I know Gold and Azure, and
can easily distinguish it from coal; I see Sir the Ambushes you lay for me; The
facility of your style covers the force of it, but weakens it not, and under a
show of carelessness, I find true Art and Ornaments. It serves not your turns
to do better in the place where you are than we; and shutting us out to hold
possession of the ancient and solid virtue; but you go about to take from us
all that is any way passable in corrupt estates, I mean the glory of language;
and not suffer us to have this little toy to comfort our selves withal, for
the loss of all our truer treasures. After fifty years Victories you will now
be persuading a parley, and will make your selves masters of men by a more
sweet and humane way than the former, as much in effect as to be that, you have
sometimes been termed, the brothers of the people of Rome, and Heirs of the old
Catoes, who made profession of severity, and yet were nor enemies of the
graces. This is to perfume Iron and Copper, and to the liberty and discipline
of Sparta, to add the bravery and dainties of Athens, M. de Saint Surin has
hereof made us excellent relations; and you have sent him back to us with his
heart wounded, and his mind tainted with that he has seen; and he wants not
much of being become a bad Frenchman; at least he reteins nothing for his
Country but a dutiful and reverent affection; his love your Island has gotten
possession of, and I am much afraid you will find more load-stones to draw him
to you, than we shall find chains to hold him with us. He is full of the
objects he has left behind him, and when I talk to him of our Court and of
our confusions; he answers with telling me of your government and good order.
And here you shall pardon me if I change my complement into blame, and require
to be righted by you for debauching a friend, who with one look of his
countenance allayes and sweetens all the bitterness of my life. The number of
my persecutours is in a manner infinite, but for how many think you I account
so brave a champion? Take him from me and you leave me quite disarmed against
ill fortune; I loose my comfort for adversity, and my example for virtue. And
finding you the principal Author of this disgrace, I know not how I should but
hate you, and persevere in the resolution I have taken, to be most
affectionately,

Sir, Your, etc.

To the Baron of Saint Surin. LETTER IX.
Sir,
I Learn by the Gazette that you have received a wound at Mastrick; so it be
light I forgive it you; but though it be but a scratch I love you too well not
to accuse you of too much forwardness. They that are poor in reputation ought
to press up to the trenches; and such fervor is as well beseeming fresh
Soldiers as young Friars; but for you, you have seen too many wars to be
called by the first name, and your valor having been showed in the presence of
the Prince, and approved by the testimony of the very enemy; it seems to me
that your part is not so much to bring it forth as a new matter, as to keep it
up as a known good. I would have you make good actions, as you use to do; but I
would have you do it now, if it might be had with a body charmed and with
enchanted Arms, that leaving behind you all danger, you might have before you
nothing but glory. If God had given us three or four lives, we might at any
time venture one, and sometimes in a bravery let one go, being assured we have
another in store; but to be prodigal in poverty, and to be careless of ones
head when no art can make him a new; this is a point has no appearance of
reason. We must not set so light by the beauties of heaven and the Rays of
visible things* nor turn our eyes from a spectacle so magnificently erected for
us: I offend perhaps the ears of your courage with this discourse, and you are
like to send my counsel away as it came; yet take not distastefully an
officious injury and think it not strange that I acquaint you with my fears,
seeing a goddess was not ashamed to attire her Son in Woman's habit to preserve
him; it would grieve me exceedingly to see you come halting home, or with but
one eye, and to bring such untoward favors from the Wars; I will not be bound
to flatter your grief with that word of a Lacedemonian mother, Courage my Son;
you cannot now take a step that puts you not in mind of your virtue, and less
with that example in the Histories of Salust, he made ostentation of a face
remarkable only for skars, and for having but one eye, wherein he took a
pleasure, though it made him deformed, and cared not for losing one part of
himself, which made all the rest the fuller of honor. Spare me I beseech you
this kind of consolation, which I should give you, if you suffer the like
losses; and be not so hot in seeking after a fair death, which can gain you
nothing but a fair Epitaph. Give me belief only this once, and after this I
will leave you to your own belief, and commend you to your good Angel. You
shall have leave to dispose of your time some otherwise than thus; but remember
that Melons are past, and make not -- stand waiting too long for you: Our
Rivers never ran more clear, nor our Meddows were ever more green. I make use
Sir of all things, both reasonable and insensible to persuade your return. In
the name of God come and draw me out of the unquietness you have put me in; I
have something, I know not what, lies heavy at my heart, and nothing will
lighten it but your company: That which a superstitious man would do for a
dream, or for some idle presage, do you I pray you for a friend: who carries
you always in his mind, and who is more than any in the World,

Sir, Your, etc.

To my Lord the Cardinal de la Valette. LETTER X.
SIR, the Letter you did me the honor to write unto me, the thirteenth of the
last Month came not to my hands till the beginning of this, otherwise I had
sooner given testimony how dear these last marks of your remembering me are unto
me, and how much I receive of secret glory, seeing all other is denied me, in
that I have done any thing which seems not altogether unpleasing to you. It is
no small matter to entertain eyes that use not to stay upon vulgar Objects; and
to minister pleasure to a mind, which has nothing in it but lawful passions,
and indeed Sir, the height, of my ambition is bounded there. If I had no other
payment for all my travail, but only your good opinion of it, I should not
complain for being ill paid; and your goodness has made me full recompense for
all the wrongs I have received. The number of my enemies is great, I see it
well; the time does not favor me, I confess it; but having your favor Sir,
what can I fear under so powerful a protection? Seeing those to whom God has
given clearer eyes than to other men, and a more sovereign reason, as well as a
more sovereign dignity, have no ill opinion of my opinions, what need I care
for the censure of the base World? and how can I but hope that the truth
assisted by a few sages, will be always able to withstand a multitude of
Sophisters? I now send you Sir my answer to such of their Objections, that seem
worth the refuting, and which have but any spark of appearance to dazzle the eyes
of simple people; the rest are so ridiculous that I dare not oppugn them, for
fear you should think I had devised them my self to make matter for discourse;
or that I coaped with them about points where I were sure they could do me no
hurt. And yet why should I dissemble my ill hap? Those ridiculous Objections
find abettours and uphoulders; although I have justice on my side, yet am I
sued still, and persecuted by men I never offended; and that when I give over
the field and entreat for my life, see the dealings of cruel minds toward
those that are good: They have no force, but because I make no resistance; they
magnify themselves in the wrong of their advantage; they have not taken it; it
is my self have given it. Their first successes, which my sufferance has
encouraged; have been new bonds for the continuance; and because I have used no
words against their blows, they think I judge my self worthy to endure them;
yet all this shall not make me change my resolution, and I am bent to stay
within the bounds into which I have voluntarily put my self. Although I am
neighbor to a Marshals Court, yet I choose rather a disgraceful quietness than
to entertain the best quarrel in the World. I have got as it were a habit of
carelessness, I dare not say of patience, least I might be accused to praise my
self for a virtue. It may happen that their persecution shall not continue so
long as my innocence, and that I may see an end of that, which would be my end.
It may be a calmer season will follow after this, and perhaps the tempest, that
threatens my head, will fall but at my feet. However the World go, I will
always comfort my self with the Letter you did me the honor to write unto me.
I will put your good will in balance against all men's malice, and against all
the injuries of Fortune; I will account my self not altogether unhappy as long
as I shall have place in your remembering me, and that you will believe I am

Sir, Your, etc.

Another to the same Cardinal. LETTER XI.
SIR,
I Never durst adventure to be suitor to you in behalf of others, and finding
my self unworthy of your favor, I have never offered to counterfeit a
Favorite. But though I did stand so far in your grace as to do good offices for
any, and that you allowed me the liberty which I dare not take of my self; yet
I should do very untowardly to begin with a suit in behalf of Mounsieur
Conrades, and to step before you in your own inclinations. I know your love to
him, is one of the most ancient you ever had, and he therefore one of the first
servants you ever entertained: The choice of so judicious an infancy as yours,
has not, I dare say, been rashly made; and I discover daily by the opening of
his heart and thoughts unto me, the reasons you had to love him at first; I
come not therefore as his Solicitour, but as his bare witness; and assure you
most undoubtedly, that I know not a man living more religious toward the
memory of his masters, more firm in performance of his duty, more fervent in
his passions, nor more passionately affected to your service than himself. Now
that he has lost M. the Marshal Scomberg, by whose commandment I came expressly
from Bordeaux, to offer him on his part all the contentment he could wish; he
thinks he has right after him to place his hope in you, and that you will do
him the honor to uphold with your protection the affairs he has at Court. I
concur with him in this opinion; and knowing that in this so general a
corruption of the World, this age of ours owes unto you the last examples we
see of goodness, and that without you neither the dead should any more find
piety, nor the miserable consolation; I have conceived you will not take it ill
that I confirm him in this belief, and that I take this occasion to say that
unto you, which in the suddenness of my departure, I had not time to say; that
I am perfectly and ever

Sir, Your, etc.
At Angoulesme 23. Nov. 1632.
To Mounsieur de Bois Robert. LETTER XII.
Sir,
YOu are a better man than you would have me believe you are. Your words of
fire and blood agree ill with the sweetness of your spirit, and having received
from you a Letter of challenge, I expect from you another of friendship. You
may make your profit of the good examples you have seen on that side the
Mountains, but follow not the Italian examples of being captious and retaining
of spleen, as if it were a Jewel. It is not fit the holy week should pass upon
your choler without abating it. It would not be an act of courage, but a
hardness of heart, and the best extremities partake so much of vice, that even
supreme right is no better than supreme wrong. Play not therefore the Tyrant
toward your friend, but stay your self within the bounds of ordinary justice.
The limits that part justice from wrong are not so well marked out, but that
one passes them often before he is aware; and it is neither a lawful
greatness to make our selves terrible to those that love us; nor an honest
resistance to stand obdurate to the prayers of men in misery. But perhaps I
offer remedies to one in better state than my self; perhaps I am afraid of an
artificial choler, and am frighted with that which is but a Vizard. It may be
you have a desire to know in what degree I love you, and that your hard dealing
with me is but to try me; such experiments would prove dangerous to any other
man besides your self, but you may make them safely; for I make you promise
that any patience shall be more insensible than your sense is tender. But yet
muse a little upon the honor of our friendship, and upon the opinion of the
world. I did make confession to you of my faults, and I am told you publish
briefs of your dislike; I have told you confidently that I suffer in it, and
because I did not tell it with a good grace, you are offended with the
incivility of privacie. Me thinks you should not exact from a plain Country
man so punctual a discretion; by living amongst clowns I have forgotten all the
good manners I learned with you: the wild man you had civilized is returned
back to his natural condition. I do not any longer walk in the Woods, I wander
there; and had it not been to see my Lord Mayors show, I had not been seen in
the City; although to say the truth, so obstinate a retyring might justly
enough have been censured as a kind of rebellion; and as the study of wisdom
takes from me all admiration of vain pomp, so yet it leaves me the reverence of
lawful authority. And to this purpose (that I may change the tenor of my
discourse) I must tell you that I am very well pleased with my Voyage, and do
not repent me to have performed a small complement, which has discovered unto
me an eminent virtue. I have studied M. de Brassac now eight days together, I
have observed him in public and in private; I have seen him handle different
subjects, with so equal force, that I am even ashamed, that having so perfect
knowledge of his own Art, yet he knows mine much better than my self. He is
none of these limited wits that count themselves full, if they have but three
words of Latin, and have but read one of Plutarks lives: Take them out of
certain common places, within which they entrench themselves, and draw all
discourse thither, every where else they are utterly disarmed and without
defense; but his knowledge is so universal, and comprehends such an infinite
number of things, that one cannot touch upon any point where he is not ready
for you; and to draw him dry, I do not think there are questions enough in the
World to put unto him. In one day I have heard him discourse with Gentlemen
about hunting and husbandry; with Jesuits about Divinity, and the
Mathematics; with Doctors of less austere profession about Rhetoric and
Poetry, without ever borrowing a foreign term, where the natural were the
fitter; and without ever flying to authority where the case in question were to
be decided by reason. To answer a premeditated oration from point to point upon
the sudden, and to send back our orators more persuaded by his eloquence than
satisfied with their own, this I have seen him oftentimes do, and no man ever
came to visit him, whose heart he did not win with his words, or at least left
in it such an impression as is wont to be the first elementing and foundation
of love. No liberty can be so sweet as so reasonable a subjection; such a yoke
is more to be valued than the Mayor of Rochels Halberds; and when one is once
assured of the sufficiency of his guide, it is afterward but a pleasure to be
led. In less than one week he has new made all spirits here; has fortified
the weak, has cleared the scrupulous, and has given to all the world a good
opinion of the present, and a better hope of the time to come. I vow unto you I
never saw a man that had a more pleasing way of commanding, nor better knew how
to temper force and persuasion together. I have indeed known some not unfit to
command, but rather in a Galley than in a City, such might serve for excellent
Galley Officers, but are never good to make Governors; they understand not the
Art of governing Freemen; there are even some beasts of so generous a
disposition, that these men would be too rude to carry a hard hand over them;
they would curb them with a Bridle and a Cavasson; whom they might lead in a
garter. They think that power cannot subsist but by severity, and that it grows
weak and scorned, if it be not frightfull and injurious. This method and manner
of governing is not like to come from the school and discipline of M. the
Cardinal, from whom nothing is ever seen to come that relisheth not of the
mildness of his countenance, and receives not some impression from the
clearness of his eyes. All that have the honor to come near about him are
known by this Character, and wear all the same livery, though they be of
different deserving. There is not so sullen an humorist that is not mollified
by his presence, nor so dull an understanding that he makes not pregnant with a
word of his mouth, this you know, and I am not ignorant of; he makes powerful
use of weak instruments, and his inspirations lift up spirits to such a height
as their own nature could never carry them. He needs in a man but a small seed
of reason to draw from him exceeding effects of prudence, and he instructs so
effectually the grossest spirits; that what they want in themselves, they get
by his instructions. These are works which none can do but he; materials which
none but he can put in frame; yet I think I may say without offense, that this
is more of his choice than of his making. To spirits that languished for want
of room to stir themselves in, he has given scope and employment, and where he
has found a virtue neglected, to make it as bright as it was solid; he has
not forborne to crown it with his friendship. There is not a mouth in all this
Province that blesses not his Election; and every man believes to have
received from him that power, which he has procured to him, who will not use
it but for our good. Amongst the showts of exultation which wait upon him in
all places where he goes; the joy of the people is not so fixed upon present
objects, but that it mounts to a higher cause, and gives thanks to the first
moover of the good influences, which the lower heavens pour down upon us. And
in effect if Caesar thought he took a sufficient revenge of the Africans, for
their taking part with the enemy, by placing Salust to be their Governor; who
did them more hurt by his private family, than a Conqueror would have done with
all his Army; by the contrary reason we may gather that the true Father of his
Country has had a special care of us in advancing M. de B^assac to the
government of this Province, and meant herein to honor the memory of his abode
there, and to make happy that land, where perhaps the first conceived those
great designs, which he has since effected. I should not have spoken so much
in this point if I did not know that you mislike not in me these kinds of
excess; and if it were not the vice of Lovers at the first to speak of the
object of their love without all limits. Besides, I have been willing to make
you forget the beginning of my Letter by the length of the middle; and by a
more pleasing second discourse, to take from you the ill taste I had given you
by the first. And so adue Mounsieur Choler, never fear that I will provoke you
again; it was my evil Angel that cast this temptation upon me to make me
unhappy; I might have been wise by the example of -- whom you handled so hardly
in presence of -- I shall be better advised hereafter: and will never be

Sir, But your, etc.
From Balzac 16. of April 1633.
To Mounsieur de Soubran. LETTER XIII.
SIR,
IF you take me for a man hungry of News, you do not know me; and if I have
asked you for any, it is because I had none to tell you, and because I must
have something to say; I have done it against the stream of my resolution
quite, which is to quit the World both in body and mind: but custom is a thing
we often fall into by flying it; and we swear sometimes that we will not swear,
I desire so little to learn that I know not, that I would be glad to forget
that I know; and to be like those good Hermites, who enquired how Cities were
made, and what kind of thing a King, or a Commonwealth was; I am well assured
that Paris will not be removed out of its place; that Rochell will not be
surprised again by Guiton; that petty Princes will not divest great Kings; that
favor will never want Panegyricks and Sonnets; that the Court will never be
without Sharks and Cheaters: that virtue will ever be the most beautiful, and
the most unprofitable thing in the World. And what can you write in the general
of affairs, that has not relation to one of these points? And for my own
particular, what can I hear, but that either some book is written against me,
or that my Pension is like to be ill paid, or that I shall not be made an
Abbot, unless I be my self the Founder of the Abbey: such news would be terrible
to a man more interressed than my self, but to me, they are in a manner
indifferent, and trouble me no more, than if you should tell me it will be foul
weather all this Moon, or that the water is grown shallow in our River, or that
a Tree in my Wood has been overturned with Tempest. I have had heretofore some
pretentions to Church preferments, but now they are all reduced to this one
preferment of being a good Christian; and so long as they cast not upon Balzac
the term of an Apostata for the rest, I am well content with my present
condition; and certainly desires so moderate, cannot choose but be succesfull,
and I will never believe that ill fortune any more than good will seek after me
so far as this; or that it is possible for him to fall that stands so low; yet
if any Devil, enemy of my advancement should envy my retiring; and if any
promoter should lay to my charge, that to get out off --. I would corrupt --, I
make my self this promise Sir, that you will stand strongly in defense of your
innocent friend, and that in so just a protection you will embark also that
excellent personage, of whom you speak in your Letter. I am, as you know,
unhappy enough not to know her, but seeing the honest men of Greece have used
to adore upon adventure, and built Altars to unknown Deities, it may as well be
lawful for me to use devotion to this Saint upon the credit of the people of
Rome, who have now these three years looked upon her, as upon one of the true
Originals, whereof they revere the Statues; they all agree in this, that since
the Porciaes and the Corneliaes there never was any thing seen comparable to
this; and that those divine women, which were the domestical Senate of their
husbands, and the rivals of their virtue, have no other advantage over this
French Lady, but that they died in an age of funeral Orations. You send me word
that you find her in the same estate you left her, and that she is now as
fresh and amiable as ever she was, and I easily believe it; this long continued
state of youth is no doubt the recompense of her extraordinary virtue: the calm
within sweetens and clears the Air without; and from the obedient passions of
her mind, there rises neither wind nor cloud to taint the pureness of her
complexion. As there are certain temperate Climates, which bring forth Roses
all the year long; and where it is counted for a wonder, that such a day it was
cold, or snowed: so are there likewise certain faces privileged, preserved to
the end of old age, in the happy estate of their infancy, and never lose the
first blossoming of their beauty. But it is not for a man buried in the
darkness of a Desert, to talk of the most illustrious matter that is in the
World: it befits me rather to read that over again which you have written, than
to add any thing to it, and for fear least any word should escape from me that
is not Courtly, and which may mar all I have said already, without further
discourse, I assure you that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac, the 8. of August 1633.
To Mounsieur de la Nauue, Counselor to the King in his great Chamber. LETTER
XIV.
SIR,
I Take great joy to hear you harken after me, and that you need no
remembrancer to put you in mind to be mindful of me. This thought of yours
is so much the more dear unto me, because it comes from a heart that has none
vain or casual, but makes choice of the Objects it beholds, and of the Images
it receives: to be thought of by you, is to be worthy of being thought of. This
ought to be the ambition of men that are worth ought; and a virtue that is not
approved of you, shows there is something in that is defective. If then I have
this mark, I have the seal and confirmation of the true good: I have both the
good fortunes, that of virtue, and that of your favor; and herein at least I
have some resemblance of an honest man. There are some whom blind chance has
lifted up above you, of whom I cannot speak in this manner: one may set their
blame and their praise in equal degree of indifferency, and there is no
Obligation to follow them in their opinions, but when they get it by
constraint, or else by purchase. All their greatness is in their Titles; there
scarce appears upon them one little beam of it in days of Ceremony; and if
they will have us to respect them, they must be fain to send a Herald to put
us in mind. For you Sir, it is not only upon the Bench that the World reveres
you, but your authority follows you wheresoever you are; she accompanies you
even in your ordinary conversation: you cannot so disguise your self, but that
I shall always take you for my Judge; and this gravity of your countenance,
which changes every word you speak into a Decree, and gives a dignity to your
very silence, may serve to verify that Paradox of the Stoikes, That a wise man
can never be a private person; and that Nature her self makes him a Magistrate.
Mounsieur Coeffeteat and my self, have often had long discourses about this
point, and it is not as we would have it, and as we wish, that a man should be
left at the bottom of the stairs, whose merit we see ascended to the top; but
this is the destiny of the best things; either they are wholly neglected, or at
most but half known: and I have seen in the same place a Munkey set upon the
top of a Piramis, and a Master piece of Phydias suffered to stand upon a very
mean Base; but the satisfaction of your conscience, and the testimony of your
good report ought to be your comfort for all such events. There are illustrious
lives of diverse fashions; but those like yours, which cast a sweet and pleasing
light, please me much better than those that thunder and lighten. It is not the
noise and the flashes that make the fair days, it is a calm and clear air; and
a life led in tranquillity and judgment, which is the work of reason; is
preferrable before one half or the great success, the World admires, which are
but the extravagancies of fortune. See here the decree of a Country
Philosopher, and matter of meditation for one of your walks at Yssy. To tell
you true, I have a great longing to come upon you one day on the sudden, and to
surprise you in some of your conferences; but it shall be then with a purpose
to return as soon as I have seen you, without so much as seeing Paris; to make
you thereby see, I can wi^h more ease, go a hundred miles for a man I love,
than four paces for the miracle of the World. Such a bravery would be an
affront, and subject to interpretation I suppose; yet I am assured that those,
who are not diseased with opinion, and infected with custom, would make no ill
censure of it, and it little concerns me, that the common people condemn me; if
you, and those other good men do justify me, and believe that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 15. January 1622.
To Mounsieur Chaplain. LETTER XV.
Sir,
EXpect not from me a regular answer to your Letters; for besides that I yield
an absolute assent to all they contain, and that in treating with you, I desire
rather to believe than dispute, and to be found faithful rather than
reasonable, I should do wrong to the acknowledgement I owe unto you, to make
you see it, in the pensiveness I am now in, and to dislustre so pure a matter
with the impression of so black a vapor. I therefore reserve it for fairer
days: when my mind shall enjoy its former serenity; and that I shall possess
it without distraction. At that time I continue my ill occupation, and after I
have made a Prince, it comes in my fancy to make a friend: you I assure you,
must be the man I shall set before mine eyes; and shall not seek a more
illustrious Original, nor a more remote: yet it grieves me Sir, that should
love with so little success: it is not reasonable you should weary your self in
a soil that will bear nothing, and that you should take pleasure to employ your
husbandry in tilling of stones and thorns; you can never dive to the bottom of
my ill fortune; you are, I deny not, a powerful agent, but it must be upon an
apt subject; your industry is great, but Art corrects not destiny; and I am
ashamed to see, that all humane wisdom should be unprofitablely employed in
governing of me, when whole commonwealths are governed sometimes with less
ado. A whole Fleet would not put you to so much labor as does one poor Bark;
and to succor one particular person, you must enter combat against Heaven and
Earth. It is better Sir, that this perpetual Object of scandal be removed by my
absence; and that I leave peace to my friends by leaving the field to my
adversaries. This resolution is not so unmanly as some would point it out unto
me, change only the terms; and that which they call cowardly and running away,
is but to be better advised and to yield to the time. I have read a word in a
Letter, which Cicero writ to Brutus, that confirms me much in this opinion; You
withdrew your self, says he, out of a corrupted City, you gave place to
Varlets; for you Stoickes say, That a wise man never runs away. Cato himself,
who would rather die, than live to see a Tyranny; was he not resolved to go
voluntarily into banishment for avoiding a more supportable evil? And think
you, that he had more reason to love his liberty, than I to love my quiet? Or
that his grief was more just than mine? As all resistences are not honest, so
neither are all flights shameful; and as there are some naughty joys, so
there are some reasonable griefs; and you shall see in the Paraphrase of our
friend, that for a disgrace which Saint Paul received at Ephesus, his heart
failed him, and he grew weary of his life. The authority of so great an
example, binds you to pardon in me, the weaknesses you charge me with: For my
self, me thinks I hear continually sounding in my ears, the voice that cried to
Arsenius, Fuge, sede, Tace; which seems to counsel me, to give my self
satisfaction by my quiet, and to give others contentment by absenting my self,
and by my silence. Some further reasons I will acquaint you with, when I shall
have the honor to see you; having no meaning to do any thing without your
liking, and without your leave; whose I am

Sir, Most humble, etc.
At Balzac 8. of April 1632.
To Mounsieur de Nesmond Counselor to the King, and Controller of the Princes
House. LETTER XVI.
SIR,
MY dear Cousin, we were put in hope we should have the happiness to see you in
this Country, and that here you would make one of the reposes of your voyage,
but you have not been pleased to make us so happy; It seems you thought not our
walks pleasant enough for you; you scorn now the Fountains of Maillou, and the
River of Balzac; these sweet Objects, which heretofore gained your
inclinations, and enchanted the innocence of your tender years, are not now
able to excite in you the least desire, not so much as to tempt your graver
age. I find in this something to be offended at, and whereof to complain. If
you had to do with a Poet, he would make a mighty quarrel between you and the
Deities of the Woods and Waters; and would send you most reproachful Elegies
in behalf of the Nymphs, whom you have scorned. But it makes well for you that
I understand not the language of the Gods, and that I can speak no otherwise
than the common people do: this will defend you from a number of naughty
Verses: and I will say nothing to you more spightfull than this, that you seem
to reserve your self all for Paris, and fear to be profaned with the baseness
of a Village. Princes and their affairs leave not in you so much as one poor
thought for us; and the pleasures of the Country are too gross and meager for
a taste that is used to more delicate and solid pleasures. You see Sir, my dear
Cousin, that my complaints are sweet, and that I justify you in accusing you.
It is certain, there is a part of the active life, which one may call
delightful; and though Virtue have her joy with less tumult than Vice, yet the
very secrecy of her joy augmenteth also the sweetness, and vapors not out the
purity thereof; and so it happens, that while you sought but after honesty, you
have found withal delight also: you dreamed but of being virtuous and
profitable to your Country, and into the bargain, you have contentment also
and pleasure for your self. For in effect considering your humor, I doubt not
but the pains you take, is your sufficient recompense for the pains you take,
and that your very action keeps you in breath; or rather refreshes you; and as
one in Aristotle said, That it was a death to him, when he was not in some
office; so I verily believe, that to take away employments from you, were as
much as to take away your life, and that you would refuse even felicity it
self, if it were offered you without having something to do. You do well to
love a burden that graceth you more than it weighs, and not to think it a
trouble to be in a race, which you have entered with as much applause as they
can desire that are going out. You have been men's joy, from the instant you
were first seen, and your many employments that have since so happily
succeeded, have but ratified the good opinion that was had of you being yet
unknown. There are some men that get more reputation by playing upon advantage;
but yours is a lawful acquest, and this integrity, which has nothing in it,
either fierce or fearful, this learning, which is neither clownish nor
quarrelsom, this course, which can avoid Precipices without turning out of the
right way, are none of the qualities with which men use to abuse the World,
none of the enchantments, which you make use of to dazzle our eyes. And though
our eyes were not capable of illusion, yet having merited the grace and favor
of a Prince, the clearest sighted the Heavens ever made, and whose gift I value
less than his judgment: It is not for us any longer to examine your
sufficiency; seeing he has chosen you for an instrument of managing his
affairs. You would not believe the pleasures that Madam Compagnole and my self
take in the consideration of this matter; and what reflection we receive of all
those good successes that accrue unto you; I can assure you, she forgets you
not in her devotions, and if God but hear her prayers, you need not make any
wishes for your self; We promised our selves we should see you in our deserts,
but since your honor calls you otherwere; it is reason we rest satisfied with
so sweet a necessity, and to hear with patience that the public has need of
your service. It is far from me to prefer a short satisfaction of my eyes
before the long and dureable joys I expect from the progress of your
reputation; and if I should desire that for your coming hither you should put
your self the farther off from your ends, my desires should be indiscreet, and
I should not be the man I ought to be.

Sir, my dear Cousin, Your, etc.
From Balzac 1. Oct. 1632.
To Mounsieur de Pontac Monplesir. LETTER XVII.
SIR,
MY dear Cousin, if the counsel I have given you did not give an interest in the
resolution you have taken, yet I could not choose but acknowledge it to be good,
considering the good success it has produced. It is true that till now I never
liked of long deliberations, nor of staid lovers; but seeing your wisdom has
concluded in favor of your love, and that it is no longer an idle
contemplation of the person you love; I seem to conceive the design you had in
drawing out the lines of your love to such a length; in which it cannot be said
there has been time lost; but that you would taste all the sweetness of hope
before you would come to that of possession; this is not to be irresolute but
subtle, and not to make a stop of contentments but to husband them. This is
not to have an apprehension of being happy, but to have a desire to be happy
twice, so that in this point you are fully justified. This circumspection,
which I accused wrongfully, and which is equally removed from Fury and
Effeminateness, puts the passions into a just and dureable temper, and makes
the mind capable of its felicity by a serious preparation; and I vow unto you
that the life you have begun was well worthy you should take some time to study
it; It is not fit to enter the state of marriage rashly, and by the conduct of
Fortune; all the eyes, that prudence has are not too many to serve for a guide
in this business; many men fall into a snare whilst they think to find a
treasure, and errors are their mortal where repentance is unprofitable; but
God be thanked you are out of danger, and your happiness is in sanctuary. There
is no Nectar nor Roses now but for you; (accept from me I pray this one word of
a wedding Complement) and in the estate you are in, what are you not? Since a
Conqueror that is crowned is but the figure of a lover that injoyes; the lover
receiving that really which the Conqueror but dreams. You offend not the
peoples eyes with proud inscriptions, nor astonish them with the clamor of
your conquest; you celebrate your triumphs covertly, and draw no man's envy upon
you; you reign by your self alone, and all the pomp, which greatness draws
after it, is not comparable to that which you enjoy in secret. I am not
acquainted with lawful pleasures, and ought not to be with forbidden; but I
have heard it said, that in the first there is a certain peace of spirit, and a
confident contentment which is not found in the other: And as the Honey is less
gathered from the flowers then from the dew which falls from the Stars; so
these chaste pleasures are seasoned from Heaven, and receive their perfection
from the heavenly grace, and not from their own nature. I have learned from the
ancient Sages, that there is not a more ancient nor a more excellent friendship
than this; that in this sweet society griefs are divided, and joys doubled,
and that a good wife is a Catholicon, or universal remedy for all the evils
that happen in life. I doubt not but she, whom you have chosen, is worthy of
this name, and though I should hold your testimony in suspicion, yet I have
heard it deposed with so great advantage on her part, and by so tender and
judicious spirits, that I am not only glad in your behalf for the good company
you have gotten you, but give you thanks also in my own behalf for the good
alliance you have brought me. I am exceeding impatient till I see her, that I
may between her hands abjure my wrong opinions; and if need be, make honorable
amends before her for all the blasphemies I have heretofore written against
marriage. I solemnly by this Letter engage my self to do it, and entreat you to
dispose her, that she may accept my retractions, which proceed from a heart
truly penitent and full of passion, to testify to you both, that I am

Sir, My dear Cousin, Your, etc.
From Balzac 23. Sept. 1633.
To Mounsieur Huggens, Counselor and Secretary to my Lord the Prince of
Orange. LETTER XVIII.
SIR,
YOur Letter has run great hazards before it arrived here; It wandered about
seven months together, and that now at last it is come to my hands; I ascribe
it to the remorse of a man unknown, who being but half wicked, contented
himself only with opening it, but would not by any means that I should lose
it. Happy were I if I could as well recover other things I grieve for, and that
I could say, he were but strayed whom I loved with my heart; but I have lost
him for ever, and you are never able to restore me that I lent you; yet I lay
it not to your charge, nor to the charge of your innocent Country. I am not of
that man's humor, who spoke a thousand villainies against poor Troy, and taxed
all her Histories and Fables, because (forsooth) his brother died there, and
perhaps of a malady that he has gotten somewhere else. My grief is wiser than
his, I should take my loss unkindely at your hands, if you were your self the
richer for it, but now the loss is common to us both; we both lament a common
friend, and your self have rather the greater share in this sad society, in as
much as herein you have advantage over me, for having performed to him the last
duties. He saw your tears fall amongst his blood, you filled your eyes and your
spirit with all circumstances of his death, and I doubt not but it hindered you
from being perfectly sensible of the victory at Mastrich, and from showing a
joyful countenance in the most joyful day of all your Princes life. For my
self, I am not as yet capable of consolation, and I have plucked off from my
wound all the plasters Philosophy could lay upon it. Me thinks my grief is to
me in place of my friend; I possess it with a kind of sweetness, and am so
tender of it, that I should think it a second loss, if I had it not to pass my
time withal; yet I must entreat it a little forbearance, that I may have time
to make you an account of your liberality, and that you may know what is become
of the presents you sent me; I received them Sir, after your Letter, and that
by another kind of adventure. I have imparted them to the worthiest persons of
our Province, I am at this time adorning my Closet with them, and make more
reckoning of them than of all the riches your Havens can show, or then all the
precious rarities the Sea brings to you from the farthest parts of the Earth.
There is as much difference between your friends style, and that of other
Panegyrists, as between the stoutness of a Soldier and the coyness of a
Curtesan. This manly eloquence full of metal and courage, seems rather to
fight than to discourse; and rather to aid the King of Sweden then to praise
him. The ordering of this Tragedy is according to the rules and intention of
Aristotle; precise decency most religiously observed, The verses lofty and
worthy of a Theater of Ivory. Every part pleased me, but that of the Chorus's
even ravished me, and because I sigh always after Italy, that Chorus of the
Roman Soldiers put me in passion; I find my self touched with it at the very
quick, and in all company where I come, I cannot forbear crying out, as if I
were in rapture with divine fury: O laeta otia Formiae; Lucrini O tepidi lacus,
Baiorum O medii dies; O solae Elysiis aemula vallibus: Lassi temperies Maris:
Campani via littoris, lis Baccho ac Cereri vetus, etc. I have only one little
scruple to propose unto you; I know not well why Tysiphone is brought in with
Mariamne, speaking of Styx, Cocytus and Acheron; and I cannot conceive how it
is possible a natural body should be formed of two as differing pieces as are
in my opinion, the Jewish Religion and the Heathenish. My doubt grows from my
ignorance, and not from presumption: I ask, as desirous to learn, and not to
pick a quarrel, especially with a man, who in such Criticismes is a King, and
whom I acknowledge for the true and lawful successor of the great Scaliger; I
have read his two Tracts upon the Satyr of Horace, which are indeed two
Masterpieces; and I do not think, I ever saw together so much antiquity
renewed, so much reason displayed, so much subtilty fortified with so much
force. He stands not dreaming upon a word of no difficulty, erecting as it were
Trophies of like passages, after the fashion of our Note-makers now adays, who
heap up places upon places, and bring nothing in their writings, but the
crudity and indigestion of their reading. He handles Grammar like a
Philosopher, and makes books to be subject to reason; and the authority, which
time has given them to the principles, which truth has established; he has
discovered that Idea of art, which the best workmen never yet came near, and
has added that last perfection, which shows spots and impurity in the most
elaborate writings. I have a great design Sir, to go make my self an Artist
under his discipline, and to be at once both your Courtier and his Scholar, I
have thought upon this Voyage a year since; but I would fain your Wars would
make passage for me the way I would go, and that there were nothing Spanish
between Paris and the Hague. The sanctity of Orators and Poets is not
reverenced over all the World, they bear no awe amongst Barbarians; these
public enemies would not spare Apollo himself, nor the Muses, and my person
would find as little respect at their hands at my book did, which in full
council they caused to be burnt by the hands of the Marquess of Aytona, Yet I
think you may say, you never heard speak of a more illustrious Executioner, nor
of one that does more honor to his trade; and that the Counts of Egmont and
Horn were not handled in their punishment with such pomp and state. I dare nor
laugh, Sir, at this extravagant cruelty. The Truce I had taken is expired, and
I cannot possibly stretch the leave, which my grief gave me any further. I
therefore leave you to return to her, and end with swearing, Per illos manes
numina dolor is nostri, that there is nothing in the World more dear unto me
than your friendship, and that I am with all my Soul,

At Balzac 2. of Febr. 1633. Sir, Your, etc.

To Mounsieur de la Nauue, Counselor of the King in his first Court of
Enquests. LETTER XIX.
Sir,
MY dear Cousin, I never doubted of your affection toward me, but I thought it
proceeded of pity rather than of merit; and that having nothing considerable in
me, but my ill fortune; your good nature was thereby only excited to do me
this charity; but now I see, you propose to your self a more noble Object, and
think to find a better reason for your loving me; yet I know not whether it be
so just as the former, and whether you may as lawfully respect a vulgar person
as you have protected an unfortunate. If I had had any such seeds of goodness
in me as you speak of, my ill fortune would have stifled all their virtue.
Nothing can bud forth in an air perpetually tempestuous. It is not enough for
the laboring man that he take pains in his husbandry, and that his soil be
good, but there must be a sweetness of the season also to favor his travel:
which I have hither to proved so contrary, that I wonder how I have the heart
to be always planting for tempests to spoil. I find more good for me in
idleness than in labor, and more gain by doing nothing, than by doing well.
When I am idle, I am at least at quiet; and envy rests as well as I; but as
soon as once I offer but to stir, there is presently an alarm raised in the
Latin Province: and opposition is made before I have conceived any thing to be
opposed. Other men's good deeds are rewarded; mine only, if any of mine be
worthy the name, should stand in need of a Pardon from the King: a very hard
suite it would be, but to get their Pardon: and I follow not virtue only
without reward, but I follow her with danger. You think notwithstanding that I
take a pleasure in this ungrateful occupation; and that I have a greater
forwardness to it, than I find resistance. You think my spirit should never
shrink for ill successes, and that of its own fertilty without either one beam
of the Sun, or one drop of dew, and at the mercy of all winds, it is able to
bud and bring forth something. You judge too favorably of a vigor that is half
extinguished, and consider not, that melancholy indeed is ingenious and
pregnant, when it comes from the temper, which Aristotle commends; but that
it is dry and stupid when it proceeds from the continual outrages of adverse
fortune. And therefore Sir, my dear Cousin, expect nothing from me to answer
your expectation, and to merit the veneration you speak of in your Letter, I
cannot endure such a great word in your mouth; are you not afraid to come under
my office of a Grammarian? One such improper term is unexcusable, unless it be
you had relation to that old Verse, Res est sacra miser; or to that brave
fellow in the controversies of Seneca, who in the life time of the Orator
Cestius, but upon the wane of his spirit, affirmed that he reverenced his very
Cynders, and would use to swear by his shadow, and by his memory. It shall
suffice me that you handle me in this manner, that Mounsieur your President and
your self would sometimes say in lamenting me, he had been further off than now
he is, if he had met with fewer ambushes in his way. I require your
recommendation of my service to that rare personage, whom I dare not call the
last of the French; I remember what was laid to Cremutius Cordus his charge;
but how ever, I account him worthy of the ancient France, and of the Senate
which we have not seen, that had the honor to be Arbitratour between the
Emperor and the Pope; a mediator between the King and his people. I require
from you but only the like favor, and I acquit you of your veneration,
provided that you keep for me your good will, which I cannot lose if you be
just, since I am

Sir, my dear Cousin, Your, etc.
From Balzac 16. Febr. 1634.
To Mounsieur Conrade. LETTER XX.
Sir,
THe account I make of you is far from being a mistaking. One should do you
wrong to take you for any other than your self; and it would be a hard matter
to find a man for whom you could be changed without loss. I see therefore your
drift, you would not think the number of your virtues complete, if you added
not humility, and you would make me see that there are Capuchine Huguenots.
Indeed a fine novelty, but it belongs not to you, to be so modest; nor to take
upon you perfection, who have not yet attained Conversion. To speak uprightly,
your respects and your submissions are not sufferable, men used to speak
otherwise in the golden age; and to say nothing more hardly of you, you are too
unjust a valuer of your self. Do what you can, you are never any more able to
weaken the Testimony, which Madam de Loges, and Mounsieur Chaplain have given
of you, than you can deny me your friendship which I crave of you in their
name. You see how contagious an ill example is* and how I imitate you in
condemning you. I can play the reserved as well as you, and seek for mediators
and favor to obtain that favor you have granted me already. These are the
subtilties of my passion, to the end I may taste a second joy, I will make you
tell me twice one thing; Moreover, at our first meeting, I will cause you to
expound your Letter, thereby to husband the better, yet for that time the
pleasure I take to hear you assure me that you love me. Such assurances should
persuade me but little in the mouth of many men; but for you, I know with what
Religion you make your promises, and of what holiness your word is. I know you
approve of no lies, but those of the Muses, and that fictions in Poetry you can
bear withal, but banish them from your conversation; I am glad therefore I
have found one face among so many vyzards, and that I can lay hold of something
I can feel, and that has truth in it. It is nothing but true hartedness of my
mind that gives me the boldness to approach other virtues, with all which I am
at defiance, if I find not this freedom in their company. By this Sir, you
have won me, and I must vow unto you, that this sincerity whereof, you make
profession, has been a wonderful allurement to a man, that is no longer taken
with the bravery, or gallantness of a fine spirit. These flashes have so often
abused me, that I am now grown to be afraid of any thing looks red, least it
should be fire and burn me. I suspect these Barks that are so painted and
gilded over, I have often made shipwreck in such: I desire those that are
sound and safe, and enter them as Vessels to sail in, and not as Galleries to
walk in. When I speak of a friend, I mean not a companion in trade, or in
disorder, nor one that can return visits the next day after he has received
them, who never misseth to send Letters by every Post: and is not failing in
the least duties of a civil life, but I mean, a witness of the conscience, a
Physician of secret griefs, a moderatour in prosperity; and a guide in
adversity. I have some few left me of this sort, but have had many losses, and
very lately one, which but for you would be irreparable; you whom God has sent
to comfort me, and whom I substitute in the place of one of the honestest men
that was in France. Our contract, if you please, shall be short and plain. I
will propose no matter of luster to engage you in it; only I assure you my
heart, and a sincerity answerable to yours. It is now of proof against the most
dangerous air of Christendom, I have brought it from Rome, I have preserved it
at Paris; It is not therefore likely that to deceive you, I am come to lose it
in a Village; and that I have any design to falsify my faith; seeing I assure
you, I will ever be

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac, the 5. of Febr. 1633.
To -- LETTER XXI.
SIR,
SInce you will have me to write that in a Letter, which I spoke unto you by
word of mouth, this Letter shall be a second Testimony of the account I make of
--, and of the feeling I have of the courtesies received from him. During the
time we had his company, I considered him with much attention; but in my
conscience observed nothing in the motions of his spirit, but great
inclinations to great designs, and to see him do wonders in the World, you need
wish him no more but matter of employment. He has all the intendments of an
honest man, all the Characters of a great Lord: by these he gains men's eyes in
present, and their hearts in expectation, and afterward brings more goodness
forth than ever he promised, and exceeds expectation with performance. And in
truth, if this Heroic countenance had no wares to vent but vulgar qualities,
this had been a trick put upon us by nature, to deceive us by hanging out a
false sign. The charge he exercises in the Church, is no burden to him, he
has in such sort accommodated his humor to it, that in the most painful
functions of so high a duty, there lies nothing upon his shoulders, but ease
and delight. He embraces generally all that he believes to be of the decency
of his profession, and is neither tainted with the heat, which accompanies the
age wherein he is, nor with the vanity, which such a birth as his does commonly
bring with it. In a word the way he takes goes directly to Rome. He is in good
grace with both the Courts, and the Pope would be as willing to receive the
Kings commendation of him, as the King would be to give it. He has brought
from thence a singular approbation, and has left behind him in all the holy
Colleges a most sweet odor, and that without making faces; or making way to
reputation by singularity. For in effect, what heat soever there be in his
zeal, he never suffers it to blaze beyond custom: his piety has nothing,
either weak or simple, it is serious all and manly, and he protests, it is
much better to imitate S. Charles, than to counterfeit him. Concerning his
passion of horses, which he calls his malady; since he is not extreme in it,
never counsel him to cure it; it is not so bad as either the Sciatica, or the
Gout; and if he have no other disease but that, he has not much to do for a
Physician. One may love horses innocently, as well as Flowers and Pictures: and
it is not the love of such things, but the intemperate love that is the vice.
Of all beasts that have any commerce with men, there are none more noble nor
better conditioned; and of them a great Lord may honestly and without
disparagement be curious. He indeed might well be said to be sick of them, who
caused mangers of Ivory to be made for them, and gave them full measures of
pieces of Gold; this was to be sick of them, to bestow the best office of his
state on the goodliest horse of his stable; and to mock indeed reason it self,
and the speech of men, to give them a neighing Consul. You shall give me leave
to tell you another story to this purpose, not unpleasant. It is of
Theophylact, Patriarch of Constantinople, who kept ordinarily two thousand
horses, and fed them so daintily, that in stead of Barley and Oats, which to
our horses are a feast, he gave them Almonds, Dates, and Pistach nuts; and more
than this, as Cedrenus reports, he steeped them long time before in excellent
Wine, and prepared them with all sorts of precious odours. One day as he was
solemnizing his Office in the Church of Saint Sophia, one came and told him in
his ear, that his Mare Phorbante had foaled a Colt; with which he was so
ravished, that instantly without having the patience to finish his service, or
to put off his Pontifical Robes, he left the mysteries in the midst, and ran to
his stable to see the good news he had heard, and after much joy expressed for
so happy a birth, he at last returned to the Altar, and remembered himself of
his duty, which the heat of his passion had made him to forget. See Sir, what
it is to dote upon horses; but to take a pleasure in them, and to take a care
of them, this no doubt may make a man be said to love them; and nevertheless
not the less the wiser man. Even Saints themselves have had their pleasures and
their pastimes; all their whole life was not one continued miracle; they were
not every day 24. hours in ecstasy: amidst their Gifts, their Illuminations,
their Raptures, their Visions; they had always some breathing time of humane
delight, during all which time they were but like us: and the Ecclesiastical
story tells us, that the great Saint John, who has delivered Divinity in so
high a strain, yet took a pleasure, and made it his pastime to play with a
Partridge, which he had made tame and familiar to him. I did not think to have
gone so far; it is the subject that has carried me away, and this happens very
often to me when I fall into discourse with you. My complements are very short,
and with men that are indifferent to me, I am in a manner dumb; but with those
that are dear unto me, I neither observe Rule nor Measure; and I hope you doubt
not, but that I am in the highest degree,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 5. Jan. 1633.
To Mounsieur Godeau. LETTER XXII.
SIR,
THere is no more any merit in being devout; Devotion is a thing so pleasing in
your book, that even profane persons find a relish in it, and you have found
out a way how to save men's Souls with pleasure. I never found it so much as
within this week, that you have fed me with the dainties of the ancient Church,
and feasted me with the Agapes of your Saint Paul. This man was not altogether
unknown to me before, but I vow unto you, I knew him not before, but only by
sight; though I had sometimes been near unto him, yet I could never mark any
more of him than his countenance and his outside: your Paraphrase has made me
of his counsel, and given me a part in his secrets; and where I was before but
one of the Hall, I am now one of the Closet, and see clearly and distinctly
what I saw before but in Clouds, and under shadows. You are to say true, an
admirable Decipherer of Letters; in some passages to interpret your subtilty is
a kind of Divination; and all throughout, the manner of your expressing is a
very charm. I am too proud to flatter you, but I am just enough to be a witness
of the truth; and I vow unto you, it never persuades me more than when it
borrows your style. There reflects from it a certain flash, which pleases
instantly as beauty does, and makes things to be lovely before one knows they
are good. Your words are no way unworthy of your Author; they neither weaken
his conceits by stretching them out at length, nor scatter the sense by
spreading it out in breadth. But contrariwise the powerful spirit, which was
streightened within the bounds of a concise style, seems to breath at ease in
this new liberty, and to increase it self as much as it spreads it self: he
seems to pass from his fetters into triumph, and to go forth of the prisons of
Rome where Nero shut him up, to enter into a large Kingdom, into which you
bring him with royal magnificence. There are some so curious palats, they
cannot relish the language of the Son of God, and are so impudent as to accuse
the holy Scriptures of clownishness and Barbarism, which made Mounsieur --,
who died Archbishop of Benevent, that he durst not say his Breviary, for fear
to mar his good Latin by contagion of the bad, and least he should take some
tincture of impurity that might corrupt his eloquence. I will not speak at this
time what I conceive of his scruple; only I say that if in the vulgar
Translation there be Barbarism, yet you have made it civil; and if our good
Malherb should come again into the World, he would find nothing in your
Paraphrase that were not according to the strictness of his rules, and the
usage of the Court whereof he spoke so often. Some other time we will confer
about the Preface, and the Letters I received, which I have in a manner all by
heart, but especially I have culled out these dear words to print in my memory,
and to comfort my spirits. A little patience will crown you, all their throws
seem like those of sick men a little before they die, in which I think there is
neither malice nor force, if you can but despise them, Prefer the better side
before the greater, and the Closet before the Theater. Honest persons are for
you, and I make account you care not much for pleasing others. The people have
often times left Terence for dancers upon the Rope, and banished Philosophers,
to gratify Jesters. I have nothing to add to this; and will take heed how I
sow Purple with pack-th^ead. I content my self Sir, at this time to assure you
that I passionately am

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 10. of May 1632.
To Mounsieur de Thibaudiere. LETTER XXIII.
SIR,
I Will not raise to you the price of my tears, though I have shed them for you
eight days together: I content my self to tell you that I am now comforted;
since the news of your death, it changed into tidings of your hurt; and that I
am made assured, you may be quitted of it, for a little pain and a little
patience. I know well that virtue is more happily employed in well using honest
pleasures, than in patient bearing troublesome crosses; and that without an
absolute distemper in the taste, one can never find any sweetness in pain; yet
you shall confess unto me, that there is a kind of contentment in being
lamented; and though the joys of the mind be not so sensible as those of the
body, yet they are more delicate and more subtle; at least, you have come to
know of what worth you are by the fear, which all honest men were in to lose
you, and that in a time when half the World is a burden to the other; and
every one reserves his lamentation for his own miseries; yet all in general
have mourned for you, in such sort Sir, that you have had the pleasure to hear
your own Funeral Oration, and to enjoy the continuance of a happy life, after
receiving the honors done to worthy men after death. If the War of Italy
continue till Winter, I will come and learn from your own mouth, all the
particulars of your adventures, and I shall then know if your Philosophy have
not been moved, and waxed pale, at the sight of the Probe, and of the Rasour.
In the mean time do me honor to be mindful of him who exceedingly honors
you, and to keep for me that part in your affection, which you have promised
me, since I truly am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 29. of July 1630.
To Mounsieur Gyrard, Secretary to my Lord the Duke de Espernon. LETTER XXIV.
SIR,
I Had heard that before, which you sent me word of by your footman; and had
rejoiced already, for the new Dignity of Mounsieur the President Segnior. It
seems you think he is made Lord Keeper of the Scales for none but for you, and
that no Feast for the joy of it should be kept any where, but at Cadillac.
Within these four days you shall see it kept all the Country over; it is a
favor the King has done the whole Realm. It is not so much for the purity of
the air, and for the fruitfulness of the earth, that we ought to call it a
happy year, as for the election of worthy Magistrates. I therefore take a joy
in this news, as I am a subject of the Kings; and this is the first Right I
claim in it: but beyond this, I have a second Right of rejoicing, in that I am
interessed in the advancement of a modesty, which I know; and make account to
be made happy, by the prosperity of him, of whose honesty I am assured. I put
not forth this last word, at adventure: I am ready to make it good against
whosoever shall think it rash; and I know he has preservatives against all the
poisons of the Court; and a judgment that cannot be corrupted with all the
bribes of Fortune. There is nothing of so high a price, for which he would be
willing to leave his virtue: if he had lived in Neroes time, he had been a
constant Martyr; but living now under a just Prince he will prove a profitable
Officer. To preserve a life, which is to continue but a few days, he would not
obscure that life, which ought to last in the memory of many ages: and the
least spot upon his honor, would be more insupportable to him, than the
effusion of all his blood. He knows that in the administration of Justice,
being the interpreter of God; he cannot work of himself; that this Divine Act
ought to be a general Suspension from all humane affections, and that in the
exercise thereof, he is no longer at his liberty, to show love, or hatred;
revenge, or gentleness. He considers that he makes not law, but only declares
it; that he is a Minister, and not a Master of his Authority; and that the
Sovereignty is in the Law, and not in himself. This is the reason why in every
cause he censures, he bethinks himself of his own proper cause, which shall one
day be censured; he so judges, as if Posterity were to take a review of his
judging; and as though the present time, were but subalternate to the future.
Thus I have heard him to make his account; and from his principles I have drawn
my conclusions; and in a conference I had sometimes with him, he seemed to me a
better man than I have set him forth. In such sort Sir, that I am not of a
mind to contradict you; In your writing of him to me, you say nothing which is
not of my knowledge; and in my writing of him to you, I do nothing but follow
your conceits. Never fear that the common errors will deprave his spirit; he
has laid too sure a foundation in the knowledge of truth; he is too strongly
confirmed in the good Sect. Having often and seriously meditated on the
condition of humane affairs, he values them just as much as they are worth, but
he adds nothing by opinion; he hates neither riches nor authority; this were
the peevish humor of the Cynicks, to hate a thing that in it self is lovely;
he makes use of them after the manner of the Academy, and of the Lycaeum, which
never thought them impediments to happiness, but rather aids and furtherances
to virtue. Or may we not say more probably that he has drawn his doctrines
from a Spring nearer hand; and that he has not gone out of himself to find
out the truest wisdom? He has examples at home, which may serve him for Idaeas
of perfection; and Sages in his own race, which are Artists of virtuous life.
Whilst he governs himself by their Rules, he may well pass by all foreign
doctrines; and having his deceased Uncle before his eyes; he need not care to
have Socrates for a myrrour: Quippe malim unum Catonem quam trecentos Socratas.
The memory of this illustrious personage is in such veneration through all
France, and his name has preserved so excellent an Odor in the prime Tribunal
of Christendom, that it is not now so much the name of a family, as it is the
name even of integrity and constancy it self. Remember the Epigram of that
Grecian, whose Manuscript I showed you; which says, that in a place at Athens
when one named Plutarch, there was an Echo answered Philosophy, as taking the
one for the other, and making no difference between the two. By the like reason
the Muses might use the same figure, and act the like miracle, in favor of
this new Pillar of justice. They never need to use reservations, nor fear too
deep engaging themselves: whatsoever they lay forth before hand for his glory,
shall all be allowed them again in the reckoning. Having been bred up in their
bosom, and being entered into their Sanctuary, he will never suffer them to
stand waiting and catch cold at his gate; nor that a Switzer shall keep them
out from entering his base Court. They shall never have (I assure my self) that
unhappy advantage to have given him all, and receive back nothing from him
again; to have enriched his mind with a thousand rare knowledges, and then
hardly get him to seal them an acquittance. Let us now come to the other part
of your Letter; and assay to satisfy your Doctor concerning his Objection. He
finds fault with me, because I praise the Pope for his beauty, and says that
such praise is for women and youth, and belongs not to old men and Priests.
First, Sir I answer, he wrongs me in changing my terms; for I make a great
difference between beauty and a good Visage: of this I spoke in the person of
the Pope, and should never have thought I had committed a sin, though I had
spoken of the other also. As concerning age, you know there are beautiful old
men, though there be not beautiful old Women; and you remember that ancient
personage, who by report of History was of equal pleasing to all companies
through all the ages of his life. As concerning the quality, besides that God
rejected in sacrifice all lean and unsound Oblation; he required also to have
handsome Priests; and you may show your friend in the books of Moses, that not
only the lame and pore-blinde, but even the flat nosed were excluded from
being Ministers in sacrificing. But if being, as he is a profane Doctor, the
holy Scriptures do not please him; yet he might have remembered that old word of
the Tragic Poet, (...), upon which I had an eye when I said, This Visage
worthy of an Empire. And yet more being a Gascogne Doctor, I wonder he never
read the Panegyric, which a Country man of his pronounced at Rome before the
Emperor Theodosius; where he should have found these words; Augustissima
quaeque species, plurimum creditur trahere de Coelo; sive enim Divinus ille
animus venturus in corpus, dignum prius mereatur hospitium, sive cum venerit
fingit habitaculum pro habitu suo; sive aliud ex alio crescit; and cum se
pariajunxerunt, utraque majora sunt parcam Arcanum Coeleste rimari; Tibi istud
soli pateat imperator cum Deo consorte secretum. Illud dicam quod intellexisse
hominem and dixisse fas est; talem esse debere qui a gentibus adoratur cui toto
orb terrarum privaeta vel publica vota redduntur; a quo petit Navigaturus
serenum, Peregrinaturus reditum, Pugnaturus auspicium. Virtus tua meruit
imperium, sed virtuti addidit forma suffragium. Illa praestitit ut oporteret te
principem fieri; haec ut deceret. In this discourse, there are some terms which
yet may seem fitter for a Pope than for an Emperor: and here is to be noted,
that Theodosius was no young man, when Latinus Pacatus praised him thus for his
beauty, for it was after his defeat of the Tyrant Maximus; and when after many
victories obtained against the Barbarians, he was in full and peaceable
possession of his glory. Sometime before this; Gregory Nazianzen had upbraided
the Emperor Julian for his ill favored Visage, for the ill feature of his
face, and for other deformities of his body, of which nevertheless he was not
guilty. Though one might here question the holy Orator, whether in doing this
he did well, or no? Yet from hence we may at least gather, that the qualities,
contrary to these he blames, ought justly and may be lawfully made account of;
and that such praises, which reflect upon the Creatours glory, are much more
Christian than those accusations, which trench upon the scorning of his
knowledge. Your friend therefore is certainly more severe than he need to be.
He is much to blame to reject in this sort the blessings of Heaven, and the
advantages of birth; and to imagine that holiness cannot be examplar and
Apostolic, unless it be pale and lean, and look like one were starved. These
are the dreams of Tertullian, who will have it, that our Savior was in no sort
beautiful, and therein gives the lie to all Antiquity, and to the tradition of
the whole Church. He draws a Picture for him, which is not only injurious to
his Divine, but dishonorable also ^o his humane nature. This in my opinion is
one of his greatest errors, and which most of all startles me in reading his
books. If he would have it, that his watchings and abstinence had dried up his
blood, and made him look ghastly; that to the burnt color of Africa, he added
also that of burnt Melancholy and of overflowing choler, it may perhaps be
granted him; yet I will not accuse, either the Sun of his Country; or the
temperature of his body: but leave every one in his natural estate; and so
should he have done. But to go about to disfigure the most beautiful amongst
the Children of men, and to eclipse all the beams and luster of a Divine
countenance, this is a sullen humor, which no patience can bear with; no
charity can ever pardon. You wondered at this strange opinion when I last
showed it unto you; and I perceived you suspected I did him wrong; now
therefore to justify my credit with you, and to let you see I did it not to
abuse you: I send you here the passages I promised you to look out. The first
is in his book of Patience; where Christ is called Contumeliosus sibi ipsi. The
second in his book against the Jews, where he is said to be, Ne aspectu quidem
honestus: but hear the third, which will fright you to hear, in his Tract of
the flesh of Christ: Adeo ut^nec humanae honestatis corpus fuit; ^acentibus
apud nos quoque Prophetis de ignobili aspectu ejus, ipsae passiones, ipsaeque
contumeliae loquuntur; passiones quidem humanam carnem; contumeliae vero
inhonestam. An ausus esset aliquis ungue summo perstringere corpus novum?
Sputaminibus contaminare faciem nisi merentem, etc. Let us see what Mounsieur
Rigaut thinks of this; and whether he be of these sharp and sour ones that
would take from Heaven its stars, and from the Earth its flowers. Certainly my
censurer is of this number; for I perceive beauty offends him, and he would
easily subscribe to Tertullians opinion. Yet say no more to him of all this,
but that which he must needs know; and spare sending out a second Process
against a man that has too much of the first, and deserves you should take
some care of his quiet; since he is from the bottom of his heart,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 10. of March 1633.
To My Lord the Bishop of Nantes. LETTER XXV.
SIR,
IT is told me from all parts that you speak of me, as one that is dear unto
you, and of my ill fortune, as of a thing that concerns you. If this tenderness
proceed from a soft effeminate spirit, yet it would not be without merit; and
oblige me infinitely unto you; but now that it comes from a feeling of the
purest spirit in the World, and the least capable of weakness; how much ought I
to esteem it, and of how great price to value it? It wants not much of making
me love that grief which procures me so glorious a consolation; and I vow unto
you, that to be pitied of you, is a more pleasing thing than to be favored of
the Court. In that Country men go upon snares and ruins; the best places
there are so slippery that few can stand upright; and if the miserable
pretenders avoid a sudden falling, it is by enduring a tedious tossing:
receiving perpetual affronts, and returning perpetual submissions. I therefore
like much better to hide my self here with your good favor, and my own good
quiet, than to bear a show there with their frights and sour looks; and I bless
the winds, and count my Shipwreck happy which has cast me back upon my old
home. Some that were more sensible than my self, would in this case complain of
the World; but I content my self to forget it: I will neither have War, nor
commerce with the world: I have sounded a retreat to all my passions; as well
those that be troublesome, as those that be pleasing; and I protest unto you
Sir, I should read with more delight, a relation of one of your walks at
Cadillac, than the most delightsom passage of all the German History: when I
think upon you in company with --, me thinks I see Laelius come to visit
Scipio, and confirming him in the resolution he has taken to stand aloof from
the tumults and turbulencies of worldly affairs; and by a quiet retreat to
place his virtue, and his glory in a sure hold. I am extremely glad of the
honor he will do my Father to pass this way, and bring you along with him; and
you may well think that after this I shall not reckon our Village inferior to
Tempe, or to Tyvoly. If it were not for the sit of an Ague, which is now
leaving me, but very quickly to return; I would go as far as Rochel to meet
with this good fortune, that I might be at the first opening of those Largesses
of the Church, which a mouth so holy and eloquent as yours must needs
distribute. But I am not happy enough to see you, and gain a Jubilee both at
once; It must be your pleasure to be so gracious as to accept of such a
complement as I am capable of; and to rest assured with my assuring you by this
messenger that I am, and always will be with all the forces of my Soul,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 13. May 1633.
Another to the same. LETTER XXVI.
SIR,
THere are some of your bounties I have cause to complain of; they are such as
cannot be acknowledged; and in the least of your actions you are so great, that
if I take measure of my self by you, I cannot appear but very little. Your
liberality makes me rich, but withal it discovers my necessity, there being no
proportion between you and me, how extreme soever my possession be, it can be
no competent price for yours; and in the Commerce that is between us, I return
you but Flints for Diamonds, yet I present them to you but informa pauper is,
not as a Mountibank; and know I give you nothing, though I keep nothing for my
self. I am well assured Sir, that I honor you infinitely, but am infinitely
unsatisfied to offer you so mean a thing, there is no reasonable man that does
not as much, and since so much is due to you for only your virtue, how much am
I to pay you more for your affection? Of this last moyity I am altogether
Non-solvent; my services; my blood are not all worth it; and I confess unto
you, I shall never be able to deserve but these four words of your Letter, Non
discedo abs te Mi Fili, sed avellor; nor those Delicias in Christo meas; nor
this, Dulce decus meum, with which you graced me at another time. Mounsieur
Gyrard, who knows all my secrets, and offers to be an agent for me with you,
will tell you with a better grace how sensible I am of your so great favors,
and how proud of so illustrious an adoption as you are pleased to honor me
with; of which I make far greater reckoning then to be adopted into the family,
of the Fabians, or the Marcelli; you shall also hear by him, that since your
departure from hence, you have been (I may say) solemnly invocated, and most
honorable commemoration has been made of you in all our innocent disorderly
wakes. Our Curate believes verily that your presence has brought a blessing to
the fruits of our Parish; and we look for better Harvests then our neighbors,
who had not the happiness thereof as we had. There is therefore just cause that
every week we make a feast upon the day of your coming to Balzac, Et ut tibi
tanquam futuro in posterum loci Genio non uno poculo libetur. If this kind of
acknowledgement will content you, I shall perfectly acquit my self of
performing my duty, having learned in Lorrain, and the Low Countries the means
of testifying that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 6. of June 1633.
Another to him. LETTER XXVII.
SIR,
THough I know the good deserts of -- are not unknown unto you, and that you
need no foreign commendation to increase your respects toward him, yet I
cannot hold from doing a thing superfluous; and assure you by these few lines
that it will be no blemish to your judgment to let him have your Testimony of
his piety. Ever since the time he renounced his error, he has continued firm
and steadfast in the doctrine you taught him: of an erroneous Christian you made
him an Orthodox, and your hand is too happy to plant any thing that does not
prosper. He is therefore your workmanship in Christ Jesus, and otherwise so
perfect a friend of mine, that I know not, if in the order of my affections, I
ought not to set him in equal rank with my own brother. This at least I know,
that the least of his businesses is the greatest of mine, and I will not only
part your savor between him and me, but will become your debtour for the whole
my self alone. I am now polishing those writings which I had condemned, but
that you asked their pardon; and since it is your will they should not perish,
I revoke my sentence, and I am resolved your self shall be the other person of
my Dialogue; after the example of that Roman you love so well, whose books of
Philosophy are commonly his conferences with Brutus, or other Sages, the true
and natural judges of such matters; yet Sir it is impossible for me to
dissemble any longer a grief I have at my heart, and to end my Letter without
letting you see a little cut you have given me there; you made me a promise to
come back by Balzac, and now you have taken another way: Thus the wise men of
the East dealt with Herod; yet I am neither Tyrant nor enemy to the Son of God.
This kind of proceeding is far unlike the Belgic sincerity, and it is not fit
for Saints to mock poor sinners. But how unkindely soever you deal with me, I
can never turn Apostara, and should you prove more cruel, I should yet never be

Sir, But your, etc.
From Balzac 15. October. 1633.
To -- LETTER XXVIII.
SIR,
SInce you have taken pleasure in obliging me, I will not have you have the
grief to lose your Obligation, nor that my incompetent acknowledgement should
make you have the less stomach for doing good. I know your goodness is clear
and free from all foreign respects, and has no motive but it self; it is not
at any man's prayers that the Sun rises; neither does he shine the more for any
man's thanks; your courtesies are of like condition: Your favors have not been
procured by my making suit; and as of my part nothing has gone before the
kindenesses I have received, so on your part I assure my self you expect not
that any thing should follow them; yet something must be done for examples
sake; and not to give this color for showing little courtesy to such as
complain that men are ungrateful. The place where you are is full or such
people; all commerces are but Amusements, and to make men believe the whole
World is given to deceive; and it is a great merit in you that you can follow
so forlorn and solitary a thing as truth is in a Country where Divines
maintain her but weakly, and where she dares scarce be seen in a Pulpit, does
it not show an extraordinary courage to take upon him to distribute her amongst
the pretenders, and that in open Theater? It is no mean hardiness to be good at
the Court; to condemn false Maxims where they have made a Sect, and where they
have gotten the force of Laws. I have been assured you make profession of this
difficult virtue, and that in the greatest heat of calumny, and the coldest
assistance that ever a poor innocent had, you have been passionately affected
in my behalf, being altogether unknown unto you, but by the only reputation of
my ill fortune; and even at this present you are taking care of some affairs of
mine, which I in a manner had abandoned; and upon the report you heard of my
negligence you make me offer of your pains and industry. The only using your
name were enough for all this; I might well spare my own unprofitable
endeavors, where my negligence, being favored by you, shall without all doubt
be crowned. You have heard speak of that Grecian, whom the love of Philosophy
made to forget the tilling of his ground; and of whom Aristotle said that he
was wise, but not prudent. He found a friend that supplied the defect of his
own ill husbandry, and repaired the ruins of his house. If my estate were like
his, I should expect from you the like favor; but I ask not so much at this
time. All that I desire now, -- has promised me a dozen times over; and I see
no reason to distrust an Oracle. He is neither inspired by any false Deity, nor
has made me any doubtful answer; to that resisting my self upon this
foundation, there seems to have been a kind of Religion in my negligence: and
I am not altogether in so much blame, as -- would make you think me. He is, I
deny not, an Author worthy to be credited; and his testimony ought to be
received; but yet he has not the gift of not erring, and never believe him
more, than when he assures you that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 9. of Febr. 1630.
To Mounsieur du Pleix, the Kings Historiographer. LETTER XXIX.
Sir,
Since the time that persecution has broken out into flames against me, I
never received more comfortable assistance than from your self; and I account
your strength so great, that I cannot doubt of the goodness of a cause which
you approve. You were bound by no Obligation to declare your self in my behalf,
and you might have continued Neutral with decency enough; but the nobleness of
your mind has passed over these petty rules of vulgar Prudence; and you could
not endure to see an honest man oppressed, without taking him into your
protection. This is to show me too much favor in a Kingdom where Justice is no
better than Mercenary, and where it is bought after long soliciting. I know
well that the soundest part is of my side; and that my state is not ill amongst
the wise; but on the other side, there are so many opposites on the By, that
make War upon me; that I am ready to leave my self to the mercy of the
multitude, and to be persuaded by the number of my enemies, that I am in the
wrong. It is therefore no small Obligation I am bound to you in, that you have
preserved the liberty of your judgment amidst the alterations and factions of
passionate men; and have taken the pains to clear a truth, which is to me of
great advantage, and was to you of small importance. I do not desire that men
should count me learned: this quality has often troubled the peace of the
Church; and they are not the ignorant that make Schisms and Heresies: And less
I pretend to the art of well speaking; many bad Citizens have used this as an
instrument to ruin their Country; and a dumb wisdom is much more worth than an
ill minded eloquence. That which I desire, and which would trouble me much to
have taken from me is honesty; of which only I make profession, and without
which we are never able to attain salvation; where with all the Greek and
Latin of our books we may incur perdition Mounsieur Gyrard, a man you dare
trust, and one that has never born false witness, will answer for me
concerning this last point. He has seen my Soul to the very bottom, and can
assure you without deceiving you, that I am no lover of vice; and if you desire
assurance that I am an extreme lover of virtue, he will enter into bond for me
that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 12. Aug. 1630.
To Mounsieur Maynard. LETTER XXV.
Sir,
THat sorrow is happy which has you for a comforter. I find more contentment
in your passionating me, than I find affiiction in others persecuting me: and
I am far from wishing ill to an age, to which I am beholding for so excellent a
friend. In this respect I easily pardon it, the wrong you say it has done me;
and should be more unjust than it self is; if being beholding to it for a
treasure, I should think much to partake of its iron and rust. It is not now
only that opinion governs the World; there has been disputing against reason
in all ages. Contentions and Heresies have ever been, and the truth it self was
not believed, when it came into the World in person, and would have spoken. I
seek not the favor of the multitude, it is seldom gotten by honest and lawful
means; and in that, Enchanters have had some advantage over Prophets. I seek
the Testimony of few; I number not voices but weigh^ them: and to show what I
am, one honest man is Theater enough. Therefore never trouble your self that
things have befallen me as I made account they would, and never ask for reason
of the vulgar who have it not. Ignorance can never be just, nor go right in the
dark: Alarms are given, and surprises are made by the favor of night: this is
the time of Murders and Robberies, she the mother of dreams and phantasms.
Your self have had your part in this experience as well as others. And at this
very time I am talking with you, it may be you are accused by some for being a
miscreant, for not believing that Saint Gregory made prayers to God for Trajans
Soul; or that Saint Paul was ever a bosom friend of Seneca. It may be you are
called Huguenot for doubting the infallibility of Philarchus, and denying some
of his miracles. It may be you are charged with seeking in vain to persuade a
Master of Art, that Aristotle had as much learning as Ramus; and that Ciceroes
style is as good as that of Lipsius. What shall I say more? It may be your dear
and well beloved Martial puts you to more pains to defend him, than to imitate
him; some scholar of Muret maintains boldly against you, that he is a beastly
Buffon; and perhaps the contrary will not be believed upon your bare word.

For sitan and stupidas bona carmina perdis ad aures. It is fit to laugh at
such disorder, and not to grow in choler; and if you will make a Satyr of it,
that it be of the Character of Horace, and not of Juvenal. I cannot abide
victories that are cruel; I ask mercy for my enemies, and love that my revenges
should be imperfit and that your Pen should not be bloody, as indeed it could
not be, but of a base obscure blood; and to put you into a quarrel unworthy of
you, I make too great a reckoning of your valor, and am too much

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 20. March 1632.
To Mounsieur de Descourades. LETTER XXXI.
SIR,
MY dear Cousin, if I could with any honesty leave the business I have in
Angoumois: -- should not go into Languedoc without me; and I would make this
journey of purpose only to have the happiness to embrace you; you would know
me presently by the old yellowness of my face; and thereupon the force of blood
would draw along with it a little tenderness, and I do not believe but you
would make a difference between your own and strangers. The effects of grace
destroy not the affections of nature; they only take away that which is impure
and earthly; and I assure my self you do not love me less than you did, but
that you love me in a better fashion. I am told that the kind of life you have
chosen is not austere, but only to your self; and that your Thorns prick no
body else; in truth, a devotion that pleases me exceedingly, and I could never
away with this studied sadness, which disguiseth the hatred it bears to men,
under pretense of the love of God. I am right glad you have taken the other
way, because we may now come safely to you, and never be afraid your virtue
should scratch us. Christian Philosophy has nothing in common with the Cynick.
This disguiseth, and that reformeth; one composeth the countenance, the other
regulates the spirit; and indeed without an exact managing the superior part;
all the pain that is taken about the inferior is to no purpose without that,
Mortification is not so good as Carnality; and if you do nothing but change
your cloth of Gold for a russet Coat; and your cut-work band for a demi
collar, you shall no doubt be a loser by the change. But the case is not so;
you have left cares and trouble, for calmness and quiet; and you possess a
happiness which Kings can neither keep with themselves, nor suffer amongst
their Neighbors; I speak of peace, which in vain is expected from there
Alliances and from their Leagues, being not to be obtained but only of God,
and who gives it not but to his friends. You are a happy man to be of that
number, and you may believe me that I am not troubled about it, seeing there is
good hope I may have a benefit by it my self, and that your prayers may draw me
after you; I doubt not but they are of great power and efficacy, and doubt as
little that I am my self of the number of those you hold dear unto you; but as
one that has more need then any other, I conjure you to double them unto me,
who am in heart and Soul

Sir, My dear Cousin, Your, etc.
From Balzac 4. of May 1633.
To Mounsieur d'Andilly. Counselor of the King in his Counsels. LETTER XXXII.
Sir,
I Perceive that Mounsieur the great Master is a great extender of expositions,
and has tied you to explain your self in a matter whereof I never doubted.
Herein he has exceeded his Commission, and done more than he had in charge to
do. I seek no new assurance of your friendship; this were to show a distrust in
the old, whereas the foundation already laid, is such that makes me forbear
even ordinary duties, for fear I should make show to need them, and as if I
would hold by any other strength then your own inclination. Care and diligence,
and assiduity are not always the true marks of sincere affections, which I
speak as well in your behalf as my own: Truth walks now adays with a less
train, men use not to make open profession of it, but rather to confess it as a
sin: her enemies are strong and open, her adherents weak and secret: yet Sir,
if she were in more disgrace, and were driven out of France by Proclamation: I
should believe you would be her receiver, and to find her out, I should go
directly to Pompone. I therefore never doubted of your love; this were to show
a distrust of your word past to me: I marvelled that -- knew nothing of it, and
that you let him take possession of his government, without recommending unto
him, your friends there. To satisfy my self in this point; I said in my mind,
that certainly this proceeded from the great opinion you had of his justice;
and that conceiving there would not be with him any place for grace or favor;
you would not do me a superfluous office. This is the interpretation I made of
an omission, which in appearance seemed to accuse you; and this is the
conjecture I made of your silence, before I came to know the cause. Now I see I
was in the wrong, to imagine you had such subtle considerations; or that you
were restrained by such a cowardly wisdom which dares not assure the good to
be good, least such assuring should corrupt it. For my part I renounce a
prudence that is so dastardly and scrupulous, that fears to venture a word for
a virtuous friend, because this friend is a man, and may perhaps lose his
virtue. You do much better than so, and I am glad to find you not so jealous
of the glory of your judgment, but that you can be contented to be slighted
and scorned, when it is for the benefit of a friend you love: let us leave
phlegm and coldness to old Senators; and never make question whether we ought
to call them infirmities of age, or fruits of reason: There are good qualities
for enabling men to judge of criminal causes, but are nothing worth for making
men fit to live in society: and he, of whom it was said, that all he desired,
he desired extremely, seems to me a much honester man than those that desire so
coldly; and are so indifferent in their desires. If you were not one of these
violent reasonable men, and had not some of this good fire in your temper, I
should not have your approbation so good cheap. That which now galls you, would
not at all touch you; and things which now descend to the bottom of your Soul,
would pass away lightly before your eyes. I hear came yesterday a man to see
me, who is not so sensible of the pleasures of the mind; and took great pity
of me and my Papers: he told me freely that of all knowledges which require
study, he made reckoning of none but such only as are necessary for life; and
that he more valued the style of the Chancery than that of Cicero; he more
esteemed the penning of a Chancery Bill, than the best penned Oration that ever
Cicero writ. I thought this at first a strange complement, but thinking well of
it, I thought it better to seem to be of his opinion, then undertake to cure a
man uncureable. I therefore answered him, that the Patriarch Calarigitone so
famous for the peace of Vervins, was in a manner of his mind, who being
returned from his Embassage, and asked what rare and admirable things he had
seen at Paris; made mention of none but their Cooks shops; saying to every
body, as it were with exclamation Veramente quelle rostisseries sono Cosa
stupenda; as much as to say that there are Barbarians elsewhere, then at Fez
and Morocco. One half of the World does not so much as excuse that which you
praise: our merchandise is cried down long since, and to bring it into credit
again and put it off, there had need return into the World, some new Augustus
and Antoninus, -- says, that whilst he waits for the resurrection of these
good Princes; he is resolved to rest himself: and not to publish his Verses,
till they shall be worth a Pistole a piece. I fear it will be long ere we shall
see this Edition come forth; for my self who make no such reckoning of my
Prose; I have no purpose to make merchandise of it; yet desire I not neither to
tire my hands with writing continually to no profit. I mean to make hereafter
no other use of my Pen, then to require my friends to let me hear of their
healths; and to assure you Sir, that I am no man's more

Than your, etc.
At Balzac 12. June 1633.
To Mounsieur Conrart. LETTER XXXIII.
Sir,
I Had a great longing to see -- and you have done me a special kindeness to
send it me over. Yet I must tell you, that your sending it gets him a greater
respect with me then his own deserving, and if you appoint me not to make some
reckoning of him, all that I shall do for his own sake, will be but to bear
with him. A man had need be of sanguine complexion, and in a merry vein before,
that should be moved to laugh at his poor jests. Melancholic men are too hard
to be stirred; that which goes to the Center of other men's hearts; stays
without doors in theirs; at least it touches but very weakly the outside; and
oftentimes I am so sadly disposed and in so sullen an humor, that if a jeaster
be not excellent, I cannot think him tolerable nor endure to hear him. It is
certain the Italians are excellent in the art of jesting, and I could mark you
out a passage in Boccace that would have made -- and all his predecessors the
Stoic Philosophers to forfeit their gravity. But there are not two Boccaces,
nor two Ariostoes; there are many that think themselves pleasant when they are
indeed ridiculous; I would our good -- would leave his wrangling about
controversies, and fall to this kind of writing, in which in my opinion he
would prove^ excellent. This would draw his Genius out of Fetters, and give it
the extent of all humane things to play in; only he should spare the Church
for her eldest Son sake, and forbear the Pope for M. the Cardinals sake, one of
the Princes of his Court. These are respects you ought to have, until your
conversion furnish you with other more religious, and change this your honest
civility into a true devotion. If we be not bound to speak of men's religion
reverently, yet we are bound to speak seriously, and ev^n at this day we call
Lucian an Atheist, for scoffing at those Gods who we know were false. For the
rest Sir, I pray take heed you show not my Letter to --, he would give me a
terrible check in behalf of --, he would not endure I should speak so
insolently of an Author approved by the Academy, De gli insensati de Perouse,
and indeed I had not spoken as I did, but that I dare trust your silence, and
know, that to discover a secret to you is to hide it. Make much of this rare
virtue and never leave it, and be pleased to believe me that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 13. of June 1633.
To the same another. LETTER XXXIV.
SIR,
I Am going to a place where in speaking good of you I shall find no
contradiction, and where your virtue is so well known, that if I say nothing of
it but what I know, I am sure I shall tell no news. I bring along with me the
last Letter you writ unto me, and mean to be earnestly entreated by Mounsieur
-- before I yield to grant him a Copy. As for Madam -- she should entertain an
enemy upon this pasport, and though she were resolved to give me no audience,
yet she would never deny it to the reader of your writings. I know of what
account you are in her heart, and how much I ought to fear, least all the room
there be taken up before hand with your favor. Yet such opinion I have of her
justice, that I willingly make her Arbitratour of our difference, and require
her to tell whether she think I have done wrong to -- in desiring him to give
over his going to Law, and to pass the rest of his days in more quiet and
sweet employments. The art of jesting, whereof I speak is no enemy to the art
of morality whereof you speak, rather it is the most subtle and most ancient
way of retailing it; And that which would fright men, being used in the natural
form, delights and wins them sometimes, being used under a more pleasing mask.
Men loath a wisdom, that is dry and altogether raw; it must have a little
seasoning, such a kind of sauce as Socrates was wont to make it; that
Socrates, I say, whom all the Families of Philosophers account their Founder,
and acknowledge for their Patriarch. The story says he never used to speak in
earnest, and the age he lived in called him the scoffer. In Platoes book you
shall find little else of him but jesting; with disorderly persons you shall
see him counterfeit a Lover, and a Drunkard, thereby to claw them whom he would
take. He shuns the style of the Dogmatists, or to speak definitively of things,
as thinking it an instrument of Tyranny, and a yoke that oppresses our
liberty. In short he handles serious matters so little seriously that he seems
to think the shortest way to persuade was to please; and that virtue had need
of delight, to make way for her into the Soul. Since his time there have come
men who contented not themselves with laughing, but make profession of nothing
else, and have made it their recreation to play upon all the actions of humane
life. Others have disguised themselves into Courtiers and Poets, and left their
Dilemmaes and their Syllogismes to turn jeasters, and to get audience in privy
Chambers. We see then the World had not always been sad before Ariosto and
Bernia came into it; they were not the men that brought it first to be merry;
jeasting is no new invention, it was the first trade that wise men used; who
thereby made themselves sociable amongst the people. Theophrastus who succeeded
Aristotle thought it no disparagement to Philosophy, nor that there was in it
any uncomeliness unfit for his school Lycaeum; he is excellent at descriptions,
and counterfeitings, and his Characters are as so many Comedies, but that they
be not divided into Acts and Scenes, and that they represent but only one
person. Seneca, as solemn and of as sullen humor as he was otherwise, yet
once in his life would needs be merry, and has left us that admirable
Apotheosis of Claudius, which if it were lost, I would with all my heart give
one of his books de Beneficiis to recover again; and a much greater ransom if
it were possible to get it entire. No doubt but you have heard speak of the
Caesar's, of the Emperor Julian; that is to say, of the sports of a severe man,
and of the mirth of a melancholic man. And from whence think you had the
Menippaean Satyrs their names; Things so much esteemed of by antiquity, and
under which title the learned Varro comprised all wisdom divine and humane,
even from Menippus the Philosopher, who was of a Sect so austere, and so great
an enemy to vice, that Justus Lipsius doubts not to set it in comparison with
the most strict and reformed order of the Church. I am much deived but Madam --
will not be found so scrupulous as you, but will give her voice in favor of an
opinion authorized by so great examples. And indeed Sir, why should you not
like that our friend should reserve some mirth and some pleasure for his old
age? and having declaimed and disputed abroad all day, should come at night to
have some merry talk in his own lodging; why should you think it amiss, that
after so many wars and cumbats I should counsel him to refresh himself with a
more easy and less violent kind of writing; and to afford us such wares as
may be received as well at Rome as at Geneva? These thirty years he has been a
Fencer upon Paper, and has furnished all Europe with such spectacles; why
should he not now give over a quarrel that he is never able to compose? He may
in my opinion honestly say, it is enough, and content himself to have outlived
his old adversaries, without staying to look for new. Having had to do with
Mounsieur Coeffeteau, and with Cardinal Perron; it would be a shame for him to
meddle now with a dizzy headed father, or with the Antic of Roan; and a poor
ambition it would be in my judgment to erect Trophies of two such broken
Bables; it were better he left individuals and fell to judge of species in
general, and that he would consider other men's follies without partaking of
them. It were better to discredit vice by scorn, then to give it reputation by
invectives, and to laugh with success, then to put himself in Choler without
profit. Though there be many sorts of disciplining men, and correcting their
manners; yet I for my part am for this sort; and find nothing so excellent as
a Medicine that pleases. Many men fear more the bitterness of the potion that
is given them, then the annoyance of the infirmity that offends them; we would
fain go to health by a way of pleasure, and he should be a much abler man that
could purge with Raspices, then he that should do it with Rhubarbe. Our
Gentleman by -- his leave is none of these; for commonly he neither instructs
nor delights, he neither heals nor flatters their passions that read him; he
has neither inward treasure nor outward pomp; and yet I can tell you, as
beggarly and wretched as he is, he has been robbed and ransacked in France. He
could not save himself from our Thieves; and you may see some of his spoils
which I present you here.

My fidling Doctor in his visage various,
Had twice as many hands as had Briareus;
There was not any morsel in the dish
Which he with eyes and fingers did not fish;
And so forth.

You see we live in a Country where even Beggars and Rogues cannot pass in
safety; though they have nothing to lose, yet they lose for all that, and men
pull the hairs even from them that are bald. There is no condition so ill but
is envied of some, no pvoerty so great which leaves not place for injuries.
Cottages are pillaged as well as Palaces; and though covetousness look more
after great gains, yet it scorns not small. But all this while you must
remember that my discourse is allegorical, and that I speak of Poets and not of
Treasurers. I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 25. of Sept. 1630.
To my Lord the Mareschall Deffiat. LETTER XXXV.
SIR,
THough I know your life is full of business, and that it has neither
festival, nor day of rest; yet I am so vain as to fancy to my self that I shall
be able to suspend this your continual action, and that the recreation I send
you shall find some place amidst your affairs: you are not one to be wrought
upon, you know the true value of things, and see in Arts those secrets which
none but Artists themselves see. There is no thinking therefore to deceive you
by a show of good, and by false flashes of reputation; no way to gain
estimation with you, but by lawful ways, and rather by seeking commendation
from ones self, than testimony from others. This is the cause that I come
always directly to your self, and never seek to get a favor by canvasing and
suit, which is not to be gotten but by merit. If my book be good it will be a
sollicitour with you in my behalf; and if it make you pass some hours with any
contentment, you will let me understand it when you have read it. Howsoever I
hope you will grant, that the Pension, which the King gives me, is no excess
that needs reformation; and that none will accuse you of ill husbandry, if you
please to pay me that which is my due. There have been heretofore in the place
that you are now in certain wild unlettered persons, who yet made show of
valuing humane learnings, and to respect those graces in others which were
wanting in themselves; forcing their humor and sweetning their countenances to
win the love of learned men; and either out of opinion, or out of vanity have
revered that which you ought to love out of knowledge, and for the interest you
have in it, I say for the interest, because besides the virtues of peace,
having in you the virtues of war; it concerns you not to leave your good
achievements to adventure, but to cast your eyes upon such as are able to give
your merits a testimony that may be lasting; I dare not say that I my self am
one of that number, but thus much I can assure you most truly that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 20. October. 1633.
To Mounsieur Granier. LETTER XXXVI.
SIR, I have received your Letter of the 27. of the last month; but it makes
mention of a former which never came to my hands: and it must needs be that
fortune has robbed me of it, for fear I should be too happy, and should have
two pleasures in Sequence. This is an accident which I reckon amongst my
misfortunes; and I cannot sufficiently complain of this Violatour of the Law of
Nations, who has been so cruel as to break our Commerce the very first day of
our entering into it; and to make me poor without making himself rich. I am more
troubled for this loss, than for all that shall be said, or written against me:
Slander has a goodly catch of it to be at war with me, it shall never make me
yield; it is an evil: is it not a glory for a private man to be handled in such
manner, as Princes and their Officers are? And is it not a mark of greatness to
be hated of those one does not know? I never sought after the applause of --,
which cannot choose but have corrupt affections in such sort, that did they
praise me, I should ask what fault I had done? Though their number were greater
than you make it, this would be no great novelty to me, who know that truth
goes seldom in the throng; and has in all times been the Possession but of a
few. Even at this day, for one Christian there are six Mahometans; and there
was a time when Ingemuit orbis, and se Arrianum esse miratus est. If God suffer
men to be mistaken in matters of so great importance, where their salvation is
at stake; why should I expect he should take care to illuminate them in my
cause which no way concerns them; and to preserve them from an error which can
do them no hurt? Whether I be learned, or ignorant; whether my eloquence be
true, or false, whether my Pearls be Oriental, or but of Venice: what is all
this to the Commonwealth? There is no cause the public should trouble it self
about so light a matter; and the fortunes of France depend not upon it. Let the
Kings subjects believe what they list; let them enjoy the liberty of conscience
which the Kings Edicts allow them. A man must be very tender that can be
wounded with words; and he must be in a very apt disposition to die, that lets
himself be killed by Philarchus; or Scioppius his Pen. For my self I take not
matters so to heart; nor am sensible in so high a degree. The good opinion of
honest minds, is to me a sovereign remedy against all the evils of this
nature. I oppose a little choice number, against a tumultuary multitude, and
count my self strong enough, having you on my side; and knowing you to be as
vigorous a friend of mine, as I am

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 15. Feb. 1633.
To Mounsieur Gaillard. LETTER XXXVII.
SIR,
I Am unfortunate, but I am not faulty, I was assured you had written to me,
but I received not your Letters. You have been my defendour; and I have been a
long time without knowing to whom I was bound for defending me: whether it were
a man or an Angel that was come to my succor. These are honest subtelties, and
generous supererogations. This is to deceive in charity, and to his advantage
that is deceived. This is to bring again that good time, wherein Knights
unknown came to Freemen, that were oppressed, without telling their names; or
so much as lifting up the Beavers of their Helmets. You have done in a manner
the like; you have hidden your self under a borrowed shape; thereby to take
away from a good action, all appearance of vain glory; and to let them that are
interessed, see, that you are virtuous without looking for reward. For my self,
I do not think I am bound to follow the intention of this scrupulous virtue. If
you have a will to shun noise, and the voice of the people; yet you cannot
refuse the acknowledgement of an honest man: nor let me from paying what I owe
you. Because you are modest, I must not therefore be ungrateful, as I am not
by my good will, I assure you. You possess my heart, as absolutely, as you have
justly purchased it; I am yours by all the sorts of right, not forgetting that
of the wars. I will even believe that my enemy has gotten a full victory, to
the end I may more justly call you my Redeemer; and that you may have the Crown
that was due to him had saved a Citizen. Mounsieur Borstill, whose wisdom and
integrity you know, will answer for the truth of my words: and for my self, I
shall need no surety; when I shall be able to testify unto you by my actions;
that there is not in the World a man more than my self

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 22. April 1630.
To Mounsieur the Master Advocate in the Parliament. LETTER XXXVIII.
SIR,
I Have too great a care of your reputation, to seek to have you be found a
liar. It shall not lie upon me, that you be not a man of your word; and that
your friend is not contented; and seeing it is expected to see this present day
what I have written of his company; It is not fit to put off till to morrow the
effect of your promise: or that he should languish in the expectation of so
small a thing. It is true my book is not here, and my memory is not now so
faithful, that I dare trust it to deliver that I gave it to keep: yet I
conceive after I have stirred it up in your name, which is so dear unto me, I
shall find enough to satisfy your desire, and receive from it this good
office. I seem therefore to remember I said, that after so many years, that the
Christian Muses have been in France: he is the only man has entertained them
with honor; and has built a Palace for this sovereign science to which all
other are subject and inferior. He has drawn her our of an obscure and close
mansion, where like the poor Socrates she discoursed in prison of the supreme
felicity, to place her a seat worthy of her, and to set up a stately and
sumptuous race for the exercise of her Children. From hence we may apprehend
the dignity and merit of our Sorbon: for which a man the fullest of business in
all the World, has yet had so particular a care amidst the most violent
agitation of his thoughts, that the design of the house he erects for her, has
found place in his breast, amidst the Forts and Rampires of Rochell. If our
predecessors the Gauls next to their Gods, gave the second place of honor to
their Druides, who showed them but a dim and confused light of the state of our
Souls after this life; what respect then, what reverence can be too great for
those venerable Fathers, who teach us by a knowledge most infallible; what the
chief and supreme good is; who discover to us in certainty, the things that are
above the Heavens, who make us true relation of that admirable Commonwealth of
happy Citizens that live without bodies, and are immaterial; and who deliver to
us the wonders of the intellectual World, more pertinently and more directly,
than we relate to blind men the ornaments of this visible World. With them are
had the springs of pure Doctrine; where with others, but only Brooks and
Streams; with them are had resolutions of all doubts, remedies for all poisons:
with them time wrongs not antiquity; nor does old age either need painting, or
fear tainting: with them this sixteenth age of the World, beholds Christianity
preserved and kept in its first luster. Seeing the memory of the most part of
the Roman Lords is perished together with their Baths, their Aqueducts, their
Races, their Amphitheaters; whereof the very ruins are themselves ruined and
lost; I find that M. the Cardinal understands more than ever they did, and
goes a straighter way to eternity, traveling in a place where his travel can
never perish and leaving the care of his name to a company that of necessity
shall be immortal, and shall speak of his magnificence as long as there shall
be speaking of sin and grace, of good and evil Angels of the pains and rewards
of the life to come. I believe I have not spoken any further of it: and I think
I could not have spoken less: it is lawful for us to set a price upon our own;
and if an ancient Writer said, that more worthy men came forth of Isocrates
School; than out of the Trojan Horse: why may not we say as much of Albertus
Magnus, and of Saint Thomas? Me thinks I hear out Country men speak of nothing
else; but of the Lycaeum and of the Academy: and it is now five and twenty
years that I have beaten my brains about the Gymnosophists the Brachmanes and
the Rabbis: but when all is done, we should remember that we are Christians;
and that we have Philosophers that are nearer to us, and ought to be dearer to
us than all they. I am glad occasion has been offered me to put my opinion
hereof in writing; and thereupon to let you know I make no mystery of my
writings; and especially with you, to whom I have opened my very heart; and
whose I am wholly without reservation.

Sir, Most humbly, etc.
At Paris 4. July 1633.
LETTERS of MOUNSIEUR de BALZAC. LIB. II.
To my Lord the Earl of EXETER. LETTER I.
SIR,
IF you had wholly misliked my book, I had wholly defaced it: but seeing some
parts of it, seemed to you not unsound, I have thought it sufficient to cut off
the corrupt part, that you might be drawn to endure the rest. I now therefore
send you an Edition of it reformed, done expressly for you, and which I have
taken care to cleanse from the stains, that in the two former were distastefull
to you. It is not my purpose to stand disputing in an Argument, where I am
willing to be confuted: nor to defend that which is condemned by you, where the
question is to give you satisfaction by my rigor; I presently grow insensible
of the tenderness of a Father: and shall he uncompassionate to my dearest
issues, as often as your pleasure shall be that they should perish. My writings
are to me no better than Monsters when they offend your eyes, and to seem vile
to you, is to be vile indeed; and therefore in stead of asking their pardon, I
have been my self the hastner of their punishment. There cannot a greater
testimony be given of a man's integrity, than when the Delinquent concurs in
opinion with the judge; and is the Executioner, where he is the condemner. All
this have I already done; and although in that unhappy passage which gave you
distaste, I had not so much a meaning to bite as to laugh; yet I confess I took
my mark amiss for laughing justly. Oftentimes one countenance for another
changes the face of the most innocent action of the world: and though I failed
only in ill explaining my self; yet it was fault enough, seeing thereby I gave
you cause to doubt of my intention. Truly, my Lord, it was never my meaning so
much as to touch the resplendent glory of your Divine Princess. I know well
enough, it was fitter to consider her by the magnanimity of her spirit; whereof
your whole posterity shall taste the fruits, then by the light flower of bodily
beauty; which not only falls away by death; but runs away at the very first
approaches of age. I should come out of another World, if I were ignorant of
the Encomiums she has in this kind received by all peoples voices. She has I
know been styled the Star of the North: the Goddess of the Sea; the true
Thetis. I have read in a Letter, which Henry the great writ unto her in the
height of all his troubles; and in the violence of the league: these words, I
will Madam be your Captain General. Even he that excommunicated her, spoke of
her with honor: and he was, as you know, an understanding Prince, and
admirable in the Art of ruling. He took a pleasure to be discoursing of her
with Ambassadors resident at his Court; and would sometimes say merrily, that
if he had been her husband, certainly greatness and authority would have been
the issues of so renowned a marriage. But though she had not ascended to this
high degree of reputation, and though he should be divested of all these
glorious marks of honor, yet there are two considerations; less specious
indeed in the eyes of the World: but more sensible to my spirit, that would
bind me strongly to reverence her memory: One Sir, that she has not scorned
our Muses; the other, that she has loved your house. I was taught by Cambden,
the knowledge she had in all kinds of learning; so far, as that she had
happily Translated out of Greek into Latin some of Sophocles Tragedies; and
some of Isocrates Orations. Of the same Author also, I have learned the great
part your Ancestors bare in her confidence and secrets; and your name is so
often used in the history of her life, that where soever Elizabeth is
mentioned, there Cicile for the most part is never left out. So that she being
by good right your domestical Deity, and the reverence you bear her, your most
ancient inclination; it is far from me to violate that which you adore, or to
hate that which you so dearly love; seeing I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 25. June 1634.
To my Lord the Archbishop of Thoulouse. LETTER II.
SIR,
I Have never been sociable since your departure from hence; no man can make me
speak; and I do not yet break my sullen silence, but only to tell you, I am
the saddest Hermit that ever was. Those whom Saint Hierome reports to have
been companions of Serpents and Scorpions, were never of so untoward an humor
as I; for I have their vexation, and I have not their consolation. Nothing
pleases me in the place where I am; you have carried away with you all its
worth and goodness; and it is not the hardness of the season, it is your
absence that obscures the beauties of my solitude. It was not well done Sir to
accustom me to a pleasure which you meant so suddenly to take away from me, or
to say better, to show me only my good fortune thereby to make me long after
it; and then go presently and make others happy with enjoining it; and yet I
know well, that such petty considerations owe obedience to a greater, and that
particular interests ought always to give place to public. Mine therefore is
not so dear unto me, but that I willingly forget it upon such occasions, and
easily for go my own conceits, to enter upon the purpose of Divine providence.
The peace we hope for shall perhaps by your voyage be advanced, and you are now
perhaps sent from Heaven to go whither you thought to have gone without
commanding; If peradventure there be found some particular men that are too
much heated, your Eusebius and your Theodoret will help to allay their heat;
and if they be too stiffly bent upon severity, you will make them abate their
rigor by the examples you bring them, of the moderation of their fathers; I
have too good an opinion of so many worthy Prelates as are in your assemblies,
to imagine they would ever agree to arm Princes, either against a penitent, or
against an honest man, offended; and would not in the interests of their order
content themselves with employing the Thunderbolts of the Vatican, without
calling forth also those of the Arsenal; Whatsoever may be said in defense of
such proceeding, it can never in my opinion have so general approbation, but
that some honest spirits will be scandalized by it. This would be to bring
excommunication into a poor account, to make it serve only for an Essay, and
for a preparative of punishment, and to make it the first plaster of a light
wound, which ought to be the last remedy of the extremest evils. Such practice
would be far from the custom of the ancient Christianity, and of the age of
Martyrs; and I cannot conceive, neither can it be, that Christian Pastors
should become Butchers of their Flock; and that the Church, which hitherto has
been in persecution, should now it self begin to persecute. This Church Sir, as
your self and the Gentlemen your brethren teach us, is not a cruel Stepdame,
proud and maligning her spouses Children; but it is a natural Mother,
compassioning her own, and desirous to adopt even Proselites and strangers: You
tell us that she runs after the greatest sinners, and goes as a guide before
all the World, which is far from saying that it stands not with her dignity to
be an instrument of their conversion, nor so much as once to take care what
becomes of them; It is you who assure us that she is content to lose her
richest Vessels, so as thereby she may gain to her the sacrilegious person who
did steal them; it is from you we learn that she is far from animating justice
to ruin innocents, who gives sanctuary of pardon to Delinquents. I have heard
speak of the sweet nature and sighing of the Dove; but never of her cruelty nor
of her roaring; and to give her claws and teach her to love blood, would be no
less than to make her a Monster; this would be Sir to make love it self turn
wild, and Metamorphose it into hate. This would be to imitate the ancient
Pagans, who attributed to their gods all the passions and infirmities of men;
no man I hope shall be able to lay such profanation to our charge, we will be
no corrupters of the most excellent purity, no handlers of holy things with
polluted hands, no stretchers of our defects to the highest point of
perfection: They which do so, in what part of the World soever they be, are
Anathemaes in your books, accursed in your Sermons, condemned by the rules of
your Doctrine, and by the examples of your life. These false Saints do not
serve Christ, but serve themselves of Christ; they solicit their own affairs
in his name, and recommend it as his cause when it is their own suit.
Persuasion that they do well makes them more hardy in doing ill; they call
their choler zeal, and when they kill, they think they sacrifice. Thanks be to
God no part in the whole body of our Clergy is so unsound; it is returned to
its Oil, and to its Balm, in whose place the civil wars had substituted deadly
Aconite and bitter Wormwood. The League is dead, and Spain heart-sick; our
Oracles are no longer inspired by foreign Deities, the spirit of love and
charity animates all your Congregations; and no doubt he that ought to be the
mouth of the assembly, will consider that Bishops are Ministers of mercy, and
not of justice; and that to them our Lord said, I leave peace with you, but
said not I leave vengeance with you; howsoever the wisdom of M. the Cardinal
will strip off all the Thorny prickles of passions, and sweeten all the
bitterness of figures, before they arrive to come near the King. This Divine
spirit is far surmounting all Orations, all deliberations, and all humane
affairs, and in this he will easily find a temper both to preserve the honor
of the Church, and yet not oppress the humility of him that submits; both to
give full satisfaction to the first order, and yet not withdraw regard from the
merit of the second; both to make us see heads bowed and knees bended before
the Altars; and yet no houses demolished, nor governments destroyed, whereof
the Altars should receive no benefit. I am in hope you will do me the favor to
inform me of the occurrents of the whole history, whereof I doubt not, but you
are your self one of the principal parties, and I expect by your Letters a true
relation of all the news that runs about. In the mean time Sir, I trust you
will not take it ill that I speak unto you of this great affair, as a man that
sees it afar off; and whom you appoint sometimes to deliver his advise upon
matters, of which he has but small understanding. At your return we will renew
the Commerce we have discontinued, and since you will have it so, I will once
again play the Orator, and the Politician before you; yet I fear me much, you
will scarce be suffered to keep your promise with me; I see you are more born
to action than to rest, and that our rural pleasures are not worthy so much as
to amuse so great a spirit as yours is, I therefore wish you such as are worthy
of you; that is, the solidest and the perfectest, and such as glorious
Achievements and glorious actions leave behind them; and I love not my self
so much that I am not much more

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 25. January 1630.
To Mounsieur Arnaut, Abbot of S. Nicholas. LETTER III.
SIR,
THe small service you desired of me is not worth considering, but only for
the great thanks I have received for it; I had altogether forgot it when I
received your Letter, which makes me yet forget it more in making me to
remember it. You have words that change things, and in your language an
impuissant willingness is an immortal obligation. If you make so great account
of good desires, I marvel what price you set upon good deeds; and if you thus
bestow your complements without necessity, I fear you will want them when you
have need; you should go more reserveldy to work, and retain more providence
for the future. A man may be a good husband, and yet not be covetous; and
seeing limits and bounds are fit in all cases, they cannot be unfit in the case
of courtesy: Think not therefore Sir, that herein you have done an act of
acknowledgement; you have gone far beyond the bounds of this virtue. If there
be a vice opposite to ungratefulness, your too great officiousness has made
you fall into it; and by the excess you have avoided the defect. The interests
of M. the Cardinal Bentivoglio have no need of recommending, but amongst people
that are not yet Civilized; that which concerns his honor, is no matter of
indifferency to them that know his virtue, and they that know it not are no
better than Barbarians. If to do him service I had not run whither you prayed
me but to go, and if I had not required an absolute suppression of that
discourse, whereof you required only but a sweetning; I had performed my duty
but very weakly, and had deserved blame in that for which you praise me. Though
his name were not resplendent in history, nor his dignity in the Church, yet he
should have luster enough in his very style and writings, and though he were
not a Grandchild of Kings, and a Senator of the whole earth; yet I find
something in him more worth than all that: I consider him without his Purple,
and divested of all external ornaments; regarding only those that are natural
to him; and which would make him most illustrious, though he had but al black
cap on his head, and most eminent, though he were but a private man. These are
advantages he has over other men, and which he communicates to this age of the
World; goods that he possesses and I enjoy. For I vow unto you that in this
sad place whither my desire to please has entrapped; and where there is no
talk but of Suits and quarrels; I should not know in the World how to pass my
time; if I had not brought his book along with me. This has been the companion
of my voyage, and is now the comforter of my Exile; and after I am dulled with
a deal of troublesome discourse, and have my ears filled with idle chat, I go
and purify my self in his delicate relations; and gather my spirits together,
which the noise and clatter had before dispersed. I never saw in so sober and
chaste a style, so much fullness and delight; if nature herself would speak, she
could never make choice of more proper terms than those he uses; and where
proper terms fail, she could never more discreetly borrow foreign than he
does. The Character of his phrase is so noble, that by this only, without any
other signs I should easily know he is come of a good house; and I see that
fortune, which has been so great an enemy of his blood, and has done so much
hurt to his ancestors, has not yet been able to take from him the mark of
their greatness, nor the manners and language of a Prince. Afterward you give
me thanks for loving qualities that are so lovely, and that making profession
of Letters, I am put in passion for him, who preserves their honor, and who in
his Country is the Crown and glory of our Muses; as often as there is question
for his service I shall need no second consideration to put me in heat about
it; I tell you plainly, I shall do it no whit the more for any love of you; I
entreat you to provide some occasion apart from all interests of his, where you
may see the extraordinary account I make of your merits, and the desire I have
to manifest unto you that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 3. of October. 1631.
To Mounsieur Ogier. LETTER IV.
SIR,
YOu could never have fallen again to your Pen upon better terms than you have
done; and I have a conceit your silence has not been so much a neglect as a
meditation. The Letter you pleased to write unto me is so full of infinite
excellent things, that it seems you have been making provision three years
together to make one feast, and that your sparing for so long a time had no
other meaning but to be magnificent for one day. The dispatch of the
Constantinopolitan slave you sent me, and the news of Koppenhagen you writ unto
me are so enriched with ornaments of your making, that I see plainly whatsoever
passes through your hands receives an impression of excellency, and that
glorious achievements have need of you to be their Historian. It is not
strange unto me that M. your brother has pleaded my cause, I am an eternal
client of your family, and as it is my part to honor my benefactors, so it is
yours to preserve your benefits: But verily I could never have thought this
last action should have had the Court of Denmark for a Theater, and the King
and his Daughters the Princesses for Judges. You sent me word I had a famous
decree passed on my side, and that the assailant was as much hissed at, as the
defendant was applauded. God be praised that grants us justice amongst the
Goths, for injuries done us by the French; and that raises up in an end of
the World a sovereign defendor of persecuted innocence, such succor sometimes
he has extraordinarily afforded when men abandon her; the Lions do become
humane, rather than leave her without protection; and in the most frightfull
deserts there have been found Nurses for Children, whom the cruelty of their
Mothers had exposed. Let us therefore never believe that sweetness and humanity
are qualities of the Earth, or of the Air; they are neither proper goods of the
easterlings, nor captive virtues of the Grecians. They are wandering and
passant, all climates receive them in their turn, and it is not the Cimbrick
Chersonesus any longer, it is Athens and Achaia that at this day are
Barbarians. This Divine Princess of whom your brother writes such wonders, has
no doubt contributed much to this change, and and though there should shine no
other Sun upon the Banks of the Baltic Sea, this one were enough to make
virtue bud forth in all hearts, and to make Arts and Discipline to flourish in
all parts. This is a second Pallas that shall have her Temples, and her
suppliants; she shall be president of Letters and studies, as well as the
former. Even that which you say of the defect of her birth, and of the
obscurity of her Mother, might be ground enough for a Poet to make an entire
work, and to assure us that she was born and came out of her Fathers head: at
least, Sir, if your relations be true, she is the lively image of his spirit,
the interpretour of his thoughts, the greatest strength of his estate, and who
by her eyes and tongue reigns and rules over all objects, that either see,
or hear. Why should I dissemble, or hide my contentment? I must confess I am
proud in the highest degree for the praises she has given me. Never Prince
passed the Rhine more happily than mine has done, seeing so good Fortune has
attended him there, and that there he should be crowned by a hand, which was
able to give wounds to all others. What shall I say more? I scorn all the
ancient Triumphs when I think upon this: I hope for no luster, but from her
splendor, I seek for no glory, but in her recommendation; her only voice is
instead of the suffrages of a whole Diet of all the North; and what reason they
should not for ever be banished the Empire, who blame that which she praises,
or that would oppose the sovereignty of her excellent judgment? As for our
common enemy condemned by her, to keep company with the Hobgoblins of Norway;
since he is no longer in the World, is no longer in state to do her obeisance.
If it be not that God will have that to be the place of his purgatory which she
would have to be the place of his banishment, and that this proud spirit is
confinde to live amongst the tempests and other frantic issues of the North,
as Varro speaks of Satyrs. You have read I suppose the Dialogues of Saint
Gregory; and therefore must needs know that all Souls are not purged after one
manner, but some pass through the fire, and others endure the Ice; and the
extremity of cold is no less an instrument of Divine justice, than extremity of
heat. But I purpose not to set abroach a question of Divinity, for I should
then begin a new Letter; and it is now time I should finish this: but telling
you first, that he which shall deliver it to you, has in charge to present you
a larger discourse; and to let you see, that there is both Greek and Latin in
our Village. If it were not for my study, my solitude would neither have excuse
nor comfort, and yet shall not have it perfect neither, unless you bring it to
me; and be so honest a man as to come and see me: as I most heartily entreat
you to do; and to believe that I passionately am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 7. Feb. 1635.
To Mounsieur Sirmond. LETTER V.
Sir,
BE not scandalized, nor take exception at my silence. The greatest part of the
Letters I write are but the payment of my old debts: and before I answer one, I
suffer my self to be summoned three or four times. I seldom stay upon matter of
complement; all I can do, is but to defend my self untowardly; I think my self
sufficiently honest, if I be but indifferently uncivil; and because I am apt to
do courtesies voluntarily; I expect also voluntarily to receive them; of you,
Sir, especially, who judge not friendship by the look, and knows that
superstition is more ceremonious, than true piety. The new favors I have
received from your Muses are to me as they ought to be, exceeding sensible: yet
think not, that this makes me forget your former benefits: and that I carry not
in mind, that it is you that gave me the first taste of good, and the
principles of virtue; you do but build upon the foundation you laid your self;
and give estimation to your own pains. Having been my guide in a Country which
I know not; it is for your honor it should be believed, I have made some
progress there, that so it may appear your directions are good. Thus your Poem
has in it a hidden art, which few understand; and I am but the color of your
design. You enjoy your self all the glory you have done me; all the glory you
have imparted to me stays still with your self; and you have found out a way
how to praise your self, without speaking of your self: and how to be liberal
without parting from any thing. If you come this Summer to Paris, I will give
you account of an infinite number of things that will not dislike you; and in
revenge thereof, I require to hear from you some news of our malcontent; Cui
mos in triviis humili tentare Veneno
Ardua and impositos semper Cervice rebelli
Far duces; Coeloque Jovem violare Tonante.


I know not whether you have been able to bring the state into his favor; but
this I know, it is no small work for persuasion to effect, seeing he is no less
obstinate in his errors, thn you strong in your reasons. Whatsoever he say of
the time; and of the carriage of things; the impunity with which he triumphs,
is a visible mark of the moderate government of this Kingdom; and in any
Country but this; his head long before this time had paid for his tongue. But
I hear he is of so vile an humor, that he is angry for his very liberty; and
thinks it is done in scorn, that he has not all this while been put in the
Bastyle. He values himself to be worthy of an informer; and of Commissioners;
and thinks he has merit enough to be punished in state. Let us bear a little
with his malady; he is otherwise not evil, nor of evil qualities: It is only
the temperature of his body that is faulty: and if Mounsieur Cytois can purge
away his choler, he shall procure to M. the Cardinal a faithful servant. I
expect hereupon an Epigram of your making, and am with all my Soul,

From Balzac 4. March 1631. Sir, Your, etc.

To Mounsieur Colombiers. LETTER VI.
SIR,
I Find by the Letter which Mounsieur de Mantin writ unto you, that you have
done me good Offices with him; and that upon your word, he takes me for more
than I am worth. It is your part now to make that sure unto him, which you have
warranted, and to disguise me with so much Art, that may make good your first
deceit by a second. For to think that I shall be able to answer his
expectation, and satisfy your promise: I know he expects too much; and know
you have promised too much; that which he speaks of me and of my writings,
seems rather to come from the passion of a lover, than from the integrity of a
Judge: and I ought to take it, rather as a Present, than as a Recompense. I
know besides, that the place from whence he writes has always been the
habitation of courtesy; and that the spark of the Court of Rome, which once
rested there, has since it parted from thence; left a light which gives an
influence to the manners and spirits of the Country. So that to this day
distinction must be made between the civilities of Avignon, which extend to all
sorts of strangers, and the resentments of an able man, which respect nothing
but reason; and a difference must be put between the honesty of a complement,
and the Religion of a testimony. Mounsieur Malherbe deceased, who never gave
any man's merit, more than its due: and but coldly praised the most
praiseworthy things; yet has heretofore to me, in so high a degree extolled
this man, of whom we speak; that I could not but think, it must needs be a very
extraordinary virtue that transported him so unwontedly, and a very pressing
verity, that forced him to open himself so freely. I have since been confirmed
in my judgment of him by diverse persons of good quality, and generally by the
voice of all our Country: But yet there is in this more cause for me to fear,
than hope: Wise men do but only taste an error; with which common people
drink themselves drunk: They do not plunge themselves in false opinions, they
pass them lightly over; and I am afraid you will ere long receive another
Letter in retractation of this, he has now written so much in my favor: if
the worst come to the worst; and that there be no means for me, to keep all the
good you have gotten me; I yet may lawfully require to have a part left me;
which Mounsieur your brother in Law cannot honestly deny me. I am unfit for the
terms he gives me; I willingly return them back to himself: Let him keep his
admiring for miracles; or at least for the great stupendous works of nature; I
aspire not, nor have any pretense to so high a degree of his account; but I
think I have right to his friendship; and that both of you are my debtors of
some good will; seeing I honor you both exceedingly, and passionately I am

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 20. of October 1632.
To -- LETTER VII.
Sir,
I Am not altogether profane, yet am but a simple Catechumene neither: I adore
your mysteries, though I comprehend them not; and dare not give my spirit that
liberty which you give it. Is it fit to be a judge of a Science, of which it is
yet but learning the Alphabet? It scarce knows visible Objects, and runs a
hazard, when it considers but the exterior face of nature; as for that which
is above, it climbs not to it, nor soars so high. My curiosity is not so
ventrous: and concerning the condition of superior things; I wholly refer my
self to the Sorbone. Never think therefore that I will give my censure of your
book: I have not yet discovered the bottom; only the bark, I must tell you
seems very precious; and I am ravished with the sound and harmony of things, I
understand not; this kind of writing would have astonished Philosophers whom
it could not have persuaded: and if Saint Gregory Nazianzen had but showed such
a piece as this to Themistius, he could not choose but have been moved with it,
and must needs have admired the probability of Christianity; though he had not
known the secret. These are not words that one reads, and are painted upon
Paper: they are felt, and received within the heart. They live and move, and I
see in them the sinews of the first Christians; and the style of that Heroic
age, where one and the same virtue, gave life both to discourse and actions;
gave influence both to the Soul and to the courage; made both Doctors and also
Martyrs. Tell me true, Did you not propose to your self a Pattern to follow?
Have you not been at the Oracle of --: have you not received some inspiration
from our excellent friend? Me thinks I meet with his very Character: In certain
passages I observe some marks and traces of his spirit; and when I read them,
cannot sometimes forbear crying out: Sic oculos, sic ille manus, etc. You need
not take offense at my suspicion: so noble a resemblance is an inferiority
lifted up extremely high. You are not therein his Ape, but his Son: There is
nothing base not mean in the imitation of so high and perfect an Idea: and you
know the example of Plato, made Philo go cheek by jowl with him. All I ask of
you at Paris, where you so liberally offer me all the good Offices you can do,
is but this; that you will do me the favor, to assure that great personage of
the great reverence I bear to his merits: and what glory I count it to be
counted his friend: but I require with all the continuation of your own love,
with which you can honor none, that is more truly than I am

Sir, Your, etc.
July 25. 1630.
To Mounsieur Coeffeteau, Bishop of Dardany. LETTER VIII.
SIR,
SInce your departure from Mets; there has nothing happened worthy of the
History I promised you, but only that Caesar as I hear, has presented to the
view of brave spirits, certain new and very strange recreations by which he
has gained a great opinion of his knowledge. As to make the images in a piece
of Tapistry, to walk, and move; to make all the faces in a room, to seem to be
double; to make a River rise in a Hall; and after streaming away without
wetting of any, make a company of Fayries appear and dance a round; these are
his ordinary sports, and to use the phrase of our friend; but the outside of
his secret Philosophy. Signiour Mercurio Cardano, swears he has seen all this,
and more; enough to find you discourse for many meetings: and if you appoint
him to set hand to his Pen, he will be a Philostratus to this Appolonius. He
has told me, as he has heard it from him, that for certain, the Heavens
menace France, with a notable revolution; and that the fall of --, has not
been so much the end, as the change of our miseries. For my self who know, that
God never makes Mountibanks of his Council; and that the virtue of the King, is
able to correct the malignity of the Stars: I laugh at the vanity of such
presages; and look for nothing but happiness from the ascendent and fortune of
so great a Prince. But to change this discourse, and this Mountibank for
another: I have seen the man Sir, that is all armed with Thorns: that pursues a
Proposition to the uttermost bounds of Logic; that in most peaceable
conversations, will put forth nothing, nor admit of nothing that is not a
Dilemma, or a Syllogysme. To tell you true, what I think of him; he would
please me more if he had less reason: this quarrelsom eloquence affrights me
more than it persuades me. They which commonly converse with him; run in my
opinion the same fortune, which they do, that live near the falls of Nilus;
there is no overflowing like that of his words, a man cannot safely give him
audience; a Headache for three days after, is the least hurt he can take, that
but hears him talk an afternoon. The Gentleman that brings you this Letter,
has charge given him from all in general to entreat you Sir, not to forsake us
in so important a matter: but to come and free our companies from one of the
greatest crosses, that has a long time afflicted civil society. You are the
only man in whom this Sophister has some belief: and therefore none but you,
likely to reduce him to common right; and to bring his spirit to submit it self
to Custom and Usage. You can if you please make it appear unto him; that an
honest man proposes always his opinions, no otherwise than as doubts; and
never raises the sound of his voice, to get advantage of them, that speak not
so loud: that nothing is so hateful, as a Chamber Preacher, who delivers but
his own word; and determines without Warrant, that it is fit to avoid gestures,
which are like to threatenings, and terms which carry the style of Edicts; I
mean, that it is not fit to accompany his discourse with too much action; nor
to affirm any thing too peremptorily. Lastly, that conversation reflects more
upon a popular estate, than upon a Monarchy; and that every man has there a
right of suffrage: and the benefit of liberty. You know Sir, that for want of
due observing these petty rules, many have fallen into great inconveniences;
and you remember him who spilt Queen Margarets own dinner by striking an
argument upon her Table with too great violence, disturbed and drove Queen
Margaret from her dinner. Such men commonly spoil the best causes; whilst they
seek to get the better, not because their cause is good; but because themselves
are the Advocates; reason it self seems to be wrong when it is not of their
side, at least not in its right place, nor in its ordinary form. They disguise
it in so strange a fashion that it cannot be known to any; and they take away
her authority and force, by painting her in the colors and marks of folly.
These are the particular heads, for which we desire you to take the pains of
applying your Exorcismes: particularly upon -- I dare say, you will have a
thousand Benedictons, if you can drive out of his body this Devil of dispute
and wrangling; which has begun already to torment us. We expect you at the end
of the week; and I remain

From Mets 15. August 1618. Sir, Your, etc.

To my Lord the Earl of Brassac. LETTER IX.
SIR,
THat which I have written of you; is but a simple relation of that I have seen
of you: and if there be any ornament in it: It must needs be, that either your
self have put it there; or else that Fortune has lent it to me. I had done it
very innocently, I assure you, if I had spoken any thing well; who was so ill
prepared for it. I should have hit a mark which I aimed not at; and have drawn
a Picture, by the casual falling down of my Pensil. My drift was to entertain
my friend, who was accustomed to the negligence of my style: and with whom; if
I committed any fault, I was sure of pardon. He cries not out murder, upon
seeing one Vowel encounter another, nor stands amazed at meeting with an
untoward word, as if it were a Monster: This favor I receive from him; and he,
the like from me: we allow all liberty to our thoughts: and if in treating
together, we should not sometimes violate Laws of our Art, we should never show
confidence enough in our friendship. Rhetoric therefore has no place in
writings where truth takes up all: There is great difference between an
Orator, and a Register; and my private testimony ought not to pass for your
Encomium. Yet you will have it to be so; you had rather accuse me of being
eloquent, than confess your self to be virtuous; and you avoid presumption, by
a contrary extremity. It seems this occasion is dangerous to you; and as in a
shipwreck, where all run to save the dearest things: so you abandon your other
virtues, to preserve your modesty. She does her self wrong Sir, to stand in
opposition to the public voice; and to reject the testimony of noble fame. She
ought not to contradict the two chief Courts of Europe; whereof the one
honors your memory, the other makes use of your counsels. Aristotle would
never approve of this; who speaks of a vice like this, with which if a man be
tainted, he resembles him to one, who will not confess he has won in the
Olympic games, though man come and adjudge him the Garland; and calls himself
still culpable, though three degrees of the A^eopage, pronounce him innocent.
Be not you of so little equity to your self; and suffer me to tell you what I
think: seeing I think nothing, but that which is the common opinion; and I
deliver not so much my own particular conceit, as the general belief of the
whole World: They who prefer a Captain of Carabins before Alexander the Great;
and know not how to praise the integrity of a Statesman, without affronting
that of Aristides, fall into that excess, which reason requires should be
avoided. Yet we ought not for all this, generally to slight all merit of the
present age; and fancy to our selves, that we are not bound to revere virtue,
unless it be consecrated by Antiquity. For my self, I judge more favorably of
things present, and do not think I run any hazard in subscribing to the Popes
judgment of you, that in serving the King, you have been his governor. This
would be to be too scrupulous, to fear mistaking, after him that they say
cannot err; and you are too courteous, to count it a courtesy that I do my
duty; and to give me thanks that I am not a Schismatic. Concerning the last
Article of your Letter; I say it gives me not so much, as a temptation: neither
am I indeed capable to receive it. It suffices me Sir, that you protect my
repose here; for to enter into defense of my interests in the place where you
are, as you do me the honor to promise me; I would advise you not to undertake
it. You could never look for better success, than the prime man of this age
had, who could not obtain of --; the favor he required of him, in my behalf.
It is much easier to break down the Alps; and to bridle the Ocean, than to
procure the payment of my Pension: and there is nothing that can make a worker
of miracles see, there is something impossible for him to do; but only my ill
Fortune. There are the bounds of this power, which is so much envied: The good
will he bears me, cannot draw from the Kings Officers the eight hundred pounds,
which are due unto me: and it is Gods will he should be disobeyed in this, that
I may be a witness against them who say that he is absolute. I only entreat
you, seeing you desire to oblige me to you, to show him the constancy of my
passions, which is obdurate against ill successes, and preserves it self entire
amidst the ruins of my hopes. It shall be satisfaction enough for me that he do
me the honor to believe I can adore freely and without hope of reward; and
that I should do him as great reverence if he were not in so great a height of
happiness. I expect this favor from your ordinary goodness, and promise my
self that you will alalwayes have a little love for me, seeing I have a will to
be all my life most perfectly

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 30. of May 1633.
To Mounsieur de la Nauve, Counselor of the King in his great Chamber. LETTER
X.
Sir,
SAy what you can, I am not so indulgent to my passion as you are injurious to
your own merits. Amongst all your good qualities, you have one that seems an
Enemy to all the rest; detraction does you more injustice than you do your
self, and envy it self gives you that which your own modesty takes away from
you. This is not to handle the truth civllly, to respect her then when she
embraces you? This is to render her civil for good, to call her fabulous, when
she calls you virtuous. I find in this Sir more scruple than Religion: The
first and most ancient charity is therehy broken, and you are faulty in the
first principle of your duty; if owing justice to all the World, you deny to do
it to your self alone. It must be a great preciseness of conscience that shall
find in you the evils you accuse your self of, and a sight more clear than
mine that shall see defaults in the course of your life. If you have any; they
are surely immaterial, and such as fell not under sense. They come not within
the knowledge of any; It must be a secret between your confessor and you. None
is known Sir, at least not known to be revealed, and if any were so known, it
would rather be sound a proof of humility than a mark of imperfection. I am
none therefore, as you say I am, of these charitable liars, who attribute to
them they love all that they want; nor of these forgers of Commonwealths, who
carry their imagination beyond all possibility of things; I present not unto
you an Idea to make you better then you are, but taking you into consideration
I propose you as my example to stir me up to goodness; I draw your picture for
my own use and not for your glory; I intend more the instructing my self, than
the smoothing you with fair words. The object of so elevated a virtue fills my
mind with great desires, and if it astonish me sometimes with its height, it
makes me at least see by experience, that an inferior virtue is possible to be
acquired; so that to say true, I study you more than I praise you, and am in
this more swayed with interest than with passion: I mean this passion without
eyes, that rises only from the animal part; for as for that which is
reasonable and works with knowledge, I have that for you in the highest degree,
and by all kind of obligations and of duties am

At Balzac 6. February 1634. Sir, Your, etc.

To Mounsieur Heinsius, Professor of the Politics at LEYDEN. LETTER XI.
SIR,
I Acquit my self of a charge that was laid upon me, and send you from
Mounsieur Favereau the Verses he lately made for the King; they have had the
approbation of all France, but they have not yet had his own, and if this
public judgment be not confirmed by your particular, he takes it but as the
passion of a Mother; and that France does but flatter her Children. He thinks
no glory is legitimate whereof you are not the distributour, and that things
are not so good by their own goodness, as by the account you make of them; you
see by this Sir what rank you hold in the Commonwealth of Letters, and that I
am not the only man that look upon you with veneration, being seated in the
Throan of the great Scaliger, and giving Laws to all the civil parts of Europe.
The highest degree that a man can aspire unto, who is Prince amongst his own,
is to become a judge amongst strangers; and there to get reverence where he
cannot pretend subjection. To this uppermost Region of merit are you ascended;
the light of your doctrine shines upon more than one people, and more than one
Country; it spreads and communicates it self in divets places and kinds; it
has as well adorers afar off, as admirers at home: He of whom I speak Sir, is
worth a whole multitude, and makes not only a part of a choice company, but is
himself alone a company and a number. Do you ask for qualities intellectual and
moral? for virtues civil and military, would you have a Philosopher; a
Mathematician; a Poet, for Latin, Italian, French? you shall find them all in
his one person. He has the Key of the most sublime sciences, and the
superintendance of the noblest Arts. Heretofore he has been the dispenser of
the conceits of Marino, the reformer and pruning knife of the superfluities of
his style, at this time he is overseer of all curious works; the Oracle that
Carvers consult, and the spirit that guides the hand before Painters. He
meddles in an infinite number of things with equal capacity, and has as many
trades as the Sage of the Stoics had; but makes better works of them than he
did. It is not possible either to fill his spirit, or to set it about work
enough; so greedy and unsatiable it is of knowledge, so impatient of rest, and
growing fresh with action. And to impart to you the expression of a gallant
friend of ours; he is in as great a heat for the pleasures of the mind, as the
Princes of Asia are for the pleasures of the body; and as they have many
Concubines besides the Sultana, which they marry, so has he one profession as
his principal study, but leaves not for all that to follow other exercises,
though follow them but with inferior affection; so that it cannot be said of
him, that he knows all, but that he ought to know; and that he is nothing less
than that he ought to be. He acquits himself most worthily of his charge, and
never stands in contemplation, when it is time to be in action. If he be a
great Poet, he is no less a great Lawyer; he makes as well the draught of a
Process as the description of a Tempest; and having sung Phillis and Amarillis
with an admirable grace, he treats of Seia and Sempronia with no less solidity.
I give this testimony as religiously of him, as if I give it before a Judge,
and as if my writing were upon Oath. Is it not fit you should be ignorant of
his merit, whom without any merit you ought to respect, though but only for
his respect to you. It is fit you know that he is an elevated person, humbling
himself before you, and a Saint offering you sacrifice. It is fit also I should
satisfy his desire, which you shall see in the word he has written to you, as
he was going out of his Inn and taking Coach, but that done, Sir, it is not
fit I should forget my self; I entreat you therefore you will be pleased that
in presenting to you the vows of another, I may offer you also my own, and make
you this true protestation, that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 5. of December 1634.
To Mounsieur de la Pigeonniere, Lieutenant General of Bloyes. LETTER XII.
SIR,
THe Letter you took the pains to write unto me has calmed my spirit, and
given it ease; I could have no comfort of the news of your death, but only by
that of your resurrection; and to make an end of weeping for you, it was
necessary you should come your self and stay my tears. I am none of these
broachers of Paradoxes, whom too much reason makes unreasonable, and have no
feeling either of joy or grief My spirit is more tender, and my Philosophy more
humane; and let them, as long as they please, call these passions infirmities,
yet for my part I had rather have my malady than their health; If I had lost
you, I had lost part of my self, and should never think my self an entire man
again, and if I had not hope to enjoy again your learned conversation, I should
find nothing but bitterness in my life; nothing in my studies but Thorns, at
this time especially, when I am promised a retreat three miles from Bloys, and
that I shall come under the jurisdiction of M. the Lieutenant General. I do not
much rejoice at this your new Dignity, because I do not rejoice at the
servitude of my friends; and because I do not count it any great happiness to
be always handling the Sores and Ulcers of the people. I make more reckoning
of your idleness than of your employment, and of the Elegy you will make than
of all the judgments you will give. If you please to send it, or please to
bring it your self to Paris, you shall make choice your self in what place of
my book you will have it set; and I shall not be a little proud to have so fair
a mark remaining of your friendship. I had more to say, but I was pulled away
from my Letter, and your own best friends debauch me; I must therefore perforce
leave you, yet assuring you once again that I am infinitely glad I shed my
tears for you without cause, and that no man is more truly than my self

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris 7. Sept. 1631.
To Mounsieur Chaplain. LETTER XIII.
SIR,
IF your ticket had overtaken me at Orleans, I had certainly returned to Paris
to receive that honor it promised me; and not have lost so pleasing a visit,
which would have comforted me for a troublesome one that afflicted me not a
little the day before. But the mischief is, that I was come hither before your
ticket, and all I can do now, is to let you know the grief I take, that my
inclination and my affairs lie not always in the same place. They have drawn
me from the suburb Saint German, to make me ride Post in ^he greatest violence
of the late heat; and have exposed my head to all the beams, or to speak like a
Poet, to all the Arrows of the Sun. I vow unto you that being in this case, I
even repented my self of all the good I had ever said of it, and would fain
call back my praises, seeing it made no difference at all between me and my
Post-boy, who had never praised it. Thanks be to God I am now in place of
safety, where you may well think I seek rather to quench my thirst, than to
clear my Sun burnt skin; and look more after refreshing than tricking my self
up. To this purpose I forget nothing of that I have learned in Italy: My
ordinary Diet is upon the fruits of Autumn; being of opinion that no
intemperance of these pure Viands can be dishonest, and that it is not fit to
be sober as long as the Trees offer us their store, and temptour appetite. Be
pleased Sir, that my business may not be to do until the trees shall have
nothing upon them but leaves; and that I may not go to the City but when the
winter drives me from the Country. In the mean time, I leave mine honor to
your care, in the place where you are, and I recommend unto you a little
reputation that is left me, having so many wars upon me, and so many
combinations made against me. I would be glad my name had less luster, and my
life more quiet, but I know not where to find obscurity; I am so well known,
if not by my good qualities, at least by my ill fortune, that though I should
banish my self into a strange Country, I do not think I could be hidden.
Vbique Notus perdidi exilio locum, I have no remedy therefore but to continue
in this famous misery, and to be laboring continually to provoke the envious,
and to make work for the idle; wherein notwithstanding, if I shall do any thing
that pleases you; I shall not think my labor ill bestowed --: I am in truth
in great impatience to make known to all the World, the account I make of your
virtue: and to leave a public Testimony, and if I durst say it, an eternal; by
which posterity may see, that we have loved one another; and that I
passionately have been, and am

From Balzac 10. September 1631. Sir, Your, etc.

To Mounsieur Mainard. LETTER V.
Sir,
I Have heard this day by a Letter from Mounsieur Chaplain, that you are at
Paris, and that in some business of his you have obliged him exceedingly:
wherein you have done more than ever you meant; and your action has in it a
double merit. I owe you thanks for it in my own behalf: and besides, being
joined as I am with him in communion of all goods and evils; you cannot fasten
upon him, and leave me free. He sends me no word of the nature of his business,
in which you have done him such good offices: but I doubt me, it is some
employment beyond the Alps, and dependence upon some Ambassador to Rome.
Whereof I think I may truly say, without giving reins to my Passion at all;
that he has both the substance and the suppleness, which are necessary in
dealing with the brains of that Country; and that he, under whom he serves,
may lie and sleep all the time of his employment, without any prejudice at all
to the Kings service. They who see but his outside only, take him for a neat
man, and one of excellent and pleasing qualities: but I, to whom he has
discovered that, which he hides from all the World besides: I know him to be a
man capable of great designs, and that besides speculative knowledge, he
possesses those also which serve for use, and are reduceable to action. I
would say more, if the Post would suffer me. I will only add this in point of
his honesty, which I said to you once of an ancient Roman, that I see no
example of virtue, in all the first Decade of Titus Livius, that is of too high
a strain, or too hard for him. Never therefore withdraw your affection, from so
worthy a place; and so long as you thus oblige my friends, It is I that will be

Sir, Your most humble and most obliged servant, etc.
At Balzac 20. of December 1631.
To -- LETTER XV.
SIR,
IN the Letter which -- received from you, I saw a line or two for my self;
that would even tickle a heart that were harder than mine, and which I could
not read without some touch of vain-glorie. There is a pleasure in yielding to
such sweet temptations, and though I know my merit has no right to so gracious
a remembrance, yet by what title soever I come to be happy, I am not a little
proud of my fortune. These are Sir the mere effects of your goodness, and your
experiments in that art, with which you know how to gain hearts, and to
purchase men without buying them. The fairest part of the earth, in which you
have left a dear remembrance of your name, gives this testimony of you by the
mouth of its Princes, and of their subjects, but seeing in the place where you
are, you meet with spirits of love and tenderness; it cannot be that any should
escape you, upon whom you have any design to take hold. All things are biting
beyond the Garonne; the Sheep of that Country are worse than the Wolves of
this; and I have heard a great person of our age say, That if France had a
Soul, certainly Gascogny should be the Irascible part. Yet I hear Sir, you have
already sweetened all you found sour there; and that your only look has melted
all the steel of the courages of that Province. Mounsieur de -- and my self
make account to go see the progress of so admirable a beginning, and this next
Summer to come and behold you in all your glory. But if we go thirty miles for
-- we would more willingly go three hundred for -- and I begin to think already
of a vow to Loretta, that I may thereby have a color to go to Rome, to be
there at the time when you shall do honor to France; and maintain the Kings
rights. This cannot be too soon for his service, nor soon enough for my desire,
who am

From Balzac 4. of August 1632. Sir, Your, etc.

To Mounsieur Arnaut, Abbot of Saint Nicholas. LETTER XVI.
Sir,
I Am very slow in answering your Letter, but I could not do it sooner; after
three months of continual agitation, this is my first hour of leisure, and the
first place I find of commerce, to tender you the complement I owe you. I see
well that your word is not subject to the accidents of the World, and that I
have chosen a plot which is out of the reach of Fortune. Your affection to me
is not of this brittle matter that friendships at Court be made of; it is of a
more excellent stuff, and such as neither time can wear out, nor my negligence
weaken. I need not doubt of preserving a good that you keep for me; your
faithfulness is more than my negligence, and I am more assured of your honesty
than of my own; notwithstanding what certainty soever I have of your love, it
is no double to me to have new assurances: Men that are well enough persuaded,
yet will go to a Sermon, and take a pleasure to hear that they know already.
For my self I can never be weary of reading a thing that gives me satisfaction,
and though it were as feigned as it is true, yet you write it with so good a
grace, that it would be a pleasure to be so deceived; yet it was fit, you
should have stayed there; and not cause me to fall from joy into presumption:
How can you look my spirit should contain it self within its bounds, knowing
that I am talked of at Rome, and that my name is sometimes pronounced by the
most eloquent mouth of Italy? you should have concealed the express charge you
had from M. the Cardinal of Bentivoglio, to send me his History; or at least
for a temper to my vanity, you should have told me at the same time, that I
must not impure a favor to my own sufficiency, for which I am beholding to
your good offices; I may believe Sir that he had never had this thought of me,
if you had not stirred it up in him by some favorable mention you made of my
person; and I know he puts so great a trust in you, that after you have once
made a commendation, he would make a conscience to use his own judgment in
examining my worth. From what ground soever my happiness comes, I am bound to
acknowledge the visible cause, and to that I destinate my first good days
journey that God shall send me. I will not fail to give thanks to M. the
Cardinal, and to give him an account of my reading, that he may see I know as
well how to receive as he to give. In the mean time I offer him a present far
unworthy of the magnificence of his, and which will show him, how with his hook
of Gold he has fished but brass, such as it is you shall do me a favor to
present it to him, and to let me hold the possession I have in your love, whose
I am all my life

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 10. of May 1634.
To Mounsieur de Nesmond, Controller of the Prince of Conde's House. LETTER
XVII.
SIR,
MY dear Cousin, your Letter has told me no news, it has only confirmed me in
my opinion; and testified that you are always good, and always do me the
honor to love me. You have qualities of greater luster than this, but you have
none of greater use; and they that could live without your wisdom, yet cannot
bear the miss of your goodness. My sister and I continue to implore it in a
business which is already set on foot by your commendation, and which attends a
full accomplishment by your second endeavor. It is neither without example nor
without reason; it needs but such an undertaker as your self, and you may
easily save it from rigorous justice, if you will but lend a little aid to its
equity. Of your will I make no doubt, it is the continual agitation of the
Court that makes me fear, which drives men one way and their affairs another.
But if the Heavens help us not, we are not like in haste to see it in any state
of consistence; it will be always floting like the Island of Greece, until a
great birth shall make it stay; and that God make sure the Kings victories by
the Queens fruitfulness. In the mean time it is not fit you should stay at
home, but that you should make one in all voyages; but you must not be of these
travellours that get many hoasts, and few friends. You are in a state of
obliging and making men beholding to you by doing always good; and now for
fear you should want matter to work upon, I offer you matter here to set you a
work. Be pleased Sir; my dear Cousin, that I entreat you to deliver to -- the
Letter I writ unto him; and when you deliver it, to testify withal unto him,
that having the honor to be to you as I am, the things that touch me must
needs concern you; Heretofore I have held good place in his confidence, and to
use the terms of a man you hate not: Vetus mihi cum eo confuetudo and cum
privatus erat Amici vocabamur. Even lately at Paris he offered me courtesies
that might have contented a prouder man's vanity than mine; and I received from
him more good words than was possible for me to return him. But these
illustrious friendships require continual cares, and an assiduity without
cessation. I know they are subject to a thousand inconveniences, and that they
grow cold if they be not stirred up and kindled continually. Three words of
your mouth spoken with a due accent, may save me the soliciting of three
months, and my requests ought not to seem uncivil; seeing I desire nothing but
that which -- has done me the honor to promise me; and thinks no otherwise,
but that I have received it. To this purpose I send you a short instruction for
--: and you may be pleased to be a means, that he cast his eyes upon it; at
such time as the business he has about your person shall permit him. I would
not solicit you so boldly: nor press upon you so burdensome a familiarity, if
you had not your self made the overture first. It is a persecution you have
drawn upon your self by the liberal offers you made me in your Letter; and I
conceive you did speak as you mean, as I do, in protesting that I honor you
with my Soul; and am

Sir, My dear Cousin, Your, etc.
From Balzac, 20. October. 1632.
To Mounsieur de Borstell. LETTER XVIII.
SIR,
I Do not know my self in your Letters: you are like those Painters, that care
not for making a face like, so they make it fair. Certainly you thought upon
some honester man than my self; when you took the pains to write unto me; and
your Idea went beyond your subject: or else you meant to excite me to virtue by
a new subtility; and the praises you give me are but disguised exhortations.
They could nor be Sir, either more fine, or more delicate: and I do not think,
that your pretended Barbarism comes any thing behind the Grecian eloquence.
But tell me true; Is it not as artificial as Brutus his folly? And are not you
in plain terms a Cosener, to make us believe you come from that climate, from
whence the cold and foul weather comes? Whereas it cannot be you should be born
any where but in the heart of Paris, or if any place be more French then Paris,
that certainly must needs have been your Cradle. You speak too well, not to
speak naturally; this garb, and this purity, in which you express your self, is
not a thing that can be learned by Books: you owe it to a nearer cause; and
study goes not so far as it. There have strangers been Marshalls of France, but
their accent has always discovered, they were not natural: and they have
found it more easy, to merit the leading of our Armies, and to gain the favor
of our King; than to learn our language, and attain a true pronouncing. But
Sir, seeing in your person, there is seen an Ambassador of eighteen years old;
and a wisdom without experience: there is not any thing, be it never so
wonderful which being reported of you, may seem incredible after this. It is
fit only, that you make more account than you do, of this so rare and
admirable a quality: and that you should use it, according to its merits; and
not to employ it upon base subjects, that are not worthy of it. Otherwise how
good an Artist so ever you be; you will be blamed for making no better choice
of your Materials; and my self, who draw so much glory from your fault; had yet
much rather see you employ your excellent language, in treating of Princes
interests, and the present estate of Europe; than in advancing the value of a
poor sick man: who prays you to keep your valuing, for --: and ask you nothing
but pity; or at most but affection: if this be to merit it, that I
passionately am

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 6. November 1629.
To him another. LETTER XIX.
SIR,
I Remember my promise, upon condition you forget not yours; and that in case
you come within six miles of Balzac: you will allow me the half days journey,
I require. It is not any hope I have to send you away well satisfied, either
with your Host, or with your lodging, that makes me to make this request: but
it is Sir, for my own benefit: for you know very well, we never have commerce
together, but all the gain remains of my side. I find that in your
conversation, which I seek for in vain, in my neighbors Libraries: and if
there fall out any errors in the work I am about, the faults must be
attributed to your absence. Leave me not therefore, I entreat you, to my own
sense, and suffer me to be so proud, as to expect one of your Visits, if you go
to Santoigne, or otherwise to prevent it, if you stay at Lymousin. There are
some friendships that serve only to pass away the time, and to remedy the
tediousness of solitariness: but yours Sir, besides being pleasant, is withal
I vow, no less profitable. I never part from you, that I bring not away
pleasures that last, and profit that does you no hurt. I make my self rich, of
that you have too much; and therefore as you ought not to envy me my good
fortune, which costs you little: so you ought to believe also, that as long as
I shall love my self, I shall be

At Balzac 20. of December 1629. Sir, Your, etc.

Another to him. LETTER XX.
SIR,
AT that time when Mistress -- parted from hence; I was too much out of order
to present my self before a wise man; and I chose rather to be failing in the
rules of civility, than to be importunate upon you with my grievances. Now that
I am a little at quiet; and can fall to work indifferent well; I must needs
tell you, that the confidence I have of your love, sweetens all the bitterness
of my spirit, and that in my most sensible distastes; I find a comfort in
thinking of this. It is certain Sir, the World is strangely altered, and good
men now a days, cannot make a troup. This is the cause, that seeing you are
one of this little flock which is preserved from infection; and one of those
that keep virtue from quite leaving us; I therefore bless incessantly Madam
Desloges, for the excellent purchase I have made by her means: and proclaim in
all places, that she discovered me a treasure when she brought me first to be
acquainted with you. If I husband it not, and dress it with all the care and
industry, it deserves; it is not, I assure you, for want of desire: but so
sweet and pleasing duties, have no place amidst the traverses of a life in
perpetual agitation, and your ordinary convensation is reserved for men more
happy than I. I wait therefore for this favor from a better fortune than the
present, as also occasions by which I may testify, that I passionately am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 1. of February 1630.
To him another. LETTER XXI.
SIR,
ALthough I am ravished with your eloquence, yet I am not satisfied: but you
remain still unjust, and I not well pleased. I see what the matter is; you are
so weary of your Penance at Lymousin: that you have no mind to come and
continue it in Angoumois. You like better to go in a straight line to the good,
than to go to it by the crooked change of evil; and prefer a safe harbor
before an incommodious creek. Wherein Sir, I cannot blame your choice; only I
complain of your proceeding; and find it strange, you should disguise your
joy, for escaping a bad passage, and that you are content to be unhappy at
Rochel; because you will not venture to be unhappy here. These high and
Theological comparisons, which you draw from the austerity of Anchorets,
concerning works of supererogatition, concerning Purgatory and Hell, make me
know you are a mocker, and can make use of Ironies, with the skill and
dexterity of Socrates. Take heed I be not revenged upon this Figure of yours by
another, and return you Hyperboles. For this once, I am resolved to suffer all;
hereafter perhaps, I shall help my self with my old Arms. But howsoever the
World go, and in what style soever I write unto you, you may be sure I speak
seriously, when I say, that I very firmly am;

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 9. Sept. 1630.
To him another. LETTER XXII.
SIR,
I Am exceedingly beholding to you for remembering me; and for the good news you
have so liberally acquainted me withal. If they -- loved Sugar, as well as
they love Salt; they should have enough of it, never to drink any thing but
Hyppocras; nor to eat any thing but Comfits. Without jesting I vow, these are
excellent Rebels; and their simplicity is more subtle than all the Art and
Maxims of Florence. These Mariners read Lessons now to the inhabitants of Terra
firma; and are become the Paedagogues of Princes. There is nothing of theirs
that troubles me, but the proposition of their Truce. They should reject it, as
a temptation of the Devil: and I dare swear, it was never set a foot, but to
gain time and opportunity: The good will, the Spaniard makes show to bear them;
is the bait they show upon the hook they hide, he seeks not after them, but to
catch them; and he makes show of kindness; because he could do no good with
force. Though I have not read the Book you spoke to me of; yet I doubt not of
its worth and goodness; I know the Author is a man of great learning and
experience, and one that has been brought up at the feet of Gamaliel; I mean
of --: who no doubt has acquainted him with all the Mysteries of our state.
For my self, it must needs be that I speak but at hap hazard of this matter:
for it would be a miracle, if by living in the Woods, I should learn the skill
to govern the Cities; and that I should be a Politician and a Lawyer, being
scarce either a man, or a Citizen: for to speak truly, if the first be a
sociable creature, and the other a manager of some part of the Commonwealth: I
see not in the estate I am in, how I can justly pretend to either of these two
qualities. In favor therefore of Mounsieur -- I yield up my right in all the
good I receive from you; and in all the praises you give me, as things that
much more belong to him than me. Admire as much as you will, his subtility; but
yet make some reckoning of my true mind; and give him that which I leave him;
but yet keep for me, that which you cannot take from me, without doing me
wrong: I mean your good will; which ought to be the prize of my passion, and of
the fidelity, with which I shall be all my life

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 1. of June 1630.
To him another. LETTER XXIII.
SIR,
I Should be extremely culpable, if you were not extremely good; but I know,
you are no rigorous exactour of that which is your due, and that you have much
indulgence, for the faults of those you love. My idleness is even become
stupidity; and has taken from me all use both of speaking and writing; yet all
things considered, this is no ill quality at this time: no man is bound to give
account of his silence; and many become Delinquents for their speaking. I do
not think therefore you would ask me news, in a time, when reporting it is
dangerous: and when one may be called in question to make explication of it
before Magistrates; though the litteral sense of our words be innocent, they
may search the allegorical, and stand punctual upon an equivocal term to make
us culpable of another man's subtilty. But I defy the most pregnant Grammarian,
and the most severe inquisitour to find any fault in the protestation I make of
most perfectly honoring your virtue, and of being with all my Soul

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris 4. of May 1631.
To him Another. LETTER XXIV.
SIR,
IF my Letters had not been lost, you should have known long ere this the joy I
have had in being made certain of the most important truth, that ever kept my
mind in suspense; and in learning from your self that you do me always the
honor to love me; not that I ever doubted of your goodness, but I have so much
knowledge of my own unfortunateness, that I cannot hear any ill news so
incredible which I do not believe to be very probable. Yet I perceive Sir, by
your holding out so firmly in behalf of a party ruined, that you are not easily
altered either in your opinions, or from your errors. That which you have once
spoken, and indeed that you have but once conceived, is never changed nor
revoked; and therefore as I have nothing more dear nor more precious than your
friendship, so have I nothing also more assured, or of more solidity. This your
ancient German probity is not a whit altered by contagion of our ill examples,
and the strength of your constitution has been able to resist the ill air of
our Court. It is not our of ignorance that you follow not the false maxims of
this age; but follow your own and those that be lawful; and if it be true,
that the King of the Flies has a sting indeed, but never stings; it is much
more true of you, that having the power and ability to do evil, yet for all
that you are no evil doer. But this would be too little to praise you but thus;
they that understand you well, will say with me, there is nothing in virtue so
high, or difficult, which your Soul has not attained unto: and as nature has
given you all the good qualities that cannot be acquired by study', so your own
study has procured you all the good qualities that are not in the gift of
nature. Though your courtesies had left me my first liberty, and that there
were neither Obligation on your part, nor Resentment on mine, yet I should say
as much as I do, and give this testimony of you before all the World, and I am
not less true of my word than I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 7. October. 1631.
Another to him. LETTER XXV.
SIR,
THis bearer will tell you how often in a day I am speaking of you, and in what
esteem your virtue is in all places where I am heard speak; I speak of nothing
else but of the kind of life you have chosen, and this I propose as the peace
of passions, which with others are so mutinous, and as the Kingdom of wisdom,
which is not free in the great World. Never repent you of so hardy a flight,
nor of so noble a banishment; the leisure that you take is far better than the
employment that others desire, and you are that close happy man that enjoys
true happiness without either pomp, or envy.

Aemulus ille Jovis, celsa qui mentis ab arce,
Sub pedibus vel summa videt fastigia Regum:
Quem non ambigui fasces, non mobile vulgus,
Non leges, non castra tenent, qui pectore magno
Spemque metumque domat vitio sublimior omni:
Exemptus fatis, indignantemque repellit
Fortunam, dubio quem non in turbine rerum
Dependet suprema dies, sed abire paratum
Ac plenum vita, etc.
This me thinks is your very description, and might be mine also, if I had cut
off a little thread by which I hang still about Paris; out of a fancy of my
friends, without any hope at all in my self; for thanks be to God I have purged
my spirit from all smoaks and fumes of the Court, and my ambition goes no
further than the border of my village. I have no longer any thoughts but
rustic and provincial; and demand not of -- but only abatement -- and return
of Quart d' Escus; if these be two things, and as it is said, both within his
power. One conference with you will fully accomplish the settling me in a good
state, and you cannot deny your counsel to a man that has a longing to put it
in practice; and who is with his whole heart

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 1. May 1633.
Another to him. LETTER XXVI.
SIR,
THis day being the six and twentieth of April, I solemnly renounce all
Complements, yet after I have told you first that I never used any with you,
but such as were most true; and that whatsoever I have written unto you
heretofore until now, is of as great force and vigor as if it had passed
before a public Notary. I have with a great deal of pleasure read the Latin,
which you did me the favor to send me; the force of the reasoning, and the
Economy of the discourse content me exceedingly; only one little word
distasts me, and your friend might well have forborne to couple us with
Mahometans and Infidels. The liberty which the King gives his Subjects, not to
be of his opinion, ought not to reach to the scandalizing of that opinion, and
seeing he holds it a glory to be the eldest Son of the Church, to call this
Church a whore, is in good French to call --. He deserves Sir more respect, and
your Doctors should have more discretion: For in truth, if their Religion were
the prime Religion of the Kingdom, and that they were at liberty to preach it
in the Lovure; they could never speak in higher terms, nor handle Catholics in
a ruder manner than they do. I assure my self you will be in this of my
opinion: One must always remember the condition of the time, and the state of
affairs; wise men will never provoke them that are easily able to undo them;
and in the ancient triumphs it was lawful for the Soldiers to scoff at their
General; but it was not lawful for the vanquished to speak reproachfully of
the Conqueror; you may please to make some reflection hereupon, and I know you
will conceive that innocence it self becomes culpable, if it draw on
persecution. I bid you goodnight, and am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 26. of April 1634.
Another to him. LETTER XXVII.
Sir,
WIthout accepting the challenge you sent me, I thank you for the care you had
to make me win honor; If it came of it self I would perhaps not stick to
receive it, but if it cannot be had without contesting, I will none of it; I
love my ease too well, I say not to lose it, but even to hazard it in the best
quarrel of the World. I am as patient and as utterly disarmed as an Anabaptist;
I am afraid of a Foyt, or a Squib; far from running upon Muskets and Swords
points, as they say in our Vicinage. It would be a hard matter to draw a man of
this humor to a Combat; but a much harder matter to make me stand in
argumentation, being resolved to let the World hold what opinion it pleases,
and even to forsake my own, if any man will wrangle with me for it. I desire
neither to establish my own Maxims, nor to destroy other men's; and if a Master
of Arts should come and try me with Omnis Homo Currit, I would answer him
Lascialo andar; and if he should go on and say, sed Petrus Currit, I would
reply, Lascialo star; and if he would conclude, Ergo Petrus est Homo, I would
take my leave of him and say, Che m' Importa? I have very seriously considered
of the the Letter of -- and absolutely lost all remembrance of my own; I
thought I had reason, and perhaps I was wrong, his intentions might be good,
but my interpretation of them was naught. The conclusion is; He is a man I make
infinite account of, and his friendship shall always be dearer to me than my
own opinion. I conjure you to give him assurance hereof, and to get his leave
that I may live; seeing I am already beholding to you for so many other
courtesies, and am also with all my Soul

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 15. August 1634.
To Mounsieur de Bois Robert. LETTER XXVIII.
Sir,
IF it had not been for a troublesome rheum which has followed me now these
fifteen days, I should have sooner thanked you for the new courtesies you have
done me, and for the late pains you have taken for the most unprofitable
servant you have. God will reward a nature so free and noble, for my self I can
but praise it, and give it the Testimony that is due unto it. But to make it
perfect, I entreat you it may be as sweet as it is gracious, and heal me if it
may be without thrusting your nails into my sores. I desire not to be left in
my ill estate by flattery, but yet I desire to be drawn out of it without
roughness; words alone seasoned with sweetness content me more than good deeds
that are dry, and come from a proud hand. Be not therefore like the friends of
Job, who reproached him in conforting him; but be compassionate a little to
humane infirmities, and remember you cannot alter me, unless you new make me. I
dare not say, that I prefer the liberty of Deserts before the magnificence of
Courts; and that chains, though never so well made and gilded over, do yet not
tempt me; I only say, I know my self too well to meddle in a trade whereof I
am not capable, and to begin a life which I must needs end, at the very
beginning. Thus Sir, I do that out of consideration which you think I do out of
laziness, and the faintness of my spirit comes from that of my body. But I know
it is impossible to persuade you to this, and no means is left me to justify
my sickness but by my death, and when you have lost me, then you will find and
say I had reason to complain. In the mean time I understand that the Devils of
Paris, of Bruxels, etc. are not let loose, and commit outrages upon me in four,
or five languages. The contrary faction fortifies it self daily, and there
seems to be merit and piety in tearing asunder my reputation. Leave me not
therefore to adversaries so incensed, and add not your rigor to their cruelty.
I conjure you to take some care of an afflicted Soul, if I have defects, supply
them by your virtue; if I be negligent in my affairs, be you my tutour, but
exact no more of me than nature has given me. You are too generous to put back
a man that casts himself between your arms; and one that is more than any other
in the World,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 5. of January 1632.
To Mounsieur Descartes. LETTER XXIX.
SIR,
YOur Letter found me in the blackest humor I was ever in in all my life. To
tell you, that in that estate it brought me joy; were it to speak too boldly
for a man in misery: but it is true, it did a little mitigate my sadness, and
made me capable of consolation. I do no more now live but in the hope I have to
go see you at Amsterdam; and to embrace that dear Head, which is so full of
reason and understanding. This is that which hinders me from inviting you to
come hither; where --: He is ever in the slavery of Ceremonies and Complements;
and plays the coward with such a contradiction of his spirit, that one could
not imagine. He has the Soul of a Rebel; and the submission of a slave: if you
may believe him, he has no ambition; yet he consents to that of another; and
dies of a sickness that is not his own, See what is to be a sycophant; and to
be undutifull by obedience. But you Sir, have raised your minds above these
vulgar considerations: and when I think upon the Stoics Wiseman, who only was
free, was rich, was a King; me thinks, I see you foretold long ago; and that
Zeno was but the Figure of Mounsieur Descartes:

Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas,
Atque metus omnes, and inexorabile fatum
Subjecit pedibus.
Either you are this happy man, or he is not to be found in the World: and the
conquest of truth, for which you labor with so great force and industry seems
to me a more noble business, than all that is done with so great bruit and
tumult in Germany and Italy. I am not so vain to pretend, I should be a
companion of your travel herein; but I shall at least be a spectator; and shall
enrich my self with the rellicks of the prey; and with the superfluity of your
abundance. Think not that I make this proposition by chance; I speak it in
great earnest; and if you stay never so little in the place where you are; you
shall find me a Hollander as well as your self; and my Masters, the States,
shall not have a better Citizen: nor one more passionate for liberty than I am.
Although I love extremely the air of Italy; and the soil that bears Orenges;
yet your virtue is able to draw me to the Banks of the frozen Sea; and even to
the uttermost Border of the North. It is now three years, that my imagination
goes in quest after you; and that I even die with longing to be united to you,
and never to part from you again: and to testify unto you, by a continual
subjection, that I passionately am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris 25. of April 1631.
To Mounsieur de la Motte-Aigron. LETTER XXX.
Sir,
I Have heard of the happy accomplishment of your marriage; and that it has
been one of the great solemnities of Rochell. I have celebrated it here in my
particular; with less pomp indeed and tumult; but with as much joy, and
satisfaction of mind, as they that sung the Hymonaeus. Though perhaps you
would not have it so; yet your contentments are mine; you have not any passion
so proper to your self, which is not common with me, and play the cruel, as
long as you will, I will have a share in that which is yours; even then when
you will not affoard to give it me. At the worst, I will love you still, as I
have ever done, as a creature supreamly excellent; though not supreamly just:
As there are some virtues that are fierce; and scornful; so there are some
sciences which have attractives amidst their difficulties, and which draw us on
in thrusting us back: You are like these abstract knowledges: Your merit
sweetens all your rigours: and how hard soever the persecution has been, which
I have suffered: yet I vow unto you, I could never find in my heart to hate
the Tyrant. I have still so great a care of his reputation, that I would not be
thought innocent; for fear he should be blamed to have done me wrong; and I had
rather be a Prevaricatour, and treacherous to my self, than to seem I had cause
of complaint against him. We ought to condemn the memory of this disorder; and
to suppress this unfortunate Olympiade. We ought to persuade our imagination,
that the matter is not so indeed; but that it is only dreamt. When you shall
please to remember your words; I shall see your Verses; and your friends
Sermons. In the mean time Sir, if you will not have it be a mere liberality; I
send you something, to exercise commutative justice, and begin a traffic
whereof the Toll is not agreed upon to be taken of right. Never was a man so
miserably busied as my self; I am intricated with an infinite number of petty
affairs: which, as you know, are no less cumbersom than the great: One thrust
of a sword hurts not so much as a hundred pricks of a Pin: and the Arabians
have a saying; It is a better bargain to be devoured of a Lion, than to be
eaten up of Flies. If I had you, I should have a Redeemer; but your
State-business, is preferable before my interests; and it is better I should
want you, than come to have you with the curses of the people. I am, and shall
ever be

At Balzac 29. July 1634. Sir, Your, etc.

To Mounsieur de Granier. LETTER XXXI.
SIR,
THe day I parted from Paris; I dreamt not of taking any journey; but a news
which I received, made me take Horse within an hour after I received it. This
is that which hindered me from taking my leave; and to use such compliments with
you, as in such cases are accustomed. If I did not know you to be an enemy of
the Tyranny of Ceremonies; and that you, as well as my self, cut off from
friendship all vain pomp and superfluities, I should study for long excuses to
justify my journey: but in so doing, I should offer wrong to a wise man; to
think he had opinions like the vulgar: and that he would not either give, or
take so good a thing as liberty. I enjoy it as I would wish within these three,
or four days; and I have received it at the Bank of the River where I left it
the last year. I banish from my mind all thoughts of the street Saint Jaques;
and dream not either of my Prince, or Commonwealth, either of enemies books,
or of my own: I dream, to say true, continually of you; and find no image in
my memory so pleasing, as that which presents me the time of our being
together. I would willingly employ Atlante, or Melisse, to procure me a more
solid contentment; and to convey you and your Library hither in a night. I
cannot forget this dear retreat of your repose; for, I know, that without this,
you would find even in Tryvolie, a want in your felicity; and that without
your books, our fruits would be but sour; and our good cheer but of ill taste
unto you. These are imaginations Sir, with which I flatter my self; whilst I
stand waiting to return to Paris; that I may there go find out a happiness
which cannot come hither to find out me. If in the mean time you please to
send me some news, whereof, you know provincial spirits are extremely greedy;
you shall give me means, to make a whole Country beholding to me; and you need
but to dictate them to --: who will ease you of the pains of writing them. In
these, I require not the strains of your understanding, nor the politic
Animadversions which come from this accurate, and Collineant judgment, (to use
the barbarous eloquence of our friend) it shall be enough for me that I may
know in general some part of that which passes, and may have some Epitome of
the History which you send weekly to Mounsieur d'Andilly. I humbly entreat you,
to assure him that I honor him continually with passion; and assure your self
also, that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 10. of September. 1631.
To Mounsieur de la Nauve, Commander of a Company in Pyedmont. LETTER XXXII.
Sir,
MY dear Cousin, I cannot endure you should be come back into France, for
nothing but --: and that he should solely and without me, possess a happiness,
which more belongs to me than him. His Letters speak nothing but of your
conversations, and of your feastings; news which he sends me, rather to brave
me, and to set me in a longing, than to give any part in his good fortune, and
to justify his stay at Paris. I shall one day have means to be revenged of him
for this malice: I doubt not to have liberty to walk abroad, when he shall be
tied to stay at home; and to have my turn in feasting and making merry, when he
shall stand waiting upon enterrements, and go exhorting men that are to be
hanged. Yet he is all this while your Favorite in my absence, though he need
not think me absent, unless he will; for if he love me enough, to be troubled
for losing me, he may easily recover me, by looking upon your face. This
resemblance between you and me, is not the least of my vanities; and I vow unto
you, I am proud of it in the highest degree: every day I thank my Mother for it
in my heart; and do a secret homage for it to Nature. It were enough for me, to
be taken for your Copy; but my gray hairs tell me to my shame, that I am
rather your Original, and put me in mind of this untoward advantage. I should
not do much good, to paint them, unless withal, I could discharge the
pensiveness that has changed them: for the tincture of this blots out all
other. It is fit therefore to be merry, and to banish sorrow, seeing this i^
the only means to new make us, and to make us able to resist old age, I
resolve my self to do so, though it be but to do Fortune a spite; and to take
from her by my not grieving, the pleasure she thinks to take in her cruelty.
But this goodly resolution stands in need of you; my joy would be perfect, if
you would sometimes be a man of the Province; and that there were any
appearance of hope, to see you at Condeville. I know no reason you should scorn
an Island, in which our Ariosto would have charmed his dearest Herces; and
whereof he would have made a thousand other strange devises, if he had been
able to discover it. Venture to come thither this next Summer, I conjure you to
it by the memory of --: and I will promise you, though not the good fellowship
of Paris; yet at least the fair days of Paris; yet at least the fair days of
Pignerol. But I fear me much you are not resolute enough to come to civilize a
clown; who yet is beyond all I can say,

At Balzac 3. of January 1634. Sir, Your, etc.

Another to him.
SIR,
MY dear Cousin, the beginning of your Letter had frighted me, and I was taking
Alarm at these words of death and Physicians, but I recovered my spirits when
I saw the first had failed of his blow, and that you use not the other but to
strengthen you in an estate they have already put you; such days as this will
prove more healthful to you than all their Drugs, and the sweetness, which
begins to spring from the purity of the Elements, is the only Medicine that
heals without corrupting, and cleanses without wasting. For my self I think
not of dying when I have once gotten March over my head, and me thinks I find
my self renewed at the only smelling of the Violets. I make use of them to
more than one service, they serve me for Broths as well as for Nosegayes. I
cannot be persuaded that cold purges the Air, or drives away sickness; and I
am glad at heart to hear the Duke of Feria is dead of the Purples in the month
of January, and that in Germany. At least this will justify the Summer and
the hot Countries, and will serve us for a proof against -- when according to
his custom he will plead our adversaries cause. I am more than I thought I was;
seeing you assure me that I am sometimes the subject of our conferences; and
though in this you run the hazard of being in the number of those Orators, who
were blamed for making ill choice of their subjects; yet pardon me if I account
the testimony of your remembering me, more dear unto me than the glory of your
well speaking; and if I like rather you should talk of my idleness and of my
walks, than to discourse of public affairs, or voyages of Princes. I regard
not the estimation of the people, I would give a great deal to buy out that
with which I have gotten it; but there are certain friendships upon which only
I rely, and to be razed out of all accounts in the state would be less grievous
to me than to be blotted out of your memory. Continue therefore these
conferences which are so pleasing to me, and of which I am in spirit a
partaker, or rather deny me not these consolations which are so sweet unto me,
and whose effect I feel a hundred miles off. I cannot dissemble the need I have
of you, I could not live if you did not love me, but withal you could love a
man who is more passionately than I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 22. of Febr. 1634.
Another to him. LETTER XXXIV.
SIR,
MY dear Cousin, I am exceeding glad to hear of your news; as for news of the
World I set so little by them, and interest my self so little in general
affairs, that I may boldly say, I never yet read a whole Gazetta through; you
may think this a strange distaste of the present time, and a remarkable
impatience, especially in a man who complains that Livies History is too short,
and wishes Herodotus would never make an end. Things that wounded me heretofore
at the very heart, do not now so much as superficially touch me; that which I
accounted as my own is now become a stranger to me, and my heart is hardened
against all accidents that happen, if they concern not either my self, or my
friends. It is true the death of -- wrought in me some compassion; I can never
hate men that are extraordinary, and it grieves me that cowardice should
triumph over virtue; and the lazy cause the valiant to be murdered. For this
man it would not serve to take him at table, it was necessary to come behind
him; for else the most resolute of the conspiratours would never have had the
courage to do the act, would never have abidden the splendour of that terrible
countenance, and would have thought he had always heard this voice.

Fallit te mensas inter quod credis inermem
Tot bellis quaefita viro, tot caedibus armat
Majestas aeterna Ducem. Si admoveris ora
Cannas and trebiam ante oculos, Thrasymenaque busta
Et Pauli stare in gentem miraberis umbram.
Change but the Latin names for Dutch, and we may conclude thus; Gustavi stare
in gentem miraberis umbram.

If I should say more, I should seem to make his Funeral Oration; I am neither
fit nor officious enough to go so far, my design was only to write a word, or
two, and to pay you all your Complements with this one little word, I am but
most truly

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 7. of April 1634.
Another to him. LETTER XXXV.
SIR,
MY dear Cousin, I mean not to show your Letter to the Doctor that brought it
to me, it would make him lose that little humility that is left him, and he
would think himself already In statu perfection is acquisitae; you do not well
to use him as he were some rare personage, it is the way to spoil him
altogether, and to harden a vanity which durst not otherwise show it self. I
shall have something to do to make him come to himself, and to take down the
swelling of his spirit, which your testimony has put him into. It is an easier
matter to corrupt than to reform the good works more slowly than the evil; and
I much fear my remedies will not be so forcible as your poison; Under this name
austere Philosophers would comprise the Present you have sent me. They conceive
that perfumes are made of sweet and pleasing poisons, and that if they make no
impression upon the body, they yet effeminate the vigor of the mind: For my
self I speak no such harsh language, but content my self to say with an
honester man than they: Cursed be these Effeminate persons that have cried down
so innocent and so good a thing. The use of it is lawful, the excess is
forbidden; I know the first, and you would cast me upon the other. For to speak
truly what good can come of so exorbitant a liberality? and what means this
abundance of Orange flower water with which you have loaded our Messenger? you
would not have sent me a greater quantity of this water, if where you are, men
had rained a great shower of it: and let this be spoken without Hyperbole; and
without putting me upon the high strain. Your good deeds have no spice of the
present poverty, one may see in them the abundance of the golden age, and an
image of that happy time of which a Poet writes; They powered out by Floods what
they give now by drops; yet you have done well to get before hand; hereafter
the sumptuary Laws will not suffer you to be so liberal; and you are threatened
with the coming forth of a Proclamation that will bring things back to the
ancient frugality of our ancestors. Perfumes shall not be used but in Temples,
and about the sacrifices at great festivals, nor biskes --; but about the
Palace, or at the Kings Coronation; so that you shall learn the virtue of
moderation by a lesson from the Prince, and you shall be made a good husband if
you will not be a bad Citizen. I my self, who profit by disorder, must tell
you thus much, that if you reduce not your great Bottles to little Viols, I
shall enform against you, and yet will always be

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 10. of June 1634.
To Mounsieur Bardyn. LETTER XXXVI.
Sir,
NEver was Host better paid than I, for making you poor Cheer; if you should
make any long journey at this price, you would make your self a poor man before
you come home, and your first courtesies are such, that they scarce leave any
place for second. You are so good that you are unjust; to compare our fruits to
those of Italy is not so much to advance our Village, as to vilify Naples and
Florence. This is to affront her whom Virgil adored, and to whom he said upon
his knees, and holding up his hands; Salve magna Parens frugum Saturnia tellus
Magna virum, etc.


There is no reason to pardon this excess to a man that makes profession of the
truth, and who ought to speak that plainly which it is lawful for Poets to
disguise. These fellows make waste of their ornaments and their figures; they
call the worst wine they drink Nectar; and though the house of Cacus were no
better than an Ox stall, yet in their Verses they make it a Kings Palace; such
liberty is not allowed to Philosophers; and without derogation to this quality,
which you have so good Title to possess, you could never have bestowed your
praises upon such base Vyands as I was fain to set before you. And for my
entertainment with which you seem much better satisfied; even that was yet much
poorer, and more meager than my cheer. You know Sir, that in our commerce I
contribute nothing but my Docibleness, and my ears; I am the people and you the
Theater; I mean a Theater reasonable and intelligent, inspired with sentences
and instructions, to whose audience I would run from one end of the World to
another, and never complain of my pains nor of my journey. I would not only
return you your visit in Tourain; but to hear you would do much more, and go
much further, willingly untertake as long a voyage as Appollonius did, who
travailed many Kingdoms, and passed many Seas, only to see Ia^chas in his
Throne of Gold; and hear him discoursing of the nature of things. Your Indian
visage and your yellow color make show of a Gymnosophist; but Gymnosophists
had not the virtue that lies hidden under this yellowness; for though they made
Trees to speak, and sent tempests on their errands, where they pleased, yet
these were effects of their Devilish arts, and no arguments of their wisdom.
Yours is not only more humane and more Lawful; but is used also with less
pride and less violence. Instead of filling the eyes with unprofitable wonders,
it makes to flow and stream in the Soul necessary verities; it does not
astonish me with prodiges, nor affright me with Thunder, but it persuades me to
do that I ought to do, and instructs me to know that I ought to know. It is the
same I think that appeared under the Empire of Trajan; and communicated it self
to men by the mediation of Plutarch. How have you decked her without disarming
her? how sweetened her countenance without weakening her force? how covered her
Bones and Muscles with a fair flesh, and made her a body of a Carcass? The
Syllogism, which by the saying of a Grecian is the Trident and Mace of
Philosophy, is in your writings all painted and perfumed: After you have purged
it from the rust of Barbarians, and from the poison of Sophisters, you make
with it a wholesome and delightful lancing, and no man seeks to ward your
blows, because they heal and tickle. With these rare knowledges you should
entertain your friends, and not with the fruits of our Orchard, nor with those
of my studies, which are as vulgar the one as the other; But yet seeing they
please your taste, and that you demand of me particularly the last piece you
saw of my making, I have entreated -- who carries it to Paris to deliver it
unto you in the place where you are; By your example I call it my dissertation,
because we live in a Country of liberty, and where faults of this nature are
not under the Jurisdiction of the Kings Commission. But I durst not be so bold
at the Court, where there is no longer any favor for naughty words, nor safety
for innovatours of our language. Remember therefore that I speak under
Benedicite, and in our most strait confidence; and imitate herein that Queen,
who in public called her Son by the name of her Husband, but in private by the
name of her favorite; much after this sort do I; having conceived my work from
the acquaintance I have with the Latin; I let it in truth carry a French title,
but in secret and speaking in the ear I give it the name of his Father. It is
now three months that M. de Nants has been in Britanie, and M. de Tholouze in
Languedoc. Upon the first opportunity I will not fail to send them your rare
Presents, and let them know in what height of account you hold them both. Do me
the like office to Mounsieur Bourdelot, and assure him that I have great
pretensions upon his learning, and that I ground my self much upon his honesty.
Hereafter one of them shall be my treasure in the necessities of my spirit, the
other my sanctuary against the malice of the World. For you Sir, it is
impossible for me to express the high opinion I conceive of you; when the
question is to speak of your virtue, I cannot find words that give me
satisfaction, and therefore at this time you shall have from me but the common
conclusion of all my Letters, that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 15. December 1633.
To Mounsieur de Aigue bear, Commander of a Company in Holland. LETTER XXXVII.
Sir,
YOur Letter has stayed here a long time for me; if I had been here at its
first arrival, I had sooner testified to you the joy with which I received it:
and the especial account I make of the meanest of your favors, I seek not
after new acquaintance; I had rather I could forgo one half of those I have
already but for yours; I vow unto you I have much desired it, and you had
attractives for me, even in the Melancholy of my Quartan Ague. I discovered a
great worth under the veil of your disvaluing your self; and saw well, that you
sought rather to go safely and solidly, than to go in pomp and state; and had
more care to nourish your mind, than to set it out in colors. I do not
therefore take you for a simple Captain of Holland, who takes nothing but
Stoccadoes; and Circumvallation; and studies such other words in that Country,
to come afterward and fright us with them here in France. I know you possess
no less the virtues of peace, than those that make a noise and handle iron: and
that you are a man of the Library, as well as of the Arsenal. Mounsieur
Huggens, I assure my self, is of the same mind; and I doubt not, but having
observed you in both these kinds, he relisheth as well your spirit, as he
values your courage. I am very glad of the correspondence that is between you;
of which, if you please, I shall make use hereafter, for the safety of our
Commerce. But Sir, I have another, more important request to make unto you; and
I earnestly entreat you to do for me, with my Lord --: the good offices, which
I have right to hope your goodness will afford me. It has been written to me
from Paris, that he had some sinister conceit of me; and indeed the coldness of
his countenance, the last time I had the honor to do him reverence, seemed to
show as much. This misfortune comes not to me by any fault of mine: for I swear
unto you Sir, that I have always carried toward him a most religious respect;
and have never spoken of him, but as of a man of very extraordinary parts. It
must needs be, that this is some rellick of those impressions, which -- has
left in him: and that he judges of me by the report of my Enemies. I will not
move questions against the memory of a dead man; nor blame the passion of a
great worthy. There have been some moved with motives less reasonable, that
have wept for their Dogs; and built Tombs for beasts they loved. In that, I
acknowledge the good fortune of --: but you know better than any other what his
honesty was: and you ought upon this occasion to give your uttermost Testimony
in behalf of calumniated innocence. I conjure you to do it effectually: and
from what Coast soever the evil come, take into your protection an honest man,
who passionately is

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 3. of February 1633.
Another to him. LETTER XXXVIII.
SIR,
I Have received in one Packet, a Letter from you, of the four and twentieth of
March; and another from Mounsieur Huggens of the fifteenth of December. I give
you a thousand thanks for each of them; and complain not, that I stayed a while
for the latter, seeing if it had come a readier way, it had perhaps not come so
safe a way: neither contains it any news, whereof the knowledge might not be
forborne without any danger: no matter in it, that either concerns the life of
the Prince, or the good of the state. It might have come time enough, ten years
hence; for it speaks of nothing but of Kings and Commonwealths, that have been
long ago. Our commerce has no object, but our books; and I have no reason to
complain of a slowness, that does a favor to my negligence. But my good
neighbor, -- suffers me to be idle no longer; she will have me hereafter make
use of her messengers; and by consequent, ease you of your conveying them. Yet
for my part, I exempt you not altogether, but if you return into Holland, at
the time you have appointed; you shall do me the favor to remember the note I
send you. I entreat you also to demand of our friends in that Country, what
reason they have to bring into our language a new fashion of speaking; and
which by the communication you have with them, is gotten into the Letter you
sent me. If you say, my Masters the States; you may as well say, Mounsieur the
Council; and Madam the Assembly: and more than this; if many Senators that
make the body of a Republic, may be called my Masters the States, then every
Senator, which makes a part of that body, may be called Mounsieur the State:
and if this be suffered, the most strange opinions of -- shall be authorized by
public use: of the same words will be made another language, and after this it
cannot be thought strange, that -- should speak of the Seigneurie of Venice; as
of the Infanta of Portugal; and that she should marry with Mounsieur the Kings
brother. It is true the league committed the like incongruity when it gave the
Duke de Main, the Title of Lieutenant of the State, and Crown of France, but
this was not without a check: you know what sport the Catholicon makes at it;
and with what force he defends at once, both the rights of the Kingdom, and the
Laws of Grammar. And where the same Author in another place, calls the
Assembly, which was held at Paris; My Lords the States; he did that but to make
it ridiculous; and not with meaning to speak regularly: Our dear friends may
make of a little City, a great; but of a bad word they cannot make a good: and
though their liberty extend very far, yet it reaches not to license Barbarism.
Mounsieur Huggens will consider of this point; and if in propounding to the
Council so important a matter, he shall speed well; he shall have the honor to
purge his Country of a vicious phrase, as much in the judgment of
Grammarians, as to free it from a Hidra, or Chymaera, and therein shall show
himself a Hercules, or a Bellerophon. This is a way I take with my friends, to
make my self laugh; because I am given to pensiveness when I am alone; and I
cannot stir up any Joy in me, but by the presence, at least the representation
of some person, which is both dear unto me, and chosen for the nonce: of this
number Sir, you are, and know well, that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
From Paris 3. of April 1634.
To Mounsieur de Bois Robert. LETTER XXXIX.
Sir,
IN the mean time, till I see you; be pleased to receive from me a complement,
which shall not be tedious: Only to let me congratulate with you the recovery
of your health. God has now a kind of interest in preserving it; seeing you
have consecrated it to him; and your life is vowed to a perpetual Meditation of
his Mysteries. I doubt not of his blessing this your holy desire; and look at
my return to find a great Preacher under your Cassock. You will show me as
many Homilies, as heretofore you have showed me Sonnets: and instead of
Parnassus and Permessa; you will speak of Sion, and of Siloe. Yet moderate your
self a little at first: and be reserved in a strange Country. I would not have
you dive too deep into the Abysses of Predestination; famous for the shipwracks
of so many Pilots; or to speak more plainly, for the Heresies of so many
Doctors. If you will take my counsel, you shall let the Jesuits and the
Jacobins fight it out between themselves about the Question De Auxiliis; and
never meddle amongst them, nor go about to part them. The often using of
Syllogismes is very dangerous for health; there is nothing that heats the
blood, or enflames Choler more then Disputation. Besides, though you make your
self hoarse with speaking for the Truth, and make it never so plain: yet you
shall never make your adversary to confess it; or ever be able to take hold of
him, so long as he can slip from you by a distinction. Above all Sir, let not
the love of Divinity make you forget your temporal affairs, and the care of
your fortune: for otherwise, It were better I should study with you to halfs;
and that you should make the Court both for your self and me. As I am like to
acquit my self extreme badly; so you are likely to grow soon to perfection; and
I despair not, one of these days to salute you by the Title, Of Most Reverend
Father in God. I know you do not disllike that we should write, to one another
in this kind of style, which Cicero and Trebatius made use of, before such
time as untoward Complements had corrupted friendship; and that this
base-jangling was brought into fashion. This Trebatius was a famous Lawyer: of
whom Cicero made great account; and yet is always wrangling with him about his
Science, and his formal Writs: the like liberty I am bold to take with you;
whom I honor infinitely; and should not in this sort contribute to our common
joy, if I were not with a perfect freeness of heart

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 11. of November. 1633.
Another to him. LETTER XL.
SIR,
I Pity your good fortune, the Court that follows you at your Chamber would be
to me an unsupportable honor, who would not give my Mornings for all the
Complements of Paris. It is the flower and prime of the day that is taken from
you; it is the time of Meditation and Prayer which flattery intrudes upon.
There is no Creditour nor Sergeant that you might not deal withal better cheap
than with these troublesome friends. You are unfortunate to be so beloved, and a
man of whom so many other have use, can be of little, or no use to himself. It
is better yet to pass for a Clown, than thus to prostitute ones self by
civility, and better never to sacrifice to the graces, than to make ones self
the beast for the Sacrifice. You would perhaps intermit this course, but the
time is past for that; a breach would draw upon you a War; and you would run
the fortune of that poor Saint, who was murdered with pricks of Pen-knives,
and cut in pieces by his Scholars. You would be the object of a Rhetorical, an
Historical and a Poetical persecution; and the muses, which now court you,
would grow furious, and fall a tearing you, so that you have no remedy now but
to hold it out, if you look for safety in the place you are in; you must ever
be the mediator between Apollo and Poets; you must always have a thousand
businesses both in Prose and Verse, your Chamber must be the passage always
from the University to the Court. This backdoor whereof you have sent me a
Platform, is in truth an excellent invention, but this will presently be
discovered, and you will gain nothing by it, but to be besieged in more places
at once. Do better Sir, quit the place that is not tenable, and come save your
self at -- I am not so poor, but I can make you a resemblance at least of the
good cheer of Paris, and furnish you with innocent pleasures, such as
Philosophy and Priesthood will allow of; It shall be for as short a time as you
please; and only to make an ill custom take another course. All the family
desires this voyage, particularly -- who is in good hope his Son cannot prove
ill, seeing you have no ill opinion of him, and for his Daughter of whom you
write me so much good: I cannot stay my self from vowing to you, that she is
not altogether unworthy of it; and perhaps would have deserved an Air with
three couplets of your making, if she had appeared in the time when you were
the great Chaunter of France. But now that you have changed your course of
life, there is no looking for any thing from you but spiritual discourse and
Christian Meditations, which yet will serve as fitly for a Sex to which
devotion belongs no less than beauty. Bring therefore to us the Original of
your piety and of your Divinity, at least show some sorrow that you cannot do
it, that I may see my affection is not scorned, and that I am not without
revenge

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 1. of December. 1634.
Another to him. LETTER XLI.
SIR,
IF you hold your old wont, you will tax me with ignorance, and write me a man
of another World; one delivered me but yesternight observations upon the
process of the Marshall of -- and I set my self to reading all the time my
Groom set himself to sleeping. In very truth they gave me an excellent relish;
and I vow unto you I never read a style more subtle, nor that hid its Art more
cunningly; I entreat you to send me word who the Author is, and to whom I am
beholding for so pleasing a night. It must needs be some man who understands
two things equally well, affairs and how to write, one that partakes of the
life of a Scholar, and of a Courtier; like to that God of whom the Poets say,
he is of the one and other World, Vtroque facit commercia mundo. From the
knowledge of Books he draws the vigor and force of his phrase, and from the
practice of the Court; the colors and sweetening of his matter. He speaks the
language of the Closet, and brings proofs of the Palace; but in such sort,
that neatness does not weaken his reasons; and his force is so tempered; that
even Ladies may be judges of the process. Once again, I entreat you to send me
the name of this sage Observer, and besides, to give me account what grace I
stand in with Mounsieur de --: I was told in no very good grace; neither I, nor
my writings neither. If I made but little reckoning of him; I should easily
comfort my self for this disgrace: but in truth, it would grieve me much to be
condemned by a judgment, to which I should make a conscience not to subscribe;
and I rather believe, there are many defects in my writings; than that in his
taste there is any defect of reason. Assure him Sir, if you please, that I am
at least capable of Discipline: and am apt enough to follow any method he shall
prescribe me, for attaining a proportion of knowledge to content him. Let him
but tell me my faults, and see how quickly I will mend them; let him but say,
what it is in my style that offends him; and see how ready I shall be to give
him satisfaction. If my Hyperboles displease him; I will blot them out of my
Letters the next time they are printed; I will truly confess all I have ever
used, and make a solemn vow never to use more. Yet it cannot be truly said;
that to use this Figure; is a matter that deserves blame; for, not to speak of
humane Authors, we should then blame the Son of God; for saying. It is easier
for a Cammel to go through a needles eye, than for a rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of heaven. But I will not seek to save my self by so supreme an
authority: In this, I will respect our Savior, but not follow him; I will
believe that such examples are far above all humane imitation; and will not
attempt it no more than to walk upon the water, and to go forty days without
eating. In good earnest, I would do any thing to give contentment to a man that
gives contentment to M. the Cardinal; and has persuaded the King of Sweden. If
he will play the Tyrant with those that seek his favor, let him; I refuse not
hence forward the hardest conditions he can lay upon me; and to gain his
protection; I renounce with all my heart my very liberty: It is now four and
twenty hours since I laid my eyes together; It is time therefore that I bid you
good morrow, or good night; take which of them you please; and believe me
always,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 4. December 1634.
To Mounsieur the Master Advocate in the Parliament. LETTER XLII.
SIR,
YOu know I have fed upon the fruits of Pomponne, even beyond the rules of
temperance; and I told you there that they are generally excellent; yet I now
especially declare my self, in favor of the last you sent me, and find them,
far surpassing the Amber Pear, or all other kinds, which I cannot name. It is
true, I affect especially the Tree it self that bears them: and I account the
meanest of the Leaves, no meaner than Jewels: yet their own goodness is such,
that though they grew in the Garden of --: or grew upon a stock that Father --:
had planted; yet I should not for all that, but highly esteem them, and take a
pleasure in their taste. In a word, to leave speaking in Allegory, and not to
flounder my self in a Figure, into which you have most maliciously cast me: I
say Sir, that in all your Presents, I see nothing but excellent; and least you
should think, I meant to exempt my self from giving a particular account of my
judgment, by speaking in general terms: I let you know, that in the first
place, the two lines spoken of at the end of the discourse, please me
infinitely; and next to this that place which is written upon occasion of --:
that France is too good a Mother to rejoice in the loss of her Children; and
that the victories gotten upon our selves, are fit to wear mourning, and be
covered with black vails. All that could have been said upon this Argument,
would never have been comparable to this ingenious silence. And as he has
dexterously shunned a passage so tender, so he enters as bravely, and as
proudly upon a matter that will bear it; when speaking of --: he says, that
having overcome the waves and the winds, that opposed his passage, and
traversed the fires of so many Canons of the Enemies; with a few poor Barks, he
made his way through a Forest of great ships, and despising all the English
Forces, made a small Island to be the Grave of the glory of that great Queen
of the Northern Islands. And a little after; where he says: that God, who
bestows his favors upon Nations, by measure; seeing, that the admirable valor
of ours, would easily Conquer the whole World; if it had Prudence equal to its
courage, seems therefore to have given us, as a Counterpoise to the greatness
of our spirits; a kind of impetuosity and impatience, which to our Armies have
oftentimes been fatal, and cause of ruin. But that now the case is altered in
this point: that now the French are only French in the Courage and Valor;
that these Lions are grown reasonable; and now, to the strength and courage of
the North; they join the prudence and stayedness of the South, etc. Also where
he says, that the carriage at Cazal, is a thing incomprehensible; and for
which we must be fain to look out some new name; for it cannot be called a
Siege, seeing the place was surrendered before ever it was battered: nor it
cannot be called a battle, seeing no man struck a stroke: nor it cannot be
called a Treaty, seeing Treaties are not made with Weapons in hand, etc. But
that which pleases me most of all, because it touches indeed the string of my
own inclination; is that which he speaks of the Marquess of Rambovillet: that
there had been Statues erected in honor of her virtue; if she had fortuned to
be born in the beginning of her race. For, as you know Sir, this illustrious
Woman, is of Roman stock; Et de Gente Sabella; of which Virgil speaks. These
are the passages I can call to mind, having not the Originals by me: being
taken from me, by a neighboring Lady; who affects the King of Sweden with the
like passion, as Madam Rambovillet, if I durst discover my self therein; they
should both know how I do concur with them, so eminent a virtue may chastely
enough be loved of both Sexes; and let the slanderous History speak its
pleasure; I for my part think no otherwise of it, than as the Queen of Sheba
loved Solomon: and as Nicomedes loved Caesar. I had begun something for the
Triumph of this great Prince, but his death made my Pen fall out of my hand;
and therefore you are like to have nothing from me at this time in revenge of
your Sonnet. For your French Prose, I send you another, which I will never
believe to be Latin, until -- shall assure you, it is; to whom I entreat you
to show it from me: Vir plane cum Antiquitate conferendus, and qui mihi est in
hoc genere, unus curia, Censor and Quirites. I have read many things of his
with infinite satisfaction: but I know, he has certain miseries in his
writing, which he lets not common people know; and -- has told me of a
continuation he has written, of the History of M. de Thou; which is not
imparted but to his special friends; and which, I am infinitely desirous to
see: but I am not a man that will enter by force upon any man's secrets: and my
discretion in such cases, shall be always greater than my curiosity, Optare
licebit, si potiri non licet, If I should not presently make an end of my
Letter, I should kill you with Latin; for I find my self in an humor that
way; and in this desert where I live: I have no commerce, but wi^h such as
speak all Latin, I would persuade you to revive them in our language; by an
imitation which you are able to do, not much unlike those great examples; I
mean of Cicero, of Salust, and of Livie; not of Cassiodore, or Ennodius
Ticinensis, or Sidonius Apollinaris. They that love this impurity of style, are
in a sicker state than they that love to eat Coals and ashes. Fat be it from
us, to have such disordered appetites, and let us never be so foolish, to
prefer the corruption and decay of things before their prime, and their
maturity, I am

At Balzac 4. of February 1633. Sir, Your, etc.

Another to him. LETTER XLIII.
SIR,
HE that delivers you this Letter, knows as much of my news as I my self, and
will make you ample relation of all that has passed at --: He has a business
in the Parliament, which is of no great difficulty; and which may be sped
without any great eloquence: yet I address it to you, but upon condition, that
you shall not employ your whole force about it; but that your laboring for him
may be a refreshing to you, from some other labor. I hear with a great deal of
pleasure, of the progress of your reputation, and of the effects of my
presages. The acclamations you cause in the Palace, are sounding in all
places; and we are not so out of the World, but that the Echo of them comes to
us. But Sir, I content not my self with clapping of hands, and praising your
well-speaking, as others do; I desire to have some particular ground, for which
to give your thanks, and am willing to be in your debt, for complement and
reverence; this shall be, when you have sped my friends suit: and which shall
be a cause, if you please, that I will now at the end of my Letter, add a
superlative; and say I am;

Sir, Your most humble, most faithful, etc.
At Balzac 2. of Nov. 1631.
Another to him. LETTER XLIV.
SIR,
I Make no secret of our friendship, it is too honest to be hidden; and I am so
proud of it, that I think my self of no worth but by it. Mounsieur Jamyn,
acknowledges my good Fortune herein, and is himself in passion to get your
acquaintance, to which he persuades himself I should not be his worst
introductor; and that by my means he might be admitted to your Closet. I will
make my self believe that he shall not be deceived in this opinion; and that
for my sake you will add to your accustomed courtesies a little extraordinary.
They who saw Pericles, how he thundered and lightened in the public Assemblies,
were desirous to hear him in a quieter estate; to know whether his calm were as
sweet and pleasing as his Tempest. This man has the like desire; and though my
recommendation were as indifferent to you, as it is dear; yet so honest a
curiosity would deserve to be respected. He is the Son of one of my best
friends, and though perhaps you know it not, you are the example that Fathers
propose for imitation to their Children; and by whose name they excite to
virtue all their youth. I need not say more to you of this; only be mindful
of our resolute and undaunted Maxims; and in this age of malice, do not scorn
the praise I give you for your goodness. I kiss the hands of all your eloquent
family, and I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris 16. of Febr. 1634.
To Mounsieur de Caupeau ville Abbot of Victory. LETTER XLV.
Sir,
THe time which my malady permits me, I bestow upon you, and make use of the
respite of my fits, to tell you, I have received your last Letters, and the new
assurances of your friendship: which is so much the dearer unto me, because I
know you use them with discretion; and that there be not many things you
greatly affect. This makes for my glory, that I can please so dainty a taste;
and that I can get good from one that is so covetous. It is no small matter to
draw a wise man out of himself; and to make Philosophy compassionate of others
evils. Although the place, to which she has raised you cannot be more eminent,
nor more sure; yet my disgraces may be cause that her prospect is not so fair,
or pleasant: and how settled soever the peace of your mind be, yet the Object
of a persecuted friend, may perhaps offend your eyes. Our Mounsieur de
Berville, I assure my self, dislikes not this kind of wisdom: he likes to have
that husbanded and dressed, which Zeno would have to be rooted out; he knows
that magnanimity has its residence between effeminateness and cruelty; and
that the sweet and humane virtues, have place between the Fierce and the
Heroic. Poets sometimes make the Demi Gods to weep; and if an old woman's death
were cause enough to make Aeneas shed tears; the oppression of one innocent,
cannot be unworthy of your sighs. Yet I require from you, none of these sad
offices: your only countenance is enough to give me comfort. I do not live,
but in the hope I have to see it, and to get you to swear once again in
presence of the fair Agnes, and the rest of your Chamber Divinities, that you
love me still. After that, if you will have us make a voyage in your Abbey, I
shall easily condescend: Provided Sir, that you promise me safety amongst your
Monks: and that they be none of those who profess exquisite words: and only
talk of Analysis and Cacozeal. If you have any that be of this humor, you are
an unfortunate Abbot; and you may make account to be never without suites.
First, they will ask you a double allowance: next they will question your
Revenew; and if you chance by ill hap to make a Book, you are sure to be
presently cited before the Inquisition; or at least before the Sorbon. God keep
you Sir from such Friars, and send you such as I am, who eat but once a day;
and who will not open my mouth, unless it be to praise your good words, and to
tell you sometimes, out of the abundance of my heart, that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 26. of December. 1631.
To -- LETTER XLVI.
SIR,
I Am able to live no longer, if you be resolved to love me no longer; and
think not that the good you promise me, can countervail the loss of that you
take from me. Keep your estimation and your bounty, for those that have nothing
in them but Vanity and Avarice: I am endowed from Heaven with better and more
noble passions; I like better to continue in my poverty, than in your disgrace;
and will none of this cold speculative estimation, which is but a mere device
of reason; and a part of the Law of Nations, if you give it me single, and
nothing else with it. I must tell you, I think my self worthy of something
more; and that the Letter I write to you, was worthy of a sweeter answer than
you sent me. If therein I said any thing that gave you distaste, I call that
God to witness, by whom you swear; I then wandered far from my intention. I
meant to contain my complaints within so just bounds; that you should not find
the least cause to take offense. But I see I have been an ill interpreter of my
self, and my rudeness has done wrong to my innocence: yet any man but your
self, would I doubt not have born with a friend in passion, and not so
unkindely have returned choler for sorrow. As for my pettish humor, it is
quickly over, and there is not a shorter violence, than that of my spirit:
whereas you have taken five whole weeks to digest your indignation, and in the
end come to tell me, you would do me any good you can, upon condition to love
me no longer. I vow unto you, it is a glorious act to do good to all the World,
and to make even ungrateful men beholding. But Sir, if you think me one, to
whom you may give that name; you do me exceedingly much more wrong, than it is
in your power to do me right: Neque decorum sapienti, unde amico infamiam
parat, inde sibi gloriam quaerere. I am wounded at the very heart, with this
you have written; but since you will not suffer me to complain; I must be fain
to suffer and say nothing; only I will content my self, to make a Declaration
contrary to yours; and tell you, I will never make you beholding to me, because
I am not happy enough to be able to do it; but yet I will love you always, and
will always perfectly be

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 1. of March 1633.
To Mounsieur Trovillier, Physician of the Popes House. LETTER XLVII.
SIR,
HAving always made especial reckoning of your friendship; it is a great
satisfaction to me, that I receive assurance of it, by your Letter. I doubt not
of your compassionating my disgraces; and that the persecution raised against
me, has touched you at least with some sense of grief; for even mere strangers
to me, did me these good Offices; and though the justice of my cause had not in
it self been worthy of respect; yet the violence of my adversaries was enough
to procure me favor and protectours. There is no man of any generous spirit,
that found not fault with the wits of your Philarchus: nor a man of any wisdom
that thought him not a Sophister. Yet I cannot blame you for loving him: seeing
I know well, you do it not to prejudice me, and that your affection corrupts
not your judgment. You are too intelligent, to be deceived with petty
subtilties; and too strong, to be broken with engines of Glass; but in truth,
being as you are, a necessary friend, to a number of persons of different
qualities; it cannot be, but you must needs have friends of all prices, and of
all me it, and that the unjust as well as the innocent are beholding to you.
You shall hear by Mounsieur --, when he comes to Rome, the little credit I have
with the man you spoke to me of, to whom I present my service, but only once a
year; and that I do too, least I should forget my name, and mistake my person.
If in any other matter, which is absolutely in my own power; you will do me the
honor to employ me; you shall see my course is not to use excuses and colors,
but that I truly am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris 4. of April 1631.
To Mounsieur Gerard, Secretary to my Lord the Duke d'Espernon. LETTER XLVIII.
SIR,
YOu cannot complain, nor be in misery by your self alone: I partake of all
your good and evil, and feel so lively a reflection of them, that there needs
but one blow to make two wounds. And thus I am wounded by the news you write,
and though your grief he not altogether just, yet it is sufficient to make me
partake with you, that it is yours. We weep for one not only whom we knew not,
but whom we know to be happy: one that in six months staying in the World has
gained that, which St. Anthony was afraid to lose after three score years
penance in the wilderness. I wish I could have had the like favor; and have
died at the time, when I was innocent: being my self, neither valiant nor
ambitious, I account those wars the best that are the shortest; and that,
though in Paradise there be diverse degrees; and diverse mansions; yet there is
not any that is not excellent good. Conserve only your goodly maker of Saints,
and you shall find some of all sorts; I mean of the one, and the other Sex:
Religious and Seculars, Gascoignes and French. You know well, I have appointed
you here a Chamber; and that you are my debtor of a visit, now a whole year,
if you be a man of your word; but I fear me you are not, and that as your
custom is, you will content your self with praising my quiet course of life;
yet I would have you to flatter at least my spirit, though it be, but with some
light hope of so perfect a contentment: promise me you will come, and make me
happy; though you break your promise, I shall enjoy at least, so much of good;
and in doing so, you shall amuse me, though you do not satisfy me. I send you
all I have of that admirable Incognito; of whom there is so much talk, and who
has made himself famous now these three years, under the name of Petrus
Aurelius: I cannot for my life find who he is. Mounsieur de Filsac, told me
lately at Paris, that of him that brought the leaves to Printing, he could not
possibly learn any more than this, that he was a man, who desires to serve God
invisibly. And in truth, if you knew in what sort he carries his secrecy; and
with what care and cunning he hides himself; you would confess he takes more
pains to shun reputation, than ambitious men take in running after it. For from
being a Plagiary, to rob others of their glory, who refuses that which is his
own, and suffers a Phantasme, to receive those acclamations and praises which
belong to himself. This is no man of the common mould; even in the judgment of
his adversaries; and his writings savor not the compositions of this age. They
are animated with the spirit and vigor of the former times; and represent us a
Church we never saw. Yet it seems in some passages, he has less of Saint
Austins sweetness than of Saint Hieroms choler; and that he is willinger to do
that, which justice only permits him, than that which charity counsels him. I
could wish he had showed a little more respect to the gray hairs, and rare
merit of Father Sirmond; or rather that he would have dulled the edge of his
Arms, and dealt with him in a gentler war. But there is no means to bridle a
provoked valor, nor to guide a great force, though with a great moderation.
All Saints are not of one temper; it is enough for Religion to cut off vices;
and to purify the passions. Our moral Divinity acknowledges some innocent
cholers; and it is the beauty of Christ's flock, that there be Lions amongst the
sheep, and that as well the sublimest and strongest spirits as the basest and
sweetest submit and prostrate themselves to the greatness of Christianity. If I
had learned nothing in his book but only to know what respect men owe to a
Character reverenced of the Angels, I had not lost my time in reading him. If
Bishops be Princes, and if their Dignity be equal or Superior to Kings, shall
we make any difficulty, to call a Prelate, My Lord; and esteem him less than a
Grand of Spain, or than an Earl of England? You will tell me more of this at
your next meeting; and I doubt not, setting aside the interest of -- send it me
back when you have read it; and forget not the Chapters of honest Bernia. I am
more than I am able to express,

At Balzac 15. of October 1634. Sir, Your, etc.

To my Lord the Bishop of Nants. LETTER XLIX.
SIR,
I Am now grown shameless, and make no longer any conscience to be troublesome
to you. But you may thank your own goodness for it: which has from the very
first been so ready to me, and freely makes me offer of that, for which it
ought to make be a suitor. I send you now four leaves for Ruel and if you
please to let three of your own lines bear them company, I doubt not but they
will have a happy arrival, and that the skiff will procure passage for the
great vessel. But because Fortune her self, has done one half of my discourse,
and that I have little commerce with any but Latins born, I humbly entreat you
my Lord, to be so good, when I am fallen to help me to rise, and not suffer me
to go astray, in a Country, where you are Prince. I know you love your own
elections, with more than natural tenderness, and that you respect me; as none
of the least of your Creatures. This is a cause, why to keep me in your favor,
and to engage you in my interests, I will not tell you to your face, that you
are the Chrysostom of our Church, that you are privy to the most secret
intentions of Saint Paul, That there is neither Jew nor Gentile, that hearing
you speak of the greatness and Dignity of Christianity, does willinlgy submit
himself to follow Christ, I will only say, it has been your will to be my
Father, and that I am

My Lord, Your, etc.
At Balzac 8. of Jan. 1630.
Another to him. LETTER L.
SIR,
YOu have a right to all occasions of doing good. I see not therefore, how I
can forbear to offer you one; and to the end, you may always be meriting of
thanks, why I should not always be craving new courtesies. The bearer of this
Letter is my near Kinsman, yet our friendship is nearer, than our alliance, and
the knot which Nature made, virtue has tied. I humbly entreat your Lordship,
to let him see you slight not things, whereof I make such reckoning, and to do
that for my sake, which you would much willinger do for his own sake, if he
were known unto you. He is a man of metal and spirit; and has served the King
in this Province, having also had the honor to be in person before him in very
famous actions. At this time, he is troubled against all right and reason, and
they that have drawn him from the exercise of his charge, to make him walk to
Paris, have nothing to say, but that they do it of purpose to vex him. And
therefore their manner of fight with him, is by flights and retreats, and they
cast so many bones of difficulty, between his Judges and him, that it is
impossible they should ever come to any issue. They are not able to hinder his
justification at last; but they are able to delay, and keep him off a long
time. You Sir, may save him this long journey, and may break this Project that
Calumny sets on; if you please but to facilitate the overture, he will propose
unto you, obtaining for him of -- only one quarter of an hours audience, I
assure my self, he will not be loath to hear him, being able to inform him of
the state of things in these parts; and which he will do faithfully, having
thereof a special knowledge. You shall therefore my Lord, infinitely oblige
him, to take him into your protection, and you may be pleased to remember, that
it is your dear Son, that makes this request unto you, one whom in the ecstasy
of your Fatherly affection, you have sometimes called your glory; and the
ornament of this age, who yet accounts no quality he has so glorious, as that
which he will never part with, whilst he lives; to be

My Lord, Your, etc.
From Balzac 3. of April 1631.
FINIS.
A SUPPLY TO THE SECOND PART; OR, THE THIRD PART of the Letters of Mounsieur De
BALZAC. Written by him in French, and Translated into English By Sr. R. B.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Francis Eglesfield, at the Marigold in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1654.

To my LORD, the Cardinal De la Valet. LETTER I.
SIR, being not able to bring you this untoward Present my self, I humbly
entreat you to execuse me that I send it. Wherein I bind you not to a second
perusal, and to read that again, which perhaps you have read already with
distaste. It is true Sir, that something is altered in the Copy, and well near
one half added to the Original; but the spite is, that base Wares get no
value by store, and the water that comes from the same Spring, can never be
much differing: but if in any of the passages, I have not altogether come off
ill, and that I have had some tolerable conceits, I acknowledge Sir, that I
have had it all from the good education I had with you; and that it is the
fruit of those Instructions, which you have done me the honor to impart unto
me. For, no man ever had conceits more pure, more pregnant, than your self; no
man ever saw things more clearly than you do; you can tell precisely in what
degree of good and evil any thing stands; and to find out the truth, there
needs no more, but to follow your Opinion. But to speak truly, I fear this
quality in you, no less than I esteem it; you have too much knowledge in you
for a Discourse that requires simplicity in the Reader. Neither am I so
unadvised, to expose it to the severity of your judgment, I submit it rather
to the protection of your goodness, and hope you will not lay open those
faults, which none but your self shall see: Humbly entreating you to protect a
spirit of your own making; and not so much to consider my manner of expressing,
as the affection with which I am

Sir, Yours, etc.

To the same as before. LETTER II.
SIR, I am negligent, for fear of being troublesome, and lest I should be
Importunately complementall, I forebeare to show my self officiously dutiful.
But my fault growing from discretion, I hope you will not take it ill, that I
have a care not to trouble you, and that you will pardon the intermission of my
Letters, which has no other end, but the solacing your Eyes. I seek no
colors of Art, to paint out the affection I owe to your service; This were to
corrupt the natural purity. Truth is simple and shamefast, and when she
cannot show her self by real effects, she will scorn to do it by verbal
expressions. It is not in my tongue to express her otherwise, than in such
terms as are the engagements of a lie; and when I shall have made you most
sincere protestations of inviolable fidelity, there will come a couzening
companion that will out-vy me, and endeare himself beyond all my oaths. I
could wish there were some mark to distinguish protestations that are true,
from those that are feigned; for if there were, I should have great advantage
over many Courtiers, more officious and more hot in offering their service,
than I am, and you should acknowledge that the eminency of your virtue, not to
speak of the eminency of your dignity, is of no man more religiously
reverenced, than of my self, who am, and ever will be

Sir, Your, etc.

To Monsieur Godea. LETTER III.
SIR, Disguising will not serve your turn, you are a remarkable man, and
whether it be that you call the dissembling of Art, Negligence, or that you
cannot put off those ornaments, which are naurall in you; I let you know that
the excellency of your style, extends even to your familiar speech, and that
you are able to sweeten it without sawcing it. A man may see that come
springing and flowing from you, which in others is brought a far off, and that
with engines; you gather that which others pull off, and though you write
nothing loosly, yet you write nothing with streyning: yet I must tell you, they
are not the periods of your sentences, nor the pawses that win me so much
unto you; I am too gross for such slender and fine threads; if you had nothing
but rich conceits and choice words, this were but the virtue of a Sophister,
and I should place you in the number of things that may please, but not of
things that one ought to love; I make more reckoning of the honesty of a dumb
man, than of the eloquence of a varlet: I look after the good of society, and
the comfort of life, and not after the delight of Theaters, and the amusement
of company: Let us make then a serious profession of our duties, and let us
give good examples to an evil age; let us make the world see, that the
knowledge we have of virtue, is not merely speculative; and let us justify our
Books and our Studies, that now are charged with the vices and imperfections
of their Teachers. Philosophy is not made to be played withal, but to be made
use of, and we must count it an Armor, and not a painted Coat. They are men
of the worst making, that now a days make the worst doing; sots take upon them
to be subtle, and we have no more any tame Beasts amongst us, they are all
savage and wild. For my self, who have seen wickedness in its Triumph, and
who have sometime lived in the Country of subtlety and craft; I assure you, I
have brought nothing from thence, but loathing and before ever I tasted it, was
cloyed: I am exceeding glad to find you of the same diet, and doubt not of the
Doctrine I Preach, seeing I read the same in your own Letter; Believe it Sir,
there is none more wholesome, none more worthy of our Creation. Which I am
resolved to maintain, even to Death, and will no more leave it, than the
resolution I have made, to be without ceasing;

Sir, Your, etc.

To Monsieur Godeau again. LETTER IV.
SIR, I have known a good while, that you are no longer a Druyde, and that you
lately made your entry into Paris: I doubt not but with magnificence enough,
and not without bestowing some public largess. I never knew you go a
forraging, that you returned not home laden with booty; and your Voyages have
always enriched your followers. I pretend my self to have a feeling of this,
and though far removed from the place where you act them, yet I do not
mean, that my absence should cause me to lose my share in the distribution of
your good deeds. Cease not Sir, I entreat you, to bind me unto you, and to
deserve well of our language. Fill our Closets with the fruits of your brain,
and since you can do it, make us to gather more sheaves of Corn, than the best
workmen hitherto have left us ears. My devotion stands waiting continually for
your Christian works, and I entreat you, they may be done in such a volume,
that we may carry them handsomely with us to Church. That which I have seen of
them, does so exceedingly please me, that I would be a Poet for nothing else
but with some indifferent grace to praise them, and to say, Verses bless him
that makes such blessed Verses.

If I did not love you well, I should envy you the conversation of Monsieur
Chaplain, of which in a fortnight I received not one small spark by the
ordinary Post. Thus I do but taft of that whereof you make full meals; yet
remember, I have as good right in him as your self, and though I trust you
with the keeping him, yet I do not quit my part in him; To him and you both, I
am most affectionately.

Your, etc.

To Monsieur Conrat. LETTER. V.
SIR, had undertaken to have answered to every point of your eloquent Letter,
but when I had spent a whole month about it, I could not satisfy my self
with my undertaking. That which I had written, was not worthy, me thought, that
I should Father it; and I began to think I should do you a great courtesy,
to save you the reading of an ill Oration. But seeing of evils, the least are
the best, you shall have cause to be pleased with this complement, which will
cost you no more but one look to look over, and never put you to the labor
of turning over the leaf. I have this only to say at this time, that the
report, which was spread of my death, has not killed me, and that in despite
of rumor and mortal Presages, I intend to be happy by your means, and not to
forgo the good fortune presented to me in your person: so I call your
excellent friendship, with which no burden is heavy, no calamity dolorous. For
I know I shall find in you that ancient generousnesse, whereof Monsieur de la
Nove, and Monsieur de Ferres, made profession: I account when I discover
secrets to you, I hide them; and shall have no jealousy of my honor when I
have put it into your hands. In such sort Sir, that my soul should be a very
hard temper, if it did not feel a kind of tickling in so present and great
adventages, and if I should not most perfectly be, as you oblige me to be,

Your, etc.

To my Lord the Bishop of Nantes. LETTER VI.
SIR, I was upon the point of sending my footman to you, when I saw your
footman enter my Lodging, who brought me news exceeding joyful; and now I
depend no longer upon Fortune, since another besides her self can make me
happy; and am so indeed as much as I would wish, and should never know the
value of your friendship, if I made it not the bounds of my ambition. To
complain of forturne, and to be your favorite, are things that imply a mortal
contradiction: it is an easy matter to comfort a pension ill paid, when a man
is in possession of store of treasure, and having neither the gift of
impudency, nor of hypocrisy, it is not for me to prosper in an age which
esteem them most that are owners of these qualities. It is enough for me, that
M. the Cardinal does me the honor to wish me well, and condemns not your
judgment of me; all other disgraces, from whence soever they come, I am
prepared to bear, and take for a favor the contempt that is linked to the
profession of virtue. But it is too much to say of me, that which Seneca said
to Cato: Catonem saeculum suum parum intellexit. These are transcendencies of
Mr. de Nantes, and impostures of love. He stretches all objects to infinity,
and all his comparisons are beyond proportion. The Sun and the Stars are
common things with him, and he can find noting in Nature godly enough to serve
for a similitude of that he loves. It is this deceitful passion has made you
believe, that I am of some great worth, and that my barren soil is fruitful
in high conceits. But Sir, I count all this nothing, if this love of yours
peswade you not to come and stay a while in it, and to be mindful of your
word. I have put Monsieur -- in hope hereof, and make my self sure since you
have made me a solemn promise; knowing that Truth is resident upon the mouth
of Bishops.

Dixisti, venies, Grave and immutabile sanctis
Pondus adest verbis, and vocem fata sequuntur.
The Author of these Verses shall be your fourth suppliant: it is one that
has been of your old acquaintance, and was accounted the Virgil of his time. I
make use of him upon this occasion, because perhaps you will make more
reckoning of him than of me, who yet am more than any man in the World,

Sir, Your, etc.

Another to my Lord Bishop of Nantes. LETTER VII.
SIR, I speak Latin but once a year, and yet as seldom as it is, it comes
more upon hazard than out of knowledge, and holds less of learning than of
rapture: vouchsafe therefore to take it in good part, that in my settled
brains, I answer you in the vulgar Tongue, and tell you, that never Ears were
more attentive, nor more prepared to hearing, than those of our family when I
read your Letter before them: they were not satisfied to have only a litterall
interpretation, and to make me their Grammarian, but I must declaime upon it,
and make a Paraphrase as large as a Commentary. If you will know the success,
I can truly say, that all the company was well satisfied; but I may tell you
all, that they were ever ravished with admiration of your bounty, specially my
Niece, who in the greatest vanity, that sex is capable of, never durst imagine
she should ever have the honor to be praised in Latin, and should serve for an
Argument of commendation to the greatest Doctor of our age. She says, this is
a second obligation you bind her in, to make her a Roman after you have made
her your daughter; and to give her so noble a Country, after giving her so
worthy a Father. And yet to these two favors, I can add a third, which she
forgot: methinkes Sir, she fattens and grows up with these praises you give
her; she is fairer by one half than she was before. And if from virtue there
issue certain beams, which enlighten the Objects that are near it; and that
beauty flows from goodness, as from the Spring, I need not then go far to
seek from whence this varnish of her look, this amiablenesse of her
countenance, is grown upon her: It is certainly your late benediction that
has painted her; and to speak it in the words of the Poet, Formosam Pater
esse dedit, Lumenque Juventae
Purpureum, and laetos oculis offlirat honores.


I have considered of the Letter whereof you pleased to send me a Copy, and in
my judgment, you have all the reason in the World to rest satisfied with it.
They could never have been more in favor of you, if you had endited them your
self, and our friend himself had writ them: if you had been the King, and he
the Secretary, if I be not deceived, this style will bring a cooling upon the
joy of -- and make them see, they have at least mistaken one word for another,
and that the absence of -- has not been a discharge of his authority, but
only a breathing from the labors of his charge. I am wrestling still with --
and preparing you an after-dinners Recreation, which I will bring my self to
Bordeaux, if you stay there till the next month. In the mean time, since you
desire new assurances of my fidelity, I swear unto you, with all the Religion
of Oaths, and with all the liberty and sinceri^y of the golden age, that I am

Sir, Your, etc.

To Monsieur de la Nauue, Counselor of the King, in his first Chamber of
Enquests. LETTER VIII.
SIR, my dear Cousin, your nobleness is not of these times, but you are
generous after the old fashion. To call the pains I put you to, a favor, and
to thank a man for persecuting you, this is a virtue which Orestes and
Phylades perhaps knew, but is now no where to be found, but either in old
fables, or in your Letter. The offers you make me, do not-so much give me a
possession, as confirm me in it, and assure me the durablenes of a happiness,
which wants nothing of being perfect, but being durable. Monsieur de -- has
stretched his belief yet further; he has told me of your coming into this
Provience, and has promised me at least some hours of those Grand days that
bring you hither: if they were as long as those of Platoes year, they should
not be too long for me, if I might be so happy to spend them in your company.
I make account to husband the least minutes of it I can take bold of, and am
about in such sort to deck up my Hermitage, that it may not be offensive to
your eyes. I can present you but with gross pleasures and Country recreations;
yet, you that are perfectly just, will not refuse to take a little contentment
where you are perfectld loved, and prefer a lively passion, and a heart
sincere, before false semblances and a dead maginificence. My complements are
short, and I am by profession a very bad Courtier, but my words carry truth in
them, and I am with all my soul,

Sir, my dear Cousin, Your, etc.
At Balzac. June 1. 1634.
To Monsieur de la Motte le Voyer. LETTER IX.
SIR, I am going from Paris in have, and carry with me the grief, that I
cannot stay to tell you in how great account I hold the offer you make me of
your friendship. It this be the price of so poor a merchandise, as that I sent
you, never was man a greater gainer by traffiking than I: and you seem in
this, not unlike those Indians, who thought to overreach the Spaniards, by
giving them Gold for Glass. I have long since known your great worth, though
you would not be known to have such worth in you; all the care you can take to
hide the beauty of your life, cannot keep the luster of it from dazeling mine
eyes, and though you make your virtue a secret, yet I have pierced into it, and
discovered it. And yet I must confess unto you my infirmity, I find it too
sublime for me, and with my uttermost ability am not able to reach it; all I
can do, is to respect it with reverence, and to follow you with my eyes and
thoughts. The World cannot raise it self above the pitch of the present age,
and be wise in equal rank with Aristides and Socrates; I am contented to be in
a lower form of virtue, for I am a man, and they demi Gods, I neither aspire
to be their equal, nor their rival, much less Sir, to be their judge or
accuser. Anitus and Melitus would be much mistaken in me, if they should think
I would join with them in their accusation, as though I thought all opinions
to be bad, which are not like mine own, I had rather think, that it is I that
lose the sight of Orafius Tubero sometimes, than think that he is strayed, or
out of the way; and rather charge my self with weakness, than accuse him of
rashness. Let him leave the middle Region of the air below him, and mount up
above the highest; let him take upon him to judge of humane things, from
Shepherds to Kings, from shrubbes to stars, provided, that he be pleased to
hold there, and bow his wings, and submit his reason to things divine. I have
not time to tell you, how much I value him. Monsieur de -- will at more leisure
entertain you with discourse about it, I only will assure you, that what
mask soever you put upon your face, I find you always exceeding amiable, and
that I will ever be

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris, 6. September. 1631.
To Madam de Villesavin. LETTER X.
MAdam, seeing it is my ill fortune, that I cannot find you then I come to see
you, I entreat you to let me speak to you by an interpreter, and that I may
make this benefit of my being so far from Paris, to have a right of writing
to you, when I could not have the power of speaking with you. Indeed, as long
as you were taken up with entertaining your dear son, whom long absence had
made, as it were new unto you, and as long as you were tasting the first joys
which his return had brought with it; It had been a great indiscretion in a
stranger, to intrude himself into your private feast, and trouble the liberty
of your familiar conversation, but now that your ecstasies of joy are
over-passed, and that a more calm estate makes you sociable to others abroad:
Now Madam, you may vouchsafe to accept my complement, and to hear me say, with
my Country freedom, that you want much of that I wish you, if you want any
thing of absolute felicity. I make no doubt but Monsieur Bourbillier your
son, as he parted from hence a right honest man, so he is turned hither an
understanding man; and that to the lights, which are given by Nature, he has
added those that are gotten by practice, and by conference. The air of Italy,
which is so powerful in ripening of fruits, has not been less favorable to
the seeds of his spirit, and having been at the springhead of humane prudence,
I assure my self, he has drawn deep of it, and has filled his mind with so
many new and sublime knowledges; that even his Father (if it were not for the
great love he bears him) might not unjustly grow jealous at it. This, Madam,
is that happiness I speak to you of, and which I have always wished to you,
and to which, there can nothing be added, but to see shortly so excellent an
instrument set a work, and so able a man employed in great affairs. When this
shall be, I shall then see the success of my ancient predictions, and of that
I have long read in his very face; so that, you may well think, I shall take
no distaste at your contentment, as well for the reputation of my skill in
Physnomy and Prognosticating, as for that I perfectly am

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac. 2. October. 1631.
To Monsieur de Gomberville. LETTER XI.
SIR, the mischance at the Tuilliries, has disqui^ted me all night, and my
unquietness would have continued still, if you had not ^^en the pains to
calm it. The news you send me, gives me life; A ^^an cannot be innocent whom
Madam de Maisonfort judges culpable, she is not one that will complain where
there is no fault; and truly, if she had taken the mischance of her page in
another fashion than she did, I would rather have abandoned reason than
maintain it against her, and would not have trusted my own testimony, if she
rejected it. You remember, that but hearing her Name, I fell down in a trance,
and that the very sight of her livery, struck into me a religious horror, and
a trembling respect, which is not borne, but to things Divine. And in this
rank, I place so rare a beauty as hers is; and though I be no man of the
World, yet I am not so very a stranger to the occurrents of the World, but that
I very well know, she is universally adored; I must not always pass for an
Hermit; this I am sure, she carries with her the desires and vows of all the
Court, and she leads in triumph those Gallants, who have themselves triumphed
over our enemies: yet I know withal, they depend more upon her by their own
passion, than by her endeavors, and follow without being drawn. These are
Captives, whom she trusts upon their word, for their true imprisonment, and
whom she suffers to be their own Keepers. In the course she holds of honesty,
her favors are so moral, or so light, that either they content none but the
wise, because they desire no more than what is given them; or none but the
unwise, because they take that to be given them, which was never meant them; so
there are some perhaps well satisfied, but it is by the force of their
imagination, and no body has cause to be proud of a Fortune, which no body
possesses. As her virtue is as clear as the fire that sparkles in her eyes,
so her reputation is as much without blemish as her beauty; and of this, honest
people give testimony by their words, and Detractors by their silence. She
makes thorns that they cannot prick, and makes slander it self to learn good
manners. And therefore Sir, I should be very unfortunate, it I had been cause
of displeasing her, whom all the World endeavors to please; and it would be a
shame to our Nation, that a Frenchman should bear himself unreverently
toward her, to whom very Barbarians would bear a reverence. If this
misfortune had befallen me, it is not the saving my Pages life, should make me
stand in the defense; and I would never desire to augment my train, but to the
end I might have the more sacrifices to offer upon the Altar of her choler. But
she is too merciful to punish mean Delinquents, and too generous, to give
petty Examples: she reserves her justice for the Great ones, and the Proud;
for those who having more tender senses, are better able to feel the weight of
her anger; or else in truth her purpose is to show me a particular favor, by a
public declaration, and to let the World see, she makes a reckoning of that
of which the World makes none. And knowing what the gratefulness of good
Letters is, she is desiro^^ to have them in her debt* she pays our studies
beforehand, for the fruit she expects from them, and obliges the Art which
can praise the Obligation: she is made believe, that I have some skill in this
Art, and I perceive I am not in so little respect with her as I thought; and of
this I am assured, by the pains it cost you, to make her take her Page again
that was hurt; and by the civil language she desired you to deliver from her.
It exceeded indeed all bounds of moderation, and it seems she would not only
for my sake protect an innocent, but would be ready, if need were, to reward a
delinquent. For acknowledgement of which generous goodness, all my own spirit,
and all my friends put together, can never be too much. It is particularly your
self to whom I must have recourse in this occasion; you Sir, who set the Crown
upon Beaut^es head, who have the power to make Queens at your pleasure; and to
whom Olympia and Yzatide are beholding for their Empire: having bestowed so
great glory upon persons that never were; and set all France a running after
Phantasmes, you may well take upon you to defend the reputation of a sensible
and living virtue, and choose a subject that may be thankful to you for your
choice; and this is a matter yon cannot deny, of which we will talk more, and
conclude it after dinner in presence of the Lady that is interessed in it, into
whose presence, I must entreat you, to be my Usher to bring me, that so I may
ever more and more be,

Sir, Your most humble and most obliged servant, etc.
At Paris, 1. June. 1631.
To Monsieur de Villiers Hottoman. LETTER XII.
SIR, being equally tender of the good will you bear me, and of the account
you make of me, I cannot chose but rest well satisfied with your remembering me,
and with the judgment you deliver of my writings; you are not a man that will
bear^ false witness, and you have too much honesty to deceive the World, but
withal, you have too much understanding to be deceived your self, and one may
well rely upon a wisdom that is confirmed by time and practice. This is that
which makes me to make such reckoning of your approbation, and such account of
your counsel, that I shall be loath to be defective in the least tittle of
contenting you. It it far from me, to maintain a point, that you oppose: I
give it over at the first blow, and yield at the first summons: yet I could
never have thought, that of a jest, there should have been made a fault, or
that a poor word, spoken without design or aiming at any, should have been
the cause of so great complaints. You know, that in a certain modern School,
there is a difference made, Fra la virtu faemi^ile; and la Donnesca; and it is
held, that to make love, it more the vice of a woman, than of a Princess; and
less to be blamed in the person of Semiramis or Cleopatra, than in the person
of Lucretia or Virginia: I carry not my opinions so far, and I mean to be no
Author of so extravagant a Morality. It may suffice, that without descending
from the Thesis to the Hypothesis, I protest unto you, I should be very sorry,
I had trenched upon the reputation of that great Queen, or intended to corrupt
the memory of so excellent an odor, as she has left behind her; of whose
great worthiness, I have in other places said so much, that I should but shame
my self to say any otherwise; and indeed, the terms I used were free, and not
injurious, and such, as if they wound a little, they tickle and delight much
more: I neither spoke disgracefully of the dignity of her royal birth, nor
gave her any odious or uncivil Names, as some others have done, whom I
condemn extremely for it; yet Sir, I will yield to confess, that I have said
too much, and though my saying too much should have attractives to charm me,
and were as dear to me as any part of my self, yet seeing it is distasteful
to you, I will for your sake cut it clean off, and never look for fu^ther
reasons to induce me to it. I can deny nothing to my friends, and therefore
make no doubt of the power you have over me, and of my testifying, upon this
occasion, without opening my Eyes, that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 4. Jan. 1632.
To Monsieur de Borstell. LETTER XIII.
SIS, I am so far from seeking to justify my negligence, that I will not go
about so much as to excuse it: nothing but my being dead, can be a valuable
reason why I waited not upon you, to offer you my service; all other
impediments would prove too light, to have kept me here: but such is your
graciousnesse, that it is impossible to fall foul with you; such your
indulgence, that you remit a fault before I can confess it: you give me no
leisure to ask you, at the very first, you oblige me to thank you, and I have
received my pardon here at home, which I never looked to obtain, but at
Oradeur, and that with long soliciting. I have not yet seen the AmbassatriS,
who has done me the favor to bring it to me, and I cannot imagine, she
should be surprised with that despair, as your Letter represents her in.
Alciones affliction, in respect of hers, would be but mean, and those women
whose tears Antiquity has hollowed, did but hate their Husbands, in
comparison of her: I know not whether you do her a pleasure, to raise her
sorrow to so high, a pitch; for after this you speak of, she shall never be
allowed to lift up her Eyes, and you give her a reputation whereof she is not
worthy, if she leave but one hair upon her Head. I much distaste your
exaggerations, and cannot think she will bear you out in the report you make
of her miserable estate: if it were such, as you make it, it would be capable
of no remedy: Epictetus and Seneca, would be too mean Physicians, to take her
in hand; yet I mean not to contradict you:

I think when death her Husband seaz'd,
Angelica with her Fates displeasd,
Looked pale in the face as Alabaster:
Charging the guiltless Stars with blame
In all th'hard Language Rage could frame,
When it is grown the Reasons Master.
Yet the glory of her spirit mak^s me believe withal, that this sad humor was
but a Fit, and continued not long, and that the same day upon the tempest there
followed a calm. A man shall meet with some Women of such spirits, that
neither time nor Philosophy can work upon them; and some others again, that
prevent the work of time and Philosophy, by their own natural constitution.
As there is some flesh so hard to heal, that no Balm can cure the prick but
of a pin; so again, there are some bodies so well composed, that their
wounds are healed with plain Spring Water, and they close and grow together of
themselves. I assure my self, our fair Lady is of this perfect temper, and
that she would be no example, to make Widows condemned for curling their
locks, or for wearing their mourning gowns edged with green. You should
allege unto her the Princess Leonina, so highly esteemed of the Court of
Spain, and the prime ornament of this last age. Knowing that her Husbands
quirry was come, to relate unto her the particular of his death, and hearing
that his Secretary was to come the morrow after, she sent the quirry word, to
forbear coming to see her, till the Secretary were come, that so she might
not be obliged to shed tears twice. There is no virtue now adays so common as
constancy, nor any thing so superfluous, as the custom of comforting. All the
Steel of Biscay, and all the poison of Thessalic, might well enough be trusted
in the hands of the mourners of our time, without doing any hurt. I scarce know
a man that would not be glad to out live, not only his friends and parents,
but even the age he lives in, and his very Country, and rather than die, would
willingly stay in the World himself alone. Speak therefore no more of keeping
Angelica here by force, who in my opinion is not of her self unwilling; and
not having lost the King of Sweden, may therefore the more easily repair her
loss. I would to God Sir, I could be no sadder than she is, and that I could
forget a person, who is at this present the torment of my spirit; as he has
heretofore been the delight of my eyes* but melancholic men do not so easily
let go the hold of their passions, and the good remedies you have sent to
comfort me for his death, I approve them all, but apply none of them: yet I
give you a thousand thanks, though six months after they were due; and though
I say not often, yet I say it most truly, that you shall never take care of any
man, that is more than my self,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 30. April. 1633.
To Madam -- LETTER XIIII.
MAdam, seeing I could not come to see you at your departure, as I was bound to
do, I do not think* I shall do you any wrong to send you a better companion
than that I promised you; I mean the Book I now send you, whereof you have
heard so much talk, and which you meant to have carried with you into
Perigord, to be your comforter for the loss of Paris. It is in truth worthy of
the good opinion you have of it, and of the impatience with which I am a
witness, you have expected it. And if wagers have been laid upon Queens great
bellies, and assurance given they should be brought abed of a son, why should
I wonder that you have given beforehand, your approbation of a thing that
deserves the approbation of all the world? It will certainly bring you out of
ta^^ with the present I gave you, when you desired me to look you out some of
my Compositions. In it you shall find that, that will shorten the longest days
of this season; That, that will keep you from tediousness when you are alone;
That, that will make you thank me for my absence. For to say true, all visits
will be unseasonable to you, when you set your self to the Recreation of so
sweet a reading; and whosoever shall come to trouble you at such a time, must
needs have from you some secret maledictions, what civilities soever you make
show of, as your custom is. I would be loath to fall into this inconvenience,
it is better I give my opinion afar off, and in a Letter, which you may
entertain without any solemnity: since then you will have me believe, that my
judgment is not altogether bad, nor my opinions wholly unsound; I profess unto
you Madam, that setting aside the affection I bear to the Author of this work,
I have observed in the work it self, a number of excellent things, which I
could not choose but praise, even in an enemy. He is not so choleric I hope,
but that he will pardon me if I say that he is one of the most pleasing liars
that ever I saw. I complain not of his impostures, but when he cease to
deceive me, because I would gladly have them last always. His History has
quite removed my spirit out of its place, and has touched to the quick all
that I have sensible in me. I will not hide my weakness: I knew at first, that
the painting I looked on, was all false, yet I could not hold from having as
violent passions, as if it had been true, and as if I had seen it with mine
eyes: sometimes sorrow^ull, some times glad; as it pleases Monsieur de Bois
Robert to tell me tales of good or bad fortune. I find my self interessed in
good earnest in all the affairs of his imaginary Kings; I am put in fear for
the poor A^axandra, more than I can express, and as much I am humbled for the
misfortunes of Lisimantus, and I have seen them both in such extremities, that
I made solemn vows for their safety, when at the very height they were
miraculously delivered. In conclusion Madam, though I have a heart hard enough,
and eyes not very moist, yet I could not forbear to shed tears, in spite of
my self; and I have been even ashamed to see, that they were but the dreams
and fancies of another man, and not my own proper evils which put into me such
true passions. This is a tyrannical power, which the sense usurpeth over the
reason, and which makes us see, that the neighborhood of the imagination is
extremely contagious to the intellectual part, and that there is much more
body than soul in this proud creature, which thinks it self borne to command
all others. The Aethiopick History has oftentimes given me these Alarums, and
I cannot yet read it without suffering my self to be deceived. As for other
writings of this kind, it is true, I make some choice, and run not after all
Spanish Romances, with equal passion. They are indeed for the most part, but
Heliodorus in other clothes, or as -- said, but children borne of Theagenes and
Chariclea, and seem to resemble their Father and Mother so near, that there
is not a hairs breadth of difference between them. But in this work Madam, I
make you promise you shall see novelties, and shall find in it this sweet air
of the wide world, and these dainties of the spirit, which are not common in
our Provinces. I confess unto you, there is in some passages something that
may seem too much painted, and perhaps too garish, and which will not bear
examining by the rigor of Precepts; but then you must confess as well that
Fables look chiefly after beauty, and care not though it be a little
immodest, seeing this kind of writing is rather a loose Poesy, than a regular
prose. As soon as I shall be able to ride, I will come and hear your Oracles
hereupon, and tell you, as I use to do, that as your self is one of the
perfectest things I ever saw, so I am more than any other,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10. August, 1629.
To Monsieur Hobier, President of the Treasures in the Generality of Bourges:
LETTER XV.
SIR, though you should say, I present you always with flowers that prick you,
and offer you services that may seem unseasonable, yet I cannot forbear the
solicitations of my Letters, nor the trading with you by this way of
Complements. The Book which I have desired Monsieur de -- to deliver to you,
shall pass if you please, but for a petition to obtain an audience; and I am
contented that my discourses Moral and Politic, shall contribute nothing to
the mending of my own fortune, so they may contribute something to the
recommending of my Sisters business: if it become me to speak of a person
that is so near unto me, and if you think me worthy to be credited in the
testimony I shall give of her, I am able Sir, to say thus much, that she is a
woman, either lifted up by her own strength above the passions of her sex, or
that Nature has exempted her from them, by a peculiar privilege: so far, as
that amongst us, she stands for an example, and leads a life that is the
edification of all our Province. But though she make profession of severe
virtues, yet she aspires to no glory by sullen humors; she has nothing
muddy, nor clownish in her, but tempers her austerity with so much exterior
sweetness, that without endeavoring to please any, she seems to be pleasing
to all the world. I therefore solicit you for her, in behalf of all the
world, and crave your favor with violence; for to crave it with discretion,
would make but a weak show of the desire I have to obtain it. In matters that
concern my self only, I am held back by a certain natural timourousnesse,
which makes me oftentimes to be wanting to my self; but in that which
concerns her, I observe not so much as honest respects, but am bold, even to
temeritie; and if therein I should not do too much, I should never think I
did enough: and yet this is a fault, which leaves no remorse behind it; the
merit of the subject justifies the importunity of the suppliant; and when you
shall know her better you will find no great excess in that I write, and will
bless my persecution. You have already obliged us exceedingly, and have put
the business in an infallible way of prospering; it only remains Sir that you
crown your courtesy, and draw a concluding word from the parties, whom I
shall call Publicans, and couple them with Heathens, if they be not converted
and led with that you shall say unto them: but I cannot doubt of the effect of
your persuasions, who know, that both by your tongue, and by your pen, you
practice out Art, with assured success. Let us now see the proof of it, in
this occasion, and I promise you, that never favor was more commended, nor
shall be more recommended, than yours shall be. The consideration of a good
deed being joined to that of virtue, you shall possess me by a double title,
and I shall not be less of due, than I am by choice,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 25. December. 1631.
To Mounsieur de Coupeauville, Abbot of the victory. LETTER XVI.
SIR, seeing the Relations that come from Paris tell us no News at all of you,
I entreat you to be your own Historian, and not suffer me to be punctually
informed of a thousand things, that are indifferent to me, and remain
altogether ignorant of the state of your health, which is so infinitely dear
unto me. It is very likely, you have all the care that may be of it, as of a
thing necessary for exercising the functions of a virtuous life; and I doubt
not but you contain your self always in that excellent mean, which is
between disorder and mortification. You are no longer hungry after the Glory of
Germany, and if the Artillery of the Vastoline carry not so far as the
Realie, I asure my self, it can do you no hurt: my mind therefore is at
quiet in that point, and I am not afraid to lose you, as I have lost some other
valiant friends; and you do well to leave the War to others, and stay your
self upon the Victory. I ask your pardon for this untoward Aequivocall word,
I have rather written it than thought it, and and it is a misfortune which
surprizeth me but very seldom: I only say Sir, that it is better to be Abbot a
dozen miles from Paris, than to be General of an Army in Thuringia or
Westphaelia; and that a Cross of so many pounds a year, is much more worth
than either Hercules club, or Rowlands sword, and that he that gave you so
honest and so rich an idleness, has not ill deserved of your Philosophy, to
which I recommend me with all my heart, and wish unto it the continuance of
this happy repose; but upon condition, that it make you not distaste our
friendship, and suffer you to place one of the most noble virtues of the mind
in the number of her maladies and infirmities. Be not a Doctor so far as
that, and remember, you are my debtor for some affection, if you forget nor,
that I am

Sir Your, etc.
At Balzac, 25. December. 1632.
To Monsieur de Forgues, Commander of a Company in Holland LETTER XVII.
SIR, my dear Cousin, I think my self a rich man with the goods you have
given me: another that should have received the same present, should not owe
you for it the same obligation, but the opinion of things, is the measure of
their value, and because I have neither mind nor eyes that be covetous, I
account the Emeraudes of your Peacock, of as great a price as those of
Lapidaries: at least, whereas they are without life and motion, these live and
moove in my base Court; I know my riches, and am known by them, and after I
have read my self stark blind, I go and refresh my wearied sight in that
admirable verdure, which is to me both a recreation and remedy. Base objects
not only offend my imagination, but even provoke my choler; and I should never
receive a Monkey from the best of my friends but only to kill it: but I vow
unto you, that beauty pleases me wheresoever I meet it; yet because it is a
dangerous thing in women's faces, I like better to behold it in the feathers of
birds, and in the enamelling of flowers. Pleasures so chaste, are compatible
with Lent, and offend not God: and therefore upon these one hour in a day, I
take pleasure to stand gazing and amuse my self: I thank you for it with all
my heart, and passionately am*

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 7. March. 1634.
To Madam d'Anguitur. LETTER XVIII.
MAdam, It shall never be laid to my charge, that you speak of me with honor,
and that I understand it without feeling. A good opinion is obligatory, from
whence so ere it come, but infinitely more, when it comes from an exquisite
judgment, as yours is; and I doubt not, but Socrates was more touched and
tickled with that one word the Oracle spoke of him, than with all the praises
the world had given him. The favorable discourses you have held of me, ought
not to be held of me in less account than words indeed inspired, and if I
should place them in the number of humane testimonies, I should show my self
ignorant, that it is Heaven which has been your Instructour; and that from
thence you have received those clear lights, whereof the Stars are but
shadows. I do not amplify any thing at adventure, nor suffer my self to be
swayed with flattery, but in this point of Illumination, Madam, I always
except matters of Faith, least your Ministers should take advantage of my
words. We must needs, I say, hold for certain, that either you have been
instructed by an extraordinary way, or confess that you owe it all to your
self, and that coming to know the truth, without study and discipline, your
virtue is a mere work of your own making. It is no small matter for one that
lives in parts remote from the Court, to be but tolerably reasonable, and able
to maintain his common sense against so many opposites and oppositions, as he
shall meet with; but in those remote parts, where you have no choice of
Examples, there to discover the Idaea, from whence Examples are taken, to
breath in an infected Air, and full of Errors; and yet retain still sound
opinions; to be continually opposed with extravagant questions, and yet always
return discreet answers; To take pity of silly Buffons, when others admire
them; to make a difference between jeasts picked up here and there, and those
that come from the Spring it self; between wise discourses, and harmonious
fooleries: between a sufficiency that is solid, and that which is only
painted; to do these things Madam, ought to be called even half a miracle:
and no less a raritie in these days than in former times, it was to see a
white Ethiopian, or a Scythian Philosopher. Our Country may justly be proud of
so admirable a birth; It is the great work of her famous faecunditie, and we
may boldly say, there is that found in Saintoigne, which is wanting in the
Circle; that which hinders the Court from being complete, and that which is
necessary for the perfecting of Paris it self. But as well here as there
Madam, if ever you will hear the vows of those who wish your happiness, I
would think it fit, you should not make your self a spectacle for the vulgar,
nor suffer your entertainment to be a recreation for idle persons. It deserves
not to be approached unto without preparation; and that they should examine
themselves well, who present themselves before it. All spirits at all times are
not capable of so worthy a communication, and therefore, let men say what they
will, I account the reservations you make of your self, to be very just, and
it cannot be thought strange, that being as you are of infinite value, you take
some time to possess your self alone, and not to lose your right of reigning;
which admits, as no division, so no Company. To use it otherwise Madam, would
not be a civiltie, or a courtesy, but indeed an ill husbanding of your spirit,
and a wastfull profusion of those singular graces, of which, though it be not
fit you should deprive them that honor you, yet it is fit you should give them
out by tale, and distribute them by measure. It is much better, to have less
general designs, and to propose to ones self, a more limited reputation,
than to abandon ones spirit to every one that will be talking, and to expose it
to the curiosity of the people, who leave always a certain taynt of impuritie
upon all things they look upon: by such vicious sufferance, we find dirt and
mire carried into Ladies Closets: if there come a busy fellow into the
Country, presently honest women are besieged, there is thronging to tell them
tales in their ears; and all the world thinks, they have right to torment
them: and thus, saving the reverence of their good report, though they be
chaste, yet they be public; and though they can spy the least fullying upon
their ruffes, yet they willingly suffer a manifest soiling of their noblest
part. You have done Madam, a great act, to have kept your self free from the
tirannie of custom, and to have so strongly fortified your self against
uncivil assaylants; that, whilst the Louver is surprised, your house remains
impregnable. I cannot but magnify the excellent order, with which you dispose
the hours of your life; and I take a pleasure to think upon this Sanctuary of
yours, by the only reverence of virtue made inviolable: in which, you use to
retire your self, either to enjoy more quietly your repose, or otherwise, to
exercise your self in the most pleasing action of the world, which is the
consideration of your self. If after this your happy solitude, you come
sometimes and cast your eyes upon the book I sent you, you shall therein Madam,
do me no great favor: the things you shall have thought, will wrong those you
shall read; and so it shall not be a grace, but an affront I shall receive, I
therefore humbly entreat you, there may be some reasonable intermission between
two actions, so much differing: Go not straight from your self to me, but let
the relish of your own meditation be a little passed over, before you go to
take recreation in my work. To value it to you, as a piece of great price, or
otherwise, to vilify it, as a thing of no value, might justly be thought in me
an equal vanity. They who praise themselves, desire consent, and seek after
others approbation; they who blame themselves, seek after opposition, and
desire they may be contradicted. This latter humility is no better than the
others pride. But to the end, I may not seem to go to the same place, by a
third way, and desire to be praised, at least with that indifferency I ascribe
to you; I entreat you Madam, that you will not speak the least word, either of
the merit of my labor, or in default of merit, of the fashion of language I
have used in speaking to you: I mean not to put this Letter upon the score; to
speak plainly, I entreat you to make me no answer to it, so far I am off,
from expecting thanks for it. It is not, Madam, a present I make you, it is an
homage I owe you; and I pretend not to oblige you at all, but only to acquit
my self of the first act of veneration, which I conceive I owe you, as I am a
reasonable creature, and desiring all my life to be,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac 4. May. 1634.
To Monsieur Balthazar, Counselor of the King, and Treasurer General of
Navarre. LETTER XIX.
SIR, I never deliberate upon your opinion, nor ever examine any man's merit,
when you have once told me what to believe. But yet, if I should allow my self
the liberty to do otherwise, I could but still say, that I find Monsieur de --
well worthy the account you hold him in, and my self well satisfied of him,
upon his first acquaintance. By further conversation, I doubt not, but I should
yet discover in him more excellent things, but it is no easy matter, ever to
bring us together again: For, he is a Carthusian in his Garrison, and I an
Hermit in the Desert; so as that which in our two lives makes us most like, is
that which makes us most unlikely ever to meet: yet I sometimes hear news of
him; and I can assure you, he is but too vigilant in looking to his Charge; he
has stood so many Rounds and Sentinells, that it is impossible, he should be
without rhumes, at least, till Midsomer. These are, to speak truly, works of
supererogation; for I see no enemy this Province need to fear, unless perhaps,
the Persian or Tartarian: the very Name of the King is generally fortification
enough, over all his Kingdom; and as things now stand, Vangirod is a place
impregnable; that if Demetrius came again into the world, he would lose his
reputation before the meanest village of Beausse: but this is one of your
politician subtilties, to make Angoulesme pass for a Frontier Town, and to
give it estimation, that it may be envied. Doubt not, but I shall give you
little thanks for this, seeing by this means you are clean gone from us, and
I must be feign to make a journey of purpose into Languedoc, if I ever mean to
enjoy the contentment of embracing you, and of assuring you, that I am*

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 1. March. 1633.
To Monsieur de Serizay. LETTER XX.
SIR, if you were but resident at Paris, I should hope sometimes to hear of
your News, but now that you are bewitched there, it will be an ungrateful
work for you to read mine. They are always such as must be pitied. In my
way there are as many stones to dash against, as in yours there are flowers:
and life it self is as evil that I suffer, as it is a good that you enjoy:
you left me blind, and may now find me lame; my causes of complaining never
cease, they do but change place; and the, favors I receive are so husbanded,
that I cannot recover an eye, but by the loss of a leg. I was yesterday in a
great musing upon this, when suddenly a great light shined in my Chamber, and
dazeled mine eyes, even as I lay in my bed. And not to hold you long in
suspense, the Name of the Angel I mean, was Madam d' Estissac, who thus
appeared unto me, and willing to make the world see, how much she has profited
in Religion, runs after all occasions, to put her Christian virtues in
practice. This somewhat abates the vanity I should otherwise have taken in her
visit; for, I see it is rather charity than courtesy, and I am so much
beholding to my infirmity for it, that she made a doubt whether I were sick
enough to merit it; as much as to say, a Paralitick should have had this
courtesy from her sooner than I. They must be great miseries that attract her
great favors; pietye which teaches the fairest hands of the world to bury the
dead, may well get of the fairest eyes that ever were, some gracious looks to
comfort the afflicted. What ere it be, I have found by experience, that no
sadness is so obstinate and clowdie, but pleasing objects may dissolve and
pierce, nor any Philosopher so stony and insensible, but may be softened and
awaked by their lightest impression. I verily think, another of her visits
would have set me on my legs, and made me able to go: but she thought me
not worthy of a whole miracle, and therefore I must content my self with this
beginning of my cure. I inform you of these things, as being one that
reverenceth their cause, and as one loves me too well, to make slight of the
goods or evils I impart unto him. This last words of my Letter shall serve, if
you please, for a corrective to the former, I revoke it as a blasphemy, and
will never believe, that all the Magic in Paris, is able to make you forget a
man, whom you have promised to love, and who passionately is,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 3. July. 1633.
Another to him. LETTER XXI.
SIR, this is the first opportunity I could get to write unto you, and to
comfort my self for your absence by this imperfect way, which is the only
means left me to enjoy you. These are but shadows and figures of that true
contentment, I received by your presence; but since I cannot be wholly happy,
I must take it in good part that I am not wholly miserable. I will hasten all I
can to finish the business I have begun, thereby to but my self in state to
see you; and if my mind could go as fast as my will, I should my self be with
you as soon as my Letter. It is true, there cannot be a more delicate and
dainty place, than this where I live banished; and a friend of ours said, that
they who are in exile here, are far happier than Kings in Muscovia: but being
separated from a man so infinitely dear unto me, I do not think, I could
live contented in the fortunate Islands; and I should be loath to accept of
felicity it self, if it were offered me, without your company. Wherefore
assure your self, that as soon as I can rid my self of some importunate
visits, which I must necessarily both receive and give, I will not lose one
moment of the time, that I have destinated to the accomplishment of -- and will
travail much more assiduously than otherwise I should do, seeing it is the
end of my travail, that only can give me the happiness of your presence. In
the mean time, I am bound, first to tell you, that I have seen here -- and
then to give you thanks for the good cheer he has made me. He believes upon
your word, that I am one of much worth, and gives me Encomiums, which I could
not expect from his judgment, but that you have corrupted it, by favoring me
too much. I earnestly entreat you, to let me hear from you, upon all
occasions; and to send me by the Post the two books, which I sent for to
Monsieur -- if you have not received them of him already; but above all, I
desire you, that we may lay aside all meditation and art in writting our
Letters; and that the negligence of our style may be one of the marks of the
friendship between us: and so Sir, I take my leave and am with all my soul,

Your, etc.
At Balzac, 2. December. 1628.
Another to him. LETTER XXII.
SIR, either you mean to mock me, or I understand not the terms of your
Letter; I come to you in my night gown, and my night cap upon my head, and you
accuse me for being too fine. You take me for a cunning merchant, who am the
simplest creature in the world: if another should use me thus, I should not
take it so patiently; but what ere your design be, I count my self happy to
be the subject of your joy, and that I can make you merry, though it be to my
cost: when I write to you, I leave my self to the conduct of my pen, and
neither think of the dainties of our Court, nor of the severitie of our
Grammar; that if there be any thing in my Letters of any worth, it must needs
be, that you have falsified them, and so it is you that are the Mountebanke,
and will utter your counterfeits for true Diamonds. You know well, that
Eloquence is not gotten so good cheap, and that to term my untoward,
language, by the name of this quality, is a superlative to the highest of my
Hyperboles. Yet it seems, you stand in no awe of Father -- as though you had a
privilege, to speak without control, things altogether unlikely; for this
first time, I am content to pardon you, but if you offend so again, I will
inform against you, and promise you an honorable place in the third part of
Philarchus. The man you wrote of, has no passions now, but wise and stayed; he
has given over play, and women, and all his delight now is in his books and
virtue. Rejoice, I pray you, at his happy conversion, and if you be his friend
so much, and so much a Poet, as to show your self in public, you may do
well to make a Hymn in praise of Sickness; as one has heretofore done in
praise of Health: for to speak truly, it is his sickness that has healed him,
and has put into him the first meditations of his salvation: I expect great
News from you by the next Post, and passionately am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 25. December. 1628.
To Monsieur Ogier. LETTER XXIII.
SIR, I cannot but confess that men in misery never found a more powerful
Protector than your self; and that you seem borne to be a defender of
oppressed innocence. The Fathers of the Minimme Order, are as much beholding to
you as my self; whose right, you have so strongly maintained, that if I did
not know you well, I should verily think, the Saint you speak of, had inspired
you. And as by his prayers he gains a jurisdiction over the fruitfulness of
Princesses, so by the same prayers he has contributed assistance to this
excellent work you send me. After this, it is not to be sufferd you should
make show of niceness; and tell me of your sloathfulnesse. When fire shall
cease to be active, I will then believe, you can be sloathfull; but will never
think you hate books, until -- shall give over his suits in Law; or if I
must needs give credit to your words, I then assure my self, this distaste
could never come unto you, but by your too great fare, nor this weariness, but
by your too great labor. I am my self a witness of your assiduitie in
study; and you know how early soever I rise in the morning, I always find you
in the Chamber next to the Meteors; which high region, I conceive you have
chosen, that you may be the nearer to take in the inspirations of Heaven. I
think it long till I come and visit you there, to take counsel of your Muses
in a number of difficulties I have to propound unto you. In the mean time, I
have this to say, that the News you send me, has even astonished me, and it
seems to me, a kind of Enchantment. Monsieur -- will show you certain
Letters, which I entreat you to consider of, and by which you shall see, that
if I be deceived, yet it is not grossly, nor without much cunning used. Make
me beholding to you, by opening your mind more particularly in this matter,
and by believing that I am with all my heart,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 4. Feb. 1629.
Another to him. LETTER XXIV.
SIR, there is no friendship in the world of more use than yours: it is my
Buckler in all my battles, it is my Consolation in all my calamities; but
specially, it is my Oracle in all my doubts. That which before I have your
advice, I propose to my self with trembling, as soon as once I have your
approbation, I make it a Maxim, and an Aphorism: and when I have once
consulted with you, never did an Ignoramus take upon him to be some great
Doctor better than I do: You have knowledge enough to serve your own turn,
and your friends; you are the God that inspires the Sibyllae: for my self, I
am no longer an Author, but an Interpreter, and speak nothing of my self;
but preach only doctrine. I give you a thousand thanks for your great
magnificence, in giving me so great a treasure, and for the learned
Observation^ you have been pleased to communicate unto me: Assure your self I
will cry them up in good place, and make your Name alleged solemnly for an
Authority. Gratefulness is the poor man's best virtue, and seeing I cannot be
liberal, I will endeavor, at least, not to be unmindfull: And so Sir, I am
most perfectly, and more than any other in the world,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 6. Mar. 1629.
To Madam Desloges. LETTER XXV.
MAdam, being in a fit of a Fever, I hear you are at Oradour, where I should
have the honor to see you, if the joy of so good News had the power to carry
me thither, and were able to give me the health, which it is forward to promise
me. Being therefore not in case to assure you in person, how sensible I am of
your many courtesies, give me eave to testify unto you, that I am not
unmindfull of the very last you showed me; and that I give you thanks for the
beginning of my amendment, whereof you are the cause. It is certain, that when
I was burning in a most extreme fire, I received a notable cooling and
comfort, to hear you but only named; and this, Madam, is the first miracle you
have done in this Country, if you stay but a while here, I hope we shall see
many more and greater, and that you will leave some excellent marks, that you
have been here. Our deserts shall be no longer rude, or savage, having once
been honored by your presence, the sweet air, that breaths on the banks of
the Loyre, shall spread it self hither; and I doubt not, but you will change
all the choler of Lymousin into Reason, and make our Lions become men. I do
not think, there is any will oppose this truth, unless perhaps -- who had the
heart to part from you with dry eyes, and could not find tears to accompany
yours. I have told him of it to his shame, before Monsieur de -- and both of us
agree, that in this occasion, he might honestly enough, have broken the laws
of his Philosophy, and might have lost his gravitie, without any lightness.
Whilst we were together, they desired to see a part of my Prince, which as yet
I dare not call by so illustrious a Name; for in truth Madam, he can be but a
private person, until such time as you proclaim him, and that he receive
investiture from his Sovereign: so I call your approbation, which is with me
in such respect and reverence, that I should prefer it before Reason it
self, if they were two things that cold be separated, and that I were allowed
to choose which I would have* I would say more hereof, but that methinks, I
have done a great work to say so much; for my head is in such violent
agitation, with the heat of my last fit, that all I can do at this time, is
but to set my hand to this Protestation, that I honor you exceedingly, am as
much as any in the world,

Madam Your, etc.
At Balzac, 25. August. 1629.
Another to her. LETTER XXVI.
MAdam, I am jealous of my Lacquies fortune, who makes now a second journey to
you, and consequently, shall be twice together more happy then my self: he
should never have this advantage of me, if to a journey to see you, there went
nothing but courage, and if the relics of my disease, which prey upon
weakness, did not tire me more than the extreme violence did, when I had some
strength to resist it. By staying in my chamber, I loose all the fair days
that shine in the garden; all the riches of the fields are gathered without me;
I have no part in the fruits of Autumn, whereof the Spring gave me such sweet
hopes; and I am promised health at winter, when I shall see nothing but a pale
Sun, a threadbare Earth, and dead sticks, that have brought forth grapes,
but not for me to eat. In this miserable estate, I have no comfort, but only
the Letter you did me the honor to write unto me, which is so precious to me
Madam, that I even honor it, with a kind of superstition, and am ready to
make a chain or bracelet of it, to try whether the wearing it about me, may
not prove a better Remedy against my Fever, than all the other I have used.
There is but one word in it that I cannot endure, being not able to conceive
why you should call your self unfortunate; are you not afraid, least God
should call you to account for this word? and charge you with ungratefulness,
for making so slight reckoning of his great benefits and Graces? He has lifted
you up above your own sex, and ours too, and has spared nothing to make you
complete: the better part of Europe admires you; and in this point, both
Religions are agreed, and no contesting between Catholic and Protestant; The
Popes Nuntio, has presented our belief even to your person, all perfumed with
the complements and civilities of Italy, Princes are your Courtiers, and
Doctors your Scholars: and is this Madam, that you call to be unfortunate? and
that which you take for a just cause to complain; I humbly entreat you, to
speak hereafter in more proper terms, and to acknowledge Gods favors in a
more grateful manner. I know well, that your loyalty has suffered by your
brothers Rebellion; and that in the public miseries you have had some private
loss, but so long as you have your noble heart, and your excellent spirit left
you, it is not possible, you should be unfortunate; for indeed, in these two
parts, the true Madam Desloges is all entire and whole. It is I Madam, that
have just cause to say, I am unfortunate, who am never without pain, never
without grief, never without enemies; and even at this very time, I write from
a house of grief, where my mother and my sister being sick on one hand, and
my self on the other, I seem to be sick of three sicknesses at once; yet be
not afraid, least this I send you should be infectious, as though I had a
design to poison you with my presents, for I have not yet meddled with any of
the Musque fruits, which I hope you shall eat; I have not durst so much as to
come near them, least I should chance to leave some light impression of my
Fever upon them: They are originally Natives of Languedoc; and not so
degenerated from the goodness of their ancestors, but that you will find
them, I hope of no unpleasing taste, and besides Madam, they grow in a soil
that is not hated of Heaven, and where I can assure you, your Name is so often
rehearsed, and your virtue so highly esteemed, that there is not an Echo in
all our woods, but knows you for one of the perfectest things in the world,
and that I am,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 20. September. 1629.
To -- LETTER XXVII.
MAdam, see here the first thanks I give you, for you know, that having never
done me but displeasures, I have never yet returned you but complaints: but now
at last you have been pleased to begin to oblige me, and after so many
sentences of death, which you have pronounced against me, and after so many
cruelties, which I have suffered, you have bethought your self, ten years
after, to send me one good news, which truly is so pleasing to me, that I must
confess, you had no other way to reconcile your self unto me; and I cannot
forbear to bless the hand that brought me a Letter from Madam Desloges,
though they were dyed in my blood, and had given me a thousand wounds. The
sense of former injuries has no competition with so perfect a joy, and of two
passions equally just, the more violent is easily overcome of the more sweet.
You have hastened the approach of my old age, and made gray one half of my
hair; you have banished me this Kingdom, and forced me to fly your tyranny,
by flying into another Country: finally, it is no thanks to you, that I have
not broken my own neck, and made matter for a Tragedy: and yet four lines
of Madam Desloges, have the force to blot out all this long story of my
misfortunes, and willingly with all my heart, I forget all the displeasures I
have received, for this good office you now afford me. I make you this
discourse in our first language, that I may not disobey Monsieur de -- who will
have me write, but will not have me write in any other style, for in truth, and
to speak seriously, now that he leaves me at liberty, I must confess unto
you Madam, that I am exceedingly bound unto you, for the continency I have
learned by being with you, and good examples you have given me: your medicines
are bitter, but they heal; you have banished me, but it is from prison: and if
my passions be cooled by the snow of my head, I have then never a white hair,
which I may not count for one of your favors: I therefore recant my former
complaints, and confess my self your debtour of all my virtue. The time I
have employed in your service, has not been so much the season of my disorderd
life, as it has been an initiating me into a regular life which I mean to
lead. Your conversation has been a school of austeritie unto me, and you have
taught me, never to be either yours, or any others, but only in our Lord,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10. October. 1629.
To Madam Desloges. LETTER XXVIII.
MAdam, my evil Fortune gives one common beginning to all my Letters: I am
impatient even to death, to have the honor to come and see you: but now that I
am well, the air is sick, and all the Country drowned: There is no land to be
seen between this and Lymousin; and the mischief is, that there is no
navigation yet found out, for so dangerous a voyage. This binds me to wait,
till the waters be fallen, and that God be pleased to remember his Covenant
with Noah. As soon as this shall be, I will not fail to perform my vow, and
to come and spend with you the happiest day of all my life. In the mean time
Madam, give me leave, to tell you, that I am not yet well recovered of the
ecstasy you put me in, by writing unto me such excellent things, that I could
not read them with a quiet mind, nor indeeed without a ^inde of jealousy.
All Frontignon would be sufficiently paid with that you write of a dozen paltry
Musk fruits I sent you; and you praise my writtings with words, which have no
words worthy of them, but your own. This, of one side makes me e^vious, and of
the other side interessed: and if the honor I receive by your flattering
Eloquence, did not sweeten the grief of being overcome, it would trouble me
much that I had no better defended the advantages of our sex, but should
suffer it to lose an honor, which the Greeks and Latins had gotten for it.
Yet take heed, you hazard not your judgment too freely, upon the unce taintie
of humane things: you esteem well of a Prince, who is not yet borne, you
should have seen his Horoscope from the point of his conception, before you
should speak of him in so lofty terms. But besides that, nothing is less
assured, than the future; and nothing apter to deceive, than hope: Consider,
Madam, I beseech you, that you favor an unfortunate man, and that Faction
oftentimes carries it away from truth. It will be hard for you, your self
alone, to withstand an infinite multitude of passionate men: and it may be said
to you, as was said to those of Sparta, upon occasion of the great Army of the
Parsians, that you can never vanquish as long as they can die. Herein there is
nothing to be feared, but for your self; for as for me, I find in your
favor, all I seek for; and having you of my side, I care not what fame can
do, having once your testimony, I can easily slight hers; and all her tongues
put together, can never say any thing for me, that is worth the least line of
your delicate Letter. It is at this time, the delight and joy of my spirit; I
am more in love with it, than ever I was with -- and if she show you that which
I write to her, you shall fin^e I make not so much reckoning of my ancient
mistress, as I do of you^ new messenger; and that I desire all the world should
know, that I perfectly am,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 13. October. 1629.
Another to her. LETTER XXIX.
MAdam, I will not take upon me to give you thanks, for the good cheer you
made me; for besides that I have none but Country Civilities, and when I have
once said, your humble servant and your servant most humble; I am then at the
end of my complements, and can go no further. It were better yet to let you
hold your advantage entire, and owe you that still, which I can never pay. I
forbear to speak of the dainties and abundance of your Table, enough to make
one far, that were in a Consumption; nor I speak not of the delicacy of your
perfumes, in which you laid me to sleep all night; to the end, that sending up
sweet vapors into my brain, I might have in my imagination, none but pleasing
visions. But Madam, what but Heaven can be compatable to the dainties of your
Closet, and what can I name to represent sufficiently, those pure and
spiritual pleasures, which I tasted in your Conversation? It is not my design
to take idly, nor to set my style upon the high strain; you know, I am bound
to avoid Hyperboles, as Mariners to avoid Sands and Rocks; but this is most
true, that with all my heart, I renounce the world, and all its pompes, as long
as you please to inhabit the Desert, and if you once determine to stay there
still, (though I have sent to Paris to hyre me a lodging) yet I resolve to
break off the bargain, and mean to build me an Hermitage, a hundred paces
from your abode: from whence Madam, I shall easily be able to make two journeys
a day to the place where you are, and shall yield you a subjection, and an
assiduitie of service, as if I were in a manner of your household. There shall I
let nothing fall from your mouth, which I shall not carefully gather up, and
preserve it in my memory. There you shall do me the favor, to resolve me when
I shall have doubts; set me in the right way, when I go astray; and when I
cannot express my self in fit terms, you shall clear my clouds, and give
order to my confusednesse. It shall be your ears, upon which I will measure
the cadences of my sentences; and upon the different motions of your eyes, I
will take notice of the strength or weakness of my writings. In the hear of
the travail, and amidst the joys of a mother, that looks to be happily
delivered, I will expose the Infant to the light of your jugement to be tried,
and not hold him for legitimate, till you approve him. Sometimes Madam, we will
read your News, and the diverse Relations that are sent you from parts of
Christendom: Public miseries shall pass before our eyes, without troubling
our spirits; and the most serious actions of men, shall be our most ridiculous
Comedies. Out of your Closet, we shall see below us the the tumults and
agitation of the world, as from the top of the Alps, we stand and safely see
the rain and hayle of Saevoy. After this, Monsieur de Borstell shall come and
read us Lectures in the Politiq^es, and Comment upon Messer Nicolo unto us: He
shall inform us of the affairs of Europe, with as great certainty, as a good
husband would do of his family. He He shall tell us the Causes, the
Proceedings, and the Events of the war in Germany; and therein shall give the
lie, a thousand times, to our Gazets, our Mercuries, and such other fabulous
Histories. We will agree with him, that the Prince he is so much in love
withal, is most worthy of his passion; and that Sweden is no longer able to
contain so great a virtue: After the fashion of Plutarch, he shall compare
together the prime Captains of our age; always excepting -- who admits of no
comparison. He shall tell us which is the better man, the Italian, or the
Germane; what means may be used to take off the Duke of Saxony from the house
of Austria; and what game the Duke of Bavaria plays, when he promises to
enter into the League; and is always harkening to that which he never means
to conclude. From these high and sublime News, we will descend to other
meaner, and more popular subjects. It shall be written to you, whether the
Kingdom of Amatonte be still in being, and whether there appear not a rising
Sun, to which all eyes of the Court are turned: Monsieur de -- shall send you
word, whether he persist in his pernicious design, to bring Polygamie into
France, and to commit nine Incests at once; I mean, whether he have a good
word from those nine Sisters, to all whom he has solemnly made offer of his
service. We shall know whether the Baron of -- put Divines still to trouble:
whether Monsieur de -- have his heart still hardened against the
ungreatfullnesse of the time; and whether Monsieur de -- continue still in his
wilfulness to punish mankind by the suppression of his Books. By the way of
Lymoges, we shall get the devises of Boissiere; the Epigrammes of Maynard, and
other daynties of this nature. The Stationer des Espies Meurs will furnish you
plentifully with Romances, and with that they call Belles Chooses: and if it
come to the worst, from the very Cinders of Philarcus, there will spring up
every month a new Phaenix of backbiting Eloquence, that will find us
recreation for one hour at least. And these Madam, are a part of those
employments, in which I fancy in my mind, we may spend our time all the time
of the heat; for when the return of April shall bring again the flowers and
fair days, and invite you abroad a walking: we must then look us out some
new pleasures, and change our recreations: we will have Swannes and other
strange Birds, to cover this water at once both quick and still, which washes
the seet of your walls: we will fall a planting of trees, and dressing the
allies of your Garden: we will dig for Springs, and discover treasures,
which lose themselves under ground, which yet I value no less than veins of
silver, because I judge of them without covetousness. And finally, Madam, we
will fall a building that famous Bridge, by which to enter your enchanted
Palace, and whereof the only design puts all the neighboring Nobility
already into a jealousy. If you like of this course, and of these
Propositions, and that my company may not be troublesome to you, there remains
nothing to do, but that you command me to come, and I am instantly ready to
quit all other affairs in the world, and to come and testify to you, that I
am,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 6. November. 1631.
Another to her. LETTER XXX.
MAdam, we receive the Answers of Oracles without making reply; perfect
devotion is dumb, and if you had left me the use of my tongue, I should then
have had one part at least, of my spirit free from this universal astonishment
that has surprised it. You are always lifted up above the ordinary condition
of humanity, and the divinenesse of your spirit is no longer an Article in
question amongst people that are reasonable; yet I must confess, you never
showed it more visibly, then in the last Letter you writ unto me, and if at
other times I have been dazeled with some beam, you have now made me stark
blind with the fullness of your light. Spare Madam, I entreat you, the
weakness of my sight, and if you will have me be able to endure your presence,
take some more humane form, and appear not all at once in the fullness of
that you are, I were never able to abide such another flash of brightness. My
eyes are weary with looking upward, and with considering you, as you are a
creature, adorable and divine. Hereafter I will not look upon you, but on that
side you are good and gracious, and will not venture to reason with you any
more, for fear I should to my own confusion illustrate the advantage of your
spirit over mine. You shall have nothing from me hereafter, but prayers and
thanks; and I will make you confess, that I solicit better than I praise, I
therefore send you now Madam, diverse crosses at one time, and persecute you
with no less then three afflictions at once, I mean, three Letters of
recommendation, which I request from you, in behalf of -- humbly entreat you
to deliver them to this messenger, and to write them in such a persuasive
style, as might be able to corrupt all the Gatoes of Paris, although indeed,
the cleernesse of our right, has more need of their integretie then of their
favor. I expect Madam, this new courtesy from your goodness, and am always
more than any in the world,

Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10. December. 1629.
Another to her. LETTER XXXI.
MAdam, in the state I am now in, there is none but your self could make me
speak: and I never did a greater work in my life than to dictate these four
untoward lines: my spirit is so wholly taken up with the consideration of my
misery, and flies all commerce and company, in so violent a manner, that if it
concerned me not exceedingly, you should know that -- finds himself infinitely
obliged to your courtesies, and my self no less than he; I think verily, I
should have let -- depart, without so much as bidding him Farewell. Pardon
Madam, the weakness of a vulgar spirit, which feels no crosses light, and
falls flat down at the very first blow of adverse Fortune. Perhaps in
prosperity, I should carry my self better, and I do not think, that joy
could make me insolent; but to say the truth, in afliction I am no body, and
that which would not so much as leave a scratch upon the skin of a Stoic,
pierces me to the very heart, and makes in it most deep wounds. Grief
dejects me in such sort, and makes me so lazy in doing my duty, and so unfit
for all functions of a civil life, that I wondered no longer at those that were
turned into trees and rocks, and lost all sense with only the sense of grief.
Yet Madam, as often as I call to mind, that I hold some part in your account
and love; I am forced to confess, that my melancholy is unjust, and that I
have no good foundation for my sadness. This honor ought to be unto me a
general remedy against all sorts of affliction, and the misery that you pity
is not so much to be pitied as to be envied. From thence it is, that I draw
all the comfort I am capable of, humbly entreating you to believe you shall
never pity a man in misery, that will be more grateful than my self, nor
that is more passionately, than I am

Madam, Your, etc.
31. December. 1629.
Another to her. LETTER XXXII.
MAdam, I received but just now your Letters of the five and twentieth of the
last month, and though I know not, by whom to send an answer, yet I can no
longer hold from expressing my joy, nor keep my words from leaving my heart to
fall upon this paper. The last time I writ unto you, I had heard of the
unfaithfulness of a friend of mine, which struck me to the very heart; since
which time, a better report has somewhat quieted me; but it is you, Madam,
that have restored to me the full use of my reason; and are a cause that I am
contented to live. Although corruption be in a manner universal, and that
there is no more any goodness to be found amongst men, yet as long as you are
in the world, it is not fit to leave it quite, but your virtue may well supply
all its defects. Besides Madam, if it be true, as you do me the honor to
write unto me, that you account my interests as your own; this very
consideration is enough to make them dearer to me than they were before; and I
am therefore bound to preserve my self, seeing it seems, you would be loath
to lose me. One gracious word, which I observed in your Letter, has won me
to you, in such sort, that I have no longer any power of my self, but what you
leave me; and in all your Empire, which is neither mean, nor consists of mean
subjects; I can assure you, that you possess nothing with more soveraigntie,
than my will. If your occasions draw you to Annix this next spring, I hope to
have the honor to see you at Balzac, where I am trimming up -- with all the
care I can, that it may be a little more worthy of your presence, and that the
amusement I shall thereby give you, may keep you from marking the ill cheer
you are like to find in a Country village: My sister is infinitely bound to
you, for the honor you do her, in remembering her; and I am my self, with all
my soul,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 1. Febr. 1630.
Another to her. LETTER XXXIII.
MAdam, my indisposition has been the cause of my silence, and I thought it
better to say nothing, than to entertain you with a troublesome discourse:
Besides, I was in a continual expectation of the performance of your promise;
and looked to have the honor, to see you here in May. But seeing you have made
my hopes recoyle, and that you make your abode in Limousin for some longer
time, be pleased Madam, that I send -- to bring me a true relation of the state
of your health; and to tell me, if you use, as you ought, the shade of your
woods, and the freshness of your fountains: For my self, who make my harvest
at the gathering of Roses and Violets; and who reckon the goodness of the
year, by the abundance of these delicate Flowers; Now is the season for my
humor, and in one only subject I find cause enough, to scorn and slight
both the perfumes of the street St. Honor, and the pictures of the fair St.
Germain. Thus I make my self happy, at a very easy rate, and have not so
much as a thought of any want. And indeed, to what purpose should I grieve for
pleasures that are absent, and curiously hunt after all the defects of my
Estate. If my commerce be only with dumb Creatures, at least I am not
troubled with the importunities of Courtiers, nor with the verses of a paltry
Poet, nor with the Prose of Messieurs --: These are the inconveniences of
Paris, which I count more troublesome, then either the dirt, or the justling of
Coaches; and at the worst, if by living in the Desert, I should become a mere
savage, yet I am sure to recover the garb of the world, as soon as I shall
but see Madam Desloges, and to make my self neat and civil, with but one
half hours conversing with her. This is my wish Madam, and passionately I am,

Your, etc.
At Balzac, 20. June 1730.
To Monsieur de la Nouve, Counselor of the King in his first Chamber of
Enquests. LETTER XIX.
SIR, My dear Cousin, one cannot say you nay, in any thing: to do you a
second pleasure, I am about to commit a second treason, and to send you the
Verses, of which I told you who was the Poet. I was bound by a thousand Oaths
to keep them secret, but I must confess you are a strange corrupter, and your
persuasions would shake a firmer fidelity then mine: yet to the end, we may at
least save the appearance, and give some color to my fault; you may be pleased
to say, that it is the translation of an Ode, made by Cornelia, mother of the
Gracchi, and that you found it in an ancient Manuscript: you may say, she made
it for one of her sons, being in love with a woman, whom afterward he
married; and that seeing him one day look extremely palo, she asked him, what
it was that made him sick, There is nothing more true then this Story, and
there needs nothing, but to change the Names. It is not indeed, the same
person, but it is the same merit, and I am sure, you doubt not, but a French
Lady is capable of as much, as Qui^tilian spoke of a Roman: Graccorum
eloquentiae multum contu^isse Corneliam, matrem, cujus doctissimus sermo, in
posteros quoque est Epistolis traeditus. -- I never heard speak of such an
impatience, or such an irresolution, for I cannot believe, that it is either
fear, or effeminatenesse, or that the spirit of so great a Prince could be
subject to such enormous maladies. Whatsoever it be, if he had but read
Virgill, a woman would have said unto him with great indignation; and is it
then such a miserable thing to die? And if he had been in the Levant, he might
have learned of a Turkish Proverb, That it is better to be a Cock for one day,
then a Hen all ones life. Et con questo vi b^tio le mani, and am,

Sir, my dear Cousin, Your, etc.
2. August, 1630.
L' Amant qui meurt.
OLympa, made me sick thou have,
Thou cause of my Consumption art:
There needs but one frown more, to wast
The whole remainder of my heart.
Alas undone, to Fate I bow my head,
Ready to die, now die, and now am dead.
You look to have an age of trial,
Ere you a Lover will repay;
And my state brooks no more denial,
I hardly can one minute stay.
Alas, undone, to Fate I bow my head,
Ready to die, now die, and now am dead,
I see already Charons boat,
That comes to ferry me to Hell:
I hear the Fatal Sisters note,
That cries and calls to ring my knell.
Alas, undone, to Fate I bow my head,
Ready to die, now die, and now am dead.
Look in my wound, and see how cold,
How pale, and gasped my soul lies:
Which Nature strives in vain to hold,
Whilst winged with sighs, away it flies,
Alas undone, to Fate I bow my head.
Ready to die, now die, and now am dead.
To Madam Desloges. LETTER XXXV.
MAdam, I have not dared now a good while tosend you any Letters, for fear you
should conceive, they carried an ill air about them; nor yet to send you any
more Melons, which yet prove excellent good this year, for doubt you should
suspect them, as coming from a Country extremely, discredited; but since I
understand by your Letter, that you are not so much frighted as I was told, and
since also, I can protest unto you most religiously, that I write from a place
most clear from any taint of the neighboring misery, and that has kept sound
in the midst of infection: I am most glad Madam, that I have the liberty to
tell you, that I value you more, than all the ancient Romans, and that I have
no comfort to think of, in the deepest hours of all my solitude, but only
you, and your incomparable merit. What business soever I am about, I take
pleasure to let this thought make me a trewant at my travail, it is a
recreation, for which I abandon all affairs; and there is neither Moral, nor
Politic, Plato nor Aristotle, but I presently hive him over as soon as you
are once presented to my imagination. I hope I shall need to use no Oaths, to
make you believe this verity: you are well enough acquainted with my pride,
and know that this Country swayne would not turn flatterer for an Empress.
There are but three persons, I am resolved to praise; you Madam, are one; and
if you have the leisure to read that I send you, you will easily guess, who
the other two are; and so I bid you Good morrow, and perfectly am

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 9. September. 1630,
Another to her. LETTER XXXVI.
MAdam, you shall receive from me no premeditated excuses, I had rather
confess my fault ingenuously, than take the pains to justify it untowardly.
Indeed a fatal sluggishnesse, cousin german to a Lethargy, has seized in
such sort upon me since my coming hither, that I have not so much as written
to my own mother; so as having failed in this first point, I thought not fit
to fail by halfes; and therefore never troubled my self much in the rest of
my duty. I speak Madam, of this exterior duty, and this affection in
picture, which is oftentimes but a false representation of the soul, for as
for the true respect, and the passion, which has residence in the heart, I
assure you, I have that in me for you, as pure and entyre as ever, and that he
that calls you his Sovereign, yet honors you not more perfectly, than I do.
Monsieur de -- will I doubt not, be my witness herein; and will tell you, that
what part soever I be forced to play amongst jeasters and merry companions, yet
under my players clothes, there will always be found an honest man. I have
been sensible, Madam of the loss, which -- has had, and have not been sparing
to speak of his unfortunate virtue; yet I never thought, he needed any
comforting for it; for, seeing he sees that God spares not his own Images, and
that his nearest friends have their disgraces and troubles, he ought not to
think any thing strange that happens in this inferior world, and upon
inferior persons; what consideration soever may otherwise make them dear unto
him. If you have vouchsafed to keep the Letters I have written to you; I
humbly entreat you to send them to me, that I may see what volume I can make
for the impression that is required of me: but Madam it shall be, if you please
upon this condition, that parting with the Letters, you shall never let your
memory part with the truths they contain, but hold undoubtedly that I very
firmly am, though I do not very often say I am,

Madam, Your, etc.
25. December. 1630.
Another to her. LETTER XXXVII.
MAdam, my labor is happy, since it is never from before you, and since I am
told, you make it your ordinary entertainment. The end of all fair Pictures,
and good Books, is but only to please your eyes, and to delight your spirit,
and the good you have not yet set a price upon, is not yet come to its utter
most perfection. I have therefore all that an ambitious man could wish for, I
may perhaps have fortune from others, but glory I can have from none but you;
and another perhaps may pay me, but none but you can recompense me. The pains
I have hitherto taken, have been but ill requited. I have tilled a ground,
that brings me forth but thorns; yet Madam, since they blossom for your
service, I am contented to be pricked by them, and I love the cause of my
disgraces, if they prove a cause of your recreations. The first News you
shall hear will tell you what I mean; and that my patience never makes my
persecutours weary. You shall see Madam, that there is no conscience made to
contradict you, and that the same which you call excellent and admirable, has
yet (...) Paris found enemies, and at Bruxells hangmen. I will say no more at
this time, but that I am,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 6. Jan. 1631.
Another to her. LETTER XXXVIII.
MAdam, I writ unto you about six weeks since, but my packet not being
delivered where I appointed it, I perceive some curious body has seized on it,
and sought for secrets, which he could not find. The loss is not great, to
lose nothing, but a few untoward words; and small comforting would serve me,
for so small a cross; yet because they were full of the passion I owe to your
service, and carried in them the marks of my duty, I cannot but be troubled,
they come not to your hands, and that my misfortune gives you cause to
complain of my negligence. I dare not undertake to clear my self altogether;
for though in this I committed no fault, yet I cannot forget some other faults
committed before. The truth is Madam, I have been for some time so continually
taken up with business, that I have been wanting in the principal
obligations of a civil life; and I have drunk besides so many bitter potions,
and tasted so many bitter Pills, that I should but offend you with my
complements; which could not choose but carry with them, at least some
tincture of my untoward humor. What pleasure could you have taken, to see a
medley of choler and Melancholy powered out upon paper, and in stead of pleasing
News, to read nothing but pitiful Stories, and mortal Predictions? But
enough of this unpleasing matter. I expect here within three or four days, my
Lord the Bishop of Nantes; and I would to God Madam, you could be here at that
time, and that you were at leisure to come and taste the doctrine of this rare
personage. I have heard you say heretofore, you never saw a more holy
countenance than his, and that his very look, was a Prologue of persuasion.
This conceit, makes me hope, that he is the man, whom God has ordained to be
your Converter, and to bring you into the bosom of our Church, Believe me
Madam, and you shall not be deceived; trust that enemy, who wounds nor, but
only to draw out the blood that causes a Fever; and never make difficulty to
commit your self to one, that intends your freedom. The triumph which the
world makes you fear, is no way injurious to those that be the captives, nor
like unto that of which Cleopatra took so sad an apprehension: but in this
case, the vanquished are they that are crowned, and all the glory and advantage
of the victory rests on their side: I am not out of hope to see so good a days
work; and seeing you are rather laid asleep in the opinion of your mother,
than obstinate in a wrong cause: I entreat you, that you will not be frighted
with phrases: We will not use this hard term to say, you have abjured your
haeresie; we will only say, you are awaked out of your slumber, and if our
dear friend, Monsieur du Moulin, would do so too, then would be the time of a
great festival in Heaven; and the Angels would rejoice at the prosperity of
the Church. My zeal Madam, is not out of ostentation: for it is most true,
that such a change is one of my most violent wishes; and to see you say your
prayers upon your beads, I would with all my heart give you a pair made of
Diamonds; though I am not rich, yet I hope you doubt not of the truth of these
last words, and that I am with all my soul,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 7. May. 1632.
Another to her. LETTER XXXIX.
MAdam, it has been, as much my shame, as my glory, to read your Letter,
having so ill deserved it; and the remorse of the fault, I committed, makes
me, that I dare not yet rejoice in the honor, I received. You are good and
gracious, even to the not hating of evil actions; Your delinquents, not only
obtain impunitie, but you allow them recompense; and idleness has more
respect with you, than deligent service with ordinary Masters. This is the
faelicite of the Golden age, where Plenty had no need of tilling; and where
there was reaping without sowing. Yet Madam, I must not so abandon my cause,
that I forbear to allege the good it has in it; it is long since I writ unto
you, it is true, but the cause has been for that these six months, I have
every day been upon coming to see you and according to the saying of the
Orator, your acquaintance, I have dispensed, with my ordinary worshipping, in
hope of a great Holy day; and to perform my devotion with the more solemnity.
If Monsieur de -- have kept his word with me, he has told you, how often he
has found me upon the very point of coming; but as many journeys, as I
intended to make, so many cross accidents always happened to hinder them, and
the misfortune that accompanies me, makes every duty, though never so easy
to another, impossible to me* Yet Madam, I have never ceased from doing
continual acts of the reverence I bear you, and I never swear, but by your
merit. My brain is dry in any other Argument, and words are drawn from me
one by one; but when there is occasion to speak of you, then I overflow in
words; upon this only Text, I take pleasure to be Preaching; and Monsieur de --
to whom I was always before a harkener; as soon as I begin discourse of you,
becomes my auditour. I can assure you Madam, he honors you exceedingly; and
neither his embassage to Rome, from whence Gentlemen return not commonly
without a certain conceit of soveraigntie; nor the employments of the State,
which make particular men think themselves the Public, have been able to make
him take upon him, this ungrateful gravitie, which makes Greatness
ridiculous, and even virtue it self odious. He has protested here, before
good company, that he will never be found other, and that Fortune should have
an ill match in hand, to think to corrupt him. I used my ordinary rudeness,
and entreated him, to be mindful of his word, and to be one of our first
examples of so rare a moderation. You shall see Madam, in a Letter I send you;
that which hereupon I am bound to say of him: and I entreat you, to maintain
for me, that I am no common prayser: and that, if I were not persuaded of what
I say, it is not all the Canons of his Fort should make me to say it. It is
only the worth of things, or at least, the opinion I have of their worth, that
draws from me the praises I give them. If Monsieur de -- should return to be
a private person, I should not respect him a joe less, than now I do: and if
you should be made Governesse of the Queens house, I should not be a whit more
than I am,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 30. April. 1633.
Another to her. LETTER XL.
MAdam, never trust me any more, I promise that I cannot perform, but though I
be a deceiver, I am an honest one; my promises are always true in my
intention, though oftentimes false in the Event. I know not what to say of this
unfortunatenesse, nor to what known cause, to attribute this long ^rayne of
mischiefs. It must needs be, there is some Devil employed, to hinder voyages
to Lymousin: and that will not suffer me to go thither to see you: sometimes
he rayseth up suites in Law against me, sometimes puts me into a quarrel; and
when these be composed, and that I am ready to take horse, either he sends me
company to divert me, or pricks my horse in shooing, or puts a leg out of
joint; for, all these crosses have befallen me, as he that delivers you this
Letter can be my witness. But withal Madam, he shall assure you, that though
I do steal away by night, and be carried in a chair, it shall not be long ere
I will have the honor to come and see you. In the mean time, vouchsafe to
accept from me, the amusement of half an hour, and be pleased to read an
Inscription, which was lately found, and taken forth of the ruins of an old
Building. It is engraven in Letters of Gold, upon a Table of black Marble, and
seems Prophetically to speak of you and me. If I were a man could make
Verses, you might doubt it were some trick put upon you; but my ignorance
justifies me; and seeing, as you know, Poets are not made, it were a strange
thing I should be borne at the age of seven and thirty years. I expect from
you a Comment upon the whole Mystery; and remain,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 6. Jan. 1628.
In Effigiem D. D. praestantissimae and laudatissimae faeminoe.
Hac est sequa^ico, veniens a littore Nympha:
Hospite qua Lemovix jure superbit ager.
Quae desiderium Dominae mibi durius urbis,
Mitigat; and per quam non fera turba sumus.
Vindicat hanc sibi Thuscae caris, sibi musa latina,
Nec minus esse suam, Graius Apollo velit.
Hanc sophiae Gens sancta colit, dat jura disertis,
Princeps Grammaticas temperat una Tribus
Scilicet ut distent speciose sana tumore,
Vna scit, and fractis verba sonora modis.
Judicat urbano quid fit sale tingere ludos,
Et quid inhumano figere dente notas.
Novit ab egresti secernere plectra cicuta,
Vosque sacri vates non sociare malis.
Ergo quid infidipetitis suffragia vulgi,
Quidve Palatinus quaritur art favor?
Quae canitis vivent, si docta provaverit auris,
Et dabitur vestris versibus esse bonos.
At si quando canat, taccas velmascula Sappho,
Te melius salva nostra pudore canit.
Another to her: LETTER XLI.
MAdam, my eyes are yet dazeled, with the brightness of your Cabinet, and I
vow unto you, the Night was never so fair, nor so delicately trimmed up, as
lately at your House.

Not when the Moon accomplishing her way
Upon her silver wayne, beset with stars,
Within the gloomy world, presents the day.
I have showed our Ladies the Description of this (...) stately Night, and of
the rest of your magnificence, which if it were in a severer Commonwealth than
ours, would be called a Profusive Wast; they admire you in your house, as well
as in your Verses; and agree with me in this, that wisdom has a hand in
every thing; and that, after she has discoursed of Princes, and matters of
State; she descends to take care of her Hosts, and looks what is done in the
Kitchen. But from a virtue of their own, they always come to that of yours,
asking me continually for News of your entertainment, and for Copies of your
Letters: and by this means, the happiness which I have from you, is instantly
made common to all the neighborhood; and yet stays not there neither, but
spreads it self both far and near, so that when you think, you write but
to one particular man, you write indeed to a whole Province. This is not to
write Letters, but rather to set forth Declarations and Edicts; I know Madam,
you were able to acquit your self perfectly, in so noble an Employment;
complements are below the dignity of your style; and if King Elisabett, should
come again into the world (you know of whom this is spoken) no question but he
would make you his chief Secretary of State. Monsieur de -- extolls you yet in
a higher strain, and is infinitely desirous to see you in this Country.
Yesterday, of his own accord he made himself your Tributary, and has bound
himself to send you, every year, a reasonable number of his sweet balls if you
shall like them, they will grow into more request than the Gloves of the
Frangapani: but because your people of Lymousin may take occasion to Equivocate
here: I entreat you to advertize them, that this Perfumer has three thousand
pound rent a year; and holds the supremest dignity of our Province, and that
this Glover is a Roman Lord, Marshall of the Camp of the Kings Armies, cousin
to Sr. Gregory the Great, and that which I value more than all this, one of the
honestest men that lives: I am bold to use my accustomed liberty, seeing you
allow me to do it Madam, having given me your Letters Patents for it, and
will bear me out to laugh in graver subjects than this is. It may therefore
suffice me to say, but most seriously, that I am,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 2. May. 1634.
Another to her. LETTER XLII.
MAdam, your place is before all other things whatsoever, and therefore no
lawful impediment can be alleged, for failing in the duty, that is due unto
you. I have these two months had great affayes; which in the rigor of your
Justice, is as much as to say, I have these two months neglected my duty.
Having not written to you, in all this time, I am contented to call it, a
Disorder, which otherwise I should call a Business, and I do not think, I
could with all the reasons of the world have made you patient, to stay so long,
for the thanks I am to give you. Your present has equally wherewith to content
both the covetous and the vain; it has soliditie no less then luster; the
only sight of it refutes the modesty you use in speaking of it: you are
injurious Madam, to so excellent a thing; it deserves the most stately
inscription you could devise to give it, and if I were worth the having of a
Cabinet, this should be the prime piece, I would make choice of to adorn it.
Because vulgar people have nothing but eyes, therefore they value nothing but
Candlestickes of Crystal, and gilded vermillian dishes; but men of
understanding, who see less with their eyes than with their spirits, they
reflect upon objects, that are more simple and immateriall, and prefer not
the peoples error, and Artificers fingers, before the truth of things, and
before the Masterpieces of the works of reason. He, to whom you did me the
honor to send me, is far above all the Encomiums I can give him: I have
only this to say Madam, that I have with me here, a famous Author, who as
soon as he has once read him, is resolved instantly to shut up shop, and give
over his Trade. He protests he will never more set band to Pen, unless it be
to sign his last Will; and therefore meants to make you a sacrifice of all his
Papers. I showed him the incomparable Sonnet, De L' Amant qui meurt, at every
verse, he called you Divine, and made such loud Exclamations, that he might
have been heard to the great high way: which you know, how very far it is
from my Chamber. He says, he will maintain it, even to the street Saint
Jaques, that Parnassus is fallen upon the Distaffe; and that Racan has given
over the right he pretended in the succession of Malherbe. He speaks in this
familiar manner, of these two great Personages, and I never hear him use any
meaner style: if I can keep him with me a while; I will tell you more of him,
and promise you a Collection of all his Apopthegms. I saw yesterday Monsieur de
-- who is a most just valuer of virtue, and by consequent, most perfectly
reveres yours. He infinitely desires you would come amongst us, and that you
would make choice of one of his houses for your abode: if you were pleased to
do this, I should have no more journeys to make: I should be the happiest
unhappie man that ever was, if I had you here to be my comforter, and that I
might be always telling you, that I always am,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 1. Aug. 1634.
Another to her. LETTER XLIII.
MAdam, you never heard speak of such a deligence; in two months your Letter
has gone twelve miles; so as a business that required have, had been this way
in a good case: and if therein you had given me advise for saving my life, I
might have had good leisure to die, before your advise came. I have made
grievous complaints hereof, to my good kinswomans -- who lays the fault of her
fault upon a thousand that are innocent; upon her Gentlewoman, her Nurce, three
maids, four men, etc. so yas Madam there have been great arrignments upon
this matter* and never was any crime so long and so rigourously in examining;
for my self, the joy I take to hear of your health, makes me forget my most
just complaints, and sweetens all my choler. I think no more of the late
receiving it; I content my self, that I have received it at last; and I find
enough in your Letter, to make me amends, for the slownesse of your messenger.
Besides Madam, I give you to understand, that I have had some few days, with
me here, Monsieur Bardyn, as much as to say, The living Philosophy: or
Socrates risen from the dead. You make doubt perhaps, what the subject of our
conference has been? Indeed Madam, it has been your self, and we have
concluded, to erect your statue in the most eminent place of his Lycaeum: and
if any Stoic come to new build the Porticus, and any other to restore the
Academie, no doubt but they will honor you with the like respect, and you
shall always be reverenced of wise men, next to wisdom it self. If you
write shortly to -- I entreat you Madam, to do me the favor, to put in your
packet the dispatch I send you. It imports me much, to have it believed, that
-- and I doubt not, but you will be content, to use this little fraud for my
sake, who am without reservation,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10. December. 1634.
Another to her. LETTER XLIIII.
MAdam, I am of your opinion, and can by no means approve the ambition of your
fair neighbor: her head is full of state and soveraigntie, and aims
certainly at a Crown. God loves her too well to second her bad desires, and to
give her that she asks: so rare a beauty ought to be the recompense of
virtue, and not the prey of Greatness: It is fit, that he who possesses her,
should understand, when things be excellent; should know the value of this, and
all his life be thankful to his good fortune for it: it is fitter to make a
Gentleman happy, than to give contentment to a tyrant; she might perhaps be
some amusment to him, when he were cloyed with killing of men; but withal,
she might be sure to be the next object of his cruelty, at the next fit of
his wicked humor. You know the Story of Mariamne; our Theaters at this day
sound forth nothing so much, as the cries of this poor Princess: he that puts
her to death, loved her above measure; and after her death, kneeled down a
thousand times before her image, praying her to forgive him. Poppea was first
the Mistress, afterward the wife, and always the Governesse of Nero; she had
vanquished this Monster, and made him tame, yet at last he slipped from her, and
in an instant of his choler, gave her a kick upon the belly, which was her
death. His uncle Caius dealt not so roughly with Caesonia, yet in the greatest
heat of his fire, he made love to her in these terms: This fair bead shall be
chopped off, as soon as I but speak the word: and told her sometimes, that he
had a great mind to put her on the rack, to make her tell him, why he loved
her so much. The meaning Madam, of all this is, that the tamest of all Tigers
is a cruel Beast; and that it is a most dangerous thing, to be wooed with
talons. I have seen the Book you writ to me of, and find it not unpleasing;
particularly, where speaking of the makers of Pasquius, and of satyricall
Poets, he says, that besides the golden age, the age of silver, of brass, and
of iron, so famous and so much talked of in their Fables; there is yet behind
to come an age of wood, of which the ancient Poets never dreamt; and in the
miseries and calamities whereof, they themselves shall have a greater part than
any other. If I go abroad to morrow, I hope to have the honor to see you: In
the mean time, that I may observe good manners, and not be wanting in
formalities, I will say I am,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 16. Aug. 1626.
To -- LETTER XLV.
MY Lord, besides the thanks I owe you for my self, I have a special charge
from Madam de -- to thank you from her, and to give you a testimony of your
Coachmans skill. He is in truth, a great man in his profession, one might well
trust him, and sleep from hence to Paris: He glides by the brink of
Praecipices, and passes broken bridges with an admirable dexterity, say what
you can of his manners otherwise; Pardon me, my Lord, if I maintain that they
be no vices, and that you do him, great wrong to reproach him with them in
your Letter. He does that by design, which you think he does by inclination;
and because he had heard; that a man once overthrew the Commonwealth, when he
was sober, he thinks, that to drink well, is no ill quality to well
governing: He takes otherwise no care for going astray, seeing he has a God
for his guide, and a God that was returned from the Indies before Alexander was
come into the world. After so long a voyage, one may well trust Father Denis,
with a short walk; and he that has yoked Tigers, may well be allowed to guide
horses. Your Coachman, my Lord, has studied thus far; and if they, who hold
in their hands the reins of the State, (to use the phrase of --) had been as
intelligent and dextrous as he, they would have run their race with a better
fortune, and our age should not have seen the fall of the Duke of -- nor of
the Earl of --: it is written to me from the Court, that --: These are only
News I received by the last Post; but I send you, in their company, the Book
you desired, which is (as you know) the Book of the wickedness of the world,
and the ancient original of all the modern subtilities. The first Christians
endeavored to suppress it, and called it, Mendaciorum Loquacissimum: but men
at this day make it their Oracle, and their Gospel: and seek in it rather for
Sejanus and Tigilinus, to corrupt their innocence, than for Corbulo or Thrasea,
to instruct them to virtue; at our next meeting we shall talk more hereof:
The great Personage I have praised, stands in doubt, that his Encomium is at an
end, and presses me to conclude, that I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 4. June. 1634.
To -- LETTER XLVI.
SIR, I am sorry to hear of the continuance of your malady, though I hope, it
be not so great as you make it. These are fruits of this unseasonable time, and
I doubt not, but your Fleame, which overflowes with the rivers, will also with
the fall of the rivers, return again to its natural bounds. I have had my
part in this inundation, and it would be no small commodity to me, that things
should stay in the state they now are in; for by this means my house being made
an Island, I should be less troubled, than now I am by people of the firm
Land; But seeing upon the abating of the waters, depends the abating of your
Rheum, I am contented with all my heart, they shall abate; as above all things
desiring your health: yet withal, I must tell you, there is care to be used:
you must abstain from all moist meats, forbear the good cheer of Paris, and
follow the advice of an ancient sage, who counseled a man troubled with your
disease, to change the rain into drowth. You see how bold I am, to send you my
praescriptions; I entreat you to follow them, but not to imitate me; for in
this matter of Medicines, I confess my self a Pharisee; I commend a Julippe
to others, but I drink my self the sweetest Wines. But to speak of something
else, I cannot imagine, why Monsieur de -- should keep me languishing so long,
and having made me stand waiting three months after his time appointed,
should now require a further prorogation; and a longer delay. For my part, I
verily believe, he spoke not in earnest, when he made you this untoward answer,
and that it was rather for a trial of your patience, than for an exercise: He
has the reputation of so honest and just a man, that I can make no doubt of
that he has promised to Monsieur de -- and I am persuaded, he accounts
himself more straightly tied by his word, than by his bond. Monsieur de --
believes that I have fingred my money a year since, and you know it is a sum
provided to stop three or four of my Persecutours mouths, who will never
leave vexing you with their clamours day and night, till they be satisfied. It
is therefore your part to use all means possible, to content them, at least if
you love your liberty; and take not a pleasure to be every morning saluted
with extreme unpleasing good morrowes, I expect hereupon to hear from you;
and am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 17. Jan. 1630.
To --. LETTER. XLVII.
SIR, you ate too just to desire such duties from a sick friend, as you would
exact from one that were in health. The reasons I can give of my silence, are
much juster than I would they were, and me thinks, three months continuing in
a Fever, may well dispense with any obligation whatsoever of a civil life.
Yet seeing you will needs have me speak, I cannot but obey you, though I make
use of a strangers hand to quarrel with you. I cannot endure the dissimulation
you show, in doubting of my affection, and of the truth of my words. I
understand no jesting on that side; these are Games that I am incapable to
learn, and in matter of friendship, I am of that tenderness, that I am even
wounded with that, which is perhaps intended but for a tickling. I perceive I
have been complained upon to you, but I entreat you to believe, it has been
upon very false grounds; and I require no better justifier, than her own
conscience that accuses me. Within a few days, I will come my self in
person, and give you an account of all my actions; and will train my self on
to Paris, in hope to enjoy the happiness of your company. In the mean time,
be careful not to cure the malady you tell me of, which brings us forth such
goodly Sonnets, and makes so well agree the two greatest enemies that are in
Nature, I mean, Passion and Judgment: so I bid you Farewill, and am with all
my heart,

Your, etc.
At Balzac, 25. August. 1620.
To Monsieur de Coignet. LETTER XLVIII.
SIR, I am much bound unto you for your writing to me, and for sending me News
that exceedingly pleases me. You may well think, I have no mind to cross
my own good; and to refuse giving my consent to the Earl of Exceters request.
To have so illustrious an Interpreter in England, is more then a full revenge
upon all the petty Scribes that oppose me in France: it is the crowning and
triumph of my writings. I am not therefore so a Philosopher, that I place the
honor he does me, amongst things indifferent, but rather to tell you plainly,
I have perhaps received too sensible a contentment in it; and upon the point of
falling again into my old desire of glory; of which I thought my self to have
been fully cured: I send you a word, which I entreat you to deliver to him,
which shall witness for me, how dear and glorious the marks he gives me of
his love and account, are unto me; Otherwise Sir, I doubt not, but I owe a
great part of this good fortune to the good opinion you have of me, which is to
be seen in every line of your Letter; and that you have confirmed the English
in this Error, which is so much in my favor. Only I entreat you, never to
seek to free them of this error, but so to deal with them, that if you
convert them from other, it may still be with reservation of this. The truth in
question is of so small importance, that it deserves not any curious
examination; and in which, to be in a wrong belief, makes not a man to be
either less honest, or more unfortunate: Never therefore, make scruple to
oblige me, seeing you shall oblige a thankful man, and one who is,

Sir, Your etc.
At Balzac, 12. June. 1629.
To Monsieur de Neusuic. LETTER XLIX.
SIR, If I were only blind, I would try to make some answer to the good words
of your Letter; but the pain, which my ill eyes put me to, makes me incapable
of this pleasing contention: and I cannot draw from my head, in the state it
now is, any thing else but Water and Wax. And besides the unhappie blindness
I speak of, I am in such sort overflowed with Rheumes, that if it were in the
time of the old Metamorphoses, I think verily, I should be turned into a
Fountain, and become the subject of some new Fable. I have lost as well my
smelling, as my taste, my Nose can make no difference between Spanish Leather,
and an old Cowes hide: and I sneeze so continually, that all my conversation,
is but to say, I thank you, to them that say, God help you. Being in this
estate, do you not wonder, I write unto you, and have the boldness to be
sending Letters? In truth, never complement cost me so dear as this, and if I
would make use of the privilege of sick men, I might very justly require a
Dispensation; but I had not the power, to let your servant go away, without
telling you, that you are a very honest Impostour; and that the Periguran you
send, is the most refined Frenchman that ever ran afoot to Paris. It must
needs be, that the people of your Village is a Colonie of the Louver, that has
preserved the first purity of their language amidst the corruption of their
Neighbors. There never were such fine things written upon the bank of
Dordoune; at least, not since the death of de Montaigue, yet I esteem them not
so much, because they are so fine, as because they come from you, whose I
passionately am,

At Balzac, 25. Jan. 1633. Sir, Your, etc.

To Madam Desloges. LETTER L.
MAdam, I am always of your mind; and like not Ladies that would be
Cavaliers. There are certain bounds that part us, and mark us out our several
duties and conditions: which neither you nor we can lawfully pass. And the
laws of Decency are so ancient, that they seem to be a part of the ancient
religion. Moses has extended the commandments of God, even to the distinction
of your apparel, and ours: and you know he expressly forbids to disguise our
selves in one another clothes. Women must be altogether women: the virtues of
our sex, are not the virtues of theirs; and the more they seek to imitate men,
the more they degenerate from their own kind. We have had some women amongst
us, that would ride Spanish horses, would discharge Pistols, and would be
parties in maintaining quarrels. M. the Marshall Scomberg showed me once a
letter, which he writ to a Gentlewoman of -- at the end whereof are these
words; I kiss the hands of this valiant and pleasing Lady, that is your second
in the day, and your wife at night. This Lady might parhaps be valiant, but to
my humor, she could not be pleasing. If she had had a beard, she could not
have had a greater fault. Women that are valiant, are as much to blame, as men
that are cowards. And it is as unseemly for Ladies to wear swords by their
sides, as for Gentlemen to have glasses hanging at their girdles. I profess my
self an enemy, Madam, to these usurpations of one sex upon another. It strikes
me with a kind of horror, when I read in histories of the ancient women
Fencers, whom the Romans beheld with such pleasure in their Amphitheater; and
I account not Amazons in the number of women, but of Monsters and Prodigies.
Sweetness and tenderness are the qualities that belong to you; and will your
she Friend give over her claim to these, that is, to the succession of her
mother, and the privileges of her birth? will she not be as well contented as
you, with the partition which Nature her self has made? I cannot conceive
with what face she can go a hunting amongst such violence and tumults, and how
she can run hallowing all day, till she be out of breath, after a kennell of
Hounds, and a troop of Huntsemen. God made her for the Closet, and not for the
Field: and in truth, it is a great sin to distend so handsome a mouth, and to
disfigure so comely a face, with blowing a borne. To expose such excellent
things to all the boughs of the Forest, and to all the injuries of the
weather; and to endanger such precious colors with wind and rain, with the
Sun and dust. And yet, Madam, to see hunting, without being a party; to go in
Coach, and in Parkes enclosed, where a multitude of beasts are kept prisoners,
and come to dye at Ladies feet; such a recreation as this, I do not condemn,
being only entertained with the eyes, and may pass either for a spectacle, or
a walk; and is as far from agitation, as from rest. But this serves not her
turn, she calls these but lazy and sedentarie recreations, and takes no
pleasure, but when it is with hazard of her life. But what would be thought
Madam, if one would come and tell you, she is slain with a fall, by rank
riding, or that she has met with a wild Boar, that was too hard for her? In
such cases, there would not only be no excuse for her death, but it would be
a blot upon her memory for ever: and to save her honor, there must be feigned
some other accident in her Epitaph. As for that other discoursing Lady you
complain of, and whom I know, she commits not in truth such extravagant faults
as this does; yet she has her faults too: and I can no more allow of women to
be Doctors, than of women to be Cavaliers. She should take you for a pattern,
and make profit of the good example you give. You know indeed, an infinite
number of excellent things; but you make no open confession of your knowledge,
as ssee does, and you show, you have not learned them to keep a School. You
speak to her, when she preaches to you; and making popular answers to her
riddles, and giving distinction to her confusion: you do her at least, this
good office, to expound her to her self. Neither in the tune of your voice,
nor in the manner of your expressing, is any thing seen in you, but that which
is natural and French: and although your spirit be of an extreme high
elevation, and far above the ordinary reach, yet you so accomodate it to the
capacity of all that hear you, that whilst the meaner sort do understand
you, the more able spirits do admire you. It is a great matter Madam, to have
gotten the knowledge of such excellent things: but it is a greater matter so to
hide them, as if they were stolen, and to call them, as you do, by the name of
of your secret Truantings. Your Canvas, your Silk, your Needles are seen, but
your papers are not seen; and those women that are taken with men that are not
their husbands, are not more surprised than you are, when you are found to have
an Author in your hand, that is not French. I know therefore, Madam, you
cannot approve of one so contrary to your self, how fair a show soever you
make, nor will ever change the plainness of your words, for her learned
gybrish. Pedanterie is not sufferable in a Master of Art, how should it be
borne withal in a woman? And what patience can endure to hear one talk a
whole day together, Metamorphosis and Philosophy; to mingle the Idaeas of
Plato, and the Praedicables of Porphirie together: to make no complyment, that
has not in it a dozen Horizons and Hemispheares; and at last, when she has no
more to say, then to rail upon me in Greek, and accuse me of Hyperbole, and
Cacozeale? These be her devises, she will have, in two verses, at least four
full points; she has a design to set on foot, and bring into use again, the
Strophes and Antistrophes; she gives Rules both of Epick and Dramatick Poesy,
and says, she cannot endure a Comedy, that is not within the law of four and
twenty hours: and this she is going about to publish through all France. If I
had a mortal enemy, I would desire no greater revenge of him, than to wish
him such a wife. Nothing has more confirmed me in my desire of solitude, than
the example of this Lady: and I see plainly, that a single life is the best
thing in the world, seeing it lies in covert, and is free from the cumber of
this talking Lady. I expect by this bearer the Essences you promised me, and
am,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 20. September: 1628.
Another to her. LETTER LI.
MAdam, I cannot possibly live any longer without hearing from you: but I
cannot hear of any of whom to hear it, and Lymousins are as rare in these
parts, as Spaniards since the war was proclaimed. I must therefore make use of a
messenger, whom you have raised to an Ambassador, to the end he may inform me
of your health and your friends. My love of you, draws on a curiosity for all
that are yours: and my mind will not be in quiet, till I hear how the
Gentlemen, your children do, and what good news you hear from them.
Particularly I desire to know, whether you be yet a Grandmother in Holland:
and whether my Lady, your daughte-in law, have brought you Captains or
Senators, at least, Madam, they shall be children much bound to their mother;
seeing, besides their birth, they shall owe her for their liberty, a thing
they should not do to a Fleming of Bruxels. I have seen the Cavalier you have
so often spoken of, and I think you judge very rightly of him. He consists
wholly of a Pickedevant, and two Mustacho^s* and therefore utterly to defeat
him, there needs but three clippes of a pair of scizers. It is not possible
to bring one -- to be afraid of him. He says, that if he wore a Lions skin,
and carried in one hand a Torch, and in the other a Clubbe, yet in such
equipage he would be more ridiculous than redoubtable. He believes he has
choler enough, but believes not he has any heart; he reckons him in the number
of beasts that are skittish and resty, but not that are cruel and furious: And
when I tell him, he has been often in the field; he answers, me, it has been
then, rather to feed, than to fight. You can, if you please, return me a
hundred fold for this my untoward short relation: and it will be long of you,
if my man come not back laden with histories, which must certainly have been
written to you by the last Posts. Take pity upon the ignorance of your
neighbors, and do me the honor to believe I am,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 15. Aug. 1635.
To Madam du Fos. LETTER LII.
MAdam, my deer Cousin; There is nothing heard in all quarters, but
benedictions and praises, which our poor pleaders give you. They invocate you,
as their Redeemer; and if Themis be the goddess of good causes, it seems you
are the goddess of good success. For my self, I have known a long time, that
you are powerful in persuasion, and never speak without prevayling. This is the
cause, why I have promised Monsieur de --, not that you shall solicit for him,
but that you shall speed for him; and I am this day warranted of the Event. I
could tell you, to make you respect him the more, that he is able to thank
you, in five or six languages; that he has a full Magazine of Astrolabes and
Globes; and that, being but of a mean statute, he has yet, by his knowledge
in the Mathematics, found a means to make himself as high as Heaven. But I
will content my self to say, that he is my friend, and your Orator: that if
my commendation, and your own glory be dear unto you, you cannot but very
shortly send him back with full satisfaction. I promised to send you the two
Sonnets, you have heard so much spoken of, but my bad memory makes me sail in a
part of my promise, and I can send you, but one and a half.

The one entire is this:

Tu reposois Daphnis, au plus haut de Parnasse,
Couronne de louriers si touffus and si verse,
Qu' ils sembloit te Couurir des orages diverse
Don't la rigueur du sort trouble nostre bonace.
Quand l' injuste Menaique a been eu cett' audace
D' employer les poisons sons sarabe couuerts,
Pour corrumpre ton Nom qui remplit l' univers
Et me sprise du temps la fatale menace.
Mais si durant la paix, tes Innocents Escrits,
Forcerent d' avouer les plus rares esprits:
Que Florence devoit ta Temple a ta memoire,
Ce style de combat, Cet Efford plus qu' humain,
Fera voir a quel point, tu peux mettre ta gloire,
Qu'and l' injure to a mis les arms a la main,
The half one is this:

Quelque fois ma raison par des foibles discans,
M' incite a la revolte, and me promet secours
Mais lors que tout de bon je me veur servir d' elle
Apres beaucoup de peine, et d' efforts impuissants
Elle dit, qu' vranie est seule aymable and belle,
Et m' yrengage plus que ne font tous mes sens.
The Author of this last Sonnet has made one in Spanish, which in the Court
of Spain, goes under the Name of Lopez de Vega, and another in Italian, which
Marino verily believed, he had read in Petrarke; It is a Spirit, that changes
himself at pleasures and transformes himself into what shape he list: yet he
deserves better praises than this, and his Moral qualities are nothing behind
his Intellectual, I will tell you his Name, when it shall be lawful to love
him openly, and and to make his Encomium without scruple. But first, it is
needful, that Fortune which has cast him upon an Enemies Country, should
bring him back to Paris, where both of us mean to wait upon or, to make our
Court, and from thence I desire not ever to return, but only to testify to
you more carefully, than heretofore I have done, that I am

Madam my dear Cousin, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 4. May. 1630.
To Madam de Campagnole. LETTER LIII.
MY most dear Sister, I send you the Book which you required of me, for my
Niece, and I believe, that this and her Prayer-Booke may very well suffice to
make up her whole Library: she shall find in it, a Devotion that is not too
mystical, nor too much refined; and which has nothing but Moral and
reasonable. I like this popular Divinity, which meets us half way, and stoops
a little, that we may not strain our selves too much. It follows the example
of its Author, who made himself familiar with common people, and put not
back so much as Curtisans and Publicans, far from making division in
families, and withdrawing women from obedience to their mothers, and their
husbands. It commends this obedience, as their principal virtue, and calls it
a second worship, and a second religion. I shall be glad to see my Niece make
profession of a piety, so conformable to natural reason, and so good a
counselor of all other duties. But let her not, I pray, climb higher, and
undertake Meditations of her own head. Irenada whom I sent her, has taken
this pains for her and has meditated for her, and for all other that shall
read his Books. There is nothing more dangerous, than to mount up to Heaven
without a helper and a guide; and it is a great confidence, one must have in
his Spirit, to let it go so far, and be assured, it will ever come back
again. It is not long ago, there was in a Town of Spain, a Society of
devoted persons, who continued in meditation so many hours a day, leaving of
all base works, to live, as they said, a more heavenly life; but what think
you, became of it? even a thousand domestical disorders, and a thousand
public extravagancies. The less credulous took the prick of a pin, for a
Saints mark, the more humble, accounted their husbands profane; the wiser
sort spoke what came in their heads, and made faces perpetually. In so much,
that when in the month of May, there did not past three or four run mad; it
was counted a good year. It is fit to stay ones self upon the true virtue,
and not to follow the vain Phantasmes of holiness. And it is far safer, to
ground ones self upon a solid and certain reading, than to go wandering in a
hollow, and unsteady contemplation. If I had more time, you should have mors
words; but he that brings you the letter, calls upon me for it, and I can add
no more to it, but that I perfectly am,

My dear sister, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 15. April. 1635.
Another to her. LETTER LIIII.
MY dearest Sister, all the world tells me, that my Niece is fair, and you may
believe, I will challenge no man, for saying so: Beauty is in Heaven a
quality of those glorious bodies, and in Earth the most visible mark that
comes from Heaven. It is not fit therefore to slight these gifts of God, nor to
make small account of this spark of the life to come: It is not fit to be of
so cross an humor, to blame that which is generally praised. Mark when a
comely personage comes in place, having but this advantage of her birth, you
shall presently see all that were talking, to hold their peace; and what noise
soever there was before, you shall have all hushed, and an universal calm upon
a sudden: you shall see a whole great multitude, all busy in different
matters to make presently but one body, and that only to stand to gaze and
wonder; some leave the tales they had begun, some curtoll their complaints, and
cut them off in the midst; every man puts off his conceits to some other
time, only to take a full view, and to contemplate this divine thing that
presents it self. If it be at a Sermon, they leave hearkening to the Preacher,
and they are no longer the auditors of M. de Nantes, but the spectatours of
Calista. The fair can never be seen without respect, without praises, without
acclamations. They triumph, as often as they appear, and their youth has not
more days, than their beauty has Festivalls. But the mischief is, my dear
Sister, that the Festivals are short, the youth is not lasting, and the fair
at last come to be ill favored. Queens and Princesses grow old, and there is
no old beauty, but that of God, of the Sun, and of the Stars. These heads
that now have neither skin, nor flesh, nor hair; These carcasses and dry
bones have been in their time, the divinities and wonders of the world; and
was heretofore called the Duchess of Valentinois, the Duchess of Beaufort,
the Marquis of --: Besides there may happen diseases, which will do old ages
work before hand, and are oftentimes more ghastly than death it self. We are
frighted sometimes to see the spoil and ruins of Faces, upon which the foot
of sickness has troaden, and there is nothing, in which we may more observe,
the lamentable marks of the inconstancy of humane things. From hence I
conclude, that beauty being a thing so frail and tender, subject to so many
accidents, and so hard to keep; it is fit we should seek after another
beauty, that is more firm and permanent, that can better withstand
corruption, and better defend it self against the force of time. Above all, it
is not fit, that women should be proud of a quality, that is infamous for the
losses and wracks of many poor Consciences, and which as innocent and chaste as
it can be, will yet be a cause to raise in others, a thousand foul desires,
and a thousand unhallowed and wicked thoughts. Say, my Niece has some thing in
her that is pleasing, some thing that is fair and beautiful, as h^^ friends
conceive, yet she ought always to be afraid of such a good, that is so
dangerous for doing hurt to others. I set before her eyes, the sad Picture of
that which she shall be hereafter; to the end, she may not grow proud of that
which she is now. There is no hurt in meditating a little upon this point. But
allow her the liberty we lately took from her; yet withal, put her always in
mind, that of the four beauties I have showed her in my Tasso; there is but
one of them, that will be a fit example for her to follow. She must leave
Armida and Erminia, for the Gallants of the Court, Clorinda is for the valorous
men of Gascoigne, and Perigord; but she that I propose for her Pattern, is
Sophronia. And if she have not courage enough to say to the Tyrant, as she
said, It is I that am the Delinquent you look for, let her at least, have the
other conditions, that are necessary to the being her follower, and imitate her
in them. This fair Saint made profession of modesty, and neglected her
beauty; she was always, either hidden under a veil, or shut up in her
Chamber, and all the world might suspect her to be fair; but there was scarce
any at all that knew it but her mother. She had no design to entrappe any man's
liberty, and therefore laid not her snares in their way, nor went to Church to
see and to be seen. My dear sister, I cannot choose but take upon me here to
be a reformer of corrupt manners, and make my complaint to you, of a Custom,
which as well as many other naughty things, the Court has cast upon us. What
reason is there in the world, that women should enter into holy places, of
purpose to draw upon them, the view and attention of the Company; as much as to
say, to trouble and disturb the whole devotion of a Town, and to do as bad,
or worse, as those buyers and sellers did, whom Christ whipped out of the
Temple? By this means, good actions become evil, and Piety comes to have no
better odor before the Altars, than Perfumes that are mustie and corrupted.
Women now adays, are bound to be seen to be at Church; and this very desire
of being seen there, is the ordinary profanation of the place where they are
seen. And in truth, seeing this place is particularly called the House of God,
what is it but to vilify God, even in the highest degree, to come and offend
at his own doors, and as it were to his face? It is even as great an
Impudency, as that of the first Angels, who sinned in Paradise. Yet herein
certainly, the Italian women are more pardonable than the French; for they
indeed, have no other breathing time of their unfortunate liberty, being at all
other times, kept up as slaves and prisoners: but in France, where women are
not denied the company and visits of honest men, they can have nothing to say,
in justification of this incontinency of their eyes, and of this unsufferable
vanity, to seek to part stakes with God, in men's vows, and to share with him
in his public Adoration. You little thought this morning to hear a Preacher,
and I as little thought to be one; but as you see, the zeal of Gods House,
has brought me to it; and finding my self at leisure, I was desirous to
bestow part of it upon you The Text was given me yesterday, by the company that
was here; where my Neeces beauty was so much extolled, that, sending you
News, which are to her so glorious, I thought fit to send her withal a
cooling, to keep her glorying in some temper: and so my dear Sister, I take
my leave, and am with all my soul,

Your, etc.
At Balzac, 3. May. 1635.
Another to her. LETTER LV.
MY dearest sister, having both of us but one passion, it makes us always
talking of one thing. My Niece is the subject of all our Lettters, as she is
the object of all ou^ cares. For my own part I see not a good or a bad
example, which I make not use of for her instruction, and endeavor to employ
it to her profit. You remember a woman the other day, who values nothing, likes
of nothing, excuses nothing; and let her be in the best and most pleasing
company that may be, yet she is sure to put them all into dumpes and
melancholy. You can come on no side of her, but she pricks and bites: all her
coasts are craggie and rockie. And it was not without cause my brother said,
that if the man you wot of, had married her, there would certainly have nothing
come of that marriage, but Teeth and Nails. It is impossible to live in peace
with such a savage chastity. I make no more reckoning of it, than of that of
the Furies, whom the ancient Poets call virgins, and wonder not, that women of
this humor, love no man, seeing they hate the whole world. This sad and sullen
poison taking up all the room in their souls, leaves no place at all for
other passions that are sweet and pleasing. They fly pleasures, rather by
having their mouth out of taste, than by having their judgment in perfection:
and are so continually fretting, that they have no leisure at any time to be
merry. As long as they be chaste, they think they may lawfully be
discourteous, and scratch men, so they do not kiss them. They have a conceit,
that by wanting one vice, they have presently all virtues: and that for a
little good fame they gain to their husbands, they may keep them under yoke,
and affront all mankind. It is true, the loss of a woman's honor is the
greatest disgrace she can possibly incur; and which once lost, she has
nothing left her that is worth the keeping: But yet it follows not, that the
preserving it, is any such royal act; and I do not admire any, for not being
willing to live in misery and disgrace. I never heard, that a woman should be
praised, for not falling in the fire, or for not casting her self down a
rock. We condemn the memory of them that kill themselves; but we give no
reward to them that preserve themslves. And so indeed it is, a woman that
magnifies her self for being chaste, magnifies her self for not being dead,
and for having a quality, without which she were as good be out of the world,
seeing she stays not in it, but for a plague to her name, and to see her own
infamy. I say yet more, that she ought not so much to consider the vice as an
evil thing, as to consider it as an inpossible thing, and not to have it so
much in detestation, as in ignorance. For indeed, if a woman be truly virtuous,
She will sooner believe there are Maremaids and Centaures, than that there are
any dishonest women: but will rather conceive that the world is given to
slandering, and that Fame is a liar, than that her neighbor is false and
disloyal to her husband: though with her own eyes she should see the fault
committed, yet it is her part to suspect her eyes were mistaken, and that it
was but an illusion which she saw; at least, she should never give sentence
upon this sort of delinquents, seeing Christ himself would not do it to the
adulterous woman. When others wrong a woman, it is her part to be sorry: and
when others say, she has been unfaithful, it may be enough for her to say,
she has been unfortunate. And yet more than this too, I could wish, if it were
possible, that where she finds most weakness, there she should show most
goodness; and I would not, that virtue should beget this bad qua^ity. It is an
enemy to society, and deserve not to have so good a mother: and one may well
fly and blame the vice, so as the flying it, be without ostentation, and the
blaming it be without choler. For otherwise, it would be as much as to require
a statue for doing nothing; and in the smart of the punishment, to seek for
the pleasure of revenge. An honest woman reformes the world by the example of
her life, and not by the violence of her spirit. She ought not to proclaim
war against any; not against the most indiscreet and insolent: and if there
chance any licentious or uncivil word to be uttered in her hearing, she ought
to check it, either by giving no care, or by falling into some other
discourse, or by casting upon the speaker a beams of modesty, that may c^ver
his confusion, and pi^ce his very soul: and thus she shall use a chastising
without offending. There is as well a severity in modesty, as a sweetness, and
which keeps insolency it self in awe: and a woman that carries this excellent
virtue in her eyes, keeps men within the bounds of their ^uty, without ever
falling into outrage, or into words of choler. Other virtues are hidden, and
have nothing in them that is visible, or that falls under sense. This virtue
has a body of light, and rises up into the face, in those pre^ty staynes,
which bashfulnesse that is her usher, as Aurora is the Suns, sends up into
it. And in truth, the Pu^ple, whereof the Poets speaks, which appears at the
break of day, is nothing so rich and glorious, as that which is disclosed in
an honesty a little bashful; the effect whereof in noble tempers is not an
overflowing of blood, but only one single drop well husbanded. It is not a
mass of r^^, which sets the face on fi^e. It is only a first impression, and
as it were, a shadow of tincture, that lightly colors it. This honest blush,
which is so pleasing a thing in maidens faces, and which I distinguish from
that, which is sottish and untoward, is a bar, and sufficient defense against
the audaciousnesse or the most impudent; and when it is seen to shine in a
woman's look, there is no licentiousness that is not dazeled with it, and is
not stopped from daring to proceed. And therefore there is no necessity of using
any straining of the voice, any churlishness of words, or any agitation of
gestures, to do that, which may better be done by silence, and with
quietness. And indeed women are bound, if for nothing else, yet for the very
in^erest for their beauty, to shun a passion, that makes such vilanous faces,
and sets so many wrinkles upon their countenance. I have heard some of them
complain, that the scent of a Rose was too strong, and that Musk made their
heads ache, because it had not mild sweetness enough: and why then will they
not take that sweetness into themselves, which they seek for so much in other
things? and find fault with the want of it in that Art, which proposes to it
self no other end? if without this sweetness, there grow from the most
precious odor, a certain quality which offends them; and if there be some
Flowers, and some Perfumes that please them not, what likelihood is there, that
Brimstone and Saltpeter can please them, and that their humor can have any
thing common with these violent substances? It is true perhaps, that sweetness
and mildness have their excesses; but yet, even those excesses are more
lawful, than the justest temper of shrewishness and incivility; at least in a
woman, they are much more commendable: and it becomes her better to dissemble
that she knows, than to discover verities that are odious: and better she
should be though^ to come out of another world, than to carry to a man the
first news of his stinking breath, and teach another to know the infirmity of
his race* which perhaps he knew not before. These Libe^ties are not sufferable
in the f^eest Conversations, they draw on other more dangerous liberties; and
though your sex be inviolable, and have the privilege of sanctuary, yet
profane persons stick not to lay hands on the Saints themselves, and on their
Altars, and nothing is so sac^ed, that can escape the hand of sacrilege. Only
those persons that can revenge offenses, may venture to give offenses; and one
that will give the lie, must be of a condition to fight a Duel, and maintain
it by Arms. My Niece has no great need of these precepts, nor indeed of any
foreign instruction; she cannot wander from the right, if she go not astray
from her own inclination; nor can be troublesome to others, if she borrow not
a vice which is none of her own. I have therefore represented to her, the
woman of the other day: but after their example, who showed their slaves drunk
to their Children, and that is to make her afraid of filthy Objects, and to
make that hateful to her, which is not in it self lovely; to confirm her in
the principles which you have taught her, and to draw her out some rules from
her own action: She is (I know) naturally good; but the best natures have need
of some method to guide them, and direction does never any hurt to virtue: she
is able to keep her self in terms extremely obliging, without ever falling
into the baseness of flattery: She is able to please without colloguing; and
although she call not every thing by the right name; nor be so very curious to
speak in proper terms, yet her style shall not for that, be the less liked,
nor her company the less desired. she may call them wise that want the
reputation of being valiant; and women that are sad; she may say they are
serious. If a man be not of a quick spirit, she may say, he is of a good
judgment: and if one be unfortunate in his actions, she may yet say, he has a
good meaning in his counsails But yet in this there is a measure to be held,
and a choice must be made, in laying her colors, that she seek not to
disguise all sorts of subjects: for there are some indeed that are not capable
of disguising. Those that are pale, she may praise for their whiteness: but
those that have a dropsy, she must not praise for their fatness: she may say,
that scruple is a bud of piety, but she must not say, that profaneness is an
effect of Phylosophie. She may make a favorable construction of things
doubtful, and sweeten the rigor of particular judgments; but she must not
contend against common sense, nor be opposite to verities that are public and
manifest. She must make a difference between errors and crimes, between a
docible simplicity and a presumptuous stupiditie, between sots that are
honest, and those that are wicked. And if she happen to be in company, where
some weak spirit is oppressed, as the world is full of such that will triumph
over the weak, and take no pity of any, she must then, by all means, be a
protectresse of such a one, and make her self a Sanctuary for all those, whom
stronger adversaties would otherwise ruin. This only is to be observed, that
she so undertake the maintaining of weak causes, that it may appear by the
tune of her voice, that it proceeds from excess of goodness, and not from
want of knowledge: and that she compassionates humane infirmities by an act of
charity, but makes not her self a party by false persuasion. I am now at the
end of my paper; and should have been a good while since at the end of my
letter: but I always forget my self when I am with you, and never think
hours shorter, than those I bestow upon your memory. And so my dear sister,
I bid you farewell, not without great longing to see you: and if you and all
your company come not hither the next week, I proclaim it to you, that I am
no longer,

At Balzac. 10. July. 1634. Your, etc.

THE SECOND PART of the third Volume of the Letters of MONSIEUR DE BALZAC.
To my Lord the Cardinal, Duke of Richelieu. LETTER I.
MY Lord, being stayed here by some occasions, I suffer this hard necessity
with a great deal of pain, and account my self banished from my Country,
being so long a time deprived of your presence. I deny not, but the victorious
and triumphant News, that comes continually from the Army, gives me some
resentment of joy, and that the brute of your Name in all quarters, touches me
very sensibly; but it is no perfect satisfaction to me, to learn that by
others relating, which I ought to know as an eyewitness, and I conceive so
great a pleasure to consist in the sight of your glory, that there is not a
common soldier under your Command, whose happiness and good fortune, I do
not envy. But my Lord, though I cannot serve you with my bodily actions, yet I
revere you day and night, with the thoughts of my mind, and in this so worthy
an employment, I never think the noblest part of my self, can do service
enough. Your Lordship, next to the King, is the eternal object of my spirit, I
never turn my eyes from the course of your life; and if perhaps, you have
Courtiers more officious than my self, and such as do their duties with
greater ostentation and show, yet I am most sure, you have no servant that is
more faithful, and whose affection comes more truly from his heart, and is
fuller of life and vigor. But to the end, my words may not be thought vain,
and without ground, I send you now a proof of that I say, by which, you shall
perceive, that a man that is himself persuaded, has a great disposition to
persuade others, and that a Discourse, founded upon the things themselves, and
animated with the truth, both stirs men's spirits with greater force, and also
begets a firmer belief, than that which is but feigned, and comes but in the
nature of Declayming. This my Lord, is a part drawn out from the whole body,
and a piece, which I have taken most pains to polish; which, I freely vow unto
you, that all the hours of a calmer leisure than mine, and all the powers of a
more elevated spirit than ordinary, would have found work enough to bring to
perfection. In it, there is handled, Of the virtue, and victories of the King;
Of the Justice of his Arms; Of Royalty and Tyranny; Of usurpers and lawful
Princes; Of Rebellion chastened, and liberty maintained; but because the Prince
I speak of, is a stirrer, and makes no stay any where, and that in following
him, I should imbarque my self in a world of several subjects; I have
therefore, prescribed to my self certain bounds, which in his actions, I
should never have met with: and after the example of Homer, who finished his
Ilias with the death of Hector, though that were not the end of the war; I
have thought fit, not to go further, than the taking of Size, though this were
but the beginning of the wonder, we have seen of his. You know my Lord, that
this kind of writing, which I propose to my self, is without comparison, the
most painful of all other; and that it is a hard matter, to continue long in
an action that must be violent, and to be violent in an action that must
continue long. This praise belongs properly to Orators, I mean such as know
how to persuade, how to please in profiting; and can make the people capable of
the secrets of Governing a Commonwealth. For as for Philosophers, that have
written of this argument, their discourse is commonly so dry and meager, that
it appears, their intention was rather to instruct, than to please; and
besides, their style is so thornie and cumbersome, that it seems they meant to
teach none, but the learned. And in this, there is no more difficulty, than
there is in healing of men that be in health. And for a man, to make himself
obscure, there needs no more, but to stay upon the first notions we have of
truth, which are never, either wholly pure nor well unfolded, and which falling
from the imagination upon paper, leave upon it such a confusion, that it
resembles rather an informed abortion, than a perfect production. Besides, in
the composition of a History, especially where the Politiques have to do, an
Author is carried, and borne out by his matter, and the things being all made
to his hand, which ease him of the pains of invention, as the order of the
time eases him of the care of disposing: he has little to do for his part,
but only to contribute words, which is by some made so small a matter, that
when Menander was pressed by some friends to publish a work of his, that he
had promised: He made answer, it shall presently come forth; for it is in a
manner all finished and ready, there wants nothing, but to make the words. But
in the persuasive kind of writing (besides, that there must be a better choice
made, and a stricter order used, in placing the words, than in simple
Narrations, which for all their luster and riches of expression, require no
more but plainness, and fit terms) they which desire to attain perfection,
or indeed to do any thing at all of worth, endeavor all they can, to put in
use, and reduce to action, the most subtle Idaea's of all Rhetoric; to raise
up their understanding to the highest point of things; to search out, in every
matter, the verities less exposed to view, and to make them so familiar, that
they who perceived them not before, may by their relation come as it were to
touch them Their design is, to join pleasure to profit, to mingle daintiness
and plenty together; and to fight with Arms, not only firm and strong, but
also fair and glittering. They endeavor to civilize Learning; drawing it from
the College, and freeing it from the hands of Pedants, who mar and sully it
in handling: and to say the truth, adulterate, and corrupt it, abusing this
excellent and delicate thing in the sight of all the world. They seek not to
avoid Rocks by turning aside from them, but rather by slyding gently over
them, and rather to escape places of danger, than to shun them. And to make
it appear, that nothing is so sour or bitter, but that it may be sweetened and
allayed by Discourse. Finally, they suffer themselves sometimes to be
transported with that reasonable sury, which Rhetoricians have well known,
though it go beyond their Rules and Precepts: which thrust an Orator into
such strange and uncouth motions, that they seem rather inspired, than to be
natural; and with which, Demosthenes and Cicero were so possessed, that the
one of them swears by those that dyed at Marathon, and of his own authority
makes them Gods: the other, asks questions of the Hills and Forests of Alba,
as if they had ears, and were able to hear him. But if I were one that did
come any thing near so noble an end, (which I neither will nor dare believe)
and that I were able to make strangers see, that all things in France are
changed for the better, since the happy Reign of our King, who no less
augmenteth our spirits, than he increases our courage: yet it is not I that
should merit the glory of this, but I must wholly attribute it to the
happiness of my time, and to the force of my object. Howsoever, my Lord, if I
cannot be taken into the List of learned and able men, at least, I cannot be
denied a place amongst honest men, and loyal servants; and if my abilities be
worthy of no consideration with you, at least, my zeal and affection, are
better worth, than to be rejected. With which meditation, I am sometimes so
ravished, that I doubt not, but my resentments must needs content you; and that
it is no unpleasing recreation to you, to cast your eye upon a Philosopher in
choler. And though true love content it self with the testimony of its own
Conscience: and that I give you many proofs of my most humble service, which I
assure my self, will never come to your knowledge; yet for your satisfaction,
I desire you might hear me sometimes in the place where you are, and might
see, with what advantage, I maintain the public cause, in what manner I
control false News that runs about, and how I stop their mouths that will be
talking in disparagement of our affairs. It is certain, that it is not
possible our State should be more flourishing than it is, or that the success
of the Kings Arms should be more glorious than it is, or that the Peace of the
People should be more assured than it is, or that your Government should be
more judicious than it is; and yet we meet with certain spirits, that are
troubled with their own quietness, are impatient of their own felicity,
cannot be held in any good belief, but by prosperities that are supernatural;
and longer than they see miracles, give no credit to any thing. If present
affairs be in good terms, then they cast out fears of those to come; and
when they see the events prove happy, then they fall affrighting us with
Presages. They take an Oath, to esteem of no persons, but forreyners; of no
things, but far set. They admire Spinola, because he is an Italian, and their
enemy; they cannot abide to praise the King, because he is a Frenchman, and
their Master. They will hardly be drawn to confess, that the King has
overcome, though they see before their eyes, an infinite number of Towns
taken; of Factions ruinated, eternal Monuments of his Victories: and more
easily the King has gotten the applause of all Europe, than these men's
approbation. They would persuade us, If they could, that he had raised his
Siege before Rochell; That he had made a shameful Peace with the Protestants;
and that the Spaniards had made him run away. They do all they can, to
exterminate his History, and to extinguish the greatest light that shall ever
shine to posterity. I doubt not, but they cast a malicious eye upon my Book;
for presenting an image of those things which offend them so much. And they who
believe Fables and Romances, and are in passion, for an Hercules or an
Achilles, who perhaps never were; They who read with ecstasy of joy, the
actions of Rowland and of Reinold, which were never done, but upon Paper: These
men will find no relish in a true History, because it gives testimony to the
virtue of their natural King. They can like well enough, that against the
credit of all Antiquity, Xenophon being a Grecian, and no Persian, should
frame Cyrus a life after his own fancy, and make him die in his bed, and
amongst his Friends; when yet he dyed in the wars, and overcome by a woman:
and they can like well enough, that Pliny should tell a lie in open Senate,
and praise Trajan for temperance and chastity, who yet was given to wine, and
to another vice so foul that it cannot honestly be named, but they can by no
means like, that I, who am the Kings subject born, should say that of him,
which no man can deny to be most true, and that being to make a pattern for
Princes, I should rather make choice of his life, than either of that of Cyrus,
which is fabulous; or that of Trajan, which is not the purest, that I may not
speak of that of Caesar Bogia, which is all black with licentiousness and
crimes. Heaven it self is not able to give this kind of people a Governor to
their mind. He that was according to Gods own heart, should not be according
to theirs: They would not think S^lomon wise enough, nor Alexander valiant
enough. They are generally enemies of all sorts of Masters; and accusers of all
things the present time affords. They make our heads ache with crying out, that
there was no necessity to make a war in Italy; but if you had stayed still at
Paris, they would have cried out much louder, that it had not been honest to
suffer our allies to perish. Because some of our Kings have made unfortunate
voyages beyond the mountains, therefore they will needs have it, that our
King, though he follow not their counsels, should yet fall into their
misfortunes. They accuse your conduct with old proverbs, because they cannot
with sound reasons. They say, Italy is the Church yard of the French: and being
not able to observe the least fault in all your carriage in that country, they
lay upon you the faults of our ancestors, and charge you with the error of
Charles the eighth. Yet I conceive that these men's sin is rather of infirmity
than of malice, that they are rather passionate for their opinions, than
Pensioners of our enemies; and that they have more need of help by Physic,
than of restraint by Law. But it is a grievous thing to see, how the
busie-bodyes of our time, speak the same language, which Rebels did in times
past; and abuse the happiness of liberty, even against him, who has procured
it unto us. They come continually, and tell me, we are like to receive much
prejudice by the discontent of such a Prince, that is gone from our side. And I
answer them, it is better to have a weak enemy to fight withal, than a
quarrelsome friend to make much of. They will by all means, that the King at
any price, should succor Cazall; and I tell them, that he has succored it
already, by his conquest of Savoy: and that in the state as things now stand,
it cannot be taken, but to be delivered back. They are not contented that you
perform actions that are extraordinary, they look you should perform some
that are impossible: And though there arise sometimes such difficulties in
things, that they cannot by any possibility be encountered; I say not, by defect
in the undertaker but by reason of repugnancy in the subject; yet they will not
take for payment, such reasons as wise men are satisfied withal, but they
would have the King do that, which the Turk and Persian joined together, were
not able to do. Th^se things, my Lord, would put me extremely into passion,
and I could never be patient at such excess of ungratefulness, if I did not
remember, that there has sometimes been a spirit, so sullen, and so saucy,
that it dared to find fault with the works of God himself, and was not
afraid to say, that if he had been of his counsel, as well in the creation as
in the government of the world, he would have given him better advise than he
took at first, or than he now follows. After so immense a folly, you must not
think it strange, if there be some extravagants; and the vulgar at all times
has been found but an unjust Judge of virtue; and yet for all that, it has
never been without admirers, and now, if those that have but little instinct,
and can do nothing but murmr, and do not favor him, it is for us, my Lord,
to testify unto you, that reasonable men, and such as know how to spear, are
of the better side.

At Balzac, 4. Aug. 1630. Your most humble and most obedient servant. BALZAC.

Another to him. LETTER II.
MY Lord, hearing that Monsieur de -- means to question me about the Benefice
you did me the honor to give me: and that by virtue of his dispensation, he
has sent to take possession, I have conceived no better shelter, to avoid
this storm, than under the greatness of your Name; nor any safer defense
against the forces of such an adversary, than the respect of such a Protector
as you are. I require not in this any strayning of your Lordships power; I know
you are sparing of it in your own proper interests, and reserve it for
occasions that are public and important: I only require the continuance of
your love, and that you would signify to him that tr^^bles me, you would be
glad he would let me be at quiet. F^^ besides that to stand in suit with a man
of his robe, were as much as to fight with a M^ster of Fence, and to put ones
whole right in h^z^rd: It would trouble me, my Lord, though I were assured of
success, to think I should owe any part of it to any other besides your
self, seeing I account it more glory to receive from you, than to w^est from
another Monsieur de -- may do well, to keep his dispensation for a better
ma^ket, and draw much more profit with a little patience. And indeed, I verily
believe he looks for nothing to make him surcease, but for some demonstration
from you, of your desire: and that he rather has an ambition to be entreated
by M. The Cardinal, than any design to take your gift from me. I humbly
entreat your Lordship to give him contentment in this point, and not suffer me
to fall, at this first step of my Fortune; and that I may not always be
unfortunate, being as I am with all my soul,

At Balzac. 8. Novem. 1631. Your, etc.

Another to him. LETTER III.
MY Lord, I am infinitely bound unto you for the honor you have done me, to
remember me, and for the pains you have taken, to write in my behalf to
Monsieur de -- It is true, your pains has not had so good success, as I
verily hoped it would: for though he had given out, that for his satisfaction
he required no more but some small sign, that it was your desire: yet having
received that sign, he continues still in the same terms, and holds the same
rigorous course he did. It makes me think, my Lord, that he knows well enough
of what worth your commendation is: certainly, if it had been employed for any
other but my self, it had found all the yiedling and respect it meriteth: but
indeed, I cast unfortunatenesse upon all matters I deal in: my evil Fortune
suffers me not to make benefit of your love* you have no sooner a thought to
do me good, but presently a thousand impediments arise to hinder it. You give
me presents, and do not receive them. You command I should be paid my pension,
and your command is not obeyed. Not yours, my Lord, of which one might say, Est
fatum quodcunque votes. You have read my Book with pleasure, and spoken of it
with commendation; and yet I suffer persecution for making it, as much as to
say, for being a true Frenchman, and a lover of public Liberty. For as for
the objections they make against me, they certainly are but colors and
pretenses: If may words be not learned, or eloquent, they are yet sound, and
full of truth. There is not one to be found in all my work, which a mean
Advocate were not able to defend before the severest Tribunal in the world.
The makers of Libells, who condemn them, are the men of all other, that first
corrupt them. I begin my Lord, to be weary of this long and obstinate
injustice; my Philosophy begins to fail me in this case: and I should be
clean and altogether out of heart, if I had no^ your goodness to rely upon.
For this, at this day, is the common refuge of all oppressed innocents, and no
man invocates it in vain. I therefore make my self believe, that it will at
last send me also some fair days, after so many storms and tempests raised
against me by mine enemies: and that after you have saved Nations, and set
Princes in their Thrones, it will be no hard matter to relieve a poor private
man, who adores you, and whom calumny seeks to ruin. I know some, my Lord
whom, you have made happy, and yet scarce knew their names, when you did me the
honor to speak well of me. And some I have known advanced by you, that lay
hidden in the throng, when your self dr^w me out, and placed me amongst the
few, yet what get I by it? For in truth I could never make any use of this
advantage, because indeed I could never serve you with such care and
subjection, as the forwardness of your favors obliged me to do. My
indisposition has always hindered my good designs; I have always combated
with weakness of body, and never durst venture to begin a life, which I was
not assured I was able to hold out. This has forced me, my Lord, to court you
in a new fashion; and to seek to do you service by my absence and ease, and
not trouble you with unseasonable officiousness, and with many low cur^sies to
no purpose. I am able to say, unworthy as I am, that I was the first man that
preached the wonders of your life unto the people, exhorted all Frenchmen to do
their duties; have in mine own person given good example in the Provinces, and
have healed many spirits that were sick, and ill persuaded of the present
government. I am not so well known by my name, as by my forwardness in your
service: And when the spiteful rumor ranabroad of late, many persons of
quality can tell, how grievously I took it: and how I resolved to follow you
to the worlds end, if so be the unfortunatenesse of France should remove you
from the Court. Yet I am not troubled that I make you these proofs of my
Fidelity, though they would be less difficult to me, than to entertain you,
as now I do, with my interests; which to say true is a cruel torture I put my
self to. It is not my desire, you should have misfortunes, to the end I might
make use of my consolations, nor it is my wish there should be disorders in my
Country, and disgrace to my Master, to the end I might the better show my
self a good Frenchman, and a loyal servant. But yet my Lord, why may I not be
of some use in a calm, and have a place as well in the joy, as in the sorrow?
You alone are the Author of your victory; but you alone cannot furnish your
triumph, but must have many Artificers to work about it. I have materials
enough to make many large Fabrics; but to undertake the work, I must entreat
your Lordship I may have a little contentment, or at least, a little quiet. The
splendor of your person is so great, that it sends forth beams of light to
your remotest servants: and the power which heaven has given you, is so
redoubtable to all sorts of Tyrants, that to give a period to my persecution,
there needs no more, but that you give some sign you mean to protect me;
which favor I persuade my self you will not deny me: for besides the common
cause of being oppressed, you have known a long time, that I make a special
profession to be

My Lord, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 5. Jan. 1632.
To Monsieur Cytois, Physician to M. the Cardinal. LETTER V.
SIR, my curiosity were undiscreet, if I should ask you news of occurrents in
the Army; but you cannot take it ill, that I ask you news of my Lord the
Cardinals health. I learn the progress of his glorious actions by the mouth
of Fame: but I must learn from you how he fares in his continual agitation;
and whether the temper of his body feel no alteration by the violent motions
of his spirit, I conceive that God doubles his force when there is need; and
that he has regard to the necessity of so many people that cannot miss him:
but I know also, that he makes use of the second causes, and that your cares
and industry concur with this providence. The services you do to one
particular man, are obligations to all the world. Never had any Science a more
worthy or profitable employment than yours has: And if the Romans erected a
statue to Antonius Musa, for healing of him who oppressed their liberty, why
may not you justly expect a public acknowledgement for preserving of him, who
makes us all both free and happy? I send him the discourses which -- I humbly
entreat you to take care they may come to no other hands but his: and
therefore that you will keep them in your custody, that they may be safe
until I come my self to Paris. I expect this courtesy from that good will
you have always promised me: and here I make you this solemn protestation,
that you can never honor any man that is more passionately than I am.

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 5. Aug. 1630.
To Monsieur de Chastelet, Counselor of the King, in his Council of State.
LETTER V.
SIR, it is a great work of memory to be mindful of me at the Court: but it
is an effect of a divine goodness to make it rain dainties in the desert:
Since Manna, there was never seen there, such a thing as you sent me; and if
you were bound to furnish me with such fare, forty years of banishment at
this diet, would be to me forty years felicity. To speak in plain terms,
your present is unvaluable: and to help my self in speaking of it, I have
been foreed to fetch comparisons from heaven, because inferior things are
never able to express it. You do it wrong to give it the name of a Preface:
but you will do much wrong to the work it self, before which such a preface
is set: If the outside be so rich, and there be so great magnificence in the
Gatehouse, what will be in the Galleries, and Cabinets? and what will the
Palace be that is worthy of such an entrance? I see indeed that it is a mark
of greatness, but I fear withal, that it is a want of proportion, and being
not possible the rest should equal the beginning, you will be accused for
disturbing the order of things, and for putting perfection out of its place,
which should not come in but at the last. See here an accusation that is very
nice, and whereof it is a glory to be convinced. In this there is less account
to be made of virtue than of vice; and the disorder which makes a magnificence,
is more worth than the method which retains a poverty. Fear not Sir, the
event of this dispute; Beauty gets the prize in all causes where the Eyes are
Judges: and they who blame you for adorning too much your refutation of the
Books of Flanders, blame you for having your Armor too much gilded, and that
in striking you dazzle their eyes. It seems they know not that the
Lacedaemonians never tricked up themselves, but when they went to fight; and
that CAESAR made his vaunt, he wan Battles with perfumed Soldiers. The pomp
of your style arrests not the sight without profit: It is pleasing to the
Reader; but withal it is fatal to slander. In it there is to be seen the
luster and bravery of Tournaments; but withal, there is to be seen in it the
force and terriblenesse of War. The only pity is, you had not a competent
Enemy to fight withal, and that so much force and valor should be spent upon
a feeble fury, and which is now at the last drop of its poison. The wretched
man you pursue, and who dies blaspheming, was not worthy of so noble a
Resentment as yours, having nothing considerable in him, but that you vouchsafe
to speak of him: you make him of some worth by alleging him so often. In
undoing him, you make him famous, and his objections will one day not be found,
but in your answers. It is five and twenty years since he was a fugitive
from his order, and should have had his trial before the General of the
Jesuits. And if these good Fathers did not deal too gently with delinquents,
and change imprisonment into banishment, he had from that time been
suppressed, with all the filthy books he has made ever since. But it was
necessary, that (to crown his inconstancy) after he had abandoned above a
dozen sides, he should now for his last prize, become a parasite to the
Spaniards, and a Secretary to those bad French that are at their Court. Let it
never trouble us Sir, that he calls us Flatterers: Atheists call honest men
superstitious. Catiline called them all slaves that would not be parricides;
and it has always been impossible, to be virtuous with approbation of the
wicked. They are delinquents themselves, that find fault with our innocence,
and they are idle fellows, who prostrate themselves every day before a Don
Dego, or a Don Roderigo, and yet think much we should do any reverence to M.
the Cardinal Richlieu. But it is fit they should be taught, that here is the
true worship, at Bruxells but Idolatry; and that to adore a foreign Power,
and such a one that does mischief to the whole earth, is not, at least an
action so truly French, as to revere a virtue, that is native of France, and
that does good to all the world. Seeing they abuse our tongue in praising their
Tyrants, and justifying our Rebels; It cannot be denied us, to bring it back
to its natural and proper use, and in more honest subjects, to purify and
make clean those words and phrases, which they have prostituted to the
conceits of the Marquis of Aytona, or made to serve the passion of Spain. If
tyranny were more to be feared than it is, and that the unfortunatenesse of
Europe should make it reach hither; yet it should never make me to unsay the
propositions I hold, and it shall be all my life a most pleasing object to me,
to see my self enrolled in the Catalogue of Authors, condemned by the enemies
of my Country. I think, I may boldly say, I was one of the first mainteiners
of the truth, and he perhaps that laid open the field, where so many Orators
and Poets find themselves exercise: it is time now, that I leave it to younger
men, and such as are more able than I am. Yet I entreat you to remember Sir,
that I give place without running away; and that it is the coldness of my
blood, and the abatement of my strength, that forces me, and not any want of
courage or change of will. Never think I will ever fail in these. I always
preserve in my heart the principles of good actions, I mean, good desires; and
when I can no longer be a runner in the Race, yet I will be one of the most
earnest Spectatours, and clappe with my hands when I can do nothing else. In
the mean time, to the end, that a good part of my ancient travail may not be
lost, and that I may not make that an unprofitable secret, between my Muses
and me, which may perhaps serve for some edification to the Public. I think,
fit, to make you account of certain things I have heretofore conceived; and to
show you, that in actions of my duty, I oftentimes content my self with the
testimony of my own Conscience. These are Pieces that were wrought before the
second voyage into Italy, and before the lamentable Divisions of the Royal
Family. In the purity of public joy amidst the applauses of all the Kings
subjects; and even of those, who have since lost their loyalty, and now lie
railing upon us at Bruxells. I send you some sheets, as I first light upon
them, and I send them Sir, rather to do you Homage by laying my Compositions
at your feet, than to make a Challenge, as opposing them to yours, rather to
acknowledge the superiority of your Eloquence, and to go in your Lyverie,
than to make my self you^ Competitor, and seek to brave you, with so rash a
Comparison. If you find any relish in Discourses so far short of the force
and merit of yours; and if you think they may give my Masters of the
Universitie, any the least contentment, I earnestly entreat you, to present
them a Copy; and withal, my humble submission to their judgment. I know, this
Society is at this day the supreme Tribunal that Censures all works of the
Brain, and gives Rules to all other Tribunalls of France. I neither doubt of
the sufficiency, nor suspect the integrity of the Judges that praeside there:
Moreover, I confess Sir, it could never have a more happy Conception, seeing
your self was the first that spoke it, nor a more illustrious birth, seeing M.
the Cardinal was a Patron to it; and therefore, borne in Purple, as were those
Princes in Constantinople, whom I would call, Porphyrogencies, if the Academie
had Naturalised this Foreign word. The honor it has done me, to make me a
member of their body, without binding me to part from hence, and the place it
has given me, without taking away my liberty, are two singular favors I
received from it, both at one time. And to say the truth, it is no small
benefit to a man of the wilderness, that turnts his face sometimes toward the
world, and is not altogether divested of humane affections, that he may enjoy
together, both the repose of solitude, and yet flatter his imagination with the
glory of so pleasing a Society. This I cannot do without thanking you for so
great a favor; and if they understand not of my Resentment by your mouth, they
may have just cause to condemn me for one of little Gratefulness. Lend me
therefore, I beseech you Sir, some five or six words, I would ask you more, but
I know they are of that worth, and so high in their account, that these few
will be enough, not only to satisfy for the complement I owe; but for the
Oration also, it is expected I should make them. You will not, I hope, deny me
the testimony of your love, and I require it of you by the memory of the other
Obligations I owe you. Atque per inceptos promissum munus Iambos: you know my
meaning, and that I have a long time been, and am

My Lord, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 15. Iul. 1635.
To Monsieur de Bois Robert. LETTER VI.
SIR, I hear you have been seen at Paris, from whence, I conclude, you are
not at the war in Flanders, but are content to go and give it your
malediction upon the Frontiers: If you would acquaint us with the passages of
that Country, you should infinitely ob^ige your old friend, who feeds upon no
other nourishment but News, and takes no News to heart, but those which
concern the King. He is so careful of the Reputation of his Arms, that he
cannot abide his victory should be spoken of with doubting: To make him
confess, we have lost one man, it is necessary there should be four Regiments
defeated; and when he is spoken to, of the Emperou^s aid, his answer is that
this is a Remedy to be looked for, when the contrary part is dead. To make this
man a Present, the Poet you wot of, made lately some Verses upon the estate of
affairs in Lorrayne, and answers another Poet, who had written, that the King
would never be able to hold it, and that the rellicke of affection, which the
Country bears to its ancient Duke, would never suffer any familiarity or
friendship to reflect upon us. The -- that are the Latins of this Country,
would make him believe, that he has found a mean between the Character of
Catullus, and that of Martial, and that he has avoided the dryness and
harshnesse of the former times, without engaging himself in the luxury and
intemperance of the latter times. With these new Verses, I send you the old
Prose you desired, and which has lain so long asleep in my Closet. Though
they be writings of an old dare, yet you know, they are always in season; and
seeing they entreat of the sovereign virtue, that is of M. the Cardinal,
they entreat of a matter that is immortal, and can never lose the grace of
being new. Thermopylae and Platea, are to this day the common places of the
Graecians that are in the world; and our remotest posterity, which shall more
quietly enjoy the labors of this rare man, than we do; shall speak more
often, and more honou^ably of them than we do. I believe, the Letter to
Mounsieur Chastelet, will not dislike you, and that you will find something in
it worth your reading. I had word sent me from Paris, that his style was too
much painted, and too full of Figures for a military style; but you shall see,
how in praising him for the rest, I justify him in this; and with what byasse
I defend the cause of worthy things. I entreat you to ask him for me, the
last Libells of --: and to deliver them to -- to bring them to me. You have
heard by -- the cause I have to complain of Mounsieur de --: Delays in such
cases are very dangerous, and if you have not already made an end of the
matter, I fear me, the Stock that was appointed for paying of me, will go
some other way. Do herein what you shall think fittest, and I shall remain,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 15. Jul. 1635.
Austrasia infaelix, ne somnia blanda tuorum,
Neu m^mores Aquilas, Imperiumque vetus.
Quamvis and Titulos and Nomen inutile jactes,
Multusque in vano Carolus ore sonet.
Carolus ecce iterum, Nostri virtute Capeti
Concidit, and lapsas luget Eugenus opes.
Vel solo dixisse sat est, capta Oppidae nutu
Atque ulrto exutum terga dedisse Ducem.
Austrasia huic vilis nimium and neglecta fuisti,
Nec te ita qui tenuit, credidit esse suam.
Credidit hostiles fugitivus linquere terras,
Sed te qui propriam jam tueatur adest.
Ille Triumphata rediit qui victor ab Alpe,
Et p^r quem placidis Mincius errat agris
Ille suo natus Juvenis succurrere saeclo,
Non tantum Patri sistere Fata suae.
Cur sequeris Fumo? Vacua^ cur diligis umbram?
Evereque colis diruta saxa domus?
Desere Fessa tuos supremasae clade jacentes,
Te validam and stantem Deserutre tui.
Prima mali patiens atque inter Gallica pridem
Fulmina and Arctoas non been tuta minas:
Tandem pone animos, ac Nostra assuesce vocari
Ni facias, Cecinit quae mihi Phoebus, habe.
Alternis vertet te Celta and Teuto ruinis,
Et nisi Pars uni^es, Praeda duobus eris.
To Monsieur Favereau, Counselor of the King in his Court of Aids. LETTER
VII.
SIR, He whose Verses you commended, believes upon your word, that he is a
great Poet: but I told him, that your words are always favorable, and that he
should not flatter himself with an approbation which you never denied to any.
He has, since that, showed me other Verses, which he made for M. the
Cardinal, and entreated me, to show you some of the places which I thought the
most accomplished, but upon this condition Sir, that at least for this once,
you shall be a conscionable Judge, and shall tell us upon your Oath, whether
you think this good or that bad:

Quid referaem Oceanum tibi ne violentior obstet
Oblitum solitus segnius isse vices,?
Et tua concordes siluisse ad Classica ventos,
Surgeret ut tacito machina fixa mari.
Machina quam vastos Gens sera tulisse Gigantes
Credat in Aequorei Caerula regna Jovis.
Quid referam Captas primis rumoribus arces,
Castraque nec faciem sustinuisse tuam?
Nempe al quid coeleste tibi est, quod cuncta verentur,
Praesentesque trahis semper ad arma Deos.
Non hostem timuere hosts, sed Judice viso,
Horruit ad certam pallida turba necem:
Si pugnas vicisse parum est, etc.
Cernis ut ad subitum conspecti muricis ignem
Depressum attollat Parthenopaea Caput,
Quae quondam vim passae ferumque exosa cubile,
Gestit in antiquos Castra redire thoros.
Non animum foedi amplexus, foeda oscula mutent,
Sed prior invicto durat amore sides.
O quoties superos Mortem Manesque rogavit,
Dum fugeret passus, Maure superbe, tuos.
O quoties voluit fieri vel in aequore rupes!
Frustrarive tuas aequoris unda manus!
Fata obstant, dominumque imponunt multa querenti
Quo gravior Siculus non fuit ante Cyclops.
Qui dapibus airis, qui sanguine vescitur atro,
Qui formosa sacra polluit ora lue.
Qui furto, non Mart potens, etc.
Hic placidis Doris Tellurem amplectitur ulnis,
Ac leviter summas languida mulcet aquas.
Littus Amore calet solo, cui Myrtea silva,
Sufficit and virides Citria silva comas.
Quo dulces Zephyrorum animas fragrantibus un^bris
Miscet, and Ambrosio tingit odore Venus,
Exul hyems fugit in scopulos, ubi mollia tantum
Frigora, and aestivas jussa parare nives.
Caetera quid memorem? teneri domus aurea veris,
Hic micat, aeternis Ora beata rosis.
Nec steriles ostentat opes sed Praeside Baccho,
Luxuriant pleno Flora Ceresque sinu.
Et dubitat tantae Ludovix accedere doti,
Hectoreis Ludovix jam quoque major avis?
Et Nymphae ingenuos morientis despicit ignes,
Nec memor est alter quam premit esse suam?
Rumpe mor as Armande, haec pars pulcherrimae rerum
Te vocat, and segnes increpat usque moras,
Parthenope te maesta vo^at etc.
I have some conceit, this last Description will not dislike you, and having
heard say, as well as I, that the Kingdom of Naples is a paradise inhabited by
Devils; you will find some relish in the fiction of the persecuted Nymphe,
and not be troubled with the Encomiums which our Friend affords the Spaniards.
Naturally he does not much love them; but since the war has been
proclaimed, and that all traffic with them is forbidden, now his nature is
turned into Reason, and now he says, He should not think himself a true
Frenchman, or a good Citizen, if he should hold intelligence, so much as with
Seneca; much less (as you may perceive by the Character of his phrase) with
Lucan; whom Scaliger has handled so hardly, or with another of that Country,
of whom he is continually repeating these words, which I think fit to let you
hear: Hispani Poetae and Romani sermonis Elegantiam contaminarunt, and cum
inflatum quoddam and tumidum, and Gentis suae moribus congruens invenissent
Orationis genus, averterunt Exemplo suo caeteros a recta illa, and in qua
praecipuae Poetarum sita laus est, imitatione naturae. Itaque fere post Augusti
tempora, ut quisque maxim vorsum inflaverat, sententiam maxim conterserat, eo
denique modo locutus fuerat, quo nemo serio soleret loqui, ita in pretio haberi
caepie. Quinetiam fucatus isle splendour, and adulterina Eloquentiae species,
ita nonnullorum qui vera Eloquentiae gustum non habent, occaecavit animos, ut
his quoque temporibus extiterint Hispani Duo, quorum alter Lucanum Virgilio,
alter Martialem Catullo, aut^po^ere veritus non est. Quorum ab utroque ita
dissentio, and siquis Deus potestatem mihi optionemque faciat etc. You see by
this, that the Spaniards have marred all in the world, and have always been
the corrupters of all good things. It is not the Politics only, that they
have spoiled, making it an Art of wickedness, and a science of Piracie; but
they have done as much hurt to other inferior knowledges, and have dealt no
kindlier with the servants, than with the Mistress. It is they that brought in
the first haeresie, and the first novelties in the Latin Eloquence. It is they
that have picked quarrels with Cicero and Virgill; that have made Books with
nothing but Antitheses, -- as one should make Feasts wi^h nothing but Salt and
Vinegar. I make you report of a Poets opinion, who requires you^s upon the
fragments I send you, where his desire is, to come as near as might be to that
ancient grace, which was to be seen in the Roman writings, till such time as
the plaster and dawbings of the Spaniards, had mar^ed their purity. I entreat
you to send him your judgment of it; and in the mean time, will assure you,
that he is as much as I can be,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 1. September. 1635.
Another to him. LETTER IIIV.
SIR, I am your vexation in ordinary, and because you have not rejected my
first importunities, you have given me encouragement to continue them still. He
that brings you this Letter, believes that my commendation would do him no
hurt with you; and I believe so too; and seeing his interests are very dear
unto me, I earnestly entreat you, to let him find that our common belief is
not ill grounded. The favors you do me, are so much the more pure, in that
they look for no requital, and that you have no friends that have suits at
Balzac. You therefore may work, as your custom is, by the only motions of
your virtue; and as it is fit, you should be more ambitious than I, so you must
be content, to leave me all the profit of our friendship, and keep for your
self all the glory. I expect an answer out of Holland, where, I doubt not, but
your work is in high esteem, as well for the merit of the matter, as for the
excellency of the former. I mean, as well for that it is the Production of a
great Poet, as for that it is the action of a good Citizen As soon as I hear
news from thence, I will acquaint you with it, and entreat this savor from
you, that you will believe I passionatelie am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10 June. 1635.
To Mounsieur Girard Secretary to M. the Duke D' Espernon. LETTER IX.
SIR, your last Letters have exceedingly comforted me, and you have such things
for me, that they make me forgetful of all my miseries. With such a
friendship, I can mock at ill fortune, and it makes me taste contentments,
which good fortune knows not of. It is true, that your absence is a perpetual
cooling Card to my joy; and possessing you but in spirit, it requires a very
strong imagination, to desire nothing else. Shall we never come to be Citizens
of one City? Never to be Hermits in the same Desert? Shall my Counsel be
always twenty miles from me? and must I be always forced to pass two Seas to
fetch it when I need it? I hope your justice will do me reason, and that
Heaven will at last hear the most ardent of all my prayers; but in the mean
time, whilst I stay waiting for so perfect a contentment, I would be glad to
have of it now and then, some little taste: if it be not in your power to give
your self; at least lend your self for some few days, and come and sit as
supreme President, over both my French, and Latin. I promise you, I will never
appeal from you to any other; only for this once, give me leave to tell you,
that the word Ludovix, which you blame as too new, seems to me a more
Poetical and pleasing word, than either the Aloysius of the Italians, or our
Ludovicus; and besides, It favors of the Antiquity of our Nation; and of the
first language of the Gauls; witness these words, Ambiorix, Eporedorix,
Orgetorite, Vercingetorix, etc. In which you see the Analogy to be plain; yet
more than this, I have an Authority, which I am sure, you will make no
difficulty to allow: you know Monsieur Guyet, is a great Master in this Art,
but perhaps you know not that he has used this very word Ludovix, before I
used it; for I took it from these excellent Verses of his: Non tulit hoc
Ludovix, justa puer acer ab ira,
Et patriae casum sic videamus, ait.


For other matters Sir, you may add to that which was last alleged in the
cause of Madam Gourney, this passage out of the divine Jerusalem, where Aladin
calls Clorinda the Intercessour of Sophronia, and of her lover, Habbian vita
Rispose and libertade,
E Nulla a tanto Intercessor se neghi.


I kiss the hands of that fair creature you love, and am withal my soul,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 20. September. 1635.
To my Lord the Earl of Port. LETTER X.
SIR, I have received a letter from you since your being in England, but not
being able to read the Gentleman's hand that sent it to me, for want of a
decipherer, I have been forced to be uncivil till now, and have therefore not
answered you; because indeed I knew not whom to answer: but now, that this
Gentleman (whose name is a mystery in his letters) is by good fortune, come
again into this country, I can by no means suffer him to part without some
testimony of the account I make of your favor, and the desire I have to
preserve it, by all the possible means I can. I will make you Sir, no studied
Protestations, nor send complements to a man that is borne in the Country of
good words; I will only say, there are many respects that make your person
dear unto me: and that besides the consideration of your virtue, which gives me
just cause to honor you, that also of the name you bear, and of the rank you
hold, are things that exceed the value of indifferency. I love all them that
love France, and wish well to our great Prince, of whom in truth, I have heard
you speak so worthily, that as often as I remember it, it stirs me up to
doing my duty, and to profit by so good an example. If it had been seconded in
Italy, we should have seen all we could have hoped. But God himself saves
none but such as contribute themselves to their salvation. Saguntum was taken
while the Senators were deliberating: and a wisdom that is too scrupulous,
commonly does nothing for fear of doing ill. The most part of Italians are
themselves the workmen, to make their own setters: they lend the Spaniard
their blood and their hands, to make a slave of their country, and are the
parricides of their mother, of whom they might have been the redeemers. But of
all this, we shall talk more at Paris, if you come thither this Winter, as I
am put in hope you will. In the mean time do me the honor to let me have
your love, and to believe me, there is none in the world more truly than I,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10 Sept. 1630.
To my Lord the Bishop of Nantes. LETTER XI.
MY Lord, the joy I take in the recoverie of your health, is not yet so pure,
but that it always represents unto me a terrible Image of your last sickness.
The imagination of a danger, though past and gone, yet makes my memory afraid,
and I look upon it rather in safety, than with assurance. We missed the losing
you but very narrowly: and you were upon the point to leave us Orphans. I
speak it seriously, and without any flattery at all, all the victories we have
gotten, or shall get, would never be able to make us amends for such a loss:
you wouldd have made our conquest turn to mourning: M. the Cardinal would
have found something to complain of in his great felicity, and would have
watered his triumph with his tears. Let it not be Gods will to lay this cross
upon our time: and if it be a cross inevitable, yet let it be deferred to our
posterity. It is necessary the Phoenix should live out her age, and that the
world should be allowed time for enjoying the possession of so profitable and
sweet a life as yours. It is true, the world is not worthy of you; but, my
Lord, the world has need of you: your virtue indeed should long since have
been crowned, but that your example is still necessary: and the more happy
ones there be in heaven, the fewer honest ones will be left upon earth. Love
therefore your self a little for our sakes; begin now at last to study your
health, which hitherto you have neglected, and make a difference hereafter
between cold and heat, between good and bad air; between meats that are
sweet, and those that are bitter. Though you take no care of your health for
your own sake, yet you must take care of it for the common good: For, I beseech
you my Lord, tell me, what should become of the cause of the poor? what of the
desolation of widows? what of the innocence of men oppressed? I speak not
of the hope of such as hope for preferment by you: for though I write you my
Father, and call you Monsieur, -- yet I am none of that number. I desire
nothing from you at this time, but that which you may give me without asking it
of another; your love and good will is the only object of my present passion.
I renounce with all my heart, all other things in the world, so I may keep but
this, and shall never complain of my shipwreck, if it leave me so solid a
planke as this to rest upon. Be pleased to do me the honor to believe it, and
that I am with all my soul,

My Lord, Your, etc
At Balzac, 15 June. 1635.
To Monsieur Senne, Theologall of the Church of Saints. LETTER XII.
SIR, I have been in ecstasy to hear of your health, and that you keep your
body in that reasonable fullness of flesh, which contributes something to your
gravity, and adds nothing to your weight. I would not wish you to seek to
abate it, nor long to be like the dry and tawnie skins of the first
Christians. For all Tertullians saying, all Saints have not been lean and
melancholic. The last that we have seen, were of your color and statute; and
you do an honor to Divinity, to preach it with a bright visage, representing
in some sort the stateof future glory you speak of to the people. Monsieur de
-- made me so rich a description of your health, that I could not choose but
begin my letter with this complement. I have seen since Monsieur de -- who
delivered me one from you, and with it our friends book, for which I thank you
with all my heart. I have yet perused only some Tracts, which in truth seem
very learned, and are as intelligible as the obscurity of the matter would well
bear. It is true, the Title deceived me; and seeing you will have me speak
freely what I think, I must tell you, I think they are nothing else than
Orations, and that they are fitter to be read upon a Joyn-stoole, than
pronounced at a Tribunal. I had thought to have found in them the persuasive
motives of Orators, in the highest strain of their style, and I find nothing
but the dry doctrine of Philosophers, and of them neither, nothing but the
ordinary language of their precepts; that it makes me think of these new
Companies of Soldiers which are levied under the name of Horse, but are put to
serve on foot, when they come to the Army. I say not, it is necessary to
handle School questions with all the pomp and force of eloquence, I only
say, that such discourses ought not to be called Panaegiricks, or O^ations, and
that there is either craft or rashness in this proud inscription, which
promises more than a Philosopher can perform. Cicero condemns it of
impropriety, as you shall see at the end of this Letter; and you cannot but
confess unto me, that our friend has mistaken himself two ways: First, to
believe he ought to play the Orator in Divinity: And secondly, to imagine,
that to make Orations with success, he need but draw forth some Exordiums out
of Plutarch's lives, and to allege the so famous Bucephalus, that was broken
by Alexander the great. These are Ornaments so vulgar and so stale, that to use
them at this day, is rather a mark of Clownishnesse, than of neatness. When
fashions are left off in the City, they are then taken up in the Country; and
there are none now but poor Gentlemen, that will offer to wear the massiest
silver lace, when it is once fitterd, or the richest Plush, when it is once
grown threadbare, Both the one and the other have been in fashion, but they
are not so now. They were heretofore novelties, but are now but Rellicks: The
first comparison that was made of the burning of Dianaes Temple, was excellent:
all other since have been but idle. And it is not enough, that the spring from
whence water is drawn, be it self clear, but to draw that which is clear,
it is necessary also that Lawndresses and Passengers have not troubled it, I
make no doubt Sir, but that which you will show me, shall be very choice and
perfect. You are I know, of too dainty a taste to be contented with every
sauce. I am very impatient till I see those rare productions: and I should ere
this have seen them, but that your promises are as deceitful as the Titles of
your Book; which notwithstanding is otherwise full of excellent discourse, and
profound knowledge. It is now four months that I have waited for you, and you
have still continued to wrong me, in continuing to break your word: yet as
much wronged as I am, I leave not to be,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac. 1. October. 1635.
The Opinion of Cicero concerning the style which Philosophers use in their
Writings.
LOquuntur Philosophi cum doctis, quorum sedare animos malunt, quam incitare.
Siquidem de rebus pacatis ac minime turbulentis docendi causa, non capiendi
loquuntur, ut in eo ipso, quod delectationem aliquam dicendo aucupentur, plus
nonnullis quam necesse sit, facere videantur. Mollis ergo est eorum oration and
umb^atilis, neque nerves and aculeos oratorios habet. Nec sententijs est, nec
verbis instructa popularibus, nec juncta numeris, sed soluta liberius. Nihil
iratum habet, nihil atrox, nihil mirabile, nihil astutum; Casta, verecunda,
incorrupta quodammodo virgo. Itaque sermo potius quam oration dicitur. Quamquam
en^m omnis locutio oration est; tamen unius orationis locutio hoc proprio
signata nomine est.

To Mounsier Granier. LETTER XIII.
SIR, my persecution should be sweet unto me, if in suffering it, I might have
the happiness to see you; but your absence makes it insupportable; and it were
as good for me to go and be killed in the place where you are, as to come
hither and die with languishing. Being here against my mind, I find nothing
that pleases me; and the objects which I beheld before, as the riches of
Nature, I cannot now look upon but with horror, and count them but as the
movables of a Prison. I sigh continually after your Cabinet, which has so
often served for a haven to my tossed spirit; and from whence I have so often
fetched Arms and courage to defend me against Fortune. I am not out of hope to
see it once again, and to sit me down in that green chair, where you know I
have used to be inspired, and foretell things to come, as Sibil did from her
Tryvet. In the mean time I must let the unhappy constellation pass away; and
must give place to the choler of heaven. So long Sir, as you vouchsafe to
remember me, and to hold me in the favor of Messieurs du Puy, I shall not want
a good portion of consolation. These are persons that without wearing purple,
or bearing office, are yet illustrious and in Authority, at least in the
reasonable world, and amongst men, that can rightly judge of things. No
employment is so honorable as their Leisure: no ambition so worthily at work,
as their virtue takes it rest. You shall do me a singular favor, to let them
know from me, in how great reverence I hold them both: and that never man
entered the Gallery of Mounsieur de Thou, better persuaded than I am, of their
incomparable merit. I will sometimes expect to hear from you; and will always
be with all my heart,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 3. Septem. 1632.
To Monsieur de Brye. LETTER XIV.
SIR, My dear Cousin, I have received three of your Letters, within these
four months: the other you speak of, are not yet come to my hands, of which
loss I am very sensible: for being deprived of your conversation. I cannot but
exceedingly esteem of that, which represents it to me. I have oftentimes told
you, that you are naturally eloquent; but yet I must confess you have gotten
new graces, by being in Ciceroes country, and the Air of Rome seems to have
purged your spirit, of all vulgar conceits. Monsieur de -- is in this of my
opinion: and you have written to us such excellent things, that they were able
to comfort us for your absence, if we loved you but a little; but in truth, no
Copy can be so good, as the Original; and if you come not back very shortly,
I could find in my heart, to go as far as Novana to have your company. Your
last Letter renues in me my old loves, and makes me with so much pleasure,
remember the sweetest part of the earth, that I even die with longing, till I
see it again. It is a long time that Italy has had my heart, and that I sigh
after that happy cowardice with which the valiant reproach the wise. If I could
have lived, as I would my self, I had been a citizen of Rome ever since the
year 1620. And should now enjoy that happiness in possession which you but
only make me see in Picture, but my ill fortune would not suffer me: she
keeps me in France, to be a continual object of persecution: and though it be
now four years since I left the world, and lost the use of my tongue; yet
hatred and envy follow me in to the woods to trouble my silence; and pursue me
even in Dens and Caves. I must therefore be feign to go beyond the Alps to
seek a sanctuary, where I shall be sure to find, at least my old comforter,
who will be pleased to believe, that I am more than any other in the world,

Sir, Your, most humble, etc.
At Balzac, 10. May, 1635,
To Mounsieur de Silhon. LETTER XVI.
SIR, I have word sent me from Paris, that you make complaints aginst me: but
being well assured, you have no just cause, I imagine, it is not done in
earnest, but that you take pleasure to give me a false Alarm. Yet I must
confess, this cooling word, I hear spoken, puts me to no little pain: for
though it make me not doubt of the firmness of your affection, yet it makes me
mistrust the malice of my Fortune. I have been for some time so unfortunate in
friendship; that it seems there needs nothing but pretenses to rid me of
them; the sweetest natures grow sour and bitter against me; and if this fit
hold, I shall have much ado to keep my own brother of my side. I would like
as well* to be a keeper of the Lions, as of such harsh friends; for though I
were more faithful than Pylades and Acates put together; yet they would find
matter of coffeehouse; and my fidelity should be called dissimulation. I
cannot believe that you are of this number but if you be, it is time for me to
go hide my self in the deserts of Theb^^s, and never seek conversation with
men any more. It is my grief and indignation that write these last words; for
my patience is moved with the consideration of the wrong is done me: and if you
should deal as hardly with me as others have done, it were fit I should
resolve to live no longer in a world, where goodness and innocence are so
cruelty persecuted. These six months I have received from you but only one
Letter, to which I made no answer, because it was delivered me but in April: at
which time, you sent me word you should be in France. Since therefore by your
own account, you were gone from thence, before the time I could write unto
you, would you, I should have written into Italy to Monsieur de Silhon, that
was not there? And that I should have directed my Letters to a name, without
either hands or eyes to receive and read them? You are too wise to deal so
unreasonably with me, and I should call your former justice in question, if you
take it ill, that I did not guess, or rather prophecy of the stay of your
voyage: and yet after a scrupulous examination of my conscience, I can find no
other ground for your complaints, but only this, and I am ashamed to charge so
strong a spirit as yours, with so weak a conceit: I must have had a devil at
command to send of my errands, and to deliver you my Letters, being so
uncertain as I was, of the place of your abode, and in truth, if I had had
such a messenger, I had sooner thanked you, than I do, for your excellent
discourse: and should not all this while, have kept within the secret of my
heart, the just praises it deserves. It has taught me, Sir, an infinite number
of good Maxims; the style pleases me exceedingly, and I see in it both force
and beauty, thorough all the passages, even that passage which did not so fully
please me, yet has as fully satisfied me, as the rest of the work: and though
of my self I be blind in the knowledge of holy things, yet the luster of your
expressing, and the facility of your method illuminate my sight. When my health
shall give me leave to go from hence, I will then for your Gold bring you
Copper, and will receive your corrections and advise, with as much reverence
and submission, as any Novice: but in the mean time, I cannot choose but put my
hand to my wound, and require you to give a reason of your doing. I know not
from whence should come this coldness in you, seeing for my self, I am all on
fire: nor how you, with your great wisdom, should be altered and grown
another man, seeing I continue still the same, with nothing but my common
sense: Great spirits are above these petty suspicions which move the vulgar:
and I wonder you could conceive ill of my affection, knowing how well you had
preserved your own. If it be the jealousy of eloquence that provokes you, I
am willing with all my heart, to leave you all the pretensions I can have to
it; and if you please, I will make you a Surrender before witness. Consider me
therefore, rather as you^ follower, who is willing to increase your troop,
than as your rival to strive for precedence. Give me leave to live: a man that
cannot be lost, what negligence soever be used in keeping me; and remember that
the least respected of all my friends is much dearer to me, than all Sciences,
or all Books. Yet such is my unhappiness, that few of them return me the
like, but seem rather they would make a benefit of my pains and sorrows.
Because they see I am persecuted, they will make every the least courtesy they
do me, to be of great value, and set an excessive price upon their friendship,
because they imagine I stand in need of it. But I desire them, and you also, to
take notice, that my friendship was never grounded upon any interest; but my
love is ever without any mercenary design, or hope of benefit. If they be not
willing to embroyle themselves in my affairs, I would have them know, I am as
unwilling as they, they should: and if they are not strong enough to defend the
truth in public, and when it is opposed; at least let them not disavow it,
when they are in place of safety; let them not deny their friend when the
storm is over, and that there is no longer any danger in confessing him* You
saw my heart, the first time you saw my face; you were at that time my
Confessor; and I have not a sin that is hidden from you. I conceive you are
too generous to make advantage of this excess of freeness you find in me;
and I do not think you so subtle, that you would make a show of discontent,
for fear least I should begin first. These are subtilities indeed of the
country from whence you come: but in my opinion very remote from your natural
disposition: and you need not make complaints of me, to prevent the complaints
I might else make of you. It is certain, that if I had not equity enough to
excuse my friends for things they were not able to perfome; I might then
perhaps have color to complain they performed not their promise; but I am
one, that know there happen a thousand impediments, which hinder a man from
keeping his word, and that every thing that is promised and not done, is not
presently a violating of faith, or a breaking of promise. Some have labored to
persuade me, that --: but I never believed any such thing, and I could never
imagine that you would go about to build your reputation upon the ruins of
the reputation of your friend. If any shall make use of such like artifices, to
do ill offices between you and me. I earnestly entreat you to make use of
the like remedies, to preserve your opinions sound, and not to suffer your
judgment to be corrupted. I take God to witness, there is nothing in the
world more dear unto me than your friendship; I make public and open
profession of honoring you: I highly esteem a number of eminent qualities in
you, both Moral and Intellectual; I have oftentimes shed tears, when I
read in your Letters of your griefs; all this, me thinks should deserve a
little affection, and make the Fathers themselves that are my adversaries, not
take it ill that you should love me; especially when they shall know, that I
passionately am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris 8, Feb. 1631.
To Mounsieur de Saint Mart. LETTER XVII.
SIR, I am paid for my pains before hand,, and look for no greater recompense
than you have already made me. My ambition should be very excessive, if it were
not fully satisfied with your excellent Verses: and if I did not think my
self happy to be honored by a hand, which crowns none but Sovereign heads,
and travells not, but about triumphall Archs, and public Monuments. I have
long since known, that all excellent things grow in your Garden; and that the
Latin eloquence, which is but borrowed by others; and a stranger every where
else; ought with you to be accounted as your patrimony: but I knew not till
now, that this rare quality, is accompanied with so perfect a courtesy; and
that a man so worthy of his name, and that adds new glory to that of the great
Scaevola, could admire any other men's works, besides his own. I will do all
that possibly I can, to deserve this your favorable judgment, and not to make
you sorry for being deceived to my advantage: but howsoevers if I be not able
to preserve your good opinion by my merit; I hope at least to merit your favor
by my affection; and to make you see that I truly am,

Your, etc.
At Balzac, 2. Sept. 1630.
To Monsieur D' Argenton, Councellor of the King, and Master of Requests in
Ordinary. LETTER XVIII.
SIR, having taken the pains that I have done, I cannot altogether disvalue my
work; yet I am not a little glad to be confirmed in my opinion by a man of
your worth: and that my labor is not unpleasing to the soundest judgment. The
second censure you make of it, assures me of the integrity of the first; seeing
I should be too presumptuous to believe you could be deceived twice together.
But let us stay there I beseech you, and think not, I will ever entertain the
vanity you put upon me. I neither pretend to instruct the world, nor take upon
me to teach you in any thing; it is enough for me, that I can find wise men
some recreation; and can lay things before your eyes, which you know already
better than my self. I may perhaps be some help to your memory, and refresh
your old Idaeas; but to add any thing to your knowledge, and impart to you any
new Doctrine, this requires qualities that are not to be found in me. I rather
hope to be much bettered in knowledge by you; and make account to account you
hereafter for one of my Oracles. Prepare your self therefore to be persecuted
with Questions, and look to receive importunities from me in ordinary. Thus I
use my friends when they are abler men than my self; and this advantage, which
is not great, is accompanied with this incovenience, which is not small. You
shall begin to find it at our next meeting; but in the mean time, I entreat
you to believe, that what bad design soever I have against you, yet I mean,
perfectly to be,

Sir. Your, etc.
At Balzac, 17. September. 1631.
To the most reverend Father, Leon, Preacher of the Carmelites. LETTER XIX.
MY most reverend Father, you do me too much good at once, your friendship is
of great worth, being alone, and you send it to me accompanied; it brings with
it an infinite number of excellent things, and resembles that happy River which
leaves plenty in all places where it passes. The Present I have received comes
from such a fruitful Vine; it is not a vain show of magnificence, which gives
only a light satisfaction to the eyes, but I find it essential and solid,
and any spirit that is capable of speculation, may well find nourishment
enough for a long time in ^he juice only of your Preface I will not take upon
me any more, though you solicit me to do it, and instead of giving my
advice, would have me, I should pronounce a Decree. Take heed, my good Father,
what you say, and consider what a goodly thing it would be to raise my Village
into a Parliament, and make appeals from Paris to Balzac. Though you had
humility enough to submit to an unlawful Magistrate* yet I have not
presumption enough to intrude upon an unlawful charge: Remember your self
besides, that your book is dated from Mount Carmell, which is to say, out of
our jurisdiction, and that Decrees are of no force, where time out of mind,
there have been O^acles. You know what S^^etonius says of it, in the life of
Vespatian, he makes no bones to make a God of a Mountain. I like not the
boldness of such Metamorphoses yet I am not ignorant, how far the force of
piety may reach; and knowing it has right to remove Mountains, I doubt not but
Carmell at this day may be in France, and that upon a place so holy and so
high, there may descend more grace and light from heaven, than there ascends
ignorance and vapors from the earth. Accept from me this true confessi^n I
make unto you, and dispense with me for that sovereign judgment you require
of me: Though I am not willing to be your President, yet I am not the less,

My most reverend Father, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 25. April. 1635.
To Mounsieur Chaplain. LETTER XX.
SIR, I have now these three weeks taken mine ease, in spite of my self; and
one of my feet, which I have not very free, keeps me in my bed, with more
inconvenience than pain. Heretofore it has put me to torture; and therefore I
count it now a favor, that it only keeps me in prison, which I sweeten as
well as I can, with my Books and my friends. You think you contribute nothing
to the comfort I receive; but I assure you, the best part of it comes from you;
and nothing comforts me so much for the fair days I lose, as that excellent
Ode you sent me: I am even ravished with every part of it; the choice and
marshalling of the words; the structure and harmony of the composition; the
modest greatness of the conceits; the force which savours not of any violence:
all these are worthy to be ranked with the best Antiquity. In some places you
do not only touch me; but touch me to the quick: the agitation of the Poet, is
transferred upon the reader; and no Trumpet makes so loud and silver a sound,
as your Harp does: Quand la Revolte dans son fort,
Par une affrense and longue mort
Paya si cherement l' usure de ses crimes:
Et que ses boulevars en fin assujettis
Contre les appareils des arms legitimes
Implorerent en vain le secours de Thetis.
Ils decriuent l' horrible pas,
Ou per cent visibles t^epas
On crut de nostre Camp retarder la vaillance:
Et figurent encore au mil^eu de nos rangs
Themis qui te preta son fer and sa balance,
Affin de decider ces fameux differens.
Ils chantent l' effroyable foudre
Qui d' un umouement si soudain,
Partit de ta puissante main;
Pour mettre Pegneol en poudre
Ils disent que tes bataillons
Comme autant depais tourbillons
Ebranlerent ce Roc jusques dans ses racines,
Que mesme le vaincut' eut pour liberateur,
Et que tu luy batis sur ses propres ruins
Un rampart eternel contre l'usurpateur.
Either I have no skill in Verses, or certainly these Verses will live to the
remotest posterity; they will be alleged for proof and testimony in the
counsels of the last Kings that shall reign upon earth; and perhaps too, they
shall serve for a Law, and for a Decree, as well as Homers Verses did; by the
authority whereof a great war that was kindled between the Seigneury of Megara
and Athens was reconciled. I know for my self, I shall never stay till your
death, for putting you in the number of my Authors; and as often as in my
presence, there shall be speaking of the siege of Rochell, of the forcing of
Suza, of the taking and keeping of Pigneroll, so often shall I allege the
divine Verses you have written of them: and these also, which I lay not less
carefully up in my memory.

Ils disent que les Immortels
De leur culte and de leurs Autels
Ne doiuent qu'a, tes soins la pomp rendissante,
Et que ta preuoyance and ton Authorite
Sont les de ux fors Appuis don't l'Europe tremblante
Soutient and raffermit sa foible liverte.
Dans un paisible mouuement
Tu to eleues au Firmament
Et laisses contre toy murmuurer sur la terre:
Ainsi le haut Olympe a son pied sablonneux
Laisse fumer la foudre, and gronder le Tonnerre,
Et guard son sommet tranquille and lumineux.
And these other, which to him, to whom you address them, are as much worth as
a triumphant Arch: Ton courage aux Monstres fatal,
Est tousiours plus fort que le mal.
Sur le solid honneur sa base est estabile:
Le droit and la raison laccompaguent tousiours,
Et sans que sa vigueur soit jamais affoiblie,
Qu'ou cede ou qu'ou resist, il vadiun mesme course.
And these other that are so sage and moral. L'or pour luy cesse d'estre un
metal pretieux.
La beauty perissable est un bien qu'il mospuso:
Pour l'un il est sans mains, and pour l'autre sans yeux
And these other that are so noble and so poetical; Cepandant que la Lune
accomptissant son course
Dessus un char d'argent enuironne d' estoiles
Dans le sombre univers represente le course.


And now, after all this, tell me, if I have not profited by the reading, and
have not made good use of your presents. I should quickly grow rich, if you
would send me such presents often; but this is too inordinate a desire, I must
be convent with one croppe in a year; and I may very well entertain my self
a long time, with that you have already sent me, for which I thank you with all
my heart, and am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 12 July 1633.
To Monsieur Bonnaud, Councellor in Ordinary to my Lord the Prince. LETTER XXI.
SIR, I acknowledge in your Verses due to me but only my name, all the rest
belongs to somebody else, and is unfitter for me than a Crown for a private
Man. I cannot therefore value my self the more, for having a thing I cannot
use; nor is it fit I should put on Ornaments, which being as unfit for me, as
in themselves they are rich, would disguise me, rather than adorn me. A
Courtier would complain that you mock him, Et que vous en faites une piece, A
Doctor would say, you undertake a Paradoxe, and try the strength of your wit,
upon the novelty of an irregular subject. I think, I must my self be of this
opinion; and charge you Sir, with abusing Poetry, and for choosing an incredible
thing to make it believed. Nevertheless, seeing the Philosopher, Favonrinus,
took upon him to praise a feavour, and the Romans adored it, I wonder not at
your design; for I perceive, there is nothing so bad of which may not be
spoken some good, and whereof some or other have not ma^e a holy day. After
this extravagant Encomium, and this ridiculous Temple, you might do well to
take my miseries too, and consecrate them in your stanzes, and take me too, and
make me a thing adoreable and divine, for they are but the sports of wit, which
delight, though they do not persuade, and accuse with pleasure, because they
are witty; but do not deceive me because I know their craft. For the assurance
you give me by your Letter of your friendship, I am infinitely beholding to
you, and make account to reap no small benefit by it; for having a soul as you
have, full of virtue, you make me a P^esent that is invaluable, to bring me
into so worthy a possession; and whilst you offer me freeness and fidelity,
you offer me the two greatest rarities this age affords. I b^lieve you speak
more seriously in Prose than you do in Verse, and that you are content to be a
Poet, but have no meaning to be a Sophister. I likewise entreat you to believe,
that the least word I speak is accompanied with Religion, which I never
violate; and that there is nothing more true, than the promise I here seal
you, most perfectly to be,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 6 October. 1635.
To Monsieur Souchote. LETTER XXII.
SIR, By your reckoning you have written to me thrice for nothing, when indeed
I knew not of your first Letters, but by your last: if I had received them, you
may be sure I should have answered them, for though I be not very regular in
observing compliments, yet I am not so negligent of necessary duties, that I
should commit so many faults togethe, How profound soever my slumber be, yet I
awake presently, as soon as I am once stirred; and especially when it is by so
dear a name, and by so pleasing a voice as yours is, Never therefore require
me to give it in charge to some other, to let you hear from me; such a request
would be an offense to our friendship, an action fitter for a Tyrant than a
Citizen: it were to take me for that great Mogull, who speaks to none but by
an Interpreter. I like not this savage stateliness, it is far from me to use so
little civility toward men of your worth: when it is I, that am beholding to
you, I pray let it not be my Groom that shall thank you for it. I will take
the pains my self to assure you I am wholly yours; and whereas I did not bid
you farewell at my going from Park, you must not take it for an argument of
slighting your person, but for an effect of the liberty I presume of, and of
the renouncing I have vowed to all vain ceremonies. They that are my friends
give me this leave; and you are too well acquainted with the solidity of
things, to ground your judgment upon apparances; neither do I think you will
require them of me, who am as bad a courtier, as truly I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 20. Iul. 1630.
To Monsieur Tissandier. LETTER XXIII.
SIR, you shall receive by this bearer the rest of the works of --: or to speak
more properly, the continuation of his follies. They are now as public, as
those of the great divine Marshall, whom you have heretofore visited in the
famous little house. He uses me still with the same pride and insolency he
was wont: and you would think that he were at the top of the empyreall Heaven,
and at the bottom of Hell; so far he takes himself to be above me: but I
doubt not, ere long, his pride shall be ab^t^d, and his insolency mortified. He
shall shortly be made to see, that he is not so great a man as he thinks
himself; and if he have in him but one spark of natural justice, he shall
confess he has triumphed without cause, and must be fain to give up all the
glory he has gotten unlawfully: Turno tempus erit magno cum optaverit emptum
Intactum Pallanta:
Monsieur de -- is still your perfect friend, and he never writes to me, but he
speaks of you. He is at this present at Venice, where he meditates quietly the
agitation of all the world besides; and where he enjoys the honest pleasures
which Italy affords to speculative Philosophers. But Sir, what mean you by
speaking of your tears, and of the request you make unto me? Do you not mock
me, when you pray me to comfort you for the death of your Grandfather, who had
lived to see so many Families, so many Sects, so many Nations, both to be born
and die: a man as old as Heresy it self: the League was younger than he;
which when the Cardinal of Lorraine first conceived, he caused a Book to be
printed, wherein he advertised France of the conception of this Monster. You
weep therefore for the losses of another age; it is Anchyses or Laertes you
weep for; at least it is for a man who did but suffer life, and was in a
continual combat with death. He should long ago have been one of the Church
Triumphant, and therefore you ought to have been prepared for either the loss,
or the gain that you have made. Monsieur Rembo was not of your humor; I send
you one of his Letters, where you shall see, he was as much troubled to comfort
himself for the life of two Grandmothers that would not die, as he was for
the death of a Brother that died too soon. I commend your good Nature, But I
like not your Lamentations; which should indeed do him you sorrow for, great
wrong, if they should raise him again to be in the state in which you lost
him. It may suffice to tell you, that he is much happier than I; for he
sleeps, and I wake; and he has no more commerce with men unreasonable and
inhumane, and that are but Wolfes to one another. You know I have cause enough
to speak thus, but out of this number, I except certain choice persons, and
par^^cularly your self, whom I know to be virtuous, and whose I am,

Sir, Most humble, etc.
At Paris, 3. Dec. 1628.
The Letter of Peter Bembo, to Hercules Strotius.
A Vias ambas meas, effoetas, deploratasque foeminas, and jam prope centum
aunorum mulieres, mibi fata reliquerunt; unicum fratrem meum, juvenem ac
florentem abstulerunt, spem and solatia mea^* Quamborem, quo in maerore fim,
facile potes existimare. Heu me miserum: Vale;

Id. Jan. 1504. Venetijs,
Another to him. LETTER XXIV.
SIR, if it had not been for the indisposition of my body, I had not staid so
many days from thanking you for your many courtesies; but for these two months
I have not stirred from my bed; so cruelly handled with the Sciatica, that it
has taken from me all the functions of my spirit, and made me utterly
incapable of any conversation, otherwise you may be sure I should not
voluntarily have deprived my self of the greatest contentment I can have, when
I have not your company; and that I should not have received three Letters from
you, without making you three Answers. Now that I have gotten some quiet
moments from the violence of my torture, and that my pain is turned into
lamenesse, I cannot choose but take you by the hand, and tell you, in the first
place, that you are an ungrateful man, to leave our Muses, and follow some of
their sisters, that are neither so fair, nor so worthy of your affection. I
entreat you to believe, it is a temptation your evil Angel has cast upon you;
and that you ought to reject it, as the counsel of an enemy. Things are not
now to begin; it is no time now to deliberate; you are gone too far in the
good way to look back, and to be unwilling to finish that little which
remains. To leave eloquence for the Mathematickes, is to refuse a Mistress of
eighteen years old, and to fall in love with an old woman. God keep you from
this unhappiness, and inspire you with better thoughts than those that have
carried you to this desire of change. It would be a disloyalty, I should never
pardon you, but should blame you for it as long as I live. For making that
reckoning of you as I do, and expecting great matters from you: it were an
infinite wrong you should do, to make me lose the most pleasing of all my
hopes. I therefore, by all means, entreat you to persevere in your first
design, and to resolve upon a voyage of three months, to come and be
reconciled to her whom you have offended, and to make her a public
satisfaction by the edition of your writings, by which it will plainly enough
be seen, the great favors she has done you. And for my part, I promise you a
chamber, where you shall have the prospect of a Garden twelve miles long; and
so you shall be at once, both in the City and in the Country. Besides, ^ bind
my self to set before your Book, an Advertisement to the Reader, to the end
that no man may be ignorant of the part I bear, in that which concerns you.
Consider whether you like of these conditions, and whether you have courage
enough to come and lodge Au Pre aux Glerks, where I will wait for you without
any design of challenge or process. You shall be sure Sir, to have there
admirable visions, and shall meditate nothing but with success: And in truth,
seeing the least motion of your spirit puts me to ecstasy; what will it be,
when you shall employ your whole forces? And if your conceits be so just, and
so well governed, in the midst of confusion, and unseasonable disturbances,
what a man will you be, when you shall be at leisure, and have the liberty
which now you want? Take my word for it, you need not fear the censure of the
world; I Will undertake, you shall have the approbation of all honest people,
provided, that you make a truce with your Mathematics, and never intricate
your brains with that melancholic and doting Science, which cost Archimedes
his life; at least, before you cast your self upon such high and sublime
specuculations, it is fit you should get you credit by exercises that are more
sweet and popular. And now Sir, this is all you are like to have at this time,
from my Sciatica, that I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 23. March. 1628.
Another to him. LETTER XXV.
SIR, I do but now receive your Letter of the twelfth of this Month, which
confirms me in the opinion I have always had; that my interests are as dear
unto you as your own, to complement with you for this, would be to thank you
for being good, as much as to say for being your self; It is much better to
return you friendship for friendship, than to pay you with unprofitable words.
In a word Sir, I make profession to be an honest man, and therefore all the
thankfulness that can be desired from a person obliged, you may expect from me.
As concerning -- I assure you I wish him no ill, because I conceive he has
done me none; it is sufficient for me, that my friends have no good opinion of
his opinions, and that his own friends begin to take notice of his false
dealing. In all this there is nothing either new or strange; I am not the first
innocent that have been persecuted in the world, and if I could not bear
detraction and slander, I should be more dainty than Princes, and their
principal officers are, who forbear not to do well, though for their well
doing they be evil spoken of; the best and foundest part is of my side, I want
no protector, either Males or Females, and if I would make use of all my
advantages, I could oppose Doctor to Doctor, and Gown to Gown; Fratribus and
fratres, and claustra minantia claustris. But it is fit sometimes to make spare
of ones forces, and to restrain resentment within less bounds than justice
allows. The Prince you desire to hear of, is yet in the Idea of the King his
Father, far from coming as yet to Paris or Thouleuze; for my self I am
always blocked up by my Sciatica, and I think all the storms of the middle
region of the air fall down upon my unhappy legs; but it is you that will
bring me health and fair weather, and your presence will work that miracle
which I expected from Monsieur de L'orme: come therefore, I inireat you,
speedily, and suffer not a man to die for want of succor, who passionately is,

Sir, Yours etc.
At Park, 30. March, 1628.
To my Lord the Duke Valette. LETTER XXVI.
SIR, it grieves me much, that the first Letter you see of mine, should not be
pure and free from all my interests, and that instead of entertaining you with
matters of weight, and proportionable to your spirit, I should bring it down
to the petty affairs of a private man; yet I cannot believe, that you being
all gracious, and all generous as you are, will think any occasion of doing
good unworthy of you, but that your virtue in this does imitate the supreme,
which is never to busy in governing of Heaven and the other nobler parts of
the world, but that he takes care as well for governing the meanest of all his
creatures. I humbly beseech your Lordship to consider me in this last quality,
and if it be no incivility to make such a request, that you will undertake the
business I present unto you, but as a disburdening you of some more weighty,
if it be not that my unfortnatenesse makes the easiest that are to become
unpossible, I see no reason you need to employ your whole forces about this
matter; there needs no more but only the motion of your will, and a light
impression of your credit, with -- to give it all the solidity and luster I
desire. I should not seem to understand the terms of the last Letter he did
me the honor to write unto me; if I had not yet some little hope left, and a
kind of satisfaction in my own Conscience. Yet I allege to him no merit of
my part, but much generousnesse of his, nor speak of any services of mine to
recompense him, but of his goodness that prevents them, and subjects not it
self to the rigours of ordinary justice: This, my Lord, is all the right I
allege for my self, and all the title upon which I ground my pretensions: but
now I leave following it my self, and put it wholly into your hands, a place
perhaps to which my ill fortune her self will bear a respect; but if she
shall be opposite to your desire, and prevail above your favor, yet at least
I shall thereby know the force of destiny, to which all other forces give
place, and which cannot be mastered by any force, nor corrected by any
industry; but yet it shall not hinder me from resting well satisfied, seeing I
shall in this receive much more from you than I am denied by him, it I hold any
part in your grace and favor, which is already my comfort against whatsoever
ill success shall happen. It suffices me to be happy with this kind of
happiness, which is more dear to me than all the happiness the Court can
give me, being a man no more ambitious than I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
At Balzac 25. December. 1634.
To my Lord, the Bishop of Poitiers. LETTER XXVII.
MY Lord, although Monsieur de -- has promised me to give you assurance of the
continuation of my service, yet I cannot forbear to add these few lines to
his testimony, and to tell you that which I tell to all the world; that your
virtue is a transcendent far above the abilities and carriage of our age. It is
a match for Antiquity in its greatest pureness and severity. When the Camilli
and the Scipio's were not in employment, they reposed themselves and took their
ease as you do; and when I consider sometimes the sweet life you lead at
Dissay, I conclude that all the employments of the Palace, and all the
intricacies of the Court are not worth one moment of a wise man's idleness. It
is well known that from your childhood you have despised Vanity, even in her
kingdom, and that in an air where she had attractives able to draw the oldest
and most reluctant spirits. All the pomp of Rome has not so much as given you
one temptation; and you are so confirmed in a generous contempt, that if good
Fortune her self should come to look you out, you would scarce go out of
your Closet to meet her in your Chamber. This is that I make such reckoning of
in your Lordship, and which I prefer before all your other qualities; for
those, how great soever they be, are yet but such as are common with many base
and mercenary Doctors, whereas this force and courage are things that cannot be
acquired in the noise and dust of Schools. You found not these excellent
qualities in the Vatican Library, nor yet got them by reading of old
Manuscripts; you owe them indeed to Monsieur your deceased Farther, that true
Knight, without spot or wrinkle* equally skillful in the art of war, and in
affairs of peace, and that was the Heroes of Muret, of Scaliger, and of Saint
Mart. I propose not a less object for my worship than they did, neither indeed
is it less, or less aeligious than theirs was; and though you did not love me
as you do, and though you should denounce war against me, and become head of
a faction to seek my ruin, yet I should not for all that forbear to revere so
rare a virtue as yours is, but should still remain,

My Lord, Your, etc
At Balzac, 4 May. 1630.
To Monsieur Guyet. LETTER XXVIII.
SIR, I fear not much to lose a thing I esteem but little, but holding your
friendship in that account I do, if I should have lost it, I should never see
day of comfor more; you must not therefore think it strange that I was moved
with the Alarm that was given me, for though I know my self to be innocent,
yet I conceived my unfortunateness to be such, that I may give credit to any
bad news. Now that Monsieur de -- has quieted the agitation of my mind, and
has assured me of your love, I cannot forbear to signify unto you the joy I
take, telling you withal, that so I may preserve a friend of your merit and
worth, I do not greatly care for loving him that will leave me. There is little
to be seen amongst men but malice and weakness, and even of good men the
greatest part is scarce sound; this is a cause why a firm and constant spirit,
as yours is, is of wonderful use in society, and it is no small benefit to
them that are wearied and overtoyled as I am, to have a person to rest upon,
that cannot fall. There is need of courage to maintain a friendship and indeed
of prudence to perform the meanest duty of life; it is nothing worth to have a
sound will, if the understanding be defective, it is to no purpose that one
makes vows and sacrifices: Nil vota furent^m, Nil delubra juvant, he complains
without cause of his spleen and his other inferior parts; this is to accuse
innocents; the evil no doubt comes from a higher place, and it is the brain
that is cause of all the disorder The knowledge I have hereof makes me have
compassion of him, and excuse in a Dr. of threescore years old, those base
shifting tricks that are not pardonable in a Scholar of eighteen. Any man but
my self would call his action a cowardice, and a treason; but I love to sweeten
my grief as much as I can* cannot become an enemy at an instant, and pass from
one extremity to another, without making a little stay by the way. I honor
still the memory of our former friendship, and cannot wish ill to a man to whom
I have once wished well; but this is too much of complaining and quarrelling. Do
me this favor, I beseech you, to make choice of something in your study for a
consolation of my solitude. I have already the Encomium of Monsieur the
Admiral de la V^let, but I would fain have the Epitaph of my Lady the Duchess
of Esp^^non, and those admirable Elegies you showed me once; In quibus tam^e*
Tibullo similis quam Tibullus sibi; I entreat you to deliver them to Monsieur
-- who will see them safely delivered to me; if you please we will use him
hereafter as our common correspondent, who knowing me to the very bottom of my
heart, will, I doubt not, most willingly add his testimony to my
protestations, that I truly am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 25. Sept. 1630.
To Monsieur de L'orme, Physician in ordinary to the King, and Treasurer of
France at Bordeaux. LETTER XXIX.
SIR, it is not now only that I make a benefit of your friendship, I have had
profit by it a long time, and you have often been my advocate with so great
force, and so good success, that they, who had before condemned me, were glad
to revoke their sentence as soon as they heard you speak, yet all this while
you did but only speak well of me, now you begin to do well for me; it is
you whom this year I may thank for my pension* Without you Sir, my warrant
would never have persuaded my partner, it would presently have been rejected,
and he still have continued inexorable. But it must be confessed, there is no
wi^de beast but you can tame, no matter so bad but you can make good; as you
heal maladies that are incurable, so you prevail in causes that are desperate,
and if you find never so little life and common sense in a man, you are able
to restore him to perfect health, and make him become a reasonable man. I
desire not to have the matter in any better terms than you have set it, I am
glad I shall not need to invocate M. the Cardinal for my dispatch, and that
Monsieur -- has promised not to fail to pay me in September. If he should pay
it sooner, I should be feign to desire you this favor, to keep it for me till
that time. Now I only entreat you, to draw from him a valuable at assurance of
it, and for so many favors and courtesies done me, I shall present you with
something not altogether so bad, as those I have already showed you; and seeing
one cannot be called valiant for having the better of a coward, neither can I
be accused of vanity, for saying I have exceeded my self. I am therefore bold
to let my Letter tell you thus much, that if my false Pearls, and counterfeit
Diamonds have heretofore deceived you, I do not think that the show I shall
make you of my new wares will use you any better. Yet my meaning is not to
praeoccupate your judgment, who neither of my self nor of my writings, will
have any other opinion than what you shall please to allow me. Since the time I
have wanted the honor of seeing you, I have made a great progress in the
virtue of humility, for I am now proud of nothing but of my friends affections;
Let me therefore never want yours, I entreat you, as you may believed, I will
all my life, most passionately be,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 8. December. 1629.
To my Lord -- LETTER XXX.
MY Lord, I hope you will not take it ill, that I put you in mind of a man, to
whom you have heretofore made demonstration of your love, and that after a long
intermission of these petty duties, which are then troublesome when they are
frequent, you will give me leave to tell you, that I have indeed omitted them,
but more by discretion than by negligence. I know Sir, you have no time to
lose, and to put you to the reading of unprofitable words, what were it but to
show an ignorance, how much the King imployes you, and how the present affairs
go. It is therefore the respect I bear to your continual employments, that
has caused my silence; and I should be very absurd, if in the assiduity of
your cares, I should present you with little pleasing amusements, and should
look for an answer to some poor complement, when you have so many
commandments of importance, and so many orders of necessity to deliver forth.
It is enough for me, that you do me the honor to cast your eyes upon the
protestation I make you, that in all the extent of your command, there is not a
soul more submisse, nor more desirous to bear your yoke, than mine is; and
that as much as any in the world, I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10 Aug. 1630.
To Monsieur Senne, Theologall of the Church of Saints. LETTER XXXI.
SIR, you need not wonder to see your name in the Book I send you: Lovers, you
know, leave marks of their passion every where, and if they were able, would
fill the whole earth with their ciphers and devices. It is a custom as ancient
as the world, for with that began writing also: and at first, for want of
paper, men graved the names of those they loved, upon the barks of trees. If
any man wonder I should be in love with a Preacher, why wonders he not at that
Roman, of whom a Grecia^, said, that he was not only in love with Cato, but
was enchanted with him? You have done as much to many others in this country,
and I have here as many Rivals as you have Auditors. Yet there is not the same
object of all our affections: they run after your words, and hang at your
mouth: but I go farther, and discover in your heart, that which is better than
your eloquence. I could easily resist your Figures and your Arguments, but your
goodness and your freeness take me captive presently: I therefore give you the
title of a perfect friend in your Encomium: because I account this a more
worthy quality, than to be a perfect Orator, and because I make most reckoning
of that virtue in a man, which humane society has most need of. For other
matters, remember your self, in what terms I did speak to you of the business
you write of; and that only to obey you, I have been contented to alter my
opinion. I was well assured the enterprise would never take effect; but I
thought it better to fail by consenting than by obstinacy, and rather to take
a repulse, than not to take your counsel. I have known a long time that
fortune means me no good, and the experience I have of her has cured me of the
malady of hope and ambition. Make me not fall into a relapse of these
troublesome diseases, I beseech you, but come and confirm my health: you Sir,
that are a sovereign Physician of souls, and who are able to see in mine, that
I perfectly am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10. Feb. 1635.
To Monsieur de Piles Cleremont. LETTER XXXII
SIR, having heard of the favorable words you used of me at the Court, I
cannot any longer forbear to give you thanks, nor stay till our next meeting
from telling you how highly I esteem this favor. I cannot but confess, I did
not look to find so great a graciousness in the country of maliciousness; and
seeing, that the greatest part, even of honest men, have so much love for
themselves, that they have but little, or none left for strangers: I thought
with my self, that the infection of the world might have lightly touched you,
and that either you had no passions in you at all, on at least, but very cool
and moderate: but I see now, that you have more generousness in you than is sit
to have amongst men that are interessed, and that you put in practice the
Maxims of our Ancestors, and the Rules of your Epictetus. It is I that am for
this, exceedingly bound unto you, seeing it is I that receive the benefit of
it, and that am the Object of your virtue. You may then believe, I have not so
unworthy a heart, as not to feel a resentment answerable to so great an
Obligation; at least Sir, I hope to show you, that the Picture mine enemies
have made of me, is not drawn after the life, and that their colors disfigure
me rather than represent me. I have nothing in me heroical and great, I
confess, but I have something that is humane and indifferent. If I be not of
the number of the virtuous; I am at least of their side. I applaud them whom I
cannot follow, and admire that I cannot imitate. I am glad if I can be praised,
not only of the judicious and wise, such as you, and our Monsieur de Boissat
are, but even of the simpler sort, that are honestly minded, such as -- I know
Sir, how to love in perfection, and when you shall know me better, you shall
confess there is none that can be more than I,

At Paris, 2 April 1635. Your, etc.

To Monsieur de Voyture. LETTER XXXIII.
SIR, if I did not rely upon your goodness, I should take more care than I do
in preserving your favor: and I should not let a messenger go from hence, by
whom I should not persecute you with my Letters. But knowing you are no
rigorous exactor of that which is your due, much less expect I should give you
more; I have conceived, I might be negligent without offense, and that having
an absolute power over me as you have, you would use it upon me, with the
moderation of good Sovereigns. And I should still continue to follow mine own
inclination, which finds a sweetness in idleness; if I did not think it
necessary to advertise you that I am in the world, lest you should think all
your courtesies lost that you have done me. I would have been glad I could have
loved you all my life long without any kind of interest, or temporal
consideration; yet it troubles me not to give honor to my friend, by giving
him matter of his virtue to work upon. I am content you shall hold the higher
part in our friendship, which is to do good, but then I look to hold the lower
and less noble part, which is to acknowledge; and this is so settled in my
heart, that a greater cannot be desired from a man exceeding sensible, and
exceedingly obliged. But though it were so, that you had no tie upon me, and
that without ungratefulness, I might forbear to love you; yet I entreat you to
believe, that the knowledge I have of your worth and merit, would never give me
leave to do it, but that the natural respect we owe to things that are
perfect, would always bind me infinitely to honor you, and to be with all my
soul, as I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 15. July 1630.
Another to him. LETTER XXXIV.
SIR, you are welcome from Flanders, from England, and from Spain. I am not
only glad for your return, but I refresh my self after your voyages: For if
you know it not, I must tell you, that my spirit has gone these voyages with
you; and you never passed the Sea, that I was not near a shipwreck. They that
know what it is to love, will not mislike the novitie of this complement: I
have born my part in all the fits of your Feavor, I have drunk part of all your
potions, I have accompanied you in all your strange adventures. It is therefore
great reason I should give you thanks for giving my friendship rest, and that
by finishing your travel, you have finished my unquietness. It is better Sir
to be a private man at home, where there is courtesy and freeness, than to be
a Lord Ambassador among public enemies; and if the Jews said well, that the
Graves of Judea were more beautiful than the Palaces of Babylon; why may not
we be bold to say, that the Dirt of Paris is better than the Marble of Madrid?
It is a juster thing to adore M. the Cardinal, than to put off ones hat to the
President Rose, or to the Marquess of Ait^na; and it would have been a news no
less shameful than lamentable, if we had come to read in the Gazets these
pitiful words; A Son of France was waiting for the King of spain's rising
up; Atque ibi magnu^
Mirandusque Gl^ens sed^t id Praetoria regis,
Donec H^sperio libeat vigilare Tyranno.
Thanks be to God, the face of things is hanged, and a great Prince liberty
has cost but the life of good a Horse. At our next meeting, you shall tell me
all the fortunes you have passed; and in requital thereof, I will tell you
news out of the wilderness, and it shall be at Monsieur de Chaudebous
Chamber, that our conference shall be, at least, if you care any thing for it,
and that I be in his favor still. Howsoever, this I am sure, he can never love
any man that honors him more perfectly than I do, or that has a greater
opinion of the beauty and nobleness of his mind He is always one of the dear
objects of my thoughts, and I still take him for one of those true Knights,
which are no where to be found now, but in the History of France. I want such
an example before my eyes, to stir up the faintness I feel in my duty, and to
thrust me forward in the love of Virtue. The least of his words make my spirit
both higher and greater, the only sound of his voice give me both life and
strength, and I doubt not but I should be twice as good as I am, if I could but
see him once a month, and make a third in your excellent conferences. But this
is a happiness which is at home with you, but far off from me, though I have a
design to come nearer to it; you enjoy it to the full, and leave to others
only a desire of it and a jealousy, and jealous indeed I should be if I did
not love you more than I love my self, and if being bound to you for a
thousand favors, I did not acknowledge my self more bound to take a
contentment in your good fortune. Enjoy then your happiness, Si^, and never
fear I will oppose it, seeing I shall always prefer your contentments before
my own, and shall be all my life,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 5 November. 1634.
To Monsieur, Mestivier Physician to my Lord the Duke D'Espernon. LETTER. XXXV.
SIR, I am a thirst for the waters of Vic, ever since I heard you think them
to be wholesome; the reputation you give them has made me to send for them, to
try whether this Drug will do me any more good than others; I am apt to believe
for the satisfaction of my taste, that there are no better medicines than those
that are least compounded, and which come ready made from the bosom of our
common mother; but specially I have a confidence in nature when she comes
authorized by your judgment, and has the warrant of so esteemed a name as
yours, and by this means Sir, you have saved me a voyage into Italy; For, but
for you I was taking a journey of two hundred and fifty leagues upon the word
of an ancient Poet, to the end I might be of those happy ones, of whom he
writes these versts, Non venas resecant, nec vulnere vulnera a sanant,
Pocula nec trifti gramine mista bibunt.
Amissum lymphis reparant impune vigorem,
Pacaturque agro luxuriante dolor.
I have since received your learned Letter, wherein you prescribe me the order
I must hold in using this wholesome disorder, and teach me to drink with art; in
truth you have more care of me than I am worthy of, my health is no matter of
any such importance, that it should be managed with such curiosity. It is not
worth the pains you have taken in treating of it so learnedly, and writing
these two leafes of paper you have sent me. The public, which you will have
to be interessed in it, will acknowledge no such matter, it has no use in
these turbulent times of contemplative Doctors. The active life is that defends
the frontiers, and repells the enemy, and the least musketier in the army of M.
the Cardinal of Valette, is at this time of more use than all the
Peripatericks and Stoiks of this Kingdom; we may therefore think that the
public we talk of dreams not of me, nor is engaged to preserve my idleness,
but it you that love me, and would therefore make me of more worth than I am,
thereby to have the more color for your loving me. I am much bound unto you
for this favor, yet I doubt whilst you set me at so high a price, there is
none would take me for such as you would vene me; but I regard it not, I bound
my reputation by your account, and desire no other Theater, nor other World but
you: it suffices me that in your spirit I enjoy the glory you give me, and
sweetly possess my good fortune, which I know I merit nor, if you weigh it in
the Skales of Scrupulous justice, but which you will yet preserve to me, if you
have regard to the passion with which I testify unto you, that I am,

Sir. Your, etc.
At Paris, 3. September. 1635.
To Monsieur de Mesmes D' Avaur, Ambassador to the King at Venice. LETTER
XXXVI.
SIR, if the persecution continue, I shall be forced to give place to envy, and
to go wait in the place where you are for a change of time, which in this
Kingdom is so adverse unto me. It is indeed my adversaries design to make all
sorts of governments my enemies, and not suffer me to breath at liberty, either
in Monarchy Aristocracy, or Democracy. You have seen his Manifests printed,
which have flown beyond the Alps; you know the cunni^g he uses to draw the
public hate upon me, and to make me ill thought of, as well by the Kings
Allies as by his Subject. He goes about to banish me out of all states, to shut
all places against me that are open, even to fugi^ves, and not to leave my
innocence one corner of the earth to be in safety: yet Sir, let him do his
worst, and practice what he can, I hope you will bear me cut to say, that he
shall never hind me from having a place in your heart, nor be able to take
from me this pleasing refuge. And besides that Ambassadors houses enj^y the
privileges of ancient Sanctua^ies, and that there is neither justice not
violence but has resp^ct unto them; I assure my self your only affection
will interesse it self for my safety, without any other public
consideration, and that you will defend me as a thing dear unto you; thought
the defense of a man afflicted were not otherwise in it self, a thing worthy
the dignity of an Ambassador; wheresoever you shall have power to speak, I
shall be sure of a strong protection, being as I am assured of your well
speaking, and this eloquent mouth, which persuades the wise, and by which the
just expounds himself, is just, shall gain no doubt a good opinion of my cause
by undertaking it, and a favorable censure of those judges at least that I
acknowledge. I expect this issue from your almighty Rhetoric, and hope Sir,
that in these troublesome encounters you will double your love and your good
offices unto me. Though I should be worse entreated of the world, and of
fortune than I am, and should have nothing before my eyes but lamentable
successes, and deadly presages, yet you would remember how that Cato stood firm
upon ruins, and held himself constant to a side which the Gods themselves had
abandoned. I do not think my case is yet in this extremity, it has subsistence
and foundation; and as it is not so bad but that an honest man may maintain it
with a good conscience, so neither is it so weak but that a mean courage may
undertake it without fear. The Gentleman that brings you this Letter, has
promised to make you a more ample relation hereof, and to inform you of my
whole story. I humbly entreat you to give him audience, until I come and crave
it my self, and that I assure you in your Palace amongst your other Courtiers,
that I truly am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris, 20. December. 1627.
To Monsieur de Thure, Doctor of the Sorbone, and Chanon of the Church of
Paris. LETTER XXXVII.
SIR, my dear Cousin, the news you sent me surprised me not, I am so
accustomed to receive disgrace, that I find in this nothing extraordinary; it
is true, I am a little more sensible of it than of the former, and the place
from whence it comes, makes me itake it a little more to heart; yet seeing you
seem to compassionate my misery, I find my self comforted of one half of
it; and having you for my Champion, I fear not what my persecuters can do
against me. Suffer me to call them so, that solicit your College against me,
and make it less favorable to me, than I ad good right to hope for. It is not
their zeal of your Religion, nor interest of the public that sets them on
work; it is an old spite they bear me, which I could never master with all my
long patience. It is the hate of a dead man which lives still in his Tomb, it
is his relics that war upon me, and whereof some ill disposed French do
serve themselves to disgrace a work, which has no other end but the honor and
service of the King. I never doubted of your good nature, and I know, if need
were, your charity would cover the multitude of my faults; but in this case, I
think I have reason rather to ask justice at your hands, and tell you, that if
you take the pains to consider my words as I meant them, and not have my
enemies correct them; you will easily grant they contain nothing contrary to
the orthodox Doctrine, or that is not maintainable in all the Schools of
Christendom. This being so, my dear Cousin, I doubt not but you will strongly
defend my cause, at least my person, and will be pleased to assure the
Gentlemen of your fraternity, that having always accounted their College as
the Oracle of true Doctrine, and as the interpreter of the Church in this
Kingdom; I could not wish a more sweet or glorious fruit of my travails, than
to see them entertained by so learned and holy Personages, that my greatest
ambition is but to merit their good acceptance, and to deserve their favorable
censure; and if for obtaining this I have not either happiness enough, or not
enough sufficiency, I have at least dociblenesse enough to learn of them that
which I know not, and to confess that in their learned conferences they
possess the secret and certainty of all holy points, whereof we in our private
meditatoins have but suspicions and conjectures, that if I were assaulted by
strangers, I could perhaps make a shift to resist, and that with success, but
that I prefer obedience, which I owe before a victory, which I might get; that
I desire not to contest with my fathers, nor pretend to have reason against
their authority, to which I submit my self in such sort, that I am resolved to
assure my self of nothing, but upon their word and credit, and from henceforth
to acknowledge no truth, but that which they shall please to teach me: I leave
it to you to augment, to reform, or embellish this complement, as you shall
think fit; I make you Master of the whole business, and never mean to disavow
any thing you shall do, being absolutely,

Sir, my dear Cousin; Your, etc.
At Balzac, 18 Jan. 1632.
To Monsieur de Vougelas, Gentleman in Ordinary to my Lord, the Kings only
Brother. LETTER XXXVIII.
SIR, I humbly entreat you to take for your self, all the excuses you make to
me, and to believe that I have always a love answerable to your virtue; though
I say it not so often, as by the laws of civility I am bound to do. Since the
coming hither to Monsieur de -- you have been the most ordinary and most
pleasing subject of all our conference* and I am much more curious to hear of
your studies, than to hear all the news of the great World. Yet I intend not
hereby to ask it of you with importunity, and to engage you again in a
commerce of unprofitable words, which would but wrong your necessary
employments: I am well enough satisfied with the assurance I have of your love,
and am well contented you should keep your complements for those you love not
so well, when I shall find my self to stand in need of you; I am not grown so
bashful, but that I can use the liberty I have long used, and trouble you
again by my freeness. Hitherto it has afforded you nothing but trouble, and
it was your evil Angel that inspired you with a desire at first to be
acquainted with me. But one day, perhaps, I shall be more happy; and for so
many and great favors you have done me, it may be you may draw from me some
small argument of acknowledgement. In the mean time Sir, I desire you not to
cast upon me, a reputation which I am not able to maintain; make no more mocks
at my prattling, and hide the shame of your friend, which your other friend has
published. He only is guilty of the fault that was done; and you may well
think, I was not so impudent to send false Latin to the University of Paris, as
much as to deliver false Money to the Mint, and think to make Mint-men take it
for current. It shall suffice me, that you approve of the French, I mean to
bring you; or at least, that you make it worthy of your approving, by making it
new with your corrections. If Monsieur Faret be returned from Brescia, you
shall make me beholding to you, to assure him from me of the continuation of my
service, I make infinite account of him, and am with all my soul,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 15. May. 1629.
To Monsieur Gerard Official of the Church of Angaulesmr. LETTER XXXIX.
SIR, my last Letters are great Books, and I have nothing to add, but only
that I entreat you to take the pains to read them over again, and to draw them
into heads for the help of your memory, which though I know to be very
excellent, yet I know also, it is extremely full of business, and that I am
but the five and twentieth of your Clients, I set down nothing so precisely,
but that I leave you liberty to change my orders, if you find them not fit,
and to sail with the wind. Nothing but good success can be expected from your
sterning; you will so manage, I assure my self, my resentments with Monsieur de
-- and make him see so much respect and modesty in my grief, that he will
perhaps be sorry be ever disobliged me* I assure my self also, that when you
fall upon my Chapter, where I treat with Monsieur de -- that you will not carry
your self, as only my instrument, and as one that has charge of me, but that
you will do as an honest man should, that is persuaded to it by the truth, and
interessed in the cause of oppressed innocence. Concerning the perfumes I
desired of you, I could wish you would bring me a shop-full; but you must use
some body else to choose them for you, for you know them not your self, but
only by name, and you may perhaps have the oil of Nuts given you for the oil
of Jasmin, and Gingerbread for Sweet-balls. So it is that pretty things are
unknown of great personages: you would think you should do your self wrong
to descend to such pedling wares, and of an Ambassador, and a Philosopher,
become a Merchant and an Apothecary; yet Aristippus would be dealing in things
that you think scorn of, and said, that he and the King of Persia were the two
unfortunate Ones, whom Diogenes pitied. You send me word that Monsieur de --
has great Designs in the Commonwealth of Letters, and that he is resolved be
an Author and a Preacher both at once. If you remove him not from so dangerous
a resolution, your shall seee Books that will be the Funerals of common sense,
and let but the name be changed, and it will be said of his Sermons, as an
excellent man of our time, said of the Sermons of Friar Lazarus. Fe^ de zele,
moins de Science
Faisoit que Lazare bossu;
Preschant des Cas de conscience
N'stoit quasi pas apperceu.
As much as to say, that though the Clock did ring out a great while, and that
he has been talking a song hour, yet so little heed is taken of him, that
none will believe there is any man in the Pulpit. Before he comes to the Ave
Ma^ia, all his Auditors are out of the Church, and he may call them Apostataes
from the Word of God, and Fugitives from the Church; yet with all he can say,
he shall never make one of them to come back. I have not these two years
written thus much with my own hand; it is to me, as one of Hercules labors:
and can you then doubt, how much I would be willing to do, to do you service? I
kiss the hands of all the Family, which you see, and which I honor
exceedingly, and am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10 Feb. 1633.
Another to him. LETTER XL.
SIR, I love you better than I thought, since you parted from hence, I have had
a number of Alarums for you: and though I stand in covert, yet that keeps me
not from the foul weather of your voyage. But I hope, by this time, you are
upon returning, and that shortly, we shall ^it by the fires side, and hear you
tell your adventures of Bcausse, and of Mantelan. Whatsoever Monsieur de --
have said unto you, when you took leave of him; I do not think, that in all
the whole Discourse, there can one passage be found that is subject to any bad
interpretation: if it be considered as a member depending upon the body, and
not as a piece that is broken off. There may, perhaps, be found some
proposition, a little bold, but never to go so far as rashness; the
Antecedents and the Consequents so temper it, that if a man will not be too
witty in another man's intentions, he can never make any doubt of mine. It was
never intended, you know, but only to prove a Monarchy to be the best form of
Government, and the Catholic Church to be the only Spouse of Christ; Neither
yet do I write so negligently, but that I am ready to give a reason of that I
write, and am able to defend my opinions against those particular persons that
oppugn them; for as for the sovereign authority, you can witness for me with
what humility I submit my self unto it. The day after your departure Monsieur
de -- came to Balzac, whom I kept with me three whole days; I never saw man
less interessed, less ambitious, less dazzled with the splendor of the
Court; and to speak generally, better cured of all popular diseases. By this I
come to know the nobleness, and even the sovereignty of reason, when it is
well schooled and instructed, we need not mount up to heaven to find cause of
scorn in the littleness of the earth, the study of wisdom will teach it as
well: A wise man counts all things to be below him; Palaces to him appear but
Cottages, and Scepters but Baubles; it pities him to see that which is called
the greatness and fortune of Princes, and from the height of his spirit, Il
void comme fourmis marcher nos legions,
Daus ce petit amas de poussiere and de bove
Dons nost^e vanito fait tant de regions.
I have at last found the Letter you required of me, which I now send you by
this Post, our good father has taken a copy of it, and says it is fit to be
kept for an eternal monument in our house; and adds moreover, that Erasmus
never had so much honor done him by the Sorbon, which instead of condemning my
divinity, has given a fair testimony in praise of my eloquence; for so he
pleases to call the little ability I have in writing; for it is his custom to
make choice of very noble terms for expressing of very vulgar qualities. For
your self Sir, you know it very well, and I entreat you to advertise our other
friends that know it not, that all this testimony, and all this honor that is
done me, is happened to me by a mere mistaking I had satisfied the desire of
the Sorbon long before it, if I had understood they desired any satisfaction
from me, but two Editions of my Book coming forth at one time, my charitable
neighbors, in my absence, delivered the Sorbone the less corrected Copy, in
which indeed, my proposition was not so fully cleared nd unfolded as was fit,
but never told them that in the other Copy I had clean taken away all color
of wrangling, and justified beforehand, that wherein I imagined they could
find any thing to say against me, I expect to hear by the next messenger of
your coming to Paris, and am with all my heart,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 25 Jan. 1632.
Clarissimo Balzacio, Facultas Theologiae Pariensiensis, S.
REdditae sunt nobis ad Calendas Aprilis abs te Literae, vir clarissime,
omnibus quidem gratis;simae, non eo solum nomine, quod multam in ordinom
nostrum observantiam prae se ferrent; sed etiam vel maxim, quod
prope^ssissimam tuam voluntatem immutandi ca quae in Principe tuo offendere
mentes Christianas possent. Hunc in librum inquirendi fama, quae nec te latere
potuit, non tam occasionem nobis, quam necessitatem attulit. In quo sane uti
nulla nis^ disertissimo, sic incogitanti quaedam excidisse deprehensa sunt, ex
little relatione quibus recensendi ejusdem delegata provincia fuerat. Praetipas,
eaque maxim instituti nostri huic Epistolae subnectemus; quae and si
judicabantur, minus ad orthodoxa doctrinae amussim quadrare, aequum tamen pro
Christiana charitate ac dignitate tua duximus, ut omnem judicii aequitatem
amicae monitionis humanitas praecederet, quo tu ipse operi tuo emendando quaqua
operam dares. I stud vero quam pre voto nostro successerie, 'vel ex ^o
intelleximus, quod tua ipse sponte in idem cosilium conspe^raver^s docilitatem
facultati nostrae, ad id tua Epistola pollicitus. Quad and maxim tibi
gratulamur, neque velimus tamen in illud incumbas, ordmis nostri duntaxat
authoritate viotus, uti bencvole recipis, sed ipsius veritatis; cui nunquam
faelicius triumphant ingenia, quam dum cedunt, summissis praesertim per
religionis obsequium armis, quorum usus quantum subsidit, ad decertandum
conferret, tantum non posset afferre impedimento ad victoriam; siquidem, hoc in
genere Vincere, nisi victi non possumus. Ne tu etiam talem deinceps debebis
Modestiae tuae gloriam, Cujus laud, non minor inter Christianos audies, quam
inter mortales, Facundia audiisti hactenus, ejusdem merito lubentissimos
laudatores habebis, quos alias multa urgente querimonia, officii ratio
coegisset vel invitos esse Censores.

De Mandato D.D. Decani and Magistrorum Sacrae Facultatis Theologiae
Parisiensis, Ptt. Bouuot.
Apud Sorbonam: Anno Christi, 1632.
Another to him. LETTER XLI.
SIR, my Philosophy is not of so little humanity, but that I grieved
exceedingly at the reading of your Letter, and was touched to the very quick,
for the death of -- yet seeing he is happier than they that mourn for him, and
that he has left the world in an age when he yet knew it not; I think it no
wisdom to be obstinate in an ill grounded sorrow, or to account that an evil
to another, which is the greatest good could have happened to my self.
Christianity will not let me say, Optimum non nasci, Bonum vero quam citissime
interire: but it hinders me not to believe, that one day of my life, with
B^ptisme, is better than a whole age of iniquity. I write this Letter to you
from -- whither I am come to lodge, after I had entertain^d my Lord -- until
night. I conceived there was some necessity to deliver him your Letter with all
speed, and therefore I exposed my person to all the injuries of an incensed
sky, and ventured to make a voyage that would have frighted a stouter man than
my self. By this you may know, that I count nothing difficult, which reflects
upon any interest of yours, or which cencernes your contentment; and I love you
so much, that I should not say so much, if I had more craft in me than I have
But my good Nature exceeds all other considerations of vulgar Prudence; and I
would not keep you from knowing what great power you have over me, though I
knew beforehand you would abuse this power. For other things, I am very glad
to hear you begin to grow sensible of the charms of music, and that you go
to the Consorts, which are in reputation. Yet I have seen the time, when your
ears were no learneder than mine, and when you made no great difference
between the sound of Lutes, and the noise of Bells. See what it is to frequent
good company; and to live in a Country of neatness. I that stir not from the
Village, know no other music, but that of Birds; and if sometimes I hear a
more silver sound, it comes from those noble Animalls which Monsier Heinsius
praises so much: and which by Lucians saying, serve for Trumpets in the
Kingdom of the Moon. I give you a thousand thanks for your news, but
especially for the last; it is certain, that the choice of Monsieur de
Belieure to the Ambassador of Italy, is a thing will be generally well liked;
men talk wonders already of his beginnings, of the readiness and Vivacity of
his Spirit, of the force and stayednesse of his Judgment, besides some other
excellent qualities of his Age, from which we may hope for much. And for my
self, who am one, that love my Country exceedingly; I cannot but exceedingly
rejoice in this new fruitfulness, which comes upon him at the latter end of
his old age. It does me good to see famous deceased men, to live again in
their excellent posterity; and I doubt not of the good success of a
Negotiation, where a Belieure, a Thou, or a Sillery, is employed These were our
Heroes of the long Robe; and the Princes of our Senate: and now their children
(that I may continue to speak Latin, in French) are the Princes of our youth,
at least they are names more happy, and that portend more good to France, than
the name of -- and no doubt she will have cause to thank M. the Cardinal, for
respecting races, that are so dear unto her; and for stirring up in the Kings
mind, the old inclinations of the deceased King his Father. I fall asleep at
this very time I am talking with you, and am rather in case to make ill
Dreams, than good Discourses: and so I take my leave of you, my dear and
perfect friend, as I also am to you, as much as possibly can be,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 4 October. 1634.
To Monsieur Talon, Secretary to my Lord the Cardinal De la Valette. LETTER
XLII.
SIR, I took infinite pleasure to see my self in one of your Letters, and
Monsieur -- who imparted it to me, can witness for me, with what greediness I
read that passage, which concerned me. I cannot say, that he is here, though it
be true, that he is not in Gascoigne, for we enjoy nothing of him here but his
Image; he is so married, that he would think it a disloyalty to his wife, if he
should dare to laugh when she is not by. All his sociable humor he has left
with her, and has brought nothing to us, but his Melancholy. When I would make
him merry, he tells me, I go about to corrupt him. All visites he makes in her
absence, though it be to Covents, and Hospitals, yet he calls them
deboystnesse. So as Sir, you never saw man better satisfied with his present
estate; not a greater enemy to single life. He is not contented to pity you
and me, and to lament our solitude; but he reproacheth us outragiously, and
calls us unprofitable members of the Commonwealth, and such as are fit to be
cut off. As for me, I make no defense for my self, but your example; I tell
him, let him persuade you to it first, and he shall soon find me ready to
follow his counsel. I hope we shall meet together ere long; and then we shall
not need to fear his being too strong for us in our conferences, when we two
shall be against him alone. Provide therefore Solutions for his Arguments; but
withal deny me not your assistance in other encounters, where it may stand me
instead. You can never do courtesies to a man more capable of acknowledgement;
nor that is more truly, then I,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 12 Febr. 1633.
Another to him. LETTER XLIII.
SIR, I am exceedingly well satisfied with the news you send me; and with the
assurance you give me by your Letter of the continuation of your friendship.
Not that I was afraid, I should lose it, but because it is a pleasure, to hear
ones self called happy; and that one cannot have too many titles for a
possession, which can never be too much valued. I take not upon me to contend
with you in Complements, or to dispute of civility with you, who live in the
light of the world, and have whole Magasins of good words. For besides, that I
never had any skill of the Court; it is now so long I have been a countryman,
that it were a miracle, if I had not clean forgot it all. Pardon therefore a
rudeness which I cannot avoid, and seeing I am not able to answer you, give me
leave to assail you, and require you to give a reason of the present state of
things: What can you say Sir, of these wretched Flemmins, who shut their gates
against good Fortune when she would come into them? and are in love with their
Fetters and their Keepers? I do not think there be truer slaves in all Asia:
and I do not wonder our arms can do no good in their Country, seeing it is a
hard matter to take a yoke from men's heads, who prefer it before a Crown, and
Sovereignty* when it is offered. Sick men are then to be despaired of, when
they throw their Medicines on the ground, and account of Potions as of
Poysonings. It is not therefore our fault if they be not cured: we have active
power enough to work, but it must be upon a matter that is apt and disposed. I
expect hereupon a Decree from your politics, and remain,

Your, etc.
At Balzac, 1 July 1635.
To Monsieur D'Espernon, Marshall of the Kings Armies. LETTER XLVI.
SIR, my complements are very rare, and I take no great care for preserving
your friendship. I account you so true of your word, that I cannot doubt of
having your love, seeing you have done me the honor to let me have your
promise. It is to no purpose to solicit Judges that cannot be corrupted; it is
enough for procuring their favor, that the cause be good. You see therefore, I
do not much trouble my self to commend mine unto you, and I present my self
so seldom before you, that if you had not an excellent memory, you had
certainly forgot me long ago. I pray you not to do me good offices, for knowing
that you let slip no occasion of doing good: I may be sure to have my part of
your good deeds, though you have none of my prayers. Your new Acquests at the
Court, make you not leave that you have on this side the Loyre: your friends
that are always with you, take not up all your heart, there is some place left
for your friends farther off, of which number I am one, and more in love, Sir,
with the contemplative life, than ever. I am always under ground, and buried
with my trees, and they must be very strong cords, and very violent
commandments, that should remove me: yet I am contented to give my thoughts a
liberty: and my spirit is often in the place where you are, and my absence is
not so idly bestowed, but that I can make you a reckoning of it. I speak to you
in this manner, because I know you are no hater of delightful knowledges, and
have an excellent taste to judge of things. Though by profession you be a
Soldier, yet I refuse you not for a Judge in our peacable difference, being
well assured, there are not many Doctors more accomplished, or of a sounder
judg^ment than your self. This quality is no opposite to true valor; the
Romans, whose discipline you seek to reestablish, used to lead with them the
Muses to War, and in the tumult of their Armies, left always place for these
quiet excercises. Brutus read Polybius, the night before the battle at
Phlilippi, and his Uncle was at his book he very hour before he meant to die.
Never therefore fear doing ill, when you follow the example of such excell^nt
Authors: none will ever blame you for imitating the Romans, unless perhaps the
Crabates, or other Enemies, as well of Humanity as of France: But to be thus
blamed by Barbarians, is an infallible mark of merit; for they know no points
of virtue, but such as are wild and savage, and imagine, that roaring and being
furious, are far more noble things than speaking and reasoning: I leave them to
their goodly imaginations, and come to tell you, that though you Letter to my
Sister be dated from the Army in Germany, yet it is eloquent enough to come
from the Academy of M. the Cardinal; it neither smells of Gunpowder, nor of Le
pais de adieu pas; I know, by certain marks I have observed in it, that your
Books are part of your B^ggage, and I find nothing in it, that is worthy of
blame, but only the excessive praises you bestow upon me; and if you were not
a stout champion and able to maintain it with your sword, you would certainly,
ere this, have had the lie given you a thousand times for praising me so. I
should be very sorry to be a cause of so many petty quarrels, and so unworthy
of your courage; a Foreign war has need of your spirit; make not therefore
any Civil for my sake; I desire no such violent proofs of your affection: it
serves my turn, that you love me quietly; and, if you so please, secretly too,
to the end, that our friendship being hidden, may lie in covert from injuries,
and that possessing it without pomp, I may enjoy it without envy: I reckon it
always amongst my solidest goods, and will be sure never to lose it, if
perfect faithfulness will serve to keep it; and if it will suffice to be, as I
most passionately am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 4 Jan. 1635.
To Monsieur de Reussines. LETTER XLV.
MY dear Brother, I have upon this last occasion received nothing from you,
but the offices I expected; I know you to be jus^ and generous, and one that
will always religiously pay whatsoever you owe, either to blood or friendship,
yet this hinders me not from being obliged to you, and to your good Birth for
it. This has bestowed a friend upon me, which I never took pains, either to
look out, or to make: it is a present of Nature, which I should have taken, if
she had given me my choice. I desire you to believe, that I never stood less
in need of comfort, than now; I oppose nothing against the rage of a thousand
adversaries, but my scorn: I am Armor of proof against all the tales from the
Suburbs St. Honor, and from all the Libells of the street St. Jacques. They
increase daily in sight, and if the heat of their spirits do not abate, there
will shortly be a little Library of follies written against me. But you never
yet heard of such a gravity as I have, nor of a mind that could take such rest
in the midst of storms and tempests as I do; and this I owe to Philosophy,
under whose covert I shelter my self: it is not only higher than mountains,
where we see it rain and hail below us: but it is stronger also than a
Fortress, where we may stand out of danger, and make mouths at our enemies. All
that hurts me in the war of --, is that which concerns the interest of
others: it grieves me extremely, that his cruelty should leave me, and fall
upon my friends. I wish I could have bought out the three lives, that touch the
honor of -- with a third Volumn of injuries done to my self, and where no
body else should have any part: and I may truly say, that this is the only
blow, which that perfidious enemy has given me, that goes to my heart; and the
only of all his offenses that I have felt. I entreat you to let my friend know
of my grief, and to make sure unto me this rare personage by all the cares and
good offices your courtesy can devise. His virtue ought to be inviolable to
detraction, but detraction will not spare virtue it self, but takes a delight
in violating the best things. I have reason to place him in this rank, and
considering him as one of the most accomplished works of Nature, I must needs
consider withal, that Nature it self is sometimes calumniated. Madam de --
enquires often after you, and has a great opinion of your heart and spirit.
You may be sure I say nothing in opposition to the account she holds you in,
but am rather glad to see my judgment confirmed by so infallible an authority:
see, you be always good, and always lay hold upon our ancient Maxims, and be
assured I am, and always will be,

My dear Brother, Your, etc.
At Paris 15, Jan. 1621.
To Monsieur Breton. LETTER XLVI.
SIR, you are a man of your word, and something more. You promise less than
you perform, having undertaken to furnish me but with Gazets; you extend your
largess to large volumnes of Books. This Jonnius, whose Verses you sent me, is
no ordinary man. The boldness, and beauty of his phrase, comes very near the
greatness and magnificence of Horace. He chooses and places his words with
the same preciseness, and care; he speaks always loftily, and if in all
things there be bounds and limits, he sometimes seems to go beyond them. For
example, upon the Canonization of Ignatius, made by Pope Gregory the fifteenth,
Nam te ille primus Vaticanis ritibus
Admovit aris Coel^tem,
Mixtumque superis aureo curru dedit
Perambulare sydera.
A Pagan Poet could have said no more of the deifying of Julius Caesar, yet in
saying so much* he should have said too much: there being great difference
between consecrating the memory of a mortal man, or the giving him a Divinity,
between the declaring or the making a God, between being Augustus or being
Jupiter. I know not also, why speaking of Protestant Ministers, he stands so
punctually to descant upon the word, which of all conceits is the poorest;
Maltque ominata Verba and and inter Obscaena,
Exinde lege publica reponendum
Solue Ministri Garnifex gerit nomen.
I should think, that this descanting makes not much for the honor of Princes
chief Counselors; and it seems, the Poet in this place, forgot M. the
Cardinal, who guides the public fortune, and governs the world under this
name of Minister. There is no greater reckoning to be made, no great matter to
be built upon three or four little syllables, which signify nothing, but what
custom, without any reason pleases, and are of no more value than use gives
them. This word Vates, is taken sometimes for a Fool, sometimes for a Sorcerer,
sometimes for a Prophet; and the word Prophet it self, is sometimes taken for
a Juggler, witness the Greek Proverb (...): Will you upon this go rail upon
Prophets, and send them with their name to the place of correction, or shut
them up in Bedlam. And yet further to endeare this subtilty of Ionicus: you may
say, that Ministers at all times have been enemies of Christ, and prove it by
this, because a Minister was one of those that stroke him on the face in the
presence of the High Priest; as it is said, Unus ex Ministris Caiphae, etc. The
ground upon which such Figures are built, is so weak and ruinous, that there is
no means to make i^ stand firm; our adversaries may make use of it as well as
we, and to be even with you for your Text of the Minister of Caiphas, they will
I doubt not bring you another Text, where our Savior himself is said to be a
Minister, come to ex^cu^e in the world the decrees of him that sent him, and to
do the eternal will of his Futher. This is called triumphing for syllables an^
words, and running after Phantasmes If the ancient Rome had used to play in
this fashion, Bishops called by them Pontisices, would have been but makers of
Bridges, no^ Dictators any more than Schoolmasters. Poor Brutus would have b^ene
the Bu^ for all the arrows of his time. The Assinii, the Porcii, the Bessie,
would not have had one day of rest, they would have been forced to get
themse^ves adop^ed into some other Families, and to change their names thereby
to s^ve themselves from the opprobrious Figures of Orato^s and Poets. I meant
to have written but two or three lines, and I am come to the bottom ^f my
paper; this is the pleasure to be talking with you that deceives me thus, and
makes me think that we are walking together, and conferring about our Books
and Studies. After all that has been said, I conclude that your Poet is a
great Lyrick Poet, and would have had a Pension of Augustus, and sat at Table
with Me^oenas. I Bid you goodnight, and am,

Sir, Your* etc.
At Balzac, 10. Feb. 1631.
Another to him. LETTER XLVII.
SIR, I am at leisure for no body but you, and though I am pestred with a
multitude of small affairs, yet I quit them all to come and tell you, that I
have received your last dispatch, and find my self infinitely obliged to
Monsieur de -- seeing you put me in hope that he will spend this winter at
Paris, ^ purpose at that time to be a daily waiter upon him, and try what I can
do to merit my fortune. I am told, that you are grown friends with the graces,
and will no longer be an enemy to honest pleasures Hold you firm, I beseech
you, in this resolution, and never give it over, if you mean well to your life.
The^e is no danger in refreshing your self some^imes with pleasing company,
that so you may return more fresh and vigorous to your learned ex^rcises. It is
better to be innocently merry at the Inn in Venice, than to go kill ones self
in the Vault of the Church, as the poor -- I lament him, in truth, as a man
dead and miserable, and it grieves me he had not time to bethink him of his
souls health, and to ask pa^don of God; but to conceive, that by his death a
great light is extinguished, and that the world has lost a great man; I knew
him too well to have any such opinion He was, to say true, a man of metal, and
had certain slashes of wit that were not unpleasant, so long as they were not
printed; but who would endure him to be enrolled among modern Authors, or give
his verse a place among the Poets of this time? Yet he himself counted his
courage and his military virtues as nothing in comparison of his eloquence, and
excellent gift of speaking and writing, wherein he was so highly conceited of
himself, that only for telling him one day of it, he never loved me after,
and is dead; I assure my self, with a heart-burning against me for it. They
that reprove me for writing Neuvelles Victorienses in my first Letter to M. the
Cardinal, make it appear they are far travelers in the Latin Country, and
never come to discover Victrices literas, Laureatas literas, Nuntiam laurum,
etc. Malice is a very unjust thing, but ignorance much more; Homine imperito,
you know the rest. And never take offense that there be some will not so much as
allow me for a Grammer-Scholler, and perhaps have reason. We oftentimes think
our selves to be the true owners of things, of which indeed we are but
usurpers; there is nothing secure against wrangling, every thing is matter of
suit in this wretched world, yet I mean not so easily to yield and give up my
right; for if I were nor able to write according to the rules of Art, I must
certainly be one of the most dull capacity, and altogether incapable of all
discipline. For, did I learn nothing by seeing the Cardinal Perron? Nothing by
being a Scholar in the French tongue, under Mr. Nicholas Geoffe^ean? Nothing
by a thousand conferences with the good man Malherbe? And lastly, Nothing by
lodging with Father Baudoin? Vel in bicipiti somniasse Parnasso? For one is as
much as the other, as you know well. This man, in truth, is no ordinary Father,
his conceptions and productions are without intermission; he fills our studies
with his books, he amends, reforms, embellishes the books of others, he smells
a Barbarism, or an incongruity seven miles off; he has counted by tale all
the improprieties that are in --: he is admirable in knowledge and use of all
particles, and I am sure he loves me not so little, to hide any secret or
mystery of all his knowledge from me; I entreat you to kiss his hands for me,
and to believe that I am most truly,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 20. Aug. 1630.
Another to him. LETTER XLVIII.
SIR, three days since I imparted my melancholy and my unquietness unto you,
and how much I was moved at the cruelty of -- I have since received your Letter
of the ninth of this present, which does not indeed take all my pain from me,
because it declares not what is done against me, but yet asswageth it a little,
because it declares that nothing is done against me that is deadly. However I
must put on a resolution for all events, and comfort my self with Philosophy,
and with you; you that are my true and faithful friend, and that stand between
me and all the stones my enemies throw at me. Your affection is no small help
to me in these troublesome encounters, and the tenderness you show to have of
me, binds me in a very sensible obligation to you. Concerning the ill will of
-- it can do me no great hurt, and pardon me if I do not think my honor is
engaged to make so bloody a war upon him as you would have me. The less show
is made of resenting petty injuries, the better and the more readily they are
repelled; if I should think upon answering him, I should but make a comment
upon his gib^ish, for them that understand him not, and thereby bring his folly
into the more credit and request. When time and place serv^s we will handle him
as he deserves, and doubt not but his lightness shall light heavily upon him,
only do you collect some common places upon this matter, and remember your
self of all that has passed between -- to the end the History may not be
lost. I have had speech with the man whose whole life is nothing but a
continual meditation of death; I never found him so austere, nor so great an
enemy of bravery as now; his devotion respects neither right of nations, nor
laws of civility. I have not been able to get him to write to that person that
loves him so dearly, and complains to you so often about it. All the Answer he
returns to his long Letters, are but these three words of the Gospel, Noli
amplius peccare, which in sweeter and more courtly terms* is as much as to
say, Lites heures au lieu de lire ses poulets
Desile tes coliers, faits-en des chapelets, etc.
I received the other day a most elegant and gentle Letter from one Mounsieur
Ytterius, a Lawyer of Antwerpe; but I know not by what means it came to my
hands, nor by what direction to return an answer. Pray enquire after him, and
let our friends know, that in spite of the Ma^quesse of Aytona, I have
adherents in Flanders, and therefore he need not make his bragges for having
burnt my book at Brux ^s. Scilicet illo igne, vocem omnium Gentium, and
libertatem Europae, and conscientiam generis humani abolere arbitrabatur. By
the next Post I will write to Monsieur Hottoman, and will give Monsieur de la
Pigeonnerio thanks for the verses you had of him to send me. We have read them
here in good company, both of Males and Females, and they all agree, that the
Fathers, my adversaries, are none of those Christian Ulysses's, he speaks of,
that have nailed their Passions to the Cross of Christ. I forgot to ask you of
Monsieur Seton, and to desire you to call to him for the papers he promised me.
I regard him as one of the great Doctors of our age, and make use of the
riches of his spirit with so great privacy, that he seems to be but as it were
my Treasurer. I know not how to make an end; nor yet am willing to say more,
because I must reserve something for Monday next. I therefore take my leave,
assuring you there is none more truly than I,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 7. Jan. 1631.
To Monsieur Girrard, Official of the Church of Angoulesme. LETTER XLIX.
SIR, I make use of you with the like liberty as I desire you would make use of
me; if therefore you have any spare time, you may allow it to the affairs of
-- but so as you allow it to mine first, and that you make a difference between
friendship and courtesy. I doubt not but you will give your best advice to the
Gentleman that is recommended to you, and will set forward the best you can the
design we have to make him one day an honest man. I find the Book more neatly,
and more correctly printed than I could have imagined; and I would tell you
that you are an able Grammarian, but that I fear your Divinity would be angry
for giving you so small a praise, and so much vilified by the Messieurs or
Masters. The two Latin Tracts you sent me are as different of style as they are
of matter. Any man that can but relish the ancient purity will take the first
of them for the work of some Roman that lived in the times of the republic,
but the other can be but the writing of some Gaul or Spaniard that came to
declaim at Rome, in the reign of the sixth or seventh Emperor. One meets at
the beginning with something that dazles, and makes a fair show of some great
good to follow, but at the bottom there is no such matter to be seen, nothing
but swelling and obscurity, oftentimes false trains, and every where brags and
bravadoes that are not tolerable. It is a pleasure, as I am told, to hear this
famous Author talk of himself; he thinks his Pen as much worth as the King of
Sweden's Sword, and no less fatal to States and Princes. He says it is he
that bestows glory or dishonor, makes men famous or infamous as he pleases,
and that he has means enough to be revenged of the Emperor or Pope, if the
Emperor or the Pope should offer him any wrong. Scaliger, Lipsius and Casaubon
were by his own saying, but his Forerunners, and all the light of the former
age, but the Aurora of his, and yet for all this, he has but a very little
head, and but very staring eyes, and but a very fumbling speech, and but a very
silly discourse, that you may know his judgment is not the praedominant part
of his soul. But the world talks otherwise of him, that he is a lost man, and
one that has forfeited his brains, not only swallowed up of a strong and vast
imagination, not only bending under the burden of an overcharged memory, but
apt to lose himself in the walks of Plato's Philosophy, for which yet he is
become an Apostate from Aristotle's Doctrine. I confess unto you now, that the
time has been I have made much reckoning of this man, and am still of those
ill husbands that give presents, but pay no debts It is certain, I discharge my
duty extremely ill; and Mons. Videll has just cause to think me the most
uncivil man that lives. But you know the secret of this matter, and that in my
incivility there is a kind of Religion, which I have not dared as yet to
violate. Unless I should sin against my faith given, I can neither enjoy the
good he has done me, nor give him the thanks I owe him; and this is the
extremity of my misery, that I have received a most precious gift, and yet can
neither be rich by it, nor thankful for it. Take some course for Gods sake,
that I may dispense with an each that is so contrary to honesty, and so
directly crosses the right of nations and all good manners. Entreat our friend
to give me my liberty again, which I have solemnly promised to employ wholly in
doing him service, and in accommodating that confusion which makes me commit
this disorder. Monsieur de Plassae has so powerfully confuted that which I
writ the other day to Madam D' Anguitour, that I am become persuaded my self,
and am no longer of my own opinion, but willingly confess, that if I should be
obstinate in defending my false maxims, I should do as ill as make a schism
amongst Ladies, and be the Author of a most pernicious doctrine. I have put
this Letter in my packet, that you may see I yielded not for nothing, and that
you may show it also to Monsieur -- who has desired me he might see it. The
Encomium of Monsieur de la Valette, which your brother desired of me, is in the
103 Book of the Histories of Monsieur de Thou. Change but the date only, and
you will agree with me, that it was certainly made for our Monsieur de
Valette, that is now. I send it you by this Post, and remain,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 4. December. 1632. RUpem brunam profectus, pulsatis muris, cum ab
oppugnatione tentatae cum damno suerum repulsus ^ssit, rurs^s redinteg^ata
verberatione, ubi vidit ab ea part con^^um frustra esse; jam ruinis ab
obsessis sarta; alio tormenta transfers; dumque in iis Collocandis laborat,
ictis majoris sclopeti, in capite sauciatus est; ex eoque vuln^re, p^st duas
horas decessit, m^redibili sui Regis Deside^^o relicto; cui strenuam admodum,
ac fidam operam semper navave^at. E^at vi summa fortitudine praeditus; in
periculis imperterritus; in adversis Constans in prosperis mode^atus,
liberalis, comis, magnae in explicandis negotiis solertiae, in imper^o ac
magistratu, qua^^ privatus, melior. Espernonius, quem ^lie hae^ede^^ rel^quit,
eum casum acerhissime tulit: quippe fratre charissimo, and firmissimo Fortunae
suae invidiosae munimento O^batus.



To Monsieur de Gues. LETTER L.
SIR, my most dear Father, you have obliged me exceedingly unto you, for
imparting unto me the good news that is come, and for communicating with me,
the joy you take in the happy success of the Kings Army. I do not think he
has a better subject in all his Kingdom, than your self; never servant was
more zealous for his Masters greatness; never Persian more religiously adored
Monarchy. You love your children, I know, infinitely, yet this is but your
second love; that of the State, and of the Public, goes far before it, and
I fear me, you would give us all for the poorest Frontier Town of Flanders, or
for any paltry Fort of Millan That which I read in the Post script of your
Letter, did s^ very well please me; the good opinion which Monsieur de -- ha^h
of me, is more a burden to me, than an honor: and I could wish, he would make
less reckoning of me, so he would let me be more at quiet. You have a strange
friend of him, to take me for his common place book, and to think that I am an
Index for finding out conceits and figures. In the matter you propounded to me
on his behalf, I can say no more than what I have said already; but if he
please to take the pains to Translate my French into Latin, he may easily do
in such sort, that he shall be taken for the Author, and I but for the
Translator* I have told you of the dignity of the Language, in which he means
to write, and what great advantage it has over ours; it is certain, that it
^levates and raises up the low thoughts of the Authors, and gives much more to
them, than it receives from them. Whereas ours contrariwise, has no beauty,
but as the Authors embellish it and set it out. It has no subsistence, but by
the matter, no force, but from the subjects that are handled. I have made
choice, of some, which I thought fittest for his purpose, if he find them for
his turn, he may make use of them, and better them much by putting them into
Cicero's style and phrase: and these are they. Good men ought to desire great
Dignities, as a necessary means to perform great achievements, which if they
perform them not, both God will call them to account for his graces, no better
employed, and the World will justly complain; it is left a prey to the wicked,
and that the desire of their own private quiet, makes them abandon all care of
the public. This is to tell you, my Lord, that you ought to reserve your
humility, for actions that pass between God and you; but that for other matters
you cannot have too much credit, nor too much greatness, seeing it is fit that
wisdom should be obeyed, and that there are some virtues, which cannot be acted
by those that are poor, etc. Though we be not so out of the world, but that we
hear news of it; yet it passes through so many places, that it cannot choose
but receive diverse impressions, and can never come to us in purity, seeing it
gathers mudde in coming but from the Louure. Yet I have come to know, and fame
has sounded in our desert, the great battles that have been fought for the
honor of France, and how you have vanquished the spirits of strangers, which
is a greater victory than to vanquish their forces. I have come to know, that
Italy has vented out all her subtilties, and employed them to deceive us, and
yet could not; and that these spirits, which thought to reign in all
assemblies, and to be masters of reason, have not been able to defend
themselves against you, but with spite and choler, nor to complain of any
thing, but that you persuaded them to that, which they came resolved never to
do, so as they which called us Barbarians, and got always as much by their
Treaties, as they lost by our Victories, have found at last, that there is
wisdom on this side the Alps, as well as beyond, and are driven to
acknowledge, that we had a man amongst us now, able to hinder them from
deceiving us as they had done. They wondered to see a Servant that could not
endure there should be a greater Master than his own, that felt the least evils
of his Country, as if they were his proper wounds, and thought it a hurt to
himself, if there were but an offer made to touch the Dignity of his Crown;
but when they saw that you applied remedies upon the sudden to all
inconveniences, which they thought you could never have avoided, that you not
only answered all objections they made, but prevented all they intended to
make, that you dived into their souls, and took hold of their intentions
there, and at the first conference, made answer to that which they reserved for
the second; then in truth their fleam turned into choler, and then you quite
routed all their humane Prudence, and all their politic Maxims, etc. I am not
able to dissemble the joy I take, to hear that your good services are
acknowledged, that when diverse counsels had been tried, yet yours, at last, was
still feign to be followed, and that in guiding the fortune of France, you are
no less President of all affairs of Europe. It is true, that of all external
contentments, I have none so sensible to me as this; but on the other side,
when I hear that your health is continually assaulted, or at least threatened
by some accident or other, that the rest, which the quietness of your
Conscience ought to afford you, keeps you not from having unquiet Nights, and
that in the midst of all your glory and good successes, yet you oftentimes are
as it were, weary of your life, then indeed, etc. And can it not be, that you
should come to hear the public acclamations, but in the unquietness of your
watchings? Nor of your praises, but in your pains? Must the Sense suffer, and
the Spirit rejoice? Must you be upon the rack, when you are in your triumphs?
Must you do two contrary works at once, and at the same time have need both of
moderation and of patience? If virtue could be miserable, and that the sect,
which accounts nothing evil but pain, nothing good but pleasure, were not
universally condemned. Certainly the divine Providence, would at this day be
complained upon by places of all this Kingdom, and all honest men, would in
your behalf find something amiss in the worlds government. B^t my Lord, you
know better than I, that it is the happiness of Beasts only, of which we must
believe the body; for, as for ours, which resides in our highest part, it is as
little sensible of disorders that are below her, as they which are in Heaven
are incapable of offenses by storms of the air, or by vapors of the earth.
And this being so, God forbid that I should judge of your condition by the
state of your health, and not think him perfectly happy whom I esteem. Do but
imagine with your self, that you have made a division of the infirmities of
humane nature, with other men, and then you shall find the advantage is on
your side, seeing there is in you but a small portion of pain for infinite
defects that are in others. Yet I cannot but think, that the term of your
patience is near expired, and that the time to come is preparing contentments
for you that are wholly pure, and will make you young again after the time, as
before the time you have made your self old. The King that has need of your
long life, makes no wishes in vain, and heaven hears not the prayers of the
enemies of our state. We know of no successor fit to undertake what you leave
unfinished; and if it be true that our Armies are but the arms of your head,
and that God has chosen your counsel for establishing the affairs of this
age; why should we fear a loss which has no right to come but to our
posterity? he will not in this only point leave imperfect the happiness he
has promised us; be loves men too well to deprive them of that good which you
are borne to do them. When Armies are defeated, there may new be levied, and a
second Fleet may be set forth when the first is lost; but if you, my Lord,
should false u^, etc. It shall be in your time, that people oppressed shall
come from the worles end to seek the protection of this Crown* (...) by your
means our Allies shall be well paid for their losses, that the Spaniards shall
be no conquerours, but the French shall be the f^e^rs of all the earth It shall
be in your time, that the holy seat shall have her opinions free, the
inspirations of the holy Ghost shall be no more oppugned by the cunning of our
adversaries, and that there shall be raised up courageous hearts, worthy of
ancient Italy, and able to defend the common cause Finally my Lord, I shall be
by your wisdom, that there shall be no more ty^anny in Christendom, nor
rebellion in this Kingdom: That the people shall leave in their superiors
hands both Liberty and Religion, and that ^^om this legal government, and from
this perf^ct obedience, there shall arise that happiness, which Politicians
seek for; and which is the end of all civil societies. My hope is that all
these things shall come to pass thorough your wise government, and that after
you have made sure our peace and our neighbors, you shall your self enjoy the
benefit of your good deeds with pleasure, and at your ease, and shall see the
state of things continu^ flou^ishing, whereof none but yours^lfe have been the
Author. I earnestly entreat you so to deal with Monsieu^ de -- that he may
rest contented with this, and dispense with me for any new meditation which
would require more leisure than I am like to have. This bearer will deliver you
the History of Queen Elizabeth, which may serve you for a recreation to the end
of the week, and then I shall come and ask your opinion, and desire you to
give me some light of that time, out of the great experience you have in many
things I desire of God with all my heart, that he will be pleased to afford you
yet some great matter to exercise your self in, and that this wise old age of
yours, which we so much admire, may long continue to be a strength and ornament
to your family. These are my earnest wishes, and withal, to make you by a
perfect acknowledgement of your favors a perfect proof that I am,

Sir, my dear Father, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 7 June 1634.
To Monsieur de Boisrobert. LETTER LI.
SIR, the Muses never favored man as they do you; you are the only man that
need neither retreite nor leisure for your meditations; In the troubles of the
world you possess your spirit in peace, and seeing the bruit of the Court
diverts not your attention, neither can the Sea and all its waves hinder your
compositions. It is no small advantage to find that solitude in ones self,
which others seek for in the Desert, and not to be bound to go out of the
world for fetching in of sound opinions and persuasive words. If the merit of
yours take place, we shall shortly see at Stage Plays, as many long Cassocks,
as short Robes, and the most austere Philosophers will have their hands and
eyes in the recreations of the people, and so Sir, of a mischief you shall
make a remedy; you shall set timorous spirits at liberty, and shall free us
from two terrible Monsters, scrupulousness, and vicious bashfulnesse. You make
me long to bear a part in this action, and in this sort to defend the Theater;
to take the field after you is not so much to fight as to pursue the victory,
and I think it no wrong to virtue to justify an innocent pleasure, and that
which is only worthy of her; this we owe to Jason, to Masinissa, to Brutus,
and other worthy men, who live at this day in the person of the man you so much
commend, and whom I admire as often as I hear. It is certain, that the grace
with which he pronounces virtue, gives them a degree of goodness, which the
Poets could not. They are more beholding to him that pronounces them, than to
him that made them; and this second Father (if I may so speak) purges by his
adoption all the vices of their birth; the tune of his voice accompanied with
the dignity of his gestures, gives a kind of nobleness to the vulgar and base
conceits. No soul is so strongly fortified against the objects of sense, which
he forces not; No judgment so wary and so well prepared, which is not caught
with the imposture of his words, in such sort, that if in this world there be
any happiness for verses, it is certainly in his mouth, and in his
pronouncing; by which, as evil things get the color of good, so good things
get the uttermost of their perfection. Let me know Sir, wether I hit right upon
your inclinations; and in the mean time I give you many thanks for your many
favors, particularly for the Letter of my Lord you took the pains to send me.
He writes indeed in the style of a Conqueror, and these words Accepi, legi,
probavi, savor much of these, Veni, vidi, vici of J: Caesar, and of these,
(...), of another Ceasar that was afterward. Though I should never receive
other mark of his love but this, yet were this a full recompense of all the
passion I ow to his service; yet I must tell you, I cannot forget the honor he
has done me, in procuring me a promise that I shall be paid of -- I have done
all possible I could to blot this thought out of my mind, but I confess unto
you, that my imaginative part is a little strong. I could never hitherto
satisfy my self herein, and what bad answer soever I receive from men, yet
still I rely upon this word of God, who commands me to hope well, and therefore
I wait still for the accomplishment of the Oracle. All our people are extremely
bound unto you for remembering it, and I am my self more than all the world
together,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 3 April, 1635.
FINIS.
LETTERS OF MONSIEUR DE BALZAC. THE FOURTH VOLVME, Newly corrected.

Printed in the year 1654.

To the READER.
THe name of Balzack is not confined within the Orb of one Kingdom: his pen
has made him known unto all that pretend to Eloquence and Politer Learning:
And had his language been more general, his worth had been more known. It is
then a duty we owe to virtue to unfold it, when it is contracted within too
narrow limits, and to unlock the Cabinet, and make it communicable, when it is
restrained from that freedom which is part of its essence and nature. Wherefore
some of our own, finding that our Authors Language was too narrow for the
merits of his works, have rendered some pieces of his in English. Nor did their
Travails fall short of their hopes, but success has crowned their endeavors.
By the encouragement of their auspicious flight abroad, I made Augury touching
the fortunes of this fresh piece, whtch I now expose to the common light,
without the countenance and patronage of any great name, but guarded only with
its own fate: It has a Genius, and carries the name of Balzac in every page,
that is enough.

Pierre Math. Hist. de Hen. 4. Live. 3.
For know (Reader) that he is Master of the pen in France, L' Aigle de l'
Eloquence Francoise, as one styles the great Chancellor Du Vair, a towering
Eagle, whose strength of wings bears him aloft above the tracts of common
flights. I may say of him, with some variation, what Pliny said of Cicero, that
of latter times, and for his own language, L. 7. not. Hist. c 30.
solus in toga triumphum meruit, linguaeque lauream, and if the Muses speak
French, they would use no other Dialect, than that of Mons: de Balzac.

If thou do not find the same thread run through all his Letters, think it a
piece of his Art, to vary the Idea and character of his speech, according to
the quality of his subject. Wherefore we find him sometimes lofty and
magnificent, and sometimes grave and moderate: now he is calm and smooth, and
anon he thunders and lightens: here his words fall like hail, Hom. (...).
and there (...), like still and gentle snow, or the silent feet of time. And
though they be but (...), strictures, and excursions of his pen, yet upon due
examination, thou shall find they be decoctions of purest Rhetoric; and take
away Monsieur, and vostre tres humble, they be so many quaint orations, and
discourses politic and moral.

But never did any beauty gain all sufferages, nor any wit a general applause.
Mart l. 4. Epig. 32.
Our Author in his Hermitage, like that Be, intombed in Amber, Dum latuit
luxit: he shined through the vail of obscurity, where in he involved himself:
but some Owleys could not brook the splendour of his light, though at such a
distance and declination; and he had more enemies in this solitude to molest
him, then the Gout and Stone. It was ever the fate of eminent persons to have
Antagonists, and envy, like the Athenian Ostracisme, and persecutes the best. A
testy Friar, under the name of Philarchus, comes out of his Cloister, and
raises the Hue and Cry after him, as an errand Thief, and avoucheth that our
Monsieur here, is but a Mountebank, and a Plagiary, that struts in borrowed
plumes, and makes a great show of the frippery and brokage of other Authors:
pudet haec opprobria, etc. But Balzac found a learned Apologist, to refute
these imputations; so that this single encounter grew up into a faction, and
the Penmen came so fast into the field, that the Philarkes, and Antiphilarks
divided all France.

There happened some disgusts between him and Father Garesse a Jesuit and a
man of able parts: But the French King himself did so far tender the studious
Repose of Mons. de Balzac, (that by these altercations he might not be
discouraged or diverted from greater designs.) He interposed his Authority to
make a Reconciliation, and because it makes for the honor of the parties
litig^nt, I have prefixed here the Kings Act, and their mutual letters, as I
find them at the beginning of Garasse his Sum Theologique.

And now (judicious Reader) Balzac stands at thy Tribunal, expecting thy doom:
He hopes to find more Candor, and better dealings in England, the Region of
peace, as he calls it, than among his own: presuming upon the goodness of his
cause, and thy justice, I have adventured something upon thy censure. If thou
contractest thy brow, it is no single fate, thou condemnest at once a multitude
of Dependents, and Admirers of his virtues, and among them, in an humble
distance

F. B.

AN ADVERTISEMENT OF Monsieur the KING.
Understanding of the bad intelligence, which by the unhappiness of the times
has gtown between Monsieur de Balzac, and the Author of this Book, we could
not but partake of the discontents of sundry honorable personages; and judging
it very reasonable, that to men that continually do good services to the
Commonwealth, and from whom it should expect better, yet hereafte should be
divided in wills and affections. We have endeavored to dispel those Clouds by
the evidence of truth; the business was not very difficult for us, being we
were to deal on the one side with a religious man, who by the rule of his
Profession, takes a glory in despoyling himself of all interests, and to desire
the love of all the world; on the other side, with a man of a fr^nk and noble
courage, whose discretion guided him to put a difference between the faults of
men, and the unhappiness of the age.

So that we thought fit, to tie again the knot of friendship, which (by
accident) had been untied. It is commonly an easier task to reconcile old
Friends, than to make new ones. Having then happily effected that business, we
thought that good men, who are ever well affected to the sweetness of peace,
would gladly receive some authentic testimonies of their good intelligence,
and for this purpose, we have got interchangeable letters under their own
hands, that confirm the sincerity of their hearts, for to present them to the
public, which cannot be distastful to any, but to those that are pleased with
nothing but disorders and contentions.

Johanni Ludovico Balzaco. V. C. S. P.
QVod ad te jam scribo, (V. C.) mirari desines, si me, ut Religiosum, and tui
amantem esse memineris: and animam, puto, and manum hanc facile agnoveris, sin
minus, saltem ignoveris, quod utrunque gestum est. Non nihil inter nos longi
frigoris fuit, seculi potius vitio, quam vestro. Septennium est, fateor ex quo
mutua inter nos Epistolarum missio interrupta cessavit; ex hoc silentio torpor,
ex torpore glacies exorta: vel patere suis, ut ad te verbis scribat
sapientissimus Hebraeorum Doctor, dicatque Christallus gelavit ab aqua: sed
nosti quid rei est Christallus, cui precium facit ipsa fragilitas? vel
frangatur, vel indomita glacies benigno tepore solvatur: favent omnia, and
tempus, and amicorum vota communium, and imprimis desiderium meum. Nolo
retegere quod odiosum est, rixarum inter nos argumenta and fomites; fatalia
ista sunt, and dissolvendis amicitiis nata: In litibus nullus (ut nosti) finis
est: dum

-- Liticulas lis seminat unica plures. Versiculos ad te extemperaneos and
rudes mitto, sed scienti loquor and occupationes meas, and Epistolarem in versu
formam; nihil enim ab Heroico retinet preter pedes, quos habet formica etiam
cum homine communes, sed quo plures eo pejores. Tibi uni prope datum est
Heroicas gravesque literas condere; scripsit Ovidius Heroidas, sed Balzacus
Heroicas. Pluribus abstineo, ne quod judicio dico, adulationi imputet, qui non
norit me hujns criminis immunem, imo and hostem. Caetera coram amantius and
fusius, scis enim a Sapiente dictum: mitte sapientem and nihil ei dicas. Regium
Proxenetam nacti sumus, hoc nomine totum dixi.

Vale and me ama.

50 Martii. M.DCXXV. ex domo Probat. S. Ge^mani.
DIc mihi, quid temere priscum turbavit a^^orem,
Qui me cord tuo scriptum (Balzace) ferebat
Atq, unum ad nomen veteris gandebat amici,
Invenisse ratus quo se jactaret, Orestem?
Cet^e ego qui cupipe rerum cognoscere causas
Scrutarique vices librato examine novi,
Hoc demum pelagus non vestigabile contis
Experior, Sophiaeque meo se curta supellex
Objicit ingenio misera, and deludit amantem;
Nam neque scintillam video fulgere, neque umbram
Quae meri^o nostri radios fuscarit amoris,
E levet affl^ctam sapitus sententia mentem
Quam fluxisse reor magni de font Platonis.
Ille inter Superos solum accensebat Amorem
Jnfantem vetulum, causas qui rideat omnes
Vt pote qui causas etiam praecesserat aevo,
Jllarumque putet rigide se jure solutum;
Et puto, si quisqu^m recte describat Amorem
Rem male non capiet, si dicat Anaition esse.
Non quod ego gravibus causis Balzace carerem
Cum Genio cogente meo te primus amavi,
Nam primum ut tenerae gemmas aetatis biantes
Et clausum ingenij calicem primoribus annis
Caep^sti referare, mihi nec cornea vena
Marmoreo sub cord fuit, nec amare negavi
Scis etenim, haud alium testem volo temporis acti,
Vt tecum crevere anni, spes crevit and ipsa,
Et cum maturos licuit mihi carpire fructus
Arboris optatae ramis, quaem rore sciebam
Este saginatam bibulo, coelique saliva,
Jure meo accessi propius, dectraque voraci
Pendulus attraxiramum: sed inania veta
Delusi agricolae durus soedavit Hydaspes,
Qui molles aditus speranti and mustea pema
Excussit rigidasque nuces lapidosaque corna.
Hic ego me fateor justum sentire dolerem.
Et nemit ab verum memini incusaere Platonem,
Primus amicitiam qui dixit Anaition esse.
Namque edii immeritum quod tu cessaris amare
Te causas habuisse nego, nisi pestis amorum
Fama, tibi uanat formaverie invida causas
Inconsulta parens edii, quod si vice versa
Forte reclamavi trepidans, contraque ligonem
Feruidus opposui volsellem, and me quique culpae
Propterea vis esse reum, Balzace, fatentem
Accipe, nec tantillum obstet, ne simus amici.
Saepius and magnae nascuntur amantibus irae,
Quas voco perpetuum sinceri gluten a moris,
Quin and roribibae nativo foedere conchae
Post validum se fulmen amant ardentius, and quo
Tempestas animosa magis turbaverit aequor,
Purior in testas coelo delabitur imber.
Fac igitur solido generosum pectus amori
Vt pateat, nomenque haud dedigenerit amici,
Quod devota meo tibi mittit Epistola jussu,
Hanc certe calamo scripsi, queus vulsit ab ala
Ipse sibi sincerus Amor, nigrumque liquorem
Esse licet videas tamen est and sanguen Amoris,
Quod tua suspicio nigrum facit, and liber ipse
Non liber est, sed prima ^ti membranula cordis,
Quam volui ipse mihi propria deglubere dextra.
Haud alias habuisse v^lim, Balzace, tabellas
Scriptorem-ve alium, non si vel Toxaris ipse,
Primus apud veteres, formam qui scripsit amandi
Pingat Amicitiam, legemque reponat in axes:
Toxaris occubuit, rigidae periere columnae,
Scruptus ipse jacet, quem sculpfit Barbarus axe^^
Et legem et sculptas absorbuit unda tabellas:
At nos Toxaridae very, nativaque proles
Vraniae, quamvis morienti posthuma matri,
Cordibus innexis verum sculpemus amorem
Qui nullis mergatur aquis, licet ipse frementem
Invidiam vom^t Oceanus, vel totus Hydaspes
Influat in medios latices, aut Doris amaram
Suspicione tumens, nos inter misceat undam.
Quin etiam si nostra foret naturae rebellis
Vnica prae reliquis ratio te coget amari
Antiquumque gelu dulci l^ntore resolvet.
Nempe quod impietas tibi displicet, Aulica pestij
Et juvinum famosa lues: nam si omina desint
Argumenta mihi, queis demum heroica monstrem
Ingenia agnovisse Deum, tum tu mihi solus
Testis eris Balzace, interque examplae fereris,
Tu tibi sis exemplo ipse, and mortalia saeclae
Despice securus; nemque ad divina vocaris
Quo Genius te cunque vocat: Tibi subditur omnis
Invidia, and resupina facis mortalibus era
Nostrumque imprimis video gaudere Malherbam.
Et quod surgenti Cicero tribuisse Maroni
Dicitur inclamans, Magnae spes altera Romae:
Hoc just Maro jam noster maturior aevi
Surgenti reddit Ciceroni: hoc ipsae videbit
Aemula posteritas, and cernes te quoque faemae
Participem: est etiam tibi Corta and Laelius ipse.
Ingenii cos blanda tui, sunt altera coelo
Lumina, nec cunctos sol obtegit invidus ignes.
Nos igitur tecum spatiis communibus ire
Aut ignes inter minimos stellasque cadentes
Ad famam patiare, licet non passibus aequis.
A Letter of Monsieur de Balzac to the Reverend Father Garassius of the Society
of Jesus.
Father,
YOu have lighted on that side, upon which I confess my weakest strength does
lie, and your courtesies have left nothing for your valor to perform that might
force me to yield. Since you employ all your Muses to beg my friendship, and
that you have already requited it with your own, I can no longer detain it then
as another man's goods. But if this were not so, my injuries are not so dear
unto me, but that I do usually forgive them upon less reason then they were
given, and my passions do never grow so headstrong but they remain still in
the power of Religion and Philosophy. Hitherto I was able to maintain a good
cause, but should I be obstinate and oppose that also that you desire, I should
do wrong to right it self if it were on my side, and from simple enmity which
has been tolerated in some Republics, I should proceed to tyranny which is
odious to all the world. Since we our selves are mortal, there is no reason our
passions should be immortal, and that men should glut themselves with revenge,
whereof God has prohibited as well the use as the excess. This is a thing
that he reserves wholly for himself, and because he alone knows how to use
this part of justice, he would not commit it to the hands of mortals, no more
then he would thunder and tempests. Let us therefore stop at our first
quarrelling, for it is already too much to have begun. Let us not give the name
of courage to hardness of heart, and if you have prevented me in the overture
of peace, which we negotiate, let it not repent you that you have robbed me
thereby of all the honor that was here to be acquired. At other times
magnanimity and humility might be two contrary things; but since moral
principles have been changed into Evangelical Maxims, and that the vices of
Pagans are become the virtues of Christians, there is a sort of cowardice that
a man of valor ought to show: and true glory does not belong to them that have
triumphed over Innocents, but to the Martyrs that they have made, and to those
men that they have oppressed. But if we must descend from general
considerations to that which is between you and me in particular; as there
could be no color that a religious man would disturb the tranquillity of his
thoughts, and quit his conversation with God and Angels, for to intermeddle
with sinful Creatures, and partake in our disorders: so there were less reason
yet, that I should go and seek for an enemy out of the world, whereas they are
within it so many Huguenots to exercise my hate upon, and so many Rebels to
combat with. Moreover Father, what opinion soever you had of it,
notwithstanding any thing that I have spoken in the beginning of my letter, yet
it was never my purpose to wage war with you in good earnest, I was not so
far moved as I made show of, and all my anger was but artificial, when my words
did at any time seem injurious; so that I do willingly consent that what was
written to Hydaspes, shall pass for an exercise of wit, not for an argument of
my belief, and that men should believe that I intended only to show that my
strength could vanish truth, when I did not fight for her. That Science that
durst undertake to persuade sick men that a quartane Ague is better then
health; Rhetoric, I say, that could frame a Panegyric for B^siris, an
Apology for Nero, and put all Rome into a doubt, whether justice were better
omitted then executed, might well yet at this day be practiced upon subjects
that swerve from common Tenants, and by pleasing fictions raise men's wonder,
though not win belief: This makes phantasmes, only to unmake them again, it
has varnishes and disguises to alter the purity of any thing in the world, it
can shift sides without imputation of fickleness, and accuse innocence without
guilt of calumny. And certainly Painters and Stage Players are not guilty of
those murders that we behold in their Tables and on their Theaters, but here,
he that is most cruel is reputed most just. Those that make Glasses which
present one object for another are not accused of Imposture, and Error is
sometimes comelier then the truth. In a word, the life of the greatest Sages is
not evermore serious; all their talk is not preaching, and whatsoever they
write is not their last Testament, or a confession of their faith. What shall I
say more? Think you that I am so delicate as to condemn all the tastes of the
numerous multitude which throng to hear you every morning? Do you imagine that
the people and I can never concur in the same opinion, and that I mean to
oppose the general verdict of good men, the approbation of Doctors, and the
authority of Superiors? No good Father, I do not allow that swinge and liberty
to my understanding: assure your self, that I esteem you in that degree as I
ought, I applaud your zeal and learning, and were it truer now then ever that
to compose great Volumes is to commit great sins, yet notwithstanding, if you
oblige me to judge of yours, according to the portion which you did send me, I
speak boldly, that it is most excellent in its kind, and Mons: Malherbe and I
will not deny you a place in the Class of Fathers of the latter age. But our
testimonies and Encomiums will not be the only fruit of your labors. I desire
with all my heart, that the conversion of Pagans and Infidels may be the
approbation of it, and I think that all the glory of this world should be
accounted but air and emptiness, by them that aim at nothing but the
advancement of Gods glory. Wherefore I need not enlarge my self any farther
upon this subject, nor wrong sacred things by profane commendations, my
intention is only to testify to you, that I claim not so small a part in the
interests of the Church, as not to be most heartily thankful to those that do
her service, and that I am right glad, that besides the reasons that prompt me
to esteem your friendship, one so powerful as that of Religion does yet farther
oblige me thereunto.

TO MY LORD THE CHANCELLOR.
MY LORD,
THat Scorn and contempt that you were pleased lately to throw upon a Libel,
framed against Mons. de Balzac, and your denial then to license it for the
Press, are a sufficient testimony how much you do value the person of that
man. You did conceive, that being, as you are, the supreme Dispenser of
Justice, you had (in a sort) violated that Justice, in permitting such hard
censures to pass upon that man, whom you with so much reason approved, and
whom others cannot with any reason reprehend. So that if there be any yet to be
found, that cannot fully persuade themselves to approve of this man by your
example, their obstinacy is sufficiently confuted by your Authority. And if
this cannot repress their sinister intents, yet notwithstanding, it prevents
the effects of them, and hinders that he be not persecuted in print. This high
favor which flows from that esteem, which you did always bear to his
writings, did invite me to collect with all diligence, these rare productions
of his spirit, for the contentation of yours. And as it was not without his
consent, that one of his friends has deposited this treasure in my hands: so I
do verily believe, that this office of presenting them to you, is also very
comformable to his inclinations. Your worth is so evidently known, that none
should imagine I could choose a Sanctuary more noble or more propitieus; and
the general current of men's affections to do you service, is so strong and
high, that I could not shun this Duty. As for me, I confess I am exceedingly
pleased with this occasion that presents it self to me, for to make it appear
to your Honor, how apprehensive I am of the late favors which your Bounty
has conferred upon me. Certainly, my Lord, my obligations unto you must be
infinitely great, since when I have presented you with all that the Eloquence
of this age has most precious, yet notwithstanding I must remain your debtor,
while I draw breath. You shall meet here with Doctrines, which the austerest
Philosophy would not disdain to own and profess; Among these severe
speculations, you shall see some flashes of wit break forth, which will serve
to entertain you with much delight; I speak of the French Epistles, for as for
his Latin, I refer them to the judgment of those that do better understand
the beauty and delicacy of that language. I am content to believe that Cicero
never entertained his friends with better grace and contentment; nay, that the
very close and compacted style, and the strong and vigorous expressions which
B^utus found wanting in the writings of that great Orator, are here to be
found; But I fear I should detain you too long, from the pleasure of these
novel lectures, if in commending ^a^e Epistles, I should arrest you any longer,
in reading this poor one of mine. Indeed (my Lord) for to speak nothing that
were unworthy of you; it were requisite that Mons. de Balzac would lend me some
of the graces of his style: or, as he will be ravished with joy, that I have
made choice of you to be the Patron of his writings, he would come himself to
make the Dedication; It suffices me, if my design and undertaking for to
perform something that might be acceptable to your Greatness, do not give you
any distaste, and that you believe, that I am sincerely

My Lord, Your most humble and most obliged servant, JOHN CAMUSAT.

TO MY LORD THE CHANCELLOR.
MY LORD,
I Have understood of your denial, for the publishing of a Libel, lately framed
against me. And though (perhaps) the harm that I should have received thereby,
would have been but small, yet my obligation unto you, never cease to be
great; and this argues a special care in you of my tranquillity, not to suffer
that any, the least noise should disquiet it. I know not (my Lord) if this be
not to handle with too much niceness and tenderness, a man that makes
profession of Philosophy; it were enough that public Authority should shelter
me from the tempest, without exempting me from the wind, and dust, and that it
would guard my retrait from savage beasts, without frighting away the flies
also, and such importunate Insects. But (my Lord) the goodness which you
reserve for me, extends farther then to ordinary justice. You take not only
care for my repose amidst the hurry and tumult of Europe, but you would have
the world also show a respect unto my retiredness, and that being sequestered
from men, I should be also placed beyond the level and teach of Detraction, yet
this fiend did pursue Saint Hierome even unto the gates of Bethlehem, and to
the foot of our Saviourss cradle; there she found him (as he relates himself)
although he had thought to hide himself. If this insolent thing had no regard
of an admirable sanctity, and a place guarded with Angels, me thinks a vulgar
innocence, retired within an ill fortified village, must not expect any
favorable treaty. But to pass from common conditions to the learned Tribe;
If in all ages, there arose seditious spirits, that rebelled against the
Chieftains of Arts, and discipline, and if in the memory of our Fathers, it was
spoken openly at Paris, that Aristotle was a simple Sophister, J think they
deal courteously with me in this Country, if they be contented to call me a
simple write That great blasphemer of the name of Aristotle (my Lord) was D.
Ramus, who afterward, though he was a Catholic, was taken for a Huguenot, at
the massacre: And indeed, some did believe that God permitted this to come to
pass by a just judgment; and that the Tutelar Angel of good Letters, took the
pretext of Religion, for to revenge the injuries that were done to Reason.
There is one this day alive in Germany, a petty Tyrant in Grammar, an enemy
of common and general verities, and an accuser of Cicero; who (not long since)
has put forth some observations, where he prefers a bill against his own
Judge, and questions the precedencie ever allowed unto that Prince of Latin
Antiquity. So that (my Lord) the universal consent of all the world,
strengthened by a prescription of 18. centuries of years, is not a sufficient
title for to warrant the reputation of that Roman, against the prevaricating
quirks of this Barbarian. Indeed, this is a business of no good example, but
yet since it is so, and that it does little avail Virtue, to be consecrated by
time, and to be crowned by the people, for to make it inviolable against the
practices of some private Humors. There is no reason that I should complain
before so many Worthies, that have been so ill entreated themselves, and that I
should be had in any consideration, where Aristotle and Cicero are not in
safety; an ordinary man should not make moan, for suffering the same destiny,
which extraordinary Personages have undergone; and I cannot with modesty,
desire or expect from you that you should reform the world for the love of me;
nay, I know (my Lord) that this little disorder, is of some good use in a
Commonwealth; and it were to be wished, that malice would busy it self thus,
about things of small importance, that it might not think of business of
higher consequence. Those that have hitherto bestowed their pains, in depraving
the sense of my words, and in falsifying my works, had (perhaps) ere this time,
forged men's Testaments, and minted false coins; And he that now desires from
you a privilege, would have stood in need of a pardon, it may be, if it had
not been for me. It is better by far, that injustice should exercise it self
upon my books, then that it should vex and implead against all that is good and
sacred in a civil society; that unjust men should rather toss and transpose
words, invert and pervert periods of speeches, then remove the bounds of lands,
or demolish their Neighbors houses; To say the truth, this is the most
innocent way that vice can employ it self in, and I believe I have not a little
deserved from the Commonwealth, for keeping at work these ten years, such an
infinite number of idle companions, who (certainly) would have been dangerous
Commonwealths men, if they had not chosen rather to have been ridiculous
Censors. It is well, that the heat of their brains, is exhaled out this way,
and that their intemperance takes this course, and that to prevent their fury,
men give some scope and liberty to their folly. Permit them therefore this
exercise (my Lord) they cannot choose but make use of their time, which they
will employ far worse, if you do not permit them to employ it thus-Permit
giddy Youth to spend their heat and fury upon a senseless subject, and a dead
Letter, which is not capable either of joy or sorrow. As long as these
Pen-fincers only beg the Seal of your Authority, be no niggard of the Prince
his grace and favor, and abate something of your wonted severity and rigor.
If it were a new and unusual thing, it may be, I should be contented to have
the first Libel, which branded me with injuries be suppressed, but since there
is now a pretty Library of them, I am in a manner well pleased it should swell
and increase; and I take a delight to build me a monument with those stones,
which envy has hurled at me, without doing me harm. I account it no disgrace
to be censured by some men, because I account it no credit to be favored by
them: I intend not to canvasse for voices, nor labor a mysterious secret,
whereby I may gain the general applause of the world. I have obtained what I
desired, (my Lord) if I have obtained your approbation, as being derived from
an unerring principle, and from an Intelligence most perfectly illuminated. God
has bestowed on you, a sovereign judgment, before the King had committed to
your hands, his sovereign Justice. And you were most powerful in Reason, before
you were so in Authority. I need not have recourse to this, knowing that the
other is no way against me, and I esteem it more glory to me, to have pleased
you, then I would think it satisfaction to have my enemies proscribed by you.
Your speeches of me upon every occasion so full of respect, your own
pour^raiture that you bestowed upon me a year ago, for a pledge of your
Affection, your imparting to me the riches of your writings, I mean those
writings, that were animated with the spirit of the State, and were full of the
greatness of your Masterie, which seemed to me so far to transcend the
strength and vigor of this age, and so nearly resembling the Roman Majesty. In
a word (my Lord) each moment of that happy afternoon, which I had the honor to
pass away with in your closet, are privileges, which I do value above that
which you denied a Fantasme or the successor of Philarchus. I dare not rehearse
my other obligations, by which I stand bound unto you, you have herein enjoined
me silence, and believe that your favors would lose something of their purity,
if my thanks should still attend them. Nevertheless you must not stifle in me
the intentions of an honest man, or smother the conceptions of grateful
thoughts, you have debarred me from divulging my acknowledgements, but you
shall not debar me from acquitting that secret part of duty, and from being,
(at least in my soul) and that while I live

My Lord, Your most humble, most obliged, and most thankful servant, BALZAC.
From Balzac the 1 of July 1637.
A COLLECTION OF SOME MODERN EPISTLES OF MONSIEUR DE BALZAC.
To Monsieur CONRART. LETTER I.
SIR,
BEing arrived home but this morning, I could not before the evening frame an
answer to your Letter which you honored me with, and was delivered me at my
arival; it is so full of baits to feed both the eyes and the understanding,
that it were impossible I could refrain from reading it more than once. It is
so judicious, and withal so passionate, that I cannot think of it without
congratulating with my Country that we have seen Philosophers, even in our own
language, and those Philosophers such Profess goodness as well as wisdom;
the time, you see is now past for to satisfy your desire; but though the King
by the activity of his courage could not render those remedies unuseful, which
you expect from my idle meditations; yet I mean not to act the bold Empyrick or
Mountebank in your presence. It would argue too much impudence to send any
drugs and receipts from a country village to Paris, and to undertake the cure
of afflicted minds in a country of good Books and great Doctors. Nay, I have
seen, Sir, in your own house, a Megazin of rare instructions and examples, both
printed and in handwriting. And Justus Lipsius, (had he been your Neighbor)
might have made a purchase of a Constantia of a stronger and better temper,
then her that he has bestowed among us. Since then the whole mass and mine is
in your own power, I cannot persuade my self that you could have desired those
few Grains that I could furnish you with, and that being so rich your self, you
were resolved to exhaust my poor stock too. Taking view from hence at so far
distance of the estate and affairs of our Frontiers, I cannot distinctly and
clearly bestow my judgment on them. I am content to carry about me the
thoughts of an honest man, and to remove from my mind the disgusts of ill
success with good hopes. I know Sir, that the fairest kingdoms have suffered
the vicissitudes of good and evil; and that the brightest fortune has some
spots and shadows; and knowing this, I cannot think strange of any disasters
that may happen, or be surprised with the news of a revolt, or be any thing
amazed with losses more then with gains. Flanders I confess is advanced pretty
far into Piccardy, and would have given the like alarm to France, as France
had given it the year before. But it may be they that plunder it freely to day
in the field, will be to morrow blockt up in a siege: your good Brothers I know
will revenge the quarrel, and they that pillage the Cities of others, will be
glad to get them home to save their own habitations against their Ancient
subject. We must then confess that Antiquity has wisely termed God of War
Communem Martem, that Homer never gave it a fitter Epithet then that. It it
certain that it never favors the same cause long. This is a Fugitive in all
Armies, and a starter from all parties, sometimes a Guelpht, and sometimes a
Gibellin, sometimes wearing the white scarf, and sometimes the red. This is too
much Sir, concerning Public Affairs. Do me the favor as to send to M. du
Moulin the answer that I have made him, the latter words thereof will call to
your mind those three verses of our Jerusalem. Torq. Tasso la Gierusal.
Liberata. Amando in te cio, and.c.
By loving that in thee, which others fear does move,
And envious hate, be seems thy virtues to approve:
And willingly with thee could make a league of love.
I beg of you the good favors of that grand adversary of the Romanists, but
yours above all, sine I am with all my soul

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 30. October. 1636.
To Monsieur du MOULIN. LET. II.
SIR, Courtesy never denies respect to any man, and thinks no man's Presents
mean but her own. This was it (no doubt) that made You speak of me in such an
high strain, and set so great a price upon my Book, which (indeed) is but the
worst part of your Library. I see you will not alter your course, or forget
your ancient civility, for the which I am infinitely obliged unto you. And if
some men would needs persuade me that at other times you handle me something
rudely, yet I cannot believe you do it with an hostile hand; on the contrary, I
suppose that in your familiar Letters you give a a true copy and character of
your self, but in actions of ceremony, men require another countenance, and
more studied gravity; otherwise, Sir, my nature can bear with my friends, and I
am not of so delicate a sense as to complain of petty wrongs which I
suffer-Besides, that I do not at all meddle with that Science of division
which ^eaches to rent our Saviors Coat into a thousand pieces, and to implead
and cavil against every word of his Testament. This commonly does rather
exasperate men's spirits, then compose affairs, and multiply doubts, in stead of
increasing charity. If I were put to my choice, I would take a little less of
that which puffs up, and a little more of that which edifieth. Truth is not
the purchase of hot blood, or of incensed choler, or a disturbed imagination.
The Labyrinthes of Logic are not the easiest way to heaven, and often times God
hides himself from them that search him with over much curiosity. You will
avouch (I am sure) all that I say, and this too, Sir, that the best quarrels
prove naught, and of bad consequence, and that the contentions of Doctors prove
the murders of their Brethrens souls, if they tend not to the peace of the
Church; for my part, I can with other vulgar Christians, but wish for it; but
you can with the Worthies of Christian Religion, contribute much toward it,
and whenever you shall preach and teach this, I shall ascribe unto you one of
the principal parts of that holy work. But while we expect that this peace be
advanced through the grace of God, and that we draw nearer every day one to
another, nothing hinders but that we may maintain innocent commerce, and
traffic in things lawful. There is no law rightly interpreted that is
repugnant to that of Humanity, does not accord with the law of Nations. If our
opinions differ, it is not necessary that our affections should disagree; the
head and the heart have their several motions, and actions distinct; and moral
virtue can reconcile and unite what the intellectual might separate. Love me
therefore still if you please, since you may do it lawfully, and I believe
also, that I may be without scruple, while I live

Sir Your, etc.
Balzac. March 30. 1636.
To Monsieur L' Huillier Councellor to the King, and Ordinary Mr. of his
Accounts. LET. III.
SIR,
YOu can make men happy, and procure them Sun shine days, where, and when you
please. Let us speak no more of misfortunes: there is nothing here within but
prosperity, since the Ordinary has arrived: and I must recall a language which
I have forgotten, since you do restore a passion to me which I had lost. I
thought there was no disposition to any joy left in me, yet notwithstanding
from a little spark raked up in my bosom, you have kindled such an excess, that
I never felt the like; such inebriations of the spirit, and sober
transportments Philosophy has observed in extraordinary successes. There is
no way Sir to suppress or keep this joy concealed, and if it be lawful for me
to speak it, my heart is so full and high that it mounts up to my face. I am
like to lose by it all the gravity and demurenes, which I have these many
years contracted by my melancho^ly life. And since there is no apparent cause
that might stir such a passion in such a languishing spirit as mine, men may
imagine that I paid some remainders, and that I have received an acquittance
patent, but that I call it your letter. They still deceive themselves, and take
me for another man than I am; for my interests touch me not so sensibly as my
passions do, and Fortune is not so rich as to present me with any thing that
might countervaile the least pledges of your Amity. The world and I do not
agree in the rate of things that are bestowed and received. It does estimate
them by an Arithmetical, and I by a Moral proportion, according to which, Sir,
all your words to me are weighty and precious, because all true; and because
Truth cannot be sufficiently estimated in a time where Oracles do fain, and
when we have reason to mistrust, even Faith it self, when the great Cato should
not be taken without caution and security. I do infinitely cherish those
speeches of yours, so full of verity, and preserve them as the titles of a
possession, which I passionately desired before I went to Paris, and which I
account for the greatest business that I did during my abode there. In lieu of
these, I will forgive Paris for all the unquiet nights, and other mischiefs I
suffered there, I complain no more of its impure air, or the jangling of Bells,
or of the justling and dirt of the streets. And though I could not carry away
thence but the bare Idea of your entertainment, yet besides that you defrayed
the charges of my journey in it, I can live here, (yet a while) upon your
charges, and feed my thoughts a long time with what I have received from your
mouth. Yet I know not whether a provident managing of remnants, may make them
last always, or whether old Ideas, do not at the last fade and vanish out of
the memory, or whether an expired felicity may denominate a man still happy.
What ever joy your letter sprang in me, yet (being a mark of your absence) it
does but advertise me, that I am six-score leagues distant from the Author of
my welfare, and that therefore I can receive but imaginary painted
satisfaction, and enjoy but foreign pleasures. You cannot represent unto me the
happy hours that I have spent in the closet of Messieus de Puy, and the fine
things that I have heard there, without tacitelie upbraiding me with the
pensive hours of my solitude, and the gibbrish of my Neighbor-hood. In truth
Sir, if you know it not, I must tell you, that Balzac is the frontier of
Barbary. But one days journey from hence, (Monsieur des Cords can tell you)
the honest Swains do not eat bread, or speak French but upon Sundaies; The most
understanding men there, believe that Prestor-John says Mass; and that the
snow in the Country of the Moors is black, the most gentle and affable find
in an innocent word, the tenth part of a lie; and are offended with the very
aspect and silence of a man that passes by. Are not these the right Antipodes
to the lodgings of Monsieur de Thou, and especially of the Gallerie, which is
not only full of the noblest spoils of Antiquity, and of Greek and Roman
Treasures, but which is (otherwise) inhabited by all the Graces of the present
Age, and all the sociable and civil virtues. Yet notwithstanding these, it
might deserve the curiosity of the remotest Nations of the Earth, and invite
the inhabitants of Cadiz and those beyond them, for to see there the great
President of Councels and humane actions, and the grand Doctor of Kings and
Commonwealths. But although this famous and learned Head appears not there,
but by the benefit of paints, yet his memory still keeps its place, and
presides in all the Assemblies that happen there. Me thinks, that of Master of
the house, He is become the Genius of the place, and inspires all those that
speak there, that so they might not speak any thing unworthy of his presence.
Indeed this is the cause of my happiness here, that my poor conceptions give
you some content, as you would make me believe; and that my adventures in
print, have the allowance and approbation of those excellent Brothers, my dear
and loving Friends. Now, Sir, that I begin to grow sober again, and to recover
my self from that ecstasy, which you have cast me into; take good heed, that
you make no doubt of the seriousness of my speeches: assure them, therefore,
if you please, that the favors that I have receiv^d from them, are not let
fall into a barren and ungrateful souls; and that it is impossible to honor
them more perfectly then I do. You shall do me the favor also as to believe,
that you never loved a man that could set an higher rate upon your amity, or
would be more then I am

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. Nov. 23. 1636.
To Monsieur the Abbot of Rois-Robert. LET. IV.
SIR, since my departure from Paris, I have received two Letters of yours, that
is to say, two singular Emblemes, or tokens of your goodness: for it is
certain, if you be not exposed to the danger of war, you are (at least wise)
obnoxious to the cumbrances and molestations of it: and in this plight to have
found the leisure to remember me, and to send from the farthest skirts of
Piccardy, but a thought as far as Guy^n, is a thing that could not be
expected, but from a friend that is extremely solicitous of those things that
he loves. According to your order, I communicated the news unto my Father, who
does profess himself much obliged unto you for it. We do daily groan for that
of peace, and if you send us intelligence of this before Easter, I will answer
you with a public thanksgiving, and with the benedictions of all our
Arrierban. That Virgin which your Authors call Astrea, was at other times,
courted and adored by them (only) of the long gown: now even Gladiators and
Pirates think her handsome and comely. I do not see any man of the sword, but
does at some time of the day mislike and beshrew his own trade. I do not know
whether this be either the cowardice of the age, or the impatience of the
Naetion, or the fear of poverty and famine presented to their imagination; or
(to speak more favorably of the present occasions) a Christian tenderness and
common sense of humanity; so vehemently does all the world desire peace, that I
think Heaven cannot send a better Present to the Earth. I think that -- should
be employed upon such a pious occasion, and chosen one of the Agents for
Coloigne. If he would bring us that excellent Donative of Heaven, he deserved
to enter the Academy in triumph, and that Monsieur the President should make
the speech himself: For my part, I should receive him after such a Negotiation
with more respect, then if he came from commanding an Army; And to tell you the
truth, the pacifick Angels do please me far better then the destroying
Angels. Think it not strange, Sir, that the desire of glory is not the passion
of Villagers, and that dreaming (sometimes) of the Crabbats, I pitch upon the
same though with the Poet: Impius haec tam culta novalia Miles habebit?
-- Barbarus has segetes?
These are thoughts which are bred in my rural walk, and which spring from
lowness of spirit; into which I am apt to fall, as soon as I have lost the
sight of you. Therefore be pleased to take the pains to fortify me from time
to time, and to send me some preservatives against the bad news which fly
about. These would help to entertain good thoughts, while we expect the
conclusion of the Treaty, and make my Neighbors know, that a man cannot be
ill informed that maintains intelligence with you, and make them believe, that
I am indeed what I profess my self to be, which is

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac 17. October. 1616.
To my Lord, the Earl of Excester. LET. V.
MY Lord, having not enjoyed my health, or as least having had no leisure at
all, since the time that your Letter was delivered me; I could not any sooner
render you thanks for the testimonies of your esteem and affection, which you
vouchsafed me therein. I will not any way seem to suspect or doubt of a news
that makes for me; and I do readily believe, that my works that were sent you
from the Queen your Mistress, have been your welcome* home among your friends.
But herein, I do acknowledge their good fortune, far beyond my deserts, and
the Influences that descend from the Court, beyond all the favors they can
receive from a Country Village. Those hands so great and powerful, that gave
you this small Present, do ennoble whatsoever they touch, and are able to
effect rarer transmutations, than those which Alchymy boasts of; with their
mark, a trivial Fable may pass for Authentic History, and the Nether-Britton
should surpass the native Frenchman. I have therefore my Lord, no thought of
deserving that Elogie, which I owe to so illustrious a circumstance; nor do I
mean to glory in the travails, which my Book (as you inform me) has made
beyond the Rhine. Your name (being one of its principal Ornaments) is that to
which I must owe my frame in those Climates, and it was upon your
recommendation and credit, that all the Courts in the North, and some of their
Schools too, have entertained my Books. I do here solemnlie promise you never
to abuse this favor, at leastwise, never to write any thing of your Island,
that might give any distaste in the reading, and that will not testify
particularly of you, that I am most entirely

My Lord, Your etc.
Balzac. Sept. 20. 1636.
To my Lord the Duke de la Valette, Governor and Lieutenant General for the
King in Guyen. LET. VI.
My Lord,
I Do not mean to tempt your valor, it were precipitate rashness to dare it;
yet I shall make bold to tell you, that you have no less Art and dexterity in
conquering, than in winning men; and that in you, that which entreats and
persuades, has no less efficacy than that which commands and enforces. It
does nothing avail me to shun the world, the better to enjoy my self in the
desert. Three words from your mouth, make me lose all the freedom I enjoy
there; and I see my self surprised in that Sanctuary, in which I thought to
save my self. I must confess my Lord, that there is no such absolute
independence, over which you cannot claim some power; that there is none so
discontented and averse that you cannot allure* or so wild and disorderly that
you cannot tame. Since you have done me the honor as to write, that you have
sent me your heart, I should betray very tittle skill or judgment in rare and
excellent things, if I were not ravished with such a present, and if I did not
esteem it above all that ambition can desire, or Fortune bestow. It may be,
the hearts of Giants were more vast, and less limited by reason; but the
hearts of the Heroes were not more noble, or of any other elevation then yours
is of; and be that speaks of this, speaks of a place hallowed, and purged from
all the vices of this age, and where all the ancient Virtues have taken
Sanctuary. Lo here, my Lord, what gift you have sent; after which, I have
nothing to wish for in this world, which I have abandoned, since this is the
most pure and refined part of it; in which, goodness cohabits with power, and
greatness combines with love. To which I must of necessity, stoop and yield;
and my heart were more vile, than yours is generous, if I were not

My Lord, Your, etc.
Balzac Jan. 10. 1637.
To Monsieur Drovet, Doctor of Physic. LET. VII.
SIR, YOur sorrow is too accurate, and studied to be true; and an afflicted
person that writes such brave things, has no great need of any thing of mine
to solace him. I will therefore forbear a task, which I conceive to be so
needless, and will be contented to tell you, that I know how to discover
counterfeit sorrows. No man could act a Desperato better than you. Panigarola
made not such exclamations when he preached, that there will be signs in the
Sun and in the Moon. And it is a pleasure to see you write of the end of the
world, of the falling of the Stars, and the final ruin of Nature, and all
this, upon occasion of my Ni^c^, laboring of a fever. This is to give Virgil
the lie, that calls your profession a dumb Science. For indeed, to find so
many Ornaments and Tropes upon such a vulgar Theme, could not be without
having a Treasury of words, and without teaching this Mute, Rhetoric. Yet me
thinks, you should husband and manage this treasure more thriftilie, and have
more care than you had, of the modesty of a poor Maid. Are you not afraid to
make her fall into vain-glorie, and mar all the pains of that good Father
that guides her conscience? if I did not furnish her with counter-poison, you
would infect her mind, and cast her into a worse malady than that you cured
her of, But I have taught her, that there are a sort of Enchanters that bewitch
by commending, and that the wanton Courtship of Sirens has allured many to
their ruins, and filled the Seas with frequent shipwracks. She believes her
Glass, and me too, who are more true to her then you, and who (without much
difficulty) can rectify her opinion of her self, which you would have strained
too high. For my own particular, I cease not to be your debtor for the quaint
extravagances and hyperboles, wherein you express your affection toward me;
and for her part, separating your commendations from her name, and considering
them asunder, by themselves, she esteems them as the wealth of a Jewellers
shop, which indeed may delight her eyes, but she finds nothing there that
belongs to her. Receive this complement as from her, if you please, I am merely
but her Secretary in this point, and J shall remain

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac 12. October. 1636.
To Monsieur de Bonair. LET. VIII.
SIR, the honorable mention that you were pleased to make of me in your Book,
is a most singular favor, and I cannot behold my self in so fair a seat
without some temptation of vain glory. I know not as yet, whether my testimony
be to be admitted or rejected; and whether I be an Apocryphal or Canonical
Author; but since you have cited me, it is not lawful for me to doubt any more
of the good success of my writings, and after this, I dare claim a place in
the noblest Libraries. It is true, J dare not own that Title you bestow on me,
of the Genius of Eloquence. Besides, that this would be a wrong to Mercury and
Pythe, who have for many ages possessed the Chair, and swayed the Art of
Elocution; it were necessary also that J had the suffrages of all the Preachers
and Advocates of the Realm; and you know, Sir, that there is none of them so
mean, that does not persuade himself that he is the God of Persuasion, and
would very hardly confess a superior. J must not therefore entertain an
Elogie, which would be challenged from me by two so great Nations, equally
terrible and potent, and J am content to be less prized by you, since J am
sure of the same affection; you shall preserve that for me, if you please,
since J am willing to give it its true estimation, and to be really

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 20. Dec. 1635.
To Monsieur Huggens Councellor and Secretary of the Commands of my Lord the
Prince of Orange. LET. XIX.
SIR, I have received with your Letter the Dissertation of Monsieur -- in
Print; but to write my opinion thereof, would be too dangerous an enterprise. I
never mean to doubt of the certainty of his Doctrine; and too bad construction
was made of me at the beginning of our commerce for to adventure farther in
that way. It suffices me to confess that I was lost in all probability, had
it not been for your protection, since even under that, I could hardly be
secure. This is a Buckler that has been pierced in a thousand places, and (to
speak freely) has served me rather for a show, then defense. My great
Adversary (as you call him) would rain have made an example of your poor
Suppliant, and showed that he did not either believe that you did love me so
dearly, or that he did not much reward the persons whom you so loved.
Nevertheless Sir, if I had been of a quarrelsom humor, that matter (perhaps)
would not have been so appeased; and men would persuade me, that my person only
was injured, my Assertions being as firm and as found as they were before the
battery. But let the field be his, seeing he cannot endure an encounter, that
I say not a resistance; and I do willingly yield him all the advantages of
this action. He chose rather to take me, then receive my submission, and
preferred a trophey before an homage. Nevertheless, I am resolved not to alter
my condition or forget my wonted civility. Yet I do make a stand at the very
same bounds that he has leapt over, and give respect to that Character, which
he has violated; I speak of your love and good opinion, which are more
precious to me then my writings or my reputation, and which I cannot disesteem
wheresoever I met them. Sir, there will be always in the world Oppressors, and
man oppressed, and I must be one of the Innocents that must suffer the
persecutions of a Herod. But there is nothing so hard that love cannot digest.
I pardon (for your sake) all my injuries and sufferings, with all my heart, and
am contented to be ill entreated, as long as I give evidence that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 10. September. 1636.
To Monsieur de Racan. LET. X.
SIR, I render you thanks for your Shephtardesse; with whom I enjoyed such
ravishing pleasures, that the voluptuous never enjoy the like, and yet so chaste
and honest, that I think not my self bound to make confession, she has revived
my spirits that were rebated with eager study, and retired with distinctions
and Syllogismes. I cannot dissemble, I have not this long time Sir, spent a day
more happily then when I entertained Her. And if I have thought Her so
beautiful in her own simple weeds, and natural habiliments, without the
addition of those helps which serve to embellish and adorn; what will it be,
when she will appear in the pomp and luster of the Theater? and when those
things that are of themselves so powerful, will be mended with the help of the
voice and the graces of pronunciation? if I thought She were to come forth
suddenly in that Equipage, I would straight begin my journie for to be
present at that joyful spectacle, and to give you the applause which you do
justly deserve. But since you have sent Her me, being yet warm from the birth,
and that She must grow up a while and gather strength in your hands, I hope I
shall be time enough at Roche to behold her in her glory. I understand Sir, in
the mean while, that there is a great contention between the Ladies about the
names of Orante and Ortana, and that they are more ambitious of the scrip and
sheapheards hook then any thing. It lies in you to do them justice, and
satisfy their ambition: yet notwithstanding, if youl'e believe be, you must
casheere this rural Equipage, and adapt yourselfe to Crowns and Scepters. That
active and strong spirit which does swey you, has too much vigor for to dwell
on weaker Themes; it would break all the furniture of Horn-pipes and Hau-bois
that you should fill it with; moreover, the Country and Cabin is not the
proper sphere of magnificence, and Shepheardesses must not dance to the sound
of a Trumpet. I have therefore chosen for you an heroic subject indeed, and
worthy the courage and majesty of your style; which style carries all the
exactness of rules, and has been already used with good approbation by the
Masters of Antiquity. But the sport is, to see you dispute and contend with
them for their own victory and to challenge them at the same carreeres and
courses that they have gained their glory by. This kind of imitation is more
noble and hardy then invention it self, and which you are very capable to
undertake. How-ever, if you shall stand in need of some aid, I am ready to do
the Office of a Grammarian, and to give you the literal interpretation of the
Texts of such Authors, which you mean to follow, with a resolution to out-goe
them. I knew that herein I shall not betray any great care of their reputation,
nor do any good office to any of them. But Sir, there is nothing that I would
not do for you, to whom I confess infinite obligations, and will be
everlastinglie

Sir, A most humble, etc.
Balzac. 3. Sept. 1633.
To Monsieur de St. Chartres. LET. XI.
SIR, The disorders of a crazie, and ruinous body, and the pains I suffer by
it, are the eternal hindrances of my devoir: These also shall be (if you
please) the ordinary Apologies for my silence. You may believe, that I do not
use to make great preparations for to treat with you, in respect of the
familiarity we profess each to other; and if I could have rendered you thanks
sooner for your courtesies, I would not have saved the expense of a few ragged
lines, so long a time. I have received the Translation of your friend who does
me more honor then I can deserve. I cannot sufficiently acknowledge the pains
that he was pleased to take for me, being not ignorant how unpleasing a thing
is Dependence. I confess that it is more than a probable argument of a man's
love, to submit himself to the fancy of a man that holds no superiority over
him. This servitude is irksome, and so heavy a yoke to good wits, that they
have seldom born it as they should; and Victorius observes a number of passages
of Aristotle, which Ciceria did not understand in his translation. And yet to
understand an Author aright is not all: things rendered in another language,
must retain the same degree of goodness, (if it be possible) as was in the
Original: the strong must not be enfeebled, not the well attired be divested or
clad in rags, nor those that are well mounted be unhorsed, and made to serve
on foot. Most Interpreters (indeed) deal with books in that manner, and do
violate the Laws of sacred hospitality, toward the persons of the noblest
strangers that they meet with. Commonly they write French after the Latin
mode, and Latin after the French; and I have seen more Authors stripped and
excoriated, than Authors translated. It is by your good favor, that I am not
of the number of those Martyrs; but on the contrary, your friend has done me
many courtesies which I needed, and furnished me with a thousand Ornaments which
I had not of mine own. I am very much obliged unto him in this behalf, and J
owe you also much thanks, for the regard you showed to my Counsels, preferring
them before your first inclinations. Accomplish Sir, that which you have begun,
and let us see a Senat^r worthy the ancient Republic, and the age of genuine
and legitimate Romans. In our time, men do bear a great opinion of their
eloquence* and a certain Author (whose name I have forgot) talks of the purple
of their language, as well as of that of their gowns. I doubt not but you will
adorn them: both with the one and the other livery; And that you will make the
driest thorns of their pettifogging Dialect, look fresh and flourishing again,
if you will take the pains to dress and manure them. Monsieur Chaplain
follows my counsel, and thanks me in all his Letters for the friendship
contracted between you. Preserve Sir for me that good which I do for others,
and think me not unworthie of it, since that I am with all my soul

Sir Your, etc.
Balzac. 4. Nov. 1636.
To Monsieur Baudoin. LET. XII.
SIR, I received the alarm of your sickness: but your letter did soon settle
and compose my mind; if it be as you write, but an attachment without grief, I
believe that I am not bound to keep much ado in bemoaning you; this necessary
rest and residence is good for something: it does (at least) privilege a
Philosopher from performing a thousand petty Offices, which do distract a
Contemplative life, and which a civil life does seem to exact from him, that
has the free use of his legs. So that in the state that you are in, you do
oblige the Public in despite of you; and doubt not, but diverse N^tions do
bless your Gout, that is the cause of your leisure, since that indeed it does
not handle you rudely, and that J do (as others) reap much profit thereby; I
know not whether I ought to call it good or bad, except my own interest should
be more considerable, then the liberty of my friend. Hereupon, I shall consult
with my Moral Philosophy, upon that part which treareth of Duties, which you (
I am sure) will not have called Offices. You shall understand Sir, in the mean
while, that I have received the second impression of my Letters, and that my
eyes are not so bad, but that I could epsy at the first glance, that which
they owe unto your care. J should be uncivil (not to say unknowing) if J did
not render you thanks for this favor, and if that my Book (having received
better order and Economy by your hands) J did not confess that it is you that
did bestow upon it its last graces. We must confess that you are an admirable
Chymick to refine that with is gross and drossie in my writings; and that you
are a great exterminator of our superfluous Characters. But J should have been
yet more deeply engaged unto you, if that you had thoroughly played the
Aristarchus, and with that Hatchet which is so formidable to SS^, which you
deem unuseful, you had hewn off my other faults, as well as that of
Orthography. This shall be reserved for another time, and for a work of greater
consequence, whereof you shall be the Judge, upon condition Sir, that you show
no pity or favor in your censures, and that my style undergo all the rigor
of your laws, as long as my person be had in consideration, and that J be still

Balzac. 25. October. 1636. Your, etc.

To Monsieur de Coignet Gentleman in Ordinary to the most Illustrious Queen of
great Britain. LET. XIII.
SIR, J was much discontented that J parted from Paris, without having the
honor to bid you Adieu. But it is very difficult to live regularlie amidst
such confusions, and to be punctual in a time when all things are out of order.
I thought I had done much, that I had not forgot my self, being in the place
where I was; and that I did put six score leagues of Land between Me and John
de Werth. Being able to make but a sorry Soldier, I thought that no body had
any thing to say to me in Picardy, and that the Kings Army, would not be the
less complete for my absence. Lo now Sir, I am arrived here, this side of the
Loire, busy in fortifying, as well as I may, my village with Philosophy; and
intrenching my self against the Enemies with good books. If the tempests which
threaten the Frontiers of Bayon arrive at us, we must think of another way of
safety, and resolve (in any case) to pass the Sea, and go and dwell in that
Region of Peace, and that happy Climate where your divine Princess reigns.
But the good conduct and leading of the King her Brother, and the good Fate of
France Forbid us to harbor any thoughts of despair; and the opinions of Sages,
that expect a calm and serenitie after a storm, are far different from the
Dialect of the vulgar, that think that all storms are everlasting. It shall be
then a visit of complement (in despite of John de Werth) that I shall perform,
and not a voyage of necessity which I must make; and I hope my words shall
find no evasion, and that I shall tell you in London that which I say here,
that I am entirely

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 10. Sept. 1636.
To Madam Desloges. LET. XIV.
MAdam, Take it not amiss, that I do much rejoice at your removal from Paris,
since that thereby I do regain the glorious beatitude of your Neighbor-hood;
and that I am now but fifteen Leagues distant from Virtue retired: Monsieur
d'Auvita did confirm this news, whereof I had otherwise an intimation
formerlie; and he has farther assured me (Madam) of the good success of your
journey, and of your victory in the Chamber of the Edict. Since the guerdon of
this Conquest lies in Aunix, I believe it will repent you to have offended the
Angoulmois some five years agone. I say it is some pleasure to me to think that
you will not digress any more out of the Road in contempt of us; and now
shortly will be the time when you will dignifie those men with your presence,
which do so passionatelie desire to see you. I am not so presumptuous as to
allege here my own wishes. But me thinks (Madam) that the Duke of Rochefeucaut
deserves one of your stages; and if it be so, I have reason to hope to be happy
in some hours of the two or three days, which you cannot deny to afford Him.
I was about to send to you -- to learn some news of you: But this excellent
Bearer, has promised me to relate some at his return; and you need not be
troubled, in that he did forbear that crude Oration that was provided for you.
This is a man (Madam) in whose month are Temples and Altars erected for you,
and who adores you in every word he speaks; He has no vulgar conceit of your
virtues, and he being ab^o^ man of parts, is worthy of that regard you bear
to him. I hope he will love me a little for love of you, and that you will do
so likewise; and add this favor to the infinite number that I owe you, and
which oblige me to be more then any man in the world,

Madam Your. etc.
Balzac. 7. October. 1636. I send you (Madam) the complement which you desire to
see; it was sent ere this, but was not received, because my packet was lost.
Since that time, I have never thought of it; but your curiosity finds out
things that are lost, and I am so good a Courtier, that none should have seen
it besides your self.



To my Lord Keeper of the Seals Seguier, since Chancellor of France. LET. XV.
MY Lord, If I had not been advertised that it was my bounden duty to write
unto you, I should not have thought it needful so to do. And though I have
ruminated as much as any other, upon the choice that the King has made of
your person, I considered it, as one of the felicities of his reign, and as a
general influence of favor upon all the world. Calling to mind the definition
of Aristotle, that calls justice the good of another, I thought it not so
congruous to congratulate with him that must be the Guardian of the Laws,
touching a preferment that will put him to a perpetual care and vigilance. But
rather to partake in silence of the common felicity of those people that shall
wholly rely upon his watchfulness. But my Lord, since custom commands it, and
that co^gratulatio^s from the remotest parts of the Kingdom do post toward
you, I should be thought unworthie of that rank which I hold among your humble
Servants, if I did not sequester my self from the Crowd to deliver you (a part)
some testimony of my joy, and to make you see, that in places of silence and
solitude there be not wanting acclamations for you, and affections for the
Country. I shall therefore make bold to tell you, that the joy which seiseth
me at this time, is mingled with a kind of vanity; and having accompanied you
with my thoughts and eyes even unto the place of your advancement, I do imagine
I have (in some sort) conducted you, whither the judgment of the Prince has
advanced you Wherefore my Lord in your promotion, I do rejoice for the good
success of my Imagination, and take no small pleasure to see my own Divinations
verified. Certainly it is a matter of delight to see a Virtue so laborious and
active as yours, brought into the most wide and spacious Carreere that Fortune
could make choice of; and this is aspectacle worthy the sight of Heaven, and
of the blessed soul of the late Cato of your race. The importance is, my Lord,
that you begin in a very good season, for to continue long; and that you are
in the verdure and vigor of your age for to uphold the crazie and decrepit
weakness of our State. In this Elevation both of Merit and D^gnitie, each man
will be your Adorer and Votary: But you will give me leave to assure you that
none will approach unto you with a purer and more dis-interessed Devotion then
mine, and that I am without much pomp and flourish, yet in much sincerity

My Lord, Your, etc.
Balzac. 1. April 1636.
To Monsieur de Morins, Counselor of the King in the Court of the Edict, at
Again. LET. XVI.
MY Lord, You are noble enough to love a man without any merits, but I were
too loose and forlorn if I were so loved, and yet you have some cause to call
me by that bad title; and if Monsieur Girard has not had a care of his friends
reputation, all circumstances condemn me. It is true that my fault was but the
omission of a Complement, which had slipped out of my memory; and yet I avow to
you, that this omission is such a sin that has (a long time) burdened my
conscience, and causes such gripes and remorse Sir, that except the same
goodness that has showed me favor do grant me a pardon, I cannot make
attonemeat with my self. But I am apt to believe that for the appeasing of my
thoughts, you will not run the hazard of your former benefits, and that you
will by your perseverance add to my obligations. Knowing this moreover, that
you are a right honest man; I must necessarily conclude that you are no
Formalist or a man of Ceremony, and that you do not tie your self to those
petty observances and Rites which make the friendship of this age more
perplexed and difficult then sincere. If Yours may be gained or merited by a
true and perfect valuation of your worth, I will not be an unfaithful
Depositary, beseeching you to believe that I am already as much as any man in
the world

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac Feb. 20. 1636.
To Monsieur de-Vaugelas Gentleman in Ordinary to Monsieur the Kings only
Brother. LET. XVII.
SIR, I did read my own thoughts in your Letter; I subscribe unto all that you
have writ unto me, and confess that in the Elogie of Monsieur Arnold the
Abbat, you do (indeed) but give your friend his due, and lend him never a
grain. This is (in truth) a most accomplished man, and who at the age of 22
years, was reputed wise even by the Italians, that lately thought wisdom was
their own freehold. He has with his great knowledge mingled much goodness:
the sharpness of his understanding is tempered and allaied by the sweetness
of his behavior, and his modesty does repress and conceal much of his
abilities. He never pardons himself, though he does bear with all humane
infirmities in others; and that Piety which he does practice, gives respect
unto all, but strikes a terror in none. Lo Sir, the testimony which I add
unto yours: which I would bestow upon an enemy that deserved it, but would not
upon a friend that wanted merit. His knowledge is attended on by other virtues,
and it has furnished him with excellent morality: for without this, it should
be solitary and of little use. I tell you nothing of the late experiment I
have found of it in your Letter which he wrote unto you: besides that my best
language would be far below my apprehension of it; I know withal too well the
power of his Rhetoric to contest with it; since he has got so many
advantages over me, he must needs have that of civilitie and complements too;
and my silence must not be accounted any more the effect of modesty but of
the Eloquence of his Letter. I send it you back because you would have it so,
and because you may make some use of it in your Cabinet; but I shall reserve a
Copy of it under your favor, that it may afford some comfort and relief to my
discontents. I have seen the siege of Tire, the death of Darius, the voyage of
the Indians, and I have read them with wonder. All these seem to me so good
French, and so natural. that it is impossible to pick out any line there, that
does savor of, or show any affinity with Latin, or wherein the original
Author has any advantage above the second. What would you have more Sir, or
what sentence can you crave of me? I have but one word to add in commendation
of your Travels. The Alexander of Philip was invincible, and that of Vaugelas
is inimitable. It is that (to say no more) that will deserve the affection of
your incomparable Marchioness, and the fair Beavy or Troop that do often
assemble at her house. Monsieur -- calls Her a choice and resplendent Court,
and the great World refined and reformed: and says, that there is no Tribunal
so sovereign that we may not appeal from, unto the Mansion of Rambouillet.
Since I cannot know what kind of work it is that my Stationer shall give you,
until this divine Roman Deem shall pass her censure upon it; I dare not as
yet, declare my self for a Book which I must not acknowledge, although I have
composed it. It suffices to tell you, that I had an aim to speak French, and
to write some Letters which should not put Her to trouble of deciphering. I did
not heartily desire that my Design might take effect; and I should believe I
had not gained a little, by the commerce of many years, if what you shall
present her with, in my name, may entertain her thoughts for a few hours; the
noblest labors of the understanding cannot aspire to a higher bliss than that;
Philosophy her self should betray too much presumption to think to take them
up wholly and employ them; she cannot claim to be any more than her diversion
and by-thought. I shall be very well contented Sir, if I might serve for that
purpose handsomely; and I should boast after this, that I were (though in my
absence) very good company. That timorousness that did ever possess me that
I could not be so, any other way, and the fear of troubling the serenitie of
another man's visage by the sullen clowdiness of mine, have made me to refrain
from all Feasts and Assemblies, and hindered me from bringing heavy looks to
those places which I esteem sacred, and before those eyes which I do reverence.
So that it is a pure reverence in me, that I abstain from acceptable and
delightful conversation, and from the pleasures of those Cabinets that
appertain to them only that be happier than I. And I do choose rather to adore
a far off with awful regard, then be importunatelie, and saucilie familiar. I
leave it to you to excuse and justify this timoriousnesse which proceeds from
respect, not from a Stoical ferocitie. Add you will do me a favor, if that
while yon represent the best part of your friend, you will take the pains to
excuse the worst. Whereunto, I do earnestly conjure you, and to believe
firmlie, that I am

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 26. Feb. 1636.
To Monsieur dela Motte-Aigron. LET. XVIII.
SIR, The Indian Canes which you sent me were pretty, but you have so
embellisht them at Rothel, that I doubt me they are not for my turn. They are
not made for a private man's use: They are Emblems of sovereign command; and a
bolder Orator then I, would render you thanks rather for your Scepters then
your Canes. By what name soever we call them, they are the more precious to me,
because they came from You, more then for any other consideration; and though
you have not made me rich, yet you have made me very glorious. It is a Maxim
in Aristotle, that Ambition is no more satisfied with benefits received, then
covetousness. But me thinks, he should have added, when it receives from him,
from whom it desired to receive. For all sorts of Benefactors do not far
obliege those that are ambitious of the better sort only. For my part, I
should believe that the Presents of Monsieur -- would pollute me, and I would
be as much ashamed of his favors as I glory in yours. In truth Sir, I have
quitted the Country, and am come purposelie to the Town to show them. With
them, I do sustain my old age with credit, and look as trim as upon solemn
days of Ceremony. They serve me both for to support and to adorn; for
movables of necessietie, and oftentation too. But the worst is, that I have
nothing here for to requite so rare a Present, but the shape and lineaments of
a vulgar man, and the sad representation of my own visage. As it were very
unjust that I should pretend to beauty: so it is a very solecisme that
Philarchus calls me a Narcissus. But there are always foolish passions, and
idle curiosities in the world. My friends at Paris would needs urge me to have
my Picture drawn, and I, to give them contentment, did yield my self for one
half hour to be transcribed, and granted them this meager delight. Some
Copies were sent me: one whereof I bestow upon you, supposing that it, will not
scare you; and knowing that affection is a better flatterer yet, than the
Painter. This is it that will bear a false witness for me to prove me fair,
and which will allow me a place in the Class of your illustrious men. Such a
place in your Cabinet, is indeed a high advancement, and which I cannot obtain
but by mere favor; but that which you have given me in your heart is no less
precious to me, and I think I have good right to the possession, since I am
reallie

Sir, Your etc.
Angoulesme 15. Jan. 1637.
To Monsieur de Borstell. LET. XIX.
SIR, I durst not undertake the great and hazardous voyage, which I did impose
upon my self some four years past, without taking leave from our noble Lady. I
have therefore sent unto her to beg it, by the man that shall deliver you this
letter; and that shall bring me back (if you please) some directions for my
journey, which I beg of you. Being provided of such ammunition, I shall not
fear the rigor of February, nor the unconstancie of March, nor the inundations
of the Loire, nor the ways of Beausse. I am sure to arrive happily at Paris:
where Sir, if you have any business, I can furnish you with a Solicitor, who
(though but a forty one) is very ambitious to do you service. Alte non temo,
and humili non s degno: I neither fear the high nor disdain the low. You cannot
think of any employment that shall not be very welcome to me; and though I
love sloth, and make a profession of Idleness, yet I will change my
inclination, and of a sedentary man become a Currier; except this, I am
commonly desirous of privacie, and never bring into the Assemblies of men but
my eyes, and my testimony. There must be spectators at such times, as well as
Poets and Actors; and some that must do nothing, for the interest and honor of
those that act. But to the purpose Sir; what are become of your Actors of the
Low Countries? I do verily think that there is no more Holland in the world,
and that the Sea has drowned the famousest part of the earth. There was never
such a dearth of news; And the Caribusian Monks do not meditate with more
silence, than they do wager war in that Country. If you are more learned
than the Gazettes, I pray impart your knowledge by this Bearer, who has a
charge to give you an account of many things, and will acquaint you
particularly how far J am

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 18. Feb. 1636.
To Monsieur -- the chief Advocate. LET. XX.
Sir, I am impatient until J can hear of the estate of your health, and learn
by the return of my Lecquay, whether your legs be better then they were wont.
It is no wonder if they bend under the burden of so many brave things which
they sustain; and being to carry the counsels of a whole Province, if they be
somewhat incommodated with such a weight. Yet J do hope well of the
wholsomnesse of that Air which you breath; and that being out of the reach of
that malignant Jupiter, (that noisome mildew, J would have said) which
over-runs the Hills of Angoulesme, you will have the leisure to travel to your
breaches, and fortify your self against winter. This is a Neighbor that does
threaten us upon the Frontiers, and if J can, J will fly from him, as far as
Africa. But this remedy is something too far. Without undertaking so great a
voyage, we will endeavor to make resistance as well as we may; and J am
already resolved to use all humane industry, to barricado my Chamber, and to
block up all approaches toward it. Jf J can maintain it bravely against so
terrible an Enemy; I shall account my self no mean Engineer, and shall think my
Sconces and Fortifications as regular as those of the Hollanders. After this,
this shall be, if you please, the Camp of our riotous discourses and
extravagances; of our peaceful disputations, and all other exercises that an
honest man may perform in a Chair, I do therefore design you for it about
mid-November, and remain

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 18. Oct. 1636
To Monsieur de Maury. LET. XXI.
SIR, You have sent me a Present which was extremely dear and welcome to me,
and which I must highly prize, both for the manner of sending, and the matter
sent; the affliction which you paint out and emblazon, is so Christian, that
all the joy in the world is not able to countervail it; and you complain in
such a learned form, that we must forbid men to comfort you, lest you should
cease complaining. I am you know, but a simple French Doctor; yet I do now and
then, make excursion into the Latin Country, and take a view of the
Frontiers. But this is too little for to know the just value of your Muse, and
to give you the commendation that you deserve. You have an ancient Roman near
you, that can distinguish between the Native and the Forrainer; and makes it
Religion to confound the modesty of the age of Augustus; with the
intemperaence of succeeding times. He has a smack of the primitive Poetry,
which the Spaniards had not yet vitiated, and made immodest; and of that pure
Latin, which the Declamators had not yet corrupted with nice subtleties. He it
is, that can give you ample and just commendation, and can make a just estimate
of the riches of your style: For my part, I can but testify unto you my deep
apprehension of your courtesies in this behalf, and assure you that I will be
while I live

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 23. October. 1636.
To Monsieur de Mondory. LET. XXII.
SIR, Your Letter was to me an old noveltie, and I received it but in the
beginning of December, thought it had been at my house since August: To unfold
this Riddle, I must tell you, I am newly returned from a long voyage, and that
J found your Letter here at my arrival. You may believe, that the name of a man
that is dear unto me, did at first encounter of my eye affect me with joy; and
that it is no small satisfaction and contentment to me, to see that J hold a
place in a memory, that is so occupied and fully fraught as yours. This is to
lie down among a bed of Roses, when I lie among so many brave Poems, and rare
discourses which you contain, as a walking Library. And if it be lawful to tell
out the rest, to be the friend of Monsieur de Mondory, is to be a Favorite of a
thousand Kings; for indeed you do so lively represent unto us the majesty and
magnificence of former ages, that we must confess that your representations,
are the glorious Resurrections of those Princes which you do personate. And
things being thus, take it not amiss that in my answer I must contradict you.
You cannot compare the bonnet of Herod with that of Monsieur the Advocate --
without doing some injury to Royal dignity, and avileling their Purple and
Diamonds; without doing your self a bad office, in lessening, and obscuring in
me thereby (if you could) the great Idea which I conceived of you, the day that
I saw you with that Bonnet. But you may be pleased to humble your self; you
cannot deface or blot out of my memory that first impression and Image of
majesty which you there left; and I cannot figure you in my thoughts, but with
a commanding accent, and the eloquence of a Master, far transcending that
inferior Rhetoric, which works but my entreaties and remonstrances. Yet I
speak not this, as though I would always consider you under the name and shape
of another; or that I believe, if that you should quit the Theater, you would
be out of all employment in the world. The Letter which you were pleased to
write unto me does sufficiently witness, that Eloquence is your natural
endowment, and that without borrowing from any, you can traffic in very good
things of your own. Suspect not then that I should recant to your prejudice,
after this new occasion of extolling you* On the contrary, I am ready (if
need be) to add something to my former testimony. I have many reasons to
respect you, and I think I may do it with the license of our severest Schools.
Since that having reformed the stage, and purged it from all obscenitie, you
may glory in this, that you have reconcil^d Comedy with -- Pleasure, with
Virtue. And though for my part I stand in need of recreations, yet since I
desire not to enjoy but those that are cleanly, and which do not violate
honesty, I do (with the common voice) give you thanks for the care you have
taken, to provide fit remedies, and Antidotes against melancholy, and other
untoward passions. But farther, calling to mind that you proposed my
contentation sometimes, for the end of your action, and that you aimed
oftentimes at me alone, I were ungrateful if I did not confess that I am

Sir Your, etc.
Balzac. 15. December. 1636.
To Monsieur Le. Guay. LET. XXIII.
Sir, You had an intention to perform an act of humility; when you did
dedicate your Poem to me; for to expect protection from a man that is not
reckoned of the world, and light from a name so obscure as mine, you could not
(sure) forget your self in this sort. The same virtue which obliges the Saints
to acknowledge Superiors wherever there are men, has carried you to this
depth of lowliness; and you have chosen an unhappy man, for to bestow honor
upon, that you might lose that, which you would fain bestow, I must confess,
that no man ever commended his Neighbor more Christian like, and does more
decline the Trade of those Mercenaries, who sell their testimonies and credit
to any, that have wherewith to requite them. These are Hucksters of Poetry and
Rhetoric; that prostitute to the first comers, even those whom you style the
kindred of the Gods and Daughters of Jupiter; and make Pegasus a very hackney
of commendation, (as I may so say) for all the world. You have a heart of a far
better mould then theirs; and though men consider not as they ought, the graces
and elegancies of your Muse, we must notwithstanding infinitely commend their
nobleness and generositie. I confess for my part, that I am a debtor to them
as far as any, and that I know not how to requite in any measure, the favors
that I have received from them. Yet notwithstanding, I forbear not to load my
Porter with a pretrie gross bundle; not pretending thus to acquit my self, or
thinking that I am hereby less then before.

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 1. April. 1636.
To Monsieur de Silhon, Musqueteer of the Kings Company. LET. XXIV.
Sir, Having your person in great admiration, I cannot misprize or undervalue
your friendship. The fair tokens whereof, which I have received in the Letter,
that you were pleased to write unto me, have obliged me so far, that I confess
that I owe you already that which you are pleased now to promise me. I will
tell you but this, that if Princes could bestow health and virtue, I should
tell more sedulous Courtier then I am, and should stand in more need of your
testimony, and the recommendation of your friend. But truly, in the case that
I am, my desires are so feeble, and my passions so cold and languid, that I
could hardly be persuaded to take up a Crosier, if I found it on the earth.
Though Philosophy does not teach, that we must seek for happiness out of the
wheeling Orb of the Court; my own laziness would cause me to apprehend it as a
fortune, under whose weight I should perpetually groan, and not a place of any
ease; and I do less esteem of a place of Government that might cumber me, then
a field of liberty that may solace me. If you go any time into Gascony, and do
me the honor to take my house in the way, you will verify what I say to you;
and avouch, that if I were as well cured of all maladies as that of Ambition I
had not many wishes to commence. It is true that some company (like that of
Monsieur your Brother) is wanting unto me; and if this were added to my
Hermitage, I durst contend with Jupiter for happiness. This is a speech of
Epicurus which Seneca does allege, but which I do mean to apply better then it
was by the Author; since bread and bear (which this Philosopher made the two
Elements of sovereign good) are not so rare or so good, as those excellent
instructions and perfect honesty, which I should find and enjoy in the person
of my friend. I do charge you to assure him, that I do ever honor and esteem
him infinitely, and for your particular, you may believe, that you cannot
affect a man that could be more sincerely then I am,

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 19. December. 1635.
To Monsieur De la Fosse. LET. XXV.
SIR, You judge too seriously of my Recreations, and bear too high an opinion
of my Essays. It is no Roman Citizen that you thus respect, it is a Barbarian
disguised. I have drawn some rude lineaments and misshapen figures, and you
would allow them for just works and exact Pieces. Your eloquence herein does
favor me, but alters me not a whit. You are powerful in Language, but I am hard
of persuasion; and I have learnt from a mous Author, that to give things
honorable appellations does cost us nothing: And I see well that Illustrious
and Excellent which you grace me with, do signify (except by way of Civilitie)
but things vulgar and mean. It is true Sir, that I do adventure sometimes to
copy out good Originals. I have an eye as much as possibly I may, to ancient
examples, and I do scarce seek them beyond Terente or this side Livy. But these
are but idle Speculations (perhaps) and impotent desires which leave an
infinite space between my abilities and my Idea; if it be so, as I fear it is,
Monsieur de Prieset does heedfully observe this distance, and pittieth in his
soul the vain attempts and rashness of my pen. Yet he is so good and loving,
that he will not, I should learn this distastful truth from him; and loves
rather to commend a fault, then discover it, in a man that is dear to him. He
has written such polite things to me, and in such abundance, that I dare not
send forth any reply after his answer, least I should be undone by so unequal
a comparison. I must not attempt this great design, for the success thereof
must needs be unlucky, though I should make use of Auxiliaries, and demands
succors of all the L^t^xists of our Province. You shall tell him then, if you
please, that I do acknowledge the advantage his style has over mine, and I
think it no disparagement that I must still owe him what I shall never be able
to pay him. You are kind enough yet Sir, to assure Monsieur Habert the Abbat,
and Monsieur de la Chamber, of the constancy of my service; and how impatient
I am, that the world does not yet know, in what regard I hold their virtues. It
suffices me that they accept and allow of my affection, and that they testify
it unto you with a nod. For to desire Letters, and not tickets from them, were
to be ignorant of the present condition of their life, and the homage that they
perform to our Monarch, who best deserves it. I have received some Verses from
Monsieur de Espesses, and you send me some more of other men's, together with a
letter, which my servant left to grow stale upon the Table in my Chamber. You
will do me the favor as to deliver him my Packet, and readily take so much
pains for my sake: who will account my self happy to be made your Agent in
these parts, and be able to express that none is more entirely

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 3. Jan. 1637.
To Monsieur de Espesses Councellor of the King in his Council of States. LET.
XXVI.
SIR, You make me (truly) to languish, and it is more then four months, since
I have expected our Translation: I call it ours, because you made it in my
Chamber, and on my paper; and I might call it mine too, by a rule in the Law,
which does adjudge the surface to go along with the profunditie; but that I
remembered the exception of the Emperor, which he adds in favor of excellent
Artizans. Nobis contra videtur, melius esse Tabulam cedere Picturae: Ridiculum
enim est picturam Apellis vil Parrbasii in accessi^nem vilissimae picturae
cedere. We must not urge a man that is intent upon more important affairs. Yet
when your leisure serves, be pleased to perfect that same Translation, and try
if our language can express Ter^nce in that nobleness of style, and the
Character of Se^pio and Laelius, which the Roman Nation observe to be in it. In
the mean time Sir, to have the more color to demand of you, I send you here a
small gift; some Verses which I received lately from one of my friends in
Englend, who does charge the Muses of the Low Countries with the making. You
are in some sort interessed in it, seeing they question the credit and truth of
an Author who among you, is cried for Indubitable; and seem to thwart your
judgment of him, as concerning the certainty of his Testimony. But (in good
sooth) the Flemmings have reason to require such a scrupulous and punctual
truth in our news: They who are the most fabulous Historians of this age, and
for the most part, truck away nothing but Apocryphal Relations. By changing
the proper names only in their Verses, we might retort all their Sarcasmes upon
themselves; we could speak truly of their Gazet, what they have falsely
written of ours; and tell them farther, that that which they deride so, is well
esteemed all over by the most ingenious Nation of the world; It is certain that
the fine wits of Rome do admire the acuteness and apposite expressions therein;
and Monsieur the Abbat of -- upon his return from Italy did assure me, that it
was pronounced in the Academy of the Humorists, that each section of the
Parisian Gazet was worth a Chapter in Florus, or Valerius Maximus. They are
Sir, as you know, Epigrams in prose: and the determination of so famous a
Tribunal, is a sufficient Countermure against the assaults of this new Poem. I
would, desire you to impart it to Monsieur Gaulmim, and some other grave Judges
of Latin learning. That we may know the gust of your great world, and what we
are to believe in the Provinces. The description of the Bureand' Adresse, seems
to me to have been drawn upon the plain, or model of that Palace which Ovid
has erected to Fame. But you will make us upon this, and all the rest most
large and learned Observations; and I do promise my self to receive from you
at once, both a Translation and a Commentary. I am perfectly

Sir Your etc.
Balzac 25 Nov. 1636.
To the same. LET. XXVII.
SIR, Since I wrote my Letter, it comes to my head that for a Counter cuffe to
the Gazeta Parisiensi^, we might send to the Low Countrymen, Historia Hispana,
and fill it with Comical sport enough. First we must make it to be the
ineestuous Offspring of the Giants, begotten upon their own sister Fame, for
the high and mighty lies wherewith it does abuse the credulity of the simple;
and (in truth) the natural pride of that Nation which appears, even in the
wandering Beggar in extremest misery; and those Rhodomont^des which to them
are so proper and usual, that their very complements retain a smack of them*
are worthy of so illustrious an Extraction, and to descend in a direct line
from Enceladus and Mimas, and Briareus. This premised Sir, and enricht with
your art, I would have this monstrous Issue gain upon the belief of the
Indians and the Cockneys of Europe, that the beginning of the universal
Monarchy promised to Spain, will betide just the next year, which is the
Climasterical year of all other States; that Gods will is, that there should
be but one Monarch upon earth; and that the Pope himself for his better
accommodation, does mean to resign Rome to him, and exchange it for the
Archbishopric of Toledo. That the Battle where the King of Sueden was slain,
was the last sigh of dying liberty; that this Prince was no such thing as we
took him to be, and for those achievements of his, which we entertained with
such wonder, nothing was performed without the help of Magic, by virtue only
of some charms and characters, and the assistance of the Powers of Hell, which
at last was found too weak against the House of Austria. That to the end, that
the second causes and humane means might concur with the design of providence,
foreign affairs do seem to complie of themselves to this great change. That
the King of England is not so brave, but that he would be contented to be a
Feudatary of the King of Spain; and if it goes to the worst, that there will
not be wanting some Gunpowder-men to make him caper in the air with his whole
Realm. That the cinders of the Holy League, and the remainder of the Huguenot
Party begin to flame a new in Frence by the bellows and Libells of St.
German; that they have bargained with some secret Engineers, who have
undertaken to fortify Ro^b^l in one night. That Duke Charles must be revenged
upon Nancy, and that he does hold Paris already in extremity; that if there
be not a Spanish Garrison already in Turin and C^sall, there will be one, when
it shall seem good to his Catholic Majesty, and when the Dukes of Savoy and
Mantua, shall be received into his favor. That he will have none of Venice or
Amsterdam, because that an Illuminatee of Madrid, and a Sybille of Naples have
assured him, that the Sea will one day swallow up these two great Cities; and
the loss of his Spaniards that should be their Commanders, would be a cause of
great grief unto him. That he had long since chastis'd the Rebels of Holland,
if some considerations of state had not hindered him from it. But let him
preserve that Land of contradiction, for a Fencing-schoole for his own
Subjects, to keep them from idleness, and to breath them by continual
exercise. That for the rest, if the world will not be so easily conquered, he
has in his coffers wherewith to buy it. And hereabouts, this Daughter of Fame
and Enceladus her Brother, must raise her tone higher, and out-bid her first
figure or number; she must with one dash of the pen make more gold, then the
Sun can make in a thousand years; she must make the winds labor, and force the
Ocean to groan under the new Fleet, which according to her computation, must
arrive every month punctuallie at Lisbon and Sivil; she must make a
discovery (if needs be) of the third Indies, and find out all the hidden
mines there; not those within the Demaines of Antichrist excepted, and cause
them to be guarded by those evil Spirits, which S Augustine calls (for this
reason) Incubones Thesauroru^^, etc. Behold Sir, a rude draught of a work which
expects from you its consummation and perfection, which you might soon finish,
if your poetical fancy should once seize you. Here is matter (you see) for an
excellent Irony, and wherewith to continue it to a hundred verses and more,
though the Comedy did affect you near so little, especially when you shall
add from and fashion to the stuff which I present you with, who am

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 27. Nov. 1637.
To Monsieur de Couurelles. LET. XXVIII.
SIR, J cannot write unto you but tumultuarilie: my hands and head are so full
of business, that being to take a journie to Paris, I am bound to bid farewell
to the Clergy, the N^bilitie and the Commons. It is now four years that I have
deliberated upon this voyage, and being at last resolved, I am like by your
favor to be accompanied then I did expect, Comes facundus in via, etc. I think
I may give this attribute to your Book, after the Elogy which you vouchsafe me
therein: and if I had not already taken part and declared my self, for the
Author of the Flandrian History, (who is one of my good Lords and friends) I
should have entered blindlie into a new faction, which (as it seems) you do
abet and patronize; but Sir, you will not take it amiss that I profess
constancy, and that this second Author, has not won my first affection. This
evening I shall begin to entertain him, and to taste of those delicacies
whereof you were pleased to make an Essay. These will not be painted Cares I am
sure, not Pageants of good; no nimble juglings and impostures practiced upon
the eye and imagination, as most part of those things are that come from that
Country. There is no imposture so finely contrived, as to be able to cheat so
cautious a judgment as yours. And I will folllow you, wheresoever you will
please to lead me, ( I mean still to except matters of faith) and I believe you
will not be offended with such an exception, since the Laws of friendship will
allow it me, and since I never cease to be most affectionatelie

Sir, Your, etc.
Angoulesme March 8. 1636.
To -- LET. XXIX.
SIR, My willingness to relieve afflicted men, deserves not the thanks which I
have reapt thereby. This is a passion which on my part does but produce
fruitless desires, and which cannot by you be ^^d in any estimation, but out
of a superlative nobleness in you. In that I have given harbor to a man that
was persecuted, I did but that which the Law of Nations required of me, and
what I would not have denied to the misfortunes of an -- or a Spaniard. If you
take this to mind, and become my debtor, you do assume the interest of all
mankind, and acquit the honor of the whole world; for my part, I am twice
rewarded for an act, which J thought was sufficiently rewarded in the doing,
and for which J expected neither honor nor acknowledgement. You see Sir, that I
am not privy to your secrets, and if you were obliged hereby, it was by an
innocent and blindly ignorant man. For the Cavalier, touching whom you ask
some news; J believe that he has prevented me, as being unwilling that any
other then himself should be the Historian of his adventures. He will (no
question) write unto you, what has happened unto him in the Resectory of the --
Fathers, and the notable advantages he has gotten over a Gladiator of the long
Gown. J am not troubled a whit that he has got him some credit in so good a
place, and gained the reputation of a man of valor. Yet, I must tell you, that
his credit is dearer unto me then my own interest; and that if he have not the
mind to dispute, it is not my desire he should turn for my sake. He may be my
friend at a cheaper rate; and I can content my self with the calmness and
tranquillity of his passion, not needing that it should break forth and appear
through noise and jangling. Many men (you know) never do a good turn, but that
they may have occasion of upbraiding. Poverty is more tolerable then such
Creditors; and there are some Patrons of such harsh dispositions, that I would
choose persecution before their succors. Upon our first meeting, I will declare
my self more particularly to you, and in the mean while, rest

Sir, Your etc.
Paris May 3. 1631.
To my Lord the Bishop of Angoulesme, chief Almener to the Illustrious Queen of
great Britain. LET. XXX.
MY LORD, I have seen in a Letter that you have written to Monsieur -- that my
name is not unknown unto you, and that I have some share in your good Graces;
this is a favor which I owe to your courtesy only, and I dare not believe,
that my more then small deserts, could have acquired me such an inestimable
good as that. I cannot justly enjoy it, if you would not admit of that perfect
devotion and reverence which I offer you, and which I were bound to pay to your
virtue, though I should never reflect upon your Dignity You have at first
boa^ding, engaged my observance. It will be (my Lord) an incredible contentment
unto me, to enjoy that happy entertainment and discourse which you have done me
the honor to promise me. And I am confident, that I shall still depart thence a
better man, and more learned, though my inclination be never so untoward, and
unapt for good purposes, and my memory never so slipperie to retain the
impression of fair Ideas. But I begin to fear that your Flock should in the
mean while languish for you, and that the interests of France, will cross and
oppose themselves against the wishes of our Province. The fear of that was it,
that caused me to send England a Book, which J did heartily desire, J could
have presented to you there, together with the Author. He is one of the great
Votaries of that great Cardinal Perron your Uncle: He does celebrate his
memory without intermission, and adores his learned Relics. He does glory
in being his ghostly Son; and you will not (I am sure) make any difficulty,
to avow this spiritual alliance that is between you and him, being joined with
the condition, that he desires to live in all his lifetime; which is to be

My Lord, Your etc.
Balzac 20. Dec. 1636.
To Monsieur De -- LET. XXXI.
Sir, I write unto you with a heart wounded with sorrow, and make my moan to
you, for the sinister opinion, that you have conceived of me, upon the first
evil report that was suggested to you concerning me. I thought J had given you
a sufficient assurance of the smoothn^sse and plamnesse of my soul, that you
should not have so easily doubted of it, and entertain a belief so injurious to
amity, before you had communicated your jealousies to your friends, and made
them clear enough. You know Sir, more then any other, that my passions are not
close and reserved, but J carry my soul still in my prehead. When J was not as
yet, so far your Servant as now J am, J did not use much Artifice, and
dissimulation to persuade the contrary; and thence you might have deduced an
infallible conclusion, that if I had changed my inclination, I would not have
deceived you with new protestations of fidelity. I do therefore religiously
protest unto you, that honoring you with that zeal as I do, you could not
inflict a greater punishment upon me, then the forfeiture of your favors. But
moreover, I do swear to you by all that is sacred in the world, that I have
committed nothing that might deserve such a cruel punishment. After this me
thinks you might be confirmed in the truth, but pardon me if I tell you, you
should have been so before; and that I do extremely wonder, that a weak and
gross calumny, should quite ruin and deface in your thoughts, the good
impressions, which I thought I had left there. I cannot hinder men's
mis-constructions of me, or bind Interpreters from doing violence, and putting
my words upon the rack, to make them depose things which were far from my
intentions. Sophisters make use of a true proposition to infer an erroneous
conclusion; and Pettisoggers still cite the Law, to authorize their injustice,
and yet none will tax truth to be the cause of error, or Law the mother of
injustice. I cannot warrant, but my own thoughts (which are sound and innocent)
not those of my adversaries, which are full of malice and rancor. I am
responsible for the things that I have written, and ready withal to maintain
them. But all the visions and fancies of men are not in my power. Every man
can make a nimble and subtle decipherer of another man's intentions. The same
picture, according to several lights and postures, may have several
representations; and often times there is a great difference between a Text and
the Commentaries, the meaning of the Author and the Criticismes of Grammarians.
I said that I knew some strange insufferable humors, and no way fit to possess
and sway freeborn men. Therefore I said, that a man, whom I do infinitely
esteem and honor was of that humor. Lo here Sir, (not to say half of what I
think of it) a conclusion very unworthie a Logician, and which is as far from
common, as from my particular sense. Jndeed it was not you, that deduced it,
yet you should not have entertained it at second hand, and if it did not seem
to you to be palpably false, yet you might have demurred a while, and suspected
it; you have done your self wrong and me too, in conceiving so bad a thought
of your own merit and my fidelity; in expressing that you have some distrust
of your self, who are of no mean value, and but very little confidence in me,
whose freeness is something worth. I have but little skill in fallacies, and a
mean Jugler may sometimes gain credit with me: nevertheless, I should never
have been thus surprised and deluded, and when you have wrote to me in a dozen
Letters at least, that you knew some men that wrote pernicious Books, and
maintained Heretical Propositions: I did not yield to such an imagination that
this did reflect upon me; and when you sent a Lackey into this Province, I did
not forbear to send you commendations by him. You see that I am stung, and
therefore am sencible. If your love were not dear unto me, I could well enough
bear your neglect of me; and if my zeal to you were not strong, I should
endeavor to solace my self, after your ill entreating of me. But because I
love, I would be requited with love; and I cannot brook to be taxt with a
fault, which I thought did not deserve so much as suspicion. Sir, I am upon the
point to publish a new Volum of Letters, where there be some which I have
written unto you and others, where I make mention of you, as your virtues did
oblige me; and where will be one also, wherein (as some would persuade you) I
am injurious to you. How I pray, can all these agree? can I be both your friend
and your foe at once? can I blow with the same mouth, both hot and cold? can
the literal sense favor you, and the allegorical injure you? can I do you
wrong, when I must needs wrong my self? shall I give an occasion of distaste by
ambiguous terms, where I must make my self ridiculous by apparent
contradictions? This was it Sir, that was suggested to your credulity, and
which you did not reject at first acquaintance, as I had reason to expect from
your good discretion. These were the false surmises which were brought before
you, wherein you found more semblance of truth, then in the sincere
protestations which I made to you. I cannot conceive (knowing that you have
continued your friendship toward me, and that I too have not lost my reason)
how you could imagine, that I intended in a bravery to disingage you, and by
those aukeward spirits which I had known, I aimed directly at you, and might
not design some other as well. I know a great many of the Gascons, and as
there be some of them very moderate, so also there be others that are not so. I
know some of Provence and Corsica, and I am not ignorant of their natural
gentleness; I know some Spaniards, and I know how agreeable is their yoke with
that which they call Castiga vellacos.

Lastly, you may believe that I have not traveled blindfold, and I had in vain
conversed with men, if I had not endeavored to know them; and yet in this
particular, men would fain make all my acquaintance to be terminated in you,
and that I have pardoned a thousand Humorists in the world (to whom my
proposition might be applied) for to violate you. They surmise, that having an
aim to wound some body, I made choice of one of my chiefest friends for my
mark; and that I have murmured closely and in dark language, that He is rough
and violent, whom I proclaim every where, and with loud accent, for completely
wise and noble. I will not cite unto you mean testimonies, for the confirmation
of this truth. I can allege My Lord, the Duke of -- and My Lord the Count of
-- of whom is here question made. They know both of them, how far I am your
Servant, and with what servencie I did maintain your honor and interests, on a
time when occasion was presented. I am willing to believe that your other
friends might serve you in some stead in some other encounters; but in this
here, all the whole Company (I except no man) was mute. There was not any
there, but my self that spoke strenuouslie in your behalf, concerning those
things that did reflect upon you; and the boldness of my affection carried me
so far, that the Lords, whom I now named unto you, did give me a public
testimony, and professed, (though with a little disgust) that I was too good a
friend to make a Countier of. I am therefore something agrieved at this time,
to be requited thus with oblequie, where I thought I had deserved thanks; to
have preserved my fidelity inviolable toward you, and now to be accused of
treachery; to be the only man in your defense on that occasion, whereof you
have cause to boast, and now to be the only man of whom you complain. I do not
use to value my services which I perform to my friends, and I am content to
stand up for them manfully, without making unto them an account of my
prowess. Moreover Sir, this betrays grief, more then presumption, and may be
termed defending, rather then upbraiding; These are resentments which
accompany innocence that is offended; and which your facility (abused by the
malice of another) does force from my heart against my will I will not conceal
it from you, you have made a deep wound in it, it makes me think in all my
dreams of the injustice which I suffer at your hand, and you had utterlie lost
any friend, that had been less firm then my self; by putting him to such a
hazard. Wherefore Sir, for all the revenge that I desire for the injury which
I have received, take it not amiss, that I give you this advice, that you give
less credit hereafter to another, and more to your self; that you would be
more jealous of those opinions that you have conceived upon your first
acquaintance of a business, and less affected to the rumors of the City,
which are not grounded upon any solid foundation. You should consider the place
from whence these quaint News have traveled; weigh the circumstances of the
thing, examine by what spirit the accuser was led thereunto: and not examine
his person only, and passion, and interests; but also the deservings of the
party accused, his manner and behavior of life, and his former actions: suspend
your judgment at leastwise, until time shall give you a more exact and
particular information of businesses; otherwise you shall never want disquiet
and vexation, and you should thus but feed upon suspicion and distrust, which
are very unwholesome viands. Men must not send you relations of whatsoever an
undiscreet friend or some rude sturdie servant, or such and such a Neighbor
shall report unto -- they must have more care of the tranquillity of your
mind; and likewise for your part, you must not swear unto the testimonies of
all the Informers, that have a plot upon your credulity, and take pleasure in
the pain and exercise which they put you unto. If you allow an open gate for
all tales and suggestions to enter in, they will throng into your house apace,
and first come, first heard. To day, they will inform you (and perhaps with
specious colors too) that your Privadoes do divulge your secrets; and to
morrow that your Domestics do rob and rifle you; and at last that all the
world is your enemy, and all private conferences, are but conspiracies against
you. I conjure you Sir, for your own peace, not to give so much credit to those
things which do no way concern Religion, nor to abandon your self to those
Relators, who pretend to dispel melancholy, when they are fit for nothing but
to whisper follies into your ears, and to calumniate with a good grace: make a
distinction betwixt the fraudulent Arts of Parasites and the freedom of
ingenious men; between those that adore Fortune, and those that regard nothing
but Virtue. For my part, I declare freely unto you, that if Monsieur the --
were raised again, and would commit his omnipotency to your hands, I should
not do that to regain your favor, what I do now perform in regard of our
friendship. At leastwise I should be more stern and stubborn (then I am) in my
displeasure, and more obstinate in seeking to you, and less solicitous of the
event of my seeking. But I have not yet the skill to complie with the times,
and to be still on Fortunes side; J profess such an austere honesty and
goodness that is not of the present times. J would take a pleasure to be a
Companion of my friend in exile, and be his fellow prisoner, J would run
under his Ruin to bear it off, when J could not help him to stand fast and
subsist. Your Fortune being so well established as it is, does not require any
such proof and trial of fidelity. But it is certain that you cannot desire of
me any experiments of love so hazardous, but I would willingly undergo them
with pleasure for your sake, and testify unto you that I am (beyond
comparison) more then all my Informers.

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 7. June 1633.
To Monsieur de Serizay. LET. XXXII.
SIR, There is no way to bear any longer with the contumacy of your silence, I
have sent this Messenger of purpose to make you speak, and to tell you (though
with some distaste to you) that you have lost your memory; and that is no
less then the third part of your soul. So that there remain but the
understanding and the will, wherein I have (perhaps) some nook and seat. You
have promised me wonders, and performed just nothing; you did owe me a visit
immediately after your voyage to Saints, and since that, you might have gone
to Rome and come back again. You see here great cause of discontent;
nevertheless I am so facile, that if you would but bereave your self of the
pleasures of the Court for three or four days, I would seal you a general
Pardon for all that is past, and account you as honest a man as ever I did
before. While I expect this reasonable satisfaction which you cannot deny me,
be pleased to acquaint my Lord the Duke of Rochefoucaut that Monsieur de Nantes
is extremely troubled that he cannot receive the honor which he would
willingly pay him by coming to visit him in these parts. He expects this
morning some tidings from my Lord, the Duke of Espernon for to render himself
where he shall appoint him to find him; and I look upon him as upon a blessing
which I expect to lose every moment. If he were not preparing to Mass he
would gnifie unto him his discontents himself, and the earnest desire he has
to make his Son one of the Luminaries of our Church. He finds the business so
for advanced, that there will be no great difficulty to effect the rest, and
that his Extraction is so happy, that a little cultivation will produce rare
and excellent fruits. Do me the favor as to deliver to Monsieur his eldest Son
the Panegyricke framed for the King of Sueden, together with the Letter which I
wrote the last Summer to poor --. This is not to recommend unto him the memory
of her: I know that she is infinitely dear unto him: nor to put him into any
affright; for men of his sort do apprehend nothing but dishonor. I desire only
that he should see that my poor judgment does sometimes jump with good
understandings, and that I had the honor to be his Rival in one passion that
he has harbored. If you do not send me by my Man the Discourse of -- garnished
with Notes and Commentaries, I shall have a new cause of quarrel; and do not
you think that I betake my self to Monsieur -- for them, this is an Oracle
(indeed) that is always ready to answer, but I fear me, that you have not
always devotion enough to consult with him. Adieu Sir, I am absolutely

Balzac 30. May 1633. Your, etc.

To Monsieur Habert, Abbat of Cerizy. LET. XXXIII.
SIR, I believe that you will not be offended with a Petition that this Bearer
shall commence unto you in my behalf. Your goodness carries you so far at to
love your Persecutors; and you have entertained so favourablie my first
importunities, that I stand not now in fear, of making motions. If you had
given me, the repulse at first, you had taught me the virtue of discretion, and
provided better for your own quietness. But the force of example is dangerous:
the evil does suddenly insinuate and grow familiar, and treads often that way,
which it was wont to measure. So that I think that I have now some color of
justice to torment you; and it is habitual unto me to abuse a thing, when I
have not found difficulty enough to make me use it with moderation. I shall
continue Sir, an importunate Beggar till you forget to be generous: and do no
doubt; but I know how to make use of a good so diffusive and beneficial, as in
your Amity. You shall travel to day for the good of my estate, because there
is a Council; and to morrow for the good of my soul, because there is a Sermon;
that I may acknowledge you my friend, for my spiritual as well as temporal
good, and that you may receive my thanks, both in this and the other world.
That which you are to pronounce with gracefulness of action, and cannot well
be communicated in writing, has notwithstanding already given me infinite
delight upon paper. I have never seen our Mysteries illustrated with so much
light of eloquence, nor Reason so succesfullie employed in the service of
Faith, nor Christian Morality better seasoned, to make it relish well in
profane palates. But in this particular, I would fain be less beholding to
you, that I might have the more freedom, and be able to assure you (without any
supposition of engagement, or sign of acknowledgement) that I admire all your
Muses universallie, both the politer and the severer ones; both those that can
compose Hymns and Anthems, and sing the praises of our Savior Christ: and
those that can resolve Problems, and deal in Christian learning. I bid you good
day, and remain with all my soul

Sir, Your etc.
Paris 29 April 1636.
To Monsieur De Gaillard. LET. XXXIV.
SIR, Be of good courage, and start not at the opening of my packet; I do
assure you beforehand, that it is not my Ghost that talks to you, and that the
Letter that I write unto you, does not come from the other world. The rumor
which was scattered concerning my death, has not killed me; and I am yet,
(since it is the pleasure of God) a witness of his works, and an Adorer of his
power. I have ere this, received the alarm of the like news; but I am no
longer credulous to dreams and presages; my soul does not labor with those
popular infirmities: And I do consent with that Grecian, that all the wishes of
enemies, all the imprecations of Poets, and all the false bruits of Fame, are
not able to bring on our destiny one hour the sooner. There is a Gentleman in
Gascoigne, who is chronicled to have been slain in the battle of Yury; and he
is yet very well notwithstanding, and means to live long. I am Sir, of the
same humor too, and confess to you that I do not much hate my life, though I
have little cause to love it. Your Stationers indeed did not believe this: they
have handled me as though I had been dead indeed, and have magined withal,
that they be my rightful Heirs ex ass, having eized upon the first papers of
mine that they could meet with. I am omething apprehensive of this injury, and
it should grieve me if Monsieur -- should be the Author of it; because I should
then endure it with more impatience yet. To say truth, if this be not to wound
and violate (downright) the Law of Nations, it is (at least) to deflowre and
taint it: and you will confess with me, that it could not be pleasing unto me,
that the -- should be published without asking my consent thereunto. Had it been
so, I should not have been perhaps very averse, and I should have desired him
only to alter something for my sake, and something for his own. For though his
understanding be passing good, yet you know well, that our Grammatians do not
allow his style for regular; and though their scruples be ill grounded, yet
they must be considered. That which I would fain have changed, and where I
thought I had some small interest, was one word, which nay ancient Enemy had
already miserably mangled; and which, (not wanting spirit and life in its
natural place) does resemble those delicate plants, which die as soon as they
be transplanted from their own banks. But remedy comes now too tardie. I must
comfort my self against this, as well as other injuries. This is but dallying
to former wrongs; and such pinches should well be born with, by a man that
never uses to complain of Treasons and Assassinates. For your satisfaction
Sir, let it suffice that I have a perfect knowledge of your wisdom and
honesty, and that I would trust you with my life, my honor, and my fortunes.
If I had had so base a thought as to suspect you in this dealing, I should
believe that I were bound to do penance for my suspicion. I know that you are
every way virtuous, and my firm friend, as I am very reallie

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 10. Jan. 1634.
To the same -- LET. XXXV.
SIR, J have received your incomparable Book: in the which (after a long and
tedious perusal) my Grammar could find no construction, nor my Logic common
sense. This is not the first time that that poor Wit has strayed so. He has
been this long time ridiculous without being facetious, and has been a
laughing stock to the vulgar, and an object of pity to the wise. The late
Monsieur -- did use to call him the greatest enemy that ever Reason had,
between Cales and Bayonne; and said, he was a fool in two Sciences, and in four
Languages. Nevertheless, if our friend shall think him worthy of some traces
of his pen, let us indulge him that exercise, with this provisoe, that he be
not violent, and that he put not himself to a heat; that (if it please him) he
do not deal seriously with him, or arm himself at all points, against an
Adversary that deserves not any encounter but with pins. As for the -- you
wrong your self, for to mistrust the moderation of my spirit. In the estate
that I have ordered and settled it in, I have less passion then the King of the
Stoics, and I must be excited for eight days together, to the cruelty of
hearing any man whatsoever, for one half an hour* It is not my intention to
write against Monsieur -- but to discourse with him; and I have not so little
wit, but that I can distinguish his person from his cause. He has obliged me
with so good grace, and spoken of me in such high language and sumptuous terms,
that I cannot doubt of his respect, or his affection toward me. And he shall
likewise see my resentment of it, through the whole file of my discourse;
wherein I am resolved to temper my self so discreetlie, that if I persuade him
not to my opinion, I shall not make my proceedings odious; and if I do not rest
satisfied with what he faith, I shall contradict him but obliquely, and with a
kind of Biasse, which shall not be distastful unto him. This will be (perhaps)
the first example of modesty, that has been heard of among the disputants of
this age; and we will demonstrate to those of that side, who talk outragiouslie
in Problems of small importance; that the altercations of honest men are
without choler, and that generous enemies live better together then malicious
Burghers. For the rest Sir, I desire you to continue the pains that you have
begun, and to send me wherewith, J may fortify all the Approaches that are
liable to assault and battery. I shall fear nothing, being strengthened with
so powerful succors; and you will justify my cause if it be good, or give it a
color of justice, if it be not so. See what an enterprise it was in you to
love me: You could never have conceived a more pernicious design for your
self. It will repent you more then once, and you will renounce at anytime (I
am sure) the sorry purchase which you have made in the acquaintance of a
troublesome man. Nevertheless, he is one that is most affectionatelie

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 20, March. 1634.
To Madam Desloges. LET. XXXVI.
MAdam, It is now three months that I have expected Monsieur de Auvila, that I
might be informed of the state of your health: But having lately understood
that it is not so current as I could wish it, and mine being not so firm, that
I could adventure upon a journie, I have dispatched one toward you to learn
the truth thereof. It will be an incredible ease to my mind, if I find that it
was be a false alarm, or that your sickness by this time be over past. I do
hope for one of the two (Madam,) because I do passionately desire it, but I
beseech you to believe that it is long of my crazie body that I am no sooner
cleared of my fear, and rid of the pain you put me to; and that you do not see
me in person instead of the Messenger that I have sent. He has in charge to
present you with my fine Cuts or small Ingravery, which I have newly received
from Paris; I thought meet to send you this dumb visit, that it might not
oblige you to any complement that might put you to trouble; you do receive
(indeed) more troublesome ones, sometimes; And if the fullenness of my
countenance be an object of bad presage, you will confess that the perpetual
silence that does accompany it, is a great Commodity: at leastwise it can never
be offensive to you, since it leaves you still at quiet, and demanding no
ceremony from you, it must perplex you less then the Antiquities and Originals
of La March, and Limousin. Finally Madame, it lies in you to preserve your
bounties for me, and maintain me in my possession. I know that Monsieur de All
is of infinite value, and I believe I cannot loose him, since it was you that
gave him me; you have too good a hand to do any thing that should not last, and
there is no accident that can menace and shake that friendship, whereof virtue
is the cause, and you the Mediatrix. I esteem that of this rare Personage as a
treasure, and I would be well pleased, that he should know by your means, that
I admire the eloquence of his Degmatical and peaceable Divinity, though I do
not subscribe unto the Doctrine of his polemical writings. I most humbly kiss
your hand, and remain

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 16. Jan. 1637.
To Monsieur De -- LET. XXXVII.
SIR, Take pity on a man that has not the leisure to live, that is always
busy and always sickly, whom a thousand griefs seize upon in his Chamber, and
a thousand persecutions throng upon from without. Monsieur de -- knows it well
that I am no dissembler, and will testify unto you (I assure my self) that in
the state that J am in, I can but admire those letters, to the which I should
frame an answer. I avow unto you Sir, that it cost me some pains to decipher
them. But yet I do not complain of my travel, which found most happy success. I
have discovered infinite rarities under the riddles of your Scribe, and I did
not mistake the graces, though He had begrimmed them all over. I send them back
to you, since it is your request, and yet notwithstanding I cease not to detain
them; my memory is not so unfaithful, but it preserves the better part of your
fair compositions, as well as of your excellent conversation. It is certain
that this gave me some gusts and appetites which I never had, before you came
hither. I am not good Sir, but by your goodness, and if I have any degree of
holy heat in me, it is neither proper nor natural unto me, I have it from your
communication. You are at this day one of those Authors whom I cite still with
a grace and an Emphasis: I do arm my self with your reasons against the enemies
of truth, and you are all my French Divinity. What a harvest might be reapt
(think you) of devour meditations, and spiritual Treatises from less seed then
are your Discourses and Letters? A man might extract from them more sap and
juice then from many Quaaragesimall. Sermons of Spanish Postillers, and were
they but a little amplified, they might serve for complete Apologies of
Christian Doctrine, and solid refutations of unsound Philosophy. Your
acquaintance then is no small purchase, and I owe you more th^n vulgar thanks
for it. But since you desire none other but my edification: instead of minting
fastidious complements for you, I will labor to put your wholesome counsels to
practice. I will become a good man if I can, that you may be celebrated in my
works, being not contented with words. The curing of a disease does
sufficiently proclaim the sovereignty of the remedy; and it is a far better way
to magnify your style by performing actions of virtue, which it does propose
as its end, then to cry out Euge at every period. There is no hopes to go
beyond this. Remember me if you please in your Sacrifices, that is, love me
effectually, after your way, since I am after mine, and that very sincerely

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 30. December. 1636.
To Monsieur Girard, Official of the Church of Angoulesme. LET. XXXVIII.
SIR, Your favor: have exhausted my thanks, I cannot choose but acquaint you,
that I do repossesse my old pieces again, and that your love is still ingenious
in obliging those whom you affect. I doubt not but that the courtesies that I
have received from Monsieur de -- are the effects of your testimonies of me;
and I must ascribe all the contentment that I have received thereby to your
preparation and induction. There is no subject so vile and mean but gains price
by your estimation. You have found the trick or secret to make objects swell
beyond their proportion ad infinitum; and to stamp a man Illustrious, though of
a very abject condition. I came to know him by the civilities of --, which are
far different from the brevadoes of --. Are not these the most tyranical
spirits in the world? that should say that I could hinder, that any Books
should be written or published, at a hundred leagues distance? that is, that I
should maintain an Agent in all the Printing-houses of France, that should
prevent the publication of Antiphilarkes. These Messieurs that have handled me
in such a sort, that fire and poison would seem to an Italian too gentle
tortures to revenge their cruelty, are at this time, offended (for sooth) that
I should be furnished with so much as a Buckler, and that I should be offered a
Sanctuary. They demand a reason of me why a man, whom I never knew, should
take compassion on Innocence oppressed, and could not endure the noise and
insolence of their false triumphs, which I should not do neither, dear Friend,
if I would give vent and liberty to my grief, and that nature suffered not in
the suppression of so just complaint. And yet I must continue to do her
violence, and deserve the approbation of Monsieur our Prelate. I beg from you
his good favors, and desire you both to believe that I am affectionatelie

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 20. March. 1633.
To the same -- LET. XXXIX.
Sir, It is not your will that I solicit, but your Memory. For amidst the
presie of business of the whole Province, which you do willingly take the
charge of, mine happily may slip out of your memory without your fault. The
importance is, to commence it with an opinion that it is feasible, and with a
resolution to carry; for if reason be urged timorouslie, and if a man do not
descend straight from generalities to particulars, a thousand journies unto the
-- will not be worth one; and we should but take much pains to little purpose.
Monsieur de -- shall pardon me, if I do not find my self either hardly, or
strong enough to undertake the work which he has done me the honor to design
me for; and for such a task, a more peaceable and happy retreat, and a more
practiced and expert quill then mine, are requisite. I have used my hand and
mind to write but toys, and things unnecessarie. For the future, I purpose
not to write any works of supererogation, but what the Church prescribes, and
God does reckon as meritorious. I am extremely troubled at my Cousins
mischance, and the burning of his Study. He cannot choose but be very sensible
of this loss, since it was the chiefest part of his wealth, and thereby sa^
the Issues of his brain perish before his face, without being able to redress
it. This must be his comfort, that he is young and laborious, and that Fortune
cannot ravish from him those true Gods which he is Master of. The loss of a
vessel is not valued, if the Pilot be saved; and Captains have been seen to
triumph after the loss of many Armies. Miser and nudus Imperator invenit
exercitum Our Advocate is more cruel then the war, and more severe then
justice: He has slain in his Letters my Lord the Marshal of -- and my Lord the
Duke of --, who are yet alive to pardon him. Tell him (if you please) that he
do not traffic any more in such news, for he will be reckoned among the
fabulous Authors else, and men will take me for bad intelligence. I know well
that he is not surety for the news that flies abroad, but he is answerable
for the asseveration wherewith he does recommend them unto me; and he must talk
of something that is not know, or at leastwise with the cautious form of the
Poets, when they say, ni faema est, ut perhibent, si eredere dignum est, I bid
you good even, and remain perfectly

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 4. Feb. 163^.
To the same -- LET. XL.
YOur friend does not well to take the Alarm, since it is not I that gave it
him. I was never used to promise but with an intention to perform; and those
that have sovereign power over me, have not power enough to make me falsify my
word. As for those idle contemplators that talk according to their fancy,
concerning the occasion of my Voyage; I do not think it any part of their
office to render an account of my actions; I ever thought that the liberty of
going and coming was tolerated, as lawful in this Kingdom; and when a man
departed out of Paris, he was not bound to publish a Manifesto, to make it
known to all the world. It is not without reason that Monsieur de St^ben does
much esteem the eloquence of M^ffeus. The late Monsieur Scaliger, who was none
of the best friends the Jesuits had, did so before him; and see here one trace
of his pen concerning it, in one of his Letters. M^ffaeut ille quisquis est,
vir elequentissimus est, ambitiosae taemen magis quam cast gatae facundiae. He
commends him (you see) though not without exception, yet in my judgment
without envy; since in this particular the most Intelligent of the Society
concur with him in the same opinion, and namely the Historiographer of the
Low Country wars, who in his Dialogues, speaks of him thus; though it be in
the person of another: Miratus sum florem and numeros O^ationis. Dixi
Scriptorem mihi videri non hujus aevi, sed e veteri illo Ordine and q^t tem
Patricio Historicorum. Nihil uspiam incultum neglectumque cone^nnae perfectaque
omniae; nisi forie eo peccat, quod nihil peccat, nam and ingenium Scriptoris
avxium apparet interdum, and dictio videtur exquisita ad sonum, eumque famili
moduletione crebro fusum. Quare monui ut orationis culturam saepius
^^b^ntiusque dissimularet, nec verbae itae trajiceret quasi complementa
numerorum. I am yet in the same state, that you left me in at parting, but that
I have still the same malady, though not the same consolation. My Ague visits
me every night, though (indeed) not in the same pomp and ceremony as it used,
when its accesses were regu^ar. But yet, it does still handle me rudely, and I
do much fear the consequence of this custom. Come Sir, and exorcize this evil
spirit out of my body, by the infusion of some mirth into my mind, and think
not that I can receive any true joy, being so far distant from you. I am

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 7. April 1635.
To the same -- LET. XLI.
SIR, Since it is impossible to withstand it, I have sent you the Letter, that
you desired to see. But you shall read it (if you please) to your own ears
only, that it may not awake Envy And that some Philarchus do not over-hear
you. Lo here withal, the three lines of Cardinal Bentivolio's Letter, which
you did so often demand of me, and which I can no longer deny you without
incivility. Di nuovo prego V. Stia a ringratiar, etc. I do again entreat you to
thank Monsieur Balzac in my name, and by the same opportu^ity to make him an
ample testimony of my great affection toward his deserts; and tell him this
withal, that no pen does more discourage me then his, for I see too well how
far it does surpass mine. I must confess that in this particular, to do me
grace he has been unjust to himself, and that the same motion of humility
that prompts Princes of his rank and parent^ge to wash poor men's feet, has
moved him to use me so respectively. Neither do I pretend to take a pride in
it; but yet I think, it will not be denied, but that I may derive some comfort
from it. And (indeed) it seems that the goodness of this brave Worthy, would
needs make me amends for the malice of my Adversaries. These few lines do weigh
down the swelling Volums of my Opponents, and I shall use no other refutation
of all that has, or shall be written against me. For the present Sir, I am not
of that man's opinion who censures that passage, La noire mere des estoiles; the
Poet that so styles the night, is not so bold and rash as the Grammarian
supposes, that reprehends him. And if this be as he says, a Gasconisme,
Tibollus was a Gascon when he said, Ludite, jam Nox jungit equos: currumque
sequuntur Matris lascivo sydera fulva choro. The Night there is mother of the
stars; as in another Poet the Nurse of them.

(...).
Nox, aurcorum furva nutrix syderum.
Our Man writes to me often enough, but he puts me to hereafter in all his
Letters; and does ever promise what he never performs. Nevertheless I do
believe, that He will certify me by the first Post touching the event of that
business which makes you so anxious, and I will not sail to impart unto you
the news, as soon as ever the Carrier brings them, I am

Sir Your etc.
Balzac 20. July 1632.
To Madamoisell de Campagnole. LET. XLII.
MY dear Niece, You did not well, that you did not keep that Houry Chaplet,
which I had the favor to receive from your Lackey; the winter would not have
budded but for you, and by consequence you should have better valued this
favor, and managed your Roses more sparingly. They should have been bestowed
about your temples, for an honor to its pregnancie, and not have been bestowed
on an Hermit: for this were to hide a miracle. J see well your drift herein,
you would needs be liberal in a time of scarcity; and lose your own right,
that you might please my passion with something; which is so much affected with
true and lively flowers: which J do term so, because the other, which men do so
much esteem, having not any odor which animates, are in my judgemrnt but fair
Pictures, or specious Carcasses. But J beseech you to resolve me one scruple
that does trouble me; and ease me of my perplexity. Tell me, was this because
there be some already, or because there be some yet left? are these
remainders, or forerunners? was it the last spring that was tardie, or the new
that is hasty and forward? lo here a Problem worthy to be discussed by the
Philosophers of your Sex, and it would not be amiss to propose it to Her whom
you speak of, for to have her resolution. I profess, that if she be very
expert, she is a very dissembler, for I could never discover her to this
hour. She has such a heavy dull apprehension, that a man had need interpret
twice or thrice over what ever he speaks to her. It were easier to converse
with a deaf woman, and I would choose rather to make my self understood by a
Cornet, then to be my own Interpreter. Yet if this stupiditie be without
malice, it is more tolerable then malicious cunning. God permits himself to be
entreated, (sometimes) by a simple thumping of the breast, and often rejects
eloquent and loud prayers. It is a miserable light, that whose glory and
luster flows from vice only, and yet is not offensive to great men. A good
Beast is of more worth than a bad Angel. This is the upshot of all (my dear
Niece) that you must lay a foundation of bounty, upon which it is allowed you
to raise a Structure of other virtues, that are more high, and more glorious.
You did not stand in need of this lesson, but I would needs fill up my paper,
before I would put a period, and tell you that I am

Your, etc.
Balzac. 15. Dec. 1637.
To Monsieur the Abbat of Rois-Robert. LET. XLIII.
SIR, The world is full of darstardlie friends, but you are none of this world.
You can love daringly and resolutelie; and I see that my injuries are
(commonly) more apprehended by you, then by my self; nevertheless I am much
vexed with the language which you received from Messieurs the -- These are men
that do understand too well the points of honor, for to give me any
satisfaction; and for my part, I carry so much goodness about me, as to
demand nothing from them but my life. I never believed that their Superior had
promised me nothing. If he has left them no other debts to pay but this, they
have great cause to commend him for his good providence and thrift. In the mean
while, I cannot dissemble my sorrow to you for his death, nor forget to tell
you, that in all his ill carriages toward me, he has never done me a greater
affront then this, to die. If I had some particular Revelation concerning it,
or if he had advertised me thereof by the Spirit of Prophecy, which is spoken
of in his Elegy, he should have seen his prating long since condemned, and
should not have carried away into the other world, that great opinion of
sufficiency, which his fraternity did sooth him with. For the other
extravagant Doctor, which you mention, it would not be acceptable to God
Almighty, that I should undertake his reformation; it were needful to create
him anew, for to amend him. It were no mean enterprise but to examine his book,
and to make a breviaty of all the absurd things therein contained. I would
choose as soon to be condemned to be a Scavenger for the streets of Paris, and
to carry away all the dirt out of that little world. His impertinencies are
infinite, and would puzzle a better Arithmetician then I am to calculate them,
and he that would go about to count them, Contera ancorae in sul'ombraso desso
etc.
Will count the Trees on top of shady Appennine
As Soon: or waves, when winds do chafe the curling Brine.


If this Bearer shall stand in need of recommendation to the Council, I doubt
not, but knowing his name, and what a share I bear in his interests, you will
effectually assist him for love of me, who am more then any man in the world;

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 30. Jan. 1629.
To the same -- LET. XLIV.
SIR, I am (ever this month) confined to my bed, where I received your Letter
directed from Roan. To read there the continuation of your sickness, could not
(you must think) be any asswagement of mine. I bestow a thousand curses upon
the waters of Forges, for impairing your health. Propertius has not been more
liberal, or bestowed more upon the Baia that killed Angustus his Nephew. But a
main difference is, that this man was a Poet, and did but act grief: but I am
truly afflicted; and true friendship does really suffer more then flattery can
personate. I am very sorry that -- has not demeaned himself toward you so
well as he should have done; and if you have resolved upon his ruin, I do not
mean to step in between him and it, and undertake his protection. I do ever
side with all your passions without premeditation; and that man that does not
please you, has no allurements so powerful, as can render him pleasing to me:
nevertheless, if this man's offense were venial, and your justice could be
satisfied; I would adventure to beg his pardon, and would become his surety,
that he should willingly undergo all the punishments that you would inflict
upon him, to regain your favor. There are some businesses between us, that
force me to dissemble a little, and do not permit an apparent runture, if there
come not from you an express order to the contrary But being once freed out of
this turmoil, if he be so unlucky as to offend you again, I declare unto you
that I do even now renounce him; and I had rather forget my obligations to him,
then to carry affections repugnant to yours. Your Cosen is too generous to
oblige (so nobly) a man whom he never knew; and I had rather believe, that his
esteem of me, is but the consequence of your love, then to imagine it to be an
apprehension of any merit in me. I do purpose a voyage beyond the Seas the next
year; If I take ship at Diepe, as I hope to do, I shall not fail to go and
kiss His hands at Roan; and to make him see that the Monster, that Father
Goulie speaks of, is a tame Beast, (at least) and capable of knowledge. If I
did exceedingly rejoice at the news, when a Canonship was bestowed upon you, I
forgot how far this Dignity was below your deserts. It suffices me, that I
give you some testimony that I am not sorry for it; and that I consider it (as
in the crowd) among other Benefices that shall fall upon you; knowing that some
few men's lives (that be not yet dead) are the only obstacles to your Virtues.
I expect by the first Post, some better news concerning your health, and ever
remain with all my soul

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 10 May 1634.
To the same. LET. XLV.
SIR, Your last Message did give me exceeding content, and though I am well
assured of your affection toward me, yet I take a singular delight to read in
your Letters that you love me. These be words, whose fragrancy time cannot
wear away; and which will be as pleasant to me many years hence, as when they
were first spoken. I am (indeed) ravished with your last Protestaetions: But I
rejoice with you the rather, for the felicity of this new age, since you are in
part the cause of it, and that by your suggestions, Monsieur -- does purpose to
allot a considerable Tenement of lands for the relief of poor and disconsolate
Muses. We shall see this year Sonnets and Odes, and Elegies enough. The
Almanac does promise wonderful plenty, and Parnassus must not yield less then
it did under the Pontificate of Leo the Tenth. For you Sir, if you believe me,
you shall never take pen in hand again, but in case of necessity, and only
that commerce may not decay. Hitherto you have been a Horace, now you a^e
Mecenaes; and if we do not celebrate you (every Scribler of us) and address
our Works, both in prose and verse to you, you have just cause to indict us of
ingratitude. For my part, I would willingly both live and die under your
patronage; and I do provide an oration for you in genere demonstrative; wherein
(at the first salute) I shall astonish the world with this great prodigy. That
you are both a complete Courtier, and a perfect friend. Since you would
absolutely have it so, that I come to Paris, it is to you, that I shall make my
most frequent resorts to do my respects; and it is in your Cabinet that I shall
(by your good leave) redeem the time which I have lost in the Country, but we
must give place (a while) to the anger of storming Jove; or to speak the
language of men, we must permit it to rain and freeze in Beausse; and not go to
outbrave the month of February. I have no great need to die out of too much
daring. My health is still very infirm and unconstant; and if I did not take
incredible care, (I say not to preserve my person, but only to continue my
sleeps) you had lost me a great while since. Since I am wholly yours, you will
allow me the use of this word, and take it not ill, that I reckon my self in
the number of those things, that are not to you indifferent. You have
infinitely obliged me in assuring Monsieur the Count of -- of the continuance
of my zeal and fidelity. I have made him so eminent and public a ma^ke, that
as I can never recant it, so can he never suspect it. I omit a thousand things
that I should tell you of: but this will be employment for the next week: and I
am forced to conclude that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 10 Feb. 1632.
To Monsieur de Savignac. LET. XLVI.
SIR, Either I have not well interpreted my self, or Monsieur de -- has not
well understood me. I do ever value the merits of Madam de Anguitar, and if it
must be, that I must (by a second act) confirm that testimony which J have
given of her, J am ready to declare my self anew, and to commend once more a
Lady that is so praiseworthy. It is true, that for the interest of her honor,
it will be something material, to understand the cause that made my intentions
to be misconstrued, and that I lead you to the very source of this jealousy;
whereas, it seemed to certain Cavaliers, my friends, that J did too much
approve of her singular humor, and frequent retirings, one of the most eloquent
of them took a fancy to publish his dislike in this point; and to write a
reproachful Letter unto me in the name (as he says) of the whole Corporation
of honest men. Wherein he proclaims open war against me in their name, as
though I had conspired against fair Society; and calls me the Common enemy; the
universally jealous man, the Tyrant to both sexes. He does imagine that it is
my intent to shut up in prison all fair and delectable things, for to punish
curious eyes. He cries out, that I would fain abrogate the sweetest laws of
this Realm, and bring in the cruelty of that custom in Spain, where honest
women are mewd up in Cages, and honest men adore but doors and windows. From
Madrid, he passes to Constantinople, and tells me in a great rage, that I am
good for nothing but to be a Counceller of the great Turk, for to advise him to
raise the walls of the Seraglio higher, and to double the Guard of the Sultana;
Then he does accuse me for a thousand mischiefs, and takes me for Him that
invented the iron grates, the locks the vails and maskes: and for the author of
all those things that oppose his intrusion and saucy curiosity. Insomuch that
he imagines that I must render him a reason of the secrets and difficulties of
all riddles; of the darkness of all ancient Oracles; of the Allegories of
Poets, and of the Mysteries of all Religions. To make answer to far less
then this, it behoved me to study a long Apology; and (as ill luck was) when
I received his Letter, I was not in the humor of making Books. Wherefore Sir, I
profess to you truly, I chose rather to yield then defend my self, and
abandon my Maxims to the verbosity of my good friend, rather then maintain them
with the expense of so many words as he did plie them with: But if J be not
deceived, there is a good deal of difference between my Maxims and the praises
of Madam d' Anguitar; and he must take heed of confounding in the design that J
have, that which I have distinguished in the Letter which I wrote unto Her. To
say that She is one of the Perfections of the world, is an immovable truth,
for which I would sight all my life time: But to say that such Perfections must
be sequestered from the eyes of men, is (I suppose) a probematical opinion,
which I may revoke without prejudice to my own constancy, or to the worth of
these Perfections. But on the contrary, most will be apt to believe, that this
will be sufficient amends, and just satisfaction for the injury I did them, in
condemning them to solitude and retiredness; and will call it their revoking
from exile and releasing out of bondage. Thus Sir, I preserve still my first
Design; and my commendations remain whole and entire among the ruins of my
Maxims. Nay out of their demolitions, Trophies might be erected to the honor of
Madam d' Anguitar, and a Theater built, where she might be gazed upon, by those
that can but divine and guess at Her; and that the Desert might no longer have
such advantage over the City. This is not then to rebel against her Virtues,
but to wish Her a more spacious Empire, and a greater number of Subjects then
She has had, nor to go about to eclipse her light, but to adjudge, that She
should issue forth out of the Clouds, for the benefit and comfort of the
Universe. I pity those Critics that take it otherwise; and am sorry that
Monsieur -- is fallen upon a thought so far distant from mine He might have
understood me well enough, without putting me to the pains of interpreting my
self; and might have seen (moreover) that though in this occasion I would not
at all consider the interests of another, yet I should have considered my own
at least. Does he imagine that I could have been persuaded to spoil at one
dash, one of the dearest issues of my brain? and to bereave my self of the
acknowledgements of one of the greatest Personages of the world, who thinks her
self in some measure beholding unto me? I am no such enemy to my self, or so
prodigal of the good that I have acquired. I do not mean to throw dirt upon
that piece, where I have bestowed so many and so rich colors; and believe not
you, that I would have razed out (being thereunto entreated by none) those
words that did no way mislike me; you that know how Heliodorus denied to do the
like, though earnestly solicited thereunto, by a whole Council. If you do me
the honor as to make a journey to morrow to Balzac, I will tell you more;
though negociating with an understanding so serene as yours, I think I have
spoken enough already concerning it. This is

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 26. March 1637.
To Monsieur Chapelain. LET. XLVII.
SIR, I am newly out of a fit of an Ague; and though the shaking and tossing be
past, yet it is not yet calm. My head is so numbed, and deafned with
yesterdayes tempest, that I am for no reasonable use; and in the estate that I
am, I am not fit for any society. Nevertheless, there is no way to put off so
just an office as this to another time, and (though with hazard of
incongruities, and offending against Grammar Rules) you must receive from me
these three or four ragged lines. You have obligations upon me, both new and
old, which cannot by me be sufficiently acknowledged. I am ashamed to be
beloved so much, and deserve it so little; and if you be not contented with an
honest heart, I can offer you nothing worthy so noble and pure affection as
yours. The last Letter which you did me the honor to write unto me, has given
proof thereof beyond all question; and I have kissed each line thereof as so many
traces or footsteps of the golden Age, and so many Pictures of the sincerity
of the old World. Your counsels are most wise and loyal, and I would most
punctually render them obedience, if I were in case to do it. But besides that
it is impossible to appease and conjure down Envy, and that I am too weak to
grapple with it: Physicians do prohibit all study and labor of the spirits; and
tell me, that I cannot meditate one half hour, without running the hazard of
never meditating more. So that Sir, it is more expedient that my cause should
perish then I; and that I should be beaten at Paris in my absence, then that I
should die here in person You will (no doubt) be of my opinion, and since the
occasion (which is presented) of dying, is none of the most glorious: you will
not take it amiss if I make some more use yet of my life, to be

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac 30. Jan. 1632.
To the same -- LET. XLVIII.
SIR, You do wrong to that Passion or regard which I bear toward you, to call
it Civility: it deserves a better name then that; and we are not acquainted in
the Country with those virtues, countenance and show. I deal very seriously
with my friends, and I speak nothing but what I mean to make good; and by the
principles of ancient Philosophy, I do think that a Complement does as much
obliege me as a Contract. Think not then that I deal with you out of Commmon
places: they are the true motions of my soul, which I show you, and if J could
exhibit my very soul, you would confess, that the expressions of my tongue are
far inferior to the Jdea by the which they were framed. It is you alone Sir,
that can content those that demand satisfaction, and make my interests even
what please you. I have neither liberty nor election when I see the bent of
your desire. Tear, burn, scatter the ashes of my books in the wind; I do
submit them to all the rigor of your justice; Tibi in me, meaque aeternae
authoritas esto. You are no more my Councellor but my Sovereign, and by
consequence, deal not with me by Argumeurs and Remonstrances, but impose Laws
upon me, and prescribe Commands. You shall never find a more docile and supple
nature then mine, no not if you were to seek in Asia, that Country of perfect
Slaves. Nevertheless, I think that my humility will not take off the edge of
persecution, but on the contrary, it will make my adversaries to swell and grow
insolent: But I have comforts ready at hand against all the ill fortunes which
I expect. Jn this, J desire only the glory of obeying you. It is enough for me
that J have showed that friendship can do more with me, then Tyranny, and J
would acknowledge your jurisdiction, when J might decline all other. J am

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 20. July. 1632.
To the same -- LET. XLIX.
SIR, Hitherto I have beheld (without disturbance) all the assaults of my
enemies; and they have but scratcht some lines of my books, and at most have
called to question some things of small consequence. But now that they wound me
in the tenderest part of my heart, I profess to you, I begin to have some
resentment. I cannot forgive them the injury they have done me, to raise
jealousies, and make a breach between us two. And J have conceived such
indignation against this imposture, that it is impossible J should write unto
you soberly and moderately. If J do not exercise vindicative justice, there is
no reason I should desire it. That which does most of all trouble me is, that I
do run after a Fantas^se, and that I know not whom to lay hold upon. And truly,
if there were any means to discover this honest Secretary that was bestowed on
me without my knowledge, I think it were very just to pay him his wages.
However, here is a man that would gain a name by such an occasion; and does
pronounce against him that terrible Arrest. Ligno pereat qui sumum vendidit.
These men should be made an example; and whereof a civil Society ought to be
quickly purged. They are the most dangerous Thieves of all, that rob us of our
friends: which be ^oods, that should remain ours, after the loss of all other.
I confess, that I have many infirmities, and am subject to err a thousand
ways, but I am not capable of an offense of that high nature that I am charged
with; and the goodly Letter which you sent me a Copy of, carries neither my
style nor my Genius; nevertheless, your faith has betrayed a weakness, and you
have staggered a little upon the opening of this false Packet. Assure your self
Sir, if I have forfeited your good opinion and favor, that I would not outlive
so smart an affliction; and you may believe, that I do not rashly hazard a
thing so precious as that. I make not only sincerity and zeal the companions
of my friendship: but discretion also and respect. The persons whom I love, are
to me almost most in the same degree of veneration, as those things which I
adore* I approach them not but with awe, which accompanies Religion; and it is
certain, that I am so fearful to attend them, that (least I should distaste them
with my sullenness) I do force and fain smiles when I am most sad. You shall
know more of this in the progress of my life; and avouch that I know how to
practice those maxims, which I hold, and approve my self, with courage and
constancy.

Sir Your, etc.
Balzac. 1. March 1632.
To the same -- LET. L.
SIR, Since I have arrived here, I have received the Letter, which you did me
the honor to write unto me; which is, a continuation of your courtesies and
bounty, and an entrance upon a commerce* where I must take all, and you give
all. While I expect to make benefit of your Prose, I feast upon your verses,
which have disrelisht all that I took for excellent before. I never saw
boldness more discreet, courage better maintained, or sweetness less
effeminate. Th^se are Sir, worthy Harbingers of your Damsel. But you do her
wrong to seem to doubt of her good Fate, and do not believe the auspicious
omens tha^ appeared at her Nativity, which promise long life. If you have
patience enough to consummate this work, all the rest is sufficient: your
natural wit is strong and pregnant; you have the perfection of Arts; your
Cabinet is a Magazin of O^naments and riches, to adorn the Subject. What more
is wanting to you? Be not nice any longer: you are condemned to go forward with
it, except you mean to quit one passion for another, and abandon Poeter for the
Politics: wherein to tell you the truth, I believe you will prove admirable. I
am of your opinion, that 1500 verses at one brea^h go far; and that it would
not be amiss, to set more reasonable bounds to every Book. But touching all
this, you may consult with Vida and Francestorius; and if they be not of the
same opinion, Scaliger may be the supernumerary* Our Doctor says, that he has
not so much need of counsel as of aid, and since things past, fall not under
deliberation, it is no time now, to know whether he has erred; he desires you
only to teach him how to deny it with some fair p^obability, to persuade the
people that Pericles is not fallen, though the people saw it. For my part, I am
confident of the good success of all your enterprises. Having found the bell
m^^ivo in favor of the Poet Marini, there is no such Monster which you cannot
shape and make handsome; and without doubt, you have such precious Oil, that
one drop thereof is sufficient to blanch a Moore. It is

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 1. Aug. 1632.
To the same -- LET. LI.
SIR, My silence is not the effect of sloth; and you may believe that it is
against my will that I deprive my self of the contentment that I took in
entertaining you. The reasons that obliged me to silence, were more just then I
wished they had been; and a troublesome Defluxion which fell upon my eyes, has
failed to charge you with a blind friend: For in that case, I think you could
not have chosen but to have been my Guide; and I did already make account to
learn to sing, that I might chant your Poem. But (by the great mercy of God) I
recovered my eye sight yesterday; and you are freed from the sad office, which
my distressed Fortune might have required from your good nature, Now that I do
speak, and do not rattle in the throat; I must give you an account of the
voyage that I made; and I must tell you with as much ceremony and eloquence as
heretofore, that I have been to meet the Court as far as Cadilliac. I had the
honor there, to do my respects to my Lord --. But his sickness that took him
the very day that he arrived thither, and mine, which would wait no longer to
attach me, did force me to take my way back to my V^llage, where I found your
Messages, and my Coffers. I render you once more, most humble thanks for the
care you took to keep them for me; and since you are pleased that I make use of
you, with such familiarity, you must permit my thankful acknowledgement
thereof. The news you wrote unto me, concerning the sickness of -- was told me
at Bordeaux, when I was there; and I swear unto you, I have not slept a good
sleep since. This is as good a man as ever I was acquainted with, and I do
mainly esteem him; because I know him to the very heart, where (without
faining) I have found nothing but what was noble, and (I dare speak it)
magnanimous. I know that his out side has been displeasing to many; But men
must not always be judged by the lineaments of the face; and that aversation
is unjust, which springs only out of deformity. I do much wonder that two
words which I have written to my Stationer, being half a sheep, are flown out
of his shop already. I assure you I am no -- nor do not use to put on severity
in reading these kinds of Relatiosn. But (in truth) this here did give me much
content; and though I meet with some passages that might be altered without any
harm, and where a decorum was not so exactly observed as it might have been;
nevertheless, (to speak in the general) the invention, to my thinking, was
handsome, the narration neat and smooth, and the style all favoring of the
Court and Cabinet. When you have read it, I will think of it, as you shall
pronounce the sentence; in the mean while, I use the liberty allowed in points
not yet decided; and the interim, that you are too good to agree with me, until
you have made the truth manifest unto me. For the Dutch Orator, remembered (as
leastwise) that I spoke nothing but touching his phrase, for I do infinitely
esteem his learning and judgment. Be pleased therefore to manage this petty
secret according to your ordinary prudence: since I am so unfortunate, that I
cannot utter one word, but it will straight find strange Glosses and
Commentaries, and that there be people so charitable, as to stir up war
against me, and create me enemies in all parts of the world. I have never
received the Letter of Monsieur de -- neither, did I need them to assure me of
his love. I know that he is good and noble; wherefore relying hereupon, it
suffices me to understand that he is well; and it is not material to me,
whether I learn this from him or from you. I forgot to tell you that J received
from Monsieur the Duke of -- many caresses and favors; he has used me like
some great Personage, or mighty Signor; and J have been his Favorite the space
of four days. I desire no more, nor do I labor to promote my good fortune any
farther, I am content to bound it Sir, with the ^ruition of your good savor,
and I am most affectionately

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 1. December. 1632.
To the same -- LET. LII.
SIR, I have returned no answer to your Letter, in regard I have been combred
(^a^ely) with some domestic affairs, which would allow me no leisure to
write; it is your Prerogative, to be able to intend several things at once: you
enjoy a spirit so calm, that you can read a Dialogue in Plato, and dispatch a
dozen businesses too at once, with a resolve to die an hour after. For my
part, one object is enough to employ me, and it is impossible for me to
reconcile recreation and business. That which you tell me of Monsieur -- is
true. The Letter which he wrote unto me is an abrid^ement of all his Books; and
I cannot return answer to it, though I would, but by the Messenger that goes
the next year from Angoulesme. But though it has been told you, yet be pleased
not to believe it, that this Letter offend me, or that mine has given any
offense. Only upon occasion of one little word, he took a hint to sport it
after his ordinary manner, and to make a new show of his old manner of boording
We must be indulgent to our friends mirth, and give way a little to their jolly
humor. Nay, a man ought not to do his enemy all the discountesies he can; and
to be very sensible of a wrong, is to add weight and measure to it. Satisfy
your self* I pray, touching my spirit by these maxims of peace; and fear not
that any man can raise my passions to an humor of contention. A thousand
Chartels cannot tempt me to one D^el, and I can be more coward then the
Hot-spu^rs of the times are quarrelsome. I fear not their strength nor
subtlety, but I fear my own trouble, and I do infinitely love my R^st: Honor
it self would seem unmannerly to me, if it came to disquiet it. And I would
fain pass for an Incognito even in my own Province, and my own Village. You
cannot believe how much I am fallen out with the world, and how distastful I am
to my self. What was wont to tickle and please me, hurts me. An Almanac and an
History I esteem alike. Those simple terms of style, phrase, and period, are
so harsh to my ears, that they make my head ache. If it were Gods will, that I
should be sentenced to lose my good or bad Reputation, I mould resign it (with
all my heart) to any that would desire it; and I have a desire to change my
name, that I might not any more share in any thing that is spoken of Balzac,
nor interesse my self either in the praises or dispraises that are bestowed on
him. Is not this Sir, a pretty resolution? and which I should long since have
undertaken. This is almost the panoplie of that Philosopher, that patiently
took a box on the ear in a public place at Corinth He professed he had a
Helmet toward future blows, that if any should chance to give him another box,
it might fall on an Iron f^ce, and not his. Apply this how you please; as for
my part, I do but laugh at Rhetoric, and all its Tropes; and have nothing to
do with that Art, which has created me so many vexations. I am with all my soul

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 10. Ian. 1632.
To the same. LET. LIII.
SIR, God does beset me on all sides, and sends me affl^ctions by Troops: To
comfort me for the disease of Monsieur de -- news is brought me of that
Monsieur de -- so that I begin to make a conscience to love you, since my
friendship is (in a manner) fatal to whomsoever I give it; and that I possess
nothing but I lose it in a moment. But there is no need of doing bad offices
about you, or to affright you with any Planet, whose malignity (I hope) you are
able to correct. I pass it over therefore to tell you, that as long as
Monsieur de -- was here, I performed my part with wonderful assiduity, so that
I was astonished at it my self. We have had long and particular discourses upon
all good subjects, and by consequence, you may believe that you have not been
forgotten. I never preach well, but when you are my Text. As I prize nothing
more justly then your love, so I praise nothing more willingly then your
virtue; and this subject pleases me so well that I never want words, if I do
not want Auditors. Yet I do not pretend to engage you hereby. To reckon you in
the number of Illustrious men, is only to leave you in your own seat; and to
say that the Damsel will be your work, is to say, that Pallas will issue out of
the head of Jove. She is at this time the sweetest hope and expectation of
honest leisure; She is the desire of the Cabinet, and will be the great labor
of the French Muses. I have threatened (this long while) a voyage to Paris;
which I intended of purpose to see it; and I hope to surprise you both together
one day when you expect me not. But remember Sir, that even your purpose is a
vow; and that you can have no such dispensation, that can take away all
scruple, if you have a render conscience, and will believe some Divines (that I
can name) concerning it. I cannot conclude my letter before I acquaint you,
that I am ravished with the good opinion you bear toward my N^phew. I ascribe
more to your predictions, then to them that make Horoscopes and calculate
nativities; and the conjectures which your good judgment does suggest, are
more certain then those which they derive out of their Art. My Sister is so
proud of the testimony you gave her, that she would have returned you a
Complement; if she durst adventure to speak to you. But her respect did check
her desire, and I have promised to excuse her silence; which (I know) you will
pardon, because it will save you the pains to reply, we desire Sir, the
continuation of your good admonitions to this gallant man; and doubt not, but a
glance or cast of your eye now and then, will edify him much. I think you
should consider him as something that concerns you. For my part, I make no
difference between your affection and mine; and I am without all reservation.

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 25 May. 1633.
To the same -- LET. LIVE.
SIR, I know not how to present my self before you: though my conscience does
acquit me, some appearances condemn me; and you see my fault, but know not my
affairs; I have had variety of them ever these three months, which have
strangely exercised me; and whereof I am yet so weary, that I must have a great
while to recover my self. All that I can, is to use my idleness well, and to
make something of my leisure. Now that I have got it in possession again, I
mean not to be disseised of it: If it be possible, I bid eternal farewell to all
Contracts, Transactions and Acquittances. These are Ornaments of our language
which must not (in my opinion) enter into your Poems. You have more care of the
chastity of your Damsel, then to violate her with these villainous terms; and
this were of a Vi^gin to make a strumpet of her. But I can never obtain that
small favor of you, or prevail so much as to see here (at least) the first
hundred verses that do concern her. I do preserve carefully all those things
that you have sent, and never produce them out of my Treasury, but to impart
them to choice wits. The invention of your first Metamorphosis is ingenious,
Ovid had swelled up and dilated that subject which you have contracted and
pressed together. But the importance is, that in this little, you appear great;
and I behold you entire in every parcel. The second part does please me no
less yet then the first, and I hold that Lionness happy that has heaven for
an Amphitheater, and has been placed there by such a hand as yours. You make
her jarre so well and tunably; and her roaring is so sweet and melodious in
your Verses, that there is no music comparable. Those of -- do not flow in
such numbers. Longeque pulch^ius spectaculum est, and dignius oculis cruditi,
videre nobilem illam feram, quam miserum and febriculesum Annaei Lucaeni
Simium. With the last letter I received Bembus which you sent me. In truth he
is not so well polished and digested as those Authors in the Library of
Monsieur -- But all tattered and confused as it is, I can assure you, it likes
me infinitely. I never love luxury, and am nothing curious for gay Clothes.
The beauty of Chariclea did shine through her rags; and your Marini has made
a Sonnet, wherein he tells us, how he fell in love with a canting D^xie. I
thank you therefore for Vinus and the Graces (though ill attired) which I met
with, in your Books, and remain

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac 3. July, 1633.
To the same -- LET. LV.
SIR, I entertain your commendations like ill gotten goods; the fruition
whereof is sweet, although unjust. It is some honor to me to have so excellent
a Flatterer as you are; and I suffer my self willingly, and take a pleasure to
be deceived by a man that can do it so neatly. I think (indeed) that the verses
which you have seen, are not bad in their kind; but I think withal, that this
is the shortest of all kinds. I durst not engage my self in a wider carreere;
my strength serves but for a short tugg; and I walk at the foot of your
Parnassu^; but I should want breath, if I should attempt to mount the top. You
do (indeed) Sir, bear the name of a great Poet, and succeed equally in all
sorts of Verses; and though you speak with extreme modesty of the last work
which you sent me: I do not find that it owes any thing to the fairest
pieces that you have showed us. There is no stanza that has not its particular
value; nor no piece but is remarkable for some beauty. But that which did
chiefly relish with me was the Prayer which you direct to Apollo; and that
admirable Music, (which proceeding out of the Clouds) heals your malady in a
trice. This is not the effect of ordinary Poetry; it is a fit of that divine
rapture and fury, which Plato has acknowledged; and which the first Poets were
sometimes possessed with. Send me such Presents often, if you would have me
rich in my poverty; and have good company in my solitude. But above all, love
me well, if you would have me happy; and assure your self, that no man in the
world is more then I am

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 9. Aug. 1634.
To the same -- LET. LVI.
SIR, I know that you love me, and I know that you are in health, but this is
not enough; I must learn something more concerning it; and you must tell me
some news of your brave meditations. Does the Girl wage war, or does she
keep at home in the Country with her Father? Does Charles grow soft in the
embraces of the fair Agnes, or does he quit love for honor? In what state are
the affairs of England? How does Hire and Pothe? What do your Achill^s and
Aj^x? are you for a battle or for a siege?

J^m nunc minaci murmr cornuum
Perstringis aures, jam litui strepu^t:
Audire magnos jam videor Duces
Non indecoro pulvere sordidos, etc.
See questions enough at once; but you are not bound to answer to them
punctually; and provided, that you satisfy me in one Article, you have to deal
with a man of a facile disposition, who will not be rigorous for the rest. I am
now more a Hermit then ever; and for having here a little Court but two days
only, I had the Megrim by it for three weeks. Tranquillity and silence Sir, are
precious things; and it Epicurus had some reason to complain of his very
friends, that they did break his head with their applause and acclamations:
what must be said of the bawlings and exclamations of a man's enemies? of the
first and second part of the Philarkes of their times? Those that write are
subject both to the one and the other persecution. But for my part, I avow to
you, that hitherto Complements have done me more harm then injuries. I use none
toward you Sir, for fear you should complain of me in the same manner; and I
am content to tell you, that I am without complement, that is, entirely

Angoulesme 1. Sept. 1632. Your etc.

To Monsieur de Silhon. LET. LVII.
SIR, You show a sort of humility that is not sufferable; and though it be the
proper style of Saints to talk of their vileness, and their nothingnesse, yet
to reject all testimonies indifferently, that come from another, is in my
opinion rather a contempt of our Neighbor then a modest conceit of our selves.
I am no flatterer, but I praise or disprayse, according as I am persuaded of
the merit of things, or their default; and if I talk often of the great lights
that you have, whether in a sacred or profane Learning, it is because I have
been dazzled therewith. Your three Discourses do please me infinitely; and I am
very well pleased that mine did not displease you: But I am the more glad that
you are of my opinion touching the putting down quite of all Answers, Replies,
Defenses, Apologies, and the like. Since I have but laughed at the attempts of
a Legion, I do not mean to complain of the insolence of one Garbine; A man were
better to pick out an enemies, and this here may fight all alone, if it please
him: It is not fit to show anger against a man that deserves pity, nor to lose
patience upon an occasion so obscure, that it were hard to make it appear. You
send me no news concerning the affairs of Italy, and I am very desirous to
hear some. It has been told me that Monsieur Maynard has not appeared in
Paris, though Monsieur de No^illes be arrived thither. He will (perhaps) be
stayed a longer time. If it be so, my affection is so far ingenious, as to
torment my mind* I stand in fear (for his sake) of all the dangers both of Sea
and Land. J do apprehend at once that he is led captive into Barbary; and that
the Spaniards have surprised him. That which must comfort me in this
distraction is, that a good spirit does pass undauntedly through all; and that
they were the Poets (his Predecessors) that made wings for Daed^lus. However
you will confess, that if Epigrams be current among the Millanois, and that he
wants but 2000, of them for his ransom, he has wherewth to satisfy them
without damage to himself. In truth, I am sollicitous touching this my dear
friend; and you will oblige me, if you will be pleased to send me a relation of
his Adventures, when you shall come to know them. I am

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 30 December. 1636.
To Monsieur Gerard Secretary to my Lord the Duke of Espernon. LET. LVIII.
SIR, Happy are those actions that fall under your Pen and History. Since you
do extol a man's idleness, even to the envy of the world, and so far, as to
propose it for an example, what will you talk of the life of the Swedish King,
and other Miracles of our age, if you will take them in hand? The mischief is,
that those that have heard you shall see me; and you have set me at so high a
rate, that I cannot hold after it, but upon your credit, and by my own absence.
If Monsieur the Duke of -- passes by Balzac, the Legend that you have framed
of me, will at first dash lose that probability that it carried, and I shall be
no more that famous Hermit that has been related and described unto him by an
officious Impostor. In vain will he seek among my papers the fine things that
you have promised him; and it will repent him (perhap^) that he turned out of
the Rode, for such a sad spectacle that I shall exhibit him. In any case Sir, I
will present my self, and if hitherto you have deceived him, yet you shall
acquit your self of the name of Cozener, when you shall assure him on my behalf
of an inviolable fidelity, and hearty acknowledgement. These are qualities
which I possess in a sovereign degree; and which I preserve for him in the
bottom of my soul. But the passion which I bear to his Honor, must not be
still kept as a secret, and I will at length profess, what I have this long
while adored in particular manner. Do me the favor as to tell him thus much,
and believe withal, if you please, that I am

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. 30. March 1635.
To the same -- LET. LIX.
SIR, I love no kind of quarrelling, much less with my friends. But it is a
thing worthy pity, that a man should receive continual wrongs, and yet must
not open his mouth to complain, but he shall be censured for a troublesome and
untoward fellow. I know the eager spirit of that man that speaks so loud, when
my interests are in agitation. I know he is carried with the hot vapors that
exhale from that sulphury vein, which (you say) lies about his heart. But you
will confess notwithstanding, that the bottom of that heart is not bad. His
lavishness proceeds from a fair spring; and in acts of friendship an inundation
is better then drouth. I forgive the irritated zeal, inconsiderate goodness,
and impetuousness of a man that cannot love with moderation. We must do him
some right; and not hate his passion, though we approve it not; for my part, I
do permit it, but not employ it; and though he tells me, that he has a fierce
Satyr to come forth to kill our Messer, if he do not save himself in the
little Cottage; I give him thanks for his good will, but I desire him to
deliver the Satyr into my hands, and for this purpose only, that none might
see it. You shall find in my packet some latin compositions that were sent me,
and particularly, the latter tears of S. Peter, which have been commended unto
you. In my judgment, (and I think you will subscribe to it) he is too subtle,
and shows too much punctuality in delineating a true Penitent. Nature does not
speak thus, nor its passions either, which are the Daughters of nature, as
subtleties are the wantons of Art. S. Peter's sorrow is admirably well expressed
by Grotius; and these four verses of his, which I remember, do weigh down the
400 that I have sent you.

Quae me recondet Regi^? qua maestum diem
Fallam latebra? quaero nigrantem specum
Qua me sepeliam vivus; ubi nullum vid^ns,
Nulli videndus, lachrymas soveam meas.
Are not these worthy of the Heroic times and purest Antiquity? the rest of
the discourse is animated with the same Genius; and is a lesson for Orators,
that sorrow must not be elaborate, or at leastwise must not betray any studied
care. I leave your Brother to relate news; he has in charge to inform you of
all occurrences, and therefore I have nothing to say, but that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
Balzac. 15. June 1636.
To Monsieur De la Mothe Le Vayer. LET. LX.
SIR, My spirits have been so dull and heavy these three days, that it is
beyond imagination. Never did any man lose the relish of all Books and Arts as
I did; and hence you may gather that that which you sent me, was very delicate,
when it procured an appetite to a languishing man. You have strangely altered
me in a moment: my soul is touched to the quick; and you have made it so hungry
after knowledge, that I have no mind to any thing but to your Philosophy. If
you will set up a Sect, I am ready to enrole my self, at least wise, I will
subscribe willingly to that frank Doctrine, which maintains its liberty
against the usurpations of Aristotle; and is contented to acknowledge lawful
power, but not to be slave to the Tyranny of one particular man. I speak Sir,
as I believe Doubtless your work will last, and to give you your full due, I
must give it in your own language: so noble an act of the soul, is not the
weakest argument we have of its immortality; and if any shall hereafter take in
hand this subject, he will be beholding to you for this new argument, which
your modesty would not permit you to make use of. Certainly there were no
reason nor color, that the Offspring should be of a better condition then the
Mother; and that those productions which must encounter time, and conquer Fate,
should flow from a corruptible Principle. But since I have sped so well in my
first solicitations, I desire not to stop there* This good success does
encourage me to redouble them, and in the name of all the Learned, to beg yet
more works of the same vigor. Though I should perform no other Office in the
Commonwealth of Learning then this, I were not an unuseful member; and this
will be (one day) honor enough for me, when it will be said, that I gave the
counsel for those labors which you have undertaken. Acquire for me Sir, this
reputation, that I may add it to that which I would gladly deserve all my life
time, which is to be

Balzac. 29. March 1637. Your etc.

To Monsieur de -- LET. LXI.
SIR, The Discourse which you did me the honor to send me, is full of an
infinite number of good things; and none can deny but your friend is both
learned and judicious. Nevertheless I do not think that he will find in that
place whither he goes, that approbation which he promises to himself: I think
that (for his speaking Latin after the French manner) his meaning is better
than his expression. He is not always so regular as I would desire; and his
words do sometimes do wrong to his thoughts. True it is, that in these times we
are very nice and delicate in the purity of expressions. We can brook no style
that is licentious, be it never so little; and whatsoever is no after the garb
of the Court is accounted barbarous. This is not that I am of the opinion of
Monsieur do -- that said that the good man's judgment could never pass beyond
the Gar^nd; and that he was put into such a fright at Blaye, that he durst not
adventure any farther. When he spoke this, he forgot (sure) that Mons. de
Pibrac, Monside Montegne, and the Cardinal de Ossat were Gascons; and their
solid judgments which are admired to this day over all Europe, do sufficiently
refute that poor jest which passes among some for excellent. It is certain
that Reason is common to all Countries, and consequently is of that, where they
say Adieu-sias, as well as when they say Dieu vous condu ssi. It is confined to
no place, and we may find subtlety among the Switzers, and stupidity among the
Florentines; but indeed, for the Language, it is not all alike: without
question in some places, they speak better then elsewhere, and whereas a
Courtier of Rome did taste something of Padua in the Histories of Titus Liviu^,
it is not impossible to observe in the writings and conversations of your men
some tincture of their Province. Ever and anon, you shall observe them to let
flip vousist for voulust, fausist for falust, cousin mi^n, and ie suis este a
Thoulouze, which mar all good speech: and their allarent, donuarent armarent,
have run over their banks, and come as far as our Country. The late Monsieur
de Malherbe has told me often that he did what possible he could for to
correct the dialect of Monsieur de -- and purge it of Gasconisme, but could
never bring it about: so difficult is it to wipe off our natural stains, and
utterly to wear out the badge of our Country. Nevertheless for all this,
neither the Patavinity of Titus Livius, nor the Gasconisme of some of our
times, do hinder them from being reputed Eloquent. And for one petty fault,
either of use or of Grammar, I condemn not those works which in all other
respects, are excellent. To satisfy your desire, I have sent by Monsieur de --
the Letters of Monsieur Heinsius, one whereof preceded my Dissertation, the
other followed his answer. Now that I have furnished you with these two
Letters, to entertain you a while; be pleased not to take it amiss that I take
leave of you, and all the world for two years. I am forbid to write any thing
for so long a time, and this is an oath that I have taken by the order of my
Confessor; and upon good and weighty considerations. I hope God will give me
the grace to observe it.

Nec mihi scribendi veniet tam dira cupido: And you will not (I am sure) tempt
me to sin, and provoke me to break that silence which I have sworn to. But
though you should solicit me a tho^^and times, and assault me every day in two
or three Languages, I am resolved to be inexorable, and not to be moved with
that happy abundance of your words. If you term me uncivil, and expostulate
with me in the words of your Poet.

Vnde istam meruit non faelix charta repulsam?
Hosts ab Host tamen per barbara verba salutem
Accipit, and Salve mediis intervenit armis;
Respondent and saxa homini.
I will make answer with an audible voice both to your Poet and you, that
Religion must sway Civility, and that a lesser duty must yield to a greater.
Finally if there be an absolute necessity, that we have some commerce with each
other; in this case, I will choose rather to make a journey then write a letter,
and expose my self to the hazard of shipwreck by going to see you, then violate
my faith by writing to you. Adieu then until the year of 1639. which we will
begin (by Gods grace) by the renewing of our ancient Trafick. Is is

Sir, Your etc.
Balzac. --
FINIS.
A Table of the Letters (as they lie in order) which are contained in this
Volume.
TO Monsieur Conrart Let. 1. p. 1. To Monsieur du Moulin. let. 2. p. 3 To Mons.
L'Huillier. let. 3. p. 4 To Mons. the Abbat of Rois-Robert. let. 4. p. 6 To my
Lord the Earl of Excester. let. 5. p. 7 To my Lord the Duke De la Valette. let.
6. p. 8 To Mins. Drovet. let. 7. p. 9 To Mons. De-Bonair. let. 8. p. 10 To
Mons. Huggens let. 9. p. 11 To Mons. de Racan. let. 10. p. 12 To Mons. De St.
Chartres. let. 11. p. 13 To Mons. Baudoin. let. 12. p. 14 To Mons. De Coignet.
let. 13. p. 15 To Madam Desloges. let. 14. p. 16 To my Lord Keeper of the Seals
Seguier, etc. let. 15. p. 17 To Mons. De Morins. let. 16. p. 18 To Mons. De
Vaugelas. let. 17. p. 19 To Mons. De la Motte Aigron. let. 18. p. 21 To Mons.
De Borstel. let. 19. p. 22 To Mons. the chief Advocate, let. 20. p. 23 To Mons.
De Maury, let. 21. p. 24 To Mons De Mondory. let. 22. p. 24 To Mons. Le Guay.
let. 23. p. 26 To Mons. De Silhon. let. 24. p. 26 To Mons. De la Fosse. let.
25. p. 27 To Mons. D' Espesses. let. 26. p 29 To the same. let. 27. p. 30 To
Mons. De Couurelles. let. 28. p. 32 To -- let. 29. p. 32 To my Lord the Bishop
of Angoulesme. let. 30. p. 33 To Mons. de -- let. 31. p. 34 To Mons. De
Serizary. let 32. p. 39 To Mons. Habert Abbat of Cerizy. l. 33. p. 40 To Mons.
De Gaillard. let. 34. p. 41 To the same. let. 35. p. 42 To Madam Desloges. let.
36. p. 43 To Mons. de -- let. 37. p. 44 To Mons. Girard. let. 38. p. 46 To the
same. let. 39. p. 47 To the same. let. 40. p. 48 To the same, let. 41. p. 49 To
Madamoisel de Campagnole. let. 42. p. 50 To Mons. the Abbat of Bois-Robert.
let. 43. p. 51 To the same. let. 44. p. 52 To the same. let. 45. p. 53 To Mons.
de Savignac. let. 46. p. 54 To Mons. Chapelain. let. 47. p. 56 To the same.
let. 48. p. 57 To the same. let. 49. p. 58 To the same. let. 50. p. 59 To the
same. let. 51. p. 60 To the same. let. 52. p. 62 To the same. let. 53. p. 63 To
the same. let. 54. p. 64 To the same. let. 55. p. 65 To the same. let. 56. p.
66 To Mons. de Silhon. let. 57. p. 67 To Mons. Gerard Secretary to the D. of
Espernon. l. 58. p. 68 To the same. let. 59. p. 69 To Mons. de la Mothe le
Vayer. let. 60. p. 70 To Mons. de -- let. 61. p. 71

