MEDITATIONS Upon 1 Samuel 26.19. Humbly presented to the COMMON COUNSEL OF
LONDON, For their serious rumination.

By their servant for their good, HENRY BURTON.

ROM 15.4. Whatsoever things were written afore-time, were written for our
learning.

ISAI. 9.16. The leaders of this people cause them to err; and they that are
led of them, are destroyed.

If ye know these things, happy are ye, if ye do them.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert. 1647.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, with the Right Worshipful the
Aldermen, and the rest of the Common Council of the City of London, Grace,
Mercy and Wisdom be multiplied.
SIRS,
THat I, of so small acquaintance with you, yet to you all not altogether
unknown, should present you with any such service as this, though it may seem
to some too much presumption, yet not to any (I hope) either arrogance, or
importunate impertinency at this time, as being not unseasonable for Truth, at
least to the wise, no not in this so idolized adulatory Age, which as, a mel
dew has so much blasted both our blossoms with blackness, and our fruit with
barrenness. And though for some respects I may worst do it, yet having by the
good Providence of Heaven spent the best part of my life in this famous City,
and that also as an unworthy Watchman therein, and not having at any time been
negligent (within my narrow Sphere) to give warning when apparent danger
approached: I should judge my self very unfaithful, if (...) last, being near
the time of giving up my account to my righteous Judge, I should be silent,
especially when I see a storm hanging over this City from an angry heaven, and
while there is yet some hope left of preventing of it. For if the Egyptians at
Moses his warning of the next morrows hideous storm of hail, did, many of them,
forthwith withdraw themselves and cattle into their houses for preservation;
then much more should Christians be wise in this point, and especially when,
not a Moses, yet the meanest Messenger is sent with a Message from God, no
less true and certain then that of Moses was, because Gods Word it self. And
for the truth of what is here brought unto you, and how far, or how near, or
how truly it concerns you all in the application, I leave to your maturest
and most Christian wisdom to judge. And when this comes to be applied, either
as a Preservative or a Corrosive, if it be with patience endured, it is a
hopeful sign of cure: if otherwise, yet in endeavoring the good I wish you, I
have herein Ezekiel. 3.17. to 21.
freed mine own soul. Nor durst I forbear this duty at this time in a matter of
so high importance, if well weighed, as wherein the weal or we of this Body, in
reference to the righteous Judge of all, is so much concerned.

Consider what is said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things:
Which is the humble and earnest Prayer of

Your faithful servant in the Lord, HENRY BURTON.

Meditations upon 1 Samuel 26.19. in these words: Now therefore, I pray thee, let
my Lord the King hear the words of his servant: If the Lord has stirred thee
up against me, let him accept an offering: but if they be the children of men,
cursed be they before the Lord: for they have driven me this day from abiding
in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go serve other gods.
THese words spoke David at a good distance of ground to King Saul, when he was
pursuing him, and newly after he had now again saved Saul's life, as he had done
but a little before in the cave (1 Samuel 24.) And they are a part of his answer
to Saul, who awaking from his dead sleep (while David took him napping, with
all his guard about him, so as Abishai, at David's command, took only Saul's
spear, and pot of water at his head, having as good a will to have taken his
life) and hearing David's voice, said unto him. Is this thy voice, my son David?
Who said, It is my voice, my Lord O King. Wherefore does my Lord thus pursue
after his servant? For what have I done? or what evil is in my hand? Now
therefore, I pray thee, let my Lord the King hear the words of his servant,
etc. So as (verse. 18.) David pleads his innocence toward Saul; also his
humility; also his fidelity and integrity, though the Lord had now the second
time closed this persecuting tyrant into his hand, so as it was in his power to
be revenged on him for all his murderous hatred, and insatiable malice in
seeking and pursuing his life. And whereas David asks him here, What evil have
I done? he might as well have said, What good have I not done, that thou
should thus requite me? I could but now have smitten thee with thine own
spear, where with formerl^ thou 1 Samuel 19.
attemptedst to smite me to the wall, when thou had bound thy self with an
oath, not to slay me; yea, and then also when I had again made a great
slaughter of the Philistines thine enemies, whereby both thou and thy people
were delivered. Thou call me thy son, but have from the beginning used this
relation as a snare to destroy me, and that by those very enemies the
Philistines, from wh^m through my God I have so often delivered both thee and
all Israel. Now therefore, 1 Samuel 24.12.
the Lord judge between me and thee, and the Lord avenge me of thee: but my
band shall not be upon thee. And besides all this, thou may remember how thou
did confess unto me with tears, when before I spared thy life, 1 San. 14.17,
19. 1 Samuel 18.28
that I had rewarded thee good for evil, and that thou knew well that the
Lord was with me, and that I should surely be king: wherefore then fightest
thou against God, in thus hunting after a flea in the wilderness?

But come we to David's words here: He prays his pursuer and persecutor, saying,
Let my Lord the King hear the words of his servant. His preface for attention,
imports weight in his words, being also spoken to a King; and as his speech
came from an humble heart, so it was full of charity, earnestly seeking (if
possible) Saul's sound repentance at length, after so many backslidings, from
his solemn promises, and hypocritical protestations. Nor did David thus speak
for Saul only, to deter him, but for all those who either counseled, or
instigated, or assisted him either with their power, or with their As the
Z^phites, chap. 26.1. and 23.19, 20.
officiousness, in carrying tales to Saul where David hid himself from his
fury, or through ungratefulness would betray him into S^uls hand, whofe City
he had but a few days before As the men of Keilah, cha. 23 12.
delivered from the Philistines. And now, ye noble Citizens, let a better
spirit move you to hearken to David's words here then was in Saul, at least in
case you shall find your selves no less in some measure concerned in them.

For here we have David for a type of Christ, as David's Kingdom was a type of
Christ's Kingdom. And here we have Saul, a persecuter of David for his Kingdoms
sake, a type of all persecuring tyrants, and that under the name of King of
Israel, under the name of Christian, or Protestant Religion, persecuting the
spiritual Kingdom, and freeborn subjects, Revel. 1.6.
yea, the Kings and Priests of Jesus Christ, and all to uphold a tyra^nical,
worldly and transitory kingdom. This tyrannical King Saul (according to Samuels
prediction and description of him, 1 Samuel 8.) with his servile and enslaved
people, so persecute David and his from place to place, that they could now
here rest or breathe in their own native Country, but were driven to seek
refuge even among their enemies, the Philistines, and that also at Gath, whose
champion they had not yet forgotten to have been vanquished by David, and their
Army routed, and themselves from time to time still put to the worst by David,
whose very name was dreadful in all the land of the Philistines. So as it must
needs be extreme necessity that should drive David and his men to such
d^ngerous exigences as these. Or suppose that Saul and his did not seek to take
away David's life; nor the life of those Worthies with him, but threatened them
only, and were content they should live and breathe in their own land, Josh. 9.
but in the same condition with the Gibeonites, to be bewers of wood and
drawers of water to all the Congregation, but to be cashiered, and for ever
abandoned from and made incapable of all Offices of trust or credit either in
the Civil or Ecclesiastical State, and so to be made the vilest and basest of
men, even the 1 Cor. 4.13.
filth of the world, and the off soouting of all things. Were not a life upon
such conditions infinitely more bitter and intolerable then the vilest and
cruellest death, especially to noble and heroic spirits, and who had been so
prodigal of their dearest blood for the saving of their Country from Philistian
Lordly domination? God for bid (you will say) that Saul and his should ever
have been so ungrateful and b^^tishly minded, so to reward such Worthies, that
had so hig^ly deserved of their native Country; and Heb. 11.38.
whom the world was not worthy of. Certainly (most wontby Citizens) I am
persuaded, that not even in that (...) modelled Common Counsel of London, out
of which so many, honest, godly conscientious men have been lately sequestered,
yet any one is to be found therein, that would approve of Saul's practices
against faithful David, that fought so gloriously for Israel, but that such a
one must needs be bereft and stripped of his very naturals, and principles of
humanity, having the Dan.
heart of a beast, with his brains cracked; so void of all hope or imagination
were it, to find the least atome of grace, Religion, or conscience, other then
desperate atheism in such a monster, as being void of common reason, should he
not be voided out of Common Council? But I leave it to your more sad
consideration, and proceed to the matter of David's speech to Saul.

Which matter confists of two branches: 1. Concerning the Lord, 2. Concerning
men. The first is in these words, If the Lord have stirred thee up against me,
let him accept an offering. The second in these; But if they be the children of
men, cursed be they before the Lord: for, etc.

For the former of these: The Scripture teaches us, that when Gods children,
as David, are persecuted by wicked men, as Saul, it is the Lord that stirs
up those men against his people. Thus did the Lord stir up Pharaoh and the
Egyptians against Israel, Romans 9.17. Exodus 9 16. Bsal. 105.25. And in so doing,
the Lord uses the wicked as his rod, or sword, or staff, or saw, or suchlike
instrument, wherewith to chastise his people, (as Isa. 10.15.) when those
wicked in the mean time are immediately set on by their own malice. And the
Lord, in so delivering his people into the hand of the wicked, as he does it
for the good of his children, so he does it in wrath to their persecutors. It
is the greatest judgment in the world, for men to be given up to the power of
their own wills to afflict and oppress Gods people, Genesis 15.13.14. Exodus 9.16.
Isa. 10.15, 16.

Obj. But has not the Lord a disposing and overruling hand in all things that
are done? Is there evil in the City and the Lord has not done it? How then is
it said here, If the Lord has stirred thee up? Or is there a time wherein the
Lord may be said not to stir up? And if so, when may the Lord be said to stir
up wicked men to afflict his people, or when not?

Ans. It is true, that at no time do the wicked lift up their hand of Gods
people, Isai. 10.15.
but Gods hand stirs them up to the action; as the Ax cannot hew, unless it be
acted by the hand. Yet sometimes God is not said to stir up, as at other times:
And that is, when there appears no external immediate cause moving a man to
this or that action, then the Lord comes in for the immediate moving cause of
it, and not man: as Exodus 21.13. And therefore in this place, the question is
put, If the Lord stirred up Saul, or, If the children of men did it. If the
children of men were the immediate moving cause, in stirring up Saul to
persecute David, then the Lord cannot be said to be the immediate moving cause.
Where then there appears no other external cause moving, then is God the mover,
and owns the action, as here, both in relation to Saul, in judgment, and to
David, for chastisement. And therefore David adds here, If the Lord bath
stirred thee up against me, let him accept an offering. As if he should have
said, Though thou, Saul, have no cause thus to pursue me, yet true it is (if
the Lord shall strictly examine my carriage toward him, he may find matter to
provoke him to set thee on, as a fierce lion, to tear me in pieces. But, if so,
that he have a quarrel against me, let him accept a Weich was a Levitical
expiation, typing out the true Sacrifice of Christ, the one Propitiatory for
sin, 1 John 2.2.
sacrifice, or offering at my hand. But against thee, O King, I have not
transgressed, that I should ask pardon of the Lord for it; but herein I appeal
to his justice, to Psalm. 7.8. see the title of the Psalm, in reference to Saul's
quarrel against David.
judge me according to my righteousness, and according to mine innocence that
is in me.

Now touching the second branch: But if they be the children of men that have
stirred thee up against me, cursed be they before the Lord. Children of men are
so named here, as being opposers and oppressors of the children of God. So
David complained, when he fled from Saul, Psalm. 57.4. Such children of men
then, as either stir up others, or do themselves persecute the children of God,
they show themselves to be therein no other then the children of men, not the
children of God. Nor does this excuse Saul, that he was egged to this by any of
his Doegs, or flattering sycophantizing Courtiers. Kings will never want bad
Councillors, if they be bad themselves. If a Ruler hearken to lies (Prove.
29.12.) all his servants are wicked. If Saul were led by bad Councillors, he
might thank himself, that either his example led them to it, or that he was led
by them. Ahab followed Jezebels counsel to get Naboths life and vineyard, and
that by an hypocritical way of a Fast: But both he, and she, and their house,
and Kingdom paid dearly for it. Adam lays the fault on his wife, and she on the
Serpent: the Serpent is cursed, but they escaped not scot-free, so as the earth
became accursed for their sakes. So here is a curse imprecated upon those
children of men that stirred up Saul to persecute David: But did not this Curse
involve Saul too? Did not the Lord forsake him? No Samuel now to pray for him,
being before his death 1 Samuel 16.1.
forbid any longer to mourn for him, as being rejected of God. And henceforth
he proceeds from evil to worse and worse. Now the Verse. 14.
Spirit of the Lord for the government of his kingdom departs from him, and
an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him. Now, 1 Samuel 28.6.
when he enquired of the Lord, the Lord answered him not, neither by dreams,
nor by Vrim, nor by Prophets. Then, Verse. 7.
he sends to seek out a Witch, to enquire of her. And all along, he stands to
none of his promises and oaths made to David, but pursues him continually to
make an end of him. And in the end he falls by the Army of the uncircumcised
Philistines, and being sore wounded, he desperately fell upon his own sword,
and so died.

Object. But David was a Prophet, and so might imprecate such a curse, which
upon like occasions we have not the like warrant so to do.

Answ. Nor need we. This curse is not taken off the file, but stands in force
still, and is recorded to admonish us, upon whom the ends of the world are
come. If we counsel others to evil, or if we follow others counsel to do evil,
both fall under the same curse, under the same condemnation.

But now what or whom does all this concern? Or what is it to this famous City,
as to those whose Body Representative (as themselves hold) the Common Council,
this should be inscribed? Certainly much, every manner of way. Shall I deal
clearly? Surely I must: Otherwise, I should neither fear God, nor love you, nor
desire the honor and safety of this City. Which God forbid. It was said of old
of Judah, Jer. 17.1.
The sin of Judah is with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond. O
that it might not be said so of London! But is not the sin of London written,
published, and made conspicuous in the eyes of all the world? I beseech you
consider what you have done. Read over again, and ponder well those frequent
pressings, importune Petitions, Remonstrances, Representations, what daily
pursuance of them to the Two Houses of Parliament, wherein, among many good
things, you were so importunate to have those Worthies of our Nation (whose
endeavors God has crowned with so many glorious Victories over potent
enemies) to be trampled under feet, abased, disgraced, cast out of all Places
of honor, credit, or trust, either in Church or Commonweal, and to be for
ever disabled and made incapable thereof, who have from the first to this day
all along showed themselves so faithful, affectionate, valiant, and prodigal of
their dearest lives, and all to deliver this City and Kingdom from becoming a
spoil and prey to those, who had long ago, in their enlarged and insatiable
desires, swallowed up London at a morsel. And your casting out of
Common Counsel and Militia sundry honest men, for no other known cause, but
because honest, as a leading case to the Parliament to do the like, is of the
same nature with the former. But whence is this? or what heathen stories or
Turkish histories can furnish us with any such examples as these? Certainly the
Grecian (...) a Law, by votes or little shells put into a pot, for the
banishment of their most famous Worthies for ten years, as Aristides, Camillus,
etc.
Ostracismon is no way parallel, being a Law to banish some one in the City,
eminent for his virtues, as Aristides, for ten years. How is it possible then,
that such things should proceed from men professing to be Christians? Certainly
they could not come from men that had but humane Principles; much less from
the Common Counsel of so famous a City as London is. It Is true indeed, and is
not denied, that you have acted these things, and have owned them. But I
beseech you, were there no children of men that have stirred you up to these
things. No nocturnal Conclaves whence these counsels sprung? Certainly, whoever
they be (and you know best) though they be in as high esteem with you, as if
they were Angels of light, or Oracles from heaven, yet (by thi^ Scripture)
cursed they are before the Lord, because they have instigated you to
remonstrate and represent the faithful in the Land, and the Preservers of
Israel (such as David was) odious and vile to the Parliament, thereby to bring
that Body Representative, and so the whole Body of the Land, under a most
damnable guilt of unnatural ingratitude, and diabolical malice, in driving
those our brethren and benefactors from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord,
1 Samuel 16.19.
as Saul, with his children of men, did David, which wrapped them all in the
Curse.

Now what is to be done, that (if possible) this curse may be removed, and the
sin expiated? Some, perhaps, will say, that no doubt those concerned in the
said Remonstrance or Representation, are now well satisfied, the City and Army
do well accord together, and do both jointly stand for Justice; and the
Common Counsel has in a late Petition desired, that, satisfaction being made
by Delinquents, an Act of Amnestia or Oblivion may be pass^d and confirmed, for
an utter abolition and final reconcilement of all parties and differences, for
settling of peace, love and unity among the subjects of this Kingdom. A blessed
Petition. But, dear Christians, there is one thing remains to be done, besides
this peace, love, and unity among our selves, and with men; and that is, our
peace with God: otherwise, as Jehu said to Jehoram, What Peace? Certainly God
requires this of you, the Common Counsel of London, for that which you have
done against your brethren in the Army, and elsewhere (only because in point
of judgment they differ from you, though they have hazarded their lives for
you) which as it is a high breach of charity, and an unsampled ingratitude, so
it is most odious and abominable before God, whose Justice and Wrath, if not
appeased by faith in Christ, accompanied with sincere Repentance, and public
Humiliation, will undoubtedly (if Gods Word be true concerning Saul, and other
in the like case) break forth upon you and your Councillors, yea upon City and
Kingdom: For Gal. 6.
God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap. In King
David's time, 2 Samuel 21.
a famine of three ^^^rs was in the Land. For what cause? David enquires of the
Lord, and the Lord answered, It is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because
be slew the Gibeonites. Why? Saul was now dead; and does the Lord now under
David's Reign punish Israel for Saul's sin? Yes: Gods forbearance is no
forgiveness, his patience is no payment. And though Saul was dead yet Israel
being accessory to Saul's sin, God punishes them. And because Saul slew the
Posterity of the Gibeonites, God now requires it at the hands of Saul's
Posterity. The Gibeonites demand of David seven of Saul's sons to be hanged,
which is granted. But why should all this ado be for the Gibeonites? for these
Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel, but a remnant of the Amorites.
I, but the children of Israel had sworn unto them. Now observe it well: As Saul
in his zeal for the children of Israel slew the Gibeonites; so the Lord, now in
his zeal, both punishes the children of Israel with three years famine, and
slays seven of Saul's sons for satisfaction to the Gibeonites. Now if the Lord
were so zealous and exact in his Justice in so punishing Saul's sinful zeal, and
avenging the slaughter of the Gibeonites, though aliens in Israel; what
impunity can they look for at the hands of the righteous God, who (out of what
zeal soever, be it for those new lords to be set over them, as the peoples zeal
was to have Saul for their King, rather then the Lord, 1 Samuel 8.7.) are so
extremely injurious and oppressive, and that to their brethren, their own
natural Countrymen, yea perhaps kindsmen too, and (that which is above all
other relations) their preservers and deliverers from utter ruin and
destruction of them and theirs, and that with the extreme hazard of their own
lives, interposing their bodies between the City and utmost imminent mortal
destructive danger, and that in a juncture of time when the enemy was in the
top of his strength, and in the ruff of his jollity, fully resolving the day
was his, before it dawned; and on the other side, our Army consisting of raw
Soldiers, and no less raw Offices, was at the lowest ebb, and given for
lost, as men that durst not engage, and whom the enemy supposed would rather
flee then fight: so injurious (I say) as to go about, in stead of putting at
least Laurel Crowns upon their heads, to make them level with the Gibeonites,
to purchase their lives with being hewers of wood and drawers of water to the
whole Nation, as glad that they may but breathe in the common air, and live of
a morsel of bread, to lengthen their miserable lives, so much worse then death,
by how much these are men of a more noble and heroic spirit, then so dearly to
prize a most ignominious life, after so many large proffers of their dearest
blood to purchase a most glorious death. No greater injury nor indignity can be
done to welldeserving Virtue, then to recompense it with impious Scorn. David
would not suffer those Worthies of his to be sent back with disgrace, 1 Samuel 10.
with their beards half shaven, and their garments cut off to their huttocks by
Hanun the Ammonite, to whom he had sent to congratulate his new Crown, 2 Samuel
12.26-31.
but to revenge such an indignity, gathered an Army, wherewith he brought under
the proud Ammonite, so as he took his Royal City, and the Crown from his head,
and put the people under sawes, and under harrows of iron, and made them pass
through the brick-kiln; and thus did he to all the Cities of the children of
Ammon: and all this (I say) for one disgrace put upon David's servants, though
new garments and their new grown beards might seem to heal all again. And will
not our David, Jesus Christ (trow you) avenge such horrible indignities as your
Remonstrances and Representations have cast upon his Worthies, and such as have
done more for you then a complement; and so much the more, when the disgraces
put upon them reflect upon himself, whose power and goodness has by them, as
his servants and instruments, achieved so great things for you, the City,
Kingdom, Parliament? Could any thing have been invented more dishonorable to
Christ, and more darkening the bright beams of his glory shining forth in those
famous acts of his, wrought by this Army, then thu^, not only to bury such
glory under an infamous act of eternal oblivion, but to brand those servants of
his with the Thracian notes of perpetual villainage? Nor do I, but the thing it
self speak and proclaim this. Your Remonstrance and Repreientation are extant
to all the world.

But what might be the cause of all this calamity? A monstrous conception sure,
that brings forth such a monstrous birth. Why, the reason is (were there any
reason at all in it) that those Worthies of the Army do not in all things
concur in their judgments with you (I would say, with your Teachers, whose
judgment is yours) about the things controverted at this day, touching Christ's
Spiritual Kingdom, while they would rack men's Consciences to conform to such a
Church Government as they are never able (for all their titular Jus divinum) to
make out from Scripture-evidence. So as such forcing of the Conscience
(otherwise informed and persuaded by the Word of God) as it is a horrible
violation of our late Solemn Covenant for a Reformation in all things according
to the Word of God; so it is no less Antichristian Tyranny over men's souls,
then that which the Pope and Prelates have exercised over us, if not worse,
Jer. 28.13.
when the wooden yokes of the Prelates being broken, seem now to be turned and
multiplied into many thousand yokes of iren. Consider therefore, ye worthy
Citizens, whether it was not the very spirit of Antichrist breathed upon you by
those who have changed the name, but not the nature of Prelatical Usurpation,
that has thus imposed upon your facile Credulity, begotten of your high
opinion of them, to undertake such a horrid attempt for the perpetual
enthralling and vassalizing of both souls and bodies of those who have been
your Deliverers, and who have abundantly proved themselves to be (next under
God) the best and faithfullest friends that either you, or the City, or our
native Country of England have in all the world at this day.

Therefore, most dear Citizens and Countrymen, Acts 3.13, 14* 15, 17.
let me use the Apostle's words to you, which he did to those that had (through
the subornation of their Synedrion, the Priests and Pharisees) by their land
Vote, Crucifigs, Crucifige, killed the Prince of life, saying, Now brethren, I
wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your Rulers. And certainly (I
affirm it again and again) never could your own genius (being ingenuous men,
and of a generous breeding and education) ever have led you into such a
miserable Maze, had not your over-credulous harkening to some other's Counsel,
ensnared your over-confident presuming on some supposed good in it, (as Eve,
through the Serpents subtilty, supposed to be in the eating of the forbidden
tree) so leading your harmless intentions captive at their will, to be the
instruments of serving their ungodly and unnatural design. Let me therefore
add, and apply to you (as the most sovereign and only remedy to cure the
wound of your conscience before God, and of your honor with men) that
exhortation of the Apostle, Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted,
that your sin may be blotted out, when the time of refreshing shall come from
the presence of the Lord. Make your peace with God, and so with your own
conscience, as well as with men; and for that end, petition the Parliament for
a Solemn and Public Fast Day, wherein your humble and sincere confession
before all, may stop the mouth of so crying a sin, that God may have his glory,
and you his mercy, and both Parliament, City and Country impunity, especially
whose spirits shall sympa^hize, and bear a part with you, and chiefly those,
who have had the prime share with you in the sin, either in counselling you to
it, or not deterring you from it (for either of these ways the sin is theirs,
Ezekiel. 3.18, 19. Matthew. 5.19.) that so they may be the first to share in the
shame, and your selves not the last.

FINIS.

