CONFORMITIES DEFORMJTY.

In a Dialogue between CONFORMITY, and CONSCIENCE.

Wherein the main Head of all the Controversies in these times, concerning
Church Government, is asserted and maintained; as without which, all
Reformation is headless, and all Reconciliation hopeless.

Dedicated by HENRY BURTON, to the honor of Jesus Christ, as the first fruits
of his late recovery from death to life; as a testimony of his humble and
thankful acknowledgement of so great a mercy: And published for the service of
all those, that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.

Scripture-Warnings for England, if not too late.

ESA. 1. 5. Why should you be stricken any more? Ye will revolt more and more:
the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. ESA. 29. 9, 10. Stay your
selves, and wonder: Cry ye out, and cry, They are drunken, but not with wine;
they stagger, but not with strong drink: For the Lord has poured out upon you
the spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes: the Prophets, and your
Rulers, the Seers has he covered. EZICH. 22. 23, etc. Son of man, say unto
her, Thou art the land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of
indignation: There is a conspiracy of her Prophets in the midst thereof, like
a roaring Lion, ravening the prey. Her Priests have violated my law, and put no
difference between the holy and profane. Her Princes in the midst thereof are
like wolves ravening the prey, to shed blood, and to destroy souls, to get
dishonest gain. And her Prophets have daubed them with untempered mortar,
seeing vanity, and divining lies, saying, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord
has not spoken. The people of the land have used oppression, and exercised
robbery. And I sought for a man to stand in the gap, that I should not destroy
the land, but I found none. HOS. 7. 11. Ephraim (so England, London) is like a
silly Dove without heart: they call to Egypt, they go to Assyria. ESA. 1. 21.
How is the faithful City become an harlot? It was full of Judgment,
Righteousness lodged therein, but now ^^^^^erers. Thy silver is become dross,
thy wine mixed with water: thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of
thieves. O homines, ad servitutem parati! Tacitus. O men, fitted for slavery!
said Tiberius of the Roman Senate; so yielding he found their degenerate
spirits to become slaves to his tyranny. As Rome was in Livies time, of which
he said, That neither the Maladies, nor Remedies could be endured: So is
England now. London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle near
the West end of Paul's. 1646.

To the Right Honorable, The LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON.
Right Honorable:
THis Title salutes you as Lord Major, in relation to your Place and Office;
which being Honorable, then much more, when true worth and virtue makes the
Person Right Honorable, as in title, so in reality: Otherwise such usual
Titles are but empty founds, being but Civil complements, and not of any Moral
notion. As it was the custom of the Heathen to style those their Benefactors,
who were their Oppressors. Christians should not use such flattery. For my
part, I have taken this boldness to salute your New Lordship, without giving
flattering titles, lest (as Elih^ said) my Maker should soon take me away. And
in truth, such Places and Titles of Honor Job 32. 22
as these, being well weighed, do somewhat resemble Honos onus.
the Crown, which Henry the 7. of this Realm, finding at Bosworth field to be
flung in a Thorn-bush, said, He that knew the weight and cares of a Crown,
would not stoop to take it up. And though your Cap of Maintenance come short of
a Crown; yet into such times are we fallen, as may make your Cap, to your self
at least, being truly sensible of it, as heavy as a Crown. And if I may speak
plainly my apprehensions, the well-being and safety, not only of this City, but
even of our fair England, claims and loudly calls for of you, an honorable,
wise, and faithful execution of your Majoralty this very year: all men's
expectations being erect, some with hope, and some with fear, according to
their several interests. But with what minds soever, and for what ends, Men
made choice of you at this time; this we are sure of, That Jesus Christ the
Lord of heaven and earth, who has all power in his hands, as King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, who raises up, and throws down again, has in his wisdom
called you to this place at this time, to do his will, and not your own. And
therefore, in this high and important office, and this juncture of time, what
need have you of another heart, and another spirit then your own, (it being
dangerous, especially in steep and slippery places, to be led by Men's spirits)
and of new principles from heaven to be put into you (as we read of Saul, who
had another heart given unto him, so as he was turned into another man, so soon
as he was anointed 1 Samuel 6. 9.
King) and all to furnish you with such qualifications of wisdom,
understanding, and the fear of God, as may in the due execution and faithful
discharge of your office, declare to all the world, that your main aims and
ends are more for Gods glory then your own, and more for the public good, then
for your own private; and more to gratify good men, then others, though never
so high or great, and whose designs drive at nothing more then ruin and
confusion. For we are not ignorant what diabolical plots are on foot, and how
ripe for execution, and what kind of Counselors and active Spirits, your
Chair, and Table, yea and Bedchamber too will be haunted withal, if experience
deceive us not. And you shall find their ordinary counsels to drive at two main
things (yet both reduced under one head, to wit, Tyranny) the one, Tyranny over
our Bodies, Estates, Freeholds, Liberties, Laws and Birthrights of all
English freeborn Subjects; the other, Tyranny over our Souls and Consciences,
which are CHRIST's peculiar freeholds and purchase, and subject to no other
Law, Lordship or Kingdom, but Christ's alone.

And in truth (my Lord) in this respect, you are in a hard condition, in case
you should by any importunity be persuaded to interpose as a Judge in the
matter of Religion, and especially in the point of Church Government, the main
controversy of these times, as wherein you have been little versed,
considering how few there be that come to preach before you, who set themselves
to open unto you this great mystery of Christ's Kingly office, and government,
over Consciences and Churches: But on the contrary, such as Ignorants most
admire and adore as gods upon earth, do withhold this truth of God concerning
his Sons Kingly government from you; nay (though under other terms) do
publicly in your solemn assemblies exclaim against it, shut it out of their
churches, will not suffer others to preach, or print it, with their good wills,
but do exasperate and incense you against all those that hold forth this truth
in the glory and excellency of it: this being that very Kingdom, of which
Christ said, Woe be to you Soribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, Mat. 23.
for ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, for ye neither go in your
selves, nor suffer ye them that are entering, to go in.

But, my Lord, you are a lover of Peace; as that part of your Speech upon your
Election, in the Hall, declared, and we all believe it: when you said, That you
would endeavor to have Unity; for which you propounded two ways, either by
Entreaty, or by Force. Indeed, in such a case, and for your place, Entreaty is
very commendable: but if you think by Force to compose the differences, that
will prove none of Gods ways, nor to lie within your sphere; as I dare say,
you abhor to be a persecutor of those that are the promoters of Christ's
honor. And being a thing not pertaining to the office, especially of a
Christian Magistrate; I need not tell you what befell Vzzah, for stretching out
his hand to stay the trembling Ark. 2 Samuel 6.


And now that I have been thus far bold with your Lordship, (which has
proceeded merely from a hearty desire, that you may not be carried with the
strong tide of the times by any malignant spirit filling your sails, through
many under-water Rocks and Shelves, endangering not only the splitting of your
own Vessel, but the total ship wrack of this floating State:) Give me leave
further to beseech you, that (as you love your own self, and soul, and family,
and posterity, your native Country, the Honor of this City and Nation you
would improve the whole power of your Office (among other evils) for the not
only suppressing, but utter obliterating out of all records of memory, or
mention, that late Remonstrance of London, which like the Trojan horse is
stuffed with such matter, as, if the importunity of some might have its desire,
would unavoidably hale in ruin both to City and Country.

Nor does any thing more clearly demonstrate that spiritual Judgment of
blindness, and hardness of heart to be upon all those who have their heads
and hands in that Remonstrance, and wilfully still persist in the prosecution
of it now in cold blood: Than the unnatural hating, and hunting after the
destruction of those very men, as our mortal enemies, who have with the extreme
hazard of their lives, been honored of God to be the Preservers both of Them,
our City and Country, and on the other side, the high esteem and honoring of
those, as our faithfullest friends, who are part-takers with Murderers, with
Rebels, with Traitors, Incendiaries, Underminers of our Parliaments, and
consequently of the State of the Kingdom, Dividers between the Parliament and
City, that themselves may reign, whose violent and fraudulent practices
proclaim them to be not friends, but such, as in whom to put the least
confidence, is to trust in the Reed of Egypt, whereon if a man lean, it will
pierce him through. And therefore, for these many and weighty considerations,
both in a due respect to your Lordship, and hearty zeal for the honor and
safety both of Parliament, City, Kingdom; fuller of dangers and enemies at
this day, then (by reason of that spirit of blindness, and deep sleep, wherein
our City has of late been sweetly lulled by the strong charms of fair false
friends flatteries) we are aware of: I have in the name of Jesus Christ humbly
commended this small Book to your Lordship, that therein I might discharge the
duty of a poor Watchman, to awaken you in the first place, and consequently all
of that Court and Counsel with you, to look out, and inward too, for the speedy
preventing of all those imminent dangers, which otherwise will suddenly
surprise us, and take us napping in the deep of our too credulous security. For
the Spirit of that Tenhorned Beast is now making war with the Lamb, Rev. 17.
(which is likely to be his last war, Babylons fall following in the next
chap.) and this Spirit warreth under Rev. 18.
new colors, not red, but white, whose Word is, REFORMATION, and this under a
fair color of a Covenant, by virtue whereof pretending a just title to the
War, he hopes, by the help of the Remonstrance, and the prime authors thereof,
and their adherents, to erect a new Bestial tyranny over souls, bodies and
estates, under new names and notions. But the issue is, The Lamb shall overcome
them (for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings) and they that are with him
are called Chosen and Faithful. And, my Lord, you shall find in this Book,
Conformity to be the Mystery of iniquity, the mother of all mischief, the cause
of all our present calamities, and the forerunner and hastener of our ruin, if
we repent not, and if our Lord Jesus Christ prevent not, which certainly he
will, because himself is the Great and Almighty General, whose Cause and Name
is mainly engaged in this war. Now the Lord Jesus Christ give you the Spirit
of wisdom, well to consider and lay to heart these things: which that you may
do, is, and shall be the hearty prayer of

Your Lordships most humble servant, HENRY BURTON.

A DIALOVGE Between CONFORMITY and CONSCIENCE.
Conformities Soliloquie.
Conformity. Who is this that comes along? Surely by his habit and gate, it
should be one, that, according as I have often heard him described by many, is
called, Conscience. And to be sure, I will be so bold, as to salute him, and
ask his name. And if it be indeed that Conscience I mean, and that he will
afford me so much patience, I will enter into further discourse with him.


Conformity. YOu are well met, Sir.


Conscience. And you also.


Conf. Sir, I pray you pardon my boldness to crave your Name. For as I came
along, I conceived from what I had heard, that you should be the man called
Conscience.


Consc. My name is Conscience.


Conf. Now I am glad of this happy opportunity to meet you, of whom I have
heard so much talk abroad in the world.


Consc. Why, what talk has the world of me?


Conf. Sir, I pray you be not offended, and I will tell you. The World
generally says of you, that you are the only troubler of the State.


Consc. Is it therefore true, because the world says it? So Ahab called the
Prophet Eliah, the Troubler of Israel: so the Jews said of Christ, that he was
a perverter, and stirrer up of the Luke 23. 2, 5.
people. So when this Lamb of God, the King of the Jews was born, Herod, and
all Jerussilem were troubled at it. Why so? Was it this King that troubled
them, or their own guilty consciences in usurping this Kingdom? Alas! Sir this
is no news, that where ever the fame of this King and of his kingdom comes,
in the powerful preaching of the Gospel of the kingdom, it brings with it
trouble and terrom to the world, or to any State. And as it was with Herod and
the Priests at Jerusalem at the birth of this King, so at his death: they could
not endure to hear of this King of the Jews. So the Heathen Emperor Domitian,
out of jealousy of his Empire, sought to root out the whole Eusebius. Eccl. Hist.
Race of CHRIST'S Kindred, until two of them were brought before him that got
their living hardly in the husbanding of a few acres of land, and understanding
of Christ's kingdom, that it was altogether spiritual and not of this world, he
dismissed them, and ceased his persecution. An example sufficient to shame
thousands that glory in the Name of Christians, and contrary to this Heathen,
cannot endure to hear of Christ's kingdom to be spiritual; but under some fair
colorable pretenses of Spiritualty, and Clergy, and I know not what, endeavor
nothing more then to set up a worldly kingdom, which yet they must (forsooth)
call Christ's kingdom, when in nothing it is spiritual, but as it is a Tyranny
set over men's consciences, souls, and spirits. But sir, before I proceed any
further with you, let me also crave your name.


Conf. Sir, my name is Conformity.


Consc. Conformity. Sir, if you be the man, I know none more ready to raise
slanders upon me then your self; and may I not say truly of thee, that thou art
one of the greatest troublers of Israel? For what can more trouble the world,
then when thou (Conformity) would force all men's consciences to dance after
thy Pipe.


Conf. Why, Mr. Conscience, do not ye think that I have a conscience as well as
you? should I therefore be an enemy to Conscience? But indeed, I confess my
conscience is not so strict, or strait-laced, or self-willed, as obstinately to
stand upon mine own singular opinion, in opposition to the general judgment
of most meh, and those not only learned, but pious too, so far as I can judge.


Consc. It seems then that every conscience by your verdict, must be
strait-laced, and self-willed, that will not follow the multitude, seeing you
ground your conscience upon men for their number, learning, piety, making them
the rule of your conscience, and not Gods Word alone.


Conf. Sir I hold this the safest way: for I may misunderstand the Scripture,
which many learned cannot so easily do.


Consc. This indeed is a good plea for Popery, who boast of their Universality,
Learning, Councels, and Synods, and therefore (besides the Popes infallible
Oracle) not easily subject to misunderstand the Scriptures. Or you are like
those Jews, who would not believe in Christ, unless the Rulers did know
indeed that he was the very Christ. Or as the Pharisees said, Have any John 7.
26. 48.
of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? Thus, do you not pin your
faith, and so your souls upon men's sleeves, when you will believe as most
believe, or as the Church or Nation believes?


Conf. But sir, I put a great difference between a Council of learned Papists,
or a Synedrion of Jewish Priests, and a Synod of learned Protestants.


Consc. Indeed the very names of Papist and Protestant import no small
difference; although a Papist and a Protestant at large are at no great odds in
matter of Faith, Conscience, Religion; only such a Protestant is apter to turn
Papist, then a Papist, Protestant. And take your Protestants at the best, call
a Synod of the learned est, and highest esteem in the world, yet even such a
Synod may in some things and those fundamental too, possibly run into, and
wrap themselves in foul errors.


Conf. How sir? show me any one instance hereof, that ever any learned
Protestant Counsel or Synod has erred in any fundamental of faith, or much
less has maintained such an Error or Heresy, and I will not henceforth be so
confident in depending and resting upon men's judgments, be they never so
learned, godly, or many.


Consc. Seeing you thus put me to it, what think ye of Jesus Christ? Is not he
a prime fundamental?


Conf. No doubt, for he is the only foundation: For other foundation can no man
lay. 1 Cor. 3. 11.



Consc. Is not Christ then as well in his three Offices (as he is King, Priest
and Prophet) as in his two natures united in one Person of the Eternal Son of
God, a fundamental of faith, so as, as well he that denies any one of his
three Offices, as 1 John 4. 3.
he that denies that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is an Antichrist and
grand Heretic, as overthrowing a principal foundation of faith?


Conf. I conceive this cannot well be denied.


Consc. Nay, of necessity it must be believed. For the Papists in joining their
Traditions with the Scripture, deny Christ's Prophetical office; and in
equalling their Satisfactions with Christ's merits, they deny his Priestly
Office; and in exalting their Hierarchy (call it Papal, or Prelaticall, or
Sacerdotall) These. 2. 4.
over the Temple of God, men's consciences, they deny Christ's Kingly Office: All
which Offices together, or any one of them being denied; is, John 2. 22.
with Antichrist, to deny, that Jesus is the Christ; seeing the Christ is he,
that is anointed King, Priest, and Prophet, of which to deny any one, is to
deny that Jesus is the Christ. Do ye not believe this, Mr. Conformity?


Conf. I confess there appears to me a truth to be in all this. But yet, Mr.
Conscience, I hope you do not go about to ensnare me with mine own confessions.


Consc. Why Master Conformity, are you conscious to your self, that while you
confess the truth, the truth should ensnare you? Certainly the bonds of John
8. 32.
truth willingly taken upon us, become the robes and livery of our true
freedom.


Conf. Sir, take me not at the worst; I would not willingly utter words to my
prejudice.


Consc. Speak the words of truth then, and fear nothing.


Conf. Well sir, proceed then to what you have more to say.


Consc. I say then, that to deny any one of Christ's Offices (as before) is to
overthrow a Foundation of faith.


Conf. I grant it.


Consc. Hereupon I infer, that it is possible for a learned Synod of
Protestant Divines to deny one of these three Offices, and so to overthrow a
foundation of faith.


Conf. Though it be possible, yet it is not probable. But sir, remember what ye
undertook, namely, to prove by instance, that a Protestant Synod of Orthodox
Divines has thus erred.


Consc. Nay stay, Mr. Conformity, remember your self well: Did I say, a
Protestant Synod of Orthodox Divines? For how Orthodox, if they overthrow a
foundation of faith? then they cease to be Orthodox.


Conf. Well, however, yet they might in other fundamentals be Orthodox.


Consc. But in any one fundamental to be Heterodox, is to cease to be
Orthodox, and, obstinately persisting, is heretical.


Conf. I confess, that any one Heresy maintained, makes a man a Heretic,
hold he otherwise never so many truths, and so he overthrows the faith, as
those did who 1 Cor. 15.
denied the Resurrection, though all other truths they held. But sir, all this
while I expect your proof or instance, that a Synod of Protestant Divines
should fall into any such foul error, or heresy, as should overthrow the
foundation.


Consc. Mr. Conformity, for instance we need not go beyond the seas, or over
our English bounds to fetch it. What if the generality of the Ministers and
people in England be found to be wrapped in such a destructive Heresy? I call
it destructive, using the 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. (...) Haereses vastantes.
Apostles word, where he says. That there shall be false teachers among Gods
people, who shall cunningly bring in destr^ying Heresies. And what are these?
Even denying the Lord that bought them, bringing upon themselves (...)
swift destruction. And many shall follow their destructive ways, or their
destructions, by whom the way of truth shall be (...).
evil spoken of, or blas^hemed. A Prophecy (by the way) which if well
weighed, and rightly applied, may be found to be in a great measure fulfilled
in these our times. For here is first a destructive, or (as our common
Translation) damnable Heresy. Secondly, this Heresy (...).
is, in deaying the Lord Jesus Christ. Thirdly, here is a many followers.
Fourthly, among this many there be some at least, who have their mouths open
in Pulpits, Streets, Tables, and their Quils in Presses, in Pamphlets,
blaspheming, speaking all manner of evil against the way of truth; even that
way of truth, which holds forth, confesses, professes, maintains (against
all the worlds reproaches) Jesus Christ in that very particular, wherein he is
at this day so mightily decried, and denied by false Teachers and their
followers. Nor can any Age, as touching this one particular, be paralleld with
this of ours for Pens and As those infamous books of Tho. Edwards and John
Bastwick, too welknown to all.
Tongues of blasphemy; lashing out, and running over all the bounds and banks,
not only of Christianity, but even of common modesty and humanity (as men
bereaft of their wits) and all this against the assertors and maintainers of
the Kingly Office of Jesus Christ. And lastly, a destructive Heresy, in that
not only it destroys souls, but is in a precipice to destroy Kingdoms, to
such a height of rage it is now grown. Notus nimis omnib. Horat.



Conf. But Mr. Conscience, what means all this? What? In that your generality,
do you charge as all, Synod, Sion, City, Country, as lying under the guilt of
such an Heresy? What? All denying the Lord Jesus Christ?


Consc. Mr. Conformity, cannot a man speak of a generality, but he must needs
name particulars? And you know that generals have their exceptions. And when a
generality is mentioned, let all particulars look to it. But what if there be a
generality, and that of Protestants (so called) in the land, which will be
found to overthrow Christ's Kingly Office?


Conf. What if, say you? what if the sky fall? Nay I dare say, yea, and swear
too, that not any one of this generality you mean, does, or dare deny Christ's
Kingly office and prerogative. I have often heard them in public to give
Christ the title of King, and to speak of his kingdom; and they every where
confess and profess him to be King of his Church. So as such a charge would
argue as much malice, as untruth.


Consc. And I have heard them say as much as you say. But is saying sufficient?
Yea, I have heard them say, That all Churchmembers must be Saints: that all
Churches be equal, and none have jurisdiction over other: that Gods Word is the
only rule of Reformation: and many such principles about Churches they confess
in words So, Christ to be King. But if this be all, it may prove little better,
then the Jews putting a purple robe upon Christ with a crown of thorns on his
head, and a reed for a scepter in his hand, with Hail King of the Jews; but
for all this, crucified him: so that you confess Christ to be King, and
crucify his true subjects Again, you know the Pharisees said many things well,
but they did them not. And does not the Scripture speak of such as Tit. 1. 16
profess they know God, but in works deny him? Whence we observe a twofold
denial of God: one in words, and another in deeds. Now I do not say, that the
generality does in words deny Christ's Kingly office: but this I affirm, that in
works they deny him.


Conf. Sir, how do you prove that? or how does that Scripture reach to those
you speak of?


Consc. A question opportunely put. And therefore if you turn to the 14 and 15
verses immediately foregoing, you may Tit. 1. 14, 15.
observe what manner of persons those were, whom the Apostle there speaks of,
and upon what occasion. For that Chapter being to set forth the office of a
Bishop or Pastor of a particular Church or Congregation, and how he should be
qualified and gifted, and the Church governed; the Apostle wills Titus to
warn the Christians, Not to give heed to Jewish fables and commandments of
men, that turn from the truth. Where he ranks the commandments of men in
Church Matters, manners, and government, with Jewish fables, as which do turn
men away from the truth, and so from Christ, as he also shows at large, Col.
2, 8. 20. 22. and throughout the whole Chapter. So as to set up the
Commandments of men in forms of worship, or of Church Government, being
Christ's spiritual kingdom, is to separate men from Christ, (Col. 2. 19.) and
to make them unbelieving, (Tit. 1. 14.) and impure in mind and conscience, V.
15. yea, abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate, Verse.
16. All which I commend to your more sad and serious consideration, Master
Conformity.


Conf. I confess this is a terrible Scripture to those that lie under the
condemnation of it. But I hope those whom you mean, are no such men: for first,
you confess they deny not in words Christ's Kingly office: and for any denial
in works, you have not yet proved, nor I hope can.


Consc. I have nothing to do with your hope. But whereas you would make it my
confession, that they deny not in words Christ's Kingly office, neither do I
absolutely confess so much. For though I confess I have heard them upon
occasion (being put to it) in words to confess Christ to be King of his
Church: yet I have heard them again say, and have read it in their books, and
they maintain it tooth and nail, that Christ has left the forms of worship and
Church government unto men, to be so framed as is most suitable to the
conditions of the people, or the laws of each State, binding all the subjects
thereof (and that under severe penalties) to an universal conformity, or
uniformity.


Conf. Why sir, has not Christ left that power and liberty to those that are
in authority; as Synods, to frame and compose forms of worship and
Church Government, such as they judge fittest, having an eye to the Scripture,
and the civil Magistrate to confirm the same by law?


Consc. The Pope indeed arrogating to himself all power in Heaven and Earth
over Churches and Kingdoms, makes his claim from Scripture. As Mat. 16. 18.
Thou art Peter, etc. Therefore his successor, the Pope, is the Rock, whereon
the Church is built. So, here are two swords: therefore the Pope has power of
both the swords. So, Luke 22 38.
The Holy Ghost shall lead you into all truth: Therefore the Apostolic Chair
at Rome cannot err. Here Mr. Conformity, cast your eye a little upon the
Scripture, * John 16. 13.
and see there what one place you can find to serve your turn, that has any
more likeness or probability in it, for what you claim, then those places
which the Papists are not ashamed to build their Babel-Towre upon. You have
talked much of Jure Divino, but are not able to crane it up higher then to Jure
Humano: and therefore, I suppose it is, that of late days, since the House put
their nine Queres to the Synod, the mention of Jure Divino is quite hushed. And
now Conscience challenges you to produce but one testimony from Scripture for
you, which will not make you as ridiculous, as the forenamed Scriptures do the
Pope. And for Synods, they have no such authority as you speak of. Give us one
Scripture. That in Acts 15. will not serve your turn. And the Apostles sought
not to humane authority, and laws, to confirm the Gospel, or to give power to
the exercise of their ministry.


Conf. Why Mr. Conscience, you your self cannot show us from Scripture a model
of your way, though promised, and long expected; and therefore why should you
require one of us?


Consc. We do not require so much of you, but to show us one only place of
Scripture for you, which you cannot do. And for us, though we do not give you
such a model, as you desire, or rather dream of (for no such model is left in
the New Testament, as was given to Moses and David in the Old; which consisted
altogether of external things, being shadows of the spiritual now under the
Gospel, the pattern whereof was Christ. But this we both have done, and yet
further are able to do, to prove our way, with all our practices in every
particular, out of Gods Word, which you are not able to do for any one of your
practices, much less for the whole way of your Classical Presbytery, as which
has no footing in Scripture. For (because you thus urge me) show us, if you
can, in all the New Testament, any one National Christian Church. Or show us
any one ground for either National or Parochial Christian Churches, or yet
any Church fixed to a place, so that all people successively coming to dwell
there, be they what they will, godly or profane, Protestants or Papists,
because inhabitants there, must therefore make up the Church there, whether
National or Parochial. Or show us that Churches should come by natural
propagation, or local habitation and succession, and not by spiritual
generation only. Or show us in Scripture either rule or example for a
Classical Presbytery. Or show us in the whole Scripture a State church
government allowed of God. Or show us out of the Word, that the Apostles
constituted no Churches without leave obtained from the civil State. Or
whether those Christian Jews that constrained the Galatians to be circumcised,
for the avoiding of persecution, did well or no, so to constrain, and that only
to avoid persecution: or whether this example will warrant you to constrain all
to conform to you; either because conformity is free from persecution, or
because all must be persecuted, that conform not. Or lastly, show us, what
better rule or example the Scripture affords, for wresting from the Magistrate
through the force of importunity by men both many and mighty, stirred up and
egged on by a College of Priests, to reject Christ and his government, and
deliver him up to their wills to be crucified, then that College of Priests in
Jerusalem, who so incensed the people against Christ, that nothing would
satisfy them, but he must be crucified; so as the Magistrate is necessitated
even against his conscience, what through fear of Caesar on the one side, and
what for favor of the people on the other, to gratify them with a Barabbas in
stead of Christ. Now to all, or any of these, we desire your answer.


Conf. Sir, I only urge this for the present, that though the Scripture has
not expressed a power given to men by Christ, yet we find examples of it in
the Old Testament, as Jehosaphat, Ezekiah, Josiah, Asa, Kings of Judah, who
reformed Religion, and are commended for it as good Kings for their labor.


Consc. They did not set up any new forms of Religion of their own head, but
they commanded the Priests and Levites to restore and repair Religion in all
things according to the prescript, and precise pattern given by God himself.
And note withal, that the kingdom of Judah or of David, was a type of Christ's
spiritual kingdom, and all the Kings of Judah were types of Christ. So as no
other Kings or States are to be paralleld with them. But yet (I say) for all
that, they went not beyond the precise rule of Gods law, as you may see by all
those examples you allege. For Christ gave those Kings, though types of
himself, no such power, as you pretend. Yea, the Scripture every where, in both
the Testaments, has punctually preserved inviolate and entire, that Kingly
prerogative of Christ, as being as incapable of being communicable to any
humane power, as his omnipotency is, or his other offices, as High Priest and
Prophet. For proof hereof: Moses for all his wisdom, and learning, and piety,
though he were a great Prophet, and a type of Christ, yet had not this power
granted unto him, to frame the Tabernacle, with all things pertaining
thereunto, as himself pleased; but a strict charge God gave unto him, saying,
See thou do all Exo. 25. 30. Heb. 8. 5.
things according to the pattern showed thee in the Mount. So David, though a
King, and a man after Gods own heart, yet was not entrusted for the framing of
the pattern of the Temple for his son Solomon, but 1 Chro. 28. 12, 19.
God gave him the pattern thereof both by the Spirit, and in writing (so
careful was God, lest David should forget any thing) which he delivers to his
son Solomon to do in all things accordingly. So in Ezekial we read, Chap. 43.
10.
where the reformation of the Church under the Gospel is typed, there is a
pattern to be measured, as Ezekiel. 40. 5. to which, answers that in Rev. 11. 1.
a place worthy our best observation, as pertinent to these times of
Reformation, which must be measured by the golden reed of the Word of God. And
for any the least dominion over the conscience by any humane binding law in
matters of faith, Christ would no more entrust the Apostles themselves, then he
did Moses and David. And therefore 2 Cor. 2. 24.
Paul disclaimed it. And 1 Pet. 5. 3.
Peter dissuaded it to the Presbyters or Elders, being himself an Elder. And
herein even servants must not be servants to men, as being bought with a price,
and so Christ's freemen. And remarkable is that 1 Cor. 7 23.
Scripture, where Christ, speaking to the multitude, and to his Disciples, he
tells them of the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses chair, * Mat. 23.
and so to be heard: but when among other their practices they bind heavy
burdens, then and there he says, Call no man Father upon earth; that is,
therein obey them not, that is for the multitude: And for the Disciples, Re ye
not called Rabbi, for one is your Master, even Christ. And that no man has
power over another conscience, the Apostle shows, speaking to the very same
purpose; Who art thou that judge another man's Romans 14. 4
servant? How much more then Christ's servant? And this in things indifferent:
how much less in things forbidden in the Scripture, must we force our brothers
conscience, or labor to persuade him? The Chapter is full of arguments to this
purpose.


Conf. But sir, if the Scripture be so clear for that which you affirm, then
has the whole Church of God for many Ages, even almost from the very Apostles,
continued in a foul error.


Consc. Nay more then almost. For this mystery of iniquity had its first rise
even in the Apostles times, it began then to work. And what was this mystery of
iniquity, but an exaltation of man's power above all that is called God, or that
is worshipped, 2 Thessalonians. 2 4.
so as to sit upon, or over, or in the Temple of God, over the consciences of
Gods people, and over the Church, as God himself? And note there also, it is
called an Apostasy, or (as Tit. 1. 14.) a turning away from, or of the truth
(as before) and such are adversaries too, and all Antichristian. Such an one was
3 John
Diotrephes; that (...), who loved the preeminence (the very spawn of this
mystery) which sets him a work to raise himself: 1. In not receiving the
Apostle John. 2 In prating against him with malicious words. 3. In not
receiving the brethren. 4. In forbidding those that would. And 5. In casting
them out of the Church. Thus also did this mystery begin to work, as the
Apostle intimates both in Tit. 1. 14. and in Col. 2. 8. 17. 18. 28. 22, 23. But
then this mystery was but in the swaddling clouts, which afterward growing by
degrees to the full stature, was so bedecked with infinite varieties of
ceremonies, and daily new fashions in Religion (as the Crow with every birds
feather) that getting an unlimited, usurped power, and that under the color of
Jure Divino, all men's consciences, Churches must conform to the present fashion
of worship and Church Government. Thus by degrees this Mystery of iniquity
mounted to its height, and has now obtained such a prescription of antiquity,
as is equivalent to a law. And not only the Pope claims and exercises this
power over his whole Popedom, and Hierarchy, but from him our late Prelates.
And whence, or from whom you derive this very power, unless immediately either
from the Pope, or from our late Prelates, whose personal Prelacy you have
abandoned, saving their Prelaticall spirit and usurped power: or else from the
antiquity of this mystery; you may do well to inform us. And in truth, this was
that very sluice, which when first opened, did let in that inundation and
deluge not only of will worship, in all kind of ceremonies and superstitions,
but also of humane forms and frames of Church Government, and in all of them
such a tyrannical power over all consciences and Churches, as has wholly
drowned all; so as Christ's Dove can no where find, where to set her foot. And
therefore in this time of pretended Genesis 8. 9.
Reformation, to erect this great Idol, to wit, a power in man to prescribe
laws, and to legitimate commandments for worship and Church government; and to
press them upon every man's conscience: what is it, but with Nebuchadnezzar to
Dan. 3.
erect his golden Image, and with an immortal Law of the Medes and Persians,
to bind all men to fall down and worship it? Or what is it, but with Jeroboam
and his counsel (and so in every alteration of the State) to set up the golden
Calves, with a strict commandment of universal conformity; none daring among
all those ten Tribes 1 Kings 19. 18.
openly to profess the pure worship of God, saving the Prophet Eliah, to whom
those seven thousand were not known. And therefore God rooted out Ieroboams
house; and did the Tribes escape scot-free, for their yielding willing
obedience to the commandment of the 1 Kings 12. 28.
King his counsel, though it were a public act of State? Was not Hos. 5. 11.
Ephraim oppressed, and broken in judgment, because he willingly walked after
the commandment? For God set wicked Kings over them, who oppressed and brake
them in judgment, tyrannizing at their pleasure. As always where a people is
brought under the spiritual yoke of bondage, they are never free from the
temporal. Nor only this, but they were carried into perpetual captivity, and
never returned unto this day. An example to be laid to heart both of Rulers and
people. Remember Ephraim therefore, the horriblenesse of whose sin appears by
the horriblenesse of the punishment. And like to this is that of Jerusalem, and
of the Jews. They said indeed, John 11. 48.
If we thus let him alone, all men will believe in him, and the Romans will
come and take away both our place and nation. No, blind Esa. 26. 11
Jews, because ye did renounce your King Christ, and so envy the peoples
salvation, therefore the Romans came and took away both your place and nation.
And how did the Jews reject this their King? Christ tells us in a Parable of a
Noble man, Luke 19. saying, (v. 14.) But his Citizens hated him, and sent a
message after him, saying, we will not have this man to reign over us. Where
note, First, they were such as professed to be the people of God, His Citizens.
Secondly, the ground of their refusal of him to be their King, was hatred of
him, and so to refuse him, is to hate him. Thirdly, the manner of their
refusal. 1. They sent a message after him (as the vulgar Translation renders
it) but the Original is, They sent (...), an embassage after him, which is
more then a message. It must be done by a public act of State, to make all
cock sure. And 2. the matter of the Embassage, We will not have this man, or
this follow ( Mat. 26. 61.
(...)) this, noting their contempt of him. And the reason hereof was their
will, We will not. But what was the issue? read and mark it, v. 27. Where
Christ not long after returns in Luke 23. 2
judgment against them, which he executes by those very Romans, whom they so
feared, to whom he gives this commission: But those mine enemies that would not
that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them, etc. Which was done
accordingly.


Conf. But good sir, neither are we as those ten Tribes under an idolatrous
government; nor as those Jews, under a Roman Governor, with a Synedrion, or
Counsel of Priests, Scribes and Pharisees: but we live in a happy time, under a
Protestant Government, a Protestant Parliament, a Protestant Synod: and
therefore there is no such danger by allowing such a power to men, as you
pretend.


Consc. Although the present State be Protestant, yet you are not sure it will
be always so. What if a Marian reign come about again with a Popish
Parliament, and Convocation? And if it be true, that Christ has left such a
power to any State (as before) without limitation, then it is left as well to a
Popish State, as to a Protestant. In this respect there is no difference. And
then it must follow, that a Popish power, making a law for the setting up of
the Mass (as Qu. Mary with her Parliament and Clergy did) and for which they
want not pretext of Scripture, and Iure Divino (if bold words, and false
glosses will do it) then all the subjects of England must either conform, or
else to the stake. So as the very admitting and crying up of such a power left
to men, as it is most false and groundless; and (as before) a Grandmother
Horesic, and introducer of the most direful tyranny over soul and all, (so far
is it from ever proving to be Iure Divino, as being Ludibrium Synodorum) so it
is the next way (and much more in this present juncture of time, as things now
stand) to make us as miserable a Nation, as both the ten Tribes, and the Jews.
And (as we touched before) if the wisdom of God would not entrust his servant
Moses, nor David, nor the Apostles, with a power in setting up what forms of
worship and frames of government they pleased, though they were both wise and
faithful, and free from all private interests, in seeking themselves, to
become Lords Paramount: Car we find in any age of the world, trow you, either
a Parliament or Synod, whereof all the Members, yea, or the greater part, are
such as Moses, David, and the Apostles were, so as to be entrusted with such a
power? And in case this State should assume to it self such a power (as we
speak of) so as to enact a law to bind all to conformity; either you must
produce some Scripture authority for it, that the Parliament may be satisfied
quo jure, and that it is Iure Divino as they require of you, and which you have
promised, but have not performed it: Or in the mean time give me leave to put
it unto you, or to the soundest judgments, how you can clear your self from
falling under that mavelous judgment of God, which we find in Esaias 29. The
matter was v. 13. That their fear toward God was taught by the precept of men.
They had set up a worship of God according to the precept of men. This was all.
And is this, in your judgment, nothing? But what They, were they, that did
this? Surely, the Prophets, Rulers, and Seers. What? the Guides and Leaders of
the People? How came it to pass? The Lord says there (as a matter of wonder,
and to be proclaimed by a loud cry) that they were drunken, but not with wine,
and staggered, but not with strong drink; and that the Lord had closed their
eyes, and poured upon them the spirit of deep sleep. v. 9, 10. So as, neither
the learned nor unlearned, could understand the vision, v. 11, 12. And all
their religion is turned into hypocrisy, v. 23. Forasmuch, as their fear
toward God was taught by the precept of men. For a religion of humane
institution is hypocrisy; while pretending to worship and fear God, they fear
and worship men, which is both hypocrisy and idolatry. And what is the issue of
all this? v. 14. Therefore behold, says the Lord, I will proceed to do a
mavelous work among this people, even a mavelous work and a wonder: For the
wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent
men shall be hid.


Conf. And what of all this?


Consc. What think you of it, Mr. Conformity? Is here nothing that concerns you?


Conf. Nothing that I see.


Consc. See ye nothing of all this? And are you not then in the number of
those, whose eyes are closed, and on whom the Lord has powered the spirit of
deep sleep?


Conf. But do ye not know, that this was a Prophecy fulfilled many hundred
years ago, even in Esay's time by those of Jerusalem? How then can you apply
it to these times?


Consc. Though it was then fulfilled, yet it is written for our learning, and
to admonish us, upon whom the ends of the world are come. And the same
Prophesies may have sundry fulfillings upon the like occasions. And for
application of it, I only made it a Quere, how you could acquit your self from
having it verified of you in these times.


Conf. But the Prophecy making mention of the Prophets, Rulers, Seers of
Jerusalem, as drunken and blind; all that I can apprehend hereof is, that you
thereby mean the Prophits, Rulers, Seers of this famous City, and perhaps also
(to speak more plainly) the Parliament, Synod, Sion-Colledge, the
Common-counsel, etc. For who are the Prophets, or Rulers, or Seers, or who are
the learned and wise men, but these? Therefore Mr. Conscience, deal
ingenuously with us, and speak no more in the clouds.


Consc. What Mr. Conformity, would you have me to do here, as you do with your
Parish people, when vou mingle all together at your Sacrament? What? good and
bad; those of the Militant, and others of the Malignant (hurch together? I
would have you to know, that I put a difference between the Parliament on the
one side, and the synod, Sion-Colledge, Common-counsel, on the other. And
Secondly, among all these I put no small odds, between the truly wise and
prudent that truly fear God, and those that are self-wise, or worldly-wise. And
thirdly, I put a difference between Sion-Colledge, and Common counsel, as
between Seers and not Seers, between the leaders, and the led. Nor fourthly, do
I apply the foresaid Scripture to any one in particular; but my desire is, that
every one in all these Companies, would by due examination of himself make the
application. For it is a matter of high concernment. And for their better
direction herein. First, Let all those that by Letters, Petitions,
Remonstrances, Compliances, Confederacies, Counsels, secret and open,
nocturnall, and diurnall, do wring blood out of the late Covenant; by pressing,
importuning, and plotting, the setting up and establishing by a law, such a
form of Church Government, Worship, Discipline, as not only is the highest
affront, and dishonor to Christ, but necessarily tends not only to the
enslaving of the peoples consciences, but to the undoing of this whole English
Nation, by vassallizing it to vilest of men, apply it. Secondly, Let all those
who would have our victorious Army in all the haste disbanded, before 2.
our peace be well settled, and our land cleared from the one end to the other
of all those dangers which do threaten it, by the treacheries of so many
malignant enemies, who carry two faces under one hood, and do but watch for
such an opportunity to wreck their envy and malice upon us, which the only
terror of our Army hinders, holding them at a bay; apply it. Thirdly, Let all
those who with such violent and potent importunity 3.
do press the Parliament for an Ordinance, to bring themselves and the whole
Land under the greatest sin of unnatural, inhumane, and more then heathenish
ingratitude, impiety, injustice, cruelty, by not only dishonouring,
discountenancing, abasing, as the vilest our-casts, those men, who have not
only, freely laid out their estates, but even prodigally, if not prodigiously,
to wonderment, hazarded, yea poured out their dearest lifeblood: but also (as
if they would despite God) by trampling upon those whom he has highly
honored, and not suffering them to breathe in their native air, by whom we
yet breathe; and by making them underlings and off-scourings of the land, who
have been the preservers of it, and that they should be despicable in their own
mother country, whom so many glorious victories have made admirable to the
neighbor Nations, yea, to the whole world; and terrible to their professed
enemies, and ours; yea, and to pretended friends too, who would master us at
home, were not these masters of the field: So as God having thus made them the
great instruments of the preservation and deliverance of our Country and City
from the most desperate, bloody, and bestiall enemies that ever the Earth bred,
or Hell hatched; enough to have for ever ever obliged a people of any
ingenuity, and not wholly given up to testify their approbation at least, and
congratulation of that great favor and honor God has vouchsafed to cast upon
them: and that as he has crowned them with so much glory, and they have cast
their crowns at the feet of the Lamb that sits upon the throne: So these
should come, and first, giving all the glory to God, gather up those crowns,
and set them upon the heads of those their preservers and deliverers, and put
chains of gold about their necks; so far off should they be from trampling such
Pearls under feet, or casting them out of our gates and ports; that they might
Solum vertere, spend the remainder of their life in some inglorious exile, to
the eternal infamy of our English Nation; Let these apply it. Fourthly, let
all those, who 4.
endeavor by their strong factions to make wide breaches, between Parliament
and City, between House and House, yea, between Gods blessing and this Land,
which was wont of old to be called Gods kingdom; and so by these breaches would
Regnum Angliae, Regnu^ Dei. Polydor. Virgil, Chron.
let in again our bainfull enemies. Let all these, these (I say) make the
application to themselves; while as they have wrested out of the Magistrates
hand a form of worship and government, and so, as it is established by the
precept of men: so God has deprived them of wlsdom and understanding, while
they would pull upon their own heads, and upon the Land, the guilt of so much
innocent blood of so many hundred thousands both in Ireland and England, to be
made the footstooll of a bloody Tyranny; and while their eyes are so closed up,
as no charm, be it never so wise, can make them either to hear, or see, or
understand, or their brains, or bowels, to be sensible of all those notorious
and palpable outrages, rapes and robberies, violence and oppression, extortion
and exaction in the land, even at noon day, unworthy affronts done to our
Parliament by seditious spirits; or of all those cries and complaints of sundry
Countries and Counties, and no redress, no justice, as if God had now forsaken
us and left us as a silly Dove without heart, full of slavish and degenerous
fear of shadows, forgetting the mighty God that has done so great things for
us, and will do more, if we by faith still depend upon him: And although the
faction is still working, and machinating the ruin of this Nation (if our God
miraculously prevent not) yet the god of this world has so blinded the eyes of
these men, through the just judgment of God, that they see nothing at all
hereof, but are themselves the main fomenters, abettors, countenancers,
promoters, advancers, encouragers, and helpers on of those, that hope to be the
instruments of our ruin. So strong is the poison of this one sin, hypocrisy,
and Idolatry, in teaching and setting up a fear or worship toward God by the
precept of men; which, as it is a removing of the heart from God, so it causes
him to remove his Spirit from us, and to give us up to such a fearful Quos
perdere vult Deus, hos prius dementat.
dementation, as is the forerunner of destruction. And, Conformity, if thou
have any of thy right senses left, consider seriously with thy self, what that
religion is, which turns men out of their very naturals, to become brutish, and
worse then Heathens; and which the Holy Ghost brands for hypocrisy, then
which, nothing is more abominable in the sight of God. Certainly, the true
Religion and Doctrine of Christ produces no such fruits as those
forementioned are: as Treason against the State, unnaturalness toward our
native country, unthankfulness toward our best deserving friends, our
Benefactors, our Preservers: yea, injustice and cruelty toward them, factious
plottings and underminings, hatred of those that be good, enmity against those
that are the friends of Christ, and so persecution of the way of Christ,
destroying of Christ's kingdom, by setting up a worldly kingdom of men, 2 Timothy
3. 5.
having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; yea, and seeking
to overtop the Supreme Power. Are we not then (as the Apostle admonishes and
commands) to turn away from such?


Conf. Nay here, Conscience, I have you upon the hip. For, First, how do we
seek to overtop the Supreme Power. And Secondly, who does more go about to
overtop the Civil power, then you, while you set up a Religion without it, and
above it?


Consc. First, For you: Do you not seek to overtop the Supreme Power, whilst
you would have your Church Government to be framed after the pattern of that,
which sets up a Power (called a General Assembly) above the Power of
Parliaments? Now the supreme power in England, is the Parliament; so as to set
up a superior power over this, is to overturn the very Fundamental laws of the
Kingdom. And this you labor tooth and nail to do, while nothing will serve
you, but the Scottish church government. I wish you would all consider well of
it, and beware of falling into a Praemunire, if you be not deep in it already.
And I could wish it were well weighed by the wisest, and those in highest place
of authority; whether the importunate pressing of the Covenant, for Uniformity,
in the Scottish sense, tend not to undermine and overthrow the liberty and
privileges of the subjects of England, when once a superior power therein,
consisting of more Clergy men, then of Lay, is predominant over the Parliament
of England? And so much the rather, when we read and consider their own
public and authentic Books of their Kirk government, Orders, Discipline,
Confession of faith, etc. wherein they give to their General or National
Assembly supreme power, not only over their Parochial, Classical, and
Provincial assemblies, but even over the Parliament it self. For not only they
take the power to appoint both time and place for the convening of their
Ecclesiastical assemblies (as 2. Book of Discipline, chap. 7.) But they say
moreover in the same chap. For this Orders cause, they may make certain Rules
and Constitutions, appertaining to the good behavior of all the members of the
Kirk in their vocation. And this they do without the Civil Magistrate. Nay
more, chap. ibid. They have power also to abrogate and abolish all Statutes and
Ordinances concerning Ecclesiastical matters, that are found noisome and
unprofitable, and agree not with the time, or are abused by the people. And
again in the same book, chap. 12. The National Assemblies of this Country,
called commonly the General Assemblies, ought always to be retained in their
own liberty, and have their own place; with power to the Kirk to appoint times
and places convenient for the same: And all men, as well Magistrates, as
Inferiors, to be subject to the Judgment of the same in Ecclesiastical causes,
without any reclamation, or appellation to any Judge civil or Ecclesiastical
within the Realm. Thus in reference to the Spiritualty, or the Church, In
Ordine ad Spiritual ^.
they make no bones to set up in their National Assembly the same Papal power,
which the Pope himself claims, over Kings, Princes, States, Kingdoms,
Commonweals. And Mr. Rutherford, in his And if the Reeder desire surthet
satisfaction, (were it needful to the wise) let him read the late book,
entitled, The Trojan horse of the Presbyterial government, unbowelled.
Government of the church of Scotland, chap. 20. p. 312. tells us, That though
none in this grand assembly have decisive voices, save only Commissioners: yet
the Acts of the Assembly oblige all the absents, not present in all their
members; and that because, whatsoever is by those Commissioners determined and
concluded, is matter necessary, and agreeable to Gods word; as being no less
infallible, then those decisions of the Apostles, Act. 15. All which
(Conformity) I commend to thee, when in thy best senses. And because thou art
apt to be overtaken with a supine drowsines, pleasing thy self with thy dreams
of becoming a King, when once thou art gotten up into the saddle or throne of
a Kirk National-Assembly: let me awaken thee by pricking thy dull sides, that
thou may be at least convinced of that spirit of Antichristian pride and
tyranny, of rebellion and treason, in lifting up a Papal throne above the Kings
and Kesars, above Kingdoms and Commonweals, to the enslaving of the whole
Nation in their souls, bodies, and estates. For whosoever shall not in all
things conform to the constitutions of that general Kirk assembly, when once
the horn is blown, then, ipso facto, imprisonment, confiscation of goods,
banishment, and what not? Now, Conformity, does Gods word hold forth any such
Kirk fashions? What? To overrule Civil States and Kingdoms? What? That all Kirk
laws and constitutions mustneeds be such, as are both necessary, and agreeable
to the Word of God? What? To set up in the Kirk an Oracle of Infallibility, and
a Pontifician supremacy, and Antichristian tyranny? and all under the name of
a Christian Presbyterian Kirk-government? But because this perhaps moves thee
not; I will remit thee to the supreme Bar of this Kingdom, there to receive thy
doom, in case thou do obstinately and madly persist in thy importunate
clamours to have that Presbyterian government set up, and thereby our
fundamental laws, privileges, and power of Parliaments, liberties and freedom
of all true bred English subjects brought under perpetual bondage, worse then
that either of Egypt or Babylon. But I pass on:

2. For us* You may know, Conformity, that we are not the setters up of that
Religion you charge us with; but it is that, which we find to be set up by
Christ and his Apostles: which they did, without leave from the Civil power, or
from the Ecclesiastical, or mixed Synedrion; as before. Secondly, though the
Kingdom of Christ be indeed over all the kingdoms of the world; yet all the
subjects of this kingdom, as they are the subjects of this or that civil
State, so they owe civil obedience thereunto: but as they belong to Christ's
kingdom, they are free from the civil power in point of religion, owing
subjection only to Christ: and if the civil power usurp over any of them, they
yield themselves to suffer, with patience, without resistance.


Conf. Conscience, I like thee well for this, yet. But you tell us strange
things of Church Assemblies.


Consc. Not more strange, then true: Read their books, and be wise. And for our
suffering, which thou likest so well, it is no more then what Christ and his
Apostles both taught and practiced, and wherein all the Martyrs followed them.


Conf. I will better consider of what you say. But do you not condemn the
Magistrate, when you say he usurps over you?


Consc. No, I condemn him not; that is for God to do, who is the supreme Judge
of the world.


Conf. Why, what limits has God set to the Magistrate?


Consc. Read Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. and that from v. 13. to the end of the chap. to
wit, the whole law of God. So also what bonds and bounds their own conscience,
and the terror of the great Judge, and their sacred oath and solemn covenant
and stipulation with the people, and not only Gods law, but the civil laws of
the kingdom, do put upon them, you cannot be ignorant.


Conf. But what if the Civil state has made a-law, to inhibi^ and restrain all
men, and that under severe penalty, from the observation of any other form of
Religion, and Church government, then that which it has established by law,
with a necessity of uniformity and conformity thereunto, imposed upon all the
subjects of the kingdom: Does the Magistrate sin, in seeing this law executed?
And without such a government, what Order will you have in your Churches, or
what coercive power in the case either of heresy, or schism?


Consc. Do you question the Magistrates sin, when his law is against the law of
God, and the liberty of a Christian, who is the subject of Christ's kingdom? For
here we are to distinguish between a subject of Christ's spiritual kingdom, and
a mere subject of the civil State. He that is a mere subject of the civil
state, acknowledging no superior power above it, his conscience (though blind)
bids and binds him to obey: but he that is a true subject of Christ's kingdom,
being also a subject of the civil State, owes a twofold obedience, one to the
Civil State, and another to Christ. According to that of Christ. Render unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. Nor
does the order or disorder in churches (as churches) put any difference between
the having, or not having of a civil power. In the Apostolic churches there
were both heresies and schisms, (1 Cor. 11. 18, 19. 1 John 2. 19.) whith the
civil power took no cognizance of: Nay, it was, and may be as apt to persecute
the truth, as to censure or restrain either heresy, or schism, or apostacy.
And Christ's government is sufficient in all Church-cases whatsoever.


Conf. But, who in a Christian civil State do not acknowledge Christ as
superior?


Consc. This is sufficiently resolved before. Such as conform to a State
religion, or a State church government, make that the supreme law and lord over
their conscience, and so exclude Christ's supremacy. Enough is said of that.
But you cut me off from what I was about to add. Man's nature is too prone to
idolize the Power so, as to make it as the shadow of the bramble, in Jothams
parable, under which to ease themselves of the labor Judge. 19. 15.
to search into the Scriptures, and so to come to know what they believe; most
men pinning their Religion upon the sleeve either of the Priest, as the Papists
do; or also of the Magistrate, as our common Protestants do, wrapping all up in
an implicit faith and blind obedience, according to your Remonstrance, that
urges conformity to the religion and government of Christ already established,
or which shall be set up. Thus it was enough for the Pharisees to say, Joh. 19.
7
We have a law, and by that law Christ ought to dye. Thus Christ must not be
God, because the Roman Senate, according to their law formerly made, had not
first motion'd it, or passed their vote for it, before Tiberius Caesar had
commended it to them, namely to admit of Christ into their Pantheon, to take
place among their gods. And is it not even so with us? Must not Christ be King
of the Jews, only because by an act of State (as before) they will not have
this man Luke 19. 14.
to reign over them. And Christ must not be God, because the Roman Senate had
not pre-resolved it. And so Christ must not be sole Lord over the conscience,
nor sole Law giver of his Church, nor his Word the sole rule of worship and of
Christ's Kingly government of his spiritual kingdom in the conscience, and
Churches of the Saints, nor indeed Christ's kingdom spiritual; because the Sat
has made a law which must rule the conscience in point of forms of worship and
of Church Government, that Christ's kingdom must be worldly, perpetually entaild
to a whole Nation, making up one National Church, the form whereof worldly,
and the materials worldly, as either no Saints at all, or else all Saints,
because all nominall Christians; and all this and much more, because the civil
State, by the instigation of men Ecclesiastical or Civil, domestical or
foreign, has so ordaind it.


Conf. Well, Conscieuce, I now perceive, that fame is no liar; I have now heard
thee my self and much more then ever I heard before, and such things, as my
stomach is no way able to digest, but that I must needs go ease it, by
acquainting those whom it specially concerns, with what thou have here
delivered. And so farewell.


Consc. Nay stay, Conformity, and this withal take with thee. First, I would
have thee know, that speaking so freely to thee, I was not so simple, as not to
imagine thou would divulge all; nay in truth, I have spoken all this to thee
to that very purpose, that thou should communicate it (if possible) so far as
the Sun shines; but first to thine at home, as thou say. But thus much let
me entreat of thee. 1. That thou would not do any thing this way in malice,
lest thou add to thy sin Secondly, that thou would speak nothing but truth,
and the whole truth and that without aggravations whereof there is no need
especially when thou speak to thy friends of Conscience, and much more of
things of this nature, too harsh for delicate ears. And thirdly, assure them
from Conscience, that what I have here spoken to thee, it is out of pure zeal
for the honor of Christ, out of pure charity to the persons concerned, out of
pure piety to see my native country in such a perishing estate, and the honor
of England to lie in the dust; out of pure hatred of hypocrisy, idolatry,
pride, covetousnes, ambition, treachery and treason, walking up and down in
long robes: And in a word, to deliver (if no more, yet) mine own soul, in
discharge of my duty to God and my country, as a poor Minister of Christ, by
witnessing the truth, and convincing error. And for a close of all (Conformity)
If thou desire Peace with Truth (as we all should do) If thou would have
me to hold correspondence with thee, and to give thee the right hand of
fellowship; If thou desire that desirable reconciliation of our differences:
First renounce thy name of Conformity, in thy sense, and conform not to this
world, but to Gods word, let that be the Cynosure or Pole Star Romans 12.
of that Uniformity of Churches, ACCORDING TO THE WORD OF GOD, as in our late
Covenant. And this thou shall do, if (I say not, if thou do shake off the
fear and favor of men, the love of the world, of honors, pleasures, riches,
preferments, ambition of greatness, of domination over Gods people, Nor if
thou castest out that old spirit of bondage under the Prelates, lest it turn
into a more dangerous tyranny, then that of the Prelacie, as being more
refined, and going under the plausible name of Reformation: Nor do I say, if
thou becommest a self denying man, taking up thy cross daily to follow Christ:
without all which notwithstanding, thou can not be his true disciple and
follower, or enjoy true fellowship with him.) But this I say, and urge, as
being the main Fundamental and Essential of a true and right visible church of
Christ: If thou confessest Christ in all that he is; If thou give him his due
honor, in submitting thy conscience only and wholly to him, with profession
thereof, and not to any humane power, and as to the only Lawgiver of his church
and kingdom, to order and establish it with judgment and justice for ever: and
to his Word, as the only law and rule Esa. 9. 7.
of the government of that kingdom, and the only Judge to appeal unto in all
doubts and controversies of faith: And if thou shall confess every church and
congregation of Christ to be only and immediately under Christ's jurisdiction,
and not subject to any other church or churches, which are so many Sisters, not
Mistresses; lest otherwise we set up the Spouse above, or in stead of her
husband Christ. If (I say) thou will confess and hold forth this in thy
public profession, preaching, and practice of it: Then, though thy Churches
have many other defects, yet if they have the being and constitution of true
churches of Christ, for matter and form, I shall not scruple to hold communion
with thee. But otherwise, so long as thou walk not up to Christ, in not
acknowledging and avowing all that he is, in not giving him his due honor in
all things, and especially in not setting him up in his Royal throne, without a
consort: How can we entertain communion with you? For,

Actum est de R^lig^one, ubi vel m^^imum de rahitur de D^^ gloria. Calvin.
Farewell Religion, where Gods glory suffers the least diminution. And
therefore (Conformity) now that you are about the setting forth of your
Confession of Faith, let not this one Article be missing:

That you do believe, confess, and profess before all the world, that JESUS
CHRIST is the sole King and Lawgiver to every particular visible Church of
his, and over every particular man's conscience: So as no Power on earth may
usurp authority, upon what pretense soever, to make and impose what laws they
please to bind the Conscience, or to regulate the Churches of God; but ought to
leave both Conscience and Churches to the only rule, and law of Christ, the
Scripture, to which alone every man's conscience must be consined, all Divine
worship in all things conformed, and all Church Government reduced. And for a
close of all, I pray thee (Conformity) advise all thy Colleagues, that they
would abstain from stirring up sedition in Pulpits, and great Tables, against
the Parliament; persuading to hold the Parliament to it, till you obtain your
desires, to retain the Scots in England, till their Government be here settled:
which would unsettle and overthrow our fundamental laws and liberties, which
you go about, in thus seeking to force the Parliament: but learn to be wise,
honest, loyal, good Christians, true Patriots, true-bred Englishmen; lest it
prove bitterness in the latter end: For God is avenger of all such.


And so farewell, Conformity.
FINIS.
THE CONTENTS of this DIALOGVE.
HOW Christ's kingdom is the troubler of States, p. 2. How a worldly kingdom
comes to be set up for Christ's spiritual kingdom. ibid. The Heathen Emperor
a shame to Christians. ib. How Conformity is a troubler of Israel. ib. The
opin^on we have of men, no good ground for conscience to build upon. p. 3.
Small difference between a Papist and Protestant at large. ib. How a Synod of
learned Protestants may err in some fundamentals of faith. ib. Many in England
under a grand heresy, and what it is. p. 5 Faith denied no less in practice,
then in words. p. 7. The evils of practical denial of the truth. p. 8.
Conformity can find no better proofs for it in Scripture, then the Pope for
his Papality. p. 9. Conformity answered, concerning the model, wherewith
Conscience is so much cast in the teeth. ibid. Great difference between the
pattern in the Old Testament, and the model in the New. ib. Conformity put to
prove many particulars of his Church by Scripture. p. 10. Conformitie's
objection, concerning some Kings of Judah, answered. ib. Conscience free from
men's yoaks. p. 11. Conformity, how the mystery of iniquity, its beginning,
growth, full stature, p. 12. Conformity the sluice, or inlet of all
superstition and slavery. ibid. Sundry fearful examples of Gods judgments
upon Conformity. p. 13. Conformity a necessary introducer of Popery, when a
State has a popish Prince and Parliament; as England has had, and may have
again for ought we know. p. 14. Conformity in worship to men's Precept, brings a
wonderful spiritual judgment of blindness, and deprivation of wisdom and
understanding. p. 15. All sorts put to try and examine themselves in sundry
weighty particulars, whether that prophecy (Esaias 29. 13, 14.) fall not heavy
upon them; wherein Conscience severs the innocent from the guilty. p. 16. How
Conformity is hypocrisy, and a removing of the heart far from God. ib. The
many bad fruits of Conformity. 17. How Conformity seeks to overtop the supreme
power, p. 19. How the Scottish Church Government, so much cried up by the
English Clergy, is incompatible with the fundamental laws and liberties of
our English Nation. p. 20. How Church orders, or disorders, as Heresy, or
Schism, may be, or not be, for all the Civil power. p. 23. How Conscience
clears it self from any withdrawing of due obedience to the Magistrate. ib.
What limits God has set to the Magistrate. ib. How prone man's nature is to
idolize men in setting up a State-Religion, and how slothful to search the
Scripture, the only rule of faith, and the evil consequence hereof. p. 25. The
counsel that Conscience gives Conformity at their parting; and what he must of
necessity do, to make peace, and hold communion with Conscience. p. 26

FINIS.

