THis useful Treatise (Entitled Religions Peace) long since Presented by a
Citizen of London to King JAMES, and the High Court of Parliament then sitting;
I allow to be Reprinted.

April 1. John Bachiler.

RELIGIONS PEACE: OR, A PLEA for Liberty of Conscience. Long since presented to
King James, and the High Court of Parliament then sitting, by Leonard Busher
Citizen of London, and Printed in the Year 1614. Wherein is contained certain
Reasons against Persecution for Religion; Also a design for a peaceable
reconciling of those that differ in opinion.

Romans 14.5, 10. One man esteems one day above another, another man esteems
every day a like, let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.

But why do thou judge thy brother, or why do thou despise thy brother? for
we shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ.

LONDON, Printed for John Sweeting at the Angel in Popes-head-alley, 1646.

TO THE Presbyterian Reader.
THis Treatise, which as a supplication to King James, and the Parliament, was
Printed in the year 1614. is for your good now again reprinted, the Author
thereof Leonard Busher (an honest and godly Man, as I make no doubt will
appear to you in the perusal of his Book) intended two things therein.

First, to make it appear that the Bishops were not true Ministers, or
successive from the Apostles, but rather a Siens, or branch of the Popish
stock, descended from the Romish Hierarchy, to whom they owned their
Instauration, Ordination, and Function: Had this advice been believed and
embraced by the Parliament then, the mischiefs they have since practiced much
of the blood that has been shed, and the miseries that by their means have
been brought upon us, had in great measure been prevented; but his Counsel was
then slighted, though by the wisdom of this present Parliament put in
execution, whereby we are secured for the future from the domination,
compulsion against Conscience, and notorious cruelties of that sort of men.

Whence we may learn, that what to a people at one time seems strange and
absurd, and in no wise to be admitted of, at another time appears an
acceptable truth; the reason is, because we are not Masters of our own
understandings, but suffer them to be dulled and corrupted, till misery, and
the sting of oppression opens our eyes, so that we embrace truth more out of
necessity then choice.

The second thing his Discourse drives at, is to make it appear by Scriptures
and sound Arguments, that the only way to make a Nation happy, and preserve
the People in love, peace and tranquillity, is to give liberty to all to serve
God according as they are persuaded is most agreeable to his Word; to speak,
write, print peaceably and without molestation in behalf of their several
Tenets, and ways of Worship (wholesome and pertinent Laws being made, upon
penalties, to restrain all kind of vice or violence, all kinds of reproach,
slander, or injury either by word or deed;) And though this advice likewise
seems not the best to some, especially to you my Brethren in the Presbyterian
way, yet am I well assured that this Nation will never be happy; but as
hitherto it has been, so for the future it will be distracted with oppression
and persecution, and the faces of one sort of men set against another, till
liberty of Conscience be allowed. Indeed a man would think we had been
schooled and whist long enough to it by our calamities, for went whereof this
age, and that age, and the other age, and every age has been miserable. For
want whereof the Apostles suffered martyrdom, the Saints and godly of all
times have been hunted like Patridges by birds of Prey: And yet, good men, in
the esteem of a great part of the world, especially of the rich and powerful
they have suffered as evill-doers, disturbers of the World, Heretics,
Schismatics, seditious Persons; and those that put them to death, have had the
reputation of being maintainers of Truth, and sound Doctrine; so apt in all
ages have the people been to mistake good for evil, and evil for good.

The Plea for liberty of Conscience is no new Doctrine, as old certainly as the
blessed Word of God it self, which gives us this unmovable foundation thereof,
That every Man should be fully persuaded of the truth of that way wherein he
serves the Lord: And though there has been struglings in all ages to make good
this blessed birthright to all peaceful People, yet through thePotency and
subtlety of Popes, Bishops, and Ministers that preferred the advance of
themselves, and their usurped and abused Function, before the good and welfare
of the People; we have been deprived of this blessing, next to the
manifestation of Gods love and goodness to us, the most excellent and
desirable in this world: for want whereof, and by means of its contrary,
Persecution; this Universe, es^ecially the Christian part thereof, has
suffered continual agony and earthquake. Wars, and its miseries have
overspread all Lands, States have been shaken and subverted Love, meekness,
gentleness, mercy, (the truest badges of Christianity) have been dampened and
banished; and in their rooms cruelty, hardheartednesse, respect of Persons,
Prisons, tortures, etc. things that our blessed Lord and Master, and his
Apostles never proved, unless upon their own afflicted bodies, have had great
sway for these many hundred years. Hence is it that in stead of Peace, we have
frequently had the Sword, in stead of sweet tranquillity, love and affection;
hatred, contention, disaffection, and the bitter fruits thereof has reigned
amongst us, and in all probability will reign till God shall put it into the
heart of the Parliament to make trial for prevention thereof, of this God-like
way, which in the ensuing Treatise is held forth.

I hope upon perusal thereof, you that are my Brethren of the Presbyterian
way, will abate much of your misguided eagerness in prosecuting your
conscientious Brethren. Consider I beseech you St. Paul before his conversion,
he was as zealous I make no question as any of you, when he persecuted the
Saints, and Acts 8.3.
made havoc of the Church, (that is, of Gods People congregated together, to
worship and serve God) when he Verse 3.
entered into every house, and drew out both men and women to put them to
Prison; when he Act. 9.1.
breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord; when
he Act. 9.2.
procured Letters of the High Priest to go to Damascus, where, if he found any
of that way (then the heretical way in his account) he might bring them down
to Jerusalem; when he Act. 8.1.
consented to Stephens death: In all these violent motions he was zealous and
hearty, and thought he did God good service in the suppression of a rising
Sect, that were against the High Priests, learned Rabbis, and Doctors of the
Law, Ceremonies, strict Injunctions, and observations of the Judaicall and
Priestly Law. You see how far mistaken zeal can go. Consider this I beseech
you; I know you are, especially you that are Laymen, zealous as you think for
God and his Truth, as Paul was: But I hope there will a time come, and I wish
it were now present, when in the midst of your heat and fervency, the glorious
and shining brightness of Love will appear in your hearts like the light
surrounding Paul going to Damascus; and the scales of ignorance and mistake
will fall from your eyes, and then you will lament all the evil, which through
weakness you have brought upon your Brethren, you will then blame your own
zeal and importunity, and apply your selves more cordially and constantly to
observe our Saviors rule of equity, to do unto others what you would have
others do unto you.

Peruse this Treatise I beseech ye, with a single heart, and unprejudiced mind,
and let it sway you, as the Arguments thereof are efficacious, and the
Scriptures therein urged are pertinent and convincing.

So wishes yours, and all other good Men's true Friend, H. B.

To the High and Mighty King James, by the grace of God, King of great Britain,
France, and Ireland, and to the Princely and right Honorable Parliament,
Leonard Busher wishes the wisdom of Solomon, the zeal of Jos^s, and the mercy
of Christ, 1 Cor. 5.5.
with the salvation of your Spirits in the day of the Lord Jesus.
FOrasmuch as your Majesty and Parliament, do stand for the maintenance of the
Religion wherein you are born, and for the same do most zealously persecute
with fire and sword; I have thought it good, and also my duty (most Royal
Sovereign) to inform your Majesty and Parliament thereof. In all humimility
therefore I give you to understand, that no Prince or People can possible
attain that one true Religion of the Gospel, which is acceptable to God by
Jesus Christ, merely by birth, John. 3.^.
for Christ says, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of
God. Also the Apost. James says, Jam. 1.18
Of his own will be begat us by the word of truth: and the Apostle Peter says,
1 Pet. 1.3.23.

Matthew. 28. Mark 16.


Being born anew, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of God who
lives and endures for ever. Therefore Christ commanded this word to be
preached to all nations, that thereby they may attain the new birth. By which
your Majesty and Parliament may perceive that the one true Religion of the
Gospel is not attained by natural birth; for then all Princes and peoples, in
all nations, should have that one true Religion of the Gospel, the which you
see and grant, they all have not, yet many of them also will defend their
Religion ( wherein they are born)by fire and sword, as if it were their
natural and earthly inheritances; or had with fire and sword been gotten, and
therefore will with fire and sword maintain and defend it: But your Majesty and
Parliament may please to understand, that the Scriptures do teach, that the
one true Religion is gotten by a new birth, even by the word and spirit of God,
and therewith also it is only maintained and defended, For the word of God is
lively, and mighty in operation, 2 Cor. 10.4. Ephe. 6.17. Heb. 4.1^.
and sharper then any two edged sword, and enters through, even unto the
dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints, and of the
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and the intents of the heart. Seeing
then the one true Religion of the Gospel is thus gotten, and thus defended and
maintained, namely, by the word preached only; let it please your Majesty and
Parliament to be entreated to revoke and repeal those Antichristian, Romish,
and cruel laws, that force all in our Land, both Prince and people, to receive
that Religion wherein the King or Queen were born, or that with is stablished by
the Law of man; and in stead thereof enact and publish that Apostolic, Mat.
28.19. Mar. 16.16. Acts 8.12. Lu. 24.4, 7. Acts 8.12.37. and ^.41.
Christian, gentle and merciful law of Christ, viz. Go teach all Nations,
preach the Gospel to every creature, that is, Christ will have his ministers to
preach and teach the people of all Nations, the things that concern the Kingdom
of God, and the name of Jesus Messiah, repentance and remission of sins, and to
baptize in his name, such as do believe. And forasmuch also that the false and
Antichristian religion did come by the spirit of error and doctrine of devils,
1 Timothy 4.1. Rev. 16.14.
and not by fire and sword: therefore by the spirit of Christ, and doctrine of
the word of God, must it be driven out of the hearts and consciences, both of
Prince and People, and not by fire and sword, as the false Bishops and
Ministers have and do still persuade. Therefore may it please your Majesty and
Parliament, to understand that (by fire and sword) to constrain Princes and
peoples, to receive that one true Religion of the Gospel, Mark 9 38, 39.
is wholly against the mind and merciful Law of Christ, dangerous both to
King and State, a means to decrease the Kingdom of Christ: and a means to
increase the kingdom of Antichrist, as these reasons following do manifest; The
which I humbly beseech your Majesty and Parliament carefully to consider, and
that according to the Word of God, which shall judge every man according to his
deeds: Mat. 16.27. Rev. 16.14. Luke 9.55, 56.

Joh. 12.47.


and persecution is a work well pleasing to all falls Prophets and Bishops, but
it is contrary to the mind of Christ, who came not to judge and destroy men's
lives, but to save them. And though some men and women believe not at the first
hour, yet may they at the Mat. 20.6, 7.
eleventh hour, if they be not persecuted to death before: And no King nor
Bishops can, or is able to command faith, Ephesians. 2 8 1 Timothy 1.13. Act. 20.11.
That is the gift of God, who works in us both the will and the deed of his
own good pleasure: set him not a day therefore, in which, if his creature hear
not and believe not, you will imprison and burn him. Paul was a blasphemer, and
also a persecuter, and could not be converted by the Apostles, and Ministers of
Christ, yet at last was received to mercy, and converted extraordinarily by
Christ himself, Jam. 5 11. ^ Pet. 3.9. 2 Cor. 5.19.
who is very pitiful and merciful, and would have no man to perish, but would
that all men come to repentance, but not by persecution, but by the word of
reconciliation which he has committed to his ministers: And as Kings and
Bishops cannot command the wind, so they cannot command faith, Joh. 3.
and as the wind blows where it lists, so is every man that is born of the
spirit. You may force men to Church against their consciences, 1 Samuel 15.1^, ^4.
but they will beleev as they did before, when they com there, for God gives a
blessing only to his own ordinance, and abhors Antichrists: And Kings are
to think that they are men as well as Kings, Act. 9.15. 1 Timothy 2.1.2. 1. Cor.
7.2.22. Wise 6.1.8.
and that Christ has ordained that same means of faith for Kings which he
has for subjects, and that subjects are Christ's freemen, as well as Kings
subjects, and Kings that believe are Christ's Servants, even as subjects are
Kings servants, and both are bought with a price, therefore both ought not to
be the servants of men in matter of faith and religion: but Kings shall give a
greater account at the day of judgment, then their subjects: and to judge men
now for religion, is to judge before the time, and also to sit in the judgment
seat of Christ, to whom only it belongs, yet not before the day appointed,
how much less to Kings and Bishops? Romans 2.16. Act. 10.42.
I read that Constantine the Emperor (called the great) wrote to the Bishop of
Rome, that he would not force and constrain any man to the faith, but only
admonish and commit the judgment to God. Christ's kingdom is not of this world,
Ioh. 18 36.10.17.
therefore may it not be purchased, nor defended with the weapons of this
world, but by his word and spirit: no other weapons has he given to his Church
which is his spiritual kingdom. Therefore Christ says: Mat. 18.17
He that will not hear the church, let him he to thee as a heathen and a
publicane: Ephesians. 6.10.17.
he says not burn, banish or imprison him, that is Antichrists ordinance. And
though a man be an heretic, yet ought he not to be burnt, but to be rejected,
after once or twice admonition, Tit. 3.10.
that is cast out of the Church, but as in the church of Rome people of all
sorts are by persecution forced there into by the Bishops and Ministers
thereof, so it is in the Church of England also, which shows that the Bishops
and Ministers of Rome and England are of one spirit, in gathering people to
their faith and church, which is the spirit of Satan, who knows wealth at his
kingdom (the false Church) would greatly decay, if persecution were laid down:
seeing himself cannot stand before the word and spirit of God, much less his
Bishops and Ministers: therefore he will have them, for a name and show, to use
the word of God, but indeed, if the false interpretation and alleging of the
Scriptures will not help, then (says he) constrain them with fire and sword: or
else (if people have liberty of conscience) they will try the spirits, which
of them is of God, as the Apostle John teaches: and then says he, the Prince
as well as people will try all things, 1 Ioh. 4.1.
and keep that which is good, and will also prove themselves (as the Apostle
Paul teaches) whether they are in the Apostolic faith or not: 2 Cor. 13. 5
and as the Church of Rome provokes the Magistrates to persecute to death,
such as are excommunicated out of her, so does the Church of England provoke
the Magistrates to persecute to death such as she excommunicates: And as the
Bishops and Ministers of Rome will persuade the prince and people, to hear and
read none but themselves, so do the Bishops and Ministers of of England also:
but the Bishops and Ministers of the Apostolic church do persuade all men, to
prove and try the Spirits whether they are of God, which they cannot do,
except they hear and read other men's doctrines as well as the Bishops and
their Ministers; neither can they if they would, so long as the Bishops have
power from the King and State to silence and imprison, etc. all Preachers, and
to burn all books which teach not their doctrines. Your Majesty and Parliament
shall understand that all those that confess freely without compulsion, that
Jesus is the Messiah, 1 John 5.1. and 1 John 4.2 1 Cor. 12.13
the Lord, and that he came in flesh, are to be esteemed the children of God
and true christians, seeing such are born of God; and no man can say, that
Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Ghost, therefore not to be persecuted.

And as Abel killed not Cain, but was killed himself; and as Isaac and Jacob
did not persecute Ismael and Esau, but was persecuted of Ismael and Esau (who,
Gal. 4.29.
and Cain were figures of all persecuters) so the believing do not persecute
the unbeleeving, nor the true Church the false, but the believing and true
Church are (as they have been) most often persecuted themselves, of whom Abel,
Isaac, and Jacob were figures, whose children are all believers and freemen,
that stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made them free, Gal. 5.1.
and will not be tangled with the yoke of bondage, no not with circumcision,
much less with the discipline and doctrine of the Church of Rome, whose
Bishops are able Ministers of the fire and sword, both to Prince and people, as
many Histories do lamentably witness, to their utter infamy and overthrow:
also, if the believing should persecute the unbeleeving to death, who should
remain alive? then none but the believing should live in the world, and the
unbeleeving should dye in their unbelief, and so perish for ever: the Lord will
not that the believing should live to the destruction of the unbeleeving, but
unto their conversion, edification, and salvation: And by persecuting of Prince
and people to death, because they will not hear and believe, is no gaining of
souls unto God, but unto the devil. And whereas ignorant and wicked Bishops
may think to win souls by killing Prince and people for Religion, they are
deceived greatly, for thereby they lose many souls, viz. their own and the
unbeleeving, their own they lose, because they wilfully break the Lords
Commandment, that says, Thou shall not kill, Luke 18.20.
meaning such as are not corporal malefactors; and the others which dye in
their unbeleef, they confess themselves are eternally lost, except they (as
some of their ministers) hold a redemption after this life. And the Bishops
should know that error and heresy cannot be killed by the fire and sword, but
by the word and spirit of God, that is the only weapons of Christ's Bishops and
Ministers, and such only Christ's ministers do use, whose lives and
conversations are so harmles, holy and gentle, that thereby, and by their
deaths and sufferings they win many souls unto God; whereby they are known from
all false Bishops and ministers, who like wolves and bears, (not like sheep
and lambs) make prey and devour both Prince and people that are not of their
kind, if they be able to master them.

Besides, may it please your Majesty and Parliament to understand, that the
believing man that has an unbeleeving wife, 1 Cor. 7.16
and the believing woman that has an unbeleeving husband, cannot live
together, as the Scripture teaches, for the salvation of the unbeleeving, if
they be persecuted to death; indeed some thereby are forced to confess with
the mouth that which they believe not in heart, and so are made true
dissemblers, in stead of true Chistians, whereby many men and women are deceived
with dissembling husbands and wives, as well as the King and State are deceived
with dissembling servants and subjects; but the word of God (if permission of
conscience might be granted) would procure upright, pure, and unfeigned husbands
and wives, servants and subjects, so that thereby neither Prince nor people
should be deceived; for all good shepherds will divide and separate, and not
force, slay, and persecute, for if men and women be found Heretics, they shall
be separated from the Church, but if they be unbeleevers, they shall not be
joined unto it, until they be converted by the word of God, much less forced:
which conversion for ought we know, may be at their death, if not before, seeing
the Lord calls some at the eleventh hour, so well as at the first, Mat. 20.
6, 7
and not at the King and Bishops pleasures. Kings and Magistrates are to rule
temporal affairs by the swords of their temporal kingdoms: and Bishops and
Ministers are to rule spiritual affairs by the word and spirit of God; the
sword of Christ's spiritual kingdom, and not to intermeddle one with another
authority, office, and function: and it is a great shame for the Bishops and
Ministers not to be able to rule in their Church, without the assistance of the
King and Magistrate, yea, it is a great sign they are none of Christ's Bishops
and Ministers, if they were, they would not be afraid nor ashamed of their
faith, nor yet would they persuade Princes and people to persecute and force
one another to believe them, but would use only the assistance of Gods word and
spirit; and therewith suffer their faith and doctrine to be examined, proved,
and disputed both by word and writing.

Tit. 1.7.9.11.
And he is a true Bishop who is unreprovable, and that is able to stop the
mouths of his adversaries, by Gods word and Spirit only, and whose faith and
discipline agree with the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, and makes no
contradiction; but all those Bishops that force Princes and peoples to receive
their faith and discipline by persecution, do (with Judas) go against Christ
in his members with swords, staves, and halberds, who seeing Gods word will not
help them, betake themselves with all haste and hazard unto the authority of
the King and Magistrate.

I read that a Bishop of Rome would have constrained a Turkish Emperor to the
Christian faith, unto whom the Emperor answered, I believe that Christ was an
excellent Prophet, but he did never (so far as I understand) command that men
should with the power of weapons be constrained to believe his law; and
verily, I also do force no man to believe Mahomets law. Also I read that Jews,
Christians, and Turks are tolerated in Constantinople, and yet are peaceable,
though so contrary the one to the other. If this he so, how much more ought
Christians not to force one another to Religion? and how much more ought
Christians to tolerate Christians, when as the Turks do tolerate them? shall we
be less merciful then the Turks? or shall we learn the Turks to persecute
Christians? It is not only unmercifull, but unnatural and abominable, yea,
monstrous for one Christian to vex and destroy another for difference and
questions of Religion, and though tares have overgrown the wheat, yet Christ
will have them let alone till harvest; Mat. 13.29.30, 38.
lest while you go about to pluck up the tares, you pluck up also the wheat
with them, as your predecessors have done, who thought they had gathered up the
tares and burned them; but you see now that they have burned the wheat in stead
of tares. Wherefore in all humility and Christian modesty I do affirm, that
through the unlawful weed-hook of persecution (which your predecessors have
used, and by your Majesty and Parliament is still continued) there is such a
quantity of wheat plucked up, and such a multitude of tares left behind, that
the wheat which remain cannot yet appear in any right visible congregation.

Acts 3.17.
And now beloved Sovereign and Parliament, I know that through ignorance you do
persecute, as did also your predecessors, Amend your lives therefore and turn,
that your sins may be put away when the time of refreshing shall come from
the presence of the Lord; who before has showed by the month of his holy
servant John, Rev. 12.14.
that the woman (meaning the Church) should fly into the wilderness for a
time, times, and half a time, from the presence and persecution of the serpent.
And that the winepresse should be trodden without the City, until blood came
out of the winepresse, unto the horse bridles, Rev. 14.20.
by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs: and thus he has
fulfilled it.

Now therefore I humbly beseech you, suffer not your Bishops and Ministers any
longer to persuade, to force your subjects or any others, to their faith and
Church by persecution, neither suffer them therewith to defend their faith and
Church against their adversaries: if they have not any thing from Gods word
against us, let them yield and submit themselves; if they think they have any
thing against us, let them betake themselves only to Gods word, both in word
and writing, 2 Timothy 3.16
For the whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God to that purpose, and is
profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness,
that the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works:
with which scripture (and not with fire and sword) your Majesty's Bishops and
Ministers ought to be armed and weaponed: Mat. 10.14, 15.

Mat. 16.11.


and whosoever shall not hear the words of such Bishops and Ministers; then
such Bishops and Ministers are commanded by Christ (not to imprison, burn,
banish, and hang them) but to shake the dust of their feet against them, for a
witness when they depart from them; Act. 13.51.
affirming that at the day of judgment it shall be easier for Sodom and
Gomorrah, then for such persons: and this commandment of Christ, did his
Bishops and Ministers obey as you may read. By which, and by that which follow,
your gracious Maty., and Princely and honorable Parliament may perceive the
will and mind of our Lord and Savior Christ, unto whose mercy I commend you,
and to the word and wisdom of his grace, which is able to build further, and to
give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified, Amen.

Your faithful and loving subject Leonard Busher: not Furbusher. There is one
Furbusher a preacher in this Land.


Certain Reasons against Persecution.
FIrst, because Christ has not commanded any King, Bishop, or Minister to
persecute the people, for difference and judgment in matter of Religion.

Secondly, because Christ has commanded his Bishops and Ministers to persuade
Prince and people to hear and believe the Gospel, by his word and spirit, and
(as Ambassadors for him) to beseech both Prince and people to be reconciled
unto God, 2 Cor. 6.20
and not (as Tyrants) to force and constrain them by persecution.

At ^y thousand Ambassadors and Martyrs of Christ has Bishops caused to be
slain since Christ ascended. Mark 13.9. Persecution destroys Christians but
not errors.
Thirdly, because through persecution it will come to pass that the Ambassadors
of the only spiritual Lord and King Jesus, may he persecuted and imprisoned,
burned, hanged, or banished for delivering the message of their gracious Lord,
sincerely and often, both to Prince and people; which to do, is a more heinous
fact then to persecute the Ambassadors of the greatest King and Prince in the
world: for in stead of heretics, they shall (as they have already) burn,
banish, and hang the Ambassadors of the Lord Jesus Christ; who does choose out
whom he pleases, to bear his name before Kings and Rulers, for a testimonial
to them.

Fourthly, because then we cannot say, we have the liberty of the Gospel in our
Land, seeing where that is, there is no persecution for any difference in
Religion, nor forcing of the conscience to believe the Gospel, except by the
word and spirit of God only, the which do wound and kill the errors of men,
and not their persons.

2 Cor. 10.4 1 Timothy 1.13, 15.

Luke 9.53.55.

Persecutors rebuked of Christ.


Fifthly, because Christ came into the world to save sinners, and not to destroy
them, though they be blasphemers, seeing the Lord may convert them as he did
Saul (after called Paul) and though they have difference in Religion, or will
not hear nor believe in Christ, that they may be converted, yet ought you not
to persecute them, seeing Christ rebukes such, and his Father sent him not
into the world, to condemn the world, but to save it: be ye followers therefore
of Christ, and not of Antichrist, in gathering people to the faith.

1 Cor. 10, 32.

Col. 4.5.


Sixthly, because then you shall not walk wisely toward them that are without,
as the Scripture teaches, but shall offend also the Jews, and all other
strangers who account it tyranny, to have their consciences forced to religion
by persecution.

Seventhly, because if persecution be not laid down, and liberty of
conscience set up, then cannot the Jews, nor any strangers, nor others contrary
minded be ever converted in our Land; for so long as they know aforehand, that
they shall be forced to believe against their consciences, they will never seek
to inhabit there: by which means you keep them from the Apostolic faith, if
the apostolic faith be only taught where persecution is.

Eighthly, because if freedom of conscience be not set up, and persecution laid
down, then all the Kings subjects, and all strangers inhabiting the Land (that
shall believe the Apostolic faith) must depart the land to some free country,
or else abide the danger of burning, banishing, Persecution does make many
strangers.
hanging and imprisoning: the first will be a great impoverishing and weakening
of our land, besides a loss of the faith fullest subjects and friends. The
second will provoke the Lord to wrath, by spilling the blood of his faithful
servants, ambassadors, and witnesses, and also open the mouths of all
strangers, to speak yet more lamentably of the cruel and bloody persecution of
our Land.

Ninthly, because if persecution continue, then the King and State shall have
(against their wills) many dissemblers in authority and office, both in Court,
City, and Country: yea, no man of any degree shall know whether they are all
faithful and true Christians that are about him, and with whom he has to do:
seeing most men will conform themselves for fear of persecution, although in
their hearts they hate and detest the Religion whereto they are forced by law,
the which is very dangerous and hurtful both to King and State in time of
temptation from beyond the seas, and in rebellion at home; for they that are
not faithful to God in their Religion, will never be faithful to the King and
State in their allegiance; specially being tried by a great reward, or by a
mighty rebel: but will (to increase their honors and revenues) conform
themselves; and some to save their honors, land, goods and lives, will yield
and submit, though against their wills, even as they have done in case of
Religion; for through forcing men to Church by persecution, the true hearted
subjects are forced out of the Land, and out of the world, some banished,
others burned, hanged and imprisoned to death.

Tenthly, because then, Persecution causes many religions in the Church.
if there be many religions in the land (as it is well known there are) it will
come to pass (through the continuance of persecution) that many religions will
be continued in the Church, seeing all are forced to Church, who bring their
Religions with them as well as their bodies, whereby all their devotion is
against their consciences, and all the Church is a confused Babel, Rev. 18.2.4
full of every unclean and hateful bird, even a bold of foul Spirits, as the
Scripture speaks; out of which the people of God are commanded to flee, lest
(as of their sins) they be also partakers of their plague. And the Bishops (the
authors of persecution) are very ignorant to think that when they have gotten
people to their Church by persecution, that then they have gotten them to their
faith and Religion, Better were it to have many religions in the land, then in
the Church.
the which is nothing so, for most people (though contrary minded) to save life
and goods, will dissemble their Religion; as for example the Jews in Spain and
Portugal, and the Papists, Reformists and others in England; but when they come
hither or to some other free City or Counrry (where praised be God is liberty
of the Gospel) then they show that before they dissembled, to avoid the cruel
persecution of our Land.

Moreover, the Bishops bewray great ignorance, when they persuade the King and
Parliament, to force Prince and people to Church by persecution: for if that be
the means to come to the Church of Christ; then Christ has taught us to flee
the means of salvation, seeing he has taught us to flee persecution: Mat.
10.23. Christ teaches to flee persecution, ergo it cannot possible be good Mat
7. 13.

Note. see 2 Timothy 3.3, 4.


the which the Bishops and their Ministers persuade to be a great means to
bring men to the Church: Indeed I confess it is the only means to bring
Prince and people to the false church; and therefore Christ teaches us to flee
that means least through persecution (which is a great temptation) we be
constrained to go the broad way (which is the false Church) that leads to
destruction, and many go in thereat: and no marvail, for there men may be any
thing, except good Christians: for (besides Demos the worldling, and Hymeneus
the blasphemer, and many other sorts of indifferent Christians, excommunicants,
covetous, and profane persons) there are notable Rebels and Traitors; yea most
cruel and desperate Traitors and Rebels, as Digby, Catesby, Piercy, etc. whose
unread and unheard treachery will never be forgotten; which persons, if they
had not bin forced to Church against their consciences, had never enterprized
such horrible and hateful treason.

And the Bishops should understand that it is preaching and not persecuting
that gets people to the Church of Christ; for the Scripture says, Romans
10.17.
Faith is by hearing, and bearing by the word of God, and not by the sword of
Princes and Magistrates, as they persuade and practice. And therefore the
Bishops of our land are truly called Antichrists: for by their beastly and
bloody persecution, as well as by their blasphemous titles, erroneous
doctrines, and popish government, may they justly be termed Antichrists.

Mat. 24. 2 These. 2. and 1 Timothy 4. 2 Pet. 2.
Eleventhly, because Christ foretold, That many false Christ's, and false
Prophets should arise, and deceive many; yea, if it were possible, the very
elect: and the Apostle Paul did prophecy a departure from the faith: And Peter
said, There should be false teachers now among the people: And John said, the
Kings should give their power and authority unto the beast, Rev. 57.13, 17
until the words of God be fulfilled; therefore if persecution be not laid
down, and liberty of the Gospel set up, you may persecute the true Christians
in stead of the false, as your predecessors have done; for they are now (like
as they were then) the smallest number: and the false Christians are now (like
as they were then) the greatest number: and persecution is a notable mark of
the false Church and her Bishops and ministers: Gal. 2.3, 4. and 5.11. and 6.12.
and therefore Christ would have us flee from it, who overcame the devil and
his Ministers by the word of God, and by a good, meek and gentle life, whose
steps his Bishops and Ministers ought to follow.

Twelfthly, because persecution of such as do preach and teach Christ is a
great hinderance to the liberty of the Gospel: Note. False Bishops reach Turks
and Pagans to persecute Christians.
For thereby are the Jews, Turks, and Pagans occasioned and encouraged to
persecute likewise all such as preach and teach Christ in their Dominions. For
if christian Kings and Magistrates will not suffer Christians to preach, and
preach the Gospel of Christ freely and peaceably in their Dominions, how should
you expect it of the infidells, unto whom Bishops and christian Kings and
Magistrates ought to give a good example, and not an evil, as to burn, banish,
hang and Imprison peaceable and godly christians, that are no traitors, nor
thieves, nor fighters, nor manslayers, nor yet swearers, nor drunkards, nor
whoremasters, nor such like. And the King and Parliament may please to permit
all sorts of Christians, yea, Jews, Turks, and Pagans, so long as they are
peaceable, and no malefactors, as is abovementioned: which if they be found to
be under two or three witnesses, let them be punished according to Gods word:
also if any be found to be willing liars, false accusers, false alledgers and
quoters of the Scriptures, or other men's writings (as some men willingly do)
let them be punished according to right and justice, it is due desert and no
persecution, but let Gods word have his full and free passage among them all,
even to the end of their lives, in all bountifulness, long-sufferance and
patience, knowing that it is ordained of Gods rich mercy, to lead the infidels,
and such as err unto repentance and amendment, Romans 2.4. 2 Tit. 2.25.
out of the snare of the devil, of whom they are taken and deceived.

Thirteenthly, because persecution for Religion is to force the conscience, and
to force and constrain men and women's consciences to a Religion against their
wills, is to tyranize over the soul as well as over the body, and herein the
Bishops commit a greater sin, then if they force the bodies of women and maids
against their wills: yea, 2 Cor. 11.2
herein they are more cruel and greater tyrants then the Turks, False Bishops
worse then Turks and Pagans.
who though they force the bodies of strangers to slavery and bondage, yet they
let the conscience go free, yea to Christians that are so contrary to them in
Religions but these Idol-bishops will force the consciences of Christians,
their own natural Countrymen, Note. False Bishops spiritual fornication.

2 Thessalonians. 2.4 1 Cor 6.19, 20. and 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. with Rev. 18.4. and 2 Pet.
2.1. 1 Pet. 1.19


even unto spiritual bondage and slavery; and herein they commit fornication
both with Prince and people, and have made all, both small and great, to
receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads, so that no man may
buy or sell, save he that will go to Church, and submit to the Bishops
ordinances, and name and mark of their beastly and bloody persecution, through
which as God, they sit in, and reign over the consciences both of Prince and
people, which is the spiritual seat and temple of God bought at a dear price,
even with the precious blood of their only spiritual Lord Jesus Messiah, the
true Shepherd and bishop of their souls.

And the Bishops in forcing men and women's consciences, do therein play the
Antichrist so well as the Popes: and indeed there is never a Bishop in the land
but is a Pope, for Pope in latin is Papa, and Papa signifies Father in
English, all the Bishops in our land are called reverend Fathers; therefore all
the Bishops in our land are called reverend Popes, so many Lord Bishops, so
many reverend Fathers, so many reverend Popes: If Idolaters ought to be slain,
then ought all those that submit and yield spiritual obedience and reverence
unto these Bishops to be slain, who then should remain in land alive? Rev.
17.13.
and these are all so many Antichrists, so many Idols, and so many false Gods
of England: how many are thy Gods whom thou do serve? For whose spiritual
adoration, the knee of every man and woman must bow, or else they shall be
persecuted: unto whom the King ought not any longer to give his authority and
power, lest he fulfill the Scripture, which says, that Kings should give
their power and authority unto the beast.

Fourteenthly, because the burning, banishing, hanging, and imprisoning of men
and women, by Protestants, for difference of Religion, do justify the burning,
banishing and imprisoning of men and women, by the Papists, for difference of
religion, even as the Papists do justify the Turks and Pagans in such like
cruelty and tyranny; wherein now is the Protestants more merciful then the
Papists, or the Papists then the Turks? Therefore as the Papists (when they
complain of the Turks and Pagans, for their bloody persecution) do therein
condemn themselves, because they are found to do the same, yea worse, for it is
greater tyranny for one Christian to force and kill another, then for Turks and
Pagans to kill a christian, for that is no such great wonder, seeing it is a
paganish part, who have no better knowledge, but Christians should have better
knowledge and more mercy then to play the pagans against christians: Note.
So also the Protestants, when they complain of the Papists for their bloody
and beastly persecution, do therein condemn themselves, seeing they do the
same, for which they blame others, and so are rebuked of the Scripture, which
says, Therefore thou are inexcusable O thou man, Rom 2.1.3.
whosoever thou art that blamest another, for in that thou judge another,
thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge do the same things: and
think thou this O thou man (that judge them which do such things, and thou
do the same) that thou shall escape the judgment of God?

Fifteenthly, because his Majesty and Parliament would not willingly themselves
be forced against their consciences, by the persecution of the Bishop of Rome
and his Princes: so I beseech them (according to the law Christ has enjoined
Christians) not by persecution to force other men's consciences against their
wills by the irritation of the Bishops of our land. Luke 6 31. Or provocation.


Sixteenthly, because persecution do cause men and women to make shipwreck of
faith and good consciences, by forcing a Religion upon them, even against their
minds and consciences, and also do send them quick to the devil in their
errors, if that be heresy for which they are hanged and burned; which to do,
is a most unchristian, unnatural, King Edward was an enemy to persecution Act.
and Mon. page 1484. The Christian answer of King Edward.

Rev. 16.14.


cruel and tyrannous deed; and I am sure you would not be content to be so
dealt withal your selves: but indeed the Popish and Idol-bishops are the
authors hereof against the people, as well as of other persecution against the
Princes. For antichristian Bishops do draw Kings and Princes hereto against
their mind, as may appear by Edward the sixth, that godly King of famous memory,
who being urged by his bloody Bishops to subscribe to the burning of a woman
called Joane Butcher, he answered, will you have me to send her quick to the
devil in her error? But when his blood-thirsty Bishops would have no nay, he
said again to Bishop Cranmer, I lay all the charge thereof on you before God;
and Cranmer said, he had never so much to do in all his life as to procure it:
whereby I do perceive that godly Kings are drawn to Battle against the
Saints, by antichristian Bishops and false Prophets, who otherwise would rule
and reign more agreeable to the mind of Christ.

Also, hereby may all men perceive that the Council and Bishops could not
satisfy the Kings conscience by their persuasion, if they could have showed
him the word of God for burning that Christian, it would have prevailed with
that godly King, and he might then of faith have consented, but his answer
shows that he was not of their mind, for all that they had said, and therefore
now, if it please you to require of your Bishops, warrant from the word of God
for the persecuting of Christians, or for forcing Prince and people to Church,
you shall find not one Bishop, yea not all of them together, though assisted
with their Ministers, will be able to show warrant from Gods word, whereby to
persuade your consciences thereunto: Romans 14.23
and whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and whatsoever is not from Gods word,
cannot be of faith.

Seventeenthly, because persecution of Christians by Christians do not only
justify Papists, and teach the Jews and Pagans to persecute Christians; but
also do teach the Papists and others (that know not the mind of Christ, and
once get the upperhand) to persecute those that persecuted them; By Digby,
Catesby, etc. Mat. 11.29 Luke 14 27.
yea, it is a means (as we have had lamentable experience) to set (such as are
forced to Church against their consciences) at deadly hatred against the King
and State, and urges all them to treason and rebellion, that have not truly
learned Christ, who himself was persecuted to death, whose harmles cross all
true Christians must take up, and whose gentle and humble steps they must
follow and walk in, or else they cannot be his disciples, nor sheep of his
pasture. And neither can the Papists be persuaded that persecution is a sin, so
long as they and other Christians are also persecuted by the protestants:
seeing the Papists do build their persecution on the same ground with the
protestants: but both sorts of Bishops do err grossly, as shall be showed (God
willing) when they make their defense, except herewith their consciences be
convinced to yield, as I wish they may for the salvation of their own souls,
the peace both of Prince and people, and the safety of the King and State. In
the mean while it is to be observed, that those Bishops, and Ministers which
persuade the King and Parliament, to burn, banish, hang and imprison, for
difference of Religion, are blood-suckers and manslayers, and such (it cannot
be denied) caused Kings and Magistrates, to be their executioners and
tormentors, in burning the Martyrs in former times, even in the days of King
Henry the eight, and Qu. Mary, as the books of Acts and Monuments will witness
if they be not burned; and I ask the Bishops and their Ministers, Act 4.19.
if the martyrs should have obeyed the King and Queen, rather then have
suffered death.

And now I must humbly, and with all reverence do beseech his Majesty and
Parliament, advisedly to consider among themselves, whether the Prince or
Princess (differing with the Church now in matter of conscience and religion,
The Bps. as the High priests, force men to obey man rather then God.

Note well.


stablished by law in our land (as the right noble Princess Elizabeth did in
Qu. Mary's days) do not incur the danger and cruelty of the law now, as that
worthy Princess did then, seeing that popish and cruel law stands still in
force in most points of Religion? and who dare trust the Bishops and their
adherents in such a case, the matter lying in their hands?

Let it be supposed that the Princes heart should be moved by the Lord to
embrace the Apostolic faith and discipline, shall he be forced to believe as
the Bishops do, against his conscience, shall he be constrained to submit to
their government and discipline against his conscience? shall he live in
vexation and persecution, and in danger of his life by the Bishops and law
stablished, as the Princess Elizabeth did? yea, it must be thus with our right
noble Prince, except there be partiality, yea it will be thus with his princely
person, except those popish and cruel laws be repealed and extinguished.

Wherefore I meekly entreat, seeing death is most certain, Better today, then
tarry till tomorrow.
though most uncertain when, that those antichristian and popish laws may be
disanulled and made void in time, lest we all lament and bewail it, when it
will be too late. And I pray your Majesty and Honors to consider, Rev. 17.16
Genesis 17.6. Romans 4 17.
that Kings and Princes hearts are in the hands of the Lord (as the rivers of
waters) to turn as he will: and the Scripture says, the ten horns (by which I
understand ten Kings) shall hate the whore and make her desolate and naked.
Likewise the Scripture says to Abraham (the father of believing Princes as
well as believing people) Also I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and will
make nations of thee: yea, Kings shall proceed of thee: which Scripture do
also overthrow the judgment of those men that hold a Christian may not be a
King nor Magistrate: Ismael, and Edom excepted, Genesis 17.8. with Genesis 15.13.18.
and 16.10. and 17.18.20. and 26.3. and 21.13.

Genesis 14. 14.


Let such consider that the Lord here speaks of Abraham's spiritual seed, and
not of his natural seed; because if it be understood of his natural seed,
then cannot Abraham be the father of many nations, seeing all Abraham's natural
seed are called Jews, and are but one nation of the Jews; so that the covenant
of God could not be performed that said, I will make nations of thee, yea Kings
shall proceed of thee: therefore it must be understood of his spiritual seed, of
which may be Kings and Princes that are not naturally descended of him, as well
as people that are naturally descended of him; therefore believing Kings may
safely walk in the steps of their father Abraham, and with their swords defend
their subjects against their adversaries, and redeem their brethren out of the
jaws of all devouring beasts and bloody persecutors, Romans 13.4.
for they bear not the sword for naught.

And now also I desire those subjects (of what degree soever, that would
destroy their Kings and Governors for difference in religion) to consider,
that therein they justify their Kings and Governors, which destroy their
subjects for difference of Religion: for as it is sin for Kings and Governors
to destroy their subjects for difference of Religion, at the persuasion of
their Bishops; so is it sin (but in a higher degree) for subjects to destroy
their Kings and Governors for difference of religion at the persuasion of their
Bishops and Ministers.

Therefore persecution for difference in religion is a monstrous and cruel
beast, that destroys both Prince and people, hinders the Gospel of Christ,
and scatters his disciples that witness and profess his name.

But permission of conscience in difference of Religion, saves both Prince and
people, for it is a meek and gentle lamb, which not only furthereth and
advances the gospel, but also fostereth and cherishes those that profess it,
as may be seen by the permission of the Princess Elizabeth, and others that
were permitted and fostered in Dutchland at that time. Permission of conscience
a furtherance to the gospel and a safety both to prince and people.
Also permission of conscience is a great and sure band and benefit to the King
and State, as may likewise be seen in the same Princess Elizabeth, who if she
had not been permitted, but had suffered death, as the bloody Bishops earnestly
desired; then had not the kingdom bin so surely, nor yet so purely kept and
preserved for his Majesty and his royal Issue, as now it is, the Lord be
praised therefore.

Further I beseech his right excellent Majesty and Parliament to observe that
persecution was the occasion that the apostolic Church was at first scattered
and driven into the wilderness, that is, desert places of the world; whither
she fled to save her self from the rage and tyranny of Antichrist, Rev. 12.6.14
and 13.17.

2 Cor. 11.1^.


and his Apostles and Ministers, the first authors of persecution under the
gospel: Therefore his Majesty and Parliament may please to consider, that so
long as persecution continue, so long will the apostolic Church continue
scattered and persecuted into the secret places of this world: and no marvail,
for her faith and discipline is as offensive, as odious, and as unwelcome unto
Antichrist and his Bishops and Ministers now, as it was then, as their burning,
banishing, hanging, and imprisoning do witness even unto this day. And it is
to be noted, that as the Apostolic faith and discipline (in the Apostles days,
2 Thessalonians, 2.6, 7.
when through them true signs and wonders were wrought by the extraordinary
gift and power of the holy Ghost) did let and hinder the mystery of iniquity
wrought by Antichrist his Apostles and Ministers by whom the lying signs and
wonders were done, through the extraordinary spirit of Satan. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 3.1, 4, 5. and 2 Pet. 2.1, 3. 1 John 4.41. 2 John 7.
Jud. 4 11.16, 18.

Note well. 1 John 4 3.


So now the catholic or antichristian faith and discipline (having gotten the
upperhand by her lying signs and wonders, and by persecution) do by the same,
let and hinder the mystery of godliness, wrought by Christ, his Apostles and
Ministers, by whom the true signs and wonders were done without persecution.

And it is well worthy to be observed, both of King, Prince, and people, that
the Bishops, Ministers of Antichrist cannot abide, nor endure the faith and
discipline of the apostolic Church, because it will be the overthrow of their
blasphemous and spiritual Lordships, and of their Antichristian and bloody
kingdom. And therefore are they so fiery hot and zealous for the Catholic, or
antichristian faith and discipline; for by their faith they show plainly, that
they are succeeded and descended from antichrist, Who confessed not that the
Messiah came in flesh: and by their discipline or government they plainly show
they are Antichrists Bishops and Ministers who persecute with fire and sword
all degrees, both King, Prince and people, that will not confess their faith,
and obey their discipline. And it is very plain and easy both for King,
Prince, and people (if they will not take up Religion on credit, and content
them with the religion they were born and brought up in (as do the Papists) to
discern who they be that teach the apostolic faith and discipline, and who
they be that teach the Antichrists faith and discipline, for the holy Apostle
shows it to all men that will give heed thereto; for he says, Dearly
beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of
God, for many false Prophets are gone out into the world, which confess not
that Jesus Messiah came in flesh. Hereby shall you know the spirit of God, The
Syriack says, Came in flesh.
every spirit that confesses that Jesus Messiah came in flesh is of God; and
every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Messiah came in flesh, is not of
God: but this is the spirit of Antichrist, whom ye have heard how that he
should come, and now already is he in the world. The same is the Antichrist
that denies the Father and the Son; whosoever denies the Son, the same has
not the Father: 1 Ioh. 2.^, 2^.

John 17.3.5.8.

1 Cor. 15.47 John 6.38.4^, 62 and 7.26, 27. John 16.2. 3.27, 21.


the Apostle means such as deny Jesus to be Messiah, the Lord that came down
from heaven, as Christ and they have taught, such have not the Father, but do
deny him also as they have taught him; and therefore Christ says, The times
shall come, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God good
service, but these things they will do unto you, because they have not known
the father nor me, the father loves such as believe that I came out from God,
thus says Christ; but Antichrist and his Ministers believe not this doctrine,
neither do they thus teach Christ Jesus the Messiah.

And you may please to understand that of this Antichrist (or rather as the
Syriack) of this false Christ came the Church of Rome: whose Bishops and
Ministers teach not this doctrine, and as the mother, so the daughter also,
teaches not this doctrine: but will likewise persecute both Prince and people,
that shall confess that Jesus Messiah came in flesh as John teaches; 1 Ioh. 4
2. John 6.62. and 3.13. John 17 5. 1 Cor. 15.47, 49

1 Ioh. 4, 3. 2 Cor. 11 12, 15.

Rev. 12.6.14.


or that the Son of man ascended up, where he was before, or that he was
glorified with his father before the world was, as himself says. Or that he
was the second man the Lord from heaven; or that he had, and has a heavenly
body, as Paul teaches: for these and such like doctrines do the Church of
Rome and her daughters persecute with fire and sword, being endued with the
spirit of Antichrist: By which Antichrist his Apostles and Ministers, the
Apostolic Church was scattered and driven into the wilderness, that is,
desert and secret places of this world, even by their bloody persecution, the
which still they continue and raise against the members and witnesses thereof,
who were, and are the martyrs which in all ages have and do suffer death,
imprisonment and banishment since the first persecution; and we never, read,
nor ever shall read that the Apostolic Church, or such as have derived their
faith, and discipline of her, did ever persecute.

Therefore I humbly desire his Majesty and Parliament, with all godly
carfulness to consider that it is not possible that the Church of Rome
(called Catholic) or those that are descended of her, and have received their
Ministry and Ordination from her, ever was, or could be the apostolic Church
(called primitive Church) or she that is descended from her: seeing the
Scripture says the Apostolic Church (called in Scripture the woman) has a
place prepared of God in the wilderness a thousand two hundred and sixty days
from the presence of such as did persecute her. Rev. 12 6.13.14.
How then, I beseech you consider, may it be possible that the church of Rome
(called in Scripture a mystery, great Babylon, the mother of whoredoms and
abominations of the earth, the woman that sits upon a scarlet colored
beast, full of names of blasphemy, the woman arrayed in purple and scarlet, and
gilded with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a cup of gold in her
hand; full of abominations and silibinesse of her fornication, the woman that
is drunken with the blood of saints, and with the blood of the martyrs or
witnesses of Jesus by her beastly persecution) was, or could be ever the
Apostolic Church, or are those that are descended from her seeing the
Scripture says, Rev. 12 6.13.14
she has a place in the wilderness prepared of God, where she should be sed a
thousand two hundred and sixty days, from the presence of her persecutors.

If so be, you will have the Church of Rome, and those that are descended from
her, to be the true Apostolic church: Note.
then it will follow that the church (called the woman, and did fly into the
wilderness from her persecutors) was, and is the false Antichristian Church;
and also it will follow that those (which we account to be the martyrs and
witnesses of Jesus) were not of the true Apostolic Church, 2 These. 2.3 6.8.

1 Timothy 4.1.2. ^

Rev. 12.6. 11, 14. and 17.2, 6, 17. 2 Timothy 3.1.9. and 4.3, 4. 2 Pet. 2.1.3 1
Ioh. 2.18, 19 and 4.1. 2 John 7. Jude 4 11, 16.

Like mother, like Daughter. 1 Timothy ^. ^. Rev. 2.24.


but were obstinate persons and heretics, even as their adversaries (in Rome,
Spain, England, and elsewhere) did persecute, adjudge, and execute them for.

But if you will have the prophecy of the Apostles to be true, and will believe
their holy writings, and also will have the martyrs (that have been burned,
banished, hanged, imprisoned) to be of the true Apostolic Church, then it will
follow and that justly, according and agreeable to the Scriptures, that the
Church of Rome, and those that did and do persecute, are descended from the
false antichristian Church, called a mystery, great Babylon, the mother of
whordoms and abominations of the earth, etc. which was and is drunken with the
blood of saints and martyrs of Jesus: seeing they have her antichristian faith
and lordly discipline, and for the defense and maintenance thereof, will also
burn, banish, hang and imprison; so hot and fiery zealous that thereby they
show plainly, that they walk so just and even in the steps and paths of the
mystical woman great Babylon, their bloody parent and mother: so even I say,
as if they studied her lying and hypocritical doctrine, her deep and devilish
divinity, her blasphemous princely and dangerous dignity; and her beastly,
bloody and deadly discipline. Through the continuance whereof, not only the
Apostolic church is continued still in the wilderness and desert of this world,
but also the Jews and others, both in great Britain and all over the world, are
kept back from the knowledge of Gods holy Word, the only order and ordinance
Christ has appointed for the gathering of his Church together out of all
places of the world. 1 John 4.1.
And so long as persecution continue, you cannot try the spirits of the many
false Prophets that are gone out into the world, as the holy Apostle does
lovingly advise and admonish you. But like the Papists, Fire and sword no
equal weapons to the spirit and Word.
must be eyed only to the spirits of your lordly Bishops and their Ministers,
who will have all, both King, Prince, and people to receive their spirits, and
therefore will not have any others to preach and print within the land, lest
their lying doctrine and lordly discipline be discovered and disclaimed. And in
stead of disputing and writing by the word and spirit of Christ (against their
adversaries) they will cruelly persecute and fight against them by fire and
sword, and spirit of Antichrist, from whom they are descended and succeeded,
both lineally, and of great antiquity. Mystically.


Wherefore I humbly beseech the King and Parliament, that you will betimes
listen unto the holy spirit in the mouth of the prophet, which says, Psalm.
2.10.
Be wise now therefore ye Kings, be learned (or instructed) ye Judges of the
earth, serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling, kiss the Son of God
lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way of persecution, when his wrath
shall suddenly burn; Let not therefore the Kings of the earth band themselves
with the Bishops and Ministers of Antichrist, Psalm. 2.^ 3. 1 Ioh. 2.20. Rev.
17.14.
nor Princes assemble themselves together against the Lord, and against his
amointed, that is, against Christ and his Church; seeing both he and she break
your bands, and east your cords from them. Rev. 12.11.
Yea, her seed overcommeth you, by the blood of the lamb, and by the word of
their testimony, for they love not their lives unto death.

Beware then in time lest you offend any more of these little ones that believe
in Christ; seeing Christ says, it were better to have a millstone hanged about
the neck, Matthew. 18.6.10.
and drowned in the depth of the Sea, then so to do. He means that it were
better for you to lose your lives, then any way to consent to the offense of
such little ones that believe in Christ. See then I pray that they be not
despised, burned, banished, hanged and imprisoned. For their Angels always
behold the face of Christ's Father in heaven; and remember he says, Matthew.
10.38, 39.

Matthew. 11.35.36


the tree is known by his fruit; but persecuting of Christians, is an evil
fruit. And that a good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings
forth good things: but persecuting of christians is no good thing: and that for
every idle word men shall speak, they shall give accounts at the last day of
judgments. How much more for every wicked and cruel deed of persecution, as
burning, banishing, hanging and imprisoning of those that confess with the
mouth, Romans 10.9.
and believe with the heart the Lord Jesus, and that God raised him from the
dead; whose laws and ordinances they are careful to keep and obey? Christ
says that such shall be saved; and yet you fear not to burn, banish, hang,
and imprison such. But if you believe that God will avenge his elect, Luk 18.9.
beware of persecuting his servants that call on his name, specially such as
witness his truth against the abominations of Antichrist. Suffer not your
Bishops to destroy those men and women that strive to serve God according to
his will in his word. Be not your Bishops executioners in burning, banishing,
hanging, and imprisoning of harmless and peaceable Christians, but let them
enjoy freedom of the gospel, and liberty of conscience; that so the apostolic
Church ( which is scattered and driven into the wilderness and desert of this
world) may be again gathered together, both of Jews and Gentiles, into visible
and stablished congregations. 2 These. ^.8.
And that the Catholic and universal Church of Antichrist may be consumed
and abolished by his word and spirit, as the holy Apostle has foretold, even
the uttermost of his arrival, which is the Imperial and triple Crown, I pray
the Lord to give such grace, the Sea of Rome may ebb apate.
through the triple sea of Rome.

And again I humbly entreat the King and Parliament to vouchsafe to hear me
with patience yet a little further: If freedom of the Gospel, and permission of
conscience might be granted, then would not Papists nor any others dissemble
their religion, to the dishonor of God, the destruction of their souls, and to
the great danger both of King and State, seeing they are forced to Church
against their consciences: and may not Popish Priests and Jesuits (unawares to
the Bishops) become the Bishops Ministers, seeing the change of their Religion,
and religious habit differ so little; and so by degrees infect the people with
more Popish doctrine, as occasion shall be? Nota. From Popes submission there
is great suspicion.
And such men will readily embrace the Bishops Orders, and so they shall
readily have the Bishops favors: by which means they may more easily and
speedily have access unto the Court, and presence of the King and Prince,
which indeed is very dangerous, howsoever not regarded. Therefore I do
(according to my duty) humbly advise his Majesty not to beutifie his Court and
presence with any popish stones, not with one, though it be of Alablaster.

But permission of conscience and freedom, and liberty of the Gospel, will no
way be dangerous to the King or State, if such like rules as these be observed.

1. That no people tainted with treason do bear any office.

2. That all sorts of people tainted with treason, do (at all times from home)
wear a black hat with two white signs, the one before, 1 Kin. 2.36 41, 42.

Romans 13 1. to 5.


the other behind in open sight.

3. That no people tainted with treason, approach within ten miles of the Court
without license.

4. That no people tainted with treason, do inhabit the City of London, nor yet
within ten miles thereof.

5. That none tainted with treason, do make any assembly or congregation.

6. That no person or persons (in whatsoever difference, by reasoning or
disputing) do draw any weapon, nor give any blow, stroke, or push, in pain and
penalty, as his Majesty and Parliament think meet.

7. That (for the more peace and quietness, and for the satisfying of the weak
and simple, among so many persons differing in Religion, it be lawful for
every person or persons, yea Jews and Papists, to write, dispute, confer and
reason, print and publish any matter touching. Religion, either for or against
whomsoever, always provided they allege no Fathers for proof of any point of
religion, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25

James 3.17


but only the holy Scriptures, neither yet to reproach or slander one another,
nor any other person or persons, but with all love, gentleness, and
peaceableness, inform one another to the glory of God honor of the King and
State, and to their own good and credit; Note. A true sign of false Bishops
and Ministers
by which means, both few errors, and few books will be written and printed,
seeing all false Ministers, and most people, have little or nothing else
(besides the Fathers) to build their religion and doctrine upon: or if it be
once stablished by law, that none shall confirm their religion and doctrine by
the Fathers, and by prisons burning and banishing, etc. but by the holy
Scriptures, then error will not be written nor disputed, except by obstinate
persons, and feared consciences, seeing the word of God will be no shelter for
any error. Yea, I know by experience among the people called Brownists, that a
Man shall not draw them to write, though they be desired; for one of their
preachers called Mast. Rob. has had a writing of mine in his hands, above six
months, Now above 12 months.
and as yet I can get no answer, it seems he knows not how better to hide
his errors, then by silence, and this will be the case of all false Bishops
and Ministers, John 3.20. John 3.10.
who had rather be mute and dumb, then to be drawn into the light with their
errors.

Therefore permission of conscience, and liberty of the gospel in our land of
great Britain, will mightily further the advancement of the Apostolic faith:
and chiefly their books, whereout sufficient matter will be drawn for the
convincing of every particular Religion which is against the Religion
stablished by Christ and his Apostles, who by all means lawful, sought the
conversion and salvation both of Jews and Gentiles. 1 Cor. 9.20.22. Act. 16.3.
And they are unconstant and faith less men, or at least very ignorant, that
think error will overcome and prevail against the truth.

For the abolishing of such thoughts, I desire such men to consider the mighty
victory and prevailing of the truth, in the time of Christ and his Apostles,
which (notwithstanding resisted and disputed against: by the most part of the
Priests and learned men, both of Jews and Gentiles) yet overcame and prevailed
against all the errors of the high Priests, and great learnedmen, both of the
Jews and Gentiles, and the Apostle faith, we cannot do any thing against the
truth, 2 Cor. 13.8
but for the truth: and seeing it is the same truth which all good men would
embrace, why should we not hope the same victory by it? Did not King Darius
and all the people both Jew and gentiles cry out and say, that truth is great
and strongest? 1 Esd. 4.38.41.
Why then should those that have the truth, and those that would have the
truth, be afraid of error? seeing truth discovers dark and dangerous ways of
error, though abroad in open books, even as light discovers dark and
dangerous places, though abroad in open high ways: And as the more dark and
dangerous the ways be, the more necessary and needful will light be found of
all that travel: So the more dark and dangerous the errors be, the more
needful and profitable will truth be found, of all that would travel to heaven.
But some may object and say, let all this be granted, yet it is no wisdom we
think, to bring dangerous errors into the light, that so many men may stumble
at them. Which being not brought to light, would not be so much as known to
some.

I answer, no more, then a Rock that lies hid under water,

And a great and sure argument it is, Another true sign of false ministers.
that those Bishops and Ministers have not the truth, that publicly dare not
dispute or write against error, as may be seen in the Bishops and ministers in
Queen Mary's days, which could not abide to have books written and Printed, of
that which they called error and heresy, but caused, that if any such were
written, both them and the Authors to be burned, if they could come by them.
Therefore if permission of conscience and liberty of the Gospel be not
granted, and burning laws repealed, then the Bishops and ministers now may
persuade and cause to be burned, both the Books the and Authors, that have the
truth instead of heresy and heretics, even as their predecessors have done
already, The Word of God the only defender of the faith of Christ.
and so shed more innocent blood, and also provoke the Lord to further wrath
against the King and State. It is not the gallows, nor the prisons, nor
burning, nor banishing, that can defend the Apostolic faith: indeed the King
and State may defend Religions peace by their sword and civil power, but not
the faith, otherwise, then by the word and spirit of God. The dutch Princes and
Peers say, that force sword, and gallows, in matter of religion, is a good
means to spil blood, and make an uprore in the land, but not to bring any man
from one faith to another. The Pagans will not persecute one another for
religion, though (as I read) there be above three thousand sorts among them.
And you know both King Henry and Queen Mary, thought themselves defenders of
the faith, and though they burned heretics and heresy, when they burned Men
and their books, Idol Bishops and false Ministers, authors of persecution Rev.
16.14.
but now you see and must acknowledge, that they were peesecutors of the faith,
instead of defenders thereof, and also that they (through the instigation of
their bloody Bishops) burned the word of God, and those that professed and
wrought it, instead of heresy and heretics. And thus it will be now if the
Bishops and their Ministers may have their wills: and therein they (as their
predecessors) fulfill the word of God, in gathering Kings of the earth to the
battle of the great day of God Almighty. For they persuade Kings to force
their subjects, Romans 10.14.17.
to receive the faith, and to be of the Church, whereas the word of God
teaches otherwise, saying, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of
God, and not by the Kings sword. And Christ says: Teach of nations, and not
force all nations: and this teaching is to be understood by the word and
writing of the Prophets and Apostles of our Lord and Savior Christ, which is
the Word of God For they that will be of the true Faith and Church, must be
called thereunto, out of the World by the Word of God, in every nation, and not
forced and constrained in every nation, as the Bishop of Rome, and all other
false Bishops and Ministers have and do persuade Kings, Emperors and
Magistates.

And his Majesty and Parliament may please to understand, that so to do, Mat.
16. 16. 1 These. 5.19.
is to quench the Spirit of God, in Christ's Bishops and Ministers, and also to
frustrate the precept of Christ which says: Preach the Gospel to every
creature. Besides it makes their one office and function void, they ought to
preach and instruct with all meeknes them that are contrary minded, proving if
God at any time will give them repentance, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.
that they may know the truth: for the ministers of the Lord must not strive,
but be apt to teach, gentle toward all men, suffering evil men patiently,
telling Kings and Princes, that the weapons of Christ Bishops and Ministers are
not carnal (as the weapons of all false and Antichristian Bishops and Ministers
are) but Spiritual, and mighty through God, to cast down holds, casting down
every high thing, 2 Cor. 10.3.5.
that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought, to the obedience of Christ.

Also, if al within the land be forced to be of the church as the Bishops and
their ministers would still have it, then there would be no world in the land,
but all the land would be the Church, which is absurd and contrary to the
scriptures, and great ignorance do the Bishops, Rev. 11.^. Act. 2.41 47.

Note. Act. 2.47.


and their ministers show, when they think the whole nation of people is the
church of Christ, for then it cannot be said, out of great Britain, the Lord
added to the Church from day to day, such as should be saved: seeing within the
land there would be none without to be added: Also within that land, A true
Church will not persecute. Mat. 12.25. Rev. 18.2.8. 1 Cor. 8.11.12.

Luc. 10.3. Genesis 32.28. Romans 13.4.


there would be no persecution, seeing the church of Christ does not persecute
at al, much less it self, but the Ministers and members of that Church do
persecute one another; and therefore it cannot be the spiritual Kingdom and
Church of Christ, but of Antichrist, seeing it is divided against it self, and
persecuteth one another and will with her mother, great Babylon be consumed and
condemned, seeing (as she) they burn, banish, hang, and imprison one another,
which is no Christian, but Antichristian, monstrous, cruel, woolvish and
tyranous part and practice, for Christ sent his Ministers as lambs among wolves
and not as wolves among Lambs.

Again, I humbly and with all reverence do beseech his right excellent Majesty,
to give me leave, to put him in mind, of those things that do concern the
glory of God, the assurance of his own salvation, the stablishment of his
throne, and the benefit both of the Church of Christ, and the common wealth of
al his Dominions. And though as Josias, he find (by reading in the book of
the New Testament) a great alteration of the Apostolic faith, and change of
the laws and ordinances of Christ, within his Dominions; Yet not to be
dismayed, as Henry Legrand, but be encouraged as Josiah to labor and endeavor
the redress thereof, according to the mind of Christ, in his New Testament.
And I doubt not, but as Jacob the Patriarch prevailed with God and men: so shall
Jacob the King prevails both with God and men, especially being his chief
steward by his new testament.

Through the zealous reading whereof will be found, that Antichrist the King of
the Catholic faith and discipline (called the mystery of iniquity.) does sit
in the Temple of God, even as the Scripture has foretold. 2 Timothy 2. 1 Timothy 4.
Rev. 7 15. 2 The. 2.8. Rev. 17.16.17.
But it is to be noted that the Scripture has also foretold, of the
consummation and abolition, of this antichrist the man of sin, and his mystery
of iniquity, with the utmost of his arrival, or highest top of dignity, he is
come unto: and this shall be done by the spirit of the Lord in the much of his
servants. For when the words of God be fulfilled, then shall the servants of the
Lord prevail (by his word and spirit) with ten Kings that shall hate, C^aled
the Temple of God.

2 These. Rev. 17.1.1^.18. Ioh. 16.2


and make the whore desolate, which sits in the hearts and consciences of
peoples, multitudes and nations, and this whore is the woman called the great
City which reigns over the Kings of the earth, meaning the church of Rome, by
her false faith and discipline, which is so fa^ settled in the hearts and
consciences of the Kings of the earth, that they think they do God good
service, in killing and burning his servants that do speak against her faith
and di^cipline, and that will not buy any of her war^s, that is, Rev. 17.13 14.
her Antichristian doctrines and ordinances. But as she has had her exa^tation
and arrival to the height and dignity of the sea Empire of Rome, by the love of
kings, who have given their power and authority unto her, and who have fought
for her against the Saints and servants of Jesus: So she shall have her
consummation and abolition ( from that height and dignity) by the hatred of
Kings, who again shall take their power and authority from her, and therewith
defend the peace and persons of the Saints and servants of Jesus: and not for
religions peace, will use their power and authority against the bloody
persecution of Antichrist and al his bloody Bishops and Ministers, and so
become nursing fathers unto the Church of Christ. And as it has pleased God,
to give his Majesty peace round about, as he did unto King Cyrus, in whose
days the material Temple began to be repaired (which was a figure of the
spiritual temple:) So I pray it may please him also (in the peaceable days of
King James) to begin to repair the spiritual Temple) the Apostolic church
scattered and driven abroad into the wilderness of this world, Esa. 2.4. Ezra
4.7. Ha. 24.10
whose calling and gathering together, must be by the preaching of the word of
God, both to Jews and Gentiles, and not by the sword of the Kings of the earth,
as Antichrist's and his Ministers have now along time persuaded and prevailed,
whereby not only the Jews and infidels, but also papists and other false
Christians, are hindered and deprived from the knowledge of the Apostolic
faith. And it is to be noted that David might not build Gods Temple, because he
had spilt much blood, which shows, no blood ought to be spilt for the
building of the spiritual temple. 1. Chro. 28.3. Ergo peace in religion is a
good means to make a unity of religion among so many Christian sects.

Exodus 25.2. and 35.5. Act 2.40.41. Mat. 28
And it is well worthy consideration, that as in the time of the old Testament,
the lord would not have his offerings by constraint, but of every man whose
heart gave it freely: so now in time of the gospel he will not have the people
constrained, but as many as receive the word gladly, they are to be added to
the church by baptism: Mat. 16.16. Mat. 10.11 14.
and therefore Christ commanded his disciples to teach all nations, and baptize
them, that is, to preach the word of salvation to every creature of all sorts
of nations, that are worthy and willing to receive it: and such as shall willing
and gladly receive it, he has commanded to be baptized in the water, that is,
dipped for dead in the water; and therefore the Apostle says, Else what shall
they do, who are baptized for dead, 1 Cor. 15.19 Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12. Luke 8.37.
if the dead be not raised, why are they baptized for dead? And therefore he
says, we are buried then with him by baptism, etc. and it is to be well
observed, that when Christ would have preached the word of salvation to the
Gadarens, he did not compel them when they refused, but finding them unwilling
to receive him and his word, Luke 9.54.55.
he turned from them without hurting them: also when James and John saw that
some of the Samaritans refused Christ, they would have commanded fire from
heaven to consume them, as Elias did, but Christ rebuked them and said, Ye Know
no of what spirit are, for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives,
but to save them. By all which it may please his Majesty and Parliament, to
take knowledge that Christ will have none consumed with fire and sword, for not
hearing and not receiving his Word. And that (howsoever it has been the mind
of Antichrist to destroy men's lives for Religion, and therein have not spared
neither Prince no people) yet it is not the mind of Christ that Princes should
destroy their subjects, nor yet that Subjects should destroy their Princes for
difference in Religion.

And therefore why should Bishops persuade Princes and people, and why should
King, Prince and people be persuaded by their Bishops and Ministers to be
contrary minded to Christ? verily it is a notorious and plain token of a false
faith and discipline, that is defended by fire and sword, the power and
authority of Princes: And they cannot be Christ's Bishops and preachers, Christ's
Bps. will not be Lords ever the consciences.
that persuade Princes and peoples to such antichristian tyranny and cruelty.
And it is very evident that those Bishops and Ministers which give over men and
women to the Magistrate to be persuaded by persecution, do show clearly that
their doctrine is not good, and that they want the word and spirit of God, and
therefore flee to the Magistrates sword for the forcing of them to their faith
and discipline: and as the wine is not good which we are forced to drink; so
those doctrines are not good which we are forced to believe. But it may be by
this time all those Bishops (who unfainedly fear God, and truly love the King)
will haste and make speed to come unto his Majesty for pardon, acknowledging the
truth of this book, confessing their ignorance and arrogance, in the knowledge
of Gods word, and in compelling the people to hear the word preached; and for
imprisoning, burning, banishing and hanging for Religion, contrary to the mind
of Christ, and also for stopping the mouths of men, and burning their books,
that preach and write contrary to their minds and wills; yea, it may be they
will also confess and say, Oh most gracious King, we beseech your Majesty to
show us mercy, and to forgive us our spiritual pride and ambition, in that we
have thus long usurped the blasphemous titles of spiritual Lords and Lords
graces, the which titles, we now to the glory of God, and honor of the King,
The Bishop ^oe know in their consciences that this is true.

Job. 32.22. Phil 2.9.11


do with unfeigned hearts confess to be due, and belong only to Christ
himself: and that the name and title of spiritual Lord cannot belong to any
earthly creature, no not to the King or Emperor, because it is an heavenly name
and title, how much less can it belong, or be due unto us, your Majesty's
unworthy subjects and scholars? And for so much as we now understand (the Lord
be praised therefore) that the holy and heavenly name and divine title of
spiritual Lord is as much, yea as high and great as the name and title of a
spiritual God and also that it is a name above every name, which God the
Father has given unto Christ only to the end, that every knee should how unto
that only and heavenly name, and that every tongue should confess that Jesus
is the Messiah, the Lord, unto the glory of God the Father, that in all things
Christ might have the pre-eminence; for be alone is the head of the Church,
Col. 1.18.
which is his body: the which cannot be, so long as we, or any other Bishops
do hold and retain that divine, high, and superexcellent name and title of
spiritual Lord; because then it cannot be said that God has so highly exalted
him, as to give him a name above every name, seeing our names and titles are
also spiritual, and are called spiritual Lords so well as the son of God,
Jesus the messiah: the remembrance hereof, most gracious sovereign, do make us
to tremble before God and the King. The Bps. in titles equal to the son of
God.
And therefore we must earnestly desire your sacred Majesty and the whole
Parliament to discharge and release us of these fearful names and titles that
do only belong to the son of God, Jesus, the only spiritual Lord that God
has given unto his Church.

Note. Gods blessings i^ expected, unles these idols be rejected, who are
exalted above all earthly Gods.
Moreover, we do (according to the truth) acknowledge, that if we should any
longer retain these divine and high names of spiritual Lords and Lords graces,
we should therein be entitled, not only with a name equal to our Lord Jesus,
the only begotten son of God, but also we should be entitled with a name and
title above your right excellent Majesty, yea above all Emperors, Kings, and
Princes of the earth, the which alone we do acknowledge to be a sufficient
cause to put us down, and to deprive us of these usurped names and blasphemous
titles. Also we do confess that our pomp and state wherein we now live, is
more like the Bishops of the Catholic church of Antichrist, then any way like
the Bishops of the Apostolic Church of Christ, unto whom we acknowledge we
ought to be made like, and also to be qualified with the like gifts and graces
of the Spirit, or else in no case we can be meet Bishops for the Church of
Christ, as the Apostle plainly teaches both to Timothy and Titus, etc. 1 Timothy
3. Tith. 6.9.
And we must further acknowledge and confess, that our houses, households, and
revenues, are more fit and meet for Princes, Dukes, and Earls, then for the
Bishops of Christ. Wherefore (being moved and stirred up hereto by the fear of
God) we earnestly beseech your Majesty and Parliament also to disburden us of
this great pomp and state, and of our great and princelike houses, households
and revenues, that so we may be made equal and conformable to the ministers of
Christ, and then we shall have both hope and comfort of the world to come,
although but little in this, except your Majesty and Parliament do grant free
liberty of conscience, the which we now do also with the poor distressed
christians most humbly entreat and desire; and that for these four reasons:
First, because thereby the gospel of Christ will be set free and at liberty,
whereby all people both Jews and Gentiles will be gathered to the apostolic
faith, church and discipline. Secondly, because many of your Majesty's
subjects, both men and women (who now are forced to dissemble their Religion,
for fear of our persecution) will be released and set free from their
spiritual bondage and slavery, wherein we now do hold them against their
consciences, and so they will become more faitfull Christians to God, and more
loyal subjects to your Majesty then ever they were before, to the salvation of
their souls, and the safety of the Crown and State. Thirdly, because the poor
distressed Christians (how banished and dispersed out of their Fatherland, over
the face of the earth) will be redeemed from great misery and bondage, wherein
now (no doubt) they live and abide, because they will not be in bondage to any
other spiritual Lord or bead, then the Lord Jesus Messiah alone; whose faith
and discipline they desire only to learn and obey. Fourthly, because thereby
great benefit and commodity will redound both to your Majesty and to all your
subjects within your Highness dominions by the great commerce, in trade and
trafick both of Jews and all people, which now for want of liberty of
conscience, are forced and driven elsewhere: and also from the revenues and
livings which we and our Clergy do possess, and from the Courts and offices
we hold and keep greats profit and commodity will redound, both to your
Highness, and to all your kingdoms; we say, more profit and commodity then we
or any man is able to express. And therefore we also desire all his Majesty's
subjects has great and small in all love and fear of God, not to be offended,
or any way moved or grieved, Too great is the ods to use the sword against Gods
Word.
when they shall see such and formation of us, as that famous King Henry the
eight did make of our lordly brethren the Abbots and their Clergy. For indeed
such a reformation ought to come among us and our Clergy, seeing we are no way
agreeable to the new Testament, of the only spiritual Lord Jesus Messiah, but
are limbs and fellow members of that Antichristian and Romish church, which in
the scriptures is Prophesied to be abolished and destroyed Now therefore we
pray you all let not King David say, the sons of Zerviah are too strong for
him, for that will be unprofitable for you all. And for conclusion, we entreat
his Majesty and Parliament to enact, that as our adversaries come against us
only with the word of God, so we go against them only with the word of God,
and nor as we have done by civil authority, for so our selves may be forced to
dissemble: Thus it may be the Lord will persuade and work in the hearts of some
of the Bishops who will willingly resign their Antichristian titles and Popish
pomp and state, with their princelike houses and livings into the hands of the
King, without any compulsion or constraint. But if they do not, yet if it
please God to open the Kings heart to see their Antichristian and Idol estate,
and the danger and damage they cause both to the King, Prince, and people, they
will be compelled thereto even as their lordly brethren the Abbots in King
Henry's days were. The Bps. greater Idols then the Abbots, images, or golden
calf.
And howsoever it be not regarded, or perhaps not discerned, yet in the sight
of God and his people they are greater Idols then their lordly brethren the
Abbots: yea, greater Idols then the images of wood and stone (which that famous
and godly King Edward did pull down and destroy) for they did not imprison, nor
burn, nor hang, nor yet cause to be banished any of the Kings subjects, thus
would not worship them as these Idol-bishops do: and out of doubt, these
Bishops are greater Idols then the golden Calfe Airon made and offered unto,
for the Calf did not persecute nor vex such as did not acknowledge it for their
Lord, as the Bishops do: neither did the Calf reign and rule by force over the
consciences of the people, as these Idol-bishops do.

Besides, the Calf was set up in stead of Moses, who brought the people out of
Egypt, Ex. 32.1, 7. What greater idolatry then to obey other spiritual Lords
then the Lord Jesus?
and showed them the will of God; but these Bishops are set up in stead of
Christ, who have brought us out of the bondage of hell, and who shows us his
Fathers will in his new Testament, the which these Idol-bishops will not suffer
us to obey, but in stead thereof will force us to fall down, worship and obey
their father Antichrists will and old testament, which stinks in the nostrills
of all reformed strangers that hear thereof, as well as in ours that have taken
our flight from it. Therefore these spiritual lords and Idol-bishops, ought to
be pulled down and suppressed, 2 Kings 23 17.20
like the Abbots their lordly brethren, though not sacrificed unto the Lord in
Smithfield, as the godly King Josias sacrificed the Idol-priests of the high
places on the Altars thereof. And I do verily believe, that if free liberty of
conscience be granted, that the spiritual kingdom of these Idol-bishops, will
in time fall to the ground of it self, 1 Samuel 5.3.
as the Idol Dagon fell before the Ark: for through the knowledge of Gods word
will all godly people withdraw themselves in all peaceable and godly wife, from
the spiritual obedience of these spiritual Lords and Idol-bishops, and
quietly betake themselves unto the obedience of the only spiritual Lord Jesus
Messiah. But howsoever it be, I shall be contented therewith, and so I wish a^l
others, for we all ought to be content if we obtain liberty of conscience; and
therefore to give God praise continually, that has wrought so blessed a work
in the hearts of the King and Parliament, for whom, as the Scripture teaches,
we ought to make supplications, 1 Tit. 2.1.2
prayers, and intercessions, that they may come to the knowledge of the truth,
and that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty.
And unto whom we ought to give (by the law of God) all earthly honor, To.
13.1.7.
fear and reverence, and willingly to pay tribute and custom, tax and toll, so
much, and so often as it shall please his Majesty and Parliament to appoint and
gather by any officer or officers whatsoever. For whom also, and for the whole
commonwealth of all his kingdoms, we ought to be diligent and ready to hazard
and lay down not only our goods, but also our lives at all times and occasions.
For Christ has only set us free from all ecclesiastical laws and ordinances,
which himself has not commanded in his last will and testament: yea, from the
ecclesiastical laws and commandments of the old Testament, Col. 2.14. Heb.
8.23.
how much more has he set us free from the ecclesiastical laws and ordinances
of Antichrist? but he has not set us free from the moral and judicial law of
God, for that the King is bound to execute, and we are bound to obey: and for
want of the execution thereof, Deuteronomy 17.18 20
there are in our land many whores and whorekeepers, and many children
murdered, besides the death and undoing of many persons about whores. Wherefore
I humbly desire that the moral and judicial law of God may be practiced and
executed, of all degrees, both high and low, without respect of persons,
according to the mind of Christ: for the Lord will have that every man shall
love him above all, and his neighbor as himself, and Christ says, Luke 6.31.
As ye would that men should do to you, so do yet to them likewise.

Therefore as the King would not have his subjects to take away his life because
he is contrary to them in religion: so let not the King take away his subjects
lives, because they are contrary to the king in religion: and as you would not
that men should force you to a religion against your consciences, so do not you
force men to a religion against their consciences: and as it is the duty of
subjects to seek the conversion of their king and State by the word of God, and
not his and their destruction by fire and sword; So it is the duty of the King
and State, to seek the conversion of their Subjects by the word of God, and not
their destruction by fire and sword as the Pope and his Prelates do teach: Note
whose vassals therein both Emperors and Kings (as well as people) have been a
long time: both to the destruction of themselves and their subjects. For who
knows not that Prelates and priests have persuaded Subjects, to destroy their
Kings and Princes, as well as Kings and Princes to destroy their subjects? 1
Cor. 3.17 and 6.19.20
but I pray them both to take notice that the Scripture says he that
destroys the Temple of God, him will God destroy. Let not therefore Kings,
Princes, nor Subjects be any longer persuaded to destroy one another through
the subtletie of Bishops and their ministers, who (most of them) only seek
the security of their own pomp and glory, and the stablishment of their
spiritual thrones therein; for so long as they may confirm that, they pass not
who perish, whether King, Prince or people. Again therefore I humbly pray his
Majesty and Parliament, to repeal and make void all popish laws and canons,
and to see the moral and Judicial law of God, Frederick and John Palsgraves,
said that under pretext of the holy-ghosts office of correction little else was
sought then to reign over the consciences of the Magistrates and subjects like
as in the accursed popedom is come to pass etc.
both firmly enacted, and carefully practiced after the mind of Christ: and
them shall Christ's spiritual throne be stablished in the hearts and
consciences both of King, Prince, and People, so as the Church Christ's
spiritual Kingdom shall increase in the knowledge of faith, and obedience
thereof, with all love, peace and charity, one toward another. And the common
wealth of his Majesty's Kingdoms will flourish and prosper, and also his throne
be constantly stablished both to him and his Heirs throughout all his
Dominions, in a sure land of peace and love, the one with and toward another,
to the glory of God and the comfort of his Majesty and of all his Subjects, and
also to a famous and excellent glorious pattern of government, to all Kingdoms,
Nations, and Countries round about, as in the days of Solomon King of Israel.
For if the holy laws of Gods word be practiced and executed after Christ's
will, then shall neither King, Prince nor people be destroyed for difference in
Religion, then Treason and Rebellion, as well as burning, banishing, hanging,
or imprisoning, for difference in religion will cease and be laid down, then
shall not men, women, and youth be hanged for theft then shall not the poor
same, sick, and weak ones, be stocked and whipped, neither shall the poor,
stranger, fatherless, and windows be driven to beg from place to place,
neither shall the lame, sick, and weak persons suffer such misery and be
forsaken of their kindred, as now they be, then shall not murder, whoredom,
and adultery be bought out for money: then shall not the great defraud and
wrong the small, neither the rich oppress the poor by usury and little wages:
then shall not men bring up and inherit others children instead of their own,
neither shall an honest man be forced to live with a whore instead of an honest
wife, nor yet an honest woman be forced to live with a whorekeeper in stead of
an honest husband. Then shall not servants be forced from marriage by bonds, nor
yet be bound to servitude, longer then six years, neither shall they be brought
up contrary to covenant, nor posted from one quarter or one year to another
for their freedom and in the end be forced to buy it of their Masters, or else
to go without it too. Then shall neither Prince nor people be disinherited,
for not being of the Church: Note well.
neither shall they be held lawless persons, though excommunicated: neither
shall any man dare kill them as now they may, and be quit by law: neither shall
any man fear to have his mouth stopped for preaching the truth: then shall no
man need to flee out of his native Country and Fatherland, for persecution
sake: then shall all men live in peace under his own vine, Act. 15.28.29. and
21.25
lauding and praising God, honoring and obeying the King. Then also will no
blood be eaten among Christians, whereby the Jews should have just cause to
stumble or be offended, neither should any relics of the ceremonial law, (as
Tithes and offerings etc.) be any longer in use, whereby the Jews should be
hardened in their unbelief, Jews kept back from the faith by persecution.
and kept from the faith of the Messiah. Then shall the Jews inhabit and dwell
under his Majesty's Dominion, to the great profit of his Realms, and to their
furtherance in the faith: the which we are bound to seek in all love and
peace, so well as others, to our utmost endeavor, for Christ has commanded to
teach all nations etc. and they are the first. Lastly, then shall not so many
Men and Women be deceived by false Ministers, neither by their Sermons, nor yet
by their books, which are full fraighted with false doctrines, and confirmed
and countenanced, not only by the Kings authority and power, but also by
wresting and false interpreting of the Scriptures, and by alleging of popish
Fathers, which through the great ignorance of the people do greatly prevail:
btt then shall be abolished through the word and spirit of god (his two
witnesses) in the mouth of his servants, Rev. 11.3. and 19.10.
who by word and writing shall breed such knowledge, that none of wisdoms
children shall be deceived. Another reason, why so many good people are now
deceived, is, because we that have most truth are most persecuted; and
therefore most poor, whereby we are unable to write and print as we would
against the adversaries of the truth: it is hard to get our daily food with the
labors of our weak bodies and feeble hands, how then should we have to defray
other charges, and to write and print? I have through the help of god out of
his word, made a scourge of small cords, 2 Pet. 2.2.
wherewith Antichrist and his Ministers might be driven one of the Temple of
God. Also a declaration of certain false translations in the new Testament; but
I want wherewith to print and publish it, therefore it must rest til the Lord
see'th good to supply it. It is the kings honor to search out a thing Prove. 25.
Exodus 3.6.
In mean while, I humbly entreat his Majesty and Parliament to give me leave to
prove the Bishops with one question, by which you may perceive the ignorance of
your Bishops: it is this, how they will be able to prove a resurrection from
these words, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
Only from these words will they prove the resurrection, if they be the Bishops
of Christ; for he proved the resurrection from hence. Luke 20.27.
The question is hard I grant, but if their Lordships be not able to interpret
it according to the meaning of Christ (as I am sure they are not) then it will
be another cause very sufficient, for their deprivation from their Lordly and
idol offices, and princely livings. But because most men do wrest and
mis-interpret the Scriptures, some of wickedness, and some of ignorance, for
the utterance of their doctrines, and so deceive both Prince and people: I will
show how you shall perceive it, lest thereby you still be deceived Every
Scripture therefore mis-interpreted do make a contradiction: As for example M.
Johnson (one of the Preachers called Brownists) to prove Rome a true church
alleges 2 These. 2.4. where the Apostle shows, That the man of sin, and son
of perdition sits in the Temple of God; which words, Temple of God, he
interprets to be the church of God, whereby he does greatly err; for then
such interpretation will contradict this scripture which says, 1 Timothy 3.15
The Church of God is the pillar and ground of truth. But if the man of sin
sits there, Rev. 28.2. Rev. 18 4.
then it is a hold of foul spirits, a cage of every unclean and hateful bird,
as the Scripture speaks: yea, the pillar and ground of falsehood, and not of
truth: Neither would the Lord call his people out of her (as he does) if it
were the true Church. Rev. 12.13, 14.
Also, if the temple of God in that place be interpreted the church of God,
this foul absurdity and contradiction will follow, viz. that the Church (called
the woman) to whom were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly
into the wilderness from her persecutors, for a time, times, and half a time,
was not persecuted neither yet did sly into the wilderness so long a time.
Neither yet was the Church (called both woman and whore, Re. 17.1, 5.
also great Babylon, the mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth)
drunken with the blood of the saints, and of the martyrs of Jesus, as the
Scripture testifyeth.

Again, if that be the church of God, where the man of sin sits, then the
winepresse was not trodden without, but within the Church; and so it also
crosses this Scripture, which says, Rev. 14.20.
the winepress was trodden without the City, so that blood came out unto the
horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs, Ergo a
false interpretation. Moreover, we are not to understand the word Temple at all
times to mean the Church; for when Christ said, destroy this Temple, and in
three days I will raise it up again, did not mean the church, nor yet the
material Temple wherein he was, but meant his body, yet the Jews understood the
word Temple otherwise, even as Mr. Johnson, etc do here understand the word
Temple otherwise, then the bodies of peoples, multitudes, nations, Rev. 17.5.
and tongues, which they ought not to do.

Likewise Paul, when he said, If any man destroy the Temple of God, him will
God destroy; did not mean the Church, but the members of the Church. So when he
said, the man of sin sits in the Temple of God, he did not mean so much as
the members of the church, much less the church. Therefore it must be
understood, that all those in whom the man of sin sits, are called the
Temple of God, only in respect that the Lord has bought them, for the Lord
has bought all men, 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 John 2.2. 1 Cor. 6.19 20. and 7.23. Lev.
18.6.
even the false teachers that deny him. Therefore no man is his own in that
respect, but the Lords. Also the Bishops themselves (to prove brothers and
sisters children may marry) allege Lev. 18. But that Scripture do not prove
such marriages, but the full contrary for it says, none shall come near to any
of his kindred, to uncover shame. But brother and sisters children are
kinsfolks: Lev. 18.17.
therefore they may not come near to uncover shame, for that were wickedness.
This they must confess, or else prove that brother and sisters children are
not kinsfolks, which they cannot: seeing then, brother and sisters children
cannot call cozen, and so all cozenship is blotted out by their doctrine, for
uncles and Aunts call their brothers and sisters child, nephew and niece.

Thus many Bishops and preachers do deceive Kings, Princes and peoples by
wresting and misinterpreting the Scripture. Col. 2.8.1^
Therefore I earnestly desire your Majesty and Parliament to beware, lest there
be any man that spoil you, through Philosophy and vain deceit, through the
Traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the World, and not after
Christ. 1 Timothy 6.^ 20, 21.^
And to avoid profane and vain bablings and Antithesis, or opposition, falsely
called learning; which while some profess, they have erred concerning the
faith.

And now O King, Prince and Parliament, open your eyes, and listen your ears
unto compassion and mercy: 2 Cor. 5.10 Mat. 5.45. Ver. 21, 22. Lu. 18.7, 8. 2
These. 14.8 Jam. 1.5, 6. Mat. 12.36.
fear God and be like unto him, for he causes his sun to shine both on just
and unjust. Think at last you must give an account of your works: many at the
day of judgemnt will be ever burned for killing and burning innocent
Christians: but no man shall be damned for saving their lives; lean then I
humbly beseech you, on the right side of mercy, rather then yield unto such as
persuade to persecute innocent christians: for they cannot help you, when you
must give account thereof unto Christ, who advises you otherwise, although they
be such as err, how much more such as do but seem to err, and for difference
in religion ought you to save their lives and I do in all humility affirm, Man.
13.29.30, 39 Acts 17.31.
that those which advise you to pluck up and burn the tares, (which Christ
commands to be let alone till the end) do advise you to pluck up and burn the
commandment of Christ, unto whom assuredly (except amendment you shall give
account at the day appointed. Therefore believe not such as counsel you to shed
blood for judgment in religion: for if themselves should suffer the pain, they
would verily give you other counsel, be not then their executioners any
longer, for all that will live godly in Christ, 2 Timothy 3.12
shall suffer persecution, though you do your best to hinder it. And I pray to
remember, that to preach the gospel (after the mind of Christ) is to bring glad
tidings unto the people; but to burn, banish, hang and imprison for religion,
is not to bring glad (but woeful) tidings unto the people; Luke 2.10. Romans 1.16.
let it not therefore be any longer preached in your Majesty's dominions, I
meekly entreat, Though Paul plans, and Apollos water, 1 Cor. 3.6.
yet it as God that gives the increase. But your Bishops and Ministers will
have an increase whether God will or not, or else they will burn, banish, hang,
and imprison. Kings and Magistrates are Gods Ministers and not the Bishops;
therefore I humbly beseech you to withstand the bloody minds of your Bishops,
that there be no more innocent Christians persecuted to death for Religion. A
crying sin
I read that in the Netherlands above a hundred thousand persons have been put
to death for religion, but now praised be God we have no such woeful tidings
preached among us, the Lord work as much in our land I beseech him, that so you
may no longer burn and banish the servants of Christ; for he says, they that
do these things have not known the Father nor me: Joh. 16.3.
yet I confess you have the zeal of God, for you think you do God good service
in burning Christians that differ from your Religion. But I also confess your
zeal is not according to knowledge for your Bishops and Ministers being endued
with University and high school learning, To. 10.2, 3.
divinity and doctrine, but being ignorant of the lowly learning, heavenly
divinity and doctrine of Christ, have and do still go about to stablish their
own and have not yet submitted themselves to the lowly learning, divinity and
doctrine of Christ: and therefore like their predecessors, will persuade you to
burn, banish, etc. such Christians as they hold to be in error about doctrines
and questions of faith and Religion, right as if they had the power to rule,
govern and dispose the hearts and spirits of Kings, Princes and people, even as
they list, and also to make them good and righteous when they will, and to
cause them to understand and believe the gospel, even by a day and hour
appointed, which to do, belongs to God alone: and therefore Christ says,
John 6.44.
no man can come to me except the Father draw him, and Christ will have his
Ministers to preach to such as are worthy and willing, and not as your
Ministers, who come to them whom they hold unworthy, and find unwilling, and
say, Mat. 10.11, 24.
Will ye not come to church and hear, and will ye not believe our doctrine? but
we will make you, or else we will burn you for heretics. Thus will they taunt
meek and holy Christians who are torn like sheep among the wolves; but Christ's
ministers will with meeknes instruct such as are contrary minded, tolerating
the evil men patiently, proving if God at any time will give them repentance, 2
Tit. 2.25. Ioh. 13.35.
that they may know the truth: whereby they show plainly that they are Christ's
disciples, and have that true faith which works by love, even as the Apostle
says, the which I pray you to consider, that so you may both know and obey the
will of Christ. Now (says he) abides faith, hope and love, 1 Cor. 13.
but the chiefest of these is love; for where love is there is no disdain, it
seeks not her own things, it is not provoked to anger, it suffers all
things, it hops all things, it indureth al things. Yea, the love of Christ so
loves, that it will not vex nor persecute any that call on his name: therefore
I humbly pray you to remember them that are in bonds, as though ye were bound
with them; and them that are in affliction, as if ye were also afflicted in the
body; and to show them mercy, Heb. 13.3.
for mercy rejoices against judgment, but judgment merciless shall be to them
that show no mercy. If ye be friendly to your brethren only, what singular
thing do you? Iam. 2.13.
do not the sinners the same? be not like unto them, Luke 6.32, 37.
but unto your heavenly father whose wisdom, love and mercy, I beseech him to
grant you, that so you may come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved: and
that we your Majesty's faithful subjects, 1 Timothy 2.
may lead a peaceable and quiet life (even in our own nation) in all godliness
and honesty: Amen.

Now, them that are persecuted, 2 Pet. 4 12.
I exhort with the words of the Apostle Peter, Dearly beloved think it nor
strange concerning the fiery trial that is among you to prove you, as though
some strange thing were come unto you; but rejoice, in as much as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall appear, ye may be
glad and rejoice. If ye be railed upon for the name of Christ, blessed are ye,
for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, ^ Pet. 2.2.
which on their parts is evil spoken of, but on your part is glorified; but let
no man suffer as an evil does or as a murderer, or as a busy body in others
matters; but if one suffer as a Christian, Acts 24.14
let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in that behalf. For all the
martyrs of the Apostolic Church have suffered as evil doers, and as
heretics. For the time is that judgment must must begin at the house of God:
if it first begin at us (says the Apostle) what shall the end be of them that
obey not the gospel of God: and if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall
the ungodly and sinner appear? wherefore let them that suffer according to the
will of God, commit their souls unto him in weldoing, as unto a faithful
Creator.

Antichrist and his persecution shall be made low. ^ These. 2.4.
Read Esaias 2.2, 4, 11, 16.

He shall judge among the nations, and rebuke many people, they shall break
their sword into mattocks, and their spears into sithes: nations shall not lift
up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn to fight any more; the high
looks of man shall be humbled, and the loftiness of man shall be abased, and
the Lord only shall be exalted in that day: for the day of the Lord of hosts is
upon all the proud and haughty, and upon all that is exalted, and it shall be
made low.

Little David overcame great Goliath, yet not brought up in war: unlearned Peter
confuted the learned Priests, yet by calling a Fisherman. Attend and help, Gal.
6.6. 1 Cor. 9.7.
and you shall see the wonderful works of God; For the foolishness of God is
wiser then men, and the weakness of God is stronger then men: And God has
chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and things that
are despised has God chosen, to bring to naught things that are, 1 Cor. 1.25,
28.

Leonard Busher.

FINIS.

