AN OLD BRIDLE FOR A Wild Asse-Colt.

OR, The new mystery of iniquity unfolded, briefly discovering the Physiognomy
of a wanton youthful King. Carnal Reason, Who under the name of true Reason
bewitcheth, and deceives many unstable souls; for whose sakes is here
declared their cunning wiles, and slights; by which they do deceive, and draw
Disciples after them, to their own perpetual disgrace, if not destruction.

In a brief Commentary on the second of Peter, Chap. 2. Where the Apostle has
plainly prophesied of that sort of Antichristians, or false prophets, now
commonly known by the name of Ranters; whose unreasonable practices being only
named, and laid open to view, will be sufficient ground to reasonable men, to
desert their wicked ways, and societies, which they continue so infections and
disorderd.

Avoid them as an alluring Strumpet. Proverbs 5.8. Remove thy way far from her,
come not nigh the door of her house.

Rom 16. 18. They that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
Belly, and by good words, and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple.

By RAUNCE BURTHALL.

LONDON, Printed for Stephen Dagnall, Bookseller at Alsbury.

To the Reader.
Reader.
IT was a sad complaint of the Lord against Israel, Ezekiel, 2.7. and thou
shall speak my words unto them, whether they will forbear, For they are
Rebellion.

Whether the persons in this Treatise described may be thus Characterised,
consider for thy satisfaction the reason of Gods calling the Jsraelites by the
aforesaid name, viz. their refusing to hear, and obey tje word of the Lord,
and verily if ever people did thus offend, surely these that are the subject of
this discourse are not innocent, for has not the Lord spoken to these men by
that Law of nature, mentioned Romans the 2.14, 15? have they not conscience
accusing, or excusing? surely if they have not, it is because they have so long
sinned against their consciences, that they are become seared with an hot Jron,
1 Timothy 4.2.

2 Has not the Lord spoken to them by the Prophets, yea, by his Son; and do
they not refuse to hear while they say of his word, it is no Rule to them? did
Jsrael despise it more, 2 Chro. 36.16? or the stiff-necked in Acts 7.51. or
some among the Corinthians, in saying? that there is no Resurrection of the
dead, 1 Corinthians, 15.12? or Hymeneus and Philetus, in saying the Resurrection is
past already, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18? or the scoffers mentioned in the 2 of Peter 3.4,
5? in saying where is the promise of his coming, and that all things continne
as they were from the beginning of the creation? or these that walk in the lust
of uncleanness, despising government, 2 Per. 2.10? or the covetous, the proud,
the boasters, the false accusers, the incontinent, the fierce, the despisers of
those that are good, the lovers of pleasures, more then the lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3.2.3, 4. Certainly if the Jsraelites were called by the name of
rebellion, for refusing to hear the voice of the Lord in the Law and the
Prophets; then those that now refuse to hear his voice in the ^aw, the
Prophets, and in the Gospel of his Son, may justly be called by the same name
And as earthly governors do not endure rebels in their dominions, but do cast
them our by death or otherwise, no more will the Lord suffer these that despise
his Law, and yield no obedience to it, to enjoy any protection from him. Those
mine enemies that would not that I should Reign over them, bring hither and
slay them before me, Luke 19 27. Yea, he will come in flaming fire taking
vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel, 2 These. 1.8.

Reader let the consideration of this move thee to take compassion of those
that have brought themselves so near destruction, even as Christ did over the
City Jerusalem when he beheld it, and wept over it, Luke 19.41, 42. and if thou will enlarge that which is briefly declared in this following Treatise, thou
may happily be an Instrument of turning many so righteousness, which will be
well rewarded, even with everlasting Glory as bright as the Stars. Dan. 12.3.
Farewell.

sun and clouds (...)



IT has been the portion of Gods people, even in all ages, to be pestered
with false prophets, and that of diverse sorts, some of longer continuance, That
have acted like princes, carrying on their interest with great pomp, and
Applause, from the world: yea with such authority as if they were infallible,
and under the name of true prophets, have been all along true persecutors of
the people of God. But these I hope are near their tropicke, and their date
almost expired: for did their Arm of flesh, (the powers of the world) withdraw
their assistance from them, they could not long stand: for their whole strength
depending thereupon, it would spoil their interest. The true Church of Christ
has altogether her dependence on the spirit of Christ, to carry on her
design, although the earthly powers oppose them: but the carnal Church being
sufficiently instructed where her strengh lies, depends on the Arm of flesh as
her chiefest pillar whereon to work her design: but when that prop fails
her, the chiefest flower in her garden is gone.

A second sort of false Prophets, and whom I make the subject of this
discourse, are such that have been very eminent (at least some of them) very
beautiful and glorious professors of the gospel, so that in appearance to all
men (yea and to the Saints,) Christ was their end both in profession and
conversation. Why what is the matter is it not so still? I could heartily wish
and should much rejoice it were so. But alas they? are fallen, they are down,
they are bewitched, I had almost said doubly bewitched, with white, and black:
witness, their high and and eminent expressions, even to admiration, one
while: and in a moment curse and swear like Bedlams: Is this the spirit of
reformation? Is this restoring the creature from its fall, to its primitive
excellency, they pretend so indeed, but it appears otherwise: verily I cannot
otherwise believe, but that if God had sent them, to be reflorers, he would
have gone before them, and carried them out so, as they should have made better
proceedings; Christ says, all that ever came before me are the eves, and
Robbers. John 10.8, Exodus 33.15. Exodus 33.2.
And Moses was of the same mind, saying to God, if thou go not before us,
carry us not hence. Nay an Angel of Gods own sending, did not satisfy him,
and the people; except Gods own presence accompanied: Then take we heed these
Men deceive us not: who would make us believe, that they are some of those
Angels, spoken of in the Revelation, to go before us; truly I am full of
Christ's and Moses mind, I had rather have Gods own presence to go before us,
then be troubled with such Angels. For if he go before us, I am sure there
will be no cursing, nor swearing amongst us, but rather Hallelujahs, blessing
and praising God for such restitutions, Rev. 19.6.
saying, the Lord god omnipotent Reigns.

Yea but do these people indeed restore, as they say they do: why, what do
they restore, can they take off the curse from the earth, that it bring not
forth briers thorns: can they restore women from pains in Childbearing, can
they deliver the creatures, (as Beevs and muttons etc.) from being killed, Romans
8.
to be our food: and deliver them also from diverse other vanities they are
subjected under by God, for the time being. If they can, why then do they
suffer (Beeves and muttons etc.) or so much as a chicke to be killed for them
to partake off: Genesis 1.29.
why do they not live upon herbs only, nay do not these men plainly
declare their pride in making themselves wiser then God, in attempting to
overthrow that order his wisdom has set here below, until fallen man be
restored, which is far beyond their power to effect, though not beyond their
pride to attempt.

Object. But say they, we must restore as far as we can, and leave that which
we cannot do, to God himself.

Ans. I An. it is well they have some manners, But I should have judged better
of them and their manners also, had they with Moses taken God to go before
them.

Object. But say they, we are restored already, and now is the time, for we are
restored to such perfection that we cannot sin. And even as that vanity which
is upon the creatures came for man's sake, even so we being restored, the
creatures of right are restored.

An. Stay a little, one swallow makes not a Summer: it does not follow that all
men are restored, although it were true that they were, which is false.

But secondly I answer, if they would speak truly, 2 Pet. 2.22.
and in stead of restored say, they are returned so as Peter makes mention of,
namely, that the dog is returned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was
washed to her wallowing in the mire: then I shall believe their return: and
all that know them, will confess the same: or had they further dealt plainly
and said, that they had been restorers of that old sect called the Adamites,
the family of love, the old opinions of Simon Magus, and the Nicholaitans: I
should likewise have believed them: except only these may be supposed to be
somewhat wilder, and do somewhat outstrip those their predecessors, in
loosnesse, and profaneness: But because the Apostles, Peter and Jude, expressly
speak of such a kind of men as these are: let us hear a little their
descriptions: I shall speak only of some verses.

(...).
2. Peter 2.2. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom,
the way of truth shall be blasphemed.

Observe here, the Prophets are bad, and their ways are bad, the Prophets are
false, and their ways pernicious, its very dangerous following blind and false
guides, yet these false Prophets shall have many followers. The way of truth
suffers deeply by them, for it is evil spoken of, and blasphemed: now whether
our false Prophets blaspheme the way of truth or not, that so we may not wrong
them, consider. If you speak to them of the scriptures: 1 Concerning the
Scriptures.
they will tell you, they would not so much as make use of them: but because of
you to whom they speak, they are above them, and beyond them, but where I know
not, nor themselves neither: but I am sure that they are without them, and
their testimony. Again, if you speak of Religion, 2 Concerning Religion.
and holiness, they will tell you, their work is to drive men out of
religion, and holiness, and their way to effect it, is by swearing and
cursing: but whither drive they? verily I know not; except to the Devil, their
now intimate companion, for he that we call the devil, is become their God,
and they are not afraid to tell you, that they had as liefe to keep company
with the devell as with God: but in conclusion on they will tell you, there is
no devil at all. Speak to them of preaching, 3 Concerning preaching.
or holding forth the truth, they will tell you, that the greatest preachers,
are the greatest deluders: but they must except themselves, for they are the
greatest deluders of all, which appears thus: those men that allow of preaching
do ingeniously acknowledge it a means in subordination to the spirit of God,
administering good to the hearers: but contrariwise these men deny preaching,
and yet practice that which is equivalent, in their occasional meetings:
namely, they communncate one to another both by word, and writing, and like men
infected with the plague, they catch the disease one of another: I mean their
corrupt opinions and practices: and yet not withstanding, you must believe if
you can, that it is all from the spirit, immediately, without means, all means
are below their sphere, they are above all means, and truth too: now is not
this a pretty Juggling? are not these the most notorious deceivers? but I would
seriously demand of these men, whether they never enjoyed any living influences
from God, in the use of means: namely gospel duties, and spiritual
exercises, or did God never ordain any forms, or means or have they
dissembled all this while, and now only come to a right posture; if it be so
that they are above and beyond all formal enjoyments, insomuch as forms are
useless; then let them know they must not so much as speak together
concerning And if men may not by speaking communicate about Religion, then why
did God give men gifts for that purpose, considering God gives nothing in vain.
God, and Religion: for its formal, whatsoever they do: and all this while
they have dissembled and cosened others: but themselves most: but however these
delude themselves, true believers have and do know the joyful sound, in
forms and means, waiting on God, till higher enjoyments come. But where do we
find, any one instance of Prophet, Apostle, or Saint, that did ever curse and
swear men out of their Religion, and forms: the Gospel saints did not so to
the Jews, and their forms: Psalm. 89.15.
but rather buried with honor those honorable corpses, and were abundant in
condescentions of love to the weak brethren, even after God had left those
forms, and their date was expired.

Verse 10. they despise government: etc. They knowing that fear of law, and
freedom to sin; 2 Pet. 2.10.
cannot stand together, do therefore despise the laws of men: that so they
might the better without control, accomplish their lusts: therefore to evade
that, they labor to make men believe, that the law, by which all men should
now be guided, is within all men, which law they call, reason, and also their
King: but when I consider what a Lord of misrule their King is: among
themselves, men must be very wary, of voting up this King, into the throne. 1
Pet. 2.13, 14, 15.
I rather incline to Gods counsel, which Peter exhorts to, promoting a visible
lawful government among men, during the time appointed by God; then submit to
their invisible, presumptuous, and selfe-will'd King, 2 Pet. 2.10.
until their young king Reason, obtaines a riper Judgment, and his subjects a
more rational and civil deportment. And shall also earnestly desire, they may
never have, Jude 8.
any filthy dreams, or visions, tending that way: for it is a sure tenent, that
a good outward government, constituted, with good and wholesome laws, was
never esteemed by Godly men obnoxious, or a burden, and bondage to any, but to
evil men.

Verse 13. And shall receive the reward of unrighteousness etc. they say there
is, no unrighteousness: but in our conceits; and consequently no such thing to
be rewarded: I suppose they would have it so; but John's opinion, and theirs,
differs; he says, If we say we have no sin, 1 Ioh. 1.8.10.
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, and we make him a liar, for
saying so of us, if it be not so: but the truth is our unrighteous actions
declare plainly, that we neither have seen him, nor known him, 1 Job. 3.6.
(namely Christ Jesus) therefore they are strange Children, that can sin,
because grace has abounded, and that it may abound the more, such are grown
very skil-ful, they have learned how to answer Paul's Interrogatories, how shall
we that are dead to sin live any longer therein? It is true indeed in a
ceremonial consideration, that has been sin heretofore, which is not sin
now, but it is far otherwise upon a moral account, for even now, in the time
of the gospel, we are under the law to Christ; 1 Cor. 9.21.
now where a law is, there is a possibility of trangression.

Verse 13. Yea but are these so unreasonable as to riot in the day time, and
count it pleasure so to do: I could wish they had not left me without Apology
for them, in that behalf they have even almost (if not altogether) cast off
all shame, its a trouble to them, to think of being ashamed: to abstain from
all appearance of evil, is to much niceness with them, their Stomachs are
not so queasie, their work is chiefly to offend men, touching Religion, and
except they make evil to appear openly, their work goes not kindly on:
therefore they will drink, and tipple and swear like mad, and that you may
know they account it pleasure, they will sing merrily, their amorous ditties:
how ever it has happened so it is come to pass, that there are diverse of
Balaams Asses amongst us, that have for some time been Ridden and burdened
with such balamitish Prophets: but I hope ere long, God will open the mouth of
these Asses, to speak with man's voice, (namely reason to forbid the madness of
these Prophets.) Now what spots and blemishes these are to all moderate, and
sober minded men, Verse 13.
to feast or keep company withal: I leave to any man to Judge, that has not
lost, and buried, his Reason amongst them.

Now how they sport themselves with their own deceivings they do it thus:
they will look upon you earnestly, and say: I made thee etc. But upon your
denial to make their words true they will say, ( I am made thee: I can upon
sufficient proof, make good what I charge them withal.
) Again they will say by Gods blood thou art redeemed, And by God I will do
so, or so, then if you dislike their speakings, as I know not who can like
them, but themselves, considering their manner of the expressions, namely in the
form and manner of an oath, then they would salve it thus, saying, are ye not
redeemed, by the blood of God: and must I not do all by Gods help: and thus
they turn many precious truths, into oaths and Riddles: and make a Jest of
them: Verse 13.
and so sport themselves with their own deceivings. And is not this fine hocus
pocus, you know a liar has ever more a purpose to deceive, and these do the
same, by their own confessions: But if they would thus salve their swearing,
and would not have us think they swear, then why do they labor to defend
swearing, by quoting diverse places of scripture, to maintain it? Now seeing
they Apologize one while, that it might not seem swearing, and another while
maintain the lawfulness of swearing, they are plain deluders, they agree
with the truth like harp and harrow.

Verse 14. Having eyes full of Adultery: now concerning bodily Adultery: that's
become a strange thing, they will acknowledge none but spiritual adultery:
they are so confirmed in their opinion that way, that they make that their
hackney to lead on to the other, which they call no Adultery. But what, is
Marrying become Null? Are those nearest relations ceased? Its very strange that
Christ was no better instructed, then to publish doctrines that were to have no
longer continnuance: did he make that near relation of husband and wife to
hold forth the near conjunction, and relation betwixt the Church and himself:
and the love of the one the love of the other, with many other mutual
respects: Ephesians. 5.23, 24, 25.
and are they now ceased? Old Tertullian could say, and that rightly, of
nothing, there is no metaphor: Now if there be no reality in such relations,
Christ must come again, and teach us truer doctrine, if he will have us believe
him; but we need not wonder at their nullifying gospeldoctrines; for by this it
appears plainly, that they nullify natures law, and go beyond Adams ruins, to
pretend repair, where was no decay: therefore let these repairers know, if
they are not wilfully blind, that marriage was instituted, Genesis 2.21, 22, 23,
24.
in P^^adise, before man's fall: And so it is not a law that belongs to man's
fallen estate, but also to his estate in innocence; to confirm this the
Prophet Malachy brings in a Reason, founded upon the Creation, declaring
wherefore God made but one woman, for one man, although God had the residue of
the Spirit, Mal. 2.15.
and could have made more, had it been agreeable to his divine will; the reason
says Malachi was, that he might seek a Godly seed, and not a bastardly,
illegitimate brood, which must needs have followed, and now would also, if
either Simon Magus, or Nicholas his opinion should take place, as these their
successors, would have it. Does not the Apostle Paul, expressly call forbidding
to Marry a doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1.3.
so that it plainly appears, that the devil and not God, taught these seducing
spirits this doctrine? Has not God plainly stamped this in nature? does not
the bird choose his mate, and both together bring up their young? Historians
write strange things, concerning the swan, in case of wrong that way.

Objection Mat. 22.30 In the resurrection men neither marry nor are given in
marriage, but are as the Angels of God: from this place they would conclude,
that this resurrection is now, and so there is now no right of marrying, or
giving in Marryage.

Answer. I desire them, first, to Consider their predecessors, the Sadduces,
that first framed this objection: and their end in so doing, which was to
overthrow the resurrection of the body: so that the resurrection of the soul
in the state of grace, here cannot be meant, neither speaks he of such a state
of men and women, that had not first died the natural death, but of those
seven men and that one woman, that were dead and buried, saying whose wife
shall she be of the seven, for all seven had her to wife? Now such as the death
spoken of here is, such is the resurrection, that stands in opposition: which
is plainly that of the body. And whereas it is fu^ther said, they are as the
Angels of God, it is evidently known that Angels do not procreat; then let
them cease to break of Relations during the time of procreation, except they
are ceased to be reasonable men.

Verse 14. And cannot cease to sin. I know not well how they should cease to
sin, when themselves would be lawless, for they making good and evil, God
and the devil all one, what cessation from sin can be expected? Therefore the
Prophet Malachi again, has has this additionall description of them: saying,
ye have wearied the Lord, with your words, yet ye say, Mal^ 2.17.
wherein have we wearied him? He Answers them thus, when ye say, every one that
does evil, is good, in the sight of the Lord, and he delights in them, mark
here how they delude themselves, although they act sin and wickedness, they
think God accounts them good, and delights in them too: Oh what a blinding
sin is this breaking of Relations: which Malachi taxes them of here, I will
close this with Asaphs words, says God: these things have thou done, and I
kept silence, thou thoughtest that I was altogether Some of them stick not to
say that Christ was a Ranter. 2 Pet. 2.18.
such an one as thy self; Psalm. 50, 51.
but I will reprove thee, and set thy sins in order, before thine eyes.

Verse 14. beguileing unstable souls. Mark well what people are misled by
them, they are unstable souls, such as were newly out of the shell, of a
carnal state, a little escaped from them, who live in error: as Peter speaks
they are silly people, that are so led, but most silly to continue long so led;
for when once the depth of their wicked ways, is perceived by an ingenious
spirit: he cannot but forsake both them and their ways: except he be willing
to bury his reason, and become a wicked man, and a fool both at once.

Verse 14. An heart they have exercised with Covetous practices, one would
think this could not touch them at all: for they account nothing their own,
but all things common: but if you were but a little acquainted with them, as
some are: to their cost. You should find that to be but their devellish cunning
namly: to teach you to account nothing They say propriety is a devil, but
whether it be a devilish speech, yea, or no, consider these places of
Scripture. 1 Timothy 5.8. Act. 5.4. 2 Cor. 12.14. 2 These. 3.7. to 12. Acts 20.33,
34, 35. 2 Cor. 11.8.9. With many more.
yours: that so they might with this Engine in a very short space deprive you
of all you have. Oh what quick returns have they in their journeyes, to such
places, and houses, where their lanck bellies, and purses, are made Plump,
they, make hay while the sun shines: for fear least their beguiled Asses,
and Mul^s, should throw off their burden, too soon.

Verse 17 Wells without water. They would have you think them deeply learned,
in divine mysteries, when as its but the mystery of iniquity: new guilt over,
even their white witchery, (called the deepnesse of satan in the Revelation)
which can never salve the wounds their black witchery makes, namely their
Cursings, Swearings, Riotings, etc. they make show of waters indeed because
they are styled wells, but if you assay and let down your bucket, Prove. 20.5.
like a man of understanding as Solomon speaks of, (where counsel in the heart
of man, is likned to deep waters,) and by As the Queen of Sheba proved
Solomon's wisdom and parts.
wise and prudent questions gage their depth: there will come up nothing but
dirt and stones; there is no waters to refresh you, but mudde to Choke you.

Jude Verse 13. He there calls them wandering stars. This holds forth their
Phisiognomy, as clearly as a Father does the child's that is like him, no Limner
can draw shape so near his pattern, if you come to a beggar, and ask him
where he dwelles, he will say he has small dwelling, whereas when you have
well examined the matter he has the largest dwelling of all for he dwells every
where, so these wandering unfixed stars, as they are like, so they are the
boldest of all, beggars; for where ever they come they are at home still; it is
all common where they graze: now ye know wandering stars, are bad guides, to
seamen, and travelers: only the fixed stars, are serviceable to men, even
to such men that stay at home, in their callings, like fixed stars; and are
not inordinate bussie-bodies, but do with quietness work and eat there one
bread, are profitable to themselves, and others: but these wandering stars; are
useless both at home and abroad, they shine, deceitfully. They guide falsely,
but devour truly, all that trust them, both in their souls and bodies, but as
wandering stars, blaze, and instantly vanish and appear no more, so will
these go out ere long, like the snuff of a candle.

Verse 18. They speak great swelling words of vanity etc. Observe here, they
are but words, they are not true enjoyments, their words are great, and
swelling they break over all former bounds, and limits, both of nature, and
Religion: they are all spirit, full of visions, and revelation on they are rapt
up into the third heaven. Higher then Paul was, but with this difference, Paul
heard things unutterable, but these have great utterance for their wares, with
strong lines and high expressions, even to amazement; Mat. 24.5.11.24.
but our Apostle Peter here leads us out of that maze, stiling them, swelling
words of vanity. These are they, They openly acknowledge themselves to be
Christ.
spoken of by Christ himself, saying many shall come in my name, saying, I am
Christ and shall deceive many, yea if it were possible, they shall deceive the
very elect, they are very cunning; therefore take heed, you poor deluded
souls, look well to your standing, look how you are bottomed, and principled,
for if your Religion come from no higher rise then man, these cunning men will
rob you of it, for they profess it to be the very end, and scope, of their
message: they will curse and swear you out of all, and leave you as void of
Religion, as themselves, even no more Religion then a wild Bull. And alas poor
souls, even these deluders themselves, are Retrograde, even gone back many
degrees, below the first heaven, and so have created trouble, and vexation to
themselves: they must for all their proud looks, Heb. 6.1.
come to their ABC. again even the beginnings of the Doctrine of Christ: And
lay again the foundation of repentance, from dead works, and of faith toward
God, and be glad they speed no worse.

Verse 19. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of
corruption etc. The wits of men and Angels contracted, and united into one;
could not possibly invent so many evident, and clear descriptions of these
wild Kine. These are the true libertines, the scripture makes mention off, and
opposes, although it has too long been, the portion of the truly Godly, to
undergo that reproach: let therefore, Godly men, have their white Robes
restored, and given to them, (viz.) let their innocence, be restored, by those,
who have formerly taken it from them; and let the saddle be laid upon the right
Horse; time, and action, has made manifest who they are; even those that have
turned spiritual liberty into carnal, and themselves out of all Religion into
beastiality. But what fools, or rather mad men are these, that dare undertake
to promise others liberty; when they themselves, are such fettered slaves, and
Goale^ birds? Nay, their God, (the devil I mean,) is kept fast in
everlstaingChaines, under darkness; unto the judgment of the great day; and
how then can these his Subjects promise others freedom, and their Master
Chained up?

Object. We aknowledge only one power; and so there is no devil.

Ans. We acknowledge likewise but one omnipotent, eternal power, in whom, all
finite, created existencies live, and move, and have their beings; we confess
all action, as it is action, (even in devils) is of God, and so it is good; but
how can this free either devils, or men, that are subjected, under a Law; for
their actions, must not be mere actions, but regular, according to Law. Now in
respect of God, all is good that is acted, or can be acted, by men or devils;
yet the same action that is good, in, respect of God, may be very evil and
wicked, in respect of men, and devils; because the Laws rectitude was not
observed, but violated; witness, the words of Peter, and John; both Herod, and
Pontitus Pilate, Acts 4.27, 28. A like instance 2 Samuel 11,12. Here God acts,
and man acts; the one well, the other ill, in the same work.
etc. Were gathered together for to do whatsoever thy hand, and thy Counsel
determined before to be done; yet what good was in Iud^^ in betraying; and
Herod, and the rest, in putting Christ to death; except their end, and scope,
had been one and the same, with Gods own will and power acting? it is true, the
work which they did was very good, but not as done by them; but only in
respect of him, who brings good out of evil; so that all the good that was in
it, is Gods; all the evil attending it, is theirs; and what else was that but
their covetousness, malice, and envy, that set them to work, to do all they
did. Thus we see it is very plain, that there is one holy power, acting nothing
but good, and a corrupt power as devils and wicked men, acting nothing but
evil, such as these carnal libertines are (with whom I contest;) and whose
seducing ways, I admonish all to beware off, that are not willing to be
blinded, and to live in fellowship with the devil; and as it is most true,
that Antichristians are least sensible what Antichristianisme is, even so these
men's frequent employment, and communion with the devil, has so infatuated and
benumed their senses, that they falsely conceit and conclude, there is no
devil, although they are his vassels to do his will at every beck. Again, I
say beware of these spirit mongers; that their fair pretenses, beguile you not;
as I have heard many young people and children, have been in London; by men
called spirits, who cunningly, by fair pretenses and promises. steal them
away, and sell them for slaves; never dream ye that these men can bring you to
freedom, when themselves are so deep over head and ears in bondage; remember
Peter's excellent reason, 2 Pet. 2. v. 19.
(viz.) For of whom a man is overcome, of the same is be brought in bondage. I
shall by way of Caution, shut up all with two Places of Scripture. 1 Pet. 2.21.
First, that of Peter, it had been better for them not to have known the way
of righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
Commandment delivered unto them: The other place is Christ's own words, and
miserable doom, upon Revolters; Mat. 12.43, 44, 45.
when the unclean spirit is gone out of a man; he walks through dry places,
seeking rest, and finds none; then he says, I will return into my house,
from whence I came out; and when he is come, he finds it empty, swept, and
garnished: then goes he and takes with himself, seven other spirits, more
wicked then himself; and they enter in and dwell there; and the last estate of
that man, is worse then the first; even so shall it be unto this wicked
generation.

FINIS.

