A DIVINE TRAGEDY LATELY ACTED, OR, A Collection of sundry memorable examples
of Gods judgments upon Sabbath Breakers, and other like Libertines, in their
unlawful Sports, happening within the Realm of England, in the compass only
of few years last past, since the Book was published, worthy to be known and
considered of all men, especially such, who are guilty of the sin or
Archpatrons thereof.

By that worthy Divine Mr. Henry Burton.



Printed in the year 1641.

(...) many thousand years past, yet they remain still fresh upon record, as
done but yesterday, even for this very end, that they might be examples unto
us, not to lust after evil things as they lusted, nor to trace the footsteps
of their sinful ways, lest we should incur the self same exemplarie
punishments as they sustained. 1. Cor. 10. 5. to 12. And as God himself, so
holy men of God in all ages, following his example, have carefully ob^^^ed, and
registered to posterity the special most remarkable judgments of God upon
obstinate sins and sinners of all sorts, (with which not only Ecclesiastical,
but even profane stories are fully fraught) happened in the ages, and the
places wherein they lived: many whereof Mr. Jo. Fox in his Acts and Monuments,
near the end. Mr. Raynolds in his Treatise concerning the miraculous discovery
and punishments of murders and Murderers. Dr. Thomas Beard in his Theater of
Gods, judgments, with sundry others, have collected and digested into entire
Tractates, the very reading and serious perusal whereof, would no doubt daunt
the most professed Atheist, and reclaim the most incorrigible sinner I
therefore desiring to tread in their pious footsteps, having received from good
intelligence many memorable presidents of Gods avenging justice upon
Sabbath Breakers; and the prophaners of Sacred times devoted to his service,
happening within the compass of our little Island within two years space, (since
the publication of the Declaration for Sports and Pastimes after Evening Prayer
on the Lords day, in Parish Churches by diverse Nullam habet spem salutis aeger
quam ad intemperantiam Meditus hortatur. Senec.
Ministers has set open the floodgates to this presumptuous sin of
Sabbath-breaking; thought it a part of my bounden duty to preserve and
propagate their memory both for the honor of Gods truth and justice; the
vindication of the entire sanctification of his sacred day, (which he has
visibly pleaded for from heaven, since men have been audaciously profane, See
the Doctrine of the Sabbath; The History of the Sabbath: the Treatise of the
Sabbath Day, and Discourse of the Sabbath lately printed: which though they
condemn the very name of Sabbath, as Jewish, yet they are all characterised
with that name and title.
as to plead, and I would I could not say to write and preach against it upon
earth) the clearing of those Ministers innocence, who now unjustly suffer
through the malice of ungodly persecuters, and raging Prelates, for refusing to
join with others in spurring on the people to the greedy pursuit of this
crying dangerous sin, to the ruin of their souls, their bodies, and shame of
our Religion, and the monition of this present, and all future ages, to beware
of this so dangerous a transgression. How God has punished this very sin in
former ages, in such who have either by dancing, Sports, Pastimes, or
unnecessarie Labors and travels profaned his Sacred day, I mean not to
record: he that lists may read store of such examples regist^ed to his hands
in the Council of Paris, under Lewis and Lotharius, anno 829. lib. 1. ca. 50.
(which relates in general; That many present in this Council were
eyewitnesses, and others of them had it by relation, that some men upon the
Lords day being about their husbandry, have been slain with Thunder, some
punished with the contraction of their joints and sins, some even with visible
fire have had their bodies and bones burnt up in a moment, and suddenly
resolved into ashes, and that many other terrible examples of like nature has
happened and did fall out daily. By which it was declared, that God is much
offended with the dishonor of so great a Day;) Petrus Plessensis in Latinia
major Sermo 20. In Matthew Paris, Historia Major Anno 1200. p. 194. in Roger
Hovenden, anno 1200. p. 122. In Matthew Westminster. Flores Historiarum: Ann.
1200. In Vincentius Belvacensis, Speculum Morale li. 3. pr 9. Distinctio 9. of
dances, In the flower of the Commandments, printed in the beginning of King
Hen. 8. fol. 159. to 163. In Henricus Gran. Distinct. 9. Exemp. 51. in the
Magdeburge Centuries Centurie. 12. ca 6. In Dr. Bownde his doctrine of the
Sabbath, Edition 2. p. 252. to 263. the first book: in Mr. John Field his
declaration of Gods judgments at Paris garden: in Mr. Philip Stubs his
Anatomy of abuses, p. 185. in the Practice of Piety: 429. to 434. and Dr.
Beard his Theater of Gods Judgments. All which have registered sundry notable
judgments of God upon sundry Sabbath Breakers (which have presumed to dance,
work, or travel, on the Lords holy day) of purpose to show the danger of
profaning holy times, and to deter men from this common sin, for which so many
have smarted from heaven in an exemplarie manner. I shall therefore confine my
self only to such domestic examples, as have fallen out in sundry corners of
this our Realm within these two years, of purpose to refute the 2 Pet. 2. 16.
madness of those Prophets, who in the Press and Pulpit; and the
profaneness of those people, who in their dancing-greens, and may pole
arbors, have been so audacious, as to affirm, the Profanation of the Lords day
by Maygames, Dances, Maypoles, Wakes, and common Labor out of time of Divine
Service, (especially after Evening Prayer) to be no sin at all against the
fourth Commandment, or any other Law of God or man; but See the History,
Treatise, Discourse, and Doctrine of the Sabbath accordingly, and Sunday no
Sabbath.
necessary and commendable point of true Christian Liberty (they should have
said of carnal and heathenish licentiousness rather) from which the people
must not be debarred; But let these blind guides, and Libertines learn from
these examples, to correct this their erroneous judgment, and practice; for
fear the Lord make them the next examples in this kind, to teach others to
keep his Sabbaths better, and more entirely for the future. And if these
tragical spectacles of Divine justice will not persuade them, that such
profaning of the Lords most sacred day is a sin, yea and a crying sin too, as
all our writers (yea and our Prelates generally, till now of late have
unanimously defined, and the whole State in Parliament in 1. Car. c 1. 3 Car.
c. 1.
two late famous Statutes and 1. 27. H. 6. 5. 5. and 6. E. 6. c. 3.
two more ancient Acts, to omit our Of the Time and Place of Prayer. part. 1.
Of Disobedience and unlawful Rebellion. part. 3. p. 292. 293.
Homilies, The Prayer after the 4. and 10 Commandment.
Common Prayer Book, Canon. 13. 163.
Canons, Article 35. of Ireland 56.
Articles, and Queen Eliz. In un^r. 20.
Injunctions, which conclude the same) I say have adjudged such a presumptuous
transgression, as will draw down Gods vengeance on men's heads; Our late
Sovereign King James of happy memory, and our present gracious Sovereign Lord
K. Charles with all the Prelates, Clergy, and people of the Realm in the first
years of both their Reigns, in the several Books of Common Prayer, and order
for the public fasts set out by their royal authorities, and the Bishops
advice, with the consent and hearty desire of the whole Realm for the abating
aversion, and ceasing of those dreadful Plagues which then swallowed up many
thousands of people every week will inform them; That among other sins, The
profaning of the Sabbath (so King James his Book styles the Sunday) and not
keeping holy the Lords day, was one chief cause why those two great terrible
Plagues (and why not also this great Plague which is now begun and spread much
abroad) brake in upon us; to the destruction not of some few particular
persons, but of many thousands, and the punishment of the whole Realm, and
Nation in general. And because some of these men plead most falsely, that the
chiefest writers of the reformed Churches are of their opinion, Homil. 162. in
Matthew. fol. 308. Hom. 28. in Mar. f. 35. Hom. 56. in Lu. f. 141. Hom. 36. in
Joan. f. 77. Hom. 88. in Act.
Mr. Kodolphus Gualter, and Comment. in Matthew. 12. and 14. p. 376. 423. in Joa;
7. f. 293.
Wolfgangus Musculus (men of principal note and learning among them) will both
assure them, that the Lords day is not only wholly, only, and entirely to be
spent in religious public and private duties of Gods worship, and that
dancing, sports, and pastimes, on it, are sinful, and execrable; (the constant
judgment of all foreign Protestant Divines whatsoever, as I am able to
prove; what ever History of the Sabbath. ^^. 1. 2. ^. 6. (...) 9 10.
Dr. Helyn or D. Pooklinton, Sunday, no Sabbath, p. 8.
others have rashly averred to the contrary; But likewise further inform them;
That God may justly revenge the great contempt of his Deity in profaning his
Sacred day with dances and such like Revels and disorders: With horrible
punishments, neither is it to be doubted (says Mr. Gualther) that the
profanation of the Lords day, is not the least cause of the evils and
calamities of our age. Yea their own most illustrious Cardinal Robert
Bellarmine (whom they almost deifie when they do but name him:) is so far a
Puritan in this particular, that he not only spends Concio 6. 9 19, 20. 2^.
four or five whole Sermons against dancing, mummeries, masks, and such like
Bacchanals, (which he simply condemns at all times, but especially on sacred
festivals and Lords days as most detestable prophanations of them;) but
likewise professes; that the practice of them upon sacred times, was the
occasion of all the public calamities and judgments which they suffered. But
by these Dances, Mummeries, Bacchanels, and disorders (says he) we pollute the
holy days of the Lord: and yet nevertheless we do inquire the reasons why God
does punish us? why we are slain in our very houses? do not the Scriptures cry
aloud, Sin makes a people miserable: And there is no evil in the City, which
the Lord has not done. Therefore these our sins of profaning the holy days
of the Lord with dances, revels and bacchanals, have procured us famine, and
pover, y and pestilence, and sedition, and all plagues and scourges. And verily
(says he) in another Sermon, I vehemently fear, that if we proceed to
celebrate the Bacchanals with mummeries, and masks, and dances, as we do at
other times, and to provoke God to wrath, with so many wicked pastimes, our sin
will be grown to the full at last, and the anger of the Lord be so far
incensed, that he will utterly destroy us, as we see he has destroyed many
nations, for what I pray has destroyed Grecia, but even that very thing which
we do? They were men exceedingly given to drunkenness, feasting and dancing,
(and that upon sacred times) as may be known, by the Orations of Basil, and
Chrysostom. But what has God done? because they were addicted to these
things, and especially to Dancing, he has imposed such a severe tyrant (to wit
the Turk) upon their necks, that they now groan under the yoke, and are
pressed with so heavy a burden, that they have neither Time nor Will to Dance
or Caper. Thus Bellarmine to his great admirers shame and refutation. If then
this sin of profaning the Lords day, by dancing, Maygames, Ales, Pastimes, or
unnecessary travel and labor, draw down Gods Plagues and vengeance upon whole
Kingdoms and Churches, as these authors, (together with Mr. John Field, in his
declaration of the judgment of God, at Paris Garden; and Humphrey Robarts in
his complaint for the Reformation of diverse vain, and wicked abused exercises,
practiced on the Sabbath day, which tend to the hindrance of the Gospel, and
increase of many abominable vices: printed by Richard Jones, London 1580.
together with Mr. Philip Stubs, in his Anatomy of abuses, and M. John
Northrook in his Treatise where in Dicing, Dancing, vain plays and Enter
ludes, with other idle Pastimes and exercises commonly used on the Sabbath day,
are by the Word of God, and ancient Writers reproved, printed for George
Bishop. London, 1579.) most punctually testify: and the Practice of Piety
dedicated to his Majesty, and 39. times printed by public authority resolves:
no wonder if it has lately caused God to unsheath his sword of exemplarie
justice upon these particular persons, (that I speak not of the whole kingdom
in general now scourged with a fresh plague and lately a draught) whose
tragical examples I here present unto your view, to deter all others from
this sin. It is a true saying of Cyprian, Praebentur cunctis Exempla, cum
fuerint quibusdam irrogata Supplicia. The Divine punishments of a few, are
warnings to all: God grant that these may be so to us. He faith the same
Father) is over audacious, who strives to pass over there, where he has seen
another to have fallen; he is patragiously head strong, who is not struck with
fear, when he beholds another perish in that course, which he is running; he
only is a lover of his own safety, who takes warning by the Deaths of oaths:
and he alone is a prudent man, who is made wife by the Ruins of other men, God
of his mercy vouchsafe that the exemplarie deaths of these few here specified
(and of thousands more in this time of mortality, occasioned by this sin of
Sabbath-breaking were as the former pests; Together with a Plague in Pope
Pelagius the second his time, An. Dom. 591. as Petrus Blessensis in his 20.
Sermon de Litania masori, records:) may prove life to many; and the judgments
on some, become remedies to cure all, who are sick of the self same si^ne. Amen.

Examples of Gods Judgments UPON SABBATH BREAKERS.
THese Examples of Gods judgments hereunder set down, have fallen out within
the space of these few years, even since the Declaration for Sports (tolerated
on the Lords day) was published, and read by many Ministers in their
congregations; for hereupon ill disposed people (being as dry fuel, to which
fire being put, quickly flameth forth; or as waters, pent up and restrained
being let loose, break forth more furiously) were so encouraged, if not imaged,
as taking liberty dispensed, thereby so provoked God, that his wrath in sundry
places, has broken out to the destruction of many, would to God to the
instruction of any. And the judgments are so much the more remarkable, that so
many in number, as here are observed, (besides many more, no doubt which have
not come to our ears) should fall within so narrow a compass of time, so
thick, and that in so many places: as we read not of such a number of
judgments in this kind for this one sin throughout the whole history of time,
from the Apostles hitherto: So many there are of them, as, it were too
heathenish to impute them to chance, and too much stupidity, and envy of Gods
glory, not to acknowledge the special hand of God in them, upon such
transgressors of his own sacred day; And it were to be wished, that all the
examples in this kind, within this compass of time; were diligently collected
and compiled into one Narration, for the further illustration of Gods glory,
and for admonition to all Sabbath Breakers, who if they repent not, nor
surcease from such their profaneness, it may justly be feared, that the
number of such examples will be daily increased, till they make a heap for all
the world, to stand amazed at. In the mean time, who so is wise, and will
observe these things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the
Lord: Psalm. 107 43. As for the truth of them, I have good testimony under the
hands of men of sufficient credit, for the most of them; and the rest has come
to our ears by credible report. If it shall so fall out, that one or two, or
so, should prove otherwise, either for the substance, or circumstance; let not
the Reader blame me, who have used my best diligence to enquire out the certain
truth of them all, and I am sure the most of the examples are confirmed by
witnesses without all exception, and none of them is to me of any suspected
credit; So as here are no fained miracles, nor fabulous stories, nor old Wives
tales, for profane Scoffers to jeare at, and play upon, thereby to disgrace
and discredit all truths in this kind, as some of late have done (History of
the Sabbath, part. 2. chap. 7. page 223.) but these examples are such, as will
abide the trial and search of this present age, wherein are yet living so many
both ear and eye witnesses of them.

Example 1.
A woman about Northampton, the same day that she heard the book for sports
read, went immediately, and having 3. pence in her purse, hired a fellow to go
to the next Town to fetch a Minstrel, who coming, she with others fell a
dancing, which continued within night; at which time she was got with child,
which at the birth she murdering, was detected and apprehended, and being
convented before the Justice, she confessed it, and withal told the occasion
of it, saying, it was her falling to sport on the Sabbath, upon reading of the
book, so as for this treble sinful act, her presumptuous profaning of the
Sabbath: which brought her adultery and that murder. She was according to the
Law, both of God and man, put to death, much sin and misery follows upon
Sabbath-breaking.

Example 2.
Also at Northampton, in the last Easter Assizes, there was a young man, who
formerly by seeing the example of good people, in the due sanctification of the
Lords day or Sabbath, had begun to reform his former loose kind of life, and
to frame his conversation according to Gods Word, and that in the well keeping
of the Sabbath, abstaining therein from sports and pastimes, and spending the
whole day in the public and private duties of it; but when once he heard of
the publishing of the book for sports; and pastimes, he fell back again to his
former wallowing, and being taken as he was picking a pocket, when the Judges
were in the Church, upon examination confessed what he had formerly been, and
how he had been reformed, and that upon the publishing of the said book, he was
encouraged to run riot a fresh, by which means he fell into this impiety and
iniquity, for the which he suffered death.

Example 3.
A Maid at Enfield near London, 1634.
hearing of the liberty, which was given by the book, which was published for
sports, would needs go dance, with others on the Lords day, saying she would
go dance, so long as she could stand on her legs; she daunced so long, that
thereof within two or three days she died.

Example 4.
Upon May day last, 1634.
being the Lords day, a Maid of the Minister of the Parish, Cripplegate,
London, was married to a Widower having three children, the youngest being at
Nurce in the country; upon this day they kept their feast in the Church-house
joining to the Church, where they spent all the afternoon in dancing: but
within one week after, the Plague began in that Parish in the new married man's
house, where within a month it took away the man and his wife, and his two
children that were in the house. And thus was the Plague brought first into
that Parish this year.

To this we will add another example, because it fell within the same month,
in the same City. A Minister, Rector of a Church in London, on the Saturday
would go with two of his neighbors, boon companions, to be joviall the next
day, being the Lords day, they conditioning that he should bestow a Sermon upon
them. They on the Lords day, being now in the country, spent the forenoon
idly: in the afternoon they go to visit another Minister, who had another
benefice there in the Country; he puts his brother to preach: which done
invites him, with his companions, to a bottle of Sack. They drank so long, that
the two neighbors tongues began to fail them. Home to their lodging within a
few miles they betake them. That night their Minister could not sleep; and
rising early to walk abroad, he returned with such a coldness upon him, that
he looked, and felt like cold pale death; the two neighbors much dismayed, and
with much a do get him home to London, where in that case continuing, he dies
before the next Sabbath day.

Example 5.
On Jan. 25. 1634. being the Lords day, in the time of the last great Frost 14.
young men presuming to play at football upon the ice on the river Trent, near
to Ganisborow, coming all together in a scuffle, the ice suddenly brake, and
they were all drowned.

Example 6.
At Dover the very same Lords day, 1635.
that the book was read, one in S. James Parish that played on a kitt, went and
played, and thereby called together a sort of wenches and young men: But he was
thereupon that very day struck by divine hand, so as within two days he died.

Example 7.
At Thurlow in Suffolk, one making a Feast to his friends on the Sabbath day,
for joy of the publishing of the Book for sports* was the next day pressed to
death, by the sudden fall or a faggot stack.

Example 8.
At Hellings by five or six miles from Af^^ in Sussex, the book being read on
the Lords day, in the Church by the Minister, on the next day being Monday, an
honest man, one Tomkins being on his way, a neighbor overtakes him, and
scoffingly asks him, if he would go dance with him the next Sunday; to whom
the man answered, Take heed that thou be not dancing in hell before that day
come, or before it be long; By the next week Gods hand fell on this Scoffer,
that himself and two more of his family died.

Example 9.
On February 9. 1634. being the Lords day, an Apothecaries man in Limestreet,
London, rid to Barnet with another companion, to make merry, who returning home
drunk, near High-gate, met a Tinker, and offering him some abuse, the Tinker
strikes one of their horses, whereat the one bid the other run him through; who
drawing his Rapier, ran the Tinker through the breast, that he fell down dead:
thereupon being by and by apprehended, and confessing the fact, they were both
sent to Newgate.

Example 10.
At Thornton near Westchester, 1634.
the people there, upon the first publishing of the book prepared for a solemn
summer-ale. The bringing in of their Lady flora should have been guarded with a
Marshall troop: the lustiest wench, and stoutest young man in the town were
chosen to be the purveyors for cakes, and for ribbons for favors, the
solemnity was to be on the Monday, but the preparation on the Lords day, this
lusty tall maid, on the Saturday before went to the mill, to fetch home the
meal for cakes on her head, she being strong and able for the purpose: but in
the way, passing by a hedge, she was suddenly struck by a divine stroke, and
fell into the ditch, where she was found dead, she was suffered to lie abroad
in that pickle all the Lords day, till Monday morning, when the Coroner being
sent for, she was thence carried to her grave immediately, where all her
solemnity was buried with her, and all her vain thoughts in that very day,
wherein the great solemnity should have been. And see what a good effect this
wrought in the whole town; First, all their mirth was turned into mourning, no
summer ale kept, and besides that, they being moved by the dreadful stroke of
God, took their May Pole down, which they had before set up, and never after
would presume to set it up again, or to have any more summer-ales, or
may-games. God grant they continue in their sober minds, and that all other
would learn to be wise by their example.

Example 11.
In Yorkshire at a Wake, in the Parish of Otley at Baildon, 1634.
on the Lords day, two of them sitting at drink, late in the night, fell out
and being parted, the one a little after finding his fellow, sitting by the
fire with his back toward him, comes behind him, and with a hatchet chines
him down the back, so as his bowels fell out; the murderer flying immediately,
and being hotly pursued, lept into a river, and so drowned himself. O fearful
fruits of carnal liberty!

Example 12.
One at Ham near Kingston, being a scoffer of all goodness, 1635.
and a common prophaner of the Sabbath, going abroad to see his grounds on the
Lords day, and finding some neighbors cattle to have broken in, he runs to
drive them out and that with such eagerness, that he fell down dead instantly
upon the place.

Example 13.
One Wright at Kingston, being a scoffer of Religion, and rejoicing much at the
suspending of his Minister, and others, for not reading the book of Sports in
their Churches, saying, he hoped to see them all so served shortly: was within
a day or two after struck with a dead Palsy, all over the one side, and with
blindness and dumbness, that he could neither go, nor see, nor speak, and so
lay in a miserable manner for a fort-night, and then died.

Example 14.
In Moorefields near London, 1635.
sundry youths playing at Cat on the Lords day, two of them fell out, and the
one hitting the other under the ear with his Cat, he therewith fell down for
dead in the place, the other was sent to prison: but the dead for the time, by
Gods mercy recovering, the prisoner was released; which may be a warning both
to them, and all other youth, to take heed how they so profane the Lords day.

Example 15.
April 18. 1635. being Saturday, one traveling with three others from London
to Maydenhead, he (the rest spending the Sabbath there) would travel on his
way, the next day being the Lords day, contrary both to Gods commandment, and
also of the Lady whom he served: who had given him strict charge; to observe
the Sabbath, and not to travel on it. He rode in the morning to Henley, and
there heard the Sermon, after that he fell to travel in the afternoon; but as
he went in the way, leading his horse in his hand gently down a plain descent,
and even way, his horse suddenly fell, and broke both his fore legs, the man
fore aghast at this not more sudden, then strange disaster, which he could not
but attribute to the immediate hand of God, and being past all hope of recovery
was forced himself to knock his horse on the head, and so to leave him, and
being the next day overtaken at Abington by his company, whom he had left the
day before, and they asking him how it fell out, he was no further on his way,
he smote his breast, and told them how it had befallen him in the way, saying
that he had heard many a good Sermon, yet none of them or any thing else did so
work upon his conscience, as this thing did; and that this example should be a
warning unto him for ever traveling on the Sabbath day again. This is
testified under the hands of those three which had traveled with him, and
overtook him.

Example 16.
At Dartmouth 1634. upon the coming forth and publishing of the book for
sports, a company of younkers on May Day morning before day, went into the
country, to fetch home a May pole with Drum and Trumpet, whereat the
neighboring Inhabitants were affrighted, supposing some enemies had landed to
sack them, the Pole being thus brought home, and set up, they began to drink
healths about it, and to it, till they could not stand so steady as the Pole
did, whereupon the Major and Justice bound the ring leaders over to the
Sessions, whereupon these complaining to the Archbishops Vicar General, then
in his visitation he prohibited the Justices to proceed against them in regard
of the Kings book. But the Justices acquainted him, they did it for their
disorder, in transgressing the bounds of the book, hereupon these libertines
scorning at Authority, one of them fell suddenly into a Deuteronomy. 28. 22.
Consumption, whereof he shortly after died; now although this revelling was
not on the Lords day, yet being upon any other day and especially May Day, the
May Pole set up thereon, giving occasion to the profanation of the Lords day
the whole year after it was sufficient to provoke God, to send plagues and
judgments among them.

Example 17.
In the same year 1634. and in the same Shire, one Edward Amerideth a
Gentleman, having been pained in his feet, and being upon his recovery,
whereupon one said unto him, he was glad to see him so nimble. Amerideth
replied, that he doubted not, but to dance about the May Pole the next Lords
day: But behold the hand of the Lord, for before he moved out of that place, he
was smitten with such a feebleness of heart, and dizsinesse in his head, that
desiring help to carry him to an house, he died before the Lords day came, so
fearful it is to fall into the hands of the living God.

Example 18.
One in Glocestershire being very forward to advance a solemn sommer-meeting,
wherein his son was to be a chief stickler, went himself in great jollity to
see it, and there beholding it, he fell down suddenly, and so died.

Example 19.
A Miller at Churchdown, near Gloucester, would needs (contrary to the
admonitions both of his Minister in private, and generally in public, yea and
that very day, and of other Christian friends) keep a solemn Whitson ale, for
which he had made large preparation and provision, even of threescore dozen of
cheesecakes, with other things proportionable; in the Church-house, half a mile
from his Mil, his musical instruments were set forth on the side of the
Church-house, where the Minister and people were to pass to the Church to
Evening Prayer. When Prayer and Sermon were ended, the Drum is struck up, the
pieces discharged, the Musicians play, and the rowt fall a dancing, till the
evening; where they all with the Miller resort to his Mill; where that evening
before they had supt, about nine of the clock on Whitsunday, a fire took
suddenly in his house over their heads, and was so brief and quick, that it
burnt down his house and mill, and devoured with all the greatest of all his
other provision and housholdstuffe. This is confirmed by sundry good
testimonies.

Example 20.
Richard Benfield an Apparitor in the Parish of Hemsteed kept an Ale in the
Church-house, joining to the Churchyard with dancing and revelling night and
day without control: pretending that the Bishop would bear him out, and not
unlikely, because at his complaint to the Bishop of his Minister, for preaching
against dancing and Maypoles, he was suspended for his labor) It happened
that upon the Lords day at even, being the 20. day of April, that his youngest
son was accused for stealing a purse, and 20. shillings in it, from a Butcher
who lay drunk upon the board or table in the Church-house, for which he was
like to be hanged (the purse being found about him.) Upon the 21. day of the
said month, Benfield his eldest son Richard went down into Hempsteeds Peirse,
about some business, and his youngest brother with him, where they met with a
little boy called Baker that had been a fishing) having some small fishes in
his hand. Benfields youngest son would have taken these fishes from Baker,
whereupon they fell together by the ears. The eldest brother Rich. Benfield
went to help his younger brother, being too weak for Baker. This Baker did
swear a great oath that he would stab him, if he did meddle with him; upon
which words Benfield fell upon Baker, gave him a box or two, and ran away.
Baker followed him with his knife in his hand, overtook him, and thrust his
knife three inches deep into his body, which wound proved mortal, so that he
never spoke more words then these; Oh Jack Baker has killed me, and so fell
down. Two men being present there, took him up in their arms, brought him up
into the Church-house alive, and so soon as they had put him out of their arms
upon the table, he groaned, and died.

Remarkable it is, that where the Father drew ale upon the Lords day and so
profaned it: In the same place his son the next day drew his last breath: for
that the punishment inflicted was stamped with the resemblance of the sin
convicted.

Example 21.
At Baunton in Dorcetshire some being at bowls on the Lords day, 1634.
one flinging his bowl at his fellow-bowler, hit him on the ear, so as the
blood issued for that the other ear, whereof he shortly died. The murderer
fled.

Example 22.
One good man Paul near Stoke in Dorcetshire, rejoicing much at the erection of
a summer pole, 1634.
at a Parish called Simsbury in Dorcetshire, and saying before one of his
neighbors, he would go see it, though he went naked through a quickset hedge:
which is a common proverb they use: Going with wood in his arms to cast into
the bonfire, where he lived, and using these words: Heaven and earth are full
of thy glory, O Lord: he was presently smitten by the stroke of God, and within
two or three days died, and his wife with him. These two last examples are
testified by a Minister in his letter to a brother Minister.

Example 23.
In the edge of Essex near Brinkley, two fellows working in a chalkpit, the one
was boasting to his fellow, how he had angered his Mistress with staying so
late at their sports the last sunday night, but he said he would anger her
worse the next Sunday. He had no sooner said this, but suddenly the earth fell
down upon him, and slew him out right, with the fall whereof his fellows limb
was broken, who had been also partner with him in his jollitie on the Lords
day, escaping with his life, that he might tell the truth, that God might be
glorified, and that by this warning he might repent of his sin, and reform such
his profaneness, and remain as a pillar of salt, to season others with fear
by his example.

Example 24.
The last Spring a Miller hard by Wootton in Worcestershire, went on the Lords
day to a wake, whence returning home again, the same day at night found his
Mill and house all on a fire; this was testified by a Minister (in a Reply to
another Minister) who was an eye witness.

Example 25.
At Woolston in the same country, where the said Ministers father had been
Minister forty years, and by Gods blessing upon his labors, had reformed
things very well* yet upon the publication of this book in print, many of the
inhabitants the Spring following, were imboldned to set up Maypoles, Morris
dance, and a Whitson ale, continuing their rude revelling a week together,
with many affronts to their ancient and reverend Pastor: but it pleased God,
that not long after, a spark from a Smiths shop, caught in that room where the
ale was brewed, and though means were ready at hand, yet it could not be
quenched, but set the house on fire, and presently flew to the barn in which
their disorder was, and burnt the same with thirteen dwelling houses more, most
of whose Inhabitants were actors or abetters in the fame: This is testified by
many.

Example 26.
Richard Jones son of Widow Jones, July 1634. not far from Dorchester, being
severely admonished by his mother, when she understood he had a purpose on
Saturday night, to go on the Lords day with other companions to Stoake to play
at a sport, called Fives, but persisting in his resolution, and going the next
day, accordingly being the Lords day at Stoke, where he played at the said
sport, at night returning home with his companions, William Burges, William
Hill, John Edwards, after they had there well drunk, they fall first a justling
one another in the way, then to boxes, and in the end Edwards stabbing Jones
under the left side, he died thereof, the Monday night following about 7. of
the clock. Behold here a terrible example of disobedience, to Gods holy
Commandments, not only the fourth, but the fifth also.

Example 27.
At Ovendean in Sussex about nine or ten miles from Alfriston, alias Ason, one
John Arcold, of the age of one or two and twenty years, eldest son to John
Arcold, a Blacksmith dwelling in Ason, with other younkars would needs fall a
ringing of the bells on a Sabbath day, presuming the Book for Sports gave them
full liberty so to do. One of the Churchwardens Robert Kenward hindered them
from their jangling; whereupon the said Arcold, and his companions fell in some
contestation with him, telling him that though he hindered them now, yet they
would ring the next Sunday, whether he would or no. But the said John Arcold
the ringleader before the next Sunday came, was struck with a sickness, in
which he continued a fortnight or three weeks til he died, in which time Robert
Kenward the Churchwarden, repairing to him, and putting him in mind of his
bold affronting of him, he seemed to be sorry for it, and promised, if God
would be pleased to restore him again to his health, he would never do the
like. God make his surviving companions, and all others, wise by his example.

Example 28.
At Walton upon Thames in Surrey, 1634.
not far from Oatlands, in the last great Frost, three young men on the Lords
day, after they had been at the Church in the forenoon, where the Minister
pressing the words of his text, out of 2. Cor. 5. 10. that we must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ, etc. they the while whispering one to
another, as they fa^e. In the afternoon they went together over the Thames,
upon the ice, unto a house of disorder, and gaming, where they spent the rest
of the Lords day, and part of the night also in revelling, one of them in a
Tavern merrily discoursing the next day of his Sabbath-acts, and voyage over
the Ice; but on Tuesday next after, these three returning homwards, and
attempting to pass again over the Ice, they all sanke down to the bottom as
stones, whereof one only of them was miraculously preserved, but the other two
were drowned. Eccl 11. 9.
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days
of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes: But know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee unto
judgment.

Example 29.
In the year of our Lord 1633. October. 26. after the book for sports was known
to be published in print, David Price a Welshman, servant to one Thomas Hill, a
known Grasier of that country, coming to Banbury with his drove on Saturday
night, declared his purpose of driving them the next day, early in the morning
being the Sabbath or Lords day: his Host where he lodged, dissuaded him,
because it was the Sabbath day, and told him that he would certainly be
stopped, and made to pay for it according to the Statute. He answered that he
would drive them, and let me see (says he) who will hinder me. So in the
morning two other accompaning him, he went to fetch the Cattle out of the
ground, one that knew him, met him at the Towns end (not yet one of the
Town) and admonished him, saying, What, David, to day, to day; he made no
answer, but went onward, and though for any thing, that appeared to any other,
or that himself complained of, he was then in good health, as ever he was, yet
within little more then a stones cast of the Town, he fell down dead suddenly,
and was buried in Banbury Churchyard the next day after; None could discern
any sensible or evident cause of so sudden a surprizall; and himself gave no
sign of any pain, weakness, or illness, till the instant time he gave up the
ghost.

Example 30.
At Wicks a Town betwixt Colchester and Harwich in Essex, upon Whit sunday last
in the afternoon two fellows meeting at the football, the one killed the other.

Example 31.
At Oxford this last Summer on the Sabbath day, one Bally Hawks a Butcher,
would needs go into his field with an hatchet and shovell to mend his ditch:
his wife dissuaded him what she could, being the Sabbath day, but he said he
would go and make an end of his work, which he did, for suddenly he was struck
dead in his ditch, and so made an end of his work, and his life together.

Example 32.
Also at Oxford a Carpenter undertaking to mend a Stage in S. John's College on
the Saturday night, for the finishing whereof he must of necessity spend some
part of the Lords day morning* that the Stage might be ready against the Monday
following, he that night fell backward from the stage, being not far from the
ground, and brake his neck, and so ended his life in a fearful Tragedy.

Example 33.
At Ivye Hinckley a mile from Oxford (about the time when May-poles are set up)
on the Lords day after Evening Prayer, when most of the Town were at the
May Pole, one John Cooper, servant to master Tinmore of the said Town, going
along the street, a maid out of a window in John Nicols his house, not far from
the Maypole, called him to come in thither; where also was another maid, and a
young man named Christopher Young, servant to Master Willis of the said Town;
John Cooper at first refused to come to them, but the maid earnestly entreating
him, he yielded to her, and being come in, sat down by the other two, where
having sat awhile, the foresaid Christopher Young spied a Gun over the
chimney, which he supposing not to be charged, fondly took down, and fell a
tampering with it, and first levelled at the Maids, and after held it up
against John Cooper, as he sat, and unwittingly lifting up the cock, it struck
fire, and the piece discharged, and shot the said John Cooper through the
shoulder, so that he died presently, being heard only to say, O Lord.

Example 34.
A young man near Bow, going to swim in the river on Essex side, on the Lords
day in the afternoon, was drowned

Example 35.
Two boys of S. Albons, going to Verolanes Ponds, a mile off to swim on the
Lords day, July 19. one of them was drowned, and the other hardly escaped.

Example 36.
At Ramsey in Suffolk, a tall man on the Lords day going with others to swim,
and being advertised and warned of a hole in the water; he swear that there was
no place there could drown him, but by and by on a sudden he was missing,
being now under water, and so drowned.

Example 37.
On September 13. 1635. being the Lords day, two young men of the Parish of S.
Dunstans in the West, London, going to swim, were both drowned.

Example 38.
At Twiford in Buckinghamshire, a fellow playing at cudgels on the Lords day
(or as some say, upon a revell day) received a hurt in the face, whereof he
died the next week.

Example 39.
At Lemster, one Master Powel, Januar. 1634. on the Lords day serving a Writ of
sub poena (and that of purpose on that day as is credibly reported) upon one
Mr. Shuit a Gentleman, this he did in the Church yard, so soon as they were
come out of the Church: Mr. Shuit thereupon told him, I thought you had been an
honester man then so, to do this upon this day; he replied, I hope I am never a
whit the more dishonest, or less holy for that: having spoken this, he
suddenly fell down dead, and spoke not a word more, his wife seeing this, was
suddenly struck with sickness.

Example 40.
A fellow in Sommersetshire being to make a Tent upon the Lords day, for a
Fair that was to be kept upon the Monday following, said to one on the
Saturday, that they would rear it to morrow, so the next day which was the
Lords day, being drunk, he died the same day roaring.

Example 41.
At Corsham in Wiltshire in the Whitsun week, at a Whitsun-ale, one Mark
Hulbert, a lusty young man, undertaking to act the fools part, was so extremely
drunk and hurt with falls taken in the time of his drunkenness, that shortly
he took his bed, where he lay very loathsomely, in most grievous pain, until
the sixth day of June, being the Lords day, on which he died at 4. of the clock
in the afternoon (the usual time for youth to take their liberty) and was
buried the same day before 9. of the clock, and yet he burst, before he was
laid into his grave, See Joh 31. 3.

Example 42.
At Topudle in Dorcetshire, one John Hooper alias Cole, upon the promulgation
of the said Book, was let down into a Well to cleanse it, for to brew beer for
a Whitsonale, by Francis Laurence, alias Smith, and Stephen Pope Churchwardens,
which Well was in the backside of Richard Laurence alias Smith. Which John
Hooper fell from the rope into the Well, where he died.

Example 43.
At Glassenbury in Sommersetshire, at the setting up of a May Pole, it
miscarrying fell upon a child, and slew it, and it is reported that it was the
Churchwardens child, who was the chief stickler in the business. Also when the
May* pole in the same Town, was again the second time a setting up, a fire took
in the Town, so as all the people about the May Pole were forced to leave it,
and to run to the quenching of the fire.

Example 44.
A May-lord of misrule, not far from thence became mad upon it.

Example 45.
Also at Battersey near London, the last year a notable example of Gods
judgment befell a fiddler, the youth of the town of both sexes, being assembled
solemnly to set up a garland upon their May Pole and having got a tabor and
pipe for the purpose, he with the pipe in his mouth, fell down dead and never
spoke word.

Example 46.
On May 31. 1635. being the Lords day, one Richard Clerk (an apprentise unto
Timothy Denorell shoemaker of Sherston in the country of Wiltshire, within
three miles of Tedbury,) being drunk at the Church-house in the same Parish,
told Henry Larrum of the same Parish, that was then in the same place drunk
likewise with the Church-house ale, that he the said Richard, would either hang
himself, or drown himself, demanding of the said Henry which of the two was
best; unto whom he replied, that he hoped he would do neither; on the day
following, being Monday in the morning, the said Richard Clerk was seen to go
through the street, without a band, as if he had been going about his masters
business, and putting on his band without the Town, he got up into the middle
of a tree, and there did hang himself. A miserable effect of carnal liberty
and profane meetings on the Lords day.

Example 47.
The 31. May 1635. the book of recreation was read in the Parish Church of
Alvelye in Commit. Salop. in the afternoon; after all divine exercises public
ended, there fell out a bloody fight betwixt 3. of Alvelye above said, and one
of Envield of the country of Stafford near adjacent, in so much that the man
of Envield was sore wounded, and had his jaw bone broken, so that he could not
eat his meat for the sustaining of nature; In his extremity he laid his death
to the charge of the other 3. The Churchwardens of the parish of Alvelie
abovesaid, presented these 4. for profaning of the Sabbath to my Lord his
grace of Canterbury (to use the words of the relation) being the time of his
metropoliticall visitation, since which time two of the parties fled; the third
was committed to prison in Shrewsbury, and was the next Assizes to come to his
answer.

Example 48.
In March betwixt 1634. and 1635. at Billericay in Essex, one Theophilus Pease,
the Ministers son of that Town, went to ring the bells on the Sabbath day, whom
the Church wardens for that time hindered; But against the next Sabbath, he
gathered a company together, faying he would ring in despite of the Church
wardens. While he was a ringing, he was taken with a giddiness like one drunk,
and so sickned, and about three days after died.

Example 49.
Anno 1635. Januarie or thereabout in Chichester Diocese, one Thomas Perkin, a
wilful and usual prophaner of Gods Sabbath in Hailing South, being ringing on
a Sabbath day, the rope took him up, and flinging him about eight foot high, he
fell down on his head, and was taken up dead, and so remained long, but life at
last was gotten into him, yet the bruise in his head is so great and dangerous
as death is expected; and little hope of life remains.

Example 50.
At Craies, two miles from Billerikey, a servant of M. Holdsworth, Minister
there, ringing on the Sabbath, his Master sent to forbid him: but he would ring
still, and before he had done ringing, he was struck sick, and a while after
died. This was a little after the book for sports was publicly read in the
Church.

Example 51.
In June 1635. on the Lords day, the Tapster and Chamberlain of the Queens head
in South warke, rid into Kent to be merry, and having drunk liberally, riding
homewards, the one of them fell from his horse, and broke his neck.

Example 52.
Also in June 1635. and as some report the very same Lords day, in Southwarke
at the red Lion, near S. Georges Church, in the afternoon, a man with another
sat drinking so long, that the other about six of the clock departing, fell a
sleep so, that he never awaked again.

Example 53.
In the month of July 1634. one Mr. Quince the Surgeon of the Tower of
London, having an horse to sell, and meeting with a chapman, went to
Coleman-street, where the horse was kept, to see and contract for him, on the
Lords day in the afternoon; the horse being sadled, Mr. Quince gets upon his
back, to show his chapman how well he would pace; which done, as he was a
lighting off his back, his foot, which lighted on the ground slipped, the other
foot hung in the stirrup, so as he fell to the ground, and with the fall brake
his thigh bone short off, so that he was carried from the place to an house
near adjoining, where he lay in great pain and agony for eight weeks space or
more, almost despairing of his life, and never stirring out of his bed: at last
it pleased God, by degrees to recover and restore him to the use of his leg
again, he having little use of it (and that with great pain) for half a years
space and more. His son had dissuaded him from riding, because it was the Lords
day; and himself has since acknowledged it a just judgment of God upon him
for profaning that sacred time, which has made him more carefully to frequent
the Church, and to avoid the profanation of the Lords day ever since. This the
party himself, and most of the Tower can testify.

Example 54.
Many more examples might here be added, not only such as have fallen out
within these few years last past, since the said book was published by the
Ministers in their Churches, but also, since the book was first of all printed
and published; the very bruit whereof, without being read by Ministers, was
enough, and too much to imbolden youth to take their liberty in profaning the
Lords day, but for the present, I will add but one more. At Chidlington upon
the edge of Hertfordshire, not far from Hitchin, a company of fellows upon a
holy day being to play a match at Football, one of them was tolling the bell,
to assemble the rest, some being come into the Church the randevoze of their
meeting, suddenly it thundering was seen a black ball come tumbling down a hill
near by: which took its course directly into the Church, there it flew into the
Bell-free and first slew him, that tolled the bell, then it flustered about the
Church and hurted diverse of them, and at last bursting; left a filthy stink
like to that of brimstone, and so left a terror to all such spend thrifts of
precious time, and especially such as is dedicated to sacred uses: Who so is
wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the leving
kindness of the Lord. Psalm. 107. 43.

Example 55.
Upon May Eve Thomas Tree of Gloucester, Carpenter in the Parish of S. Michael,
some coming unto him, and asking him, whether he would go with them to fetch
the May Pole, he swore by the Lords wounds, that he would, though he never went
more. Now whiles he was working on the May Pole on May day morning, before he
had finished his work, the Lord smote him with such a lamenesse and swelling in
all his limbs, that he could neither go, nor lift his hands to his mouth, to
feed himself, but kept his bed for half a year together, and still goes lame to
this day; May 4. 1636.

Example 56.
About a year since 1635. in Ashton under the Hill, in the Parish of Beckford,
in the country of Gloucester, the Minister there Mr. Blackwell, having occasion
in his Sermon in the afternoon on the Lords day to reprove the profaning of
that day by sports, etc. as soon as the Sermon was done, a young man of that
place used these words, Now Mr. Blackwell has done, we will begin; and so taking
the cudgels, plays with them; and at the second or third bout, he received a
thrust in one of his eyes, that thrust it quite out, so as it hanged by, and
could never recover it again.

THese Examples of divine justice, so notorious, so remarkable both for humber
and variety, having fallen out in so narrow a compass of time, and so
dispersed over the whole land, as every particular place, and country might
take special notice thereof if they will not take, and make impression in our
stony hearts, to move us to speedy repentance (as for many other enormities,
and crying sins, so in special) for this our ring leading sin of the
heathenish profanation of the Sabbath, or Lords day: what plea can we make for
our selves; why the Lord of the Sabbath should not send some universal,
epidemicall sweeping calamity upon the land, sparing neither small nor great?
And now, that the plague and pestilence begins to break forth, and spreads it
self much amongst us, the Lord shooting these his terrible venomous arrows,
from which not even Princes nor Prelates palaces can secure themselves, from
becoming his buts and marks: What can we more impute it unto, as the cause
thereof, then to this grand sin, of the profanation of the Sabbath or Lords
day, occasioned so much the more by the publishing of the late book for sports,
and that, by the Ministers themselves? For was it not the judgment and
confession of King James of famous memory, and of the whole State and Kingdom
in an exhortation published in that great plague, beginning with his reign,
1603. where are these words: The Lords Sabbath is not kept holy, but polluted,
etc. and therefore the cause is apparent, why the plague is broken in amongst
us? And was not the same exhortation afterward republished by our gracious
King Charles (whom God long preserve a religious and righteous Governor over
us) in the first year of his reign, with the approbation of the whole
Parliament, where the same is acknowledged of that other great plague, in the
beginning of his Reign 1625. namely, that one principal and special cause
thereof, was the not keeping holy, but polluting the Lords day? And if this
were a principal cause of those great plagues then, why not of this which now
we suffer? yea what Plague upon plagues may we not justly expect to break forth
upon us in these days, wherein we have increased and surpassed our fathers
sins, and that in such a height, as they reach up to heaven, to pull down
flames and flakes of vengeance upon our heads. And so much the more, since upon
the publishing of the said book, so manifold mischiefs have attended and
followed, as never any age since Christ, much less such a Christian state as
we profess to be, has seen, or ever heard the like. For besides the open
violation of Gods holy commandment, the 4th. Moral, acknowledged in our Homily
of the time and place of Prayer. Part. 1. p. 124. 125. 126.
Homily to be the ground of our Christian Sabbath day (as it is there, no less
then 8. several times distinctly styled; as also in another Hom. against
Rebellion. par. 3. page 292.
Homily twice, which by the way makes me wonder at the audacious insolence, and
arrogant ignorance of some new Masters in these days, and in particular of Dr.
Poc. k in his Sunday no Sabbath, who is not ashamed to avouch with open mouth,
that the name of Sabbath was never given to the Lords day, until it was
brought in by John Knox, and others of the puritan faction in the year 1554.
What says he then to the Homilies of our Church, which were set forth in K.
Edw. 6. his Reign, and so I am sure before 1554. by three or four years; now
these (to omit innumerable testimonies more, both out of ancient Fathers, and
the Prelates of this land; too large to be comprehended, in a Parenthesis,
(being enough to furnish a pretty Treatise) these our Homilies (I say) so
frequently and clearly called the Lords day the Sabbath day, before John Knox
called it so, 1554. And the same Homilies being set forth afresh by Queen
Elizabeth, 1562. will Dr. P. dare to charge the learned and pious compilers of
them, a pack of Puritans, or (as Doctor Wh^ Bp. of Ely.
some other) Novell Sabbatarians? But this by the way) by which violation (I
say) of the Sabbath or Lords day, God is intolerably dishonored, and his
religion disgraced through outrageous libertinisme: What an invention of
Antichristian tyranny has broken in at the opening of this great sluice? What
havoc is made in our Church by sundry of the Hierarchy in suspending godly
Ministers, depriving them of their liberty, livelihood, and Freeholds, against
all Laws of God and man, so as they, their wives and children are exposed to
beggary and all misery, and their flocks to be devoured of the Wolves, and to
become a pray to the roaring Lion; and all this, because they dare not offer
violence to their consciences, in doing that, which should dishonor God,
endanger their own, and their peoples souls, abase before God and man the
authority and dignity to their Ministry, condemn the innocent people of God,
and call the wicked righteous, teach inferiors rebellion to their superiors,
and in a word hasten the pulling down of vengeance from heaven upon the Land? O
ye heavens, stand amazed at this sight! Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in
the streets of Askelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the
daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. what could the Pope have done more,
then some of our Prelates have done in this kind, for the darkning of the
glory of Christ's kingdom, and for the setting up of Antichrists throne again
in this Land? But our Lord says, Ye shall know them by their fruits. Besides,
what impudency and impiety has broken out from sundry aierie and ambitious
spirits, who have dared in their late published books upon books, to belch out
their blasphemies against God, and the power, purity, and profession of the
Religion established amongst us for so many years. Nor only is the floodgate
of all profaneness and impiety broken up, in the violation of the fourth
commandment, but of the fifth also, when as, by occasion of the publishing of
the said book (which inhibits Magistrates and superiors, to restrain or punish
youth fortaking such liberty on the Lords day, as the book allows, and which
all other books, writings, monuments of Fathers, Councels, Kings, Emperors,
Divines ancient and modern, Protestants and Papists, have universally with one
vote and voice cried down, till now but yesterday a new generation of
Maleferiati has risen up, outdaring and defining the whole world and God
himself) inferior persons exalt themselves in high contempt against their
Superiors, as the common vulgar against the Magistrate and Minister, servants
against their masters, children against their parents, and wanton wives against
their husbands, which has caused such outcries and complaints of masters, for
their servants unbridled and uncontrowled outrage on the Lords day; which must
also in-jure them with pride and presumption of spirit the whole week after,
and so their whole life, while like untamed colts they have thus learned to
take the bit between their teeth, and so to run a gallop into all excess of
riot.

So as if the book be not all the sooner called in, and authors of those late
books against the sanctification of the Lords day condignly punished; and a
speedy reformation hereof set on foot: how can we look for a stay of the plague
until the Land be consumed? Now the Lord make us wise, to lay these things to
heart, lest he tear in pieces, and there be none to deliver. For as never any
Christian Church has produced such monstrous impieties: so never any Church
has been the theater of such tragical examples of divine wrath, as our Land
is like to be, if we speedily repent not. Unless therefore we repent, we shall
all likewise perish, as these examples have done before us.

Now for these so many, so markable examples of Gods judgments inflicted upon
the violaters and prophaners of the Lords day, and that in so short a time,
even since the book for such sports was published, we may thus argue and
conclude.

That, for which the Lord inflicteth and executes so many notorious and severe
judgments, must needs be a notorious and heinous sin, and so a breach of his
holy commandment.

But for the violation and profanation of the Lords day by sports and
pastimes, or by servile works, the Lord inflicteth and executes many notorious
and severe judgments, as of late we have seen. Erg. the violation and
profanation of the Lords day is a notorious and heinous sin, and so a breach
of Gods holy commandment.

The major Proposition is a Maxim in Divinity. God punishes no man, but for
sin: and sin is a transgression of Gods law: 1. Joh. 3. 4. For the Minor
proposition, it is so clear, as it cannot be denied, except men will be
senseless and blind Atheists. But they that fear God, shall declare the work
of God, for they shall wisely consider of his doing; as Psalm. 64. 9. Now if the
violation or profanation of the Lords day be a sin, and so a transgression of
Gods holy commandment: then of what holy commandment, but of the fourth. And if
of the fourth, then the holy keeping of the Lords day for the Christian
Sabbath, is grounded upon the fourth Commandment, and commanded in it, as God
has abundantly testified by his many remarkable judgments, even within these
two years, as has been showed.

Ob. But here some may object: God may punish men for the breach of humane
ordinances, which are out of the express commandments of God. So in this
instance, God may punish the violation or profanation of the Lords day by such
sports, or wakes, as being a breach of a humane ordinance, or Ecclesiastical
institution.

Answ. I answer it is true, all humane ordinances, being not against Gods word,
are to be observed for conscience sake of Gods commandment, commanding
subjection to all ordinances of men for the Lords sake.

And if it were a humane ordinance, to dedicate this day of holy rest to God by
a perpetual vow and Decree: then the greater is their sin, that devour that
which is sanctified, and after the vow make inquiry, how it may be violated.
So as they are liable to the like judgments, for so doing, without repentance.

THE EPILOGVE.
THus have I presented you with a large Scene of late several examples of Gods
judgments upon Sabbath Breakers, and such So the Statute of 1. Caroli c. 1.
styles them.
disorderly people, who have been so presumptuous as to profane the Lords own
sacred day, against the monitions of Gods faithful Ministers, with
unnecessarie labor, vain sports and idle pastimes. To which I might annex many
ancient Precedents of like nature which I pretermit, only one excepted, which
is remarkable. In the year of our Lord 1583. in the famous Metropolis of this
our Land, the City of London, two Citizens, the one leaving his wife, the other
her husband, and committing adultery together on the Lords day, it pleased God
to strike them dead with fire from heaven, whilst they were in the very act of
uncleanness, their bodies being left dead in the place half burnt up, sending
out a most loathsome savor, for a spectacle of Gods avenging Justice unto
others, to teach them both to shun the sin of adultery and of Sabbath-breaking
too, and to take heed how they commit any fin or wickedness at any time, and
especially on Gods sacred day, or how they follow dancing, may-games,
Morisdaunces, Ales, and such lascivious pastimes, Vincentius Volnacensis Spec.
moral. li. 3. Ps. 9. Did. 6. Mr. Northbrook, Stubs, Brant, Lovel, and others
in their Treatises against dancing.
which commonly end in whoredom, adultery, as being strong allurements
thereunto, this judgment was so famous and remarkable, that Laurentius
Bayenlinke, a foreign Historian, in his Opus Chronologicum orbis universi
Antwerp. 1611. p. 110. has thought good to register it to posterity, if any
deem those judgments strange, or that God should justice such punishments on
this sin, which some now justify, as a part of Christian liberty, both in the
Pulpit and in The late Treatise, History and Discourse of the Sabbath, Sunday
No Sabbath, Doctor Pri. and a sovereign Antidote against Sabbatarian Novelties.
printed works. I shall only entreat such to remember, that the whole
Convocation house, all the Arcbbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and greatest
Clerks of England in their book entitled, The Institution of a Christian Man,
subscribed with all their names, and dedicated to King Hen. 8. an^. 1537. and
King Hen. 8. himself in his own book inscribed A necessary doctrine and
erudition for any Christian man set forth by the Kings Majesty of England,
with the advice and approbation of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and
Nether house of Parliament, ann. 1543. and by the King himself, dedicated under
his name and title to all his faithful and loving Subjects, and published by
virtue of the Statute, of 30. H. 8. c. 26. in the exposition of the fourth
Commandment, have in the very dawning of Reformation enjoined all Bishops and
Preachers diligently to instruct and teach the people, committed to their
spiritual charge ( and I wish that some Bishops would now do it) that against
this commandment generally do offend all they, which having no lawful
impediment, do not give themselves upon the holy day to hear the Word of God,
to remember the benefits of God, to give thanks for the same, to pray, to
exercise such holy works both publicly in the Church, and privately in their
houses, as be appointed for such holy days: but (as commonly is used) pass
the time either in idleness, in gluttony, in riot, or other vain and idle
pastime, Do Ergo it is in force, and the profaning of the Lords day a sin
against it.
break this Commandment. For surely such keeping of holy day, is not according
to the intent and meaning of this Commandment, ( as some new As the Treatise,
History, Discourse of the Sabbath.
Doctors now dogmatize) but after the usage and custom of the Jews, ( though
some late Rabbis would make the world believe that the strict sanctification
of the Lords day, and the restraining of vain sports and pastimes on it, is
Jewish, when Epist. 6. ad magnefianos.
Ignatius, Tract 3. in Job. de 10. chordis. c. 3. In Ps. 32. 91. De consensu
Evang. li. 2. c. 77
Augustine, In Job. Evang li. 8. c. 5.
Cirillus Alexandrinus, Homily de festis diebus.
Ephraim Syrus, Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 13.
Socrates, Scholasticus, Codicis Theodosit l. 15. tit. 5. lex. 5.
Theodosius the Emperor, Enare in Ps 91.
Beda, Vincentius Belvacensis, and generally al Authors since, have branded
dancing, sports, and recreations on the Lords day both as Jewish and
heathenish; and Edit. 5. Lon. 1624. Sect. 38. n. 1. p. 110. Se. 43. digr. 46.
n. 6. p. 165. 186.
Dr. John White in his way to the true Church defended and published by his
elder brother, Dr. Fr. White now Bishop of Ely, In 4. preceptum.
Mr. Zanchie, In John Eu. c. 7. fol. 273.
Wolfg. Musculus, Proposition for the Christian Sabbath, p. 4.
Mr. John Sprint, as Popish and licentious; tending to the overthrow of piety,
and desolation of public Government) and does not please God, but does much
more offend him, and provoke his indignation and wrath toward us. For as In
Johan. tract. 3. in Ps 32. and 91. de 10. chordl^ c 3.
St. Augustine says of the Jews, they should be better occupied, laboring in
the Speculum morale li. 3. part. 9. c. 6.
fields, and to be at plough, then to be idle at home. And women should better
bestow their time in spinning of wool, then on the Sabbath day to loose their
time in leaping or dancing, and other idle wantonness. Now if the whole
Clergy, King, State, and Parliament were so quicksighted as in those times of
darkness to see a Lords day Sabbath in the fourth Commandment, to be Wholly,
only and entirely dedicated to God and his true worship, as they there teach;
and so pious as to believe, that the exercise of vain idle sports, pastimes,
and dancing on it, did much more offend God, then ploughing or spinning, and
provoke his wrath and indignation toward us; no wonder if we in the clear
sunshine of the Gospel behold so many sad spectacles of his wrath, and
indignation against the offenders of this commandment in this kind, to teach
these blind Seers and seducing guides (as In his Sermons.
Bishop Latimer long since named them) that God is now as jealous for the
sanctification of his day, and as much offended with the profaneness of it,
and infringers of the fourth Commandment, by unnecessarie labors, travel, or
idle pastimes, as he had been in any age, if not rather much more, in regard of
the great light of the Gospel, that has for these many years so clearly shined
amongst us, which if they will not yet believe, I shall at once close up their
mouths with the resolution of our Homilies ratified by 13. Eliz. c. 12. which
ratifies the 39. Articles.
Act of Parliament, and the 35. Article of our Church, to which these Novellers
have subscribed, and whose Patronage they pretend against all The treatise and
history of the Sabbath.
novell Sabatarians: But alas ( says Part. 1. of the time and place of prayer.
p. 126.
the Homily) all these notwithstanding ( and I pray God I may not still say
notwithstanding all these fresh examples) it is lamentable to see the wicked
boldness of those, that will be counted Gods people who pass nothing at all
of keeping and hallowing the Sunday. And these people are of two sorts; the one
sort, if they have business to do, though there be no extreme need, they must
not spare for the Sunday, they must ride journeys on the Sunday, they must
drive and carry on the Sunday, they must come and ferry on the Sunday, they
must buy and sell on the Sunday, they must keep Markets and Fairs on the
Sunday; finally they use all days alike, work days and holy days are all
one. The other sort is Worse (so the Homily against these Treatise of the
Sabbath day, p. 231.
new masters, who make labor in men's callings on the Lords day Worse and more
unlawful then dancing and Pastimes, contrary to the judgment of Tract. 3. in
Ioh. In Ps. 32. and 91. de 10. chordis c. 3.
Saint Augustine, Gregory the great, Apud Alex. Alensis sum. Theologiae part.
4. q. 11. m. 2. Art. 11.
Alensis, and all Media villa Peraldus Nider Volaterranus, F. Martyr, Musculus,
Stuckius, Aretius, Hyperius, Szegedine, Angel. de Clavasio. Dr Bound, Dr.
Criffith, Williams Practice of Piety, Osmund Lake, and infinite others.
Writers since, who una voce resolve, that it is better and more lawful to
plough and spin on the Sabbath day, then to dance:) for although they will not
travel and labor on the Sunday, as they do on the work day, yet they will not
rest in holiness as God commands; but they rest in ungodliness and
filthiness, prauncing in their pride, pranking and pricking, pointing and
painting themselves to be gorgeous and gay, they rest in excess and
superfluity in gluttony and drunkenness (as they do at Wakes, Ales, and
May-poles) like rats and swine, they rest in brawling and railing, in
quarrelling and fighting, they rest in wantonness ( and what else is dancing,
Moris dancing, may gaming, etc.) in toyish talking, in filthy fleshlinesse, so
that it does too evidently appear, that God is more dishonored, and the devil
better served on Sunday, then upon all the days of the week besides. And I
assure you, that the beasts that are commanded to rest on the Sunday, honor
God better then this kind of people, for they offend not God, they break not
their holy days. Wherefore, O ye people of God, lay your hands upon your
hearts, repent and amend this grievous and dangerous wickedness, stand in awe
of the commandment of God, gladly follow the example of God himself, be not
disobedient to the godly order of Christ's Church used and kept from the
Apostles times until this day, fear the displeasure and just plagues of
Almighty God if ye be negligent, and forbear not laboring and traveling on
the Sea the Homily ^. times styles the Lords day, and the 3. Homily of
rebellion twice.
Sabbath day, and do not resort together to celebrate and magnify Gods blessed
name in quiet holiness and godly reverence. I shall conclude all with the
words of the Council of Paris under Lewis and Lotharius. Ann. 829. li. ^. c.
50. and li. 3. c. 5. and 19. Multa alia terribilia judicia. etc. Many other
terrible judgments have been, and hitherto are, whereby is declared how much
God is offended with the dishonor of this day. Wherefore the Imperial
highness is specially to be implored of the Note.
Priests, that this power ordained of God for the honor and reverence of so
great a day, may put a fear into all men, lest none of what condition soever
presume on this holy and venerable day to use these and the like sports,
dauncings and leapings hereafter, because while they do these things, they both
darken the glory of Christianity, and give occasion to the blasphemers of
Christ's name the more to dishonor him.

We require also, and earnestly entreat, that in the observation of the Lords
day, as we have a long time beseeched you, you use due care that unless great
necessity constrain you, free your selves on that day, as much as may be from
worldly cares and sollicitousnesse. And that which becomes the honor of so
great a day, that both you your selves do it, and by your example do teach and
compel yours to do it.

We wholsomely admonish all faithful people, that they give due honor and
reverence to the Lords day, because the dishonor of this day does both much
swarve and abhor from Christian religion, and does without doubt procure the
peril of souls to the violaters thereof; And with that of the Council of
Burges, an. 1582. Apud Bach^llum Decretae Ecclesiae Gall. l. 4. Tit. 7. c. 21.
Although Lords days and holy days are instituted only for this purpose, that
faithful Christians abstaining from external and gainful works, might more
freely and with greater piety give themselves to divine worship, and to the
meditation of the infinite benefits of Gods goodness toward mankind, and so
being wholly taken up with the wholesome duties of religion, should diligently
beware as Ignatius admonishes the Philippians, that they should not abuse holy
days with any disgrace or injuries, yet notwithstanding in our times, it
preposterously and usually comes to pass, that both solemn and religious
days are not only spent in transacting, unlawful and secular business, but
likewise in luxury, lasciviousness, prohibited sports, and pastimes, Revels,
and the exercising of other wickednesses, whereupon it is not to be doubted,
that for the greatest part, so many calamities wherewith we were so long since
confirm^ justly inflicted on us by God, who is incensed against us by so great
wickedness. To appease whose present anger, and likewise to avert his greater
indignation hanging over our heads: we command all Parish Priests of our
Province, that they frequently and seriously admonish the people, that on Lords
days they not only keep themselves from all prohibited works, but likewise
that they be ex animo cordially and religiously, present at all sacred
mysteries of the Church, and at the preaching of Gods Word, and that they
preterm it not the works of piety in relieving the poor, comforting the
afflicted, and in doing other pious things, wherein Christian profession and
charity do most of all shine forth. And we exhort all Magistrates according to
their and our duty, as far as possibly we may, that they would take care, that
those holy and solemn days should be holily and piously celebrated, this
being principally in their power, and belonging to their charge. Neither verily
can any manner of Governing the Commonwealth, be better or more praise-worthie
then that which gives the first place and care to divine worship and religion.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for John Wright junior, and for Tho. Bates, and are to be sold
at their shops in the Old Baylie. 1642.


