A brief DECLARATION OF THE Several passages in the Treaty concerning the
Surrender of the Garrison OF LVNDY; Formerly Commanded by Tho. Bushel Esquire;
Governor thereof for His MAJESTY.

Die Sabbathi 10. Julii 1647.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That upon the
delivery up of the Isle of Lundy to the Lord Vicount Say and Seal, or his
Assigns, by Mr. Tho. Bushel, the Delinquencie of the said Tho. Bushel be
taken off, and all sequestration in respect thereof be discharged, And he and
his assigns restored to all such rites as he or they had or ought to have in
the Mines in Devonshire, Wales, and Cornwall, and to all his other estates and
rights whatsoever, And that the men that were with him in the Island, being not
Soldiers of estate and fortune, be pardoned and freed from delinquencie.

H. Elsing. Cler. Par. Dom. Com.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 164^.

SIR,
IT may be called a happiness, when an engagement in a hopeless design is not
beyond the possibility of a retreat, and an opportunity with Honor to draw
back, may not then in prudence be slighted; Sir, I conceive it is your case,
and some hints received, gives me to believe that you will not be so mindlesse
of yours, and the Kingdoms condition, as not seriously to consult with your
reason, how to manage a safe retreat, since it is every way probable, that
going on is unavoidably destructive: Besides, how can those parts and
ingenuities that I hear do lodge in your breast, but insatiably thirst after
the good and honor of this Nation; and can you imagine any other way under God
that it may be procured, but by a Parliament? Me thinks such motives from
within your self, should stir you to yield a willing and ready submission to
that supreme power, the glory of this Nation, in which the King is necessarily
included: Neither can you forget what former engagements that Noble Lord, that
is concerned in the place you hold, has put upon you in the business of your
Mines, and now you have an opportunity at once to congratulate him for ancient
favors, and to engage him to new of the like kind, which if you would on your
part surrender him but his own, it would be by him so deeply resented, that I
am confident, upon good grounds, you might expect from him the utmost that in
honor and honesty he could do for you, both in making up your breach with the
Parliament, and for the procurement of your Mines, and Customs. Sir, Omit not
this opportunity, the Summer is now drawing on, and then you may well imagine
that your condition will be lower, and your terms (if any) harder: If you will
be pleased to afford me an answer, you may direct it to my Garrison of Swanzey,
where, saving my fidelity to the Cause, I shall be ready to the utmost to
express my self

Sir, Your humble Servant, Phil. Jones.
Swanzey, Jan. 12. 1645. For Tho. Bushel Esquire, Governor of Lundy.



SIR,
YOurs of the 12. of Jan. I received the 16. of March, the substance of which,
I confess to be good counsel, and true, except in your too full expressions,
of what I cannot pretend to my abilities; but concerning that Honorable person
you mention, to whom, for his particular obligations, I shall ever endeavor to
express my self a thankful acknowledger: And I hope his Lordship entertains
so charitable an opinion of me, that it never entered my thoughts to make use of
his Lordships Isle, either to his dislike, or prejudice, which I protest I only
adventured on, to prevent a worse Inhabitant, and to make use of its
convenience for my poor affairs in the Mines I undertook to discover at
Commartin, for the general good, which I have better hopes in, and shall
account richer, because they were settled to me in Parliament, by his Honors
favor: and withal the retirement of this place, as a means to disingage the
obligations of my friends, the only earthly riches I aim at. Now Sir, to
vindicate my self to you, to whom I desire I were better known, the bearer
having so fully acquainted me with your worth, I have sent you the Copy of a
Letter, which not long since I wrote to Mr. Goodier of Heathrop in Oxfordshire,
and Mr. James Ingram of the Fleet, who are well known to my Lord about an
exchange of some Lands I have in those parts for this place, which lies near
his Lordship; but for those conditions you mention, when his Honor clerly
understands the sincerity of of my heart, I am confident there will be no
dispute between us, it being a place of such privacy, as my disposition is well
known to affect, had not the troubles of these unhappy times made me more in
love with; so that should his Lordship through any man's suggestion, and
misunderstanding of my innocent intention be invited to a rough proceeding with
me, his Lordship may perchance sacrifice a true servant, but one who will never
express himself an enemy; for I am resolved to leave the place to his Majesty,
who first entrusted me with it, rather then enjoy it without his Honors
consent, and so remaining

Sir, Your humble Servant, T. B.
Lundy 19 March 1645.
My dear Friends,
ALthough the distractions of these times have many ways added to my
melancholy, yet me thinks I suffer in naught so much, as in that they
permitted me not to see you; nor to give you an account of my proceedings in
the hopeful Mines of Commartin, which I doubt not, with my Customs, will soon
put me in a condition to requite all courtesies of a fruitful gratitude,
especially if you can treat with my Lord Say for this Isle of Lundy; which
place, though in it self is desolate and stormy, and has naught to invite an
Inhabitant, except one of my temper who therefore loves it, because it seems of
kin to the Isle I lived in before, as also in regard it lies convenient for our
Mines at Commartin; I do therefore again desire you to take the first
opportunity to acquaint my Lord Say, that if any thing I have in Oxfordshire
may better please him, then this remote Rock, let his Honor make his own
conditions, and I will stand to them, although it proves of a greater value, I
remain

Your Servant, T. B.
Lundy 19 Feb. 1645. For his honored Friends James Ingram, and Edmond Goodier,
Esquire;



SIR,
In consideration, you live on an Island, where you may not have the certainty
of what God in his goodness has done for Englands well affected ones; I being
by the High Court of Parliament placed Vice Admiral of these Seas, have
thought it fit to send you these Summons, and that God may as well touch your
heart, as he has done many other of your side, I thought needful to declare
to you, that not only all the West, (except some 5 places) are come in
obedience to the Parliament, but almost all England, as by the enclosed list of
victories does appear (to God be the glory) And that happily you may plead you
will do what the King does; here I send you the Copy of his Letter to the High
Court of Parliament to come in; as also, a Copy of what entertainment is at
London provided for him, that so if you be not wilfully blind, you may see in
what a forlorn condition you will be in, if you surrender not the Island to his
right masters use. Your positive answer he expects, that would be your friend,
if you would be your own, and so rests,

John Crouther.
Happy Entrance Regis under Lundy. 20 April. 1646.
Worthy SIR,
I Have received your Summons, and to let you know my respects and affection I
have to the owner of this Isle, as likewise to the Parliament, preserving my
loyalty to the King my master; I have sent you the Copy of my Letter to the
Governor of Swanzey, and his Majesty, concerning the same, which I expect daily
an answer, the which if it cannot satisfy your disposition for the present, I
must be forced to stand upon my own defense, in regard I value my reputation
above life or fortune, and so with my hearty thanks for your news, in that
hopes it gives me of a desired peace, I remain

Your true Friend and Servant if you please, T. B.
From Lundy 20 April. 1646.
SIR,
HAving received this enclosed from the Committee of both Kingdoms, I have sent
this Drummer unto you, giving you this assurance, that if you please to repair
to my headquarters, or to any other place in the Parliaments quarters, to
speak with such as my self, or my Lord Say shall appoint to meet you; you shall
have a safe conduct for your coming, and return: or if you think not fit to
come forth of the Island your self, to send one to signify your mind
concerning this business of my Lord Says, or to him he shall appoint here with
me,

Your Servant T. Fairfax.
Colomb. Iohn-house 8 April. 1646.
Die Lunae 12 January. 1645. At the Committee of both Kingdoms at Darby House.
IT is Ordered that a proposition be made to Mr. Bushel, that if he will
deliver up the Isle of Lundy, this Committee will use their endeavors with the
Parliament, that he may be restored to his Interest in the Silver Mines.

Gualter Pressed Secret. to the same Committee.

SIR,
YOurs of the 8 of this month I received not till this morning, else I had
returned a sooner answer; that had not your occasions removed you from these
parts, I would not have failed to have waited on your Excellency, for I should
have thought your promise Sir of my free return to be more impregnable then
Lundy; but to let you know the clearness of my proceedings, and my true respect
to my Lord Say, I have enclosed these Letters, which at your leisure you may be
pleased to peruse; assuring your Honor, that I will dispatch a friend with all
the speed I can to his Lordship, and I doubt not of procuring a way both to
deserve the continuance of his Lordships friendship, and to preserve my
fidelity to the King my master, which I hope your Honors patience will allow
me, having no other design, but to preserve my fortune, for the discharge of
my debts, to which if your goodness will but countenance, it may be reckoned
amongst your victories; and will oblige many more besides,

Sir, your humble Servant, T. B.
Lundy 3 April. 1646. For his Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax, etc.



May it please your Excellency,
ACcording to your commands, and my promise, in my last Letter, I have sent
this Gentleman my kinsman to wait upon your Honor and my Lord Say, to whom I
have given full power to conclude my Surrender of Lundy, having obtained my
masters consent thereunto; and to that purpose I have likewise desired him to
wait upon his Majesty, whose goodness I am confident will not deny me a favor
of a higher nature, and without which, a grant were it of the Indies, should
not invite me to it, for I am resolved what ever becomes of me, my name shall
never be found amongst theirs, who have betrayed their trust, which fidelity I
presume your Honor cannot but approve of, where he is an enemy, who is

Your humble Servant, T. B.
Lundy 14 May. 1646. For his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax, etc.



An answer to the Vice-Admirals Message.
SIR,
IN Answer of your Message, whether I keep this Isle wholly for the King, or
for the King and Parliament, the which for to prevent any mistake: Know Sir, I
was trusted by the King, and keep but my private family, without injuring of
any, which obliges me to preserve, until I have a return of the Treaty
enclosed, sent by an Order from the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms, with
a Letter of His Excellency, Sir Tho. Fairfax, wherein to accommodate their
Honors desires, and preserve my own reputation with the King my master, I did
upon sight thereof, dispatch my friend and kinsman to conclude the business,
but if you, or any other, shall conceive my proceedings to be not justifiable
in your own conscience, before God and man, let the blood that is spilt light
upon those that are the occasion, so remains

Your Friend and Servant, as I find you mine, T. B.
Happy Entrance Regis in Lundy Road. 20 May. 1646.
May it please your Majesty,
THe enclosed I received from my Lord Says servant, who is now Governor of
Swanzey, which I conceive was sent by his Lordships direction, wherein he
invites me to the surrender of this Isle, being his Lordships known purchase;
in the perusal of which, I was not at all startled at the threats therein, but
must confess my self moved at the obligation it minds me of, with which I
formerly acquainted your Majesty in the presence of my Lord of Dorset, since
which Captain Crouther, Vice Admiral of these Seas summoned me to surrender
this place. And not long after Sir Tho. Fairfax sent a Drummer with his Letter,
and an Order from the Committee of both Kingdoms, wherein they proposed their
assistance in restoring me to my Interest in the silver Mines, if that I would
deliver up this Island to my Lord Say. Your Majesty well knows how I have
maintained Lundy at no other Contribution but my own, and how cheerfully I have
exposed my friends, and my own credit for your service, as well as exhausted
them in the discovery of the Mines royal; besides the place in it self is
useless, except in some advantages it may yield to me, if your sacred Majesty
would be pleased to vouchsafe me leave to express my gratitude to my Lord Say
by my quiet and free surrendering it, which I hope your goodness will not deny
me, but if otherwise, your Majesty shall require my longer stay here; be
confident Sir, I shall Sacrifice both life and fortune, before the Loyalty of

Your obedient humble Servant, T. B.
Lundy 14. May, 1646.
His Majesty's Answer to Mr. Bushel, concerning the surrender of Lundy.
BVSHEL,
WE have perused your Letter, in which We find thy care to Answer thy trust We
at first reposed in thee; now since the place is unconsiderable in it self, and
yet may be of great advantages unto you, in respect of your Mines, We do hereby
give you leave to use your discretion in it, with this Caution, that you do
take example from Our selves, and be not over-credilous of vain promises, which
has made Us great, only in our sufferings, and will not discharge your debts.

From Newcastle 14. July, 1646.
May it please your Honors,
HAving received your courteous Order of Treaty concerning my surrender of
Lundy, enclosed in a Letter from his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, by the hands
of his Drummer; I held it an obligation of my duty to dispatch my friend and
kinsman unto your Honors for the conclusion of the business, but instead of an
expected reply, I was resummoned by Captain Crouther the Vice Admiral; as also
my servants has been since apprehended and imprisoned as Traitors against the
State, which in its self I value not, but as it concerns your Honors, and his
Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax, who assured me the safety of my own person, much
more my servant; for if these be the fruits of your Honorable favors, or the
Parliaments peace with me, who ever honor them next to my master: I shall
henceforward give no credence to man, but will prepare my self for what
condition the Almighty shall dispose me, in being confident of a happy issue;
having never wronged any in these times of public Rapine, where commands are
now only sought, either to betray or oppress the Country, in which catalogue I
assure your Honors, my name shall never be found; for if your patience will not
give me leave to part fairly with Lundy, and at once to express my fidelity to
my master, and my respects to your Honors, the world shall then see at how
cheap a rate I value my life or fortune, when they stand in competition with my
trust; and therefore I hope your Honors wisdoms will advise of some Nobler
way, then in time of Treaty and compliance to surprise so mean an encounter, as
me and my poor family, which covets to remain

Your humble Servant.
Lundy 14. June, 1646. For the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms.



May it please your Excellency,
I Have taken the boldness to vindicate your Honor, the Vice-Admirals Summons,
and preserve a right understanding of the proposed Treaty to me, from the
Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms concerning my surrender of Lundy; that
their Pious Order, nor your good intentions according to the Noble presidents
of your other actions may not be blasted by the errors of others ends, unless
they can assure their rough proceedings to carry a palm of victory in their
hands with less prejudice, then your wisdoms has prescribed the way for.

Sir, your humble servant T. B.
Lundy 14. June, 1646. For his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax.



My Honored Lord,
I Have received you Noble Letter the 20. of June, and likewise an Order from
the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms the 12 of April the which, in
obedience thereunto, and for preserving my loyal duty to the King my master, I
did then speedily return the enclosed Letter by my friend and kinsman, for
settling of the business in such a way, as I conceive might not infringe my
fidelity to his Majesty's trust, nor in conclusion, be wanting of my gratitude
to your Lordship. Be pleased therefore to have but a little patience that I may
perform the same Justice to your Honor, as I would have done to my self,
without any prejudice to your Lordship, or repentance to your Servant; and the
harvest shall be such, as your posterity may have just cause to bear in memory
my integrity to your Honor, and my demeanor to my country: For having received
a second Letter from your Lordship, that his Majesty's pleasure is to command
all garrisons should be surrendered upon Honorable terms, it were an ignoble
Act in me, to keep away the inheritance from him that I am so much obliged to
Honor as your Lordship, and therefore that your own conscience might witness
how desirous my affection is to obey your Honors commands, I am willing to
descend to the lowest condition of Honorable terms that can be admitted by
the Laws of morality, reason, or religion, which is in a word, to have but my
poor estate as well restored me for the payment of my just debts, with an Act
of Oblivion for my servants, as I have been careful to preserve your Honors
Isle at my own charge, without doing the least injury to any; and for the same
purpose I have reco^mended the overture of my humble demands, to the Honorable
Court of Parliament, by one Mr. Squire, who was sent to me from the Honored
Committee of Devon, to Treat upon the like terms, which makes me the more
assured of a happy issue; knowing their Piety, my own innocence, and your
Lordships inclination to Justice, I remain,

My Lord, Your Honors obliged Servant, T. B.
Lundy 28. June, 1646. For the Right Honorable, the Lord Viscount Say, and
Seal.



Mr. Bushels demands to the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms upon their
Treaty for his surrendering Lundy.
THat having on his part obtained his Majesty's consent for delivering up the
Isle into the Honorable hands of the right owner, with the consideration of
his several losses by Sea and land, and his great charges in the fortification
thereof, to preserve a retired condition, so that it fears no enemy, was by
himself humbly desired, but to have an Act of Oblivion for his servants, and
his own Estate restored him toward the payment of his just debts, and
following his public calling in Minerals; as also their Honorable countenance,
so far as they find his actioas correspondent, for the good of the Common
wealth, viz. His several grants of the Mines, Mint, and customs of Lead, with
his goods and Estate at Enston, to be restored him, and confirmed in
Parliament: As also 100 Tuns of his own Lead, and 100 Tuns of Potters Ore, to
be brought from his Mines in Wales to Bydeford, for the better discharge of his
debts in Devon, and recovering the deserted works of his Mines at Commartin,
before he surrender the Isle of Lundy: with such privileges for his Miners,
and the said Parish of Commartin, where the Mines Royal is found, as the Laws
of other Nations allow, in cases of like nature.

SIR,

IT did much astonish my understanding, to hear that the Honorable house of
Parliament, should in their wisdoms distribute those Mines of Wales, to my
enemies, when their better judgment can well remember, my chargable adventures
grew so great, as my undertakings were pitied by my friends, and insulted over
by men more willing to condemn, then to examine, until the disposer of all
things had repleated my endeavors, with the gift of his providence: As likewise
the heavy burden of their displeasures, in besieging me and my poor family at
sea, and barring all commerce from me by land, knowing that my conscience
witnesses I ever Honored them next to my master, nor never injured any in
these times of Common Rapine, without it were in my humble requesting the
restitution of my poor fortune, for the payment of my just debts, or the
freedom of my servants to work in the said Mines, whilst I Petition Heaven for
a further discovery of his mercies toward me, in this my retirement to the
naked promontory of Lundy, the considerations whereof, has so redoubled my
griefs, that if I had not made a resignation of my sufferings in soul, body,
and estate, to the eternal and Divine power of Justice, for contemning the
revenge of injustice, my disposition of humane patience would have been
transported into weak passions, and followed the instructions of those who
advised me to take goods at sea, unless I were restored my right at land; but
such Counselors are fit for war, and not for peace, for Heathens, not for
Christians, when the remedy is worse then the disease; and therefore you may be
confident Sir, the lowest condition of misery, shall not enforce me to an act
of violating that moral and Divine Law, (do as you would be done unto) which
has made me deposite double the value in your masters hands, I. C. for what
commodities my constrained necessity compels me to borrow from your ship called
the Fortune: This being the occasion, and true state of my condition, I hope
your charity will judge friendly of him, who covets to requite such a
christian-like courtesy.

T. B.
Lundy 20 September. 1646. For the Master of the Barque called the Fortune.



SIR,
GIve me leave lovingly to question your judgment, for omiting this fair
opportunity, in making up your breach with the Parliament, since all other
garrisons are surrendered except yours of Lundy, which is generally conceived,
will no ways advance the Kings cause, as things now stands, nor your credit to
keep the Isle from the right owner, but be certain to increase yours, and my
sufferings that is deeply engaged for you: wherefore I hope your prudent care,
and professed honesty will look as well upon your friends misery, as altogether
the service of his Majesty, and not leave me to the mercy of an enemy, nor your
self exposed to the trophy of their pity, when it now remains in your power to
remedy the one, and come off with Honorable terms in the other; knowing by
Proclamation your past and present Actions is charged as the greatest crimes,
and to those that shall relieve you, conceived as Traitors against the State,
for your forwardness in recruiting his Majesty's Army with a thousand Miners,
at his first entrance to these wars, clothing his soldiers, supplying his
Magazine with Ammunition of Lead, and bringing your Mint from the Castle of
Aberistwith, to pay them; as also disobeying their several Summons by Sea and
Land, for surrendering Lundy: These, with many other accusations, if not timely
prevented, will I fear fall fatal upon your life and fortune, which God in his
good time avert, shall be the daily prayers of

Your faithful friend, J. J.
20. August, 1646.
Mr. Bushels Answer to a friends Letter, which by way of Admonition threatens
his life and fortune.
SIR,
TO prevent your fears, and seeming jealousies of my proceedings, I have not
only sent your deep engagements canselled, as an affection I bear to
friendship, but likewise my innocent answer, and resolution here enclosed, of
those pretended crimes laid to my charge in the lining of your Letter, being
confident it will satisfy the moderate hearers, if not aggravate by malevolent
spirits, whose envy I so much contemn, as were my person upon the Scaffold of
execution, I should signify the same expression, and pity their judgments
that have surrendered those strong garrisons of the Kings, or were not forward
to maintain the Royalty of his Majesty's legal Rights, in regard I fear the
honor and fidelity of our English people to their Sovereign Prince will
thereby be called in question, and through their own transgression be punished
by another Nation, which is the only cause, I ingenuously profess, makes me
covet to maintain the place at my own charge, rather then be in the List of so
prodigious a Story to future posterity, without any disrespect to the
Honorable Owner, whom I am obliged to honor in a fruitful gratitude, next to
my Master: Thus is the condition and intention of your servant, that conceives
it more secure in point of morality, reason, and religion, to pay my tribute
debt due to nature for performing the commands of my just Prince, then live to
enjoy any earthly content with a guilty conscience, by betraying the trust of
Gods Anointed; and therefore to deny the truth of my actions, were to deny my
Master, which for replication to your objection, I shall reduce the reasons
that induced me to it, as I must give an account at the high Tribunal; That my
compliance to serve his Majesty, was not out of an ill respect to the
Honorable Parliament, but as a loyal duty to my Masters Commands, and in a
confident hope to balance the breach between King and Parliament, as no forced
power should not be able to take away the Regality of his Sovereign Rights, nor
his Prerogative trench any more upon the privilege of his native Subjects,
being his sworn servant before the wars, and I conceive permitted by the
Parliaments Honorable Order to attend his person, whose Mint, is well known to
the meanest man, that it was his Majesty's, and therefore in me double
ungrateful if I had not restored it; disobedient if not obeyed his Commands
for conducting his Miners, or unworthy of ever farming his Mines Royal, if
refused him a parcel of his own Lead for his money, being then at the
Parliaments pleasure to command the like; and for my retirement to Lundy, it is
well known, the occasion was my affection to solitude, the pressing of my
Miners at Commartin, as also to prevent an ill Inhabitant, which should have
prejudiced the Kings cause, the Countries traffic and surprise the honorable
Owner from his purchased right, but to demean my self so therein, as my
conscience might not accuse me of an unjust act during the Government, nor the
adjacent Countries be charged with the maintenance: And for clothing the Kings
Army, I am confident the Commonwealth will receive as much benefit thereby, as
my service therein has done his Majesty; for having the Customs of Lead
assigned me in satisfaction of my great disbursements, it obliges my diligence
the more to discover new Mines, and recover the old, when I have no other hopes
of re-imbursing my engagements, but by increasing the staple commodity of Lead,
which is as well known to the general State much decayed, as my particular
adventures can witness to the world my discovery: Besides sir, your better
judgment may well conceive others would have undertaken the service, and not
be so careful of surprising plundered Clothes from the unruly soldiers, with
buying it again, to the full value of the right owners, which I refer for proof
to the poor men that made it by their honest calling, and so committing you to
Gods protection, as my innocent preparation to this Summons of death in your
Letter of admonition, which to question your secrecy, having made you my
Confessor, were a sin in

Your servant, T. B.
Lundy 24. September, 1646.
SIR,
I Have received, my Honorable Lord, your Fathers Letter, and the Honorable
Committees Order, to treat with you concerning the Surrender of Lundy, the
which I shall not only most willingly obey, but if your affection has a desire
to see the Isle, as I am informed by Major Pomeroy, I do here promise you, upon
the faith of a Christian, and the word of a Gentleman, you shall be heartily
welcome both going and coming, for the Major has given such a Character of
your worth and merit, as I desire to be acquainted with so noble a nature, and
should have waited upon you my self, were it not for some reasons this
Gentleman can acquaint you from the

Servant of your Commands, T. B.
Lundy 19. November, 1646. For his Honored friend Major Fienes Present.



Die Saturni 31. October. 1646. At the Committee of both Kingdoms at Darby house.
ORdered, that whereas formerly leave was given to the Right Honorable Lord
Viscount Say and Seal, to treat with Mr. Bushel about the rendering up of
Lundy Island, and that this Committee did undertake to do their endeavors,
that upon the surrendering the said Isle, the Delinquency of the said Mr. Bushel
should be taken off, and he restored to his Interest in the silver Mines: It is
now Ordered, that all the Soldiers there with Mr. Bushel, shall have the same
benefit of the endeavors of this Committee upon the surrender aforesaid, to
have their Delinquency taken off, they being not men of Estate, and they shall
have liberty to go to their own homes, and live there unmolested, they being
obedient to the Laws of the Kingdom, and submitting to all Ordinances in
Parliament: And that the Lord Say shall have time to continue to treat with
them for two months after the expiration of the time formerly granted.

By Command of the same Committee. Gualter Pressed, Secret.

My Lord,
I Have received your Letter, and the Honorable Committees Order of both
Kingdoms, by your hopeful son, which should be most willingly obeyed, could I
relieve my losses, or cancel my obligations, with the sight of their good
intentions, but if the Honorable Committee will be pleased to procure the
performance of my estate, and those immunities I formerly sent, here enclosed,
by an Ordinance in Parliament, toward the payment of my just debts, and the
prosecution of my public inployments before my surrender, which as I am
informed by Mr. Squire who was employed by the Commissioners of Devon to the
same purpose, that their pious Charity have engaged their endeavors to
accomplish my humble desires after my surrender, otherwise I must be forced
through a constrained necessity, to beg leave of your Lordship, for its
convenience, as the refuge of my fortune, to right my unsupportable sufferings
by Sea and land, which hitherto I have patiently endured, and preserved the
place against all foreign oppositions at my own charge, without assistance
from his Majesty, or prejudice to any, as the countries adjacent will inform
your Lordship: it being contrary to the disposition of my natural inclination,
for seeking a restoration from the ruins of others, that never injured me, but
rather to wait upon the Parliaments justice, for satisfying my Creditors out of
the demands of my mean fortune, which I am confident no man with an honest
conscience can deny me; and for any other, I fear not the power of their
greatness, knowing my resolution and innocence, is prepared to encounter their
cruelties, were it the worst of evils, and not fear life, or that Delinquencie;
which loyalty to the King my Master has laid upon me, when the consequence
stands in competition with my reputation, as Orphans and Widows are wanting of
satisfaction. Be pleased therefore in your Lordships wisdom, as a prudent care
to the Piety of peace, to recommend once more my civil request, here enclosed,
to the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms, least the blood that may be spilt
light not upon your Honor, nor your family, as upon those that hinder the
progress of so happy a Treaty; for some reasons, this Gentleman can better
inform your Lordship by relation then my self, by a Letter, whom I sent on
purpose, to know the Parliaments positive answer, least a dellatory Treaty
should force me to fall into another famine, which Gods providence has
miraculously relieved me, when all the world had left me, and therefore I fear
not what the malice of man can do to

Your Lorships humble Servant T. B.
Lundy 24. November, 1646. For the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Say and
Seal.



Mr. Bushel,
THat which the Committee of both Kingdoms have undertaken, which was to take
off all Delinquencie from your self and those who are with you in the Island
and thereby all sequestration of your Estate, and a pardon for what has been
done since these wars, in respect of the war, or by occasion of that, I assure
my self you may rest secured shall be done, if you will deliver me my own: And
truly why I should suffer from my friend in my inheritance, I know not, neither
do I see the equity or Justice of it: I have now an opportunity to do you a
good office, and having once set you Rectus Incuria, I shall do you pleasures
in that which withal may be for the public good: the King is now come to
Holdenby, and you have kept that place when all others are rendered, as I think
the longest: It will be just and Honorable for you, now upon terms, for your
own Indemnity, in respect of what you have done, and those who are with you,
to deliver it: If you will buy that which is mine, give me 3000 li. for all
that is there, you shall have it, so you keep it, not to offend the State,
which I think you intend not: if these either cannot be done, or you like it
not, keep not from the Owner that which is his; let me know your resolution,
and I then will send my Son thither, if you will render it upon the terms the
Committee have undertaken:

Your very loving Friend, W. Say and Seal.
February 16. 1646. For Mr. Bushel at Lundy.



My Honorable Lord,
YOur Noble Letter of advice is to me a Law, and your virtuous promise, to take
me into your care of protection, is in my estimation a liberty above Magna
Charta, or the strength of Lundy; and therefore your Lordship may rest assured
of your inheritance delivered to your hopeful son, upon the sight of his
person, or satisfaction for the same according to your Honorable desires; for
upon the faith of a Gentleman, my intention was never no otherwise, then to
obey my Masters Commands in keeping of the place, without prejudice of any,
much less to your Lordship, other then to live retired, and see my poor Estate
justly distributed toward payment of my debts, as his Majesty can bear me
witness: And in regard your Lordship might discern the Candidnesse of my
heart, and innocence of my soul, I have taken this great journey to kiss your
hands, that I may have the Honor to wait upon your worthy son back, and secure
the state of my fidelity to his Majesty, and their Honors, of any future trust
reposed, when I have given your Lordship real satisfaction, according to your
just demands, or take my leave of your Lordship, and wish you a better Tenant,
I rest,

Your devoted Servant, T. B.
Commartin 24. March, 1646. For the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Say and
Seal.



To the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Say and Seal.
WE the Inhabitants of the Counties of Devon and Cornwall, and nearest
borderers upon the Island of Lundy, do in all humility certify your Lordship,
that Mr. Bushel, since his abode in the said Isle in the times of the late
war, has been so far from oppressing us in any kind, that he has been a
means of some advantage to us by keeping the said Island, and your Lordships
inheritance out of the hands of some persons, who (as we are credibly informed)
would have made use of it to the prejudice of these and other parts of the
Kingdom. And further, we are bold to certify your Lordship, that the said Mr.
Bushel has adventured great sums of money to recover the deserted and drowned
Mines of Commartin, which is strongly reported to be very hopeful by his
means, and by his continued industry may prove very exceeding advantageous to
the common good, and to these Western parts in particular: now in regard some
of our neighbors, to whom he is indebted for certain sums lent to further him
in his noble and great design, to recover the said Mines; having received this
annexed Letter from the said Mr. Bushel, and fearing that they and we should
be deprived of so good a neighbor, and so industrious for the public good, do
hereupon humbly entreat your Lordship (if it may stand with your convenience
and good liking) still to admit of his continuance in the said Island, that so
by his care and charge we may live secure, and by his knowledge, and active
diligence, bring the great work of the said Mines, from hopes, to certainties.
This is our humble request in his behalf, if it be not in the matter of it
prejudicial to the State, or disadvantagious to your Lordship.

William Carry. George Carry, Rector of Clovelly. William Greenway, Minister.
Henry Prust. Rich. Kinsam. John Pollard. John Sanders. William Lange. James
Lile. Nic. Shapley, Sen. Nic. Shapley, Jun. Ruben Laurence. Ric. Tomb. Hugh
Nicolas. Aughter Lyle, Sen. Aughter Lyle, Jun. Tho. Snow. Peter Lyle. Jo.
Shapley. Ric. Cleverton. George Mungoy, Curate. Jo. Crange. Tho. Velly. Hen.
Iuell. Jo. Bagilhole. George Grigg. Jo. Way. Justinian Yeo. Ric. Bagilhole. Jo.
Nicholl. Jo. Cook. Jo. Band. Francis Row. Peter Row. Tho. Row. Will.
Mugford. Ric. Crange. Ric. Smith. Jo. Husband. Ric. Yeo. Ric. Trick. Tho.
Cook. Jo. Band. Antho. Luttrell. Nic. Luttrell. Will. Heardwick. Jo. Bishop.
Tho. Luttrell. Jo. Lynthorne, alias Loy. Nic. Pitton. Jo. Skame. Matthew
Brook. Ric. Leach. Abra. Bond. Jo. Friend. Jo. Juell. Hugh Deymond. Jo. Cook.
William Prideaux. Charles Yeo. John Cock. With many hundreds more.


My Lord,
I Have found Mr. Bushel so much a Gentleman of his word, in the surrender of
your Island of Lundy to me, according to his Excellency, and your Lordships
Order, for the use of the Parliament; That upon Thursday last being the 24th of
February himself with his officers and soldiers took shipping for Ilford
Comb, with purpose to employ them in his chargeable adventures of recovering
the dejected works of Commartyne, Mines, and his other Minerals in Wales, The
reality of which actions, together with the general report of his Noble
proceedings in his public affairs, without taking contribution from the
Country, or violence to any man, all this while he has kept the said Island
and Garrison of Lundy, (although the last in surrender) does double oblige me
to become an humble suitor to your Lordships, that if any man shall go about to
infringe the Ordinance of the Honorable House of Parliament, and his
Excellencies agreement made with Mr. Bushel and your Lordship for restoring
him his Estate, and taking off the delinquency of his soldiers, (whose names
are here underwritten) that it may be looked upon as an act tending to the
dishonor bot of his Excellency and your Lordship, and therefore that both
himself and they be thus far taken into your Lordships care of protection,
which is the humble request of

Your ever dutiful Son, Richard Finnes.
Lundy 24th of February 1647.
May it please your Excellency
TO be informed, that according to your Commands, and Mr. Bushels promise, both
me and my soldiers met him at the Kay of Crovelly, being the place appointed,
and the nearest harbor to take shipping for Lundy, where we were forced to
stay fifteen days for a wind, before we could arrive into the Road of Lundy;
And his Lieutenant having notice that it was us by their Governor Mr. Bushels
shooting off a pistol, gave us at our landing a salutation with all his Guns,
and a volle of shot, as an entertainment of friendship, and free welcome, which
made me so confident of his former professed fidelity in surrendering the same,
that both my self and my men marched through his guard unto the Castle,
commanding his own men to remain in another house, lest the ignorance of some
men on both sides might beget a difference through exchange of language, and
misunderstanding of the truth; but so soon as they had understood the Kings
consent for a surrender to the right Owner, and the Conditions made on their
behalf by their Governor Mr. Bushel with your Excellency and my Lord, the
morning tide following they took shipping for Ilford Comb, where he purposes
to employ them in his chargeable adventures of recovering the distressed works
of Commartyn Mines, and his other Minerals in Wales. The Garrison being thus
freely surrendered, with all things thereunto belonging, for Ammunition of Guns,
and household stuff, according to his engagement upon the word of a Gentleman,
but having demanded of his Lieutenant Mr. Richard Cock what store of provision
was left in the Island, he replied with a deep protestation, that for six
months before Mr. Bushel went over to treat with your Excellency, according
to your letter sent by your Drummer, they nor their Governor had not eaten a
bit of bread in six months, nor scarce drank a barrel of bear in two years,
alleging the occasion was the Governors known losses by land and sea, which
caused diverse of the soldiers to decline the service, upon his proposal of
eating horseflesh, And made the hearts of those that stayed the more willinger
to endure all hardness to obey his Commands, without trespassing of any by
land or sea, were it to the loss of their lives; this integrity of theirs, and
the honesty of the Governor, as also his public employment in Minerals for
the Common good, being confirmed by the Country, makes me humbly present their
names here underwritten, as Officers and soldiers of the last Garrison, and
men that have done the least of injuries, notwithstanding their sad condition,
which I wish for the president of others, they may be looked upon as the best of
enemies that have Conditions from the Honorable Parliament, and your
Excellency, I remain

Your devoted Servant, Richard Finnes.
Lundy the 24th. Feb. 1647.
A List of those men's names which I found upon the ISLAND.
Tho. Bushel Esquire; Governor. Mr. Rich. Cock Lieut. Gover. Capt. Edward Owen.
Major Rich. Pomeroy. Lieute. Oliver Bouck. Rich. Kynsam. William Gilbert.
Gunne^^. John Scott. Gunne^^. John Trout. William Skinner. Daniel Hanger. Tho.
Brayley. Henry Battee. James Bonden. Samuel Shortridge. Jo. Wheeler. Jo.
Thorn. Geo. Gilbert. Rich. Harris. William Matheage. Rich. Chi^ge. Fra. Hobbs.
Richard Finnes.
Copia vera.
May it please your Excellency.
THe King my Master having commanded me to restore the Honorable Lord Say his
Isle of Lundy, upon sight of his Lordships Letter to me directed the 16th. of
Feh. 1646. and the Conditions propounded by your Excellency, with a wish from
His Majesty, that would to God every man had his own, and then he should have
some thing, which has made me surrender the said Isle with all the Alacratie
and freeness to that noble Gentleman Mr. Richard Fiennes, according to your
Excellencies Commands, as by his letter here enclosed does appear; which makes
me now descend into the bowels of the earth, for discovering Mineral
treasures, that by it through Gods providence I might have hope to redeem my
late losses by sea and land, as none others should have share in the sufferings
but your servant, upon confidence that your Excellency will free my servants
employed in so public a work, for the common good, from pressing, according
to the intention and true meaning of the Honorable Ordinance of both Houses.
The obligation whereof binds me not only to follow this harmles calling for
the Common good, but esteem your Excellencies piety for preserving the poor
Mariner from the rapine of an ill natured Commander in the time of civil
wars, as the greatest benefactour that I seek from the bounty of mortal
man, all which I humbly submit to your Excellencies Nobleness, and rest,

Your obliged Servant, T. B.
Comartyn 11. March. 1647.
WHereas I formerly sent a safe conduct to Tho. Bushel Esquier to come and
treat with Lord Uicount Say and Seal, or my Self, abut the Surrender of the
Isle of Lundy; And the two Houses of Parliament, Ordered that upon the delivery
of the said Island, the delinquency of the said Mr. Bushel, and the soldiers
upon the said Island, shall be taken off, and he restored to his Estate with
the Mines, in Wales, Devon and Cornwall And whereas I understand that he has
so far proceeded in the. Treaty with the Lord Say concerning it, that he is
now ready to go to Lundy, and deliver up the same so soon as the Lord Say
shall appoint any person to whose hands the custody thereof shall be committed,
but proposes he may have his freedom till he can recover the possession of his
Estate restored to him by Parliament; I conceiving it very reasonable that he
should have some time to settle his Estate, and being not willing to agree to
such an uncertain limitation of time as is proposed, have (for the reasons
aforesaid, and for that his civil carriage, and endeavors to advance the
public, are certified from the country) agreed to grant the same for the
space of six months. And therefore do hereby give free liberty to the said
Thomas Bushel to pass to the said Isle of Lundy, and to return to London, or
continue there, or in other parts of this Kingdom, free from any arrests,
suits, or molestation whatsoever, for the space of six months, to begin and
commence from the time of the surrender of the said Isle, or to go beyond the
seas if he shall think fit so to do. And all Justices of the peace, Majors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, officers, soldiers, and other persons whatsoever whom it
may concern, are to take notice hereof, and conform accordingly as they will
answer the contrary at a Council of war.

Fairfax.
Given under my Hand and Seal the 30th. of October, 1647. At my Quarters at
Turneham Green.
Die Sabathi 10. Julii. 1647.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That upon the
delivery up of the Isle of Lundy to the Lord Viscout Say, and Seal, or his
assigns, by Mr. Thomas Bushel, the Delinquency of the said Thomas Bushel be
taken off, and all sequestration in respect thereof be discharged; And he and
his assigns restored to all such rights, as he or they had, or ought to have
in the Mines in Devonshire, Wales, and Cornwall, and to all his other Estates
and Rights whatsoever, And that the men that were with him in the Island,
(being not soldiers of estate and fortune be pardoned and freed from
delinquency.

H. Elsing. Cler. Par. Dom. Com.


