A VINDICATION OF Mr BVRROVGHES, Against Mr EDWARDS his foul Aspersions, in
his spreading Gangraena, and his angry Antiapologia.

Concluding with A BRIEF DECLARATION What the INDEPENDENTS would have.

By JER: BURROUGHES.

JER. 20.10. Report, say they, and we will report.

PROVE. 18.8. The words of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into
the innermost parts of the belly.

Tertul. advers. Hermogenem. Hermogenes natura turbulentus, qui loquacitatem
facundiam existimet, and impudentiam constantiam deputet, and maledicere
singulis officium bonae conscientiae judicet.

LONDON, Printed for H. Overton, and are to be sold at his shop at the entering
into Pope's Head Alley out of Lumbard-street. MDCXLVI.

A Vindication of Mr Burroughes, Against M. Edwards his foul Aspersions.
ALthough I may venture upon the testimony of the consciences of those who know
me, to vindicate me from M. Edwards his foul aspersions; Nec audiendi sunt
quando reprehensa in aliquo negligentia sua, per qua^ fit ut in malam
suspicionem vemant, unde sua^ vitam long abesse sciunt, dicunt sibi coram Deo
sufficere conscientiam, existimationem hominum non imprudenter solum,
verumetia^ crudeliter contemnentes. Quisquis a criminibus vitam suam custodit,
sibi been facit; quisquis etiam famam, and in alios misericors est, nobis
necessaria est vita nostra, aliis fama. Aug. de bono viduitatis, c. 22.
yet hearing there are some whose spirits are as dried tinder to his sire, (if
men were willing to be undeceived, and not to run away with foolish
conceits.) I thought it might not be amiss to spend an hour or two upon this
vain man. Augustine says, Those are not to be hearkened to, who having
suspicion raised of them which they know themselves to be free of, shall say,
their conscience in the presence of God is enough for them, and for the esteem
of men do not only imprudently contemn, but in it are cruel: That is, as he
after expresses himself against others which are hindered in the good they
might get by them, because the suspicion raised is not removed: For, says he,
A good life is necessary for our selves, but a good fame for others. You do
well to your self in being careful of your life, but you are merciful to
others in being careful of your name. Wherefore though mine own conscience is
enough to satisfy my self against what ever M. Edwards has written or said,
yet in mercy to others, and that I may not be wanting to my duty in removing
any stumbling block that might hinder the work of my Ministry, which I was
moved unto by a Letter sent to me from a good and worthy friend, I shall now
do that which I had thought I should never have brought my heart unto, viz. to
spend time in the vindication of my self. Might the hurt go no farther then
my self, if I did not do it, the meanest employment in the world should
rather take up my time then this, but something must be done. John was of a
most loving, sweet, and gentle temper, yet having to deal with a man of an
evil spirit, he speaks contemptuously of him, I will remember (says he) his
deeds, (...), prating against us with malicious words. Such a naughty spirit
appears in this man; so be it he can get filth to cast upon men, he cares not
out of what kennel he rakes it; as it is hard to meddle with him, to answer him
according to his folly without expressions against him, grievous to a spirit
that has any sweetness of love, or meekness in it; had I to deal with him
alone, I should only answer him in the words of the Angel, Jude 9. The Lord
rebuke thee. Yet the man is very impatient that he has no Answer, he
concludes, and would have others to do so too, that all he says is truth,
because there comes forth no Answer to it. It is a miserable thing that we must
be at the mercy of every one, who has a mind to accuse and rail, so as to be
bound to take off our selves from whatsoever employments God has set us about,
to attend the answering of whatsoever he says or writes; I hope I shall give
God a better account of my time then so. Whatsoever M. Edwards has written or
said concerning me, I bless God I can with comfort spread it before him, and
entreat him to judge between us.

He thinks he has done God and his Brethren good service, but I am very
confident, and I am not alone in this my confidence, that Bishop Wren was not
more mischievous to the Prelacy, then he has been to the Presbytery; I doubt
whether there ever was any in the Christian world who was looked upon as a man
professing godliness in that height that he has been, that ever manifested
so much boldness and malice against such as himself acknowledges to be godly,
as he has done; Were there nothing but the Presbyteriall opinion that made the
difference between him and me, I should not abate my esteem of his godliness
in the least, for I believe there are as godly Presbyterians as Independents.
But that fiery rage, that implacable irrational violence of his, makes me
stand and wonder at him, not so much for recording stories that he hears, but
that hearing such vile reproachful things against such as he ownes to be
godly, and the persons thus reproched living near him in the City, who it may
be might satisfy him in the falsnesse of the reports, so as to keep him from
publishing them, yea when some of them hearing what he was about, have sent to
him to tell him that if he would Confer with them they would satisfy him about
particulars they would clearly convince him, that such men were traduced, and
himself abused in such reports, yet that he should refuse to confer with them,
saying he had testimony enough, and so fall a laying on, take off who will or
can, herein following that wicked Jesuiticall Maxim, Fortiter calumniare,
aliquid haerebit, Calumniate lustily, boldly, no matter whether it be true or
false, something will stick. I believe this example can hardly be paralleld in
any age. How is it possible that he should ever right those he has wronged, if
he says he will recant if he can be convinced wherein any is wronged? That
will not do it, for how is he sure that his recantation shall come to the
knowledge of all, to whom his calumniation has come? is this enough for men's
names so traduced by him, for him afterward to say. I was told so, I was
misinformed? I beseech God to touch his heart, and the hearts of such as have
any way encouraged him in such a foul work.

There is an odious disease in nature, casting up the excrementitious
filthiness at the mouth, which is no less noisome then dangerous, therefore
the Physicians call it Miserere mei Deus. Thus exulcerate minds affected with
the like malady in morality, being surcharged with superfluity of choler and
malice, and not able to contain, break forth into distemper of words, and
pour it out in unsavory language; such we must leave to a Miserere mei. But
is M. Edwards sick of this disease? Does not he profess his zeal for God, his
dependence upon God for assistance very often?

Gangrana, he speaks of Printed pamphlets, where he says he was reproached,
but he was not willing to be provoked, or to trouble himself at the barking of
every dog; and for this he quotes in his margin M. Woodward, and M. Burton.
What is M. Burton become a dog now, and M. Woodward, who is a known ancient
godly man, a Schoolmaster, yet for ought I know no Independent, is he a dog in
M. Edwards his mouth and pen? If M. Edwards and his party rise in their spirits
according to this proportion, how can we live near them? what already got so
above M. Woodward and M. Burton, even whilst they are but in the shell, and see
power but hopefully to come into their hands, that they can look upon them as
dogs beneath them? I speak of M. Edwards and his party, because he says so
many have given him thanks for his Book.

In his last book I find him exceedingly fretting and vexing at a testimony
Master John Goodwin had under my hand against the truth of a story in his
Grangraena, which he says is full of Jesuiticall equivocation. Yea further, no
equivocation can free it from a lie. Bona verba. After master Edwards has done
fretting and chafing, after his fit is over, notwithstanding all he has said,
that testimony is, and must stand true, and will be found in the plainness of
it to be a witness against him: what! beyond equivocation? no less then a
flat lie. This is the first time that ever any man gave me the lie. But I pray
Master Edwards how do you know it is a lie? How? Master Allen (he mistakes the
man's name, the man he means is Master All) an honest understanding man he
says told him so, and after justified it in Master Bellamies shop in the
presence of many; This is the only witness Master Edwards has against me: as
for Master Randal whom he mentions, he speaks only of Nicols his being with M.
Greenhil at another time, not of that meeting I testify against, nor any thing
about my knowledge of him, nor any thing that Master Greenhill denies.
Howsoever then it is but ones I, and ones No: and yet how many have drunk in
this report as dirty and foul as it is? surely there is a spirit in men that
makes them very thirsty after Calumnies and reproaches. But what if this only
witness M. Edwards has to prove me a Liar, shall give it under his hand that
that testimony of mine is true, what if that which M. Edwards in the strength
of that witness shall say is a lie, I shall be able in the strength of the
same witness, say is true; where will the lie stick then? After M. John
Goodwins Book came out, I met with this M. All, and in the presence of many,
caused him to turn to that page where my testimony is, and to read it; I then
asked him, Whether that testimony of mine were true or not? He answered, for
any thing he knew it was true. Some in the company desired him to set his hand
to what he said; He presently took pen and ink, saying, he would write
according to what he apprehended, and so far as he knew, and wrote these
words, subscribing his name:

That the Testimony of M. Burroughes which M. John Goodwin, page 42. says he
has under his hand about Nicols, is true.

Thomas All.

I have by me the paper where this is written with his own hand, and this M.
All, M. Edwards his only witness, in the presence of many, under his hand,
witnesses that he thinks my testimony true, in reference to the whole I had
written to M. John Goodwin. By what witness then can M. Edwards prove a lie?
Something has caused M. All since to mince the matter, and to make a relation
of some things that neither I nor M. Greenhill ownes, but at that time when he
gave my justification under his hand, he was urged again and again in the
presence of many to declare whether he could say any thing against the truth of
any particular in my testimony, and he professed he could not. Surely if he
could not, how could M. Edwards who had all he had from him? Besides this, M.
All says in what he has printed, that there are some things in M. Edwards
his Book, (speaking in relation to what M. Edwards reports from him) that never
came from him; and yet M. Edwards stands boldly to justify that all from first
to last is true. But I pray consider further what are M. Edwards his arguments
to prove my testimony a lie.

First this. I say the story of Nicols and such a meeting mentioned page 79. is
all false. No, says he, some part is true. The first part wherein is laid down
Nicols his maintaining to M. Greenhils face those opinions; How then came M.
Burroughes his affirming that story M. Edwards has of one Nicols to be false,
be in any sense justified to be true?

against M. Edwards, he is cunning, he will find you out. But M. Edwards, look
back again to what I affirm in that testimony under my hand, you shall find,
I only say this, that all the story about Nicols in such a page, namely page
79. is false, now to prove me a liar you tell the world that a part of the
story in another page namely page 78. is true, is this a good argument to prove
a man a liar, who says the story in one page of a book is false? But he lies,
because the story of another page of the book is true? What brave stuff is
here to prove a lie? I profess to all the world, as in the presence of God, I
do not now invent this to help to salve the business, but what ever failing
might be in the expression, the reason of my mentioning the page, was to limit
my testimony to what was in that page concerning Nicols; what was in that
meeting there mentioned in reference to him, I took not upon me to deny what
might be between M. Greenhill and Nicols at some other time; and all that M.
Greenhill denies in my testimony is that part of the story of Nicols, in
reference to that meeting there mentioned. He need not rub his memory to call
to mind any other time that Nicols had been with him; for where did he ever
deny any such thing? There is nothing mentioned about it in any thing I wrote
to M. John Goodwin.

Here you have M. Edwards his first argument to prove a lie; let us see whether
he will be more happy in his second: will he not there hit the nail on the
head? It is this. How can M. Burroughes say he never heard of such a man in the
world as Nicols, when as it cannot be thought but that M. Greenhill named him
to him at Col. Zacharies house?

Burroughes says he never heard of Nicols, but he lies, because it cannot be
thought but that Master Greenhil named him to him. If I should argue from all
men's thoughts, expressed about Master Edwards and believe them, I could prove
Master Edwards foul enough.

His 3. Argument, if I never heard of Nicols, how came Master All to know,
that the opinions related, were Nicols his opinions, seeing Master All was not
at the first meeting? Ans. Because Master All had heard of Nicols, therefore I
lie in saying I never heard of him, what ridiculous stuff is this?

4. How can Master Burroughes give it under his hand that he to this day never
know of any of Nicols his opinions, when the opinions of Nicols were told him
by Master Greenhil? Ans. But can Master Edwards or any man living think that I
denied that I had never heard of such an opinion that makes God to be the
Author of sin? which it seems was Nicols his opinion; surely both I and all men
that know what the study of Divinity means have heard 100. times of this
opinion. M. Greenhil speaks of Blasphemous opinions and names this, does it
follow therefore that he told me of Nicols his opinions? I appeal to 100.
Divines in London, have ye ever heard of Nicols in Moore-fields and his
damnable opinions, would they not stay till we read Master Edwards his book we
never heard of Nicols and his opinions, and yet not one of these but have heard
that some hold God to be the Author of sin, but they would tell you any man
but a cavilling wrangler would say the meaning of the words must needs be, that
they never heard of this opinion as Nicols his opinion.

What brave work is here to prove a lie! If these be good proofs of a lie, I
only say this, if Master Edwards can make lies as fast as he can prove them,
he has won the honor of the name Cretensis, and deserves to carry it
written in a paper in his hat all his days.

For equivocation his Quere is page 92. Whether any Jesuit could or would have
drawn up half a score lines fuller of equivecation?

meeting and such are mentioned Six times a piece brought in at every turn;
all the weight of his testimony still referring to the words meeting and such,
such a meeting, such a man.

such a meeting, such a man, often, on purpose that the Reader might know that
all I intended was in reference to that meeting, and to Nicols as concerned in
it; But he says my equivocation lies in this, that I would put the whole story
upon that meeting.

Edwards were not resolved to shut his eyes, he might see that I only meddle
with that of the story that is mentioned in such a page, namely page 79. I say
all that is false, but if there be any thing true of the story in another page,
I meddle not with it: If I had said all the story had been false, without
limiting it to that page, M. Edwards had had room enough to have ruffled in,
and yet he ruffles as if I had said so, and would make the world believe I did
say so.

He says page 88. that the whole story and all the particulare of it are true,
and there is nothing false in it from first to last.

page 79. is true; and M. Edwards still will aver, that all the particulars
of the story from first to last has nothing false in it. In that story he
tells you of a meeting concluded of upon the occasion of Nicols his opinions,
where I and M. Greenhill were; when as still it is affirmed again, and his
only witness he has, acknowledges there was no such meeting, neither I nor
Master Greenhill never knew of such a meeting. And he confesses that he did
mistake. If he should find such mistakes in me, in his mouth they would be
lies. There is something related, which surely is either true or false: but
true it is not, for he confesses there was a mistake, and yet he boldly says
that all the particulars of his relation are true, there is nothing false from
first to last. What a man is this M. Edwards? he can relate a business, he can
mistake in his relation, report that to be that never was, and yet all he says
is true. Cast him where you will, he falls upon his legs.

But he says, there is only a mistake in the transition.

Nicols his coming to M. Greenhil, venting such opinions. 2. That upon that
occasion there was a meeting concluded of, where M. Greenhil and I he says
were; is this of a meeting, but a transition? Truly if Master Edwards has such
a liberty to make such kind of transitions that shall make such things to be
that never were, he may by the help of his transitions tell and write lies
apace. Hereafter you must call M. Edwards his falsities, his transitions.
Transition is a new figure M. Edwards has invented; when you think he writes
lies, it is because of your dull capacity, not understanding his figurative
speaking; it is per Transitionem. By this he can heap up story upon story, and
turn falsehoods into truths as he pleases. This his Rhethorique raises his
Cretian art beyond what formerly it has been.

The Contest between me and M. Edwards in this thing is plainly this.

I meet occasionally with M. Greenhil; among many things in discourse he
expresses his great grief at the horrid blasphemies there are abroad; upon
which I express likewise my sense of such things; and this is all M. All
tells him: therefore I blame not the man so much as I blame M. Edwards for
moulding reports as he pleases, so as if he has but a piece of a business,
he can make it up a whole business as he thinks fit.

After this passed between M. Greenhil and I, I find in a Book M. Edwards
relating a story of one Nicols in Moore-fields, holding damnable opinions, a
man I never had heard of in my life, and that upon occasion of him, a meeting
was concluded of, where he says I was; which meeting I never had heard of, and
it was strange to me to find my self set down in print, to be at such a
meeting, speaking such things, when I never heard of the man, nor of any
meeting about him, nor of any of his opinions.

But did I never say those words upon no other occasion mentioned in M. Edwards
his Book?

Bellamies shop to buy a Book, and there he should hear some bemoaning the
damnable opinions that are vented in London, as I believe has been often
there, and this Minister there expressing his dislike, should afterward find
in a Book that there is one Nicols in Moore-fields, a man whom he never had
heard of, holding damnable opinions, and a meeting concluded of about what this
Nicols had vented, at which he was saying thus and thus, something to which
effect perhaps he had sometime spoken in M. Bellamies shop occasionally, would
this story be a true one? would it be a lie, or an equivocation, to say this
story is false? Or

Take it thus. Suppose M. Edwards should say in his Pulpit at Christ's Church,
that he was the Angel that was to pour the vial upon the sun, and afterward
there should be this story written, that there was a meeting, where mistress
Katherine Chidley and M. Edwards were, and at that time M. Edwards should say,
I am the Angel of God prophesied of, who am to pour forth the vyal upon the
sun; would M. Edwards think this story were a true one? Surely a truer story
then that he has in that page of his book 79. in this regard that he had
heard of such an one as Katherine Chidley, I had never heard of such an one as
Nicols. If M. Edwards be resolved to take this liberty, to raise, to compound,
to make stories thus, what may he not say? He may easily fill books every
month with stories enough, which he can put into what shape he pleases,
especially considering how he invites all men to bring him what stories they
can, with promise to conceal their names, crying in every street, Dust, Dust.
No marvel his Cart is so full.

After all this that is said, were it much more to this or any thing else, it
is easy for him to cry out in M. Bellamies shop, and afterward in his Book,
It is a lie, it is a lie, nothing but juggling, nothing but Jesuitical
equivocation. Oh what strange men are these! But you know the man, and the
manner of his communication.

Page 94. of the second part of his Gangraena, he enquires what the reasons
might be that M. Burroughes and M. Greenhil should conspire together to give
such a testimony in writing. But whence does it appear that M. Greenhill gave
this testimony in writing? his hand is not to it. How does it appear that he
conspired it should be given in writing? may not I relate what he said, and yet
he not conspire to give it in writing? That writing I take wholly upon my
self. He gives three reasons why he thinks we did it: The first two are from
his being conscientious of evil in himself and Book: His third is, that they
might free themselves from suspicion of being against a toleration of other
sects and opinions.

M. Edwards says that this meeting was a little before M. Burroughes fell upon
the preaching of the power of the magistrate in matters of Religion, and point
of Toleration; and was it so? Surely then M. Burroughes was not so afraid of
suspicion to be for the repressing such horrible things as M. Edwards would
seem to make him; he that preached and printed what Burroughes did, would not
be afraid to own his being against such horrid opinions as much as master
Edwards his relation from master All comes to.

He falls foulely upon me in page 92. of the first part of his Gangraena, as a
double minded man; of all the Apologists he says I sometimes seem to come
near, and then I fly off again.

punctum I have seen truth in; and this I have observed in some, they have
been angry when they have seen their brethren come near them, because then
they could not get so full a blow at them as when they were at a farther
distance.

No, you will say, we are not angry that you come so near, but that you go
back again from what you seemed to come near in.

Edwards from being my Judge: The accusations or condemnations of a shameless
man shall never make me ashamed. Upon the most diligent search I could make
into my conscience, I do not know that in any particle wherein I have come
near my brethren of the Presbyteriall judgment in the Assembly or otherwise,
that ever I started back in the least; yea let any bring forth what ever I have
said in the Assembly, either formerly or lately, what ever I have delivered in
preaching, printing, or conferring, wherein they think I came nearest my
Brethren, I hereby profess that I am still the same, and that I will upon any
occasion publish my self to be the same. Indeed of all the Apologists,
Providence put me upon that work of handling the point of Heart-Divisions, and
I bless God I did it in the uprightness of my heart. In that argument I was
put upon showing how near men called Independents came to those of the
Presbyterian judgment, wherein I declared my self freely. Now let not M.
Edwards be angry with me for going along with him two miles, because I cannot
go three; and because he thinks if I yield thus far, I cannot but contradict
the whole cause, except I will contradict my former assertions: Let him not be
displeased with me, though I be not of his mind; his blustering spirit may make
my speeches or lines seem to lie cross, but let a meek, quiet spirited man
look on them, and they will lie right enough, as they have done to many
Presbyteriall Brethren. Although nothing under heaven would more rejoice me
then to help to find out any expedient whereby I might agree with my Brethren
who are for the Classical and Provincial Presbyteries, yet I must needs
profess that all that I have hitherto heard in the Assembly or elsewhere,
after (I hope) sincere laboring with my heart and with God, that I might know
his truth, has not shaken nor caused any Scruple in those Principles my
conscience has been engaged in, against the extending that ruling power of
Pastors and Teachers our Brethren challenge beyond their charge of feeding by
the Word and Sacraments.

And though I be in Mr. Edwards his thoughts the worst of all the Apologists
when I am against him, which I dare not gainesay, yet when I do any thing that
pleases him, then he calls me a chief man among the dissenting Brethren, as
page 212. of his second part of his Gangraena, where he cites my speech lately
printed, made in Guildhall for the Scots. By which speech, Mr. Edwards and all
men may see, that difference in judgment hinders not me from giving that
honor to men that God would have given them, neither takes it off my heart
from them. But am I of the same mind still?



What should I follow this vain man in any farther particulars? both in his
last, and in his former books, he vents a very angry spirit against me, though
never provoked by me, which I have often wondered at; why man! what is the
matter? what have I done? what comes it to more then the old non-conformists
not communicating with the Churches here, because they could not join in
kneeling? their scruple lay in one thing, mine in another. But though many of
our Brethren thought, and I believe still do think they were in an error, yet
their spirits were calm and quiet toward them. What is it that raises the
wind against me and others, (suppose we be in an error) except it be the hope
that these men have of having power in their own hands, which formerly they
had not? I have hitherto abstained from that which is most provoking. What have
I then done that thus angers the man? He is displeased that I preach so much,
that I have so many Lectures. I will not tell of the Livings, preferments,
Sequestrations, Lectures, that those of the Presbyteriall judgment have. What
would he have me lay down a Lecture, and gather a Church? This would anger
him more. Though I sought none of those I have, yet I was not unwilling to
yield to Gods call in the desires of the people, opening such a door of
service, though the continuance of the greatness of the work was like to be
beyond my strength, because (to speak plainly) I saw such a spirit working,
that I feared the door for my preaching would ere long be shut, this made me to
cast my self upon God for strength to do as much work as possibly I could in
the time when opportunity was continued; and I could tell sad stories that
would make others think as I did. He is troubled at the Means I have, though
it be much less then he mentions, and as at great an uncertainty as may be; if
men be taxed for any thing more then they like, they know where to relieve
themselves in withdrawing from such contributions; if any weakness of body
hinders the continuance in the greatness of the labor, the means presently
ceases; yet I have no reason to complain. But this I say, if ever I grow rich
by commings in for preaching, let me lie under censures as absurd as M. Edwards
himself can devise.

But it may be he is angry with me because though my practice offends him not
so much as others, yet I countenance and plead for those whom he cries out
against as Schismatiques.

Edwards and some others more then now I do; perhaps my pleading and preaching
for forbearance of dissenting Brethren would be of more force then now it is.

He and others make a great outcry against Schism, they think and say that
men leaving a true Church, cannot be freed from the charge of Schism.

To that I would only say thus much, Suppose the Non-conformists, or those of
the Scottish Nation, who lived in the City in former times, who could not
acknowledge the Bishops authority, nor communicate in the Sacraments in the
parishes where they lived without sin to them, still acknowledging them to be
true Churches, yet if the Parliament had made an Act whereby they should have
had two or three places in the City appointed for them, wherein all that could
not conform to the Discipline then established, should have had liberty to
have had the Sacraments and other Church-Ordinances together in those places by
themselves, freed from the burden of Ceremonies, and subjection to Episcopal
Authority, would they not have blessed God for this liberty, had they been
Schismatiques, in the enjoyment of this liberty? Certainly the allowance of the
State will not alter the case; if it be Schism to do thus without allowance
of the State, and venturing upon suffering, it is Schism when the State does
allow it, when they are freed from suffering, Schism is a Church sin. What
ever offense against Order of State men may be charged with, who gather thus
without allowance of the State, yet they are not therefore Schismatiques,
because they do that without the allowance of the State, which if the State
did allow of, would not be Schism: where the Lutherans and Calvinists have
liberty to live in one Country together, and yet not communicating one with
another; are all the Lutherans, or all the Calvinists, Schismatics? Suppose
the Greek Churches had liberty to live among us, would they be all Schismatics
to us, or should we be so to them? Many of the French and Dutch Churches who
live in our parishes, though they understand our language well enough, yet
would not communicate in the parishes where they live, because of the
Ceremonies and subjection to Bishops, were they all Schismatics too? Do not
men ordinarily in London and elsewhere for the outward advantage of trade or
otherwise, leave one Church and go to another? and may not a man for any
advantage of enjoyment of Ordinances that he cannot have in the Church he
formerly lived in, not in that purity, but that it will be sin in him to
continue in it, remove to another Church? and what if his dwelling be not
removed to the other side of the street, does that make it Schism? Many of the
converted Jews were a great while in Church Communion before they saw their
liberty to converse with the Gentiles, though converted also: it was their
fault that they would not join with the Gentiles being Christians, the
partition wall being broken down, yet they were never accounted Schismatiques
for this fault of theirs; whereas now if a man lives in a parish, and does not
join in Church fellowship in that parish, he is branded for a Schismatique.
What hurt the abuse of words, and among others this of Schism has done in the
Church, we all know. When men who give good testimony of their godliness and
peaceablenesse, after all means used in faithfulness to know the mind of
Christ, they cannot without sin to them (though it be through weakness) enjoy
all the ordinances of Christ, and partake in all the duties of Worship as
members of that Congregation where their dwelling is, they therefore in all
humility and meekness desire they may not live without the ordinances of
Christ all their days, but for the enjoyment of them may join in another
Congregation, yet so as not condemning those Churches they join not with, as
false, but still preserve all Christian communion with the Saints, as members
of the same body of Christ, of the Church Catholic, and join also with them
in all duties of worship that belong to particular Churches, so far as they are
able. If this be called Schism, it is more then yet I have learned, or then (I
believe) M. Edwards can teach me.

Page 98. he throws me his glove, challenging me into the field to try his
valor with me in this point.

Gangraena, namely, Whatsoever errors or miscarriages in Religion the Church
should bear withal in men continuing them still in communion with them, these
the Magistrate should bear with, continuing them in the Kingdom or
Commonwealth, in the enjoyment of the liberty of subjects, this with M. Edwards
is a huge error: Whereas he passes almost all his other errors without any
animadversion, he must needs have one here, he cannot pass so foul an error
as this without confuting it presently, see what his Confutation is: Those
(says he) who out of conscience are not satisfied in taking up Arms against
Armies raised by a Prince, the Church will not deal with for this, but the
Magistrate may. To this M. John Goodwin answered, that I before had said that
in matters of civil justice between man and man, there the plea of conscience
would not free a man from punish-went if he offends; but for matters of
Religion, there what ever charge the Magistrate has over men, it is not more
then the charge the Church has in its kind; therefore where the Church should
bear with men, the Magistrate should. Now the man comes in with his refutation
and instances in a business of taking up Arms, as if this did not come under
the Head spoken of before, namely, the matters of civil justice, not a matter
of Religion, as distinct from civil justice: and his Reply is only this, as if
an erroneous conscience did not make things the Magistrate accounts matters of
State, matters of Religion, and the Magistrate also reckon many things to be
matters of State, which many consciences account high matters in Religion.

Edwards his valor in dispute may be judged by this, we need never fear
encountering with him. I say that in matters of Religion as distinct from
matters of civil justice, there the Magistrates power extends not beyond the
Churches: and he comes and tells us that an erroneous conscience may account
matters of State, matters of Religion, what then? if he accounts them to be
matters of Religion, does this alter the nature of the thing? what ever he
accounts, yet if he does offend against civil justice, he is to be punished;
and whatsoever the Magistrate accounts, yet if the thing in its own nature be
not against civil justice, but only against some rule of Religion, surely he
is not to punish in his way, further then the Church may in her way; who speaks
of what one man accounts, or what another man accounts, the things must be
judged according to what they are in their own nature: if M. Edwards his
threatening Piece do no better feats then his Animadversion and Reply to M.
John Goodwin has done, that which he judges an Error remains still a Truth,
he must blot it out of his Catalogue of Errors, his conscience must tell him
there is one Error less then his reckoning: but I would be loath to be writing
or waiting till Master Edwards his conscience be convinced, or if it be, till
he confesses it to be.

There is only one passage more that I shall need to take notice of in his
last Book, and something he has of it in his former, namely, my conformity in
the Bishops times. This conformity he speaks of was ten years since, and
though I did conform to some of the old Ceremonies, in which I acknowledge my
sin; I do not cast those things off as inconvenient or discountenanced by
the State only, but as sinful against Christ; yet I think there can hardly be
found any Man in that Diocese where I was, who was so eyed as I was, that did
conform less then I did, if he conformed at all. As for the new conformity,
God kept me from it; and my sin in the old, makes me to be of the more
forbearing spirit toward those who now differ from me. I see now what I did
not; and I bless God I saw it before the times changed: and others, even some
who scorn at new light, must acknowledge they see now what a while since they
saw not; why then should they or I fly upon our Brethren, because they see not
what we think we see? Oh how unbeseeming is it for such who conformed to old
and new Ceremonies, now to be harsh and bitter in the least degree against
their Brethren, who differ from them, when they do differ so much from what
they were themselves but a while since I some of them know I loved them as
Brethren, when they conformed to that I could not, but was suspended for
denying it. Let me have the same love from them as Brethren, though I cannot
now conform to all they now do. True! where sins are repented of, they are
to be buried, but so as sinners be willing to lie down in their shame, and
walk beseeming their repentance for such sins.

Thus have I spent time about this boisterous, froward spirited man, which I
grudge as much as ever I grudged any time since I knew what the worth of time
was: But yet seeing my pen is going, it shall pass upon what this man has in
that angry Antiapologia in reference to my self. He has two things against
me: 1. My going out of the Kingdom: 2 My Preaching and Writing for the
Congregationall way. For the first he says, page 19. That M. Burroughes for
some speeches spoken against the Scottish War, in some company not to be
trusted, he for fear fled in all haste to Rotterdam. This he mentions in
diverse places of his Book. He says, this made him stumble at the truth of some
things before mentioned in the Apology.



First, he says, some speeches were spoke, for fear whereof I, etc.

How does he know there were speeches spoke, for fear whereof I fled? It may be
there was only an accusation of speeches, for fear whereof, etc. In his bold
Assertion there is held forth to the world at least some indiscretion in me,
that I should speak words of a high nature in company not to be trusted. But in
that business I am so fully clear, as I wiped off before my Lord of Warwick
whatsoever might have seemed indiscretion, not by mine own Assertion only,
but by the testimony of two Gentlemen, all the company besides the Accuser, who
were present at the whole discourse of that matter. The truth is, there were no
such speeches that I spoke, for fear whereof I hasted away, there was only
some accusation of speeches, and Si sat sit accusasse, quis innocens erit? What
man can free himself from Accusation?

Secondly, He says in all have I fled to Rotterdam.

Rotterdam.

Thirdly, Had not the Prelatical faction been incensed against me for standing
out against their superstitions, I should have ventured to have stood to what I
spoke, for all I said was but by way Quaere, affirming nothing, for I knew how
dangerous the times were then, but putting quarrels tending to justify the
Scots when they first rose in Arms, hearing them rayled on in the company
where I was, all my danger was in standing for them, and that with that
wariness that such times required. But I knew what the power of the
Prelaticall party at that time was, who were extremely incensed against me; a
man's innocence then, could not be his safety: I being most foulely traduced in
the report of my words, though the two other Gentlemen cleared me never so
much, as my Lord of Warwick knows, (for the Conference was in his Garden) yet
one witness affirmative in such a case would have been taken against an
hundred negatives. A mere Accusation then was enough to cause me to provide
for my security.

Fourthly, but suppose before any such Accusation and danger, when I was in
peace and safety, that then I had my call to the Clutch of Rotterdam, yea and
had entertained this call, and acknowledged God much in it, (as indeed I had
cause) and that this came but as an after Providence of God to make my way more
clear to me, and to take off fully all my friends, from whom it would have
been hard without some such providence to have got off, without much trouble.
Will it not appear that M. Edwards ventures boldly to relate whatsoever he
hears, and to put what constructions upon it he pleases, for he brings in this
story to prove me false, in the saying with the rest of the Apologists, that we
saw the evil of those superstitions that were adjoined to the Worship of God.

The true story of this business is this, which seeing Providence calls it
forth, I hope God may have glory by it.

I being by Bishop Wren, deprived of my living in Norfolk, In which I believe
I endured as great a brunt, as almost any of those which stayed in England;
though M. Edwards is pleased to say Page 19. of his Antiapologie, that we fled,
that we might be safe upon the Shore, while our Brethren were at sea in the
Storm. I believe neither he, nor scarce any of our Presbyteriall Brethren,
endured a harder Storm at Sea, then I did before I went out of England; Yet I
bless God, he stirred up noble friends to countenance and encourage me in my
sufferings: For which I will not cease to pray that the blessing of God may be
upon them and their Families. I for some Months living with my L^: of Warwick,
with whom I found much undeserved love and respect, when I was in the midst of
as great encouragements for staying in England, as a man deprived, and under
the Bishops rage, could expect, I set my self in as serious a manner as ever I
remember I did in all my life, to examine my heart about my staying in England,
whether some carnal respects, that countenance I had from diverse noble
friends, the offers of Livings, did not begin to prevail too far with me; my
spirit was much troubled with these thoughts, Why do I still linger in England,
where I cannot with peace enjoy what my soul longes after? Did I not formerly
think, that if ever God took me clearly from my People, I would hasten to be
where I might be free from such mixtures in Gods worship, without wringing my
conscience any more? Why do I therefore now stay? Am I not under a temptation?
God knows these were the sad and serious workings of my spirit, and the
workings of my heart were as strong, as ever I felt them in my life; Now whilst
I was thus musing, thus troubled in my spirit, and lifting my heart up to God
to help me, and set me at liberty, leaning upon my Chamber window, I espied a
man in a Citizens habit, coming in the Court Yard toward my Chamber, and in
his coming near, I knew him to be formerly a Citizen of Norwich, but at that
time, one of the Church of Rotterdam; this man comes to me, and tells me that he
came lately from Rotterdam, that he was sent by the Chrurch there, to give me a
call, to join with M. Bridge in the work of the Lord, in that Church; when I
heard him say thus, I stood a while amazed at the providence of God, that at
such a time a Messenger should be sent to me about such an errand; my heart God
knows exceedingly rejoiced in this call of his, I presently told him I saw.
God much in it, and dared not in the least to gainsay it, yea, that my heart
did much close with it, yet desired to see God a little further in it, this
only I required, that he should go or send to the Church and return my answer:
with desire, that because most of them knew me, they should give me their call
under their own bands, and then there would be nothing wanting that I knew, but
I was theirs, and thus we parted. In this my heart was much eased, now seeing a
clear hand of God taking me off from temptations, that I was afraid might
otherwise have stuck upon me, but this I kept to my self.

Now as God would have it, three or four days after this, a friend meets me,
and tells me, that such a man reported of me, that in a conference about the
Scots, justifying them in what they did, I should speak such things as might
bring me into trouble; After I heard this, I could not but take notice of Gods
hand, that surely now God intended to open the door very wide, for that call I
had to Rotterdam; yet because, whether I went out or stayed in the Land, I
desired to clear my self as much as could be; I went to this accuser with one
of the Gentlemen, who was at our whole discourse, we both labored to convince
him that he had mistook what was said in that Conference, that certainly there
was no such thing as he had reported, though at first there appeared a very
evil spirit in him, as if he intended evil against me, yet I went freely up
and down for a fortnight or three weeks after in the Country, and got another
Gentleman, who also heard all that Conference, to speak with him; at the last
he began to recant of what he had said, and promised to me and one of the
Gentlemen who had heard all our former discourse, that he would take me off
what he could, that he would satisfy all that he had told any thing against me
unto, and now tell them that he was mistaken in me, and that things were not so
bad as he apprehended, and withal said he made no doubt but to set me right
again. After this I hoped all would blow over, my Lord of Warwick falling sick
at London, sent for me, I came up to him, continuing with him a fortnight or
three weeks longer, going freely up and down the City, my Lord knew all the
business, and made no question but all was over. Now I being as I hoped set
free from my Accuser, the Messenger from Rotterdam comes to me again, with an
answer to what I had desired, showing me how the Church there had met, and had
sent a call to me in writing under the Elders hands, with many other hands in
the name of the Church: upon which we agreed upon the day when, and the place
where we should meet in Norfolk, to make a full conclusion, and accordingly to
take order for our voyage. Now within three or four days after this second
call, this business that we thought had been dead, breaks forth again afresh:
I had intelligence from a Minister in Essex, that the truth was, he that
accused me before, had dealt treacherously with me, and the business grew to a
height, it was come to the then Lord Treasurer: Upon this still I saw my call
the clearer and fuller, and at my fore-appointed time went into Norfolk, where
I met with the Messenger, and concluded the going into Holland. Though my call
by this was clearer, yet the thought of going out of the Kingdom thus, was
grievous to me, for I knew I must never see England again, times continuing as
then they were, and no man living could have imagined that alteration that
after fell out.

Now I appeal to M. Edwards, had he known all this (which if it had pleased
him he might have done, for I sent to him to tell him I would satisfy him
about this business) would he have made such a relation as he has done, to
such a purpose as he has done? for of all the things he has against me, the
manner of my going out of the Kingdom in the way that he relates it, is the
greatest aspersion that is upon me, when indeed it was one of the most
merciful providence of God to me that ever befell me in all my life, wherein
I saw as clearly an eye of God watching over me in particular for good, as ever
in any thing. I know not what a bold daring spirit, whose aims are to asperse
men, would have done in this case, had this I now relate been known, as it was
to many; but ingenuity certainly, where it had been in the least degree of it,
would have abhorred to have done as M. Edwards has done. The Lord set his
conscience upon him, rebuke him, and be merciful to him in this thing.

His second thing he has against me in his Antiapologia, is his Charge for my
Preaching for the Congregationall way, as page 216. he says I preached at
Mildreds Breadstreet, against National Churches under the New Testament, and
for the way of their particular Churches.

I do remember I said something, it was in the time of the Prelates, my speech
was directed against them, it was the day the first Protestation was taken,
because a great argument they use for their power over Nations, is from the
power of the High Priest over the whole Nation of the Jews. I said that we
were freed from the Paedagogie of the Jews, and now there were no National
Churches by institution as the Jews were, mentioning these 3. things. 1. There
are no national Officers as they had. 2. No National Worship as they had. 3.
It was not sufficient now, to make a member of the Church, because one is by
birth of this or any other Nation, as then it was, because one was borne of the
Nation of the Jews. And is this a Doctrine that will not go down with a
Presbyterian? Surely it must be a Prelaticall Presbyterian who cannot digest
this; I am confident all the Presbyterian Churches in the World will
acknowledge what I said here to be true. That we may call the Church in England
a National Church because of the many Saints in it who are of the body of
Christ, I deny not, nor ever did, but that it is by the institution of Christ
formed into one political Church as the Nation of the Jews was, this is no
Independency to deny; where are any particular men standing Church Officers to
the whole Nation by Divine institution? what National worship has Christ
instituted? does our Birth in the Nation make us members of the Church? These
things are so palpably plain to any that will understand, that it is tedious
to spend time about them.

He says further in the same page, that I preaching before the Lord Major and
Aldermen, preached for a Toleration of all Sects and Opinions, so they were not
against Fundamentals in Doctrine, and Fundamentals in Civil Government.

went from house to house, Who are you for? Are you for Presbytery, or
Independencie? Many answering, They knew not what Independencie was; The
Hand-gatherers replied, Independents are such as would have no Government, as
would have all Religions, all Blasphemiss and Heresies tolerated, as would live
under no Laws: Oh, say they, No, we are not for them, we will set our hands
against them, and thus hands might easily multiply. Yea this is the weapon by
which Ministers in their Pulpits, where no body can answer them, fight against
Independency with. But is this fair? Do not your consciences condemn you in
this thing? For my part, as I never was, so I now am not for a toleration of
all things, nay I should be loath to live in England if ever it should be here.
I do and shall pray and endeavor against it. But what I said before the Lord
Major and the Aldermen, had I been a Presbyterian I should have said it, and
were I a Presbyterian I should say it again. The Presbyteriall way had once
need of such a doctrine, and may have need of it again. I remember not the
words that then I spoke, but this I remember, what I said was from the 14. to
the Romans and I am sure I have since said and published in that Treatise of
Heart-Divisions three times as much about that Argument, and that Scripture,
and yet I believe many hundreds of Presbyterians think what I have published
there to be true doctrine, only M. Edwards has so much of the Prelacy and
violence in him, that he cannot digest it.

As for my Lectures that are printed upon Hesea, that he mentions page 220. I
am not willing to spend time in answering, he mentions no particular words, but
refers you to the Lectures and pages. They are to be seen, I refer my self to
all moderate Presbyterians, let them judge whether there be any thing there
that may not stand with Presbyterian Principles. Never any have appeared
against those Lectures but M. Edwards, and lately M. John Vicars; I reverence,
and teach others to reverence old age; but it must know there are many
infirmities attending it, it is fitter for devotion, then that it should
interest it self in matters of contention. If M. Vicars had told me some
experiences of the work of God upon his soul, or of the good providence of
God toward his people and himself in the course of his life, I should have
diligently observed them, and I hope might have got good by them; But oh how
unbecomming old age is that spirit of contention that appears in his Books!
if he thinks those places he has cited will serve his turn, surely his skill
in Presbytery is not great, my pen was running in a hard expression, but I
will not provoke the old man: yet I must be plain with him, How uncomely is it
for an old Professor of Piety and Religion, to be found jeering and scorning at
Piety and Religion? who would have thought that ever M. Vicars should have
lived to that day? Thus he does in the Frontispice of his Book, The names of
the five pious Apologists, and the names of the seven Religious Remonstrants.
Whereas the chief scope of his Book is to cast dirt upon these Apologists and
Remonstrants. Certainly the spirit of the man is much altered from what he
heretofore seemed to be. Can it become the gravity and wisdom of old age to
charge (and that publicly) his Brethren of unworthy double dealing, of
unfaithfulness, upon no other ground then the relation of one man, and that
relation but upon one witness? and yet this very witness gives it under his
hand, that what these men that he charges thus, has said is true, and why must
he charge Master Greenhill too? Surely he did not think what he did, for all
that M. Greenhill said, was, he wondered to see such a thing in Master Edwards
his Book, as a Relation of a meeting concluded of about Nicols, where I and he
(M. Edwards says) were; what doubleness or unfaithfulness in this? for not
only M. Edwards his witness says he never told him so, and such a thing
never was, but M. Edwards now confesses it. Is there then weight enough for
such a charge of M. Vicars, not only upon me, but upon M. Greenhil? The Lord,
I hope, will cause M. Vicars to see cause to be humbled for this.

In the close of all me thinks I see M. Edwards in M. Bellamies shop fretting
and vaporing, I will answer him, I that I will, I will reply, I that I will:
like one Pise, Jerome speaks of, who though he knew not what to say, yet he
knew not how to hold his peace. M. Edwards may be bold enough in Answering, for
I am persuaded he believes I will hardly ever be brought to trouble my self
about him; He is so foul, who can meddle with him without dirtying his
fingers? I am resolved rather to lie under many prejudices and censures, and
commit my name and cause to God, then to trouble my self further with him.
Though I will not fully conclude never to do any thing further about him in
public, yet this I engage my self unto, that if any thing in what he has
said, or shall say, shall stick in the hearts of any conscientious, who desire
satisfaction, if they will but make it known to any that have or ever had any
acquaintance with me, I will (if it be desired) give them satisfaction in it;
but I confess I am loath to promise this to strangers, I have been so traduced
by strangers who have come to me for satisfaction in some cases of conscience.
For instance, in that about a late Petition of some of the Citizens, which M.
Edwards mentions page 110. of the first part of his Gangraena, where he says,
some came to me the day after I preached, to be satisfied about it, who (he
says) put me hard to it. I confess I spent near four hours with one
company who came to me about it; yet Master Edwards says, I said little. It
may be some of them reported so. How easy is it for any to come to be resolved
in a case of conscience, and when they are gone, to say, He said little? Yet to
those four who then came to me, there was so much said, that two of them went
away satisfied, and the other two fell off contradicting one another: The one
saying, If there were that in the Petition that I objected, he would have no
hand in it; the other of them said to his friend, Certainly there is that in
it. And after that, only one company more came, that I remember, where one, an
eminent Presbyterian, a great friend to M. Edwards, went away so satisfied, as
he after professed he never received more satisfaction in any thing he had
scrupled, and that with these reasons I gave him he had satisfied two
Ministers, who before were of another mind; and yet it seems some were pleased
to tell Master Edwards I said little: it was easy for them to say so when they
were gone, and themselves must be the Judges of what I said, and of what I
affirmed. I refused none that came to me, but if I were at home, spoke with,
and debated the matter at large: I was abroad only when one company came, of
which I after had any notice, which was at the time of the Assembly, where I
was; yet my wife earnestly desired them to come in the afternoon, and told
them I should very willingly confer with them: and two of that company did
come, with whom I conferred at large, near four hours, although M. Edwards
is pleased to say I spoke little, but my wife much: whereas my speech was not
only so long, but had that influence upon two of them, as is before mentioned;
and I remember not that my wife was with them, or made any stay, but after so
much time spent, as she thought it was time to break off, she brought them a
cup of beer, and staid while they were drinking, or very little more. But can
any man think but it must be very tedious for a man who has any thing to do,
to spend time in answering such bables as these? and yet because even these
bables take with vain spirits, who willingly catch at every thing, something
must be said, if it be but to please children.

Thus have I wearyed my self, and it may be the Reader, in these personal
things: of all books, I never cared to read books of this nature. The Lord
deliver me from such an implacable, furious spirit as this M. Edwards has,
that I may have no more to do with him. If he pretends at any time to deal in
a rational way, he mingles such personal things, as must needs make it
tedious for any man of ingenuity, who has any thing of weight to take up his
head or heart, to meddle with him. Let any man write a rational discourse,
acknowledged by themselves to have much strength in it, against that way so
much opposed, and then let them complain if they have no Answer. Some few
things have been published this way, and most of them have had Answers, and
when God gives further liberty from other occasions, further Answer shall
appear in public. But is it possible for so few of us, having so many things
lie upon us, to attend the Answer to every Pamphlet that comes out against us?

That extreme eagerness and violence in Master Edwards, M. Vicars, and others,
to asperse our names, makes us to think that God has made more use of our
names then we were aware of, and shall be an argument to quicken us to more
watchfulness to walk inoffensively and convincingly before all men. For we see
by their anger, even almost to madness bent that way, that they had little
hope to prevail with all their arguments against the cause we profess, till
they could get down our esteem (such as it was) in the hearts of the people.
The old way of the Heathens against the Christians in the Primitive times, and
of the Prelates against the Presbyterians when time was. But our names are not
in the power of their tongues and pens, they are in the hands of God, who will
preserve them so far as he has use of them, and further we shall have no use
of them our selves.

There is also one M. Bellamy, while he would seem to be Londons Remonstrating
Champion, he has nibbled at me. To whom I say, 1. That I am persuaded I stand
clear in his conscience, whatsoever I am in his book. 2. If what he objects
against me be an Error, yet surely it has nothing to do with the point of
Independencie of Church Government, there is no connection between the one and
the other, yet he brings it in to show the Principles of such Independents. 3.
If it were Independencie, yet it runs not parallel with those men's opinions
he had mentioned before, who (he says) hold, That If the Parliament have been
any way unfaithful and unserviceable to the Public, or but groundedly
suspected so to be, (which all the world knows, that knows these men's minds,
they will quickly be ready to do) if in any thing they please not their
Palats, that then those that chose and sent them, may have liberty to choose
more faithful, able, and better men in their places. Now (says he) consider
these men's Tenets. He charges them to tend to utter confusion of all order,
power, Government in Church and Commonwealth, and I will give you an instance
(says he) of one, (naming my self, in my Answer to D. Fern.)


But will his instance reach to that he brings it for, to show me to be one of
those men he mentioned before for?

1. In that he says of me, do not I say, if the Parliament should grow
tyrannical, particular men cannot help themselves? 2. The whole State should
suffer much before it should help it self by any ways of resisting. 3. If you
can, suppose a Parliament so far to degenerate. 4. That they should conspire to
destroy the Kingdoms. 5. That they should aim at themselves so far, as to
possess the Lands and riches of the Kingdom to themselves. 6. What the
Kingdom should do I determine not, but leave to the light of nature to judge.
Now is this parallel to the former opinion he mentioned, am I one of those men?
does this tend unavoidably to utter confusion of all order, power, government
in Church and Common-weath? 7. Let M. Bellamie first give a better Answer to
that Objection, before he finds fault with mine.
Oh how tedious is it to spend time to follow these vain men, and that we must
needs answer to these peevish objections!

What I have done in a way of just Apology for my self, you may expect from
my Brethren, from some very shortly, from others as their occasions shall
permit, no ways questioning but they are able to set themselves right in the
consciences of conscientious men.

But you will say, we had rather see what you would have, what your Cause is,
then this vindication of your Persons.





edification be observed amongst others, that there be a cohabitation in those
that join, and that all that are fit to be members that do cohabit do join as
much as may be. 3. We would have no coactive violence used against such men who
carry themselves religiously and peaceably in their differences from others, in
such things only as godly and peaceable men may and do differ in. Were these
3. things granted, we might live together as Brethren in peace, and love. Are
those the men that are the hinderers of reformation, and the disturbers of the
peace, who would be satisfied with these 3. things, and if they cannot have
them peaceably by the permission of the Magistrate, are resolved to sit down
quietly to suffer, or to go to what places in the world liberty may be enjoyed
in these, and yet must these be judged the disturbers of the peace? But while
men think there is no way for peace but by forcing all to be of the same mind,
while they think the Civil Sword is an ordinance appointed by GOD to
determine all Controversies in Divinity, and that men must needs be chained
together by fines and imprisonments, or else there can be no peace; that except
all men be of the same mind themselves are of, all will come to confusion:
whilst these Principles prevail with men, either there must be a base
subjection of men's consciences to slavery, a suppression of much truth whilst
they seek to suppress error, or else exceeding disturbance in the Christian
world. Happy those men, their memories shall be blessed. Not who bluster, and
are violent and furious in forcing others to what they conceive right, for
these are certainly the disturbers of our peace; but those who shall find out
some expedient whereby Conscience may not be enslaved, truth not suppressed,
and yet error not countenanced, the spirits of men each toward other sweetened,
Peace procured, Brotherly love recovered, strengthened, confirmed, for the
raising up of such for the blessing of God upon such and their endeavors, I
shall not cease to pray, who am desirous of nothing more then Truth and Peace:
but the Lord rebuke turbulent and violent spirits.

But seeing you mention a Committee of Lords and Commons for Accommodation, why
did not you join in a way of Accommodation with your Brethren? Nothing would
satisfy you but a Toleration.



But you say, you would not have the Ruling power of Ministers go beyond their
Pastoral Charge for Word and Sacrament; what help then can there be, if the
Elders of a Church, or a whole Church shall err?



If you say, The Magistrate must come in and help.



2. If you interesse the Magistrates power, he must then either by himself or
by some Commissioners take cognizance of the jus and the fact, wherein his
power is to be exercised, he must not act upon an implicit belief, that the
acts of the Church are right.

3. Will you call in his power in all matters of difference, wherein your
selves cannot agree? or will you only desire his power to help, when either
the heinousness of the matter, or the turbulencie of the carriage, manifests
stubbornness? If in the former case, then you make the Magistrate the Judge of
all Controversies in Religion, which I believe you are not willing to do. If
in the latter only, we are agreed. Why then is there such a stir, such an
outcry against that which is called the Independent way, as if there must
needs be a confusion of all things, if liberty in it be granted? The Lord judge
between us and our Brethren in this thing: To him we refer our Names and our
Cause.

FINIS.

