A NARRATION OF THE LIFE OF Mr. Henry Burton. WHEREIN Is set forth the various
and remarkable Passages thereof, his Sufferings, Supports, Comforts, and
Deliverances. Now published for the Benefit of all those that either do or may
suffer for the Cause of CHRIST. According to a Copy written with his own Hand.

PHIL. 1. 21. Christ is to me, to live, and dye, gain. Dum patior pro Christo,
potior Christo. LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1643.

The Preface to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
I May say, as old Jacob, and no less truly, few and evil have the days of
the years of my Genesis 47. 9.
pilgrimage been. For proof hereof, As it is with a Mariner, or traveller, who
after a long Voyage, coming within ken of his native Country, begins to
recount with himself the many hazzards he has run, what by terrible storms
in the midst of Rocks and shelves, what by pirates, and other perils; all
which having now waded out of, and overcome, and arriving at his wished port,
after thanksgiving to God for bringing him to the haven where he would be; Psa.
107 30
he ^ts him down, and (to recreate himself and friends) begins to discourse
of his travells, and of the most memorable passages therein: So is it now with
me. Only, I cannot yet say, that after so long, tedious, and perilous a
Voyage as I have passed through by Sea and Land, every where attended and
assailed by fierce tempests and Pirates, I have already arrived at the Port or
Haven, which I have long wished for, to wit, my celestial Country, and which
through the Perspective Glass of Faith I can as yet (in comparison) at such a
distance, but darkly discover. For although by 1 Cor. 13.^
his divine providence, whose exiled prisoner I have lately been, I am now
delivered from that (otherwise perpetual) prison and exile: yet I still carry
about with me the manicles and fetters of this mortal and sinful body, which
I cannot be freed from, until I have paid my To wit, Death. 2 Cor. 5. Ioh. 14
2.
prison-fees, that so my soul may flit out of this her earthly tabernacle to
her heavenly mansion.

Nor is it unusual for men to set forth a description of their own lives.
Moses did so. David so. Paul so. And who fitter Exodus. Psalms Act 2. 2 Cor.
11. etc.
then a man's self, as being best acquainted with, and most privy to the many
passages of his life. Nor had I undertaken this task, but partly to satisfy
the importunity of many godly friends, and partly to give a just account to
Gods people of that divine support and comfort, which it pleased the Lord to
uphold me with, in all my trials. To which purpose I may use the Apostles
words: Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of
Mercies, and the God of all consolation, who comfort 2 Cor. 1. 3, ^
us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in
any affliction, by the comfort, wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.
As also the words of David, Come and hearken, all ye that fear God, and I will
tell you what he has done for my soul. And these are they especially, to whom
Psalm. 66. 16
next unto Jesus Christ the Righteous Judge, as I owe my life, so I ought to
give an account thereof. For the rest, I am not ashamed to make my self herein
a spectacle even to those that are without, this being but an anticipation,
seeing we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one
may receive 2 Cor. 9. 10.
the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be
good or evil. Farewell.

HEN. BURTON.

(...) 64. 1642.
(...)



He that once dead, unburied lay
Three days (count years) and half a day:
Revived here shows his pilgrimage,
Now in the last scene of his age:
The short remainder, sharp or sweet,
Expect till death shall make complete.
A Narration of the Life of Mr. Henry Burton.
MY birth and breeding was at Birdsall, an obscure Town in Yorkshire; and the
more obscure, as having never had a preaching Minister time out of mind, long
before I was borne, nor (for ought I know) to this very day. Notwithstanding my
Parents were piously affected, they would correct us, their children (whereof
they had many) and that severely, if we swore an oath, or neglected the Church,
or made a lie. Me, of all the rest, they kept at School* my mother encouraging
me with often showing me a new Testament in English, which she kept locked up
(it having been my Grandfathers in Queen Mary's days) promising it me, when
I could read it; so as afterward I was put to read every night two or three
Chapters in it to the Family. In time they sent me to the University of
Cambridge, and placed me in the College called St. John's, where I proceeded
Master of Arts: In which time it was my happiness to be a constant hearer of
Mr. Chatterton, and Mr. Perkins on the Lords day. For from my first entrance in
the College, it pleased God to open mine eyes by their ministry, so as to put
a difference between their sound teaching, and the University Sermons, which
savoured more of humane wit, then of Gods word. Thus I had, and for ever have
cause to admire and adore the goodness of God, who thus brought me out of
darkness, into his mavelous light. Some time after I was in the house of a
Noble Knight, for the education of his two sons, in which time, with them
sojourning a while with a religious Mrs B^w at Ask, near Richmond in the North.
Matron of worthy memory, and having often conference with her, she took such
notice of my spirit then, and chiefly of my zeal against the Prelates pride
and practices that she said then to some (yet surviving) of me, This young man
(said she) will one day be the overthrow of the Bishops.

After this I was, by the foresaid Knight, recommended to the excellent Prince
Henry of glorious memory, whom I served as sole Officer in his closets during
his life; only the Bishop, who was Clerk of King James his closet, envying me
the title of Clerk, was a means to depresse me, though my office otherwise was
absolute. But this was by the special providence of my God still, who would
not suffer me to rise high in Court, lest I should have been corrupted with
the preferments of it. Nor had I learned the art of ambition to climb up that
ladder, in so much as I would often say to a familiar friend in Court, that I
wondered wherefore I lived in Court, considering my natural indisposition to a
Court-life, as also how the greatest benefit I found by my office was, that it
afforded me time for my private studdies, which I hoped God would in time bring
me forth to make more public use of; and then I should know why I had so
lived thus long in Court. And in that time under Prince Henry, I writ a
Treatise in Latin of Antichrist, which in a Manuscript I presented to him,
with an Epistle Dedicatory, and which he graciously accepted, causing it to be
kept in his Library at S. James.

After his much lamented decease, I was continued in the same place and office
to Prince Charles, when God stirred up my heart to enter into the Ministry,
being then above thirty years of age, but yet too soon, as having not yet
sufficiently learned to weigh that Text of the Apostle, And who is sufficient
for these things? or yet the right way of a Ministers external call, which the
ignorance and 2 Cor. 2. 16
sloth of those times had not learned to walk in. In that time I writ a
Treatise against Simony, entitled, A Censure of Simony: Also another Book,
entitled, Truths triumph over Tront; wherein I unfolded that mystery of
iniquity packed up in the sixth session of that Council, encountering therein
those two Champions of the Council, Andreas Vega, and Dominicus Soto: These
two Books were published Cum Previlegio, though with much ado obtained of the
Archbishops Chaplains, in those, not then full grown ripe, evil times. Yet
they ripened so fast, Abbot of Canterbury yet living, that I could not obtain
of his Chaplain the licensing of an answer of mine to a Jesuits Book,
entitled, The converted Jew, which he boldly had dedicated to both our
Universities: And I understood he durst not do it, for two causes: first,
because in that Answer I had upon occasion consuted the Arminian Heresies:
secondly, because therein I proved the Pope to be the Antichrist. Which two
things began in those days to be Noli me tangere, and fuel for the H^gh
Commission surnace, proving afterward pillary-offences inexpiable, never to be
forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to come. Which after times,
being hastened on by the immature death of King James, have been the only
causes that have made his life desirable; as Titus Livius said of Hieronymus
of Syracusa, Qui solus Patrem desiderabilem fecit.

Well, King James being dead (whether so, or so, or otherwise, time has not
yet examined) and King Charles succeeding; I shall now acquaint you with a
notable passage of divine Providence, in parting the Court and me asunder. For
I understanding that the Bishop, the old Clerk, should still continue in that
Office, and that the King had designed me for some other inferior Office; and
observing also that with Neale, Lawd also should be continually about the King:
I saw there would be no abiding for me in Court any longer. Yet before I went,
I thought I was bound in conscience, by virtue of my place, to inform the King
of these men, how popishly affected they were, simply imagining, that the King
either did not so well know their qualities, or that perhaps he might be put
upon second thoughts, by considering the dangerous consequences of entertaining
such persons so near about him, as I presented to his Majesty in a large
letter to that purpose. Which letter he read a good part of, I standing before
him; but perceiving the scope of it, he gave it me again, and bade me forbear
any more attendance in my Office until he should send for me. Whereupon,
though for the present my spirits were somewhat appalled, and dejected, yet
going home to my house in London, and there entering into a serious meditation
of Gods Providence herein, how fairly he had now brought me off from the
Court, when I saw such Lords were like to domineere, and how I might do God
and his Church better service in a more retired life, as wherein I was in no
danger of Court-Preferments, thereby to be cowardized from encountering such
Giants as began already to threaten the Host of Israel, and against whose
power I thought Saul's armor would give me small defense, but much hinder me
rather: I hereupon began to recollect my scattered spirits, resolving now after
almost twice seven years service, quite to forsake the Court; which I did
signify by another letter to a friend of mine of great place near unto the
King; so as the King has said, that I put away him, and not he me. However it
pleased him to say so, yet I had abundant cause to bless God, and daily to
rejoice with exceeding joy, that I was now freed from the Court, which joy has
now continually increased ever since to this very day without intermission.

Thus having bid the Court farewell, I kept me close to the Ministry of the
Word, and besides my weekly preaching every Lords day M. Montague after B of
Chichester, then of Norwich.
twice, I answered sundry erroneous and heterodox Books set forth by the
Prelates, and those of the Prelaticall party. As 1. Montagues Book, styled, An
Appeal to Caesar: the first part whereof defended all the Arminian Heresies,
and the second was to maintain many gross points of Popery. And Dr. Francis
White prefixed his Approbation to both. My answer to the first part was
published in print: but that to the second was by the Egyptian Taskmasters
strangled in the birth, being upon the breaking up of the Parliament, taken
tardie in the Press as it was a printing.

A second Book, to which I made and published an Answer in time of Parliament,
was Cosens Private Devotions, or Hours of Prayer, to which his Popish
Canonical Hours I framed a fit Dial.

A third was a Book of Dr. Hall B. of Exceter, wherein he affirmed the Church
of Rome to be a true Church. Which in a Treatise of mine upon the 7. Vials I
occasionally confuting, and Mr. Cholmley his Chaplen, and Mr. Butterfield
another Minister, making each of them a several reply, I thereupon made one
full answer to them both, so as both sat down, and replied no more; and Dr.
Hall himself would salve or rather dawbe up the matter, by begging the
suffrages of two Bishops, and two Doctors, who so shuffled together each his
own Cards, that they easily made one pack. And well might they both shuffle,
pack, cut, and deal, when no answer was permitted to be published. But for all
that, my Babel no Bethel, remains entire, and unshaken by any of their breaths,
saving that some of their black mouths labored to besmeare me with their proud
scorn. And for so writing against the Church of Rome, as no true Church of
Christ, and because such kind of Books were printed without license when none
could be obtained, I was brought the first and second time into the High
Commission, whence I had not escaped without cindging at least, to make me
smell of it ever after, if not stigmatising either in my name or purse, had I
not come in time to procure a Prohibition in the Court of Justice, before the
door was shut, which was not long after, the Bishop having a little before my
Prohibition threatened in open Court, that whosoever London, Lawd.
after that of Mr. Pryns then tendered, should be the next (which fell to my
lot) to dare to bring a Prohibition there, he would set him fast by the heels.
But instead of setting me by the heels, he hung me up by the head; for the
next morning after that my Prohibition was tendered in Court, whereat the whole
Board was hushed, he sent his Pursuivant for me, and anew quarrelled with me for
my late preaching against bowing at the Name Jesus; and though I told him that
it was first enjoined by the Pope, and showed by Scripture it had no ground
there: yet he proceeded to suspend me from preaching. But I appealing from him
to the Arches of Canterbury (which afterward I came to see, was no better then
to go from the black Witches enchantment to be healed with the Spell of the
White Witch) and held him so to it, that he was glad to loose me again from my
suspension.

Another Book of my writing, styled, Isreal's Fast, being published at a
general Fast, brought me again into their High Commission extraordinarily
called for that purpose only, where they examined me what, or whom I meant by
Achan: I answered, the Jesuiticall Faction; and no more could they squease from
me, so as not knowing what to do with me, they let me go.

Another Book I wrote, and published, and that by license too casually,
entitled, The baiting of the Popes Bull; for Pope Urban the 8. had sent forth
his roaring Bull among his Roman Catholics in England, to incite them to be in
a readiness, whenever occasion was ministered for the promoting of the
Catholic Cause, as they usually call it: This was an Alarm, or preparative to
arm them for that plot, which was then a contriving, and which we see now
marching forth into the field, expecting some desperate issue. This Bull passed
up and down City and Country without control, until, so soon as it came to
my hands, I fastened upon it. Well, hereupon the Bull roared so loud, that the
bellowing was heard to the Counsel board. This baiting was made a heinous
offense against the State, as being done without acquainting the board, which
gives leave both to Bear-baiting, and Bull-baiting. Thither I was summoned,
where I found fix of the Council sitting of purpose to examine me about it,
whereof two were, Neale of Durham, and Lawd of London. By these I was soundly
baited for 2. or 3. hours together. They would have made my Book against that
Bull, a Libell. God put into my mouth an answer to all their questions, though
some were very captious and insnaring. For it was ever my care to observe my
Master Christ his Counsel, being called before Counsels (Mark. 11. 13, 15.)
not to premeditate what or how to answer; and accordingly I found his promise
most true; for it was given me that hour what to answer, even when I was so
put to it sometimes, that I knew not what to answer, till darting up a prayer,
I had such an answer put in my mouth, as put to silence the opposer. And in
fine I was sent home without any Censure.

Only let me here take occasion to relate a pretty passage that fell out upon
this Book. In the Frontispiece was a picture of K. Charles on the one side
with a sword putting off the Popes Triple Crown over against it. Which when I
showed to a little Daughter I then had of 3. years old in her mothers hands,
telling her the meaning of those two pictures, she presently replied, O Father,
our King shall cut off the Popes head; it must be so, it must be so: Which
words she uttered with that vigor of spirit, and vehemence of speech, that we
exceedingly wondered at it, saying, It was not impossible. And I do now the
more look after the full accomplishment of her words, as of a prophecy put into
a Babes mouth, When of late we have seen one of those, It must be so, fulfilled
in Scotland; so as we may hope to see the other It must be so, fulfilled in
England, when God shall put the like necessity of It must be so, and that
redoubled, in cutting off the Popes head in the English Hierarchy by the Regal
Sword. But this by the way.

Another time after that (when the Duke of Buckingham was at the I Will of Re^,
the while the poor Rochellers and the bravest Chevalry of England were
betrayed unto the French,) was I summoned to the Counsel Board; but for what
cause, I could not come to know: for between the Summons, and day of
appearance, came the Duke home. So as I having waited all the afternoon at the
Counsel Chamber, door, I was not so much as called in, nor sent for any more,
but once for a show without examination. Now I had a little before in a Sermon
on the 5. of November spoken of sundry fore-running signs of the ruin of a
State, which upon that return of the Duke, would not (it seems) endure the
Examination. Nor was my time yet come; I was to wait for another 5. of
November; all these troubles hitherto being but as it were so many velitations,
or light skirmishes in comparison, before the main Battle; my Captain training
me up by degrees so many years, to fit me the better for the great encounter,
which he had fore appointed me unto. Which great encounter, because (all
circumstances weighed) it wants example; it will not (I hope) be more tedious
to posterity to read or hear, then it was for me to undergo it. And I have
the rather published these things at this time, because it may commend the
credit thereof to after-ages by those who have been eyewitnesses of all.

Notwithstanding all these troubles and vexations hitherto, which the Prelates,
and their confederates, whose Captain was Dr. Lawd then Bishop of London.
London, continually pursued and exercised me withal, yet my spirit was
carried on with a mighty and undaunted courage, which my God put into me, and
so much the more, as these men grew the more audacious and outrageous both in
opposing and oppressing the Gospel it self in the Ministry and Ministers
thereof, and in erecting and imposing Romes rotten Relics in all the High
places of the Land. I could not be silent nor patient, to see such things. Nor
could all their terrors, though armed with the greatest power on earth,
deter me. Yea, I was never fuller of spirit, nor freer of speech, then when I
encountered London face to face Insomuch, as on a time being summoned by a
Pursuivant to London-house, and waiting there all alone without till the
Bishop, accompanied with his Chancellor and Register should send for me in,
the while my thoughts were busied in searching what the cause might be (which
was my weakness then) I was at length no sooner called in, but seeing the
Bishop in his Chair, with his said Officers about him, ready to examine me,
there came upon me as it were the spirit of a Lion all the while I was before
them, so as they were amazed with my Answers. And another time, in the same
place, when the Bishop in his Chair was proudly insulting over me standing at
the other end of the Table, and a friend of mine standing by, I (thinking thus
with my self, What do I standing here to hear such language) did thereupon
without replying, turn my back, and go toward the door to be gone, and
looking back for my friend to follow, the Bishop at that very instant changed
his note, and began to speak me as fair, as possibly could be, whereupon I
came toward him again, saying with^n my self, that if he spoke reason, I
would hear him. Nor was I at any time before him, but methought I stood over
him, as a Schoolmaster over his Schoolboy. So great was the goodness of God
upon me. Another time, I being convented at a High Commission Board at
London-house, about my foresaid Book, Babel no Bethel, Harsenet then
Archbishop of York having run himself out of breath with railing against me
and my Book (a special faculty, wherein his Grace exceeded) at length saying,
that I had dedicated my Book to the Parliament to incense them against the
Higher Powers (he meant the King) then I answered, No, my Lord, I am none of
them that divide the King and Parliament, but I pray God to unite them
together. At this he had never a word more to say; For this was presently after
that Parliament was broken up, wherein the Petition of Right was signed: so
that he knew better who they were, which at that time divided the King from the
Parliament. Well, at the same time I must to prison, and tendering bale, London
answered, No, for (said he) the King had given express charge, that no bail
should be taken for me. Then, my Lord (said I) I desire to know by what Law or
Statute of the Land you do imprison me; if it be according to Law, I humbly
submit my self; otherwise I do here claim the right and privilege of a
subject, according to the Petition of Right: but nor Petition, nor Right, nor
Law, could keep me from prison. To the Fleet I went, where stepping in, and
saying to the Porter, By your leave; and he answering, You are welcome Sir; I
thanked him, saying, that is some comfort yet. But I found the comforts of my
God there exceedingly, it being the first time of my being a Prisoner, saving
that I was still, and had been a long time, in the High Commission Bonds,
which restrained my liberty to the scantling of that tether.

But I hasten to the maine Battalion, or pitched battle with the Prelates, and
their prelaticall party. For I more and more disliked their usurpations, and
tyrannical Government, with their attempts to set up Popery: Therefore I
purposely preached upon the second Chapter to the Colossians, crying down all
will worship, and humane inventions in Gods service. Hereupon I began in my
practice, as in my judgment, to fall off from the ceremonies. Only I watched
for an occasion to try it out with them, either by dint of Arguments, or force
of Law, or by the King and his Counsel, resolving of this, that by this means
I should either foil my adversaries (though I had no great hope this way) or
at least (which I was sure not to fail of) discover the mystery of iniquity,
and the deceit of hypocrisy, which like a white veil they had cast over all
their foul practices, and false pretenses, being woven with the fine thread of
solemn Protestations, Declarations, Proclamations, and the like. And this
discovery I took to be of no small importance and consequence, because I saw
how every day they got ground in the hearts of simple and credulous people, apt
to believe their plausible pretenses, and pompous shows of piety, as if all
they did, were to maintain the Protestant Religion, when under that specious
color the withered whore of Babylon came in maskd at the first, till at length
she began to show her painted face in her Superstitions Altar-service, and
other garbs. And as they labored to undermine, and overthrow the true
Protestant Religion, and in stead thereof to set up Popery; so they did no
less seek to overthrow the Civil state, with the good laws thereof, and
just liberties of the subject, and to introduce an arbitrary Government,
otherwise called Tyrany, which takes away every man's property in his own
goods and estate, as plainly appeared by all their practices, as in exacting of
shipmoney, which was to be perpetual, and sometimes twice imposed in one
year, (upon some pretense of foreign enemies, when we had cause to fear
none, but our homebred traitors) and other impositions, with a thousand
monopolies. Of all which I being not a little sensible, both as I was a poor
servant of Christ, and therefore bound to vindicate his cause against
Antichristian men: and also as a free borne subject of the kingdom, as one who
ever prized the just liberty of my birthright above this life it self: I
therefore thought how I might best acquit my duty both to God, and to his
Church, and to my Country, in defending the cause of both.

To this purpose, on the fifth of Noxember, 1636 (being a day, by Act of
Parliament to be solemnized in an anniversary solemn thanksgiving for that
great deliverance of King and Parliament from the Gunpowder-treason, which
Popish traitors conspired to have executed on that day, 1625) I preached
(according to my custom) two Sermons, taking for my Text Prove. 24. 21, 22. My
son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change: For their calamity shall arise suddenly, and who knows the
ruin of them both? But before I proceed to a further relation hereof, let me
tell you of a passage or two falling out but a little before my troubles. The
first was this, A reverend godly Minister (Mr Williamson of Kent) having newly
preached in my Church, upon Acts 21. 13. and we having some private conference
of his Text and Sermon, I said to him in the close, Well brother, I must be an
example hereof one day. The other was of a strange dream I had one night, not
many days before this day came: I dreamed (lodging then at a dear friends
house in Stratford Bow near London) that I saw a most magnificent Palace, the
like whereof I never saw upon the earth; and therein a most glorious throne
erected, and in the throne Jesus Christ sitting in Majesty, but all alone,
without any attendance of Angels or Saints about him, only there lay all along
before the throne a man dead, with his feet toward Christ, and his face upward
the other way. But after awhile the dead man was raised up, and stood upon his
feet, looking toward the throne: Whereupon immediately there appeared about
the throne an innumerable company of glorious Angels and Saints, exceedingly
rejoicing and praising God for restoring life to that man. This dream I told
in the morning to my wife, and after that to my dear Christian friends in the
house (all yet surviving) to whom I also made this interpretation; that this
dead man was the present Church of Christ, which now lay for dead, and none
took the care of it but Christ alone; but after awhile Christ would restore his
Church to life, and set her in a glorious estate, as one raised from the dead
to the state of glory; and then all the holy Angels and Saints should rejoice,
and sing Halelujahs to him that sits upon the Throne. And this I told them
should most certainly come to pass, and that shortly, so as they should live
to see it. And so being to go to London that morning, I took my leave
thereupon, saying, Well, what ever come on it, I must to my work. And this work
proved to be that aforesaid (Nov. 5.) When having preached those Sermons, I was
not long after summoned by a Pursuivant into the English Inquisition Court, the
High Commission; from which I presently appealed to the King: And because I
foresaw that this would prove a public cause, and putting no confidence either
in my Appeal, or in the equity and innocence of my cause, or in the just laws
of the Kingdom, being fallen into such times, wherein nor law, nor conscience,
nor innocence, nor justice, nor clemency, nor humanity, could take place; but
that some unjust, odious censure must stigmatize both the cause and the person:
therefore I shut my self up in my house, as in my prison, and there did
compile my two said Sermons, with my Appeal, in one Book, to the end it might
be published in print, as it was, sheet by sheet as I writ it; the while the
Prelates Pursuivants, those barking Beagles, ceased not night nor day to watch,
and rap, and ring at my doors, to have surprised me in that my Castle, nor yet
to search and hunt all the Printing houses about London, to have prevented the
coming forth of my Book, which they heard to be at the Press. But God, by his
good providence, so prevented them, as neither they could touch my person,
before I had finished my Book, nor yet prevent the publishing thereof, for all
their unwearied search. And here I may not omit to magnify the great Name of
God, especially for two things. First, for his admirable strengthening and
supporting presence in so carrying up my spirit all the while of my writing
that Book, (entitled, For God and the King, together with the Appeal, etc.)
that not all the incessant roarings, and ballings of those beagles could either
interrupt my work, or distract my thoughts, or discourage my resolution, by any
the least apprehension or fear of danger; but that with all cheerfulness and
invinciblenesse of spirit the work was finished. Secondly, the Lords wonderful
Providence is here to be admired, in that the Pursuivants had no power, either
to apprehend my person, or to prevent the publishing of my Book: but just that
night, when I had received some dozens of Copies bound up, and the Books for
the King and Council were a binding up, and nor sooner, nor later, having also
newly concluded the Family Duties for that night, came the Sergeant at Arms,
with his Mace, in the Bishop of Londons name, accompanied with diverse
Pursuivants, and other Officers; yea with the Sheriff of London, with swords
and halberds, and with pick-axes, fell a breaking up my doors, which being
strong, and I making no resistance, held them work till eleven of the Clock;
They break in, surprise my person, ransack my study, carry away what Books they
pleased, and carry me away prisoner to a Constables house for that night; and
the next day at night, being Febr. 2. they had got a new warrant from the
Council Board, to carry me to prison in the Fleet, where I was kept close
prisoner from wife, or friend, and so remained for half a year, till I was
removed to another prison, as you shall hear anon. During my abode in the
Fleet, I was served with a Writ into the Star Chamber, to answer an
information there against me, drawn up by the Kings Attorney in the Name of the
King, notwithstanding my said Appeal not yet repealed. But all is one for
that. With much difficulty, being all along close prisoner, I get my Answer
drawn up by Counsel, and the same by special Order of Star Chamber,
admitted in Court upon my Oath to be a true Answer: Above a week after I hear,
that the two Chief Justices, by appointment of the Court, have quite expunged
my Answer and defense, contained in 80 sheets; leaving only the negative part,
and that also of their own patching together, contained in some half a dozen
lines. Thus my Answer in Court is left no Answer of mine. After this comes the
Examiner for my Answer to his interrogatories, which was to be reckoned part of
my Answer in Court: But I answered him, that my Answer in Court being wholly
expunged, and so made no Answer of mine; I was not bound to answer the
interrogatories. Hereupon I was brought into the Star Chamber, to be censured
by all those terrible ones, pro confesso, as having refused to put in my
Answer, when Ier. 11. 21.
indeed themselves had put it our. What I then spoke for my self by leave of
the Court, which had already the day before set down my Censure in black and
white; and what the Censure was, and by whom, I refer to the Relation of all
the passages of our three sufferings, set forth at large in Print, 1641. Only
thus much, when I saw (...)
that they would proceed to censure (notwithstanding they did not, nor could
object the least crime in all my Book, For God and the King, but that they
said, I was too sharp against the Prelates) having obtained leave to speak, I
said, My Lords, I perceive I am brought into a great strait, that of necessity
I must either desert my cause and my conscience, or undergo the Censure of
this Honorable Court: and therefore I do without any further deliberation,
choose rather to abide the Censure of this Honorable Court, then to desert my
Cause and my conscience. Here at the Audience gave a great humme. But when they
came to the censure, it was so terrible, especially the perpetual close
imprisonment in a desolate goal; that (lest my spirits should faint within me)
I did there earnestly in my heart entreat the Lord, that he would strengthen
me, and hold up my spirits, that I might not any way dishonor the cause, or
give those terrible ones cause to triumph.

And at that very instant the Lord heard me, he put such strength in me, as
neither my self, nor my two Brethren did once change countenance before those
terrible ones, so as some of them afterward said, that they never saw three
such men, who instead of being daunted, so stood before the Court, as if they
had sit in the Judges place. And forasmuch as the night before a friend came to
me in the Fleet, and told me he saw my Censure set down in their Book, as
standing on the Pillory, etc. I did therefore that night (...) (...) Exodus 19 4
redouble my prayer to God, that he would strengthen me at my Censure, so as I
might not dishonor him and his Cause the next day before that great Court. And
immediately upon my prayer I was filled with a mighty spirit of courage and
resolution, wherewith I was carried up far above my self, even as it were
upon Eagles wings. And hereupon again I prayed, entreating the Lord that he
would be pleased to keep up my spirits at that height, to the which he had now
raised them; the answer of which Prayer I found, not only all the next day of
my Censure, but throughout all my sufferings, which that Censure produced.

After the Censure, (which was Deprivation, Degradation, standing on the
Pillary two hours, loss of both ears by the hangman, five thousand pound
fine to the King, perpetual close imprisonment in the Castle of Lancaster,
restraint of all use of pen, ink, and paper) I was brought back to my close
prison in the Fleet (June 14. 1647.) where I waited till the day of Execution,
which was the last day of June. In the interim, my wife, with Mr. Bastwicke,
plied the King with their pitiful complaining Petitions and deprecations, for
the taking off, or at least the mitigating of the execution: but a little
before the day came, a voice was heard in the Star Chamber, uttered by the
Atturney-Generall, That it was the Kings pleasure, the Censure of those 3. men
should be executed to the uttermost: So as the execution proved to be as void
of Mercy, as the Censure was of Justice. The night before the Execution, I did,
as before the Censure, address my self by earnest prayer for divine support
in the acting of that Tragedy upon the scaffold of public reproach. Filled I
was with exceeding alacrity of truly Heroical, and Christianly magnanimous
resolution. My two supporters (next under God) were, the nobleness and pure
innocence of the Cause, and the uprightness and integrity of my conscience
With these I went on foot the next morning from the Fleet to the place of
Execution at Westminster, far better guarded, then with those many halberds
and weapons that attended me. My wife had the favor to go all along with me,
going together with this equipage, as to the celebration of our marriage. When
I came in sight of the Pillary, my spirit was mightily cheered, and my heart
raised up to a Mr. Price in Coleman Pre^t L^ndon.
higher pitch of joy. I said to one, a little before my going up to the
Pillary, I shall this day preach down Antichrist in the Pillary: And say
nothing, replied he: yea, said I, and say nothing. This was omitted in the
Relation forementioned. All the while I stood in the Pillary, I thought my
self to be in Heaven, and in a state of glory and triumph, if any such state
can possibly be on earth. I found those words of Peter uerified on me in the
Pillary, If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the
spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, 1 Pet. 4. 14.
which on their part is blasphemed, but on yours, glorified. For my rejoicing
and glorying was so great all the while, without intermission, in the Pillary,
that I can no more express it, then Paul could his ravishments in the third
heaven: so as I could best, and most truly say 2 Cor. 12.
Amen to those words of a godly woman, going along in the troop near Charing
Cross, at my return from banishment to London, (which God was also pleased to
cloth with so great glory) she said to me, O Sir, this is a glorious wedding
day; to whom I replied, It is indeed, blessed be God; I, said she, but your
wedding day on the Pillary was much more glorious: I admiring the woman's
speech, answered, It is indeed most true, good woman, blessed be our God.

After the execution, I was carried again the same day to my Fleet-prison,
where mine ears, after the Chirurgions bloodletting, were a healing till
toward the end of July; when, before they were quite healed, I was hastened
away to Lancaster, July 28. having said the night before to a religious Matron
of London visiting of me, I must now (said I) prepare for my exile, not
thinking then of any further exile, then Lancaster Castle, being an exile in
mine own Country. On the day appointed I passed on horseback from the Fleet
through Smithfield, where for throng of people all along I could not pass, but
very slowly, though the Keeper hastened all he could, who fretted to see so
many thousands all the way we went, he reckoning the number to be forty
thousand. By the way so many taking me by the hand, pressed the very blood out
at my fingers ends, but with another mind then the great ones drew the blood
out at mine ears. I rid to S. Albons that night, being accompanied all the way
with above five hundred horse of loving friends, which the Keeper also much
envyed. Many staid there all night, but were not suffered to sup with me, no
nor to see my face. Nay the Keeper was so strict, that he would scarce suffer
my wife, who went along, to dress mine ears. Coming to Daventry, it
exceedingly refreshed me, that I had the sight, and a little society of that
holy and reverend Father, Mr John Dod, who came two or three miles off to see
me; as also his effectual servant prayer for me and my wife, calling me his
son, and her his daughter. At Coventry two worthy and reverend brethren, Mr
Nalton, and Mr Hughes, with their wives, came also to salute me and bid me
farewell; In our short discourse, they rejoicing and congratulating Gods
gracious and mighty assisting of me in my suffering, and my happiness therein:
I answered, I have cause to bless God more for this suffering, then for all
outward blessings in the world, and I account this to be one great part of my
happiness, that I have now cast off that yoke of the Prelates, under which I
had so long groaned; but I promise you, said I, it did cling and cleave so
close to my neck, that I could not shift it off, but that it shaved off mine
ears. And when at our parting they were very sad; I labored to comfort them,
saying, Come be not sad; for three years and a half hence we shall meet
again and be merry: which I spoke alluding to the three days and a half, the
time of the two witnesses lying unburied; of which speech we shall have
occasion to speak more anon.

There also one of those godly women, saying unto me, O sir you are in a happy
estate, you are past all danger, and sure of Heaven; but for us, what shall we
do? I replied, that the assurance of Heaven cannot secure us from manifold
temptations and afflictions, and snares of Satan, so long as we live in these
houses of clay. And therefore we have need continually to stand upon our watch
and ward, and to pray one for another, having so malicious and unwearied an
Adversary, whom neither close imprisonment, nor Iron Gates and Bars can
hinder from assaulting us.

On the 3. of August, being sacurday, we came to Lancaster, and on the 5. being
Monday, the Keeper brought me into the Castle, where the Keeper thereof, under
the Sheriff, received me. There he sitting in John of Gaunts old Chair, fell
to speak his pleasure of me, and to censure me for what I had done: To whom I
said, Sir it is your office to be my Jailer, not my Judge. Well, in short,
lodging he had none for me, no bedding, no furniture, so as if he had not been
enjoined to keep me up close, that none should come at me, he would surely have
put me among the common Thieves and Rogues in the common Jayle. For he would
find no other room for me, but a vast desolate room within the Iron Gate of
the Common Goal, where none had layne for almost twenty years, where was
nothing but bare cold walls, and those with wide and ruinous clefts to let in
the cold winds; and windows, having iron bars outward, and wodden bars in
the midst, both to let in the wind, and to let me from putting forth my head so
much as to see, or take breath in a calm: So as had not my wife been there to
provide a bed, and other necessaries for my better accommodation, the beastly
man had suffered me to lie and dye by the cold walls. The door also of the
room was open below, so as when the cold North, or North-east wind did blow,
it filled it both with cold and smoke, that no fire could be made in the coldest
time. It was such a miserable lodging, that when after my removal from thence,
some Londoners, my friends, being at Lancaster, desired of the Keeper, to see
the room where I lay; he would not suffer it, for very shame. Yea though the
room had a Leads over, and stayres leading to them out of the room, yet during
all the time that I continued there, I could not obtain one breathing while,
or one turn on those Leads. And the room had one quality more, that I could
not walk in it, for it was flooted with thick planks that were round upward,
and so distant one from another, that I could not set one step, but I must look
to every footing. Two poor men, whereof one was a Papist, lodged in the room
continually: I bought them two Primmers to teach them to read, but I could
never get them to spend with me one quarter of an hour. One morning Lawrence
the Papist coming up, and sitting down, I asked him if we should begin now to
learn to read? he said, no Sir, not to day. Why Lawrence, said I? For it is
(quoth he) S. Lawrence day: I could not persuade him. My wife provided my diet,
but they would not suffer her maid to bring it to the top of the stairs, to my
door, that she might see it safely delivered, and see me also to carry her
mistress word that I was alive and well. Very jealous they were of conveying
letters, so as when my maid brought a shirt ayred for me, they would shake it
open, and so air it indeed after their fashion. One morning as soon as I was
up, by reason of the coldness of the room, I was taken with a terrible fit of
the Colic, so as Lawrence coming up, told me I looked like death. I went to
bed again, but nor he, nor any else must stay by me, to help me, or look to
me: for in truth their intent was to take the advantage of any sickness,
thereby to make an end of me. I was then extreme ill for two hours, even unto
death. But my good Keeper was with me, and I pleaded with him, that seeing he
had put me there, and that for his cause, and had deprived me of all outward
helps and comforts, he stood charged with me; so as if I miscarried, it must be
under his hand, and the like. Thus I lay pleading, till at length it pleased
him by a strange way to remove the malady. This was the only fit of sickness
that I had in that prison. It was sufficient to discover their murtherous
intents, and what I must trust to, if I were sick, none must come at me. And,
to add to their cruelties, there was a dark room under mine, where they put
five witches, with one of their children, which made such a hellish noise night
and day, that I seemed then to be in hell, or at least in some Popish
Purgatory, the Region next above hell, as the Papists tell us: so as now I was
deprived of the sweetness of my privacy, and of the only solace of my solitary
prison, when I could not either pray, or meditate, or yet sleep quietly. In the
Goal I did often solace my self with singing of Psalms, which (as I
afterward understood) did mightily, as on the one side comfort the better
minded people, so on the other, vex the malignant or Popish party. And their
malice herein appeared the more, that they had room enough elsewhere in the
Castle to bestow these witches in, who had continued a long time there. But my
wife, with great and long importunity, prevailed to have them at length
removed. Well, in fine, my two Keepers brought it out very shily, that I was to
be removed further off into banishment, into an Island; but they could not, or
would not tell me whither; For they were lessoned to conceal all things from
me. Well, the time of my removeall approaches: it must be some night; I must
not know it till over night late. My wife having some inkling of it, prepared
necessaries for my journey, and sent them before to Leverpoole as I directed
her. On the first of November very early, being yet dark, I was brought out of
the Castle, where the Sheriff was attending with horses. So soon as I was out
at the gates of the Castle, I did before them all put off my hat, and solemnly
blessed God, saying, Although I know not whither I am going, but whither God
will; yet I thank God, that I am out at these gates. The Keeper Couel, being
vexed at this, said, But you are here yet: But I bless God (said I) that I am
out at these gates. My Children were there, for whom I had over night, with
much importunity, obtained, that they might see their father, and he them,
before he went; but I must only salute them, scarce speak one word to them to
comfort them. It was the last farewell of my dear daughter, whom I never saw
after. So I parted from Lancaster, after I had been there almost thirteen
weeks. A prison it was, where for the extreme coldness of it, I could not in
all likelihood have outlived one winter. In which respect I took it as a great
mercy of God, that I was soremoved thence, in hope I might come to a better
place, I was sure not a worse. At Preston we lodged that night, where no
importunity could prevail with the Sheriff for my wife to have one sight of
me, much less to speak a word to me. The next day we lodged at Leverpoole,
where on the next day after I was attended with the Sheriff, with the Mayor,
and their Officers, who brought me to the water side, and there saw me safely
embarked: Only by the way one favor I had, that I could see my dear wife
standing aloof all alone on the sand till I came and bid her farewell, and so
passed away; only I said unto her at parting, Wife, be of good comfort, God is
working. At Leverpoole, and not before, they showed me the Order for what place
I was bound, which was the I Will and Castle of Guernsey. This put me in mind,
and taught me the meaning of a dream that I had in the Fleet, after the
Execution. I dreamed, that I was assailed with a huge, fierce, and furious
Bull, who came running full-but at me twice, but being tied at a great Cable
rope, he could not pass the length of the Cable, but there stop raging that he
could not reach me. Now I found, that this dream did portend my voyage by sea,
to such a place, beyond which the Ship-cable reached not, for the Bull to have
his will on me, which was to destroy me.

Another dream, after this, I had in the Fleet, a night or two after, which
was, that sundry friends being at dinner with me. I saw a Fox couching down
behind them, and watching to snatch away their Victuals: whereupon I espying a
book lying near at hand, took it up and flapt it upon the Fox, taking him by
the neck with my right hand, and holding him up aloft, and saying to the
company, Lo, here is the Fox that would cosen us all of our Victuals. The
Book was just of the same volume, binding, cover, color and bigness, that the
Archbishop of Canterburies Book was, entitled, A Relation of a Conference
etc. which I did first see at Gernsey. And when afterward I saw the Reply to
the same Relation published in Print; what was this, but the discovery of the
subtle Fox to all the company? But this by the way as by anticipation.

Now to return to our Bark. When I was, by the Sheriff, and Mayor, coopt up
close in my cabin, where they left me: about an hour after I was suffered to
come forth upon the deck to take a little breath, the Bark then being a ground;
and there I could not contain my self, but brake out into a triumphant
exultation before all the people, rejoicing that now I was, as it were,
separated from the world, having forsaken my native Country; and blessing God,
that I had now overcome the world, bequeathing my wife and children to God, and
my self to Heaven. Whereat all the beholders were astonished, and sundry of
them much strengthened by my example.

On the Lords day at night, being the fifth of November, lying still at anchor
in the road at Leverpoole, the wind not yet serving, there was a most terrible
tempest lay upon us, which made the Bark to crack again, being anchor-driven
upon a flat rock; where it had like to have beaten it self to pieces, both in
the flowing and ebbing of the water; there being at that time, in the same
broad river, another Bark wracked in our view: But it pleased God to preserve
us. Yet our Bark had, with that storm, sprung a leake; which though the
Carpenter did his best to mend it, yet it troubled us all our voyage, and put
us to pumping every half hour.

The same night the storm drove away out of Dublin River twenty Vessels into
the Channel, most of which were not heard of a month after, saving only
four, and the rest not heard of at all, during our riding there.

The man, appointed by the High-Sheriffe of Lancashire Mr. Kirby, to take the
charge of me to Guernsey, was one Burton, the most notorious K. in all the
Shire. He would have had my wife to send me 30 or 40. pound, but got of her 6.
pound (so much as she could, yet with difficulty, spare) which he undertook to
deliver to me; but defrauded both her and me of it. When we came within the
bar of Dublin River, there we lay at Anchor a whole month, all which time
this Burton swaggered in Dublin with that six pound, and not once either came
or sent to me so much as one Bottle of wine, or one joint of fresh meat, to
refresh me, while tumbled and tossed on those waters. But (which is yet worse)
this Burton, with his mates, though the Bark was hired for the King, only to
transport me, yet fraighted the Bark with raw Hides, which so pestered and
infested us, that for my part, it had almost poisoned me with the continual
stinch, a thing most odious to my nature. But all that I could do (which was
just nothing) would not not help it, I threatened Burton, that I would (smiling
to my self) complain of him to the King for so abusing his prisoner, but he
cared no more for it, then if I had threatened to tell the Archbishop of
Canterbury.

Having thus spent just 28. days in Dublin River, the wind coming about a
little, we set sail and were in great jeopardy by the coast of Ireland,
between the shore and the shelves, or beds of sands that lie all along, the
wind blowing hard from off the shore, and the Bark often cracking under us, I
lying all the while in the bottom of the Bark, as Jonas in the Whales belly,
when almost all hope of safety was taken away, the Master crying to the
Steers-man, and he answering, that he could do no more. Still the Pumpe was
going, but by Gods mercy we escaped. I was extremely Sea-sick both from England
to Ireland, and from thence till we came almost to Guernsey, even nigh unto
death. By the way we touched at Milford Haven, and last of all I took my
farewell of England at the Bay of Dartmouth, being not permitted to take the
least refreshing on Land after my embarking either at Leverpool; where we
floated 7. days, or in Ireland, or in England. In seven days more we passed
from Ireland to Guernsey, and so, after our voyage by Sea from England thither,
which was for 42. days, or six weeks, by Gods mercy we arrived at Guernsey,
lodging the first night in the Town in the Island. The next day, being
Saturday, I was conveyed over that part of the Sea, which divides the Island
from the Castle, where I was received by the Lieutenant Mr. Nathaniel Darrell,
a Noble Gentleman born in Kent, which gave me hope to find courteous usage,
remembering the praise that Caesar of old gave to the people of Kent, that they
were the most civil and courteous Iul. Caesa. Comment.
people of all Britain. And truly so I found him: For although my first
lodging in the Castle was in a low Chamber, the window whereof was on the
outside compassed in round with boards, a yard distant from the window, only
to let in Light, so as I might not look out to see either Earth or Sea, but
only up to heavenward (like to a pinned Pigeon, to make sport for the
Faulkoner) and many times I was so scanted for air, as I was glad to stand
upon a form to suck in a little breath through a broken pane in the top of the
window: Yet I assure my self it should not have been so, if either the
Lieutenant, or the Governors of the Castle could have helped it. I merrily
told the Gentleman porter of the Castle, my Countryman, one morning walking a
turn or two with me in the room, pointing to the Boards before the window,
saying, You deal with me here, as they do in our Country with a mad Bull, when
they put a board before his face.

I continued in this room 16. weeks, not once going forth into the open air.
And yet (see the goodness of my heavenly Keeper) I was not once sick in that
room, to keep my bed one day; no nor was I ever more cheerful in all my life,
then in that very prison, as where I could every day dance my sink apace,
either when I was cold, or wanted breathing, or for exercise. So as the close
prison was to me as a most princely Palace, or Paradise of pleasure; and such
as the old Serpent could not so easily cheat me of the happiness of, as he did
our first Parents of that earthly Paradise. For in all my straits, still as I
reflected upon the cause for which I suffered all these things, my heart leaped
for joy, and I could not contain my self, but that my body also sprang and
jumped in my chamber, even with the like spirit of alacrity, (I dare say) as
David danced before the Arc. And all this while from my first entrance into my
suffering, and all along to the very last, in all my imprisonment, in all my
banishment, in my separation from my loving and beloved wife, and children, and
friends, this separation having no other bounds (in the boundless tyrannical
Censure) then perpetuity it self: yet I was so far from accounting all this
suffering as any the least affliction to me at all, as that I held and valued,
and enjoyed it as my chief joy, my glory, and my Crown, and the greatest
happiness that ever God vouchsafed unto me in all my life; and thus it
continued without any intermission, or interruption until God was pleased to
release me from my bonds. And one thing I may not omit, how gentilely careful
and respective Mr. Lieutenant was of me all the time of my being prisoner in
the Castle, to provide good and wholesome diet for me, the best that the Island
and Sea afforded, which he sent me warm from his own Table.

Well, after 16. weeks I was preferred to a better lodging, where I might lock
out at my window over the Sea Eastward. I accounted this a very high degree of
preferment. Whence also, after one half year more, by the coming, and favor
of the honorable Governor of the Castle and Islands of Guernsey, I was
advanced to the next Chamber above it, which was the highest Chamber in the
Castle, and had one window Southward, and another Eastward, yielding me a fair
prospect to the Sea from South to North, which was a great recreation to me.
Yea, God made every thing a Recreation; the making of mine own Bed, and the
sweeping of my Chamber, was as an exercise of my body, so a recreation of my
mind. For though it might seem a strange alteration, from having been a
public Act. 19. 35 (...).
sweeper of Souls, to become now a poor sweeper of my prison; yet the
consideration for what, and whom I had undergone such a suffering condition, I
rejoiced in this service, and was ready to become yet more vile for his sake,
who humbled himself to become a servant for me, and who had honored me with
so high an office of a sufferer for his Sake.

Being thus sweetly accommodated for lodging, quiet from all noyses, and having
gotten about me my Bibles in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French, etc. As also the
Ecclesiastical History in Greek, I made these my daily exercise; It was my
daily recreation to take my English Testament, and without the Greek, to read
the English into Greek, which I did with the like facility, as to read
English; and then I did compare my Greek with the Greek Testament, to see
wherein I differed in any word, putting one (...) for another, and the like. In
which, and other conveniences, which that lodging afforded for study and
privacy, I began now to see more clearly then before the special providence
of God, in bringing me out of Lancaster Goal to that Castle: For had I
continued in Lancaster Castle (besides the hardship of lodging, cold, and other
usage) I could never have enjoyed that opportunity of study, which I had at
Gerusey; there being at Lancaster one Dr. Wildbore who had always a malignant
aspect, and watchful eye over me; I could not have a book, but by his
permission, he being one of the Prelates Priests and Creatures, a double
Beneficed man, and an heir apparent to a Bishopric, which he hoped to merit
by his good service, in keeping a strict watch over me. But (blessed, be God)
at Guernsey Castle, though none could be more careful then Mr. Lieutenant in
observing the Court-Orders to keep me from the use of pen, ink, and paper, even
for my private studies, though I earnestly desired him, promising him, if I
might enjoy that favor, I would write nothing that might procure him any
displeasure or trouble: And surely had he upon my promise granted my suite, I
had been true to him: But my heavenly Keeper provided otherwise for me what I
desired. For through his good providence I had an art to make ink, and for
pens I had goose wings, which were to sweep the dust off my windows, and for
paper, a private friend in Guernsey town supplied me, for all the strict watch
and ward that was kept about me by my keeper: in the use of all these I was so
wary, that while any was coming up the stairs, I had time to convey all away,
that never any of my keepers could see either pen, ink, or paper, in my
chamber. By this means, through Gods merciful assistance, I writ the Reply to
the Relation, which being finished, I sent away for England by the foresaid
private friend. After this, upon a second revisall, I writ a Supply to the
Reply; but this was never printed: I writ also an answer to Dr. Halls
Episcopacy by divine right: But neither was this printed. For the reply did
very hardly escape the Bishops beagles, hunting it up and down, while it was a
printing; but the same providence which preserved and produced that For God and
the King, preserved this also, and brought it forth to light. I writ also
sundry other things, some of which came to light, and some miscarried. The
writings flowed from me with such an affluence and facility, that they were no
labor to me, but a recreation: and neither did my writing abate my reading,
nor my reading hinder my writing: For both I read so much every day (being up
early and late) as if I had writ nothing: and I writ so much, as if I had done
nothing else. Now concerning the Reply; therein was verefied the dream I spoke
of, which I had in the Fleet, concerning the Fox: The fox proved to be the
Archbishop of Canterbury: The Book that was flapt upon the lurking fox, which
was just of the same volume, bynding, cover, color, bigness with the
Relation, was Canterburies Relation it self retorted upon him; the right hand
that held up the fox by the neck, to show his fox-like fraud to all the
company, was the right hand which writ the Reply to that foxes Relation,
whereby through his cunning sophistry, and notorious hypocrisy he thought to
have gulled all England of the Gospel; and set up the Romish Mass in stead
thereof, as the Reply has plainly discovered. Thus both my foresaid dreams in
my Fleet-prison were made up in Guernsey Castle prison, where the strong cables
end of Gods providence stayed the fury of that Beast or Bull from pushing at
me, so as he could not, for all his Bull-like power, and fox-like craft and
policy, hinder that work, whereby the fox was uncased: which title I had given
to the Reply, calling it, The uncasing of the fox; but that I thought a more
moderate title would better suit with the fury of those times, in case any
spark of common reason had been left for right reason to work upon.

Again, although, when first I heard of an Order from the Lords to take my
wife prisoner, in case she should come to Guernsey Island to enquire after her
husband, whether he were alive or dead, I thought it hard: Yet after it pleased
God to enable and employ me in those services aforesaid, I saw another clear
evidence of divine providence in keeping my wife from me for a time, that so
her society might not be any impeachment or impediment (at that time) to my
employments there. Thus the Lord turned all these things to cooperate for good.

In this interim, I heard of the good pleasure of God, in taking away my dear
and only daughter. It was a little before supper that Mr Lieutenant began
darkly to intimate the same unto me, until I prayed him to deal plainly with
me, which he then did: whereupon craving pardon, I immediately retired to my
lodging, and there on my knees gave the Lord solemn thanks, that it had
pleased him to translate my daughter, now his alone, into his Kingdom of
glory, after he had fitted her to be a Virgin Spouse for her husband Jesus
Christ. For a holy and sweet conditioned Maid she was ever from her childhood,
being now grown marriageable, and now for ever married unto Jesus Christ. This
was she that said (as before) It must be so, it must be so. Now the reason, why
I thus gave thanks to God upon this news of the death of my daughter, was my
assurance that she was now in heaven: so as I did not shed a tear for her
death, no more then I did at my parting with her and her brother at Lancaster
Castle, or with my wife at Leverpoole sands; as not daring in public to
blemish the Siccis oculis ad Christi vexillum vol^. Hier.
cause of my suffering with one tear for any worldly loss: Although otherwise
I wanted not expressions, in my privacy, of both loyal affections to my wife,
and natural bowels to my children.

On April 25. 1640. I set the day apart to seek God, especially for his Church,
which then lay under great pressures; wherein having spent the day till four
of the clock in the afternoon, I walked two or three turns in my Chamber, and
being very sad, and disconsolate because I had not, as at other times upon the
like occasion, received an answer of comfort from God, and being somewhat faint
with abstinence and closeness of the room, I opened that window which looks
into the sea eastward, to take a little air, the sea coming as near the
shore on that side, as that I might from my window throw an apple into it: thus
looking forth, by and by there was presented before the window a Rainbow, lying
flat all along upon the sea, with the A strange and miraculous Rainbow.
two ends close to the shore, and the bow from me ward: it was a perfect and
entire Rainbow; but because it did not, as ordinary Rainbowes, stand upright,
but lay flat upon the sea, it filled me with wonderment; and so much the more,
because looking both upwards and downwards, I saw no cloud for the Rainbow to
subsist in, neither was the air moist, it being a dry windy day. I observed
indeed (putting my head forth at the window, and looking upwards) many broken
little clouds driven away with the wind, but never a one large enough for such
a Rainbow; and the clouds moved apace, and passed away, but the Rainbow abode
still for the space of half a quarter of an hour, keeping its posture, lying
flat and steady upon the sea; whereby it plainly appeared to be no natural and
ordinary Rainbow, but super-naturall and miraculous. Mine eyes were taken up
with beholding, and my mind with admiring it, till at length whole, as it was
at first, it began to withdraw it self whole as it was toward the North-east,
toward England: I saw it move thus for the space of two leagues, lying flat
upon the sea, till it vanished out of my sight. Hereupon I began to be amused
in my self, what this should mean: I was persuaded, that God had sent this
Rainbow to me for some special use, that I should make of it: But I knew not,
nor could imagine what. I prayed again, that the Lord would be pleased to show
me what use to make of it. I hereupon cast my thoughts upon the first Rainbow
in Genesis; but that was set in the cloud, and for a sign of Gods Covenant,
Genesis 9. 12, 13.
that he would no more destroy the world by a flood of waters. But what is this
Rainbow to that? This is without a cloud, and lies flat upon the sea. Well,
this interpretation I made of it: That forasmuch as I had earnestly sought God
for his Church that day, and had not received an answer of comfort, and being
sad, God thereupon (without any my seeking of a sign) presented before me a
miraculous Rainbow; I took it to be sent of God, as an answer to my prayers
that day, and to be a sign to assure me, that he would certainly and
miraculously deliver his Church, which now lay floating upon the seas of
affliction, ready to be swallowed up. Upon this interpretation I was so
satisfied, and filled with present comfort, being fully persuaded of the truth
thereof, that I was never sad after upon any such occasion: and when at any
time since I have been disconsolate for the Church, I have presently reflected
mine eyes upon my Rainbow, and have therewith been comforted afresh, and my
heart remains fully established against all doubts and fears. I say, my
Rainbow, as having the sole propriety in it, seeing it was seen of none but my
self alone. And how miraculously has God wrought for us, by many deliverances
since that time hitherto? Soon after a Parliament was miraculously procured:
and soon after again it was by Gods wonderful Providence miraculously broken
up, in the very nick of an imminent danger, as all do know; so as the
dissolution of the Parliament, in the prevention thereof, proved to be as the
ashes of the Phoenix, whereof is begotten another Phoenix; the dissolution of
that proving the generation of this (hitherto in many things) happy Parliament,
which we have now so long enjoyed, and which God has so miraculously preserved
from so many desperate Cutthroats, when they came armed, both with power, and
bloody resolution, to make a massacre of that sacred Senate; and when the
Northern Army was designed for the like execution. And should we run over,
and well weigh, and number the several deliverances that God has given, both
in this Kingdom, and in that of Scotland, from so many treacheries, treasons,
and rebellions, from the first till this present, both by Sea and Land (taking
in the late Spanish Fleet, and Armado for not the least, so miraculously
defeated) we shall find and acknowledge them so many miracles, or miraculous
deliverances; and so much the more, when we consider on the one side the
overtopping power, and undermining plots of the most cruel and treacherous
sworn enemies, and homebred vipers, and degenerate monsters, that ever hell
hatched, or Rome brought forth, machinating the utter ruin of both Parliament
and People, Religion and Rights, Laws and Liberties, City and Country: and on
the other side, the weakness both of Parliament and People, to defend
themselves, and the State from imminent ruin, when in our greatest dangers
there were such divisions in both Houses; so as for a long time, especially
before the Prelates, (those incendiaries, and make-bates,) were cast out of the
House of Lords, matters of maine consequence, tending to reformation, and
preservation of the Kingdom, could not pass current, no place could be found
for the punishing of Delinquents, and the like; their impunity proving a kind
of immunity to advance their Crest to such a height of insolency, as it is now
grown intolerable, if not incurable. Yet notwithstanding all this, see how
miraculously the Lord works for us: For has he not caused all the
machinations of that miscreant and malignant party, to make against themselves,
and for us? What got the Prelates by their bold Remonstrance against all the
Proceedings of this Parliament, as mere nullities? Were they not thereupon
cast out, as nullities in Parliament, and by this occasion each House better
united in it self, and both Houses better accorded, and more firmly combined
together? What have they gained by attempting of Hull, by soliciting, (by
flattery or force,) simple and credulous poor souls, by gathering Forces
against the Parliament, and the loyal Subjects of the Kingdom, but thereby to
discover to the world, what truth there is in all their Protestations, and
fair false pretenses to the contrary: so that the trecherons intentions, and
bloody projects, and beastly practices of that selfe-damning Crew, might be
found the more worthy every day to be hated and abhorred both of God and men?
So as it is apparent, that our God has given up our enemies to be
self-blinded, their hearts being hardened to their confusion: That in all their
disasters, and our deliverances all along, we might sing with Moses; Who among
the Gods is like unto thee, O Lord! Who is like thee! Exodus 15. 1^.
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders.

Thus hitherto we have seen the many miraculous things, which are so many
miraculous deliverances of the Church, and so many steps and degrees unto a
greater and a more miraculous deliverance, yet to come; all which have in part
answered to the interpretation of the miraculous Rainbow above mentioned. I
say, in part, because the great miraculous deliverance is yet to come. And
there is no surer sign of this great miraculous deliverance of Gods Church,
then the fury and rage of Satan, and Antichrist, with all their confederate
faction, making open war against the Kingdom and Gospel of Christ.

And now is this war begun professedly in Ireland by the Rebels there. (who
have their Authors, Factors, and Abetters both in Rome and England) for the
rooting out of all Protestants, and the Protestant Religion; which war they
intended to perfect in England and Scotland. So as this outrageous war in the
^ebellion of Ireland, and in the raising of Popish forces in England against
the true Protestants, under the infamous name of Round heads, which war is
fomented by all Papists and popishly affected within the Land, and without;
among whom our Prelates with their Priests are not the least incendiaries, and
bellowes-blowers, seducing also their blind-folded Ignorants, to make a party
with them, to destroy themselves and families, together with their native
country, and all the honor of it: This war (I say) so furiously and
universally by them prosecuted, is a most certain immediate fore-running sign
of the imminent ruin of the whole Kingdom of the Beast, which is spiritually
called Egypt; even as the power of the Kingdom of Egypt, Pharaoh and his Host,
pursuing Israel to the red Sea, with resolution utterly to destroy the Lords
people, was that which led them to their own dismal destruction in that Sea:
For the enemy had said, I will pursue, I will overtake them, I Exodus 15. 9.
will divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon them, I will draw my
Sword, my hand shall destroy them. The very language of our Antichristian
enemies at this time; the Cavaleers at York divided among themselves, the
streets, houses, and spoils of London, they threaten the utter extirpation of
all Roundheads (as they call them) to wit, all Protestants, even all such, as
cannot away with Popery; Therefore certainly the ruin of this cursed faction is
near at hand, which shall be with a fearful destruction, forasmuch as they
make open war against the Lord and his anointed people: So as that which is
prophesied of those Kings and Rulers, in the second Psalm, who with their
heathenish rage, and tumultuous troops war against the Gospel, the bands and
cords whereof they endeavor to burst in sunder, and to cast away from them,
hastneth now to be verified of them; the Lord that sits in Heaven, laughes
at their proud and vain attempts, and with his iron Rod shall he break them
in pieces like a Potters Vessel. And even as Pharaoh with his Egyptians would
not be warned, nor humbled with those 10. terrible plagues, which the Lord sent
upon Egypt one after another, but their hatred against Israel still continued,
till at last the Lord utterly rooted them out; so seeing none of all these
defeats, which the Lord has sent upon the desperate designs of our new
Egyptians one after another, disappointing them, and delivering us, will
reclaim them, or appease their fury, but after all, they do still seek to
extirpate the people of God, and all true Religion: The like destruction must
needs overtake them, that overtooke the old Egyptians. As the Prophet says, O
Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall Isa. 26. 11.
see and be confounded for their envy toward thy people; yea, the fire of
thine enemies shall devour them. And this is the time, foretold of old, Revel.
11. be my book, entit^led, The sounding of the sixth Trumpet. Rev. 16. 16.
the time of the sixth Trumpet, sounding forth woe against the Beast, for
slaying the two Witnesses, after whose reviving again, there follows a great
earthquake, after which follows the destruction of the Beasts Kingdom under
the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, when the Kingdoms of this world are
become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for
ever and ever. And this is the time wherein the battle of God Almighty is
fought in Harmageddon, under the pouring out of the Plagues of the sixth Vial
upon the Beast. Now is Michael and his Angels fighting against the Dragon and
his Angels. Revel. 2 7, 8. Rev. 17. 14. Rev. 20. 9.
Now is the Lamb and his party (the called, and chosen, and faithful)
fighting with the Beast and his party. Now is the Holy City begirt with the
Forces of Gog and Magog, open, and secret enemy, whom fire from heaven
consumes, even the zeal of God, and of his people. And the Deliverance of the
Church shall be the more miraculous, because it is wrought by the mighty hand
of God, through many troubles and d^fficulties, which Gods people must pass
through, as through a sea, before they arrive on their wished shore. And this I
apprehend to be signified by the manner of the going away of the forementioned
miraculous Rainbow, which manner was no less miraculous, then the Rainbow it
self. For it went away, and so vanished at length, not as other Rainbowes, by
peece-meale, as the cloud wherein it subsisteth, does waste away; but it passed
away whole and entire, all along upon the sea as far as I could see, and
toward England it went: as if Gods Church in England especially should have a
miraculous deliverance through a sea of troubles. And the expectation hereof
yields me no small supportation in the midst of these tumultuous times, and
dubious events, assuring my self, that he which gave the Rainbow such a
subsistence without any cloud, will also perform and accomplish the thing,
whereof it was sent to be a sign, even the glorious deliverance of his Church,
how unlikely or defective soever the means be.

Yea shall I add one circumstance more? When the same day at night I went to
write this down in mine Almanac for remembrance, I found that this day was
the very day of the month wherein I was married, which I had not observed
before to be that day. Hereupon I began to apprehend, that surely this was a
sign, as of the Churches deliverance, so of mine also therein. For mine own
particular deliverance As 2 Samuel 11. 11.
I made no account of, unless I might enjoy it as a part of the General
Deliverance of Gods people, as I professed to many at my return home, when I
began to enjoy my deliverance as a part of the public, which I made as sure a
rekoning of, as if then already fully accomplished.

But at length, to wind up so much of the thread of my life, which was spun
out in that my closse imprisonment and banishment, let me acquaint the Reader
with those special cordialls, which were to me more sweet then my daily food.
I had ever been from my youth up much acquainted with David's Psalms, in my
private devotions, as wherein I ever found greatest sweetness and solace to my
poor soul; which as they afforded more matter of comfort to me, as my life
had been all along much exercised with affliction: so most of all in my prison
and exile. And although the Psalms have all of them their several
excellencies, yet among the rest I had, from my very youth made choice of one
Psalm especially, as which I was extraordinarily affected with, in that I
could both most clearly read the general estate of my life past, and present;
as also both feelingly pray for, and confidently wait for those promises and
comforts which were therein presented to the eye of my faith, and which
afterward I began in my latter sufferings, in a great measure, to enjoy, which
after my return from exile seemed to have a more full accomplishment. As for
the purpose (to omit many other passages of the Psalms, which I leave to the
readers judgment, and consideration, how far forth they are remarkably
applyable to the several conditions of my life, if well weighed) not only in
my last and greatest sufferings, I found answers of God to all those prayers in
that Psalm, which I had often prayed, in supporting me, and being my strong
refuge (v. 7.) even then, when I was (as on the pillary) a wonder unto many;
when also (v. 8.) my mouth Esa. 8. 18.
was filled with his praise, and honor all the day; when in the time of old
age (v. 9.) I was cast off, and even out of the world in a manner, so as the
enemies said, God has forsaken him; persecute him, and take him, for there is
none to deliver him (v. 11.) yet the Lord did not cast me off; he forsook me
not. And (v. 30.) how was that fulfilled at my return, Thou which have showed
me great and sore troubles, thoushalt quicken me again, and shall bring me up
again from the depths of the earth? And (v. 21.) ^ow began God now to increase
my greatness, and comfort me on every side? And after this (of which more
anon) I found that also verified (v. 18.) Now also when I am old and
gray headed, O God, forsake me not, until I have showed thy strength unto this
generation, and thypower to every one that is to come; which here is done in
part, in this support of Gods strength and power, in carrying me, a weak man,
through so many and great troubles to his eternal praise and glory.

And besides all this, what mighty confusions have I since seen upon those
enemies, against whom the Psalmist prays, v. 13.? Not to mention more (all
being so notoriously known) let me tell you one passage. I being with some
friends walking in the Tower, where we were invited to see the Artillery, one
came and told me, that the Archbishop of Canterbury (my grand adversary) as he
was going along to the Chapel to do his devotions, was met by one, who told
him that I was hard by in the Tower: whereupon the Prelate presently returned,
hasting to his lodging, least (it seems) I should meet with him; who now not
brooking to see my face, and ears defaced: how shall he look Jesus Christ in
the face, whom he has pierced; when he shall come to Judgment, in flaming
fire, rendering veugeance to all miscreants?

This in brief of this Psalm, wherein it has pleased God to give me such an
interest through Christ, in whom all those sweet promises have so full an
accomplishment.

In a word, infinite were the supports and comforts which I received by the
Psalms. As Psalm. 40. wherein it is spoken of Christ, and of David (v. 10) I
have not hid thy righteousness within my heart, I have declared thy
faithfulness, and thy salvation; I have not concealed thy loving kindness,
and thy truth from the great congregation: this, I could in the integrity of my
conscience (being not privy of baulking any truth in my ministry, which was
forbidden by the Prelates) so far apply to my self, as that I could with the
greater confidence take up the words immediately following (v. 11.) Withhold
not thou thy tender mercies from me, O Lord: let thy loving kindness, and thy
truth continually preserve me. etc. As I remember, how a little before my last
troubles, Mr. Walker, my reverend and learned brother, being convented, and
admonished by Dr. Lamb to preach no more of the Sabbath, and he being
thereupon (...), half persuaded to it: I told him, Brother Walker, if you
yield herein, be assured they will some time or other get you in their snare;
and when they have you in prison, what comfort will you find, when your
conscience shall check you, that for fear of man, you forbear freely and
fully to declare the truth of God; and most of all then, when it was most
opposed and oppressed? And not long after my going into banishment, they
catched him indeed, and put him in prison; where I doubt not but he found
comfort from God, according to my words, which he had upon that occasion
followed.

Again, I was mightily supported by those words, Psalm. 66. 10. 111. 12. For
thou O God, have proved us, thou have tried us, as silver is tried: Thou
broughtest us into the net, Thou laidst affliction upon our Greck. (...) etc.
Thou have set riders upon our heads.
loins: Thou have caused men to ride over our heads; we went through fire and
through water: but Thou broughtest us out, into a wealthy place. Which wotds
afforded me two great props to support me: The one, that God was the sole
author of all those my troubles, as wherein no miscariage of mine had given any
the least just offense to those men, who forcibly drove me (yet witting, and
willing) into their net, where they rode upon my head. The other was, that as I
saw the Lords hand leading me through the fire, as on the pillary, where the
sun did extremely beat upon my head, and through the water, passing through the
seas (as aforesaid) so I did verily assure my self, that the same hand would
deliver, and bring me into a wealthy place. According also to that promise,
Isa. 43.^. Yea when in my close prison and exile, I was as an owl in the
desert, or as asparrow that sits alone upon the house top, yea as one free
among the dead. (Psalm. 88. 5.) like the slain that lie in the grave: yet this
was my comfort, that I could say, Thou O Lord have laid me in the lowest pit,
in darkness in the deeps; (v. 6.) lover and friend have thou put from me, and
mine acquaintance into darkness. All contented me well, because the Lord had
done all these things to me; (...) etc. Phil. 1. 29.
and that, not in his wrath, and displeasure against me, as D^vid there
complains; but in his loving kindness and favor, in his free grace calling,
and enabling me to suffer so great things, for his name sake.

In a word, I did now and then in my prison, exercise my self with preaching
to my self upon some text of Scripture, both for my present strengthening, and
comfort; and also to keep me from rust, in case it might please God to call me
forth to preach again in the great congregation.

Hereunto (if it be not tedious to the Reader) I might add a brief narration
of many other helps and supports, which I found throughout all my sufferings,
as also throughout the whole course of my life: As first Prayer; This never
failed me at any time, and in greatest distress it had most speedy and
speeding answers. What blessings has it obtained for me? What victories over
strong and masterfull corruptions, lusts, temptations, snares? How often
thereby Satan foiled, and sin prevented? How my spirits supported in all my
sufferings? I could here tell of many wonderful returns of prayer in the many
passages of my life; and particularly concerning Gods Providence in disposing
of me in marriage, wherein his goodness marvelously appeared, partly by
preventing some, and chiefly by providing successively two fit matches for me,
who proved notable helps to me, both in my ministry, and in my sufferings,
being both of them lovers, and valiant for the truth. And the second, yet
surviving, can relate how miraculously Prayer brought us first together. O the
excellent use of Prayer to all the purposes of this life, whether spiritual or
temporal! It is the most effectual solicitor of all our causes, having such
an Advocate at Gods right hand.

My second help in my sufferings was the testimony of my conscience; which
stood in these particulars. First, A sure belief that all my sins were
forgiven, and washed away in the blood of Jesus Christ. Secondly, An infallible
knowledge, that the^ cause for which I thus suffered, was a most noble, holy,
righteous, and innocent cause, as being the cause of Christ, of his Gospel, of
his Church, yea and of the whole Land, my native Country; which cause I was
(not only as a Christian, but much more, as a professed witness of Christ)
bound to maintain, even to the loss of all things in the world. Thirdly, the
testimony of my conscience sealed by my record from on high, that my continual
opposition in the course of my ministry, both by preaching and writing against
the adversaries of the truth, was out of no other respect (as either of an
humor of contradiction, or ambition, or vain glory, or affectation of
singularity, or of malice to any man's person, or out of any discontentednesse
with my present condition, as some have faflly and causlesly slaundered me, the
Lord having been so far good unto me, as to set me far above all such base
lusts (though I wanted not my corruptions) not to prevail over me) but merely
out of the conscience of my duty, in zeal to Gods glory, and love to his
truth, and service to Christ, and to his Church. There are sundry Ministers,
yet living in London, who can witness, that I was not ambitious to show my
self alone in the cause, when my frequent solicitations of them could not
prevail to have more fellows to share with me. And fourthly, (not to recount
more particulars) in that God has given me these three comforts more. First,
that before my last Censure (as aforesaid) I owed not a penny to any man, it
having ever been hateful unto me to owe any thing to any man but love; which
love I am daily paying, while daily praying for all. Secondly, that in this
respect I can say with the Apostle, I am free from the blood of all men, having
kept nothing back that I knew necessary and profitable, Acts 20. 20 26, 27.
but delivered (though in great weakness) the whole Counsel of God, even
against all opposition of men in their express edicts, armed with terrors and
threatenings to the contrary. Thirdly, although from my youth up I have not
been free from many humanefrailties and follies, lusts and vanities, baits
and temptations without, and corruptions within, ready to betray me; yet herein
my conscience does greatly comfort me, in this mercy of God I exceedingly
glory, that his Grace still prevented me, and preserved me in my integrity;
that he might Psalm. 41. 12.
set me before his face for ever, even in the rank of those, of whom it is
said, These are they that were not defiled with women. Thus have I Rev. 14. 4.
showed some special grounds of such comforts, as I enjoyed in my prison and
exile: These were my sweet Associates, and Vade-mecums in that my solitary
secluse: these the cordials and preservatives (from and under my God) of my
life and health.

Nay, shall I add yet one more. For this our comfort comes in the rear,
though late first; yet at last, That all this my suffering was mainly from the
malice and instigation of the Prelates (to say nothing of Papal leagues) who
oppugned me with two powerful Armies, the High Commission, and the
Star Chamber, and all for this cause (cause enough) that I testified the
truth against their Prelaticall oppositions, and tyrannical usurpations: so as
their shutting me out from among them, their depriving and degrading me of my
Ministry, I now accounted my greatest honor and privilege, as being now freed
from such an Antichristian yoke. As I told the Warden of the Fleet, as he
carried me from my Degradation in Paul's, that now I thanked God I had cast off
the Bishops Livery, and found my shoulders much the lighter by it.

Now to sum up all my sufferings, that only God may have the glory; herein
let me deprecate the Censure of arrogance, if I make the great Apostle, next
after my Lord Jesus Christ, my pattern to follow, though at a vast distance
The Apostle having recited his many and great fufferings, as so many
privileges, wherein he had out-stripped the false Apostles, 2 Cor. 11. saying
(v. 23.) Are they the Ministers of Christ? I speak as a fool, I am more: in
labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in
death often, etc. he concludes, ver. 30. If I must needs glory* I will glory of
the things which concern mine infirmities. And chap. 12. 9. Most gladly will I
rather glory in mine infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me;
Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake; for when I am weak, then am I
strong: so the Apostle. And who shall deny me (though but a dwarf to such an
Apostle) the like liberty to glory the rather in my infirmities, that the power
of Christ may rest upon me, and be the more glorified in me? seeing Christ's
power is most seen in greatest weakness, yea his strength thereby made
perfect. And Mat. 21. 16. Out of the mouths 2 Cor. 12. 9 Mat. 21. 16
of Babes and Sucklings thou have perfected praise.

But what are my sufferings to those of the Apostle? surely whatever proportion
they may hold, or if any at all, let not envy grudge us the balance of the
Sanctuary to weigh them in; if by this ^eans Christ's power shall appear the
greater, in equally supporting one so unequal to his Apostle in gifts, and
graces; and yet in sufferings not altogether so unequal. Shall we be bold to
take a parallel view of them? Pardon me good Reader.

First, the sole cause of all Paul's sufferings, was his witness-bearing A
parallel between Paul's sufferings, and the Authors.
to the truth of the Gospel, and for none other cause were all my sufferings.
Secondly, Paul was in prisons more frequent: so have I been; yea confined to
perpetual close imprisonment. Thirdly Paul suffered stripes above measure: and
I have suffered loss of very much blood on the pillary, equivalent to many
stripes. Fourthly, Paul fuffered thrice shipwreck: and I suffered the loss of
all at once, with imminent danger of shipwreck two several times. Fifthly,
Paul was in perils by sea: so was I in my tedious voyage by sea on a stormy
winter season, and through perilous seas between Lancashire and Guernsey, for
six weeks space, sundry times very near perishing in the Irish seas. Sixthly,
Paul was in perils among false brethren: so was I, never free from perils of
false brethren, or false Christians, who used to watch me in my Church to catch
something from my mouth, to carry to the Prelates, and so bring me into the
lions paws. Seventhly, Paul was in perils of his own countrymen, the Jews,
who sundry times way-layd him, to kill him: so have I been sundry times in
perils of the Jesuits, my countrymen, who in the City apparently two several
times, laid their ambush to take away my life; also of false ministers,
pretended friends, who privately brought me into the Prelates mercy, for
preaching against bowing at the name Jesus, for which I was suspended, as
before. Eighthly, Paul suffered hunger and thirst, cold and nakedness: so had I
nothing left me of mine own, to preserve me from hunger and thirst, from cold
and nakedness;se; lying under the formidable fine of 5000 l' payable to the
King, had it either been extended, or I able to have paid the tenth part of it.
And with mere cold had I perished in Lancashire Goal, had not God in his
providence translated me thence: and with hunger had I perished in Guernsey
Castle, had I not been fed by the Governors allowance, from Mr. Lievtenants
table; for the which no recompense could be obtained from those, by whose
authority I was there committed close prisoner, where I could not help my
self. Ninthly, Again, Paul was rescued from the hands of the cruel Jews,
High Priests, and Pharisees, by his appealing to Caesar, a heathen Emperor, who
protected him from their violence: but I, by appealing from the cruel
Prelates, was not rescued from their bloody hands. Tenthly, Paul, when the
Jews laid wait for him, without the gates of Damascus, to kill him, was in a
basket let down over the wall, and so esaped: but I being in mine own house
beset with bills, and swords, and threatened with a Prelates mace, had my house
violently broken up, and my person carried away to prison, although I might
have the same time escaped their hands. Eleventhly, Paul was persecuted by the
Jews, who were professed enemies of Christ: but I by those, who profess to be
Christians, yea Protestants, and to be for Christ, yea to be for the very
Church of Christ. Now a professed enemy is less dangerous, then a Psalm. 55.
12. 13. 14.
professed, but false, friend. Twelfthly, Paul (if the story be true) suffered
death, by being beheaded, with the sword, under Nero at Rome: And I suffered
that on the pilary in England, my native Country, which was more painful, and
no less, if not more disgraceful, then such a death. For my head hung two
full hours on the pilary, as if it had been separate from my body; and there
were my two ears disgracefully and butcherly cut off with the hangmans knife,
whereby my blood was abundantly shed, even to the expiring of the soul; all
which was, both for the present, and afterward in the time of healing, much
more painful, then the chopping off of the head with one stroke. Thirtenthly
As God endued Paul with an excellent spirit to undergo and overcome all his
affliction with a singular alacrity and constancy, so as he sung Psalms in the
prison, and accounted his life, and all outward things, but as dung, in
comparison of Christ: so the same God poured into my soul abundantly the like
spirit, of fortitude and magnanimity, not only cheerfully and constantly, but
even triumphantly, to be more then conqueror in all my sufferings; as also the
Apostle said of himself, 2. Cor. 2. 14. and Romans 4. 37.

Besides all this, First, Paul was never haunted, hunted, and vexed by
Pursuivants, as I have been. Secondly, Paul was never bound in bonds of two or
three hundred pounds to answer the High Priests in their synedrion, as I have
been in the high Commission Court. Thirdly, Paul, when he was a prisoner, and
that under Nero; yet had liberty Acts 24. 23 and 28. 30. 31
to visit his friends and acquaintance; and they to come and visit him: but I
was shut up in a close prison, where neither my self could visit others, nor
they me. Fourthly, Paul had his fellow prisoners with him to be mutual
comforters: but I was shut up all alone, without a fellow, or compainon.
Fifthly, Paul was never fined in more then he was worth: but I was. Sixthly,
Paul was never deemed to more punishments then one, at once: but I to many, and
those most griveous punishments; and that contrary to the law of the Medes and
Persians. Ezra. 7. 26. Seventhly, Paul was not condemned before the hearing of
his cause, nor himself condemned, for refusing to assent to the condemning of
his own cause before hearing: but both I and my cause were thus condemned,
contrary to the law of the land, and of all nations. Eighthly, It was lawfullfor
Paul to have carried about with him a sister a wife, if he had had one: but I
having an honest, godly, most loving, and tender hearted woman to my wife, was
not suffered to have her with me according to Gods Ordinance, for our mutual
comfort and support, in our great affliction; but we were violently separated
one from the other, without any the least color of cause. Ninthly, Paul was
suffered to write to his friends, and to those his children, whom he had
begotten by the Gospel, and to those Churches, which he had planted: but I was
not permitted the use of pen, ink, and paper, so much as to write to my
friends, or to my disconsolate wife, or my poor orphan-children, whom God had
given to me in lawful wedlock. Tenthly, Paul never was banished from his
native country: but I was, and that extrajudicially, sent into perpetual
banishment. Eleventhly, Paul, though a prisoner, yet was not forbid to preach;
but exercised his ministry in the prison, to all that came unto him but my
mouth was by Decree for ever stopped; which one affliction was to me, as in it
self, so heavy, as is sufficient to counter-ballance all Paul's afflictions
Twelfthly, Nor did Paul live to know experimentally those sufferings, which
Antichrist (foretold of by him) should both craftily invent, and cruelly
inflict upon Gods 2 Thessalonians 2^
servants, in these last times; which my self have now lived both to see, and
suffer. Antichrist was then but a cockatrice in the egg: but now he is broke
out, and grown to be a great red dragon. Thirteenthly, Paul once by pleading
the privilege of a Roman; escaped the whip: but I, though once by pleading the
benefit of a subject, I obtained (which yet cost me ten pounds) a Prohibition,
whereby. I was delivered from a double lash of the High Commission: yet the
next day after as aforesaid) I fell under the Prelates lash; who suspended me
from my ministry, for preaching the truth; sor the which truths sake I have
also suffered all these things. Finally, Fourteenthly, Paul's Judges would not
condemn him, for the bare accusation of his adversaries, saying, It was not
the manner of the Romans to condemn any man, before that he which is accused,
have the accusers face to face, and have license to answer for himself
concerning the crime laid against him: but Act. 25: 16.
I; though I had permission by the Court to make my defense in writing, and at
the censure to speak for my self, yet all was as nothing, but without either
accusers, or witnesses (saving only a counterfeit information in Court, charging
many things, but proving nothing, but serving only for a snare, which innocence
it self could not escape) I underwent the most terrible Censure that ever was
inflicted in the world. But though I underwent it, yet through the power of
Christ I overcame it. To him alone be all the glory and praise of a suffering,
which only his power and grace made so great, so glorious.

After a^l this, let me a little recreate my Reader, with a small story of a
passage falling out, while I was in Guernsey Castle. On a time, a pigeon
sitting near my chamber window (where my daily feeding of them made them so
familiar, as they would follow me up and down the Castle) a wild hawk
suddenly plunged upon her, and beats her down to the ground, above four
stories, and falls a preying on her. I beheld it a while from my window, and
presently thereupon ran down to rescue the dove, though I was to run above a
flight shot off* I ran, and sound the hawk still upon the pigeon, and when I
was ready to cease on the hawk, she flew off, and then the poor Pigeon took
her faint flight also, the bold hawk pursuing her about the Castle; but the
dove escaped, for any thing I could hear. This use I made of it; I compared
the Dove to the Church, and the Hawk to the enemies of it, hoping that, though
for a time the Hawk get the Dove under to p^ey upon her; yet deliverance shall
come in the nick: in the Mount will the Lord be seen, and the Church shall
escape, but hardly; but whether by flight (as Revel. 12.) or otherwise, that
rests only in our Great Deliverers hand. This by the way.

But now it is high time to close it up. For November 15. 1640. being the Lords
day, a Bark comes to Guernsey from England with friends, and an Order from the
Honorable House of Commons for my enlargement, and return for England.
Blessed tidings indeed, and the more, because it came from a Parliament; and
yet more, in that it was the Parliaments handsaile, presenting much good, but
promising much more. The News filled the Castle with joy, and so the Island.
The first observation I made of it, was of the day, on which this tidings came.
First, I noted it was the Lords day, which day I had mightily propugned and
defended, both by preaching and writing against the malignant and profane
adversaries of the sanctification thereof, and of its morality. And when the
book for dispensation, and allowance of sports on that day, came with an
injunction to be publicly read in my Church upon a Lords day; that very day,
in stead of reading of it (which I utterly abhorred to do, as an abominable
thing) I turned my afternoon preaching into an opening of the fourth
Commandment, therein proving the Lords day, to wit the first day of the week,
to succeed the seventh, or last day of the week, both for Sabbath, and
Sanctification under the Gospel. Now the news and Order for my enlargement
coming to me on the Lords day, I took it as a gracious reward of mercy from
God, whose day I had formerly stood for against all the adversaries thereof.
Again, secondly this day was the fifteenth day of the month, to wit November,
which was the first day of the last month that made up the three years and a
half from the day of my Censure; and so was fulfilled that which I spoke
before at Coventry, to the said Reverend Ministers, Mr Nalton, and Mr Hughs,
that three years and a half hence we should meet again and be merry. For
June 14. 1637. was my Censure, and November 15. 1640. was the first day of the
last month that made up three years and a half: so as the Parliaments Order
calling me forth of prison to be presented before them, seemed to me to be that
great voice from heaven, saying to the two Witnesses, after their lying dead
three days and a half (three years and a half) unburied, Come up hither.
Moreover I observed, that I had come to Guernsey on the fifteenth day of the
month and three years after, on the fifteenth day of the month, taking that
month current from the fifteenth day, came my release. And the like did my
brother Prin of his coming to Jarsey, which was on the seventeenth day of the
month, and his release came to him on the seventeenth day of the month: so
punctual is God in doing all things, in number, weight, and measure, could we
but take a right measure of his doings in all the passages of his Providence.

On Tuesday the seventeenth, the messengers came to my brother Prin, so as by
Thursday after he came to me to Guernsey, where we being feasted by all the
Ministers there, and more especially by Mr Delamarch at his house, and my self
by some worthy Merchants in the Town: we were no sooner ready to set sail,
but the wind came about for us to go for England. And here I cannot omit to
observe the sweet Providence of God, in bringing our friends from London so
prosperously. They came on Thursday from London to Southampton, the next day
they provided a Bark, the while the wind was opposite, but Saturday morning,
the fourteenth, they being ready, the wind came about and brought them the next
day to Guernsey. They staid not one day for the wind in coming, nor we for
going for England. On Saturday the 21. about two of the clock in the
afternoon, taking our leave of the worthy Lieutenant, and the rest, we set
sail for England; where the wind, by a gentle gale, brought us the next day at
night, being the Lords day, to arrive. And here again I observe two special
passages of the divine Providence. First, that the wind blowing flack, and the
night coming on, and we being now distant from from the maine land three or
four leagues, so as the master was somewhat perplexed for want of wind; we
encouraged him, and thereupon all our company went into the hold, and fell to
sing Psalms: We had no sooner begun to sing, but presently the wind began to
whistle up, so that we might hear the Bark to rowse through the waves: we
continued our singing, and the wind continued his blowing, until just as we
had done singing, the master had cast anchor, we not knowing it, till we came
upon the deck, for which we blessed our God. The second Circumstance was, that
in the very same place, where I had parted last from England, did our Bark now
cast anchor for England, God so disposing it by his wind. And this was in the
mouth of Dartmouth, where leaving our Bark to go for Southhampton with our
Stuff, we lodged in Dartmouth that night, concluding and refreshing our long
Pilgrimage with the close of the Sabbaticall rest of that day.

The next day, being courteously entertained of some of the best of the Town,
who also provided us horses, being nine or ten in company, we hastened for
London; and came that night to Exceter, within night, where we saw the faces of
many religious people, who most lovingly entreated us, many of them
accompanying us the next day out of the City. We rode the next day to Lime,
where coming, though somewhat late in the evening, we were kindly entertained
by the reverend and godly Minister there, Mr Geere, and by a worthy Justice of
the Peace. Thence we set for ward the next morning before day, hastening to
come to the Lecture at Dorchester, which we did; being there refreshed both in
soul and body, where we were saluted, and entertained by many worthy
Christians. After dinner the same day we rode on our journey, lodging at a
private Town between Dorchester and Salisbury. The next day we dined at
Salisbury, where we visited Mr Thatcher, a reverend and laborious Minister
there, but very sickly at that time, and since deceased: whence in the
afternoon, being accompanied by sundry good Christians in the City, we rode to
Andover that night, being in the way met by sundry good Christians of that
Town, who entertained us very courteously, and accompanied us on in our
journey the next day; on which, being Friday, we reached to Egham that night,
being met by the way, before we came at Bagshot, by many of our loving friends
and neighbors of London, and especially my Friday-street neighbors, my old
Parishioners; and when we were not far past Bagshot, we were met by my most
loving and dear wife, who came accompanied with many loving friends, and worthy
Citizens of London; among whom was that most affectionate friend, Mr
Willingham, and his loving wife, who came with my wife in the Coatch, which he
had provided for that purpose. What expressions of joy and love there were at
our meeting, cannot be expressed. Well, to Egham we came in the close of the
day, where every house brought forth a light to light us to our lodging, where
we were most nobly entertained by multitudes of friends, that from London met
us there. They called it our wedding night, which was principally celebrated by
that worthy and reverend Minister of Egham, Mr Rayner, who prayed with us, with
solemn giving of thanks, expressed also in singing of Psalms, which he had
most fitly and sweetly composed of many parts and parcels of Psalms, very
admirably accommodated to the present occasion; and all which, continuing
almost a whole hour, Mr Rayner repeated without book.

The next morning very early all our company was ready, and after prayer took
horse, being on our journey for London before the Sun arose. Of the whole
train, consisting of two or three hundred, many went out of Egham, not without
their branches of Rosemary and Bays, as Ensigns of the wedding: insomuch as
all the way as we rode, the poor people brought forth whole baskets of
Rosemary and Bays, to furnish every one in the train, which continually was
increased by the way. At every Town the Bells were rung as we passed through,
the streets being strowed with people to see our faces. But by the way I
observed the Sun rising with an extraordinary brightness by reason of the
clearness of the air, the whole sky notwithstanding being covered over from
side to side round about with one entire cloud, as it were a seamlesse mantle
or veil upon the whole hemispheare, only the Sun unclouded; But still as the
Sun mounted higher and higher, this mantle or clould did by degrees draw
back, and give way to the Sun, and so passed before it, until the cloud did,
by degrees, wholly vanish, as driven away by the Suns brightness, without
the least breath of wind to cause it so to pass away. This was observed also
by many in the company; so as, though it were the end of November, yet after
the Sun had chased away the cloud which fled before it, never was there a day
in Somer more clear, more bright, more sweet and comfortable then that was.
And it was the more to be observed, because all the days in our journey, from
our first landing, were much clouded, and thickened with mists or fogs, only
beginning to clear up as we approached to Egham, where our friends met us. So
as the extraordinarinesse of this days brightness and beauty, so cleared up
as before, made some impression in my mind of a sweet and glorious day, or
time, which the Sun of righteousness, arising over England, with healing under
his wings, was now about to procure for us, after once that black cloud which
hanged over the Land, was by degrees chased away. But this by the way.

Nor did the cloud faster wane before the Sun, then the faces of our friends
from London began more and more to shine, being now multiplied, as it were into
so many constellations of bright stars; by the reflection whereof, our way
toward London seemed to be another via lactea, or (...), as the Philosopher
calls it, that milkie-white brightness, which we see in the heavens in a
clear starty night.

But now in the midst of all this glory and favor cast upon us, and shining
forth from the faces and affections of Gods people, I began to fee, and to be
sensible of a far greater danger, then I had been in during all the time of
my imprisonment and exile. For then and there I displayed all my sails, to be
filled with the gentle gales of comforts breathing from heaven upon me: but now
I saw a necessity of taking in my sails, lest the wind of Gods favor, and of
his peoples affections blowing so strongly, yet sweetly, upon me, might
overturne, and sink my brittle Bark now in the very bosom of the haven. For I
began now to feel some stirrings within me, Satan now laboring to overthrow
me (as he did Adam) in this my seeming Paradise; which he could not do while I
lay on Jobs dunghill. Therefore as the Mariner, seeing an Herican approaching,
presently takes in his sails: so did I now, I descried in this calm a storm
abrewing; hereupon I did retire my thoughts inward, and did earnestly pray to
the Lord, that he would no less strongly support me with his hand now in this
prosperous condition, then he had done formerly in all my sufferings. And the
Lord heard me; for both for the present he answered me, My grace is sufficient
for thee, my heart all the way as I rode, putting it self in a posture of
defense against Satan's fiery darts, and couching so low, that his bullets flew
all over my head: and afterward, lest I should be exalted with abundance of
salutations in London streets, and abroad, a messenger of Satan was sent to
buffet me, as we shall hear anon.

Thus we are in our way to London; we dine at Brainford, where not only all the
Innes, but streets were filled; the company flowing in as a maine springtide,
not only filling the high way, but overflowing the banks all along. They were
multiplied at Brainford to many thousands, horses and coatches filling the Road
from thence to London; which no less filled the Adversaries hearts with envy
and madness, who for so long time before had rejoiced and made merry, during
our durance. A little before I came to Charing Cross (as before is touched) a
woman being on foot in the midst of the horse, called to me, and said, O Sir,
this is a glorious wedding day: To whom I replied, It is indeed, good woman,
blessed be God. Yea, said she again, but your wedding day upon the pillary was
more glorious. I admiring this speech of the woman, answered, indeed it is
true. And truly so it was; for my suffering on the pilary was made glorious by
an inward spiritual power, and hand of heaven upon my soul, making it to
ride as it were in triumph, in that charret: but this my return from captivity
was attended with an external glory shining forth from humane favor; although
all was the effect and fruit of Gods mercy and providence, causing the same;
who in all, is to be blessed for ever.

And when I was newly past Charing Cross, over against the Mewes, Sr Peter
Osburne, Governor of Guernsey, where I was prisoner, was staying in his Coatch,
with the boot down (no doubt as he was appointed) to receive me into his
coatch, and so to carry me to his house, at Chelsey; which he tendering unto
me, I desired his honor to excuse me, seeing I was all in a sweat, and fit to
go no where, but to my own house, lest my health might be endangered. He
pressed me again and again: I answered still as before. Then said he, take
notice that I have required you to go with me: I replied, And I pray you Sir
take notice of the answer, and reason I give you, why I dare not go with you.
So he dismissed me; and we rid on; the streets all along, on each side thronged
with people, and all the houses, and windows from the Mewes, to my house in
Alderman-bury, full of beholders of all sexes, and ages of all sorts; we were
three long hours in passing from the Mewes, to Alderman-bury. Against my
coming home that night, some friends waiting in my house for my coming, one
of them espied there a strange man in a scarlet cloak, musled about his face;
and being demanded what he was, and not giving a clear answer, they wished him
to be gone; whereupon he went his way. So I coming safely home, enjoyed
natural rest in mine own house; and the next day, being the Lords Sabbath,
spiritual, and corporal rest from all my labors past.

On the monday following, my brother Prin and I went to attend the House of
Commons; my brother Bastwick being not yet returned from Silly. We presented
our persons with our petitions to the House, for the hearing of our cause. It
was granted; a special Commit was appointed for the examination of our
cause; and in the same Order of the House to the same Commit (a thing wherein
the hand of divine Providence is not a little seen) it was ordered, that after
the examination of our causes, the Courts and proceedings both of the High
Commission, and star chamber should be examined; and the issue was; our cause
was declared and voted first by the Committee, and after by the whole House, to
be innocent, and all the proceedings of those Courts against us illegal,
against the laws of the land, and the liberties of the subject: and on the
other side, both those Courts were alike voted to be illegal; and thereupon
an Act was drawn up, and passed, and stands now in force, for the utter
abolishing of both those Courts. So they are brought down, and fallen, and we
are risen, and stand upright. And blessed be the Lord, that Psalm. 2^, ^.
both those Courts fell under such a Cause, as gives them no just cause to
complain. But for our cause, although the honorable House of Commons have
voted it so far for the clearing of us, as it can yet go: yet the
Transmission thereof to the House of Lords is not hitherto passed, for a
recompense of our wrongs sustained. But herein we are patients with the whole
land, which lies a bleeding, while the cause of innocent blood cannot find
redress. Yet blessed be God, that by virtue of that vote I have liberty to
preach; although I have suffered not a little for that first Sermon I preached,
after my liberty obtained, as my first fruits paid to the Parliament at
Westminster. Clamors were raised by some malignant spirits, and received too
credulously by some of the better minded, who had not heard the Sermon; which
the more grieved me. But how justly fame did censure me, the Sermon it self
(if once it may obtain license to be printed, which it has a long time waited
for) will clearly show. Many other wrongs have I suffered, both by false
reports, and by books published under the name of Mr. Burton in general,
which the simple hearted people took to be mine; being only counterfeited to
get away their farthings. But the righteous judge will one day clear all. When
the next day after that Sermon I was taken with a fit of the stone, the first
sensible fruit of my long close imprisonment; fame gave it out, that it was for
grief and shame of my said Sermon. Though after this, I have had sundry fits
of the stone. I might mention many other reproaches cast upon me, since my
enlargement, which I have learned the more easily to digest, and contemn,
(saving only that I take them as messengers of 1 Cor. 12. 9
Satan, sent to buffet me) by my experience in my greater sufferings. He that
has stood an innocent upon the pillary, and the^e had his ears cut off; which
he endured with not only patience, but alacrity and triumph: cannot he (trow
you) brook to be unjustly branded for an Infamous person, and that by such as
were the prime authors of such bloody, and barbarous cruelty, but he must needs
be sick for sorrow of that, which he accounts his glory and crown? Or shall
such a one be ashamed to bear in his body such glorio is marks of the Lord
Jesus? Or, he that chose rather to be deprived of all, liberty, livelihood,
ears, credit with the malignant world, degrees in schools, yea his sweet
native country, wife, children, friends, all outward comforts, rather then
betray the cause of Christ, and basely yield to unreasonable and absurd men:
after the suffering of all these, is it so easy a matter (think you) to
overthrow such a one with the impotent breath of a man that shall dye; or of
the son of man, that shall be made as grass? should I now at last so forget
the Lord my maker, as to fear Esa. 51. 12, 13.
continnually every day, because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were
ready to destroy; of whom the Prophet says, And where is the fury of the
Oppressor? Behold my witness is in Heaven, and my Record is on Job. 16 19.
high. And certainly, if witnessing the Truth against Falsehood, and openly
detecting the machinations of Apostats (if ever they were other then
dissembling Hypocrites, before their vizards were pulld off) deserve the brand
of An infamous disturber of the peace of this Church, and State; I will wear
it as a badge of the greatest honor of my service to Christ in this World. And
I bless my Lord who accounted me faithful, and put me in this service, and
enabled me so therein, as to deserve to be reproached no otherwise then the
Prophet Eliah was by the grand disturber and troubler of Israel, to whom the
Prophet replied 1 Kings 18 17, 18.
I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, in that ye have
forsaken the Commandments of the Lord, and have followed Baalim. And if by
[This Church] be understood the Prelaticall or Hierarchicall and by [State] a
Tyrannical, and lawless Government, I heartily thank God, that I have bin a
disturber of these so, as never since that time they could peacably go on (as
before they did) in their rebuilding of Babel, the end whereof will be confusion,
or in reedifying of Jerico, the curse whereof Josh. 6. 26.
was the rooting out of the whole race, and posterity of the Rebuilder.

What should I speak of the many reproaches and infamies, which I have
undergone since the clearing of my Cause in the honorable House of Commons,
ever to be honored of all posterity? But this was my comfort all along, even
the clearness of my Conscience, being not guilty to my self of any just cause
by me given, why any, (unless Prelaticall and Jesuitical spirits, or such as
are through ignorance seduced by them) should fall so foul upon me, saving
that the more any man endeavors to come nearest to Christ, and so to shake off
the shackles of sin and yoke of Antichristian usurpation over the souls of
men the Rev. 18. 13.
more necessarily and unavoidably he must pass the pikes of all those whose
conversation in the world cannot find elbow-room enough to L^^. 13. 24.
walk in Christ's narrow way, which leads unto life. Nor need this be made a
wonder in our days, which has bin the perpetual practice of the world in all
ages since Christ had a Church upon earth since the Lord himself put that
enmity between the Serpent and the Woman, Genesis 3. 15.
and between her seed and his; yea in this Age of ours (wherein Satan's wrath is
so great, because he knows, that he has but a short time, and wherein the
ten horned Beast, and his limbs are fighting their last battle in
Harmageddon, whither the Almighty himself brings them, that he might show
himself to be the Almighty in giving the Revel. 16. 14, 16.
last and most terrible defeat to all their power and plots) not to see such an
enmity were a wonder, when we have already seen what a wonder-working age it
has been (as before has been touched) and certainly shall yet see greater
things then these. And therefore for poor me to be set in the Front (as it
were) of this battle between Christ and Antichrist, nnd to be shot at, as a
prime kindler of the coals; what wounds I receive from the adversaries, I shall
wear them as crowns upon me, whose weight the greater it is, the more
sensible thereof is my weakness and unworthiness to bear it.

Again, how I have been reproached and reviled by those two Champions of
Canterbury, to wit, Dr. Heylin, and Dr. Dow, whom the Prelate employed in the
writing and publishing of their two Books in answer to that of mine, For God
and the King, I refer to every judicious, ingenuous, and Orthodox Reader of
my Book and theirs. And they writ against me, when I was fast close Prisoner in
the Fleet, beating and wounding me at their pleasure, when I was bound hand and
foot; and when (though I had had opportunity, which I had not, to answer them,
yet) I could not have got my Book licensed for the Press, or yet any man that
durst print, when they saw the Author to be so used. As for their Answers to
the Doctrinall points in my said Book, not only the Reverend Ministers of
London in their late Remonstrance, exhibited unto the Honorable House of
Commons, and openly debated and proved from point to point, have among other
things taxed as erroneous, but my Doctrines themselves do and still
unshaken, entire, and orthodox, notwithstanding all their proud and bold
attempts to batter them down. But where they cannot (as all along) fasten
their envenomed darts against the Doctrines, they have sharpened their virulent
style against my person, sprinkling it all over with as black disgraces, as the
Gall and Vinegar of their Ink, but much more of their imbittered and galled
Spirit could pour forth. D. Dow spends his whole second Chapter professedly in
going about to grace my whole course and manner of life; doing therein, as a
Declamatory Orator, who having a bad Cause to plead, falls foul in the first
place upon the Person of his Adversary. As the Orator Tertullus, whom the High
Priests had feed to plead against Paul; who, after his colloguing Preface to
Foelix, for a favorable audience, he begins thus against Paul, saying, We have
found this man a Pestilent fellow, and a mover of Sedition among all the Jews,
etc. And so this Doctor A^. 2^.
has farsed his Chapter with many sore charges upon my Person. One is, I can
devise (says he) no better Apology, nor other way to free him from the just
imputation of imbittered malice, and traitorous intention, then to say, that
discontent at once has cracked his brain and his conscience. To which I answer,
The Lord rebuke thee But he begins at my breeding in Cambridge, for some short
time (as he says) surely that some short time was six years together entire,
taking my Degree of Mr. of Arts the next year. Well, what then? Where he was
never observed for any excellency, but that he could play well on an
Instrument. Surely I plead not excellency in any thing. What God has freely
given me, I bless him for. Yet this there be some yet living can testify,
that I was so observed for a Ciceronean, that I was in request for making
Orations for Gentlemen in the College; which I speak not to glory of, but to
tell Dr. Dow, that H. B. will at this day dispute with Christopher Dow* either
in Latin or Greek. That I could play well on an Instrument, I thank God also;
and the rather, because that quality was borne with me, and it never was any
hindrance but a furtherance to my studies. But after he was a Schoolmasters in
a Noble-mans house, (says he) he found the favor to be admitted to a mean
place in the Closet of his Majesty that now is, then Prince of Wales: which
sometime he was wont to execute in his hose and dublet, with a perfuming pot in
one hand, and a fire-shovell in the other; and as I have heard, received for
his pains 5. pound per annum, and a Livery. Now all these particulars he
relates, as so many disgraces upon my person. Why? was it a disgrace for a young
man as I was, for a while to teach the two Noble sons of a Nobleman in a
Noble house? And for the favor I found in Court to be admitted to a mean
place, in the Closet of his Majesty that now is, then Prince of Wales: our
Doctor here is quite out. For first, the place in the Closet, how meanesoever
he accounts it, which I was admitted into, was the whole office of the Princes
Closet, both the Great and the Privy Closet, entirely. I had the Charge of
all, to provide furniture and Books, and all requisites for those Closets,
which came to no small value. It Is true indeed, that by the Prelaticall party
working in the Kings Court, and which ever had a malignant eye upon me, I was
kept from the Title of Clerk, but I had the Office of Clerk: So as when the
Princes servants were to be allowed two parts of three, proportionably to the
Kings servants, I had for 20. nobles (the Clerks wages of the Kings Closet) 5.
pound allowed to me. For the Livery, it was just the same that the Kings Clerk
had; but for my part, I never received it, because I never demanded it, being a
red Jacket, and I wot not what else, an old obsolete Livery for the Clerk: But
the Doctor has (I know not through what error) quite omitted the best part of
the time that I spent in Court. For my first Court service was to that most
noble, and of ever most glorious memory, Prince Henry, whom I served upon seven
years space; and which I would have been willing to have served many seven
years in my dublet and hose, even in a far meaner office, conditionally it had
pleased God to have continued his life so long. A gracious Prince and Master he
was to me; he was pleased often to admit me to speak with him alone, and for
any motion I made to him, I ever received a most gracious answer. I could tell
the Doctor, how when some Officers had in my absence given way to the Players
to bring their bag and baggage into the Closet, there to dress themselves,
upon my complaint to his Highness, he did forbid it. Another time, from an old
custom (and I being then out of the way) some of the Gentlemen dancing in the
Great Closet, his Highness upon my complaint to him, quite for bade that also,
saying (being with me alone in his Privy Closet, where he used me with the
most sweet carriage and communication, that even one familiar would use unto
another) that he would not have any to dance in his Closets, and bid me so to
tell them from him. I could speak much more in this kind, but I forbear. Now
if ever I waited in my hose and doublet, it was to that Noble Prince Henry. But
be it known to Dr. Dow, that for all such offices, as of perfuming, and the
like, I kept a servant to do them, as the Kings Clerk did. I ever carried my
self sutably to my degree, as a Scholar though living in Court, where I
studied no less then if I had been in the University; Yet I remember, that one
time my man being out of the way, and the Prince coming suddenly to Chapel,
before we were aware, I not having my Cloak or Gown on, snatched up the
perfuming Pan, to sweeten the room where the Prince was to pass, as the
manner was. And this is all that sometime, that I did so, it being also a
solemn time, when a great Prince (as I remember, the Palatine) came along with
him.

But (says he) upon the Prince Charles his going into Spain, H. B. whether
his indiscretion did minister cause of suspicion, or what ever the cause were,
certain it is, he was put out of the list for that voyage, and that when his
goods were a Shipboard. Here the Dr. again is wide for my goods were not a
Shipboard; hereof he cannot say, Certain it is; but certain it is, I
confess, that I was put out of the List, and that also when my goods were
truncked: But inter pontem and fontem misericordia Domini: Between the City and
the Ship was Gods mercy seen, which yet he imputes to some suspicion of my
indiscretion. Indeed, if my plain dealing against Popery, be indiscretion, I
can hardly to this day, as old as I am, and as bitten as I have been, so avoid
the suspicion, as not to make manifestation thereof, yea although it had been
in Spain it self; as Paul did in Athens, when he disputed with the
Philosophers in Areopagus. And therefore I have cause to bless God to Acts 17.
this day, that I was unlisted for that Spanish Voyage, where perhaps some such
indiscretion might have left me in the lurch of the Inquisition, where our
Countryman Mr. Bedle had been for so many years immured, whence no more
redemption then from the Infernal Prison. And why should I have escaped in
Spain that Babylonish prison, when I could not escape the like in England? But
what ever other cause it was on man's part, Certain it is, that Gods good
providence prevented that, that so this should not be prevented.

But this he calls a little after, His hoped Voyage into Spain. Indeed if Dr.
Dow had been the man, well might he have called it, His hoped Voyage into
Spain, and so of his desired preferment thereby a Bishopric at least; and I
bless God, that both I escaped the Voyage, and the Preferment too.

But His Majesty upon his misbehaviour dismissed him the Court, whence being
cashiered, and all his hopes of preferment dashed etc. These malicious
misconceits of the Doctor are detected of wicked falsehood before. And so I will
follow him in his Wild-goose Chase no further.

And now that he has spit all his spite, what is all this heap of disgraces,
being summed up together? All does not amount to this; that Mr. H. B. is either
a drunkard or a whore-master, or any such vicious person, or an idle droane in
his Ministry, or one that was ever, or would be a double beneficed man, or one
that favors Arminianisme, or Popery, or one that suffers his wife (had he such
a one) to be his master, or his Curate hers. And now should I as diligently
trace the steps of this Doctor, as he has hunted mine; O Doctor, I will say no
more, but draw a veil over the rest: Nolo in hoc ulcere esse unguis. And so I
leave both the Doctors to the righteous Judge of quick and dead.

And what shall I say to the grand master of these two Doctors, who for their
so good service has so richly rewarded them? But God reward both him and them
according to their deeds.

And now it is time for me to shut up my discourse of the course of my life, it
now drawing on apace to its final period. As for the reproaches I have
undergone by false brethren about my suffering, as that it was just, I will
bundle them all up, either to burn them, as Constantine did, or to leave them
in the hands of the righteous Judge of all the world, who will do right. And
here let me close with a story concerning my suffering; wherein it will
appear, that the righteous Judge from heaven has set to his hand to the House
of Commons, in the vindication of my Cause.

Since my return from exile, a certain Attorney at Law being then in the
house of one Mrs Monday, then dwelling a little within Aldersgate in Little
Britain, Febr. 17. 1640. and mention being made of my name and sufferings,
and Mrs Monday saying, that England had never thriven since he suffered; and
that though she had never seen him yet she had shed many a tear for him: the
said Attorney replied, Could so many wise men and Judges be deceived? for he
suffered no more then he deserved, nor so much neither; and therefore what a
pox (such was his language) should you be sorry for such a man as he? No sooner
had these words passed from him, but his right ear suddenly and strangely fell
a bleeding at the lower tip of it; and so long it bled, as it wet a whole
handkercher, so as it might have been wrung out; whereat his heart so fainted,
that he sent for half a pint of Sack, and drunk it up himself alone. Whereat
his brother then present, with sundry more, said unto him; You may see brother
what it is to speak against Mr Burton: Yet such was this man's spirit, that in
stead of taking notice of the hand of God herein, he continued cursing, saying,
what a pox, had I not spoken a word against Burton, my ear would have bled;
though he could not at that time show any reason, or natural cause, why his
ear should then bleed, it being whole and sound; so as upon the ceasing of the
blood, Mrs Mondays maid wiping the blood off his ear, and looking wistfully
upon it, could not discern whence the blood should issue, but only a small
pore, or hole no more then a pins point could go into, there being neither
scratch, nor scab, nor scarre upon his ear. The persons then present that saw
this, were these; the Atturneys brother and his wife, Mrs Adcock, Mrs Anne Roe,
Mrs Joan Monday, and Ellin Hutton her servant. All this Mrs Monday and her maid
testified before sundry Christians of good credit, my self and wife being
present.

Yet after this, within some few days, the said Attorney had found out a
flamme, to make Mrs Monday, and others, believe, that the cause of that
bleeding of his ear was by a razor, which he had borrowed two or three days
before; wherewith he having cut his ear, and at that time rubbing it, it fell
a bleeding. But neither was this put* off ready at hand when his ear so fell a
bleeding, nor did the maid discern any such thing, save only one little hole
no larger then a pins point, which could not possibly be made with a round
razor.

But after this, for all this shavers device, he forbore any more to come to
Mrs Mondays house; who asking him at her door, why he was grown such a
stranger, and praying him to come in, he refused, saying, No, I will come no
more to your house to work miracles. But I pray God he may sin no more, lest
a worse thing happen unto him.

And now to stop the mouths of this, and all other reproachers of my
sufferings as just, I will only refer the Reader to those votes of the
Honorable House of Commons, whereby he shall find in the Book, entitled, A
New Discovery of the Prelates Tyranny, page 139. etc. my innocence is cleared
to all the world, by that representative Body of this Kingdom.

FINIS.

