THE GOSPELS GLORY, without prejudice to the LAW, Shining forth In the glory of
God the Father, the Son, the Holy Ghost, For the SALVATION of SINNERS, who
through grace do believe according to the draught of the Apostle Paul in Romans
8. ver. 3. 4. Held out to public view.

By the Ministerial labors of Richard Byfield, M. A. Pastor in Long-Ditton;
and teaching on Thursedayes weekly in Kingston upon Thames, Surrey.

Justitia legis fides est Christiana. Ambros. tom. 5. in cap. 2. Epist. ad Romans
LONDON, Printed by E. M. for Adoniram Byfield at the three Bibles in Corn-hil,
next door to Pope's Head Alley. 1659.

QUid illam legem (naturalem) excluserat praevar^catio (Adae,) ac propemodum
aboleverat, in pectoribus humanis regnabat superbia, inobedienti aque sese
diffuderat: Ideo successit ^sta (per Moysen) ut nos scripto conven^ret, and
omne os obstrueret; ut totum mundum faceret Deo subditum. Subditus autem mundus
ei per legem factus est, quia ex praescripto legis omnes convincuntur, and ex
op ribus legis nemo justificatur, id est, quia per legem peccatum cognoscitur,
sed culpa non relaxatur, videbatur lex nocuisse, quae omnes facerat peccatores:
sed veniens Dom^nus Jesus, peccatum omnibus, quod nemo poterat evitare,
donavit, and chirographum nostrum sui sanguinis effusione delevit. Ambro. Tom.
3. Ep. lib. 9. Epist. 71. ad Irenaeum.

Because the prevarication (of Adam) had excluded that Law (of nature) and had
almost abolished it, pride did reign in men's breasts, and disobedience had
diffused it self: therefore this (Law written by Moses) has succeeded, that it
might sue us with a writ, and might stop every mouth, that it might make the
whole world subject to God; but the world is by the Law made subject to him,
because out of the prescript of the Law, all men are convinced, and no man is
justified by the works of the Law; that is, because by the Law sin is known,
but the fault is not released: the Law did seem to have been hurtful, which had
made all men sinners: but the Lord Jesus coming, has freely forgiven sin to
all, which no man was able to escape, and has blotted out our handwriting
with the shedding of his own blood.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, HIS HIGHNESS, Richard, LORD PROTECTOR Of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, with the Dominions thereunto
belonging, Grace and peace here, and glory hereafter.
HUmane Creations in civil Societies God does own. And unto every humane
Creation, for our Lord Christ's sake we owe submission: this is our well-doing
according to the Will of God. Here supreme, and sent of the supreme is order
and beauty; bands and beauty. Laws against evildoers, and for encouragement
of wel-doers, with execution of those Laws, for which purpose they bear the
sword, are of necessity, that Magistracy in its various Creations may attain
its end. But in the Church all things are of God; and whatever is of man, is
alien to that Society. The grand enemies of the Church under the New Testament,
are the Dragon, the Beast, the false Prophet: this last is the most dangerous;
the Beasts and Dragons, spiritual wickedness and power, the animating vivacity
of that lustful Whore, Babylon the Great, the Woman that rides the beast. And
the Beast is a Beast, whether arising out of the sea, or out of the earth, or
ascending out of the bottomless pit. And the Dragons poison and paw is in all,
and all to mischief the Church of Christ. This Paradise he affects to be in,
because not his place: but chiefly out of his love, his love to work ruins
there. How slily, how insensibly slides in this old Serpent? humane here,
humane of what note soever, and Satan presently Acts it. Christ knew it well,
who said to Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me; for
thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men. The
love feasts shroud divisions presently, destroy the Lords Supper, and harbor
sly and spotty Heretics, and deceivers. Prelacy in the ministry, though
brought in ad tollenda schismata to take away schisms, brings forth the man of
sin, and with him the mystery of iniquity. An Easter day filled the Christian
world, East and West with miserable contentions, and turned the Professors of
Christ's name after formalities and mere Nifles. The retired solitariness of
some eminently devout, filled it with Monkery, Nunnery, and the swarms of the
orders of such. Commandments of men received to teach the fear of God, do Null
the Commandments of God. Men's opinions chosen for the rationality, or the depth
of them, have proved the depths of Satan. Men's Inventions entertained for their
suitableness to humane Policies, have, while served the lusts of men in
Magistracy, trampled on Magistracy, enthroned Tyranny, and suborned for sacred,
Maxims that are the horns to push at and gone all the godly and the power of
godliness: Such as these; No Bishop, no King. Christ's Kingdom is an enemy to
Caesar. Christ's simple Ordinances for worship, without the pomp of humane
Ceremonies, are not for the State and Majesty of Princes. That is, the world
knows his own, and will know nothing but his own. It has been long and
lamentably experimented, that the evils of the Church have ever disturbed the
state. That which corrupts men, and sets up lust, must needs be against God,
and against Magistracy which is from God. The Gospel in its purity will help
all this evil, will bring with it all good; this Gospel is one: the name of
them that hold that one faith is sacred, the name Christian. The love it
teaches and works, is the bond that knits them together in one brotherhood;
love is for Communion, not for single standing, separating, nor dividing. Its
power is as sweet, as strong; as beautiful, as powerful; as good, as
commanding. Administrations there are in diversity, but one Lord there is, from
whom, as there is but one Church, one body, for whose edification all those are
given; One body in Communion distinguished into several, but no severed
fellowships or Churches for order and edification-sake. Absoluteness in
severed Companies is of Primacy affected. The 24. Elders are one community
about the Throne and the Lamb: and are more able to advise than one that
arrogates, because he loves to have Praeeminence; The Instituted order in
Administrations of the New Testament, is, Apostles, Prophets, (these the
Scriptures now supply: lay the Bible in the midst, and consult therewith, and
there you have them;) then Teachers, Deacons, Governments: these Christ Jesus
by his Spirit gifts, and by his Church owns. One way, and one heart go
together. Diversities of ways, nurses up divisions of heart. O Princes, let
Christ the King of glory, in his Gospel, and Gospel-Administrations come in.
These things belong unto the wise; these concern the supreme primarily: and
Grace, Wisdom, and Prudence discerns, closes with, and establishes them.

The strange crossenesse and contrariety of things that stands out in these
Gospel-dayes, and rises so stoutly for one against another, amazes the best
heads, and staggers, yea, confounds the stoutest hearts that are by place and
office to manage them; here are with us in one womb the old revived strugglings
of the holiest and profanest; the purest and the subtlest; the most for power,
and the most denying of the power of godliness; the most zealous, and the most
formal and richly goodly lukewarm; the weightiest grain, and the lightest
chafe; the deepliest poor in spirit, and the loftiest proud in the flesh; the
heaven-born Sons of marvelous light, and the hell-born brats of thickest
darkness: these cause difficulty to rule, so as to foster the gracious, and
discountenance the wicked, severing the precious and the vile. Faith, an active
faith, the faith of the Lords Heroes is the one only help; this keeps with God
in his Word for principles of Policy, for upright ways, for support and
courage in both, against carnal counsels, courses, confidences and fears, the
worst of Counselors.

These Considerations possess, whilst with joy in God through Jesus Christ,
glorying in his works, all honorable and glorious, and in his ways, all
righteous and holy; with fears, sorrows, and prayers, because of judgments
impendent for the wickednesses of errors, divisions, profaneness abounding;
and for the Magistrates sake and their concernments, and for Common-weals and
Kingdoms, the Innes of the Church; for, as for the Ministers, sackcloth cannot
hinder the efficacy of their Prophesying and Witnessebearing salutiferous and
destructive: nor their slaughter do any more than issue forth their
resurrection, to the fall of the tenth part of the City to be visited, and the
ruin of seven thousand of men of name; let the earth-dwellers, the merry world
of them beware.

For the Publishing of this Treatise, besides the Importunity of many of the
Commissioners of Surrey, for the ejection of ignorant and scandalous Ministers,
who heard part of it delivered in Sermons, which wrested from me a concession
to their desires; two things swayed with me. First, that in this slight age,
tossed to and fro with puffes of windy vaporings which blow high and big, and
take with many the wholesome, old, everlasting, and absolutely necessary truths
of saving doctrine, might be laid again before all men's sight, to cure, if the
Lord will, this giddiness of head; and secondly, that in this notional,
high-flown, conceited age wherein nothing is esteemed, but that which goes
under the name of Mysterious, of a more spiritual dispensation, and above
Scriptural, and the plain truths of the Scripture are overlook't: called low,
carnal, and fit for none but Saints under the lowest dispensation; It might be
manifest that these truths only are truly heavenly, spiritual, Gospel-mysteries
of the highest dispensation that ever shall be in this world: and that upon the
review and Christian-experience, all might see that the other Novel speakings,
are low, carnal, beggarly things, belly-breaths, the issues of fleshly tumors,
indigested waterish tympanies, and crackes of clouds without rain: That I
prefix your Highnesses name, is an act of boldness, for which pardon is humbly
craved. I adventured on it, that I might acknowledge the encouragement given to
my Ministry two years since, at a needful time by your Renowned father, now
with Christ, who openly and really owned it almost oppressed, by willing, my
labors at Kingston; of which poor labors, as they are mine, these are some of
the fruits presented to your most serene aspect, and offered to the service of
your faith. What remains, but prayers promised, that your life may be bound up
in the bundle of life with the Lord your God; your person may abide in the
secrets of the most High, hid there, even in his bosome-love in Christ; your
heart may remain, large, wise, holy, humble, and believing; your eyes may see
the great Council in Parliament assembled, full of grace and peace, the Lords
and yours to his glory, and your abundant joy for the good of these Nations,
and of the people of Christ in all the world; In you also through the advice of
that your great Council, it may be manifest, that God does and will still bless
these Nations, and make them instrumental to the ruin of Romish Babylon, with
all that belongs thereto, and that out of illuminated zeal for the Gospels, the
Saints injuries, and blood, till the vengeance and recompense be rendered to
her, double: which work shall be fulfilled in its time, by the Lamb, and his
called, and faithful, and chosen. On which work your heart set, you have the
Hosanna of him that waits for the mighty thunderings of the Hallelujahs, and is

Your Highnesses most obliged for the Gospels and the Public good, Richard
Byfield.

The CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. AN Explication of the Text, in its dependence and manner of laying
down, with three special observations, giving further light to the words, and
with the four great truths of doctrine; three of them expressed, and the
fourth strongly implied in the Coherence.

Chap. 2. The first great truth which is this, that there is no salvation by
the Law, or by any other means, save by Jesus Christ.

Chap. 3. The second great truth, The fullness of salvation of sinners by Jesus
Christ, and that set forth by many choice truths, which the Apostle in this
Text takes for granted.

Chap. 4. The fullness of salvation by Jesus Christ expressed, in the person who
is the first efficient cause; he that provides this salvation; God, even God
the Father.

Chap. 5. The fullness of this salvation, in the Person who undertakes to work
it out, even Gods own Son.

Chap. 6. The fullness of salvation manifested in the way God takes to save
sinners by his Son.

Chap. 7. The fullness of a sinners salvation evinced in the outward cause
moving God to give his own Son, and to take such away to save, which was, the
impotency and impossibility of the Law to save, and the lost estate of the
sinner.

Chap. 8. The fullness of this salvation in the end of Christ's mission intended
and attained, which was the expiation of sin, and the fulfilling of the
righteousness of the law for and in the sinners that shall be saved.

Chap. 9 The fullness of salvation shines in the person who makes saving
application thereof, dethroning corruption of nature, and ruling the whole man;
even the Spirit; the holy Ghost; the Spirit of the Father, and of the Son.

Chap. 10. The third great truth; the lively description of the persons that
shall be saved, and do partake of this salvation by Jesus Christ, viz. They are
such who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

Chap. 11. The fourth and last great truth, which is, The fullness of the
assurance, and of the consolation of those who are in Christ, and walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

THE Gospels GLORY.
ROMANS 8. 3, 4. Ver. 3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak
through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh,
and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh.

Ver. 4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.


CHAP. I.
Contains an Explication of the Text in its dependence, and manner of laying
down, with three special Observations giving further light to the words, and
with the four great truths of Doctrine, three of them expressed, and the fourth
employed in the cohaerence.

SECT. 1.
THe whole Chapter is the Conclusion The dependence of the words on the former
part of the Epistle. Their scope is comfort.
of the large treatise and disputation of the holy Apostle Paul writing to the
Romans concerning the Justification and Sanctification of believers in Jesus
Christ. The Apostle draws up all that he had delivered in this Epistle, for
the practice of the Saints, and especially for their consolation against all
sorts of evils that may befall them in this present Two evils, sin and
affliction.
world. Now because there are two sorts of evils which assault their faith, and
that sorely and dangerously, which are, the sense of the remainders of sin
within them, and the manifold afflictions, tribulations and temptations that
befall them from without: two evils, sin and the Cross; sin that dwells in
them, and the Comfort in Christ to believers against both.
Cross that attends them from abroad: The Apostle against both these does
exceedingly comfort all believers. And this he does, not without cause. They
that believe in Christ, do they not find sinful corruption working in them?
and is it not as a law in their members? does it not sometimes carry them away
captives? and is it not always averse and adverse to their holy inclinations
unto, and delight in the law of the Lord? Paul in his own person sets out the
estate of a believer to be such, in the latter end of the seventh chapter. If
this be the estate of those that believe, and that have in them the beginnings
of grace and sanctification, How can they be comforted? for is not sin to be
regarded? is not sin the more grievous, the more good and gracious God is to
them? and ought it not so to be? do not their souls hate sin the more, and are
therefore the more troubled because such corruptions stir in them, and break
forth against God? the Apostle grants it all: but for full consolation sets
Jesus Christ against this evil of sin, and asserts, that their sins shall not
condemn them. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. This is handled from the first
verse to the middle of the seventeenth verse.

For the second evil: true believers are subject to persecutions and to
afflictions before and above any others* they are the (...) of contradiction,
the very strife of tongues: how then shall they have comfort? Where is the
gain of godliness? The Apostle says, there is this certain truth full of
Consolation, that all afflictions that can befall the believer, are so far
from prejudicing his salvation, that they promote and assure unto him his
greater glory in verse 17. and this argument is continued unto the 31. verse.
And then in the 31. verse to the end, the Apostle breaks out into a triumph of
faith over both evil, sin and affliction; over all that may stand in the way of
their comfort, not leaving until he has raised them together with himself, in
despite of all adverse things, to the height of one more than a Conqueror,
and to the glorying of one that is fully assured.

In the words of these two verses, The The dependence of the words on the
former verses. To them that are in Christ, comfort against the evil of sin.
proposition for comfort against the sense of sin laid down in the first verse
is proved and demonstrated: and the meaning of the probation of that
proposition given in the second verse, is also in these words cleared, [There
is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus]. That Is the proposition,
whereof these words in verse 3, 4. give the full demonstration; and it is this;
In Jesus Christ their sins are condemned, and the righteousness of the Law
which is the strength of sin, is fulfilled. What condemnation can there be
where sin is condemned, and where all righteousness is fulfilled? and this is
the true case of all that are in Christ; besides, they are under another law,
even the command of the Spirit of Jesus Christ after whom they walk, and who
from Christ is in them, lawing of them; So that they who are in Christ Jesus
are not only under another Law, but the Spirit of life which is in Christ
Jesus, and from him a their Head, and as the second Adam, is in them as a Law,
even the Law of the Spirit of life which delivers them from the Law of sin and
death: this is the sum of the second verse; what is this law of the Spirit?
It is the Spirit of grace and What is the Law of the Spirit. What is the Law of
sin.
holiness dwelling in us by the Word of the Gospel, which has in us the power
and force of a Law. What is the Law of sin and death? It is the deadly power of
sin, which has in all men by nature the strength of a Law to command, and
commanding reigns through the strength of the holy Law of God unto death or
condemnation. Now (^ observe how the third and fourth verses clear up this)
nothing but the living spiritual law of the Spirit which is in Christ Jesus,
can give a sinner, an Apostle, a Paul deliverance from the power of sin and
death; but this can; this Law of the Spirit of life has delivered me. This is
thus made out. The Law of God could not do it, for that does not give this
Spirit: but the Gospel only can do it, because the Gospel gives the Spirit,
the Spirit of life which sets free from the Law and power of sin and death.
This is the dependence of these verses upon the former.

SECT. 2.
The words are the sum of the Gospel, The manner of laying down the Doctrine
of the Gospel here. 1. By prevention of an objection. Object. Might not the Law
deliver a sinner?
explaining the great mystery of salvation which God himself first preached in
Paradise to our first Parents miserably fallen, which the holy Apostle opens
in this manner. He lays it down first by prevention of an Objection; and then
by reckoning up the causes of salvation; and lastly by re-assuming the
description of the persons that have their part therein.

The Objection is this: How does the Law of the Spirit alone deliver the
sinner? might not the holy Law of God deliver from sin and death?

Answ. The Law cannot deliver: The deliverance of a sinner from sin, and
Answ. It is the thing impossible to the Law.
from the damnation of sin, is that which is the impossible thing of the Law;
that which is impossible for the Law to do. The Law is the holy Commandments
of the Eternal God, Maker of all things: these discover sin, and condemn the
sinner; but they deliver not from either. That which is of use, and is of this
nature, to show and sentence for sin, cannot possibly work deliverance to a
sinner; but it is the Gospel, that Law of faith, that discovers a Savior
Jesus Christ, and in Jesus Christ, how a sinner may be made righteous, and so
be delivered from sin; and how one condemned by the righteous Law, may be
delivered from that condemning sentence, and so be set free from death which
sin deserved: [God sending his own Son, etc.] where it appears that a
sinner may be delivered from his sin, and made ri^hteous, and delivered from
the Law, and not condemned. [What the Law could not do, in that it was weak
through ^^e flesh, God sending his own Son, etc.]

The former Objection may yet be urged; for it may be said, the Law is
righteous, and can it not then give righteousness and life?

Answ. The Apostle explaineth the Yet the Law is in no fault.
thing, and amplifieth it; the Law cannot do it: not that there is fault in the
Law; this impossibility comes through the weakness of mankind now fallen,
who are not able to keep the Law. The Law is not weak, as if not perfectly
righteous and holy; or as if it had not a promise of life annexed to it: but
you are weak, who are not able to keep it. It is through man's weakness, who is
not able to perform the righteousness thereof, that the Law is become weak:
the perfect, exact holiness thereof makes through our weakness weakening it,
that none can stand righteous by it, nor live by it. Hence arises the
inpossibility of help by the Law. Thus the Law is still preserved honorable,
and is magnified, when yet it cannot help us; and we are in the fault, the
fault is wholly ours.

Again, the Apostle displayeth the Gospel 2. By opening the causes of a sinners
salvation.
glory, and displayeth the mystery thereof, by opening the causes of the
salvation of a sinner.

1. The outward impulsive cause; the impossibility and impotency of the Law to
save, through the impotency of man who stands bound to keep the Law; this is
the external impulsive: this very thing that the Law cannot help us, but
condemns our sins, and us for our sins, and curses us; which is not thorough
any fault in the Law of it self, but only by accident, by reason of our corrupt
nature; this, this is that outward thing which moves God to save sinners: that
which might move God to come and execute the sentence of the Law, that moved
God to provide a Savior. That which the Law cannot do through man's default,
that God does by sending his own Son.

2. The efficient or working cause, the first working cause in saving a sinner;
God. God set the accent there; it must be noted with emphasis, lift up the
voice, and stay the heart upon that Word, write it in great letters. It is not
my observation that you must not slip over this one syllable, but the Apostles
divinely inspired, as afterward in this chapter when he says, If GOD be for
us: and again, It is GOD that justifies. God against whom our sins are, God
whose righteous and eternal Law we have rendered useless to an utter
impossibility to do us good, and that for ever until He put us into another
state; He is the first agent in the work of our salvation.

3. The material cause. What course does God take to save a sinner? God sends
his own Son. Gods own Son does take away sin by his passion, bearing our
sins in his own body: his own Son in our flesh in which he was incarnate, kept
the Law for us, and so the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled.

4. The final cause, which is this, Redemption is wrought by the Christ of God;
that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us; in us, who have
made the Law unable to do us any good, who have made it to the Law impossible
to set us free from sin and death.

3. In us? may some say in whom? lest 3. By describing the persons for whom
this salvation is wrought.
we should be deceived herein to our everlasting undoing, while there is such a
Gospel, such a Savior, we have the persons described for whom all this is
done. In us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit; that is, in us
that believe in Jesus Christ: but because many do deceive themselves, in saying
we believe, and do not believe; the Apostle uses not those words, but takes
up this description, which notes out a believer by the Spirit he has
received, and the Spirit by the rule and dominion he has now in and over him;
and this rule of the Spirit over believers by this, that sin does not now reign
in them, though sin be in them; and the ruling of the Spirit, and the
dethroning of sin by their walk: it is not ordered by the flesh, nor at the
will of the flesh, but their life is ordered by the Spirit of Jesus Christ
through the Word of this his grace dwelling in their hearts.

Thus we see proved in these words, that there ^an be no condemnation to those
that are in Christ; for though the Law would condemn them, because they are
sinners, and there is sin in them that deserves condemnation, yet their
sins being condemned in Jesus Christ by a righteous God, God may pardon them
with the good leave of his justice, doing no wrong at all to the holy Law.

SECT. 3.
For the further opening of the words, here are Three things of special
observation.
three things of special observation.
1. The diverse acceptance of the word [flesh,] in the compass of this Text.

First, it notes mankind with all its abilities and excellencies upheld in men
of 1. The word flesh, taken four ways here.
God himself in his long-suffering since the fall, in these words [weak through
the flesh,]

Secondly, it notes out the humane nature as corrupted with sin, in the words
[sinful flesh] for [the flesh of sinne] that is, mankind such as sin has made
it, not such as God made it, soaked with sin, under the power of sin, weak
frail flesh; the soul and its endowments beslaved to the flesh, to the senses,
to the sensual apperite, to the things the outward man the flesh desires,
insomuch that the whole man may well be called flesh.

Thirdly, It notes the humane nature, frail and mortal, but not polluted with
sin. In the words [condemned sin in the flesh] that is, in the flesh of Jesus
Christ.

Fourthly, it notes the corruption or sinfulness of man's nature; in the words
[walk not after the flesh.]

Now from these several acceptations of the word flesh, we gather, Four
observations from that.


First, what man is since the fall of Adam. Take him with all abilities in his
best estate here, out of Christ, he is but weak, frail, mortal and sinful
flesh; mortal and sinful man: he is flesh, that is, carnal, sensual, and wholly
corrupted with sin; he is utterly unable to keep the holy Law of God, to
fulfill the righteousness of the Law, to make satisfaction to Gods justice for
the least sin, by all the righteousness he can by himself attain unto. And
therefore wholly unable to escape condemnation.

Secondly, We may here learn that the flesh, that is, man consisting of body
and soul, though frail and mortal, even weak, dying flesh, enfeebled in his
abilities and operations both of body and mind, is not in that regard sinful;
for then the Son of God who became flesh, who took on him our nature, a true
humane soul and body, and our nature infirm, frail and mortal, our very flesh
and blood, must needs have been defiled with sin; but he knew no sin, he
was the Lamb without spot and blemish: therefore the flesh, or body of man is
not evil as it is flesh and blood, nor the desires, appetite or weakness,
frailties and diseases that attend it, no more than the mind the top of the
soul, the will and affections of the soul are in themselves evil. God is the
former of our bodies, as well as the Father of our spirits; and God is not the
Author of sin: this is diligently to be heeded against the dreams of most
Heretics, old and new, against the general sayings of Philosophers, and the
common and usual conceits all men have of the flesh or body, as if that were
the evil sinning, blameworthy part in them; but their souls, their hearts,
their minds, the spirit of the mind, that they think to be good and holy, and
to receive its defilement from the body. And therefore men place all Religion
in some observations of abstinence bodily, bodily exercises, as, Touch not
this, taste not that, and handle not the other; or in some neglecting of the
body, macerating and punishing it, and denying satisfaction to the poor flesh
in the natural desires thereof, unto which weak body there is an honor due:
whereas all that defiles a man is from within, from the heart and soul of man,
from these good hearts of ours comes all wickedness, as our Lord Jesus
teaches.

Thirdly, here we are taught that there is something in man far worse than
death, mortality, frailty, or any disease or pain; even that which brought all
this upon him, and that is sin which we make so light of; sin is the worst
thing in the world; sin is far worse than affliction, than all deaths.

Fourthly, here may be seen how near the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God
came unto us; he came so near, that he took to himself in nearest union, not
only our souls, which are spiritual substances, but our very bodies; he took to
him our flesh and blood; he took to him our whole nature, and that in the
condition which sin had brought it unto; the very likeness of sinful flesh,
our infirm nature; a soul subject to some kind of ignorance, to affections of
love, anger and sorrow; a body subject to hunger, thirst, nakedness, cold,
weariness; a frail mortal man he was, but wholly without sin: yea, tempted
as we are, like us in all things, sin only excepted; he became flesh. He did
not assume our nature as it was in our first Parents in their innocence, but as
it is now since the fall; he came not into the world in the form of a King, or
some great Monarch, or of an honorable person, or rich and wealthy; no, nor of
a freeman, but of a servant; he became Phil. 2. 7.
poor and destitute of all; naked flesh* 2 Cor. 8. 9.
Behold the grace, the great love of the Lord Jesus Christ: behold it, till thy
heart be loose from all that men here admire and dote upon, and begin to draw
toward this Lord, the Son of the most High, who disdained not to come so low
to seek after and exalt thee.

2. Here we have the persons distinct, 2. Three distinct persons, and works of
those persons distinct, in a sinners salvation.
with their distinct workings, who are employed in the salvation of the Elect.

1. God the Father, he is sending his own Son; he is condemning sin, he is
salving and keeping whole and untoucht the righteousness of the Law.

2. Then the Son of God Jesus Christ, he is incarnate, he becomes flesh; he
pays the price of Redemption by suffering the damnatory sentence of the Law,
he fulfills the righteousness required in the commands of the Law.

And lastly, The Spirit he unites to Christ, that this might he in us through
faith; he applies and brings home with power all this that the Father and Son
have done; he thrusts out the flesh, the power of corrupt nature: and
regenerates, sanctifies and rules in them so mightily, that they walk after the
Spirit. [In us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.] Who 2 Samuel 7. 23 Deuteronomy, 33. 29
are like unto Gods chosen: who are thus saved of the Lord? whom God the
Father, and the Son, and the Spirit thus redeem! for whom these three, yet
one God do thus go forth and work, and are so employed to deliver from sin
and damnation! Blessed and happy art thou, O Israel of God, whether Jew or
Gentile, thus saved of the Lord!

3. We have also here the summary 3. The two ways given to mankind, in which
everlasting life might be obtained.
comprehension of all the ways that ever God gave to mankind to obtain life
by, that is, the Law and the Gospel. We have likewise the only way by which
mankind fallen can possibly be delivered, and obtain everlasting life, which
is the Gospel. And further, how these two, the Law and the Gospel mutually do
work: The Law comes, but is found weak, unable; and the deliverance of a sinner
thereby, a thing impossible; yet this Law takes off the sinner from his great
confidence, leaves him at a loss, shuts him up to Christ, and to faith in him,
when that shall come to help. The Doctrine or Law of Faith in Christ Jesus,
that establsheth the Law every way, and does that for the sinner which the Law
could not do. By it, Gods love, and Christ Jesus the Son of God the Savior,
God in Christ is made known, the Spirit is given, the flesh o^ corruption of
nature subdued, righteousness fulfilled, sin condemned, and the sinner
saved. And withal, the words are so composed, that the sum of the Gospel is
briefly, orderly, plainly, practically (or as it may and must fall into
practice) and fully set down here to our edification and consolation abundantly.

SECT. 4.
Having thus far unfolded the words; here are four precious and important 4.
grand truths.
truths, three in the text, and one in the context. We have three most glorious
and necessary truths of greatest moment that can concern us and our salvation,
and the assurance thereof, laid down in open and express words.

1. The impossibility of a sinners salvation by any means save by Jesus Christ.

2. The absolute fullness of a sinners salvation by Jesus Christ.

3. The lively description of those among sinners who do obtain salvation by
Jesus Christ.

And then in the connection of these words with the former, we have a fourth
doctrine of excellent worth, viz.

4. The fullness of their assurance to be out of the reach of condemnation, and
to be in the estate of salvation, and the fullness of their consolation who are
actually in Christ.

[What she Law could not do] It is that which the Law cannot do. It is (the
(...)) the impossible thing of the Law. When he also says further [In that it
was weak] he teaches that the Law is weak, and so is unable to give life,
righteousness and salvation to a sinner, and to deliver him from the Law of
sin and death. This is that thing ((...)) in which it is weak. The Law is a
perfect rule of righteousness: It commands well. It is a holy and exact
sentencer of the disobedient, it judges righteously; but as for deliverance
and salvation there it leaves a man that has sinned, and to that work it is
utterly weak: that is the thing in which it is weak; therefore this impotency
of the Law demonstrateth the impossibility of the Law to deliver a sinner, And
then when he says [through the flesh] that is, man, since the fall, taken with
all his best abilities, and they and he in them upheld by God the Creator in
riches of patience, and in riches of goodness, and having in him the light of
natural principles, and with him the book of the Creature to read; and not
only the work of the Law written in his heart, but also the Law given to him
from God by lively voice, and written in Tables of stone, and perpetuated in
the holy Scripture; man thus sustained and furnished with his utmost
improvement which he can make of the same, is but flesh, weak flesh, so weak
that he has brought this impoten^y and impossibility upon the Law; the good,
holy, spiritual and righteous Law of God which had the promise of life annexed
to it. Now through the flesh, through man who is weak, the Law becomes weak:
and deliverance from damnation and from sin is that impossible thing of the
Law, which man cannot have by the Law; thus this gate to life is fast shut; yet
the Law is set up in its due worth and power: and man cast down under his
deserved blame: man is laid dead to the Law, and the Law dead to man as to the
matter of righteousness and salvation. Therefore also it unavoidably follows
that no other creature, nor means can deliver a sinner: for what means
(setting aside Jesus Christ) is comparable to the Law? or what creature is
above the Law? this is the first doctrine.



1. It is GOD that provides this Savior the Lord Jesus, and the salvation that
is in him; God sent his Son. If GOD will save, who can destroy? God, the
Lawgiver offended, the person against whom all our sins are.

2. The person undertaking the work, It is Gods own Son. If he undertake it
by whom the worlds were made, the Son of the Fathers love, What a salvation
must it needs be? and who, who or what shall condemn?

3. The way God took to save by him; it is unspotted, perfect and complete;
this way was

1. By designation of him to the office of Mediator and Savior, and to the
works of that office. God sending his own Son. Sending notes the
Commissionating, and actual employing in the execution of some function and
work to the which he that is sent was foreordained, selected and called; and
all this designing of the Son by and from God is of his mere grace and
infinite good pleasure within himself.

2. By his Incarnation, God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh; here
is a suitable Mediator and Savior, one that has all right, for he took to
him flesh and blood, and all ability, for the Son of God became flesh.

3. By allotting the business concerning which, and for which he is sent. It
was sin. God sending his Son for sin. Sin was that concerning which he
came; the business he was employed in: to be a sacrifice and propitiation for
sin ((...).) the foulest thing in the world, fouler than hell; he is sent
about sin to take that away, to take it on him, on his own body, on the body
of his flesh. God sent him charged with sin, with the iniquities of all his
people. God sent him as he that had before all worlds engaged himself for sin
to take it away. Go out of heaven, out of his Fathers bosom he must for the
business of sin; for sin lay upon him, and since he had undertaken the
debt, no rest could there be to him, till he had paid the utmost farthing. It
was much he should be sent in the likeness of sinf^l flesh, but behold God
sending him so, and concerning s^nne [(...)] and for sin. What business what
work is here for Gods own Son to be busied about, and to have any thing to do
withal?

4. By course of justice. God condemned sin in the flesh, or, in that flesh,
viz. which his own Son had at the Fathers sending, taken upon him. The Syriac
reads, in his flesh. The Son of God saves by making satisfaction to Gods
justice. God condemns sin in the flesh of his Son, and so there is no
condemnation to the sinner; the Son^e of God in his flesh suffers, sin is
said upon him; and salvation is brought by redemption, by ransom, by payment
of the debt fully charged and exacted. God is gloriously and infinitely just in
the act of saving a sinner. Sin is damning, but in the flesh of Christ sin
is damned; God condemns it there. Now, the condemnation of sin, is the
indemnity of the sinner. In these four you have the way God took to save a
sinner.

4. The outward moving, or impulsive cause, because that the Law could not
help, and because that man had made that way to life by the Law impassable,
that was it that moved God thus to save. The impotency of the Law, made weak by
man. What the Law could not do, God would do. Our undone condition, our
irrevocable estate by our own default, moved God to save. This is also to
admiration, and of strong consolation.

5. The end aimed at and attained. The end of Christ's mission, incarnation, and
passion, [That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us.] In the
Law there is the righteousness of the commands, and the righteous, just,
damnatory sentence of threatenings against the transgressors of those holy
commands. Now God sent his Son, and held the forementioned course in laying
our sins upon him, that the whole righteousness which the Law requires of
us, might be fulfilled in us who are in Christ by faith, whiles by Jesus Christ
it is fulfilled for us, and for our sakes, in our room and stead: and so the
Law is, while fulfilled for us, fulfilled in us who are in Christ by faith. And
then secondly, the holiness and righteousness of the precepts is fulfilled in
us, whiles by this faith which unites us to Christ, receives his Spirit,
draws from Christ sanctifying grace, and purifieth the heart, a new obedience
in all uprightness and integrity respecting the whole Law is begun, and more
and more increases in us in this life; and is of that growing nature, that it
will go forwards, hold on, fight out its way, persevere and overcome, and at
last be perfected in glory; thus the righteousness of the Law is in us; by
faith Christ's righteousness in obedience and sufferings, for us reckoned to us
as ours, and by the same faith holiness in truth begun, and growing up to
perfection in us. See here the Gospel fights not against the Law, as the Law is
not against the Gospel. The Gospel acquits those whom the Law pronounces
guilty, but not as considered nakedly in their guilt; that were against the
(Jus) the right of the Law, but by the intervening of, and the guilty
considered in the [(...)] the price, and satisfaction of the Son of God; and
this is agreeable to [the jus] the right of the Law. The Gospel sets them free
from condemnation notwithstanding their sins, because it brings in God
condemning their sins in the flesh of his Son, and the Son bearing the
condemnation of sin laid on him of God, in his own flesh. The Gospel while it
acquits from the Law, purifieth the sinner, and gives him an heart and power to
judge himself, to love the holiness and righteousness which the Law
requires, and in this work upholds him with delight in the inward man till
holiness be perfected. So the Gospel fulfills the Law every way, in Christ and
in us, fulfills the righteousness of the Law for us, and in us; and while for
us, in us.

6. The person applying, and the manner of application of this salvation, even
the Spirit, the Spirit of Jesus Christ, who (in all those that are delivered
from condemnation by Jesus Christ) is uniting them to Christ, and regenerating
and sanctifying them. This Spirit sets himself up in the throne, and pulls the
flesh out of the throne, and he reigns in them, and orders their lives. This
person, even the holy Ghost, and his work making this salvation to come home
with saving efficacy, is mentioned implyedly in these words [In us, who walk
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.] Thus the Apostle has set out
lively the second great Doctrine.

The third is a description of those for who walk not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit. They are known by their walks, that is, by the tenor and
course of their lives, in which they deliberately set themselves with
continuance and progress: which course of life is framed after the guidance and
rule not of the flesh, that is, of their corrupted nature, but of the Spirit,
that is, the Spirit of Christ which by the Word ingraffed in them, dwells in
them, and orders their conversation.

for, leads us unto. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ,
though there be much sin in them; for the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, and
from him coming into them, is as a Law that has delivered them from the Law of
sin, and so from the Law of death: and all this is most evident; for, in Christ
their sins are condemned, and they justified and sanctified: for see, they, as
men set at liberty, do walk after the Spirit, and not after the flesh. This
then is the precious truth which lies in the coherence concerning the riches
of their assurance and consolation who are in Jesus Christ.

The sins of those that walk after the Sp^r^t shall never be to their
condemnation, neither shall hinder from them the benefit of all the salvation
that comes by Christ: nor ^et ought they in the least kind to hinder their
full assurance, their comfortable walking in their obedience, their constant
combating against the flesh, nor their full dedition to the Law of the Spirit
of life, as to that which will give them full deliverance from the Law of sin
and death.

CHAP. II,
Containing the first great truth, which is this: that there is no salvation
for any man by the Law, or by any other means save only by Jesus Christ.

SECT. 1.
Having drawn up four choice truths of saving knowledge absolutely necessary to
everlasting blessedness and sound comfort, compactly delivered by the holy
Apostle in this portion of Scripture; I 1. Doct. No salvation but by Christ.
Gal. 3. 21, 22.
come now to handle those four truths at large: the first of them is this.

There is no salvation for any man by the Law, or by any other means
whatsoever, but only by Jesus Christ. If there had been a Law given which
could have given life, Verily righteousness should have been by the Law: but
the Scripture has concluded all under sin, says this Apostle, that the
promise of faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe; These are
opposite; the Law and the Promise; the concluding of all under sin and the
giving of life and righteousness; the faith of Jesus Christ whereby we believe,
and the works of the Law; the giving of the promise which is a reward reckoned
of grace to him that believes, Romans 4. 3, 4, 5
and the paying of a debt which is a reward to him that works. If then the
Law could save, there had been no need of the Promise; the Promise were in
vain; nevertheless the Law is not against the Promise, but it shuts all men up
to the Promise, where life and righteousness is alone to be had by believing in
Jesus Christ. But may there not be found some other name besides, or together
with Jesus Christ by which a sinner may be saved? for answer, hear the Apostle
Peter as the mouth all the rest of the Apostles, saying to all men, and to all
the people o^ Israel: Jesus Christ Acts 4. 10, 11, 12
of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, is the stone
which was set at n^ught of you builders, which is become the head of the
corner: neither is there salvation in any other; for there is none other name
under heaven given amon^ men, whereby we must be saved. Let us yet see how all
things are utterly unable to save a sinner.

SECT. 2.
First, the Law cannot deliver a sinner; 2. Not by the Law Moral as a Covenant.
Romans 10. 5 Gal. 3. 10.
not the Law moral; neither as it a Covenant given to mankind; which says, Do
this and thou shall live: for so man being found to fail in doing, he falls
from the promised life; and on the contrary, the Law having this penalty
covenanted, cursed is every one that continues not in all things written in
the Law to do them; every sinner falls under the curse; as many therefore as
will stand by the Law, must of necessity fall under the curse. But may A
Commandment
not the Law as it is a Commandment, deliver us from sin? no, neither as it is
a holy Commandment can it do it; for so it manifests sin; by the holy
Commandment, we come to the knowledge of sin, which is nothing else but a
swerving from that Ceremonial. Heb. 9* ^, 9 24 Col. 2. 17.
perfect rule; nor can the Ceremonial Law deliver the whole excellency of that
Law consists in signifying and shadowing out jesus Christ. The Sacrifices
there commanded did make nothing perfect, they took not away sin, for then they
needed not to have been offered up to God again and again; their washings and
sprinklings did not cleanse the conscience, that Heb. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. Heb. 9.
9. Heb. 10. 5. 6. Psalm. 40. 6, 7. Gal. 3. 24.
whole Law was a carnal commandment; God while he required them, rejected them
as insufficient: this was their right use, to lead them to Christ, and to teach
that salvation was to be had in him only, and not in them. Again, as for the
moral Law, these two things the Scripture affirms concerning it. 1. The Law
cannot save. 2. The Law cannot save. Irenaeus lib. 3. adversus Haer. c 20
Veniens lex quae data est per Moysen, and testificans de peccato, quoniam
peccator est (Adam) regnum quidem ejus abstulit, (Adae scilicet) latronem and
non regem eum detegens, and homicidam eum osteodit. Oneravit autem hominem, qui
peccatum babebat in se, reum mortis ostendens eum, spiritualis enim cum lex
esset, manifestavit tantummodo peccatum, non autem interemit: dominibatur
peccatum, sed homini. Nor was given of God to save.
The Law was never given of God to that end that a sinner might thereby be
saved. The Law cannot save: for, First, the Law commands righteousness, but
gives no strength to do what it commands, nor restores any lost strength. The
Law promises life, but it is to him that perfectly keeps it; It promises no
good to a sinner. Secondly, none can keep the Law, therefore none can by the
Law attain to righteousness through the weakness of the flesh, the
disability of frail man to continue in all to do it, the Law is become
impotent for justification. And without righteousness it is impossible there
should be life; or that there should not be death and the curse. Thirdly, If a
sinner could keep the Law for time to come, yet by the Law no good to him;
because he must first answer for his former transgressions, and dye the death,
accursed of God his Maker because of them. The Law was not given of God, that
righteousness and life might be Romans 3. 20 and 7. 7. Ver. 9. 14. and 7. Ver.
13.
obtained thereby: but it was given, that by it a sinner might come to the
knowledge of sin; that he might know what is sin; that lust, or coveting is
sin; that our natures are wholly polluted, and that we For what ends the Law
was given.
are carnal, sold under sin, who can hold no proportion to the plat-forme of
righteousness which the Law delivers, and who have on us a very necessity of
sinning; and that he might know the sinfulness of sin. It was given, that it
might work wrath; that is, the sense and apprehensions of Gods deserved wrath.
It was Romans 4. 15.
given, that the perfect holiness, and exact rigor of the justice of it might
batter down all confidence in humane goodness, power of free will, works of
our righteousness; privileges external, or any of our performances; and pound
to pieces all confidence in the flesh. It was given, to provoke sin. It was
given, to Romans 7. 8
convince of our utter disabilities. It was given, to arrest, attach, imprison
the jolly Gal. 3. 22.
secure sinner, and to conclude all under sin, that they might be glad to
come to Christ in the promise. It was given, that through the Law, we might for
ever Gal. 2. 19.
be dead to the Law; therefore the Law is a killing letter, (not a dead letter,
no 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7.
part of the Word of God is a dead letter; for then it could not be of such
power as to be a killing letter) and the Mi^istry of it, is the Ministry of
death and of condemnation. Lastly, It was given, that unto those that being
dead to it, and brought to faith in Jesus Christ for righteousness and life,
it might be a rule of holy life, a light and lamp, and the royal Law to guide
into all well-doing; and contains the good, acceptable and perfect will of God.
Now for the use of this The use to be made of this. 1.
truth; first,

This confutes and condemns the folly of diverse sorts among us.

1. Of those that think to be saved by their good meanings, good intentions or
purposes; their prayers, and the works of righteousness which they have done,
or intend to do.

2. Of those who think to be saved, because they hope they do no body any
wrong; or because they are, as they call it, of a good nature, and of a gentle,
good and loving disposition, and of a sweet temper: or because they break not
out into great and notorious sins, of theft, murder, adultery, profane
swearing, and cursed speaking, with the like: or, if they have been guilty of
such staring abominations, yet they do many good works, which set against their
evil works will answer for them, and they are persuaded will weigh them down:
or, they rest upon their civility and morality with the love and good report of
all their Neighbors.

3. Those also that think to be saved by a devotion taught by the precepts of
men, or by observing a form of Religion and of Godliness.

4. Those likewise are condemned here, who hold and teach, and seek
justification by works; these so remaining can never Romans 9. 32. and 10. 3, 5,
6.
attain to the righteousness of God, which is not a righteousness of works,
but of faith.

Secondly, This also teaches the true Paul, who in his own person gives us one
that is taught of God thereby, when he says, I through the Law, am dead to the
Law, (never more looking for righteousness and justification of life that way)
that I might live unto God, Gal. 2. 19. No life but through this death; never
thus dead but through the Law when it comes; the Law comes, sin revives, and
we dye; and this dying is the way to life, even to a living unto God.

SECT. 3.
Secondly, No sinner can work his own 2. A sinner cannot save himself, for six
reasons.
deliverance; for,

1. We are weak and without strength, Romans 5. 6. There is no strength in us to
fulfill the Law: no strength to satisfy the justice, and so turn away the
wrath of God: much less is there strength in us to recover our lost integrity,
nor to keep it, if we had it again restored to us: no strength to help our
selves, to meet the Lord in the ways of his saving grace, or to choose and
walk in the way that is called holy; no strength for any service unto God.

2. We are flesh, and in the flesh; that is, wholly corrupted with sin, under
the power and reign of sin; the poison of the Old Serpent has run like water
into our bowels, and like oil into our bones; from the spirit of our minds to
all our outward members we are leprous, all unclean, and soaked in iniquity,
conceived in sin, and shapen in wickedness: we Romans 5. 6, 8.
are sinners and ungodly, when God in Christ by his death comes in love and
^ity to redeem us; we lie in our bloo^ until he says to us Live; we are dead
in sin and trespasses, till he q^icken us; and how can such please God? they
cannot do Romans 8. 8.
it.

3. We are enemies unto God; our Romans 5. 10. and 8. 7. Col. 1. 21. 2 Cor. 10:
3, 4, 5.
wisdom, our savor and smatch is enmity unto God. We are enemies in our
minds, because they are on evil works; our principles, our thoughts, our
reasonings, our imaginations are high things lifted up in rebellion against the
knowledge of God, and the obedience of Christ: and as strong holds fortified and
kept in a desperate War against the Spirit of the Lord, which in the Ministry
even of the Gospel comes forth to bring us into a blessed captivity, and subdue
us and our very hearts (the worst part of man) unto himself, and to his
obedience; the carnal mind of man is not subject to the Law of God, neither
can be; there is no good to be done with it; put it off, Romans 8. 7.
mortify it, crucify it, crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts
thereof; for that is all the good that can be done with it; good it will never
be: but we must be in the Spirit, and the Spirit of Christ dwell in us to
enable us to such work, or else we have no will, no heart to it. Romans 8. 13.
Oh then how far are all men from any ability to work their own deliverance!

4. We see not our sinfulness, nor our misery: nor can, nor will be brought to
see it by any other means than by the Scripture, the written Law of God, which
is the only glass in which we can truly see our selves, James 1. 23. Romans 7. 7.


5. Though the Law has not lost it is rectitude, yet our weakness to keep it
makes the Law (by accident) to be the more against us. And

6. Notwithstanding all this that has been spoken, we yet are full of high
thoughts of our selves, we are proud and secure sinners; and are naturally bent
to seek to establish our own righteousness. For the use of this, The
consideration The use of this.
hereof should take us wholly off our own legs, and bring us to self-denial. It
should cause us to deliver up our selves to the Law, that we might be thoroughly
convinced of these things, and that the Spirit might be in and through the Law,
a Spirit of bondage in us, and we might be glad at heart of a Savior that can
deliver us.

SECT. 4.
Thirdly, No mere creature can possibly 3. No mere creature can save a sinner,
for six reasons. Matthew. 16. 26. 1 Pet. 1. 18*
deliver us; for

1. No creature is above the Law. If the Law of God cannot give life, it is not
in the power of the creature to do it. The Creator alone is above the Law.

2. No creature, nor the whole Creation has in it a worth to be a price of
value for a soul. All the treasures of both the Indies, all things in this
world, because corruptible things, are not so excellent as a soul: and the
price of the Redemption thereof at the hands of God is too high for men and
Angels: it cease for ever in respect of the creature, Psalm. 49* 6, 8.

3. Whatever any creature can do, he owes it for himself, and does but his duty.

4. Grant yet, that some creature could give help, could there be any
salvation? for then, for this very cause we should be servants unto the
creature; and this were to bring us into bondage, and not into liberty: they
are not their own who are bought with a price; if the creature did lay down the
price, we were the creatures servants, which to be, is absolute slavery.

5. Our evils are greater than can be removed by creatures; yet removed they
must be, if any of us be saved; and our good, that we may be happy, is greater
than can be by them communicated. The evil is, the infinite wrath of God, the
guilt and damning nature of sin standing in force, and confirmed by the
strength of an eternal perfect Law, the Empire of sin and death, the power of
the Devil that strong armed man of whom we read, Luke 11. 21, 22. The good we
stand in need of, is a righteousness above the righteousness of the Law; a
Resurrection as well spiritual as corporal; the communication of the divine
nature, eternal life, and a blessedness excelling the blessedness of Adam in
Paradise, and a Kingdom which cannot be shaken. All and every of these are
beyond any created power to give or take away.

6. No creature could ever think of the way, manner or means whereby we might
be delivered. The world, in the wisdom of God, upheld for some thousands of
years in its wisdom and abilities, by its wisdom knew not God, much less
could find out the way of peace and ^reconciliation for sinners with the God
that made them, 1 Cor. 1. 21. Markinde was continued, and their rational power
sustained, and the work of the Law written in their hearts was apparent in
them, and yet, with all the glory of God in his works of Creation and general
providence preaching to them, they perished in their vain imaginations; and
professing themselves wise in searching to find out God, they became fools,
corrupted Gods glory, and turned his truth into a lie unto themselves, Romans 1.
21. and 2. 14. And as for the holy Angels, they could not find out the way of
man's reconciliation; for they come to know it by the Church, Ephesians. 3. 10.

SECT. 5.
And fourthly, as for any other means; what can enter into man's heart, but the
4. Nor any other means.
offering of Sacrifices, even to thousands of Rams, or ten thousands of Rivers
of oil, a thing impossible to be had: or the giving of the sons of our
bodies, for the sins of our souls, a bloody and as fond as desperate a
course, or the building of Temples to God? but all these, with such like, God
rejects, Micah 6. 6, 7. Isa. 66. 1, 2, 3.

Now these are the uses unto which we should put this Doctrine. The use of this.


First, to show our lost estate by nature, to put us all among the lost. All
men are helpless and hopeless in respect of themselves or any other creature.

Secondly, To strip us of all fig leaves; lay us naked, and to shut us up to
Christ.

Thirdly, To endear Jesus Christ unto us, that we may say, Give me Christ, or
else I dye.

And fourthly, to form us to a readiness to be any thing that God would have us
to be, that Christ may be ours.

CHAP. III.
Containing the second great Truth, which is, the fullness of the salvation of
sinners by Jesus Christ; proved, and set forth by many choice truths which the
Apostle in this Text takes for granted.

SECT. 1.
THe second Doctrine is this. There is absolute fullness of salvation for
sinners in Jesus Christ. In There is fullness of salvation in Christ for
sinners. Proved, 1 Cor: 1. 30.
him there is a redemption plenteous, Psa. 130. 7. and eternal, Heb. 9. 12.
salvation to the utmost, Heb. 7. 25. in him an everlasting righteousness, Dan.
9. 24. in him righteousness and strength; he is made to us of God, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption what can a sinner need (and yet
his needs are unspeakable) but they are all exceeding abundantly in glory to be
supplied in Christ? A sinner, a most imperfect nothing; yet if believing, he is
complete in Christ; in him it pleased the Father Col. 2. 9, 10. Col. 1. 19.
Joh. 1. 16.
that all fullness should dwell, that out of his fullness poor needy sinners
might receive even grace for grace, grace answerable to that which is in Christ
the head of his body the Church; grace upon grace, more and more still; he it
is who came by water and blood; all sorts of taking away sin is in him, the
whole of legal ablutions 1 John 5. 6. Joh. 3. 34. Romans 5. 21.
and cleansings, and he has the Spirit not by measure. Grace reigns over
sin and death, through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our
Lord.

To open this; that this fullness of salvation Opened.
may appear, I shall follow our Apostle in this Text. Two ways it may be set
forth.

First, In the most excellent truths intimated, pre-supposed, and taken for
granted, as bottom, substrate, and foundation, or ground truths, upon which
his frame of declared Doctrine of the Gospel here delivered is built.

Secondly, In the six special heads expressed, which before were pointed out.

SECT. 2.
The Truths taken for granted and intimated are these.
First, That even the Elect of God, and 1. By five truths taken for granted
here in the Apostles words.
the Redeemed by Christ, are by nature in the same condemnation with all others
of the children of Adam; for they are flesh, weak sinful flesh; they are unable
to keep the Law, under sin, and under the curse; for whom God sent his Son,
the Law being unable to help them, and their deliverance being that thing which
was impossible for the Law to do. Although all men are not Reprobates, yet all
by reason of sin are reprobable. Man in himself has no cause of glorying;
and as to God, no cause of complaining. To the Elect man is there undeserved
grace; and to the Reprobate is there deserved punishment* The Elect and
Redeemed remain, till their effectual calling, in themselves miserable, carnal,
alienated from Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3.
the life of God, dead in sin and trespasses, the children of wrath, even as
othets. In them are no propensions, inclinations, or foregoing dispositions to
receive grace, not one of them was ever able to raise up himself to meet God in
the ways of his grace. God never gave Christ to any because he was better than
others, nor sent the Gospel to any because they would give it better
entertainment. This only may be said of him which is true of any other man,
that being a reasonable creature, and not a stock, or a brute beast, he is a
subject upon which the glory of God and his Image may be reestamped; but for
any goodness, or less guilt, God finds them all in their blood, and
wallowing in their filth, none righteous, no not one; all altogether
unprofitable and abominable.

Secondly, That condemnation, death and hell have their power from sin: and
sins strength to condemn lies in the Law and in the righteousness thereof;
for mark here, God to deliver from condemnation, condemns sin: and sin
being the swerving from the righteousness of the Law, for which the Law
sentenceth the Transgressor thereof with the curse, sin is then utterly gone,
when the righteousness of the Law is every way fulfilled. God therefore
purposing to deliver, fetches out the very heart of sin, and takes it quite
away by providing that the Laws righteousness be fulfilled. Hence it is
manifest that this is an undoubted and first truth, that the Laws
righteousness is the strength of sin. The sting of death is sin, and the
strength of sin is the Law, 1 Cor. 15. 56. Full salvation can no other way be
wrought, but by unstinging death, and by fulfilling the Law; which is the only
way to pluck out deaths sting: let this be done, and the deliverance from sin
and death is full and complete.

Thirdly, That mercy in God cannot make him like of sin, or blind him that
he should not see it, and the sinfulness of it; or cause him to dislike the
righteousness of the Law, and of the just sentence thereof: because God cannot
forgo his holiness, justice and omniscience. God condemned sin, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled; he condemns sin, he provides
that the Law be fulfilled, and so he saves the sinner.

Fourthly, That the benefit of Gods saving love, and of the Redemption by
Christ, and of the Gospel, is never to any man actually, till it be in him; and
if never in him, never was it to him intentionally. God and Christ never
intended life and righteousness to those in whom he never fulfills it. This is
taught in the words [in us.]

SECT. 3.
And fifthly, As the ground of the whole work here declared, and as the
foundation of the Apostles argumentation, this is taken for granted, that God
of his infinite goodness was resolved to save some sinnets out of fallen
mankind, and to give unto them eternal life. Of this the beloved disciple
speaks, in 1 John 5. 11. This is the record that God has given to us eternal
life; and the reason thereof is nothing in the creature, but it is that in them
whom he shall save, Ephesians. 1. 6, 7. and 2. 7. Ephesians. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 12. Genesis
17. 1. Heb. 6. 18.
he might show forth the glory of his mercy, love and grace; the glory of his
manifold wisdom, of his power, of his holiness and justice, while his grace
does superabound, Romans 3. 24. and in all, the glory of his immutable counsels
and decrees, which no length of time, wickedness and unfaithfulness of man,
power and policy of Satan, cords of death, depth of the grave and hell can
hinder from taking full effect and accomplishment.

The sum is this; sin is sin: the Law is the Law; God is God; the persons
to be saved as miserable, vile, filthy and guilty as any: and yet Gods mercy
magnified, Christ's grace exalted, the sinner saved, and while saved, not left
carnal; but all that is done for him, has its holy and blessed work in him.

These things premised, consider now the six particulars expressed by the
Apostle, and then you will see here omnimodas salutes, all sorts of salvations,
salvation from sin, the curse of the Law, death, the grave, and the wrath to
come, salvation of the soul, and of the body, salvation eternal, salvation to
the uttermost, salvation full, and attaining its end.

CHAP. IV.
Contains the fullness of salvation by Jesus Christ, expressed by the
Apostle, in the person who is the first efficient cause; he that provides this
salvation, which is, God, even God the Father.

SECT. 1.
THe first truth the Apostle fixes us upon 2. By six truths expressed, as 1.
God is he that provides this salvation.
expressly, demonstrating the fullness of salvation for sinners to be had in
Jesus Christ, is this.

God is the first mover; the primary efficient of the wonderful work of saving
a sinner, [God sent his own Son.]

Here begins the excellency and fullness of salvation for sinners through Jesus
Christ, that it is God that provides it. Isa. 43. 13.
If he work, who shall let it? what God does, is for ever; what God does, is
done Eccles. 3. 14.
indeed; his work is perfect: nothing can be put to it, nor can any thing be
taken from it: upon this word, GOD, must we must put our accent, it is written
with emphasis, as the Apostle in ver. 33. of this Chapter fastens us upon this
thought, saying; it is GOD that justifies; so here, GOD sending his Son,
condemned sin; this then is of high and serious thought.

What has this of consideration in it? and what conclusions flow from hence?
dwell awhile on these two.

(1.) What matter of due and high What matter of highest conside^^tion is in
this; seven fold. Ps. 83. 18. Rev. 1. 4, 8 Exodus 3. 14
consideration is there in this, that GOD is the worker here? this word GOD
carries our thoughts,

1. To the true God, Jehovah, the one only God, whose name alone is J^hovah,
the force of which name is delivered thus in the New Testament, which is, which
was, which is to come; who is, I am, that I ^m; who has his being of himself,
and gives to all things their being, who gives a being to all his words which
he speaks, and to his gracious promises in their season, so that no tittle of
1 King. 18. 39.
them shall fall to the ground; this Jehovah he is the God, he is the God. All
other whom men call God, are not God by nature, they are but either the
creatures, or the inventions of their own brains, the work of their own hands:
they are Idols, and an Idol is nothing in the world, it has no deity at all,
and therefore as such, 1 Cor. 8. 4, 5.
it has no being at all; and having no being, it can do neither good nor evil,
it is profitable and good for nothing. God Jehovah, he who is, and none besides
him, he gives this Savior, and therefore his who are taken into this Covenant
of Mal. 3. 6.
salvation, are not consumed, nor can ever perish.

2. To God as the Majesty offended, as he against whom all our sins are: who
might have glorified in his justice upon the sinner; but mercies to
forgiveness and to eternal life do please him. Who can of right remit, because
the wrong is against him, against him only; if he acquit and justify, who can
lay any thing to their charge? if he be for the sinner, Psalm. 51. 2. Rom 8. 33,
31.
who can be against him?

3. To God as clothed with all his Attributes, with all his Essential glory.
In this salvation through the Lord Jesus Christ, look upon his Almightinesse,
or All Sufficiency; he comes forth and says to his poor cteature, the sinner
whom Genesis 17. 1.
he calls, I am God Almighty, I am God All-sufficient, to me nothing is hard,
nothing impossible; have me and thou have enough, thou have all, thou need
not go out to any other, nor be to seek, and at a loss for any thing, or in
any estate; look upon his Infinity or Infiniteness, the Alpha and Omega, who
has Phil. 1. 6.
begun and will perfect his work. Behold his Eternity, is he not from
everlasting Hab. 1. 12.
the Lord their God, the^r holy one? they shall not dye. All the greatest
enemies, the mighty Lord God has ordained and established but for the
correction of his people. Behold his Unchangeableness; Heb 6. 17. Numb. 23.
19, 20.
the immutable God is willing here to show unto the heirs of promise, the
immutability of his Counsel by interposing himself by an oath; he will not
repent of this his Word: and no conjuration can reverse it; hear what he says,
I will ransom them from the power of the grave, I will redeem them from death;
O death, I will be thy plagues: O grave, I will be thy destruction: Repentance
shall be hid from Isa. 64. 5.
mine eyes; this unchangablenesse causes continuance in his saving ways when
his people raise his wrath against them, and they ought to say thereupon, we
shall be Jer. 31. 20.
saved; this unchangeablenesse shines in the sounding of his bowels toward
them repenting: and though their provocations are such as would weary and tire
out Hos. 11. 8, 9.
any created patience, yet he is God, and not man; the thoughts of giving them
up, turn his heart within, and his immutable counsel makes his repentings to be
kindled together: so far is repentance from God; his gifts and calling are
without repentance. Romans 11. 29. Mat. 3. 17. and 17. 5. Zeph. 3. 17 Tit. 1. 2.
Isa. 54. 9, 10. Jer. 31. 35, 36. Psalm. 89. 33, 34, 35. Isa. 47. 4. Isa. 57. 15.
In this his beloved Son he is for ever well-pleased; he rests in his love.
Behold his truth, God who cannot lie has promised eternal life; and his
faithfulness, he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. This Covenant is as the
waters of Noah unto God; more stable than the Mountains and Hills; as sure as
the Ordinances set with the heavens: Gods holiness is here pawned; in this
redemption it is most gloriously manifested. Consider his holiness, who only
is holy, and therewith his height and loftiness, and never the like
manifestations of lower condescensions then in this work of saving the poor
humble sinner; he is the holy one of Israel; never the like manifestation of
holi^esse as in this work, though God be holy in all his works, and of purer
eyes than to behold iniquity with any liking; here the glory of his wisdom is
Romans 16. 27.
illustrious, the only wise found out this way: no Angel of light, none of the
1 Cor. 2. 7.
wise of the world could ever have thought of it. It is the hid wisdom of God,
wisdom in a mystery; the contrivance is such, that when it is made known, all
the Ephesians. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 12 Ephesians. 1. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 19. 1 Cor. 3.
19. Isa. 44. 25, 26.
holy Angels admire it as the manifold wisdom of God, and are never enough
satisfied in the delightful viewi^g of it, and prying into it; the whole
business is of deep mysterious wisdom; all is according to foreknowledge.
God knows them that are his; he cannot be deceived, none can go beyond him,
nothing can escape him; he takes the wise in their craftiness, and turns
them backwards, and makes diviners mad, but confirms the word and counsel of
his messengers to whom he gave the word of this salvation; he d^spenseth full
seasons, for making Ephesians. 1. 10.
known this mystery of his will in stupend ways of wisdom, he brings home his
chosen both of Jews and Gentiles through Romans 11. 32, 33.
investigable passages of Providence; he so calls and brings to glory, that
his foolishness is wiser than men, and by foolish 1 Cor. 1. 25, 27.
things he confounds the wise world: but above all, behold God here, gracious
and just, exactly, infinitely just, and yet mercy and grace exalted through
justice, and above justice.

This word (GOD) carries out or thoughts,

4. To God as the faithful Creator, the Maker of heaven and earth; of all
things visible and invisible, who has engaged all Isa. 42. 5, 6. and 41. 1, 2.
and 44. 24. and 45. 11, 12, 18.
his glory as he is the Creator, to fulfill this work of Redemption. And as he
lays all that his glory at the stake to assure it; so he lays out no less
efficiency in the performing of this salvation in every part of it, then what
was put forth in the Creation. Romans 4. 17. Ps. 51. 10. Isa. 57. 19.
He calls the things that are not, as if they were, he creates in them clean
hearts, he creates the fruits of the lips to be peace, and so you must conceive
of every piece of this salvation that appertains to the being or well-being and
comfort of the saved ones, all is done in the power of a Creation.

5. To God his absolute Sovereignty, and Royal Dominion; who makes all for his
own wills sake, who is not bound to give account to any of any of his matters;
who is not bound to any, who has mercy because he will have mercy; who, as the
Potter, has power over us his clay, and makes some vessels to honor, when for
his own glory he might make all unto dishonor; who makes one to honor and
another to dishonor, when he might show his power in annihilating, as well as
his skill in making; or if he will show his skill, might show it in fashioning
it another way to other uses; or if he will show his skill in such salvation,
might show it upon one, or on a few, or upon those whom he passes by, and not
on us. In this work his Sovereignty is full of Regality, God is Lord and King;
here Majesty and Righteousness shine in splendour. The 2 Timothy 6.
blessed and only Potentate, Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, will in his time
show his Christ; his will is with perfect justice, and his justice to the
utmost showed to set off and make his mercy upon the vessels of mercy more
Renowned. And his Dominion is mighty, holy, wise, good, and reaching to every
thing and action of all his creatures, to bring about his intended salvation.

6. To Gods eternal good pleasure within Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6.
himself; doing the whole work according to the counsel of his own will to the
praise of the glory of his grace.

7. For this word GOD carries our minds to God the Father; God sent his own
Son, he has a Son whom he sends, therefore he is a Father, this God is God
the Father. God must here be thought on, as he is the God and Father of Jesus
Christ; in this glorious manifestation of himself is God to be beheld in this
work of Redemption, as he is the Father of his own, only, eternally begotten
Son, his beloved in whom he is well-pleased, and not only as the Fountain of
being; he is to be beheld in his love and goodness, not that of a Creator, but
that love of a Father, of the Father of his only begotten Son, the Son of his
love, the Son of his bosom, the eternal delights of the eternal Father.

SECT. 2.
(2.) What conclusions do issue from What conclusions flow from this; ten.
hence? is God the Author of this salvation, then it follows,

1. Here is love, as the Apostle says, 1 John 4. 10. Not that we loved God,
but that he loved us and sent his Son, etc. God first loved us, here is love
1 John 4. 10, 9, 19. Joh. 3. 16. 1 John 4. 11 Ver. 19.
that is first, love manifested, love so, as cannot be paralleld, ma^chless
love, love that is the perfect sampler of love, love that is the fountain and
former of all true love: we love him because he first loved us. The Laws voice
to man is, Thou shall love God above all, and thy neighbor as thy self. The
Gospels voice The voice of the Law, and of the Gospel differ.
is to man hateful and hating, God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life. The Gospel excells the Law, as much as Gods love excells
man's; it superexcells, for it declares and proclaims Gods love to man void of
the love to God which the Law commands.

2. God is love; to us in this way of 1 John 4. 16
manifestation all love: out of this way it is a terrible sight to look on God,
on sin, death, the grave and hell; upon the Law, on any misery or affliction,
on the judgment to come: but in this way nothing so delightful as the presence
of God, and the light of his countenance gives peace and joy, against which is
no Law, and which no death nor guilt of sin can destroy. The Law is delightful,
death desirable, and sin it self made humbling and profitable, because now
hateful and abominable to us, by how much the more we believe and know that
thus God is love.

3. All here is kid until God reveal: All here is mysterious, 1 Cor. 2. 7. All
James 1. 17, 18.
is heavenly, all from above, from above Creation, from God under another
notion 1 Cor. 2. 12, 14.
then as a Creator. The animal or natural man cannot receive these things when
told him, cannot find them out, till they be told him; but the spiritual only,
who has received the Spirit of God, and not the spirit which is of the world.
Nothing suits with these things of the Gospel, but what is from above, the born
from above can alone close with these things. They are too high for the
unregenerate man who is the fool under the power of folly, and values them as
the Swine does Pearls. A double revelation of the Spirit is absolutely
necessary to the discerning of the things of this salvation; the one of the
Holy Ghost inspiring the Prophets and Apostles to preach and write them; the
other, of the same Holy Ghost as he is the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation
inlightning the eyes of our understandings to know them, when in and by the
Word they are declared to us, 1 Cor. 2. 10. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18.

4. Here is truth of salvation, and here is strength of salvation; truth of
salvation: for God is the rock, his work is perfect, all his ways are
judgment. A God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he, Deuteronomy. 32.
4. And strength of salvation; when he gives quietness, who then can make
trouble? and when he hides his face, who then can behold him? whether it be
done against a Nation, or against a man only, Job 34. 29.

5. Here is satisfaction and assurance to the soul; satisfaction, for the Lord
laid on his Son our iniquities: the Lord bruised him, God gave his Son;
nothing can satisfy the awakened soul, nothing can set down the doubting soul,
but God who is above the soul, and above the Law, above sin and Satan. And
assurance is here, it is no venture, but a state in which we may glory, to cast
our selves on God; we Ps. 62. 7. and 56. 10. Romans 8. 31, 33, 36.
may say every one for himself; in God is my glory, in God will I praise his
Word, in God we are more than Conquerors.

6. Here is irreversiblenesse; God cannot lie, God cannot deny himself, God is
not as man that he should repent, he has blessed, and who shall curse? Tit. 1.
2. Numb. 23. 8, 19. His gifts and calling are without repentance, he will never
repent of them, Romans 11. 29.

7. God is in Christ; in Christ and in him alone is God reconciling the world
to 2 Cor. 5. 19.
himself; he is not nor can be found in the whole work of Creation, reconciling
a sinner, and not imputing trespasses; no science of the nature of the
creatures, no knowledge of the connection, and rational mutual chaining of the
several creatures in this whole globe, as so many parts of the universe, having
dependence one upon another, and influence into each other by way of cause and
effect; no knowledge of the Deity that made all, and rules all; no principles
and seeds of virtue and righteousness there learned and thence gathered by all
the strength of the principles of reason and light in man, and improved to the
utmost for the framing of thoughts, desires, gestures, words and deeds; none of
these, nor all these, nor whatever other manifestations of the infinite,
invisible, eternal Godhead, as the invisible world of Angelical spirits, be
they Thrones, Dominions, Principalities or Powers, none, none of them have God
in them reconciling a sinful man to himself, not imputing trespasses. In none
of these, nor in all these laid together has God set forth a ransom for a
sinner, a price of a redemption for a soul that has sinned, a sacrifice and
sin-offering; or himself appeased, propitious, and merciful, forgiving sins,
and receiving the sinner into his favor: or any of them set forth as a
propitiation, or in them as on a mercy seat, as upon a throne of grace; no, no,
but God is in Christ, merciful, reconciling, pardoning, accepting into a state
of grace and favor: Christ Jesus God has set forth a ransom, a price of
redemption, a sin-offering, and a propitiation for our sins; Christ is the Lamb
of God; God has provided the Lamb for sacrifice: as Abraham answered his son
Genesis 22. 7, 8.
Isaac, who said to him, My Father, behold the fire and the wood; but where is
the Lamb for a burnt-offering? to whom Abraham said, My son, God will provide
himself a Lamb for a burnt-offering. Behold, the Lamb of God, as John the
Baptist Joh. 1. 29.
cried.

8. All things are of God, 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18. that is, all things in the
regeneration, in the Kingdom of Christ, in the business of Redemption, in the
Church of Christ as it is his Church; are of God; of God, not in the way and
the putting forth of his power, and the manifestation of his glory as he is the
faithful Creator, but they are of God as he is the God and Father of Jesus
Christ o^r Lord, as he is pleased to set forth himself, his power and glory in
the way of Redemption: here they are all of God, and nothing of Angels or Men,
or of any other whatsoever. Whatever is not of God in this work, but of men or
any other, is altogether disagreeable, to be rejected, unprofitable, and shall
be rooted out.

9. Here we see, it makes nothing at all, neither is it a pin to choose, what,
or which of the twain befall us; to be blessed of the world, or to be cursed:
to be blessed of evil Ministers, of Balaams, or to be cursed; to bless our
selves, or to have misgiving thoughts of our selves. We stand or fall to God,
and not to man, or to our selves: Hark what God says of thee and to thee, and
not what man, or thine own heart says, as David said of old, I will hear what
God the Lord Psalm. 85. 8.
will speak.

10. Here we see, believing is the work that God would have of us. He finds
out in his own wisdom, of his love and good pleasure within himself, all that
concerns this work, it is the mystery of his will, his bosom secret and
counsel; Ephesians. 1. 10.
his Spirit must reveal and tell it, if he speak not, if he give not out his
Word, none can dive into it; now then he testifyeth, and we are to receive his
testimony, and to believe his Word; he that believes, sets to his seal that
God (who speaks) is true, John 3. 33. He that believes not, makes God a
liar, 1 John 5. 10. Because he receives not his testimony or witness; he that
receives Christ Jesus, receives God that sent him: he that rejects Christ,
rejects God. All respect or neglect in this great business, runs up so high
as to God himself.

SECT. 3.
The use of this point is to call upon us to entertain these thoughts, digest
this The use hereof:
truth, and it will work, warm it and rub it in by meditation, and it will
enter into thy soul. First, believe this truth in the general, that GOD does
thus tender the everlasting salvation of poor sinners, great sinners: and then
bring it home unto thy self, that GOD offers life to thee a sinner: Dwell
awhile on these; if we lay away the principles of sound doctrine, and care not
to know them: if we stick in an overlie knowledge, and do not believe them with
the heart, receiving them as the saving truths revealed by the Spirit of God,
and testified to the children of men, as Gods own Record and Testimony, there
is no talking of the application of faith upon them to our own souls.

Quest. But some may say, how may one know that he has apprehended aright this
truth, that it is GOD that has provided the way of salvation?

Answ. In general thus; if rightly apprehended, then every word of this
salvation will come to the soul, as the Word of God; not as the word of a man,
though never so worthy credit; not as the word of a King, yet power goes with
the word of a King; not as the word of an Angel, it is more than so, when it
comes to thy heart as the Word of God. It 1 These. 2. 13.
will come to thee in the power of God, in divine life and strength; it will
work effectually in thee: Gods Word-runneth very swiftly, he commands, and
the thing is done. Again, it will come to thy soul as the good Word of God, the
Word, and Message in which thy good, thy everlasting good does lie; to such a r
These. 1.
heart the Gospel comes in much assurance, and in the joy of the Holy Ghost:
the Gospel now stands to thee as an undoubted, unmovable truth, now it is the
best news that ever came into the world, the glad tidings of great joy; the
only light and life of thy heart.

In special, attend that God the Lord is the first and principal Agent or
Worker here.

1. It lays down in the heart of a sinner, a possibility of his salvation.
That which to the Law, to man whiles he stands to the Law, is impossible that
GOD will yet do it, it becomes very possible, with God all things are possible;
say to thy self before the Lord, it is possible that such a sinner as I am, or
as thou art may be saved; for GOD sends a Savior for sinners; you, this
lays down a possibility above all difficulties; the difficulties are great,
our innumerable sins, the bortomlesse depth of the deceitfulness and the
desperateness of the wickedness of our hearts, the impenitency of an hard
heart that cannot repent, the death in s^n and trespasses, the alienations,
withdrawings and gain-sayings of an heart that cannot believe; the cursed
barrenness in the heart and life of all grace and good fruit; the defilement
and contagion of sin as a leprofie, and as the plague of pestilence; the
guilt and condemning power of sin; the distance and separation; yea, the
enmity between God and man which sin has made: the great enemies; such are,
the Law, the Curse, Mortality, Death, the Grave, Hell, Satan, Tentations,
Persecutions; the world with all its lusts and errors; the body of sin,
called the body of this death; (Romans 7. 24.) the Backslidings and Apostasies
which we are subject unto; Satan's strong holds within in false principles, high
thoughts, and devised devotions, depths, carnal reasonings, foolish and
snarling objections: besides, the wisdom of a conceited, the pride of a
presuming, and the dejections of a despairing heart. If these Armies of
difficulties, and of impossibilities to created means should beset thee, yet
that GOD should reveal himself in a saving way, stays the heart, and renders
all of them Conquerable.

2. It awakens, it shakes the careless soul, and fills with trembling. It
says with Jacob, God is here, in this Word of the Gospel, and I was not aware;
little thought I of such a presence in this contemned Word.

3. It lays a basis, a foundation unmovable thus; we have him to believe on,
who supports Heaven and Earth, who is the Rock of Ages.

4. It sets another face on God, and on all things. God is in Christ
reconciling the world; God at peace, and all things become full of peace.
Behold, all is new, there is now a new face of 2 Cor. 5. 18.
things. In this light we see light, and have life; there is a blessing in all;
through Gods blessing the worst and most deadly are not only harmless, but
medicinal and helpful, the heart begins to live, at this presence a heavenly
calm passes, bespreadeth and dwells upon the soul. Tranq^illus Deus
tranquillat omnia.

5. It heals the heart of hard thoughts of God, and of alienations from God;
then I perceive says the soul, the holy God will yet look after me.

6. It sets the heart on God: is there hope yet for such a one as I am? surely
it is good for me to draw near to God.

7. It prevents and allayes the overmuch grief for sin, or for afflictions
and miseries, our own, or the Churches; overmuch in both is hurtful to our
souls, dishonorable to God, scandalous to men; this delivers, I even, I am he
that comfort you, says the Lord, Isa. 49. 14, 15. I blot out your
transgessions, Isa. 43. 25.

8. It makes to cry to God out of the depth of our hellish filth and guilt,
Psalm 130. 1. It boiles up the spirit to fervency in Prayer.

9. It puts an Awful, Reverential, Uniting fear into the soul, Psalm 130. 3.
There is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.

10. It enclines the soul to believe, hope, wait, and love, Psalm 130. 4, 5.

11. It comfort with comforrs rational and real; from grounds in God, from
the presence of God, 2 Cor. 6. 17. I will dwell in them, I will walk in them,
I will be their GOD, and they shall be my People.

12. It devotes, it assures, it raises to Triumph. What shall we say to these
things! If GOD be for Romans 8. 31. Ephesians. 1. 3. 1 Pet. 1. 3.
us, who can be against us. What shall separate us from the love of GOD; it
fills with praise, and with gloryings, and humble boastings in God. This GOD is
our GOD; GOD is become my salvation.

Thus of the person who is the first mover in the great work of a sinners
salvation.

CHAP. V.
Treats of the fullness of the salvation of a sinner, in the person who
undertakes to work it out, even Gods own Son.

SECT. 1.
THe Person that undertaketh to work out the salvation of a sinner, 2. Gods own
Son undertaketh to work out the salvation of a sinner; who he is. Gal. 4. 8.
Heb. 1. 3. Romans 8. 32 1 John 4. 9. Joh. 3. 16. Rev. 1. 8. and 22. 13.
is Gods own Son. The Apostle is express, God sent his own Son, his Son by
nature; taking the word nature, in that sense in which the Apostle takes it,
when he says of Idols, they by nature are no gods. His own Son, distinguished
from all other, and dear unto the Father, the express Image of the Fathers
person. He spared not his own Son, his only begotten Son, who was not made,
nor created, but begotten, the eternal Son of God: who of his grace assumed and
took to him a true humane body and soul, of the seed of the Virgin Mary, and
united it to his person, even this person the Son of the Father; this person,
the own, only begotten Son of God the Father, is he whom God sent: he who is
by grace of personal union, and by conception of the Holy Ghost as he is man
(the man Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Mary) the Son of God also. But this
Sonship (if it may be so called) is of grace, not of nature, and not the thing
intended here: and because the humane nature of the Son of God, is of Adam,
though not by Adam, he is also in that respect the Son of God Luke 3. 38.
by Creation. But when it is said here expressly, God sent his own Son; this
notes out the person, who is the Son of God by nature, who that he might
perform the work of salvation, did take to him that humane nature, a creature
of God, and did unite, support and Individuate it of his grace by his own
person, inseparably and for ever. The glory of this act is unconceivable, but
that belongs to the work of salvation, and is not of consideration in this
saying. He is called the Son of his self, (...), because he is Gods Son, not by
grace, neither of personal union, as the humane nature of Christ his Son: not
of Creation, as Angels, Adam and all men are Sons of God: nor of Mal. 2. 10.
Communication of beams of Dominion, as Magistrates are Sons of God. Nor of
Psalm. 82. 5. Ephe. 1. 6. Joh. 1. 11.
Adoption, or of regeneration, as are all the Elect believers. No, he is one
greater than all these, Gods own Son: This is the undertaker of our salvation.
And this is the second Medium, which produces that grand conclusion before
delivered; A demonstration thereof, Divine, and Apostolical, that is, that the
salvation by Christ is full and absolute: the Alsufficiency of our salvation
appears abundantly Joh. 6. 96. Mat. 16. 16 1 John 5. 7, 9, 10.
in the person that undertakes the work, the Son of the living God. This is a
doctrine of faith of necessity to be believed. Gods own Son, see here his
glory, and from thence the alsufficiency of our salvation.

SECT. 2.
Behold his Glory: for, His glory.


1. He is of the same essence and nature with the Father, the brightness of
his Fathers Heb. 1. 3. 5
glory, the express Image of his person. This honor and excellency is above
all Angels, he is very God of very God, as the Nicene Creed has it, (...), of
the same substance with God the Father, not, (...), of a like substance, but
the very same: not of another substance, (...); not of unlike substance, (...):
not of the same kind of substance, not of the same species, (...)* but he is
(...) of that very essence, coessential: as the Creed of Athanasius has it.
The Godhead of the Father and of the Son is one. In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and Joh. 1. 1. 1 John 5. 20 Phil. 2. 6.
the Word was God; and therefore being true God, he is Coequal with the
Father, and it is no robbery at all. He is God of himself, (...)* though he be
not Son of himself, (...), but Son of the Father; he is life of himself, (...)*
he is righteousness it self (...). There is also between him and the Father a
mutual Joh. 14. 11. Joh. 8. 58.
In-being (the Greek fathers call it (...)) the Father is in him, and he is in
the Father.

He is Eternal, before Abraham was says he, I am; He is Alpha and Omega, the
first and the last. And this his eternity is the foundation of his eternal
Kingdom, of whom it is said, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever. And
again, Heb. 1. 8. Heb. 1. 10, 11, 12.
Thou, Lord; in the beginning have laid the foundation of the earth, and the
heavens are the works of thine hands: they shall perish, but thou remainest,
thou art the same.

He is Omniscient, he knows all things; Joh. 2. 24. and 1. 47, 48, 49. Rev. 2.
23.
all men, all that is in man: neither needs he that any one should testify of
man, for he knows what is in man, all their reasonings, all their thoughts,
all their ways. He searches the heart and reins.

He is Omnipresent, he is in every place. Lo, says he, I am with you to the
end of Mat. 28. 20
the world. His presence everywhere is that which gives the ground of the
promise of his gracious presence with all his Ministers in all their
Ministerial performances, in all ages and places to the worlds end.

He is Omnipotent. Whatever the Father Joh. 5. 19.
does, that does the Son likewise.

He is the Creator of all things, visible Joh. 1. 2.
and invisible. In him all things consist.

He is the Vpholder of all, by his mighty Word of Command. Col. 1. 16.


He changes all things at his pleasure. Heb. 1. 12. Heb. 1. 3.


To him is due from men and Angels, Divine honor and worship, and Faith. Heb.
1. 6. Joh. 14. 1. Psalm. 2. 12.
In him we should believe, him we should kiss and do homage unto. He is God
Romans 9. 5. Tit. ^. 13.
blessed for ever, the great God our Saviur.

2. He is aeternally and only begotten. Joh. 1. 1. Pro. 8. 22. Col. 1. 13. Mat.
17. 5. Joh. 1. 18.
The word, the wisdom of God, and therefore he is the Son of Gods love, the
eternal delights of the eternal Father, In whom he is well-pleased. He that is
in the bosom of the Father ((...)) and now he is neither lesser, nor lower in
the favor of his Father, because he has stooped so low as to become flesh,
and to be the Messiah.

SECT. 3.
2. From his truth, behold the alsufficiency The Alsufficiency of salvation by
him in five things. 1 John 5. ^1 and 4. 9.
of the salvation of Gods people: for,

1. In this Son is our eternal life placed. This is the Record, the sum of
Gods Testimony witnessed in the Bible, that God has given to us eternal life:
and this life is in his Son. God sent his only begotten Son into the world
that we might live through him. In this Son, the beloved, Pro. 8. 30. Mat. 3.
17.
the Son of his bosom, his eternal delights, God the Father does rest
well-pleased for ever.

2. This assure the absolute sufficiency of Christ Jesus for his Office, he is
the Mediator who is the Son of God. The Son is the Prophet, he declares the
Father, Joh. 1. 18. Joh. 3. 32. and 6. 68, 96 Joh. 5. 25, 28. Heb. 1. 8. Joh.
1. 49. and 10, 30.
he testifies what he has seen and heard, he has the words of eternal life,
his voice raises the dead, the dead spiritually, out of their sins; the dead
Corporally, out of their graves. The Son is the King, greater than all, who
has all Sovereignty, authority and power.

The Son is the Priest, who is consecr^^ed Heb. 4. 14. and 7. 28.
for ever more, who has the heart and ear of the Father always.

3. This puts a value and worth of infinite price upon all that he has done,
or 1 John 1. 7.
does for us now in heaven; into his sufferings, and into his intercession. The
blood of Gods Son cler^seth us from all sin; the Son is consecrated for
evermore.

4. He can do all that we stand in need Joh. 1. 51. and 3. 13.
of, because he is the Son of God. He can create the heart anew, and give the
Holy Ghost. He baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. He opens heaven,
and brings in the Angels-service that they may minister unto us. He sees the
truth of grace in our hearts. He knows the workings, beatings, and breathings
of our Joh. 1. 47, 48. and 10. 28, 29, 30. Joh. 5. 26, 28. Heb. 12. 16 23. Psa.
89. 27. Jer. 31. 8. Exodus 4. 22 Psa 89. 19.
spirits: and all our secret duties; the guilelesse spirited Nathanaels, their
most retired meditations and prayers under the fig tree. He gives the power or
privilege to be Sons of God; he makes free indeed; he gives life to whom he
will; he preserves the life spiritual given, and gives eternal life; he
fetches out of the graves; he makes us a Congregation of Gods firstborn. God
has laid help for us upon one that is mighty.

5. There is no danger to adventure Jer. 17. 7. Joh. 3. 16. 36. Joh. 14. 9.
here. No fear of that curse, Cursed be the man that trusts in man, for
Jesus Christ is the Lord Jehovah. It is no fault to believe on him, to worship,
to serve, to call upon, to obey him. There is no perishing to a believer. There
is nothing but wrath to him that believes not on him. Here is the only way to
see the Father.

SECT. 4.
For the Application and Use, Improve it The Use.
thus.
1. By this Doctrine Inform thy self: 1. Of Information.
First, of the excellency of the word of Scripture which reveals this truth,
and especially of the glory of the New Testament, which is the Gospel of the
Son of God. Secondly, of the honor conferred on sinful men, called to the
faith of Jesus Christ, they are called to fellowship with the Son of God.
Thirdly, 1 Cor. 1. 9.
of the faithfulness of God in the ways of his free and saving grace; he
failed not to send his own Son into the world according to his promise: We
may trust him to make good all that he has spoken; the heaven of heavens, and
blessed life, and immortality there is not too much, nor too good for
believers. It is not so good as his own Son.

2. Be persuaded to dwell upon these 2. Of Exhortation. Ephesians. 4. 13. Gal. 2.
20.
meditations, until thy heart be winned and persuaded, first, to believe in
the Son of God; secondly, to seek growth in the knowledge of the Son of
God; and then thirdly, to live by faith of the Son of God; and fourthly, to
digest this truth in the power of it, that thou may triumph over all.
Brethren, beloved, look above all to this faith, that Joh. 20. 31 1 John 5. 12.
you may receive and have the Son in you, and that you may know you have him.
Let there be the hearing of faith, the Confession of faith, the emptyings of
faith to reject all for him, to forget all for him; the application of faith;
that makes us apply our selves to him, to draw near to the saving of the soul,
and not to Mark this distination of the applying act of faith
draw back; that applies him to our selves in desires of the hungry and
thirsty, and in high prizings of the poor in spirit, and in the repo^e of the
weary and laden, and in the breathings and aspirings of the lowly, and in the
waitings of those that know no other door of mercy, till we come to the
applications of comfortable persuasions, the obedience of faith, the betrothed
Mat. 22. 12
love which faith works, and the wedding garment of all Gospel-dresse that
may become the Espousals of such a Bridegroom.

3. And why should we not delight our 3. Of Consolation. Isa. 8. 9, 10 and 9,
5, 6. Psa. 2. 1, 2, 5, 6. 1 John 5. 5.
souls in this glorious principle of Christian Religion, which leads us unto
the holy One, the mighty One of Israel? for here we see, and from hence we
meditate and threaten terror to the associations of all enemies: We carry
victories over the world's lusts and lies, errors and terrors, vanities and
violence: We know the advancing and amplitude of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ:
We are confirmed Psa. 2. 6, 8. To. 8. 32. Heb. 2. 2, 3 and 12. 25, 26. and 10.
29. Joh. ^7. 26 1 John 4. 9. Romans 8. 31. 32, 39.
in the stability of all the promises, and in the greatness of the sin and
misery of all the disobedient and contemners of the Gospel: We have the love of
God manifested, the love wherewith he loves his own Son reaching and clasping
us; A love that cannot but freely give us all things, a love that assures God
is for us, a love from which nothing can separate us.

CHAP. VII.
Treats of the fullness of salvation manifested in the way God takes to save
sinners by his Son.

SECT. 1.
3. THe third truth demonstrating the 3. The way God took to condemn sin in the
flesh of his Son, and so to take it away, provs the salvation full.
perfect fullness of salvation by Jesus Christ, comes now under consideration,
which is from the way and course God in his good pleasure took and held in
saving sinners by his Son. This is held out in these words [Sending his own
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the
flesh] which contain this doctrine: The way God took to save a sinner by
Christ, is a sweet and sound demonstration of the alsufficiency of the
salvation in Christ Jesus, and the way was this, to condemn sin in the flesh
of his Son whom he sent in the flesh, and that of purpose to take away sin.

Two things are to be unfolded here, 1. The way which God takes. 2. The
effectualness of that way.

1. The way of God is this, while he saves the sinner, he will condeme his sin
to the low ^ Hell, and lower by far; and that in the very same nature that
has sinned, even in humane flesh. That this may be done, he sets out his own
Son to be made flesh: he sends him in the simil^tude of sinful flesh, in a
true humane soul and body, such as sin had made frail, miserable, and mortal;
such a one as ours is. He thus sends him for sin, that he may bear all their
sins charged on him. And then in this flesh of his own Son, their sins shall
be condemned; the Son of God condemned for their sin, and so in that
condemnation, sin for ever condemned; for this end he sends him as one that
has taken upon him the Office of a Savior, by mediation, by suretiship, and
by redemption, and as he whom God had designed to this office.

Consider every step in this way: they are Five steps in this way of God. 1 His
Sons preordination. 1 Pet. 1. 20. Ephesians. 1. 9
five, the first step is,

1. Gods preordination of the Son to be the Mediator, that he in our nature
should execute the office of a Mediator, of Priest, Prophet, and King, in a
state of humiliation. This preordination is Gods eternal foreknowledge,
counsel, purpose and decree out of his infinite good pleasure within himself,
appointing his Son to be the Christ to bring the Elect to glory. Christ Jesus
as God-man is the means of election to be executed, he is the cause of our
salvation, but not of our election. In this preordination there was a Council
held between the Father, the Son, and the holy Spirit. In this council all that
concerns man's salvation was determined, Act. 2. 23. and 4. 28. The Son is set
out, and by a free voluntary dispensation, he yields to be ordained and
appointed, Romans 3. 25. And with him an Agreement is made, that he should give
his soul an offering for sin; and then, according to promise in that
agreement, he should see the fruit of that his travel of soul to his own hearts
full satisfaction. Isa. 53. 10. All that ever shall be saved were given to him
before all worlds. John 10. 29. and 17. 6, 9, and 6. 37, 39. Life eternal is
promised before the worlds, ((...),) grace, that Tit. 1. 2. 2 Timothy 1. 10.
is, free love and favor with the effects of it, was given the Elect in
Christ, before the world began. A book of all is written; the Records, the most
High's Parliament Rev. 20. 15 and 21. 27. and 13. 8.
Roles, called the book of life, the Lambs book of life. And accordingly, he,
before he was sent, was Preached in Genesis 3. 15. promised to Abraham, in Genesis
22. 18. and to David, in Psalm. 132. was prophesied of Isa. 7. 4. and 9. 6, 7.
and 53. Jer. 23. 5.
, was Typified in the Tabernacle and the Ark of the Covenant* Heb. 9. and in
Melchizedech, Heb. 7. 3. was seen in fore-shewes in a humane shape, in which of
old he appeared frequently to the Fathers, as the holy Angels also used to do.

2. Gods mission of his Son is the second 2. His mission.
step of this way of God, The work thus; 1. The Father and the holy Ghost do
send, and the Son voluntarily condescends to be sent. All stoops, nothing too
dear for the salvation of a sinner. The Son is brought in speaking thus, I
have not spoken in secret from the beginning, from the Isa. 48. 16. A clear
old Testament proof of the Trinity Joh. 7. 28, 29.
time that it was, there am I, and now the Lord God and his Spirit has sent
me. 2. The Son came not of himself: he took nothing on him of his own head
apart from the Father, in the whole business of Redemption. 3. The Father gave
him out of his bosom, he sent him on this great errand, he parted with him,
spared him not, but he delivered him up. 4. He sent him in his Incarnation, in
the fullness of time, (but of this Act in the next step.) 5. He sent him into
the world, into this miserable, vain, sinful place: he dwelt among men, and was
found in fashion as a man; he sent him not Isa. 61. 1.
to delight and glory in the world. 6. He sent him furnished with gifts; he
sanctified him, separated him from all other, as Joh. 10. 36. Joh. 5. 3^. and
9. 4.
only able and fit for such a work as to save the world, and filled him with
the Spirit, not by measure, as he is man; and having thus sanctified him, he
sent him. 7. He sent him, and gave him work to do and finish, and set him a
day, a season to do Joh. 7. 6. 8 and 8. 28. and 12. 49. and 14. 24. Joh. 17. 1,
4.
it in; he neither did nor spoke of himself, but as the Father which sent him,
gave him Commandment what he should say, and what he should speak; he did
nothing of himself, he does what he sees the Father do, and spoke what he
heard and learned of his father; he did all in the very hour of the allotted
day, and finished his work in the hour of the day set him; the work some of it
was none of the easiest or fairest work: he was not only to preach the doctrine
of the Kingdom, and to confirm it by Miracles, to keep the law, and to fulfill
all righteousness; but to be a pattern, in doing and suffering, yea, to be a
Ransom, a Price, a Sacrifice* for sin, to suffer a cursed death, and to be
made sin, and a curse for us: and this Heb. 10. 8 9. ^oh. 3. 17. Act. 3. 26, 1 John 4. 9. 10. Joh. 8. 29. Joh. 16. 32
hard and foul work he delighted to perform. 8. He sent him not to condemn, but
to save the world, to bless his people, to be a propitiation, that in him we
might have life. 9. He sent him and was with him, he never left him alone,
because he does always those things that please his Father; he never did his
own will, or sought his own glory, but his glory who sent him; and when all his
Apostles left him alone and forsook him, then the Father was with him. 10. He
sent him with Commission; what was that? surely most worthy the perusing by us;
his Commission he opens and reads: it was this. 1. His Commission was and is,
to seek and to save that which was lost: 2. To dye and rise Luke 19. 10. Joh.
10. 28. Isa. 49. 6. Joh. 6. 39, 40.
again for his sheep: 3. To be the Covenant of the people of the Jews, and
raise them up, and to be salvation to the ends of the earth: 4. To see that no
believer perish, but that he raise every one of them to everlasting life at the
last day: and to give faith to all that the Father has given him, that the
given of the Father may come unto him: 5. To speak comfort to the weary soul:
6. To bruise and Isa. 50. 4. and 61, 1, 2, 3. Joh. 4. 34. and 5. 30. Psalm. 2.
8, 9. 3. His incarnation. Heb. 10. 5. Heb. 2. 16.
crush the enemies, and to rule all for the good of the Elect. A gracious
Commission.

3. The third step is his Sons incarnation; God sent his own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh. God fitted him a body; the Son of God assumed not
the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham; he assumed flesh, that is, a
true and very man consisting of an humane soul, and an humane body; he assumed
flesh and blood, not only a soul, the more noble part of man, but flesh, even
the beginning of our nature, growing from infancy Heb. 2. ^4. Mat. 2. and 1.
to perfection of age and stature, and not a full and perfect man grown, at his
full stature and ripe age when he first assumed our nature; flesh; weak, dying
flesh; he assumed into the unity of his person the similitude of sinful flesh,
the similitude of the flesh of sin; such flesh as sin has now made it to
be in us sinners; not sinful flesh; for he never knew sin, but such a soul
and body as ours is now by sin, and not such as Adams was in the state of
innocence: that had been great love and great condescension and abasement; but
how great humiliation to take part of the same flesh and blood of which we
consist? yet further, he took to him the likeness of sinful flesh in a low and
abject condition, having no form nor beauty; Phil. 2. 6, 7*
in the form of a servant, and not in the form of the rich, the honorable,
the potent; not in the form of a King, or of Gal. 4. 4.
a Monarch: he took flesh, made of a woman, made under the Law; he who was the
only Lawgiver, and might have been a Law to himself, is made of a woman; of
the seed of Abraham, as well as of Adam, a Jew, under the Law of Moses,
circumcised, and therefore a debtor to keep the whole Law, thus made under the
Law that he might redeem those that were under the Law.

See then the Son of God, the Word who was God is incarnate, God manifest in
the flesh, made flesh of the seed of woman, a Virgin, the Virgin Mary, by
conception, and by birth; by conception by the Holy Ghost, by his
over-shadowing power sanctifying and making her womb fruitful. In this
conception there was the plasmation and forming of the child Jesus; 2. The
assumption; 3. And the personal union of the humane nature of Jesus Christ. The
Son of God became flesh also by birth, born of a woman and brought forth into
the world. Although therefore he was sent in the similitude of sinful flesh,
true and very man in all things like one of us, yet he was without sin: there
was no sin in his conception, no sin in his birth, no sin in him all his
life.

4. The fourth step is the work allotted to him by his Father; he is sent not
only 4. His work appointed.
to dwell among men, which had been a great abasing business, though it had
been to dwell with the Saints on earth, but he must dwell among beastly men,
among fat Bulls of Bashan, and be with Mark 1. 13
men set on fire; he must be with the Beasts of the Wilderness, far from the
estate of man in Paradise: he is sent to fight with Devils; the sorrows of
death must take hold of him, and he must be compassed with the pains of hell.
And which is above and beyond all this, he must be numbered with transgressors,
and bear the sins of many, even of all the millions which shall be saved; he
that knew no sin, is sent to be made sin for them, and he to bear them,
imputed to him, laid on him, on his own body, as if he had been the sinner.

5. The fifth and last step in this way of 5. Condemnation of sin in his flesh.
God is this, The condemnation of sin in the flesh of Gods own Son. Now
this has four distinct things in it.

1. The Lord laid on him the iniquities Four things in that.
of all the Elect, Isa. 53. 1 Pet. 2.

2. Sin indefinitely is charged on him: sin in all its evil came upon him;
in its condemning power, even the curse due to sin by the Law of God. In its
defiling power, not defiling him, but the imputation of the foulness, and
defiling nature of sin came upon him; he was made sin. In its weakening
power, weaknesses not culpable, but miserable, weaknesses attending man's nature
since the fall, but not such as attend particular persons, took hold of him; he
was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief.

3. He who was the holy one and the just, was made the sinne-offering.

4. God condemned sin in his flesh; the Son of God bears our sins in his
own body on the Tree; for sin the Son is condemned and crucified being made a
curse for us; sin would have held down the sinner for ever in hell; there
sin has the mastery over the sinner, there it is alive in its full poison
and strength; but here sin is destroyed and utterly abolished, it is fully
and for ever taken away, and that in a legal and exact way of justice, the
sinner is saved, and sin condemned. This is the way, and the five steps in
this way of God coming to us to save us.

SECT. 2.
2. The effectualnesse and sufficiency of The effectualnesse of this way.
this way appears in two things principally.

First, In the fitness of Christ Jesus for the work; he is God to treat with
and satisfy God: and he is man to deal with man: he is the Son of Gods love
to make us sons, and place us in Gods love and favor, by whom we have access
into, and stand in his grace, accepted in the beloved; he is the image of the
Father, in whom we may see the Father, and who repaires the image of God in us,
and to whom we are to be conformed; he is the son of man, our brother, the
second Adam in whom we partake of all that is Job 19. 25
in him, our kins-man to whom the right to redeem does belong.

Secondly, In the sutablenesse of every thing to our distress; as for the
distress we were in, here we have, 1. Man the offender. 2. Sin the sting of
death. 3. Flesh, that is to say, man made by sin weak, miserable and mortal. 4.
Sinful flesh, flesh of sin, a body of death, a body of sin. 5. The Law, the
strength of sin. 6. The Laws weakness to deliver the sinner. 7. God
offended; these are the seven cords of man distress; answerably, here is 1.
The Son of God made man; and so man punished, sin punished in the nature
that sinned; as God is holy, he is an adversary to sin; as just, he punishes
sin; as true, his threatening before the fall could not be made void, it must
fall on man; for to man was the Law given, to man was death threatened, to man
as the first Adam, on man must the punishment light; now here is a man, an
Adam, the Son of God taking to him man's nature of Adam, though not by him
has somewhat to offer: and God through his Christ the second Adam, and through
him crucified, receives a sinner into favor, remains holy, just and true.
2. The Son of God made man sent for sin; so that here is in this Christ in
his low humiliation a propitiation, a mercy-seat; here is the Lamb of God in
whose flesh sin was damned; the sufferings due to sin he bears: GOD
suffers, the Son of God does all in the flesh; (for actions are of the
person) therefore here justice is satisfied, sin is taken away, and death is
unstinged. 3. In the flesh, the humane nature of the Son of God, sin is
condemned, and a perfect conformity to the Law in original and actual
righteousness is performed and brought in before the Lord, therefore here is
the sinner justified and healed, health and soundness restored by curing the
disease in the very cause, and the flesh is delivered and recovered thoroughly.
Here are the Priestly Robes, and the Royal change of raiment to cloth a poor
naked sinner withal 4. In this Jesus Christ, the flesh and sin are separated,
Adams sin and Adams nature divided, and man's nature made a Fountain of
holiness and life; wonderful, high and heavenly things. 5. Here is the Law
answered in the Comminations and in the Commandments by Christ's obedience
passive and active. 6. Here God by his Son does that in weak flesh, which the
eternal Law could not ever be able to do. 7. Here is ^od in Christ Jesus
reconciling the world to himself. God provides the Lamb, God condemns sin,
God prepares a righteousness, fulfilling the Laws righteousness; and if God
be thus for us, who can be against us? if God justify, who shall condemn?

SECT. 3.
For the use of this.
1. This precious truth in viteth us to behold again the love of God to man.
Here To invite to contemplation. 1 John 4. 9, 10. Tit. 3. 4. Ephesians. 2 4, 7. Ephesians.
1. 7. Tit. 2. 11.
is love, here is love manifested; here is bountifulness of love shining,
never the like love manifested, never did God manifest the like love to this
that appeared in redeeming in mankind. It is exceeding kindness, Gods great
love wherewith he who is rich in mercy loved us; the riches of his grace, the
exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness, the glory of his grace
abounding; the grace of God that brings salvation. Our blessed Savior speaks
of it with emphasis and admiration, God so loved the world; Paul speaks of it
as alone peerlesse, God commended Joh. 3. 16. Romans 5. 8.
love to us: and John with an index, in this was manifested the love of God,
herein is love. All other manifestations of love are not comparable to this;
great was Gods love to man in the Creation, to place him Lord of the visible
world, to indue him with a soul bearing on it his Genesis 1. and 2.
own image and likeness, to seat and plant him in a Paradise, to provide him a
Sabbath, to give him Sacraments; the Sacrament of life to establish him, and of
the Tree of knowledge of good and evil to warn him where his danger lay, and to
bless him with conjugal society; great is his love in his daily providence
over him; great in the Covenant made to all Nations in Noah; great in the
particular experiments Psalm. 36. Genesis 8. 21, 22. Ps. 107. 8, etc. Psalm. 104.
27, 34.
men feel in sickness and health at Sea and Land; great to all creatures, his
mercy reaches to the heavens: all wait on him for seasonable food. David says
hereupon, my meditation of him shall be sweet. Great was his love to the Elect
Angels whom he has established about his Throne; who always behold his face;
but to whom gave he his own Son? what nature did he ever unite so near to
himself? where, or when did he ever such works for any, as in earth to condemn,
in hell to dissolve all the Devils works, in heaven to provide Mansions, and
all in, by and through the flesh, the flesh of his own Son, the similitude of
sinful flesh, flesh indeed, but like sinful flesh; for a sinful child of
disobedient Adam, justly a child of wrath!

All creatures here below are for this ransomed captive sinners rightful new
and pure use. Angels that fell are reserved in chains of darkness to the
judgment Jude ^.
of the great day, no Savior afforded them, but they are set forth to warn us
to flee the wrath to come: the blessed, holy and elect Angels, the innumerable
company of them, are made ministering spirits sent forth for the good of the
heirs Heb. 1. 14. Heb. 2. 8. Romans 8. 16
of this salvation; the world to come is put in subjection to man: in Christ we
are joint heirs with him of all things.

This love dec^ared is the powerful way to work on a sinner. Hell and wrath,
the Law and sin, without this proposed, do terrify and vex, but the heart
flees God and loathes. All other love of God is abused by the deceitful wicked
hard heart; but let this love be set forth, and now sin and all the deserts of
it, wound, stab and gore, pierce and tear to pieces, and yet the heart draws
near; and drawing near, melts down, dissolves, desires, pants after, longs for
Christ, and God in Christ, judges it self, justifies God while he judges him;
trusts, though God kill him; cannot think or say any thing is ill that this God
says or does.

This love is the fatness of Gods house, the River of Gods pleasures, the
light, the life, better than life it self; this love fills with love, this love
makes gracious, zealous, tender of heart, noble of spirit, and truly lovely;
this sweetens the crosses, sanctifies afflictions, and makes out blessings to
be blessings.

2. Have thou informed thy judgment, 2. To exhort.
and taken a view of Gods love in this way of salvation? Now then let this
doctrine come in the power of it to persuade and exhort thee to believe, to
meditate with admiration, and to ascend to fixed contemplation.

1. Believe this truth, this is the work Joh. 6. 29.
of God; the work that God requires; since we cannot work the righteousness
of his holy Law, that we believe; there is no other work suitable to Gods
dealing with us; he sends his Son, we are to receive him whom God has sent,
and believing is receiving; he tells and testifies this unto the world, we are
to believe his Word and Testimony; there is no other work left, Christ has
done and suffered all for us; believing is the acceptable work, it gives glory
to God, and destroys boasting utterly; this faith does all the work; by faith
Christ is revealed, conceived, formed, born, lives and dwells in the heart;
faith makes the sinner mourn, pray, wait at wisdoms gates, confess Christ,
contemn and overcome the world, deny himself, exalt God, lay under the
creature, resist the Devil, live holily and heavenly, and dye in hope, peace
and joy: faith purifieth the heart, works by love, circumciseth the heart to
love God, makes to fear the Lord and his goodness, frames to the life of a
pilgrim and stranger on earth, and enables to do and suffer, and labor, and
grow vigorous in the midst and strength of all that opposes, like men
heaven-born, born from above, as men heaven-aspiring, as bound for and tending
to the Country above. This is the will of God the Father that sent Jesus
Christ his Son, that every one that sees Joh. 6. 40. Joh. 17. 3.
the Son and believes on him, should have everlasting life. This is Eternal
life.

2. Meditate, Say with thy self, Lord, what is sin? what is man? who art
thou? sin it is the mischief, that which destroys the work of Gods own hand,
and that which ruins the choicest creature, which no holy Law can abolish,
which no sacrifice but that of Gods own Son can expiate, that which condemns
the Son of God; and can never be condemned in it self, and in the heart of
the sinner, but by such a way; and as for man, what is he? even dust and clay,
at his first and best raised out of the dust of the earth: a very rebellious
lump, a mass of rebellion, a lump of rebellious clay, a leprous heap, a
putrified sore, a hateful and hating enmity, proud, conceited, brutish,
foolish, sinful flesh that is not subject to the Law of God, nor can be,
unless mortified, crucified, and created again; but as for Thee O Lord God,
what is this name of Father? what is this thy Son? what is thy Sons name?
Oh that we could tell; do thou make thine own Son to be sin? and condemn
him as a sinner, and condemn sin in his flesh? is this the manner and Law of
thy love to the sons of men, to sinful man? what manner of love is this! Now
stay, make up what is wanting in thy conceiving of these things, in admiration,
in the administration of faith, which makes us draw near to God, which
transforms us into the image of Gods love.

3. Fasten thy thoughts; know thy self and God in Christ more: behold his glory
to make thee like him in this his love. Take the Gospel glass (and while in
the glass of the Law thou see thy self to just detestation and shame of
face) with open face behold the glory of God in his grace in Christ his Son
crucified; in that mitrour view it freely to transform thee into the image of
this his love and grace, from one degree of glory, to another degree of glory.
Let Gods love work in thee such love to thy own soul first, and then such love
to the souls of others; their salvation dearer to thee, then thy own things
temporal, than thy temporal life. A pure love, sin the enemy, and the sinner
the object of thy love; sins against thee, not hindering thee seeking of
their good. Love that is in deed and in truth; love to die for the brethren;
love making willing to part with, lay down, lay out, expose to the utmost of
sufferings whatever is dearest, willing to be counseled, appointed and sent:
no envy, no ambition, nothing of self. The greatest and lowest service proves
the greatest love, love bearing one another infirmities and temptations.
Behold this love to the espousing of thy soul to Christ for ever, and adjure
all not to disquiet him who is the love. Cant. 2. 7. 3. To convince.


3. Suffering the Word of exhortation; Consider also how this doctrine is full
of conviction. It convinces of the great sin and misery of all men, yea, of
all Christians that refuse Jesus Christ; their refusal is of the only remedy
of a poor guilty sinner, it is the refusal of the Son manifesting the greatest
love; it is the refusal of God the Father coming to undone man in a way of
salvation as mysterious as salvifical, as full of glory as of grace; the more
exalted in lofty height, the more it is matchless in lowest condescensions of
free grace; their refusal is a Prove. 8. 36
degree of hatred of Christ, and this hatred of the Son is the hatred of the
Father; they love death, they love to be damned, they love to go to hell, they
love that which will bring them thither, they pass not for that which would
deliver them thence, they have not the Word, nor the love of the Father abiding
Joh. 5. 38, 42. and 8. 41, 42.
in them; for then they would receive him whom the Father has sent: and all
this has the greater aggravation, in that every one so knows his sickness and
seels his wound, that he will go out for some or other, and any one that comes
in his own name, whom God the Father never sent nor sealed, him he will
receive; every one will have his way of Religion, but this way of God he will
not own.

4. This doctrine also gives ground of 4. To humble.
deep humiliation even to the godly who do believe, yet are guilty of much
neglect of three things.

1. Of the riches of assurance; both of full assurance of understanding to the
acknowledging of this mystery of God, even Col. 2. 2.
of the Father, and of Christ; and of the full assurance of faith that they
might in God all day long and night glory in the Lord Christ alone, and rejoice
in him for evermore.

2. Of enjoying God in Christ in all other their enjoyments.

3. Of the high valuations of Jesus Christ; when you hear these reproofs, say,
Is not this a part of that love in Christ to the Elect Vessels of mercy, that
God condemns my sin, but yet he condemns not me? he condemns my sin that he
might save me.

5. Lastly, This ministers strong consolation to the humbled; every one that 5.
To comfort.
desires to be found in Christ, that seeks his righteousness, that owns his
own want of all righteousness, and takes his own sins as the detestable and
deadly thing; to thee is this Savior sent, for thee did he come into the
world, to thee does God come in every step of this way, to thee belongs this
grace of God bringing salvation; Go over the whole of this truth, and put in
thy self, thy name, thou art the man or woman for whom God took all this care,
and concerning whom he had all these thoughts of peace for good.

Hitherto of the third special truth demonstrating that the salvation by Christ
is a full salvation; the fourth follows.

CHAP. VII.
The fullness of a sinners salvation evinced in the outward cause, moving God
to give his own Son, and to take such a way to save; which was the impotency
and impossibility of the Law to save, and the lost estate of the sinner.

SECT. 1.
4. THe outward impulsive cause of Gods giving his Son in the flesh to redeem
and save, is in these words; [what the Law could not do, in that it was weak
through the flesh, God sending his own Son, etc.] these words considered of
themselves as one entire proposition, namely this, [the Law could not deliver a
sinner; for it was weak through the flesh:) do contain that first great truth
handled before in the second Chapter of this Treatise; but now take them as the
Apostle here puts them in their Syntax, in the Contexture, woven in together
with that which follows, to this effect; [what the Law could not do, that God
did by sending his own Son;] and then we have that which moved God to set forth
this way of Redemption by his own Son. God gave the Law, and sin was
provoked, and the sinner dyed; the sinner looked to it, stood convinced it was
holy, just and good, but the more seeking righteousness and life by it, his
weakness the more appearing, and he unable to keep it, the more he lay under
the curse of it: God then takes this course, he will send his own Son, and he
shall bring righteousness and life to this helpless sinner; hence a fourth
special doctrine offers it self, proving the second general, which shows that
this salvation in Christ must needs be complete and admirable. It is this:

The very impossibility of the justification, 4. The impotency and
impossibility of the Law to save, and the lost estate of the sinner, is the
outward thing that moved God to save him by Jesus Christ. Proved ten ways.
life and salvation of a sinner by the Law, and the sinfulness of miserable
fallen man which brought that utter weakness upon the Law, was that and that
only from without that moved God to justify and save a sinner by Christ; and
therefore it is a salvation glorious, gracious and all-sufficient. This truth
is evident diverse ways.

1. That which is the help when the Law cannot help, must needs be high and
powerful; for first, The Law is the only way of life which God as Creator does
give to a reasonable creature; and secondly, The Law is so able, that (being
perfect and Gods own Covenant) it cannot be weakened but only by accident; not
by its own failing, but by ours: it is weak, but through the flesh.

2. The Law for righteousness, and Christ for righteousness, do stand in
direct Gal. 2. 16, 21.
opposition; yet the Law is not against the Gospel: the Law drives to Christ
alone; the Law is fulfilled, when Christ is Gal. 3. 21, 22.
received, the Law comes in that the offers of Christ might be esteemed, which
else a proud sinner would wholly neglect Romans 10. 4
or pervert, and never understand aright; this is the help given of God, which
is the end of the Law.

3. That help that is able to set flesh, sinful weak flesh right in Gods High
Court of Justice, (recta in curia, as Lawyers speak) and to put strength into
it, and so make up the breach, so that both the Law shall stand in its full
force and strength, and yet the sinner be righteous and live, that is
altogether a Sovereign salvation: but such is the help which Gods grace in
Jesus Christ does bring; it puts forth its power gloriously efficacious, for
and upon and in sinful weak flesh.

4. When that which deserves that God should cast off, reprobate and condemn to
hell for ever, and so glorify his justice, is made the ground of giving
Christ; what now can be alleged to hinder, if the Omnipotent, All-wise and
All-gracious God be able to save a poor perishing creature, if Christ the Son
of God be able to help? sinfulness of flesh is the very ground. It deserves
damnation, as we see in the righteous sentences of the Law, in the casting away
of Angels fallen, in men whom God reprobates; the same reprobablenesse is in
the very Elect men, in all of them, and therefore Isa. 43. 22, 25. Ephesians. 2. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5.
is this Savior given.

The Prophet Isaiah pleaded for God with Israel long ago, bringing in the Lord
speaking in his own words on this wise: Thou have not called upon me O Jacob,
thou have been weary of me, O Israel; thou have made me to serve with thy
sins, thou have wearied me with thine iniquities; I, even I, am he that
blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy
sins.

5. When this, that all help fails, and through man's own fault, shall be the
rise and advantage that God will take to give Isa. 63. 5.
his Son to be the Christ and Savior; this answers all objections. Now thus
it stands here, none to help, none to uphold; therefore (says God) my arm
Isa. 41. 27, 28.
saves. No intercessor, no man, what! no counselor! Behold (says the Lord) I
give one that brings good tidings, what! can no God, (Idol god) no worship,
no sacrifice, Lambs, Rams, Bullocks, Rivers of oil, no price of silver or
gold, nor prayers, nor tears of blood give help; Isa. 45. 20, 21, 22.
behold, a just God and a Savior I am, and there is none besides me; look unto
me says God, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth; behold the Lamb of God
that takes away the sin of the world.

6. Therefore mercy was the only motive, mercy has the miserable for its
object. An unchangeable purpose of love within God himself according to the
good pleasure of his will, was the only proper cause causing salvation, and
therefore it must needs be firm as a foundation of God; by grace are we saved,
above and against desert. It is the glory of free grace, and it is to the glory
of free grace to save Gratia non est gratia ullo modo, si non sit gratuita omni
modo. Romans 5 20. and 3. 27 Ephesians. 1. 6, 7. and 2. 8, 9.
a sinner. Grace is not grace any way, if it be not frank and free every way.

7. It must needs be done thus to show the glory of grace superabounding, when
sin and the Laws curse cannot hinder; but where sin has abounded, grace
abounds much more; and to exclude boasting, that glorious superabounding
grace may have the praise for ever.

8. If it had been grounded upon any thing in us as the cause of this saving
love, we should never have dared to come near unto the holy God, because we are
sinful; nor could our hearts have stood stable in his presence, because
creatures, and so are subject to change, we should have found so much weakness
and changeableness. The holy Angels stand before God through Christ as their
Mediator of Confirmation, who need no Mediator of Reconciliation and
Redemption, because they never sinned.

9. This raises the heart to an exclusive 2 King. 7. 34.
resolution, like the Lepers in the book of the Kings, in this manner; If we
stay in our natural estate, we are sure to perish, if we come into Christ, we
can but perish; perhaps we may find favor and grace, for there is enough in
him; yea, and it begets in the soul the positive resolution of the Prodigal;
there is bread enough in my Fathers house, and I perish Luke 15. 15, 16, 17, 18.
here, and starve with hunger; I will arise, and go to my father and say,
father I have sinned.

10. Lastly, The blessedness of a sinner consists and cannot possibly
consist in any Romans 4. 6, 7, 8.
other thing than in forgiveness, and in a non-imputation of sin; in the
merci^ul covering of iniquity: for what shall become of him that has sinned,
if hi^ sin be charged upon him; he must pass under the eternity of the wrath
to come, which sin has justly subjected him unto: and then where will be the
time and place for blessedness? what can be beyond everlasting? if
forgiveness of sins be the blessedness of a sinner, then here is nothing in
man to move God but this; here is a sinner, a man undone by his own sin, but I
will be his God, and will be Heb. 8. 10, 12.
merciful to his transgressions, and I will remember his sins no more. This,
this is the Covenant by which we sinners can live and stand in the sight of God.

SECT. 2.
But wherein may it be made to appear Illustrated six ways.
that the weakness of the Law, made weak through the sinfulness of man moved
God to give his Son?

Answ. 1. Because this is the main reason why God left the Gentiles to
themselves for above two thousand years, upholding them nevertheless in the
utmost of natural abilities which are in man since the fall, and giving them
all the blessings of Creation continued in his Providence with goodness and
long-suffering, that all the world might see, man cannot by his wisdom find
out the true God; find out the way of reconciliation and salvation; man cannot
do ought but wander from God, he understands not, and will not ask after
Christ: and then God will say, Behold me, to them that asked not Isa. 65. 1.
after him, and that shall be verified, I Isa. 41. 27. Junius in locum. 1 Cor.
1. 21.
am found of them that sought me not; then God gives Christ, the first that
says to Zion, behold, behold the things which none could tell of: he that is
the one, the only one that brings good tidings. Paul to the Corinths opens
this, saying, After that in the wisdom of God (who wisely disposes of all
things in his providence, governing the ages of the world, and the generations
of men upon the earth) the world by wisdom, (their wisdom of the light of
nature with which they came into the world endued of God the Creator, having
the book of the creature open before them, and time afforded to improve it to
the utmost, of which wisdom even in the things of God they grew conceited,
professing themselves to be wise, nevertheless the truth is, they by wisdom)
know not God: much less could ever so much as dream of Christ; It pleased God
in his infinite eudoky, or good pleasure, by the foolishness so esteemed by
the wise of the world, of the preaching of Christ crucified, for the Redemption
of a sinner, to save them that believe.

3. The reason why the Jews were left of God to dote about the establishing of
their own righteousness (to which thing all men by nature stand inclined,
neither can they by the utmost abilities of reason in man arise higher, or seek
any thing else: that the Jews, I say, went about Romans 9. 31, 32.
this) to their cutting off, was this: that all men being concluded in unbelief
(from the Reign of which they cannot deliver themselves, when the Gospel of
Christ is told them never so plainly; and all that they will drive that Gospel
unto, is but this, to seek the more to establish thereby their own
righteousness.) It might appear that salvation comes only then unto men, when
the Lord will of his own free grace take hence the occasion to have mercy upon
them all, whether they be Jews or Gentiles; and there the Gentiles sooner
attained the righteousness which is by faith in Christ Jesus, than the Jews
who had the Scripture, which the Gentiles had not; and the Jews cannot get over
this evil of going about to establish their own righteousness, and do make to
themselves Christ Jesus, A stumbling Romans 11. 3^, 33.
stone, and a Rock of offense to this day; nor will it ever be otherwise,
until God glorify the riches and power of his grace to have mercy upon them.
When Paul, that heaven-measuring soul, knowing in Gospel-mysteries, through the
Revelations which Christ gave unto him, entered into the discourse of these
ways of God, he is raped in admiration, and breaks out thus, Oh the depths of
the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out!

3. This was the reason why the Law was given, that the Jews having the Law in
a perfect draught from God himself, by the glorious ministry of the holy
Angels in the hand of a Mediator Moses, might Gal. 3. 19. 20, 21, 22,
find that thereby they could not have life given them, because they could not
get righteousness thereby, but were all concluded under sin, that so the
promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe, and not
to them that would stand by their works; by which with the help of the holy Law
to the uttermost they could never attain to righteousness, although they
sought it zealously thereby.

4. The first proposing of the Gospel to Adam fallen, proves that man's
destruction by disobedience was the rise and ground of the exhibiting of the
Messiah. It was proposed in a threatening to the Tempter, when Satan had
through subtlety destroyed Gods workmanship: and in these words was it first
Preached, It shall break thine head, that is, the woman's s^ed shall break thine
head: she that brought in sin upon mankind by thy seducement, shall be the
instrument to bring forth that man, that seed that shall dissolve the Devils
works; the ruined workmanship of God shall be reared and restored by flesh of
the woman by which it was ruined.

5. The manner of disposing of the Covenant of grace teaches this: for therein
Ezekiel. 36. 25, 31.
God promises to work all the work, even by a new Creation, out of worse then
nothing, against all impossibilities to any created strength, that the saved
may have no other grounds in themselves to look for mercy, but their doings and
ways abominable and loathsome; and they might be loathing and abhorring
themselves as they look to receive mercy: that it might be for ever known and
acknowledged by them, that God does all not for their righteousness, but for
his own names sake. Mark there also how God lays down this as the reason and
ground of making Covenant with any, taking them to be his people, and promising
to be their God: For I will says God, be merciful to their transgressions, and
I will Heb. 8. 9, 12.
remember their sins no more. Likewise this is evident from the manner of
disposing the heart of the federate, of him whom God receives into Covenant:
he is brought to this frame, even to smiting on his breast, standing aloof off,
not lifting up so much as his eyes to heaven, in sense of unworthiness and
conscience of guilt and filth, and to say, God be merciful to me a sinner: To
be ashamed Luke 18. 13 14. Ezekiel. 16. 62, 63. M^t. 11. 28 1 John 1. 7, 9.
and confounded, and never open his mouth any more, because of his shame, when
God is pacified toward him for all that he has done. So also the promises
made to confession of sins: the invitations of the Gospel to the
sinneburdened, and sick with sin: The prayers, and arguments used in prayer by
Gods people; such as this, for thy names sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity,
Psa. 25. 11.
for it is great. This were strange Logic, a strange art of reasoning, but
that this is all that in us does move God to pardon, even that which deserves
damnation, our sins, our sinfulness: and this is that only thing, besides
his own bowels of tender compassions, which causes him to will our salvation,
and to will the giving of a Savior, and to will the appointing of all means,
and effectual workings in and by those means useful to salvation. Our lost
estate by sin, moved Christ to come to seek and save, and moved God the Father
to send him to seek and save. Mark the arguings of the godly, the bottom on
which they fasten their foot when they sue for justification, and cry for
mercy: Enter not into judgment, for no flesh Psa. 142. 2 Psa. 130. 1, 2, 3.
Jer. 14. 7.
living can be justified in thy sight. And, out of the depths (of the guilt and
filth of sin) have I cried unto thee, etc. And, Do thou it, though our
iniquities testify against us, for we have sinned against thee: for our
backslidings are many. So runs the Gospels sum; This is a faithful saying,
and worthy of all 1 Timothy 1. 15.
acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. And the
subjects of the grace of the Gospel; Publicans, Sinners, Harlots, A Manasseh, A
Mary Magdalene.

6. The pattern of Gospel-mercy, Saul 1 Timothy 1. 16. with ver. 12. 13. Phil. 3.
4, 5, 6.
made a Paul. Saul the pattern in what he was before conversion obtaining
mercy; a Persecutor, a Blasphemer, injurious, full of Pharisaical confidence of
his own righteousness which held his eyes blindfold, ignorant of Christ, and
his heart malignant to all that was of Christ, and so the chief of sinners,
this Saul obtained mercy for a pattern: these were his meritorious works, his
previous dispositions, his free will power to the obtaining of saving mercy;
the pattern, in the grace abounding in his conversion; the grace of 1 Timothy 1.
14.
faith and love which is in Christ Jesus, that is, which is truly Christian;
the pattern in the work upon him remaining after Gal. 2. 19, 20, 21. Phil. 3.
5. 6, 7, 8. 1 Timothy 1. 15 Romans 7. 7. to the end of the chapter
conversion; the pattern of mercy to all sinners that shall afterward believe
in Jesus Christ to eternal life, in all these, through the conflicts they shall
sustain in their spiritual warfare.

SECT. 3.
Be informed and directed hence in four Romans 8. 2. The use, 1. To inform us.
things.

1. In the right use of the Law in respect of life and justification, which is
this, first, that righteousness cannot be had by the Law, but the curse; and
therefore secondly, Gal. 3. 10. Romans 7. 13
look upon it, that sin may be known, that sin may become to thee exceeding
sinful, when thou find that it works death in thee, even that Law kills
thee, which is good, holy, just and spiritual; thirdly, make use of it to
conclude Gal. 3. 23. Gal. 3. 24. Phil. 3. 8, 7, 9.
thee under sin, and shut thee unto faith in Christ; and fourthly, that thou
may be schooled unto Christ; fifthly, that thou may renounce thine own
righteousness which is by the Law as loss and dung, as offalls and dogs-meat
that thou may win Christ, and be found in him, who is true food, riches
and the best gain; sixthly, that by the body of Christ Jesus crucified for
sinners, thou may be delivered from the Law of thy first husband legally,
inasmuch as he is dead; even Romans 7. 4.
the Law as it is a Covenant, that so tho^ may be free to be married unto
another, even to the Lord Jesus Christ risen from the dead, that thou may
bring forth fruit unto God, and no more bring forth fruit unto thy self, dead
fruit, that has self-ability for the principle and spring, and self-glorying
for the end; which must needs make the best of works done after the holy Law to
be dead fruit, carrion-like, stinking and abominable.

2. In the right use of the disability thou find in the Law to help and
deliver, this is by accident, Lay the blame altogether upon thy self; for there
lies the cause thereof: let thy corrupt nature, thy flesh be charged with it,
that the Law may be magnified and kept honorable in thy esteem; and that God
the holy Lawgiver may be justified and cleared when he therein judges thee:
Say with blessed Romans 7. 10, 14.
Paul, the Law is holy, and the Commandment holy and just, and good; the Law is
spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin.

3. In the right use of the weakness and wickedness of the flesh when thou
feel Phil. 3. 3, 4
the same; Have no confidence in the flesh, in thy natural abilities,
privileges, performances; Place no confidence in them for ever, for flesh
defiles them, and makes to it self-advantage of them: Never trust thine own
heart any more, for Prove. 28. 26.
this is the property of the fool that is not wise toward God; the more thou
feel the motions of sin in thy members, look out and betake thy self to
Christ, and to free grace so much the more: Is there not a cause? have thou not
weakened the holy perfect Law? bring out thy sick and weak, thy blind and halt,
thy deaf and dumb, thy leprous and dead, bring them out before this Lord
Messiah. The great miracles he wrought in the perfect, powerful, present cures
of bodily miseries here on earth, were all to direct us where to seek and find
the cure of all spiritual maladies. Christ Jesus loosed the cords of
afflictions, by loosing the cords of sin; the true method in taking away the
cause, and thereby the sad effects, shows the skill of a Physician indeed.

4. Here be advised what is the greatest and most shameful perverseness, and
that is, to continue in sin that grace may abound; Romans 6. 1.
to turn this grace into wantonness and lasciviousness; to profess Christ,
and live Heathenishly. Grace, free grace, and not the Law, breaks down the
dominion of sin. Christ dissolves the works of the Devil; he was manifested
Romans 6. 14 1 John 3. 8, 5.
to take away sin, and in him is no sin, he is not faulty in the work he
undertook.

2. Be persuaded to come to Christ; let rhis love draw thee; will God take the
Use 2. To exhort.
rise and ground of showing mercy from thy undone estate, there also do thou
take thy rise, and from thence look unto him; what can stand in the way to
hinder that love which sin cannot hinder; which sin drew forth to full
manifestations? think on it seriously, frequently, believingly to turn thee
quite about after this God.

Again, be ravished with desires and admiration: Oh the heights, depths,
lengths and breadths of this love of God! The Lord strengthen us with might by
his Spirit in the inner man, that we may comprehend with all the Saints the
love of God in Christ, in all its dimensions and Ephesians. 3. 16, 18, 19.
measures, to the filling of us with all the fullness of God; the fullness of
this his revealed glory. And while thou contemplatest the ways of Gods grace,
admiring astonishment will cause thee to cry out, Oh the depths both of the
knowledge and wisdom of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways
past finding Romans 11. 33, 34, 35.
out! who has given to him first? let him stand forth, and it shall be
recompensed unto him; who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been
his Counselor? Use 3. To comfort.


3. Comfort also springs out and flows hence in abundance: first, under sins
guilt, and under sins motions; Die under Romans 7. 9, 13.
the feeling thereof: let sin in the thought thereof grow exceeding sinful
and abominable in thine eyes, as indeed it is in it self; view thy self a
sinner in the perfect glass of the pure Law of God, behold it in the reflection
of the crucifying, death and burial of the Son of God for the sin of the
world, and let free grace be glorified, and then thou art safe. Secondly, under
temptations of presumption and of despair; under the temptation of presumption,
either that of carnal confidence, or that of carnal conceptions of mercy.
Nothing in us, or in any other creature or thing out of God himself was the
cause of Gods love to any. Christ himself is but the gift of this love of God;
when thou look upon thy self, dwell upon thy guilt and filth, that thou
may by faith alone dwell in God, and God dwell in thee; he sindes thee
sinful, lost and forlorn, and he will save, and in saving cannot leave thee
such, for then he did not save. Under the temptation of despair, what support
is here? No sin, no Law made God to loath, as in justice he should, but to
pity, and to redeem. Thirdly, under the power of enemies; Isa. 49. 24, 25, 26.
Behold here, sin that sells the sinner, occasions the workings of the tender
bowels and mercies of the infinite God, of God the Father to save; Behold here,
the Lawful Captive, the Captive of the Mighty is redeemed and delivered.

Hitherto of the fourth truth demons^rating the second great doctrine
concerning the full salvation which is in Jesus Christ. Now let us come to the
fifth medium which the Apostle gives to demonstrate the All Sufficiency of
this salvation.

CHAP. VIII.
Treating of the fullness of salvation by Jesus Christ, proved from the end of
the sending of Christ intended and attained, which was the expiation of sin,
and the fulfilling of the righteousness of the Law, both for, and in the
sinners that shall be saved.

SECT. 1.
5. THe words of the Apostle now to 5. Salvation is full where sin is expiated,
and the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled for and in us sinners.
be handled are these; [And for sin, condemning sin in the flesh, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, did God send his own
Son;] here is delivered this glorious truth, viz. That the end of Christ's
mission, incarnation and passion being to expiate sin, and to fulfill the
righteousness of the Law both for and in us, does abundantly prove the
salvation of those that are in Christ to be absolute and full.

Here three affrighting and sinking sentences Opened, and while opened,
demonstrated.
are savingly and everlastingly answered: The awakened sinner when he considers
the Law of God, and the Bonds of his obedience thereunto, as he is a reasonable
creature, cannot but reason thus;

1. I am a sinner, and sin condemns me by the righteous sentence of the Law
which I have broken. It is answered, The Son of God is sent in the flesh for
sin, to be the sacrifice to take it away, the Lamb of God slain in sacrifice
for the sin of the world. God condemns sin, which would condemn thee; God
condemns it in the flesh of his own Son; as the Syriack reads the words, in
his flesh, and the connection of the words in these two verses does enforce that
sense; for he that sent his own Son in the flesh to condemn sin in the
flesh, and so save the sinner, must needs condemn sin in his flesh, and not
in our flesh; for had we born in our bodies the condemnation due by the Law for
our sins, we had perished everlastingly, and had for ever layn under the
curse of the Almighty Lawgiver, but sin is expiated by a sacrifice of
infinite value, sin is condemned in the flesh of Gods own Son; therefore
thou shall never be condemned for thy sin.

2. The Law requires perfect obedience and righteousness of the creature, and
continuance in the same. I cannot perform the obedience which the Law
requires; and were all my former sins forgiven, I shall sin again. It is
answered, the Son of God has fulfilled the righteousness of the Law in thy
nature for thee; for God sent him in the likeness of sinful flesh, he sent him
about sin, that he in the flesh, the humane nature, might fulfill the
righteousness of the Law; therefore he was sent not for himself, who was not
obliged to the Law, but for us to fulfill it for us; therefore his obedience is
thy obedience, his righteousness thy righteousness. The righteousness of
Christ Jesus, the righteousness performed by him, is performed for thee, not
for himself, it is thine: it is the righteousness of God, of Gods appointing
ordained for thee: it is the righteousness of faith, thine by believing, not
by working; thou have not a righteousness of works, for thou art a sinner, but
here is a righteousness provided for a sinner; believe, and it is thine; it is
an everlasting righteousness; live ever by believing, and all thy sins are
covered, thou art clothed for ever. The Son of God Jesus Christ is the Lord
our righteousness.

3. But man is yet a creature, and though he be not under the curse, and be
acquitted of his sin, yet is he bound to obedience, and not the less bound,
but the more, because God so loves, as to give Christ his own Son; my bonds of
obedience are greater, and yet I sin daily, my sin is the more aggravated,
because they are against such a gracious God and Father, and against such a
Lord Redeemer; it is answered; The Son of God is sent to fulfill the
righteousness of the Law in us; how? may you say;

1. By setting out to the world, and to the heart of a sinner, sin more vile
and the more condemned in and by the heart of the sinner, which is one point of
righteousness to hate and judge sin. And God most holy, while most of love, and
most just while most of mercy; now this heals us of profaness whilst it
allures; and draws with cords of love whiles it fills with holy fear; sin is
hated, and God loved; the name of the Lord Christ is named with an heart
departing with a blessed Apostasy from iniquity; and as love abounds, just
abomination of sin increases with self-loathing and self-abhorrency.

2. By showing a crucified Christ, which sight woun^s to the quick, persuades
to Zach. 12. 10. Joh. 12. 32, 33. Joh. 3. 14, 15, 16. Gal. 2. 19, 20.
believe in God so loving as not to spare but to deliver up his own for us; so
faithful of his word, performing in due time the greatest, unlikeliest, and
ancientest promise he ever spoke; to believe in Christ so gracious, to believe
his promises, threatenings, commandments, and all his words. This sight
crucifies us with Christ, ye^ causes to live to God, and to live in and through
crucifyings.

3. By this faith the sinner is united to Christ; not by a moral union, as love
uniteth, but by a mystical, receiving his Spirit; not by a Physical or natural
union, but by a supernatural. Christ of whom the Word and the Spirit do therein
testify, faith receives; faith receives Christ in the Word, justifies, and
Christ is formed in the heart; faith brings home the love of God in Christ, as
the Holy Ghost in the Word of the Gospel reveals, and by that Word reveals
the Son in the sinners heart believing: this faith works love, this faith
works by love, which is the fulfilling of the Law.

4. By this faith Christ is received; not only as satisfying Gods justice
punishing and commanding, but as purchasing grace, glory, and all good things
else: yea, as purchasing the blessing of the promise, even the Holy Ghost who
renews after Gal. 3. 12.
the image of God, and sets the heart on high in hope of the glory to come,
eternal life.

5. Christ coming into the believer, breaks down sins dominion, and sets up
his own government in the soul, the Romans 6. 14
authority of the Lawgiver, the spiritualnesse of the Law, and his delight in
all this.

6. By his Spirit, he creates us anew, he confers all principles of obedience,
he comes and dwells there in the new creature, he is in the seed abiding in
them, he enables, he excites that ability, he imparts to them the promises, he
puts life into the Word and Ordinances that they may be in power.

7. By his exemplary life in holiness, both in doing and suffering; he beats
out before us the way of righteousness as our pattern, which draws out
imitation, (man being a creature prone to be led by examples, and his imitating
inclination in his new Creation sanctified,) now we would walk as Christ
walked; the heart is set on high and perfect patterns, even on Gods holiness,
and on Christ's purity.

8. Here is the image of God to be beheld in a mirror, in liberty and in great
1 Cor. 3. 17, 18.
glory, the image of God lost, but in Christ found again, begetting in us the
very same image, we see and are transformed, we see and are assimilated, and
made like unto it.

All this work is in true and powerful beginnings which tend to, and are
growing toward perfection, and shall be perfect with perfection of degrees and
fullness, as here it is of parts and of uprightness.

SECT. 2.
This Doctrine is of singular use to wipe Uses. 1. To vindicate the Gospel.
Gal. 2. 17, 18, 19.
off all aspersion cast upon the Doctrine of justification of a sinner by faith
in Jesus Christ without the works of the Law, as if it were a Doctrine of
loosnesse: for see here Christ is not the minister of sin; he destroys sin
in believers, he by faith purifieth them to the very heart; the preaching of
this Gospel of forgiveness of sins out of free grace by faith in Jesus
Christ destroys sin; it makes the believer to live to God through a double
death, and the latter of them which this Gospel by faith puts the sinner unto
is no less than crucifying, yet a death to the believer most desirable, because
it is a crucifying of him with Christ. And now this believer cannot but abhor
the thought of being such a transgressor as to go about to build again that
which by receiving and professing, and preaching (if he be a Minister) this
Gospel he destroyed, was there ever the like effectual way of destroying sin,
and fulfilling the Law in a sinner as this? here sin is made hateful in the
heart of the sinner, profanesse of heart healed, the heart formerly alienated,
now drawn to God, the old man crucified, which Christ and the believer lives
yet, or rather Christ lives in him; faith uniting to Christ, and receiving
Christ works by love, love constraining to live to him that dyed for them, the
Holy Ghost is received, the Son of God revealed in the soul, Christ's,
government is set up, and sins dominion is broken down, the heart is created
anew, and the sinner enabled to walk in Gods statutes, and to do his
commandments with delight in the spiritualness and purity of the Law; he would
be holy, as his heavenly Father is holy, and pure as Christ is pure, and walk
he would as Christ walked: by faith beholding God in Christ all of love, he
suffers a change from glory unto glory, which shall be perfected in both body
and soul in glory. Was there ever such a fulfilling of the righteousness of the
Law by weak sinful man as this, which is wrought by faith in the Son of God
sent into the world to take away sin by one offering and sacrifice once for
ever? Jesus Christ was a curse for sin, not a cloak for sin; he fulfilled
all righteousness, but nulled no Law; he fulfills the Law in us, whiles he
enables to believe that he fulfilled it for us. The Ministry of the Gospel is
the Ministry of Romans 3. 31
life, of righteousness, and of the Spirit: we establish the Law by faith; we
magnify it and make it honorable; we bring to glorious liberty, not to base
licentiousness, which is most absolute slavery. We advance godliness, while
our Doctrine forms it in power, and destroys a powerless form of it: we
maintain good works, while through the Gospel the sinner is called to come to
God through Christ alone, and God takes him into his own gracious and powerful
hands, and makes, molds, fashions him in his own workmanship in Christ Jesus
created anew unto good Ephesians. 2. 10.
works. O ye Pontificians, ye Papists and all others to whom the Gospel comes,
know ye, The Law is not against the Promise: The Promise ingraves the Law in
the fleshly tables of the heart.

This Doctrine also tries and differenceth 2. To try Professors.
Believers and Believers, Christians and Christians; upon the Believer and
Christian indeed, the former three sentences are deeply fastened, and the
answers are experimentally and sweetly resented in the heart that closes with
them, and receives the mould of them; such a heart is truly believing and
Christian, and no other: Go over them again and again in thy thoughts, and try
how it is with thee.

CHAP. IX.
Shows that the fullness of salvation shines in the Person who makes saving
application thereof, deth^oning corruption of nature, and ruling the whole man;
even the Spirit, the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of the Father, and of the Son.

SECT. 1.
THe person applying, and the manner of his application of the salvation by
Christ is implied in these words, [who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit] here the Spirit is the person that brings home this work with efficacy
and power; for here we have a double consideration of the Spirits work in the
saved ones; the first presupposed and implied, namely, that God the Father, and
Jesus Christ his Son do give to those that shall be saved the Spirit, who
applies savingly all the love of the Father, and the grace of the Son: who
pulls the flesh, or man's natural corruption out of the Throne, and sets up
himself to rule the man; mention is made in these words of such a Spirit, and
who can be able to do such a work but the Spirit who is the power of the most
High; who will be willing but the Holy Spirit, or as we usually speak the Holy
Ghost? likewise, either sinners have this Spirit of themselves, and so none
have; for if they had him in them by nature, how is it that he ruled not, how
is it all by nature are under the power of the flesh living and walking in
their sins? or else he must be given, and who can give him but God the Father,
and Christ his only Son? this giving and working of the Spirit for the bringing
home the Redemption which is in Jesus Christ, is therefore necessarily implied
in these words. The second work of the Spirit is expressed in a Description of
the Redeemed ones; [They walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit;] both
these considerations are in the subject persons made partakers of that work of
the Spirit, two ways commended in the words, [us, who walk, etc.) first, that
the Jews and the Gentiles, the Apostles and all others that belong to God, are
all alike sharers in this mercy and work of the giving of the Spirit to them to
apply saving^y this salvation, and to reign in them, and frame their
conversation, although they have not all alike this Spirit in the same measure
and degree; Us who walk says the Apostle, we Apostles, we Jews, and you the
believers at Rome to whom he wrote, you that were sinners of the Gentiles; us,
you as well as we, who walk after the Spirit. Secondly, that neither the one
nor the other of them, have respect with God but in Christ; No, were he an
Apostle, not Paul himself, nor do they look for part in this salvation upon
lower or other terms, but as they fall within this Description. Hence
therefore we have two things before us.

1. The sixth branch of truth that proves the fullness of salvation in Christ.

2. The third great doctrine, which is, The description of a true Christian.

The sixth branch is this.

The salvation of sinners by Christ is complete, Doct. 6. The Spirit of the
as being savingly applied by the Spirit, given of God the Father, and of
Christ Father and the Son, applies the salvation by Christ, dethroning
corruption, and ruling the whole man. 1 Cor. 6. 11
his own Son to them that shall be saved; In which application, the Spirit
dethrones the flesh, and rules the whole man. The sinners which are washed,
justified and sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, have this so great a
change wrought by the Spirit of our God, says the Apostle: God who sent the
Redeemer, has covenanted that his Word and Spirit shall be in the seed, and
seeds seed of the Redeemer, to whom the Father gave them that he should save
them, as the Prophet Isaiah shows, saying, The Redeemer shall Isa. 59. 21.
come to Zion. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my
Spirit that is upon thee (that is, upon Christ the Redeemer,) and my words
which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of
the mouth of thy seed (for whom the Redeemer gave his soul an offering for sin,
and went in travel with them on the Cross) nor out of the mouth of thy seeds
seed, from henceforth Isa. 53. 10. Gal. 3. 14. 1 John 4. 13. and 3, 24
and for ever. Christ has purchased it, and the believer is possessed of it.
Hereby we know, says the Apostle, that we dwell in God, and God in us, even by
the Spirit which he has given us. This is that way in which he saves, even by
the renewing Tit. 3. 3, 5. 2 These. 2. 13, 14. 1 These. 1. 3, 4, 5.
of the Holy Ghost, which he sheds on us abundantly through our Lord and
Savior; and through this way, even the sanctification of the Spirit; God
brings his chosen unto glory. Hereby our election is known. The Son of God
the wisdom of the Father, subdueth us by his Spirit poured out unto us; by
which he makes known his words to us: This is called the Communion Pro. 1. 23.
2 Cor. 13. 14. Joh. 3. 3, 5
of the holy Ghost. And this is so absolutely necessary, that unless a man be
born from above of water, and of the holy Ghost, he can never see the Kingdom
of God; that is, he cannot come into and enjoy eternal life in heaven, he can
never enter into it, unlest he be born again of the holy Spirit now poured out
as plentifully as water and floods according to the promise of the Old
Testament: this our Apostle is peremptory, If any have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his. There are three that bear Record in heaven, Isa. 44.
3. Romans 8. 9. 1 John 5. 7, 8.
and three that bear Record on earth unto the salvation of sinners by Jesus
Christ, and the Spirit is one of each three. The Spirit is the witness that
testifies of Christ, and the Spirit is the witness that testifies in the
true Christian, that he is the child of God; the believer has the witness in
himself, the word of Scripture is the Spirits Testimony; in this word as in his
Chariot the Spirit comes into the heart; by this word engraffed, which is the
Spirits work, he dwells there, and in and by this word which he quickneth, he
gives in his witness that we are the Children of God.

Now it is the compleatnesse of this work of the Spirit which is here to be
considered: And this will be manifest if we observe diligently the opening of
these seven things.

1. Who this Spirit is. Seven things unfolded, touching the Spirit.


2. What is his saving work in and upon the elect of God, and the Redeemed of
Christ.

3. That the Spirit is in Office to do that saving work, and his faithfulness
in this his Office.

4. The peculiar works of the Spirit in order to this saving work.

5. The Inhabitation of this Spirit where he is thus given.

6. The time of his coming.

And lastly.

7. The peculiarity and appropriation of this work to the elect of God the
Father, and to the Redeemed of Jesus Christ.

SECT. 2.
1. Who this Spirit is.
This Spirit is the holy Ghost; for so the Apostle in this Chapter makes it
clear, 1. Who is this Spirit.
when he calls him the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of Christ, ver. 9. and the
Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead: the Spirit that shall quicken
our mortal bodies, in ver. 11. and in ver. 16. he distinguishes this Spirit
from our spirits in the point of witnesse-bearing. Therefore the Spirit is the
Holy Ghost, or the Holy Spirit, as our Translators also render it in the
Epistle to the Ephesians, Chapter 1. 13. and chapter 4. 30. which is all one in sense,
the word Spirit being from the Latin, and Ghost an old English word. Now that
we may know who the Holy Ghost, or the Holy Spirit is, note 2. He is God, he is
true and very God, equal in power and glory with the Father and the Son, the
same God in essence, though a distinct 1 John 5. 7
person in the Godhead and the third person; for there are three, and these
three are one: three persons; the Father is not the Son nor the Holy Ghost; the
Son is not the Father, nor the Holy Ghost; the holy Ghost is not the Father nor
the Son; they are three, yet these three are one God, not three Gods: one God
in essence; the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, is
but one. Spirit here is taken personally, and not essentially, as when it is
said, God is a Spirit; and these three are one in bearing Record; one God in
bearing Record, yet three that bear Record; three persons and one God; and that
he is God is manifest; The Lord is that Spirit, or that Spirit is the Lord. We
are transformed into the 2 Cor. 3. 17. and v. 18
Image of God in beholding in the glass of the Gospel the glory of God; and
this transformation is wrought even as by the Spirit of the Lord; that is, it
is such a work as none can do but the Spirit of the Lord, and such wherein the
Spirit of the Lord is plainly seen; an expression like that concerning Christ
Jesus, We saw his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father; as is
not of similitude, or likeness, for no like is the same; but as of
specification of the very things; as the glory, that is, no other or less than
the very glory of the only begotten of the Father. So likewise here, as by the
Spirit of the Lord, that is, by no other worker, and by no less than by the
very Spirit of the Lord; and it may also be read (which I most approve as most
agreeing to the whole Context going before, especially in ver. 17. as by the
Lord the Spirit. Again, To tempt the Spirit, is to tempt Act. 5. 3, 4. Isa. 6.
9. with Act. 28. 25.
God: as we find in the History of Ananias and Sapphira; The Lord Jehovah spoke
by the Prophet Isaiah, and Paul says, the holy Ghost spoke those same words by
Isaiah. The name Jehovah is the name of the true God only, this his name which
is his alone, he will never give to another, but here it is the name of the
Holy Ghost, Jehovah is the Holy Ghost, who spoke by the Prophets, and who is,
as the Nicene Creed professes, The Lord and giver of life.

The properties also of the Godhead, are given to the holy Ghost; as eternity,
Heb. 9. 14. Psa. 139. 7.
called the eternal Spirit. Omnipresence, or to be present in all places at
once: as David sang, whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Omnipotence, to be
Almighty: and this the works of the Spirit do manifest; he does the works of
God, the works which only God can do: as the work of Creation; by the Spirit of
the Lord were the Psalm. 33. 6 Job. 26. 13 Job. 33. 4. and 32. 8. Genesis 1. 2.
with Deuteronomy. 32. 11. Isa. 61. 1. and 48. 16. 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10, 11.
heavens made; the Spirit garnished the heavens, and made man, as Elihu said,
The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty has given me
life. The ^nspiration of the Almighty gives men understanding. Likewise the
work of preservation; the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters, or
was moving with an hatching virtue as the bird sits upon the eggs, and
hovereth over her young to cherish and preserve them; his work is the sending
and anointing of Jesus Christ: the gifts of tongues and miracles, and the like,
which he distributeth as he will. These works declare the deity of the holy
Ghost: and they declare it above Suae libertatis arbiter, omnia pro authoritate
propriae voluntatis dividens. Ambr. l 1. c 2. de spiritu sancto. 2 Cor. 13. 14.
Rev. 1. 4.
the force and reach of all cavills of sophistical blasphemers, and to the
strong Consolation of all believers; he it is that applies with saving efficacy
the love of the Father, and the grace of the Son. Divine honor is also given
to him: as to be baptized into his Name, to pray and bless from him, to call
upon him. And in the second to the Thessalonians, Chapter 3. ver. 5. the Apostle
prays thus, The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the
patient waiting for Christ. So Ambr. l. 3. de spir. sancto. c. 15 The same
Father urges also that place in 1 These. 3. 12, 13. patrem dixit, filium dixit:
quem ergo cumpatre and filio, praeter Spiritum junxit? Mark. 3. 29. Heb. 10. 29.
Here are three distinct persons, God to be beloved, Christ to be waited for
with patience, and the Lord to whom the prayer is made, that he would direct
the hearts of believers into that love and patient waiting. Now this Lord is
the Lord the Spirit, who directs the hearts of those whom he sanctifies and
enableth to believe. Against the holy Ghost sin may be committed, and to
great height, and men may commit such sin against him as may become
unpardonable: because they wilfully and maliciously oppose and despite him in
the manifestations of his presence, and gracious workings in the Gospel for the
Application of this salvation; therefore he is very God, he is the Spirit of
grace.

2. He is the Spirit of the Father and of the Son; the Spirit of God, and the
Spirit Romans 8. 9. Isa. 61. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 11. Gal. 4. 6.
of Christ. He proceeds Joh. 15. 26.
from the Father and the Son, and according to this his existing, about the
work of saving application of Redemption, he is sent forth of the Father, as he
is the Spirit of his Son, into the hearts Gal. 4. 6.
of those that are privileged with the Adoption of children. God the Father
sends him as he is the Comforter, and the Son Jesus Christ sends him: and
therefore he is Joh. 15. 26 Alius, non aliud. Joh. 14. 16
another, a distinct person, not another thing: he is another Comforter; the
Lord Jesus the Bridegroom, he is one Comforter, the holy Spirit, in the
Bridegroom, and the Bride one and the same, he is another Comforter, he is the
Spirit who knows the whole heart, and the most hid councels and secrets of
the Father and the Son; these Gospel Mysteries, the 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11.
secrets of this bosome-love, into which no Angels of light could dive, no more
than a man can know what is in another man, unless he reveal it. This is he
who works in us to bring home this salvation: therefore it is done most
effectually and most comfortably.

SECT. 3.
2. What is his saving work?
In the Elect of God the Father, and in The saving work of the Spirit, made up
of 14. works.
the Redeemed of Jesus Christ his Son the Redeemer. The holy Ghost has his
saving work: and it is made up of these several works following.

1. Renovation, or regeneration; In which the holy Ghost by the word of Christ
as water, as a laver of water washing a sinner, as floods of waters poured out
upon the dry and barren heart, does cleanse and wash, and in the washing change
and make a new the sinner. The word of the Gospel is as pure water, and water
fructifying. The Lord Jesus Christ is a fountain opened for sin and
uncleanenesse, who came both by blood and water: all sorts of clensings and
washings are found in him, and the holy Ghost in the work of his grace by the
Record, by making the sinner to know his own foulness and uncleanenesse by
sin; and the fullness of clensing away sin by a bathe of that water, and by a
Sacrifice in that blood which is in Jesus Christ the only Son of God
crucified, and by taking the basin of the Word which sets forth Christ, into
his own hands to sprinkle and rinse the sinner so enlightened; and by taking
hold also of such a sinner to put him into this laver, and under this
sprinkling he makes the heart to feel Christ's love, and the flinty rockinesse
of it to melt and flow down before the Lord God, and all the abilities of his
soul to flow together, and rise up toward the Lord Jesus with strong and fixed
desires; and then the holy Spirit is as water, (water that catrieth with it,
and in it, the virtue of Christ's blood, set Joh. 3. 5, 6, 8.
forth in the Gospel,) all to the washing, and renewing, and begetting again,
in such wise that this sinner is born from above, Tit. 3. 5, 6.
born of the Spirit, born of God, and Christ is formed in him. The party came
into this laver a sinful man, all leprous, a dead man, but he comes out of it a
new man, a living changed man, quite another man than he was before. Behold the
laver of regeneration, the renewing of the holy Ghost shed on a poor humbled
sinner abundantly, and richly through Jesus Christ our Savior; this work is of
absolute necessity for old and young, for learned and unlearned, for Jew and
Gentile. And as that which is born of the flesh, is carnal, corrupt, earthly,
low and weak: so that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit, spiritual, pure,
heavenly, high, and powerful, and discerning the holy Mysteries of the Gospel
of the high and holy God.

2. Sanctification: the Apostle Peter describes a true member of the Church, a
subject of grace and peace by the work of the three persons in the undivided
Godhead about his salvation, so that the Spirits work is that which singleth
out the individual person from among all other the children of men, and seateth
the Fathers love, and the Sons grace of Redemption upon him particularly.
This is the Description, He is one Elect according to the foreknowledge of God
the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling
of the blood of Jesus Christ. Sanctification is we see, the saving work of the
Spirit. Sanctification of the Spirit: and belief of the truth 1 These. 2. 13, 14.
is the way through which God, calling sinners thereunto by the Gospel
ministered by the ministry of the New Testament, does bring those whom he has
chosen from the beginning to salvation, unto the obtaining of the glory of the
Lord Jesus Christ, as this Apostle Paul teaches in another place. Now the
sanctifying work of the Spirit is this: 1. He illightens; and this illumination
is accompanied, 1. With wisdom, that knows things as they are, and values them
as they are worth, that knows the worth of the things of God in Christ
discovered according to their excelling nature and difference, and prefers them
above all other things: and it is 2. With R^velation also, bringing Ephesians. 1.
17, 18.
the things of Christ unto the mind in Gods own light; in a light above the
light of man's reason: And it is thirdly with rectifying, or rather making anew
the Organe: the eyes of our understandings, which were covered with blindness,
and Mat. 16. 17
that blindness was in and from our birth (so that we were born blind) they
are opened that we may know. All this is beyond the illumination which is of
common grace, and which may be found in the best of hypocrites. 2. He quickens,
he causes the dead in sins and trespasses to awake, arise, and live; he is the
Spirit of life, the righteousness of Christ declared and set forth by God in
the Gospel, and brought home to the soul of an humbled sinner by the word
attended with the Spirit: and the Spirit is life, because of this
righteousness; life from the death of condemnation which sin deserved: life
from the death of sin; life true and joyful. 3. He circumcises the heart with a
circumcision made without Romans 2. 29 Col. 2. 11.
hands. In this work, the word is the circumcising knife; this knife is taken
into the hand of the Spirit, the heart is the part that is to suffer, and not
the flesh or body of the sinner, the foreskin is the superfluity of
maliciousness and wickedness; Jam. 1. 21. Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
the skin upon the heart, the skin of other loves which oppose the love of God,
as self-love, the love of the world, the love which is called lust, and the
love of superstitious vanities, and men's inventions in Religion, and worship:
and the cutting off this fore-skinnesse, is when the word in the hand of the
Spirit, and by it skilfully used, getting between our hearts and them, it makes
the heart to see them to be such as the word says of them, and to judge it
self for them, and to cast them away as unprofitable and destructive, even
because of Christ circumcised and made under the Law for us, and for our
deliverance from the same Law. Until this work be done, no love of God can be
wrought in us; strange loves have the heart; and when this work is done, it
reaches to the circumcision of the ears, and of the lips, and of the whole
man; Insomuch that the body of the sins of the flesh, the whole frame of
sinful flesh suffers and is destroyed. 4. He gives us spiritual senses, and a
sagacity and quickness of sent, whereby he makes us savor spiritual things,
and to smell out, and delight to pursue spiritual ways; this work is so
eminent, that the Romans 8. 5. Isa. 11. 2, 3
newborn babe can taste distinguishingly the sincere milk of the Word fit to
feed, batten and make to grow, from all adulterate stuff, and can see and
discern judiciously the things of the Spirit of God from all other things, and
make up a right judgment concerning them, and can in hearing, try the words of
doctrine delivered, and try the spirits in the teachers, the Spirit of Christ
and the spirit of Antichrist, the Spirit of God and the spirit which is of the
world, the spirit of truth and the spirit of error. In ordering his
Conversation, he can sent and smell the ways of holiness from those of
profaneness, so that he is of quick understanding in the fear of the Lord,
and is sensible, and has his feeling of spiritual mercies, and plagues of sin
that annoyes spiritual life, and of the power and spiritualnesse of Ordinances
and Administrations from ordinances of men in will worship, and formal
out-sidednesse and shows, and florishes in administrations. All this the new
born babe is able to do by a naturalnesse like an instinct, though for want of
Art, or of strength of the reasoning ability, or not yet having the wits, the
senses exercised in the word of righteousness, he cannot show to his own or
others satisfaction where the fault lies, much less is able to dispute it,
and by arguing convince the evil doers, the opposer, and the pleader for the
evil; the quickness of spiritual senses does grow, as age in Christ comes on;
the Spirit in this work rested upon Jesus Christ as he was man in all fullness,
as became our head, and it is on every living member of his mystical body,
according to his place of membership as becomes such a Member. 5. He writes his
law in our hearts. The Law, 2 Cor. 3. 2, 3, Romans 8. 2
that is, the sum of revealed truth, both of the Law strictly so called, the
Law of the ten Commandments, and of the Gospel: this is that which is written;
the writing is such an engraving of the truth with love of the truth upon our
hearts, made soft, tender, and fleshy, as that it cannot be blotted out. The
soul may be torn from the body, but the truth cannot be torn out of the heart.
And this impression of the truth is such, that now it is the Law of the mind,
which Laws the man: It is the Law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ
Jesus as the Head, and in them as the members; this is an heavenly edition of
the Bible, so imprinted upon the soul, that the man becomes a living walking
Bible, which print comes off so fair in the life of the regenerate and
sanctified, that they are the Epistles of Christ to be seen and read of all
men. 6. He gives liberty; he sets us free from the law of sin and death; the
title, the dominion of sin is taken away that we may 2 Cor. 3. 17. Romans 8. 2.
Joh. 7. 37, 38. and 4. 14
become servants of righteousness. 7. He is a spring, and rivers of l^ving
waters in our bellies, flowing up within us unto eternal life. Our hearts by
nature are as a dry and barren howling Wilderness, not fit for habitation, nor
bearing any good plants, untilled and horrid to the sight: It is the Spirits
work to be in us whom the Lord will save, changing the very will, breaking,
open springs, and causing Rivers of sweet, wholesome and healing waters of the
blessings of the Gospel, of all gifts and graces, and grounds of comfort to
flow within us, even in the very heart and conscience, in the belly of the man;
and there these waters to be not as standing lakes, and ditch-water, but ever
streaming out, and fed from the hid wellhead of the holy Spirit. When this
work is in us, then of Wildernesses we become fruitful Fields, then we have
within us Isa. 44. 3. and 49. 10. Joel 3. 18. Zach. 14. 8
that which will satisfy, and will allay and quench our thirsts, our souls
will be as a well-watered garden whose waters never fail. 8. He causes all the
fruits of graces fructifying to be in us and to abound in us: all his fruits he
makes to break Ephesians. 5. 9 Gal. 5. 22, 23. 2 Cor. 3. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 13.
forth; all goodness, righteousness and truth, love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; against
which and such like there is no Law. 9. He transforms us into the image of God
from glory to glory. 10. He enableth us to believe, and Ephesians. 2. 18. Jude 20.
Gal. 4. 6.
to speak by confession, to pray to the Father through Christ with gracious and
fervent desires, crying Abba Father, to mortify the deeds of the body; our
members that are on the earth, and to be crucifying the flesh with the
affections and lusts Romans 8. 13 Gal. 5. 24.
thereof, that old bel-dame original sin, the sinfulness of our natures in
which we were conceived and born with all the cursed brats thereof inward and
outward, in which actual transgressions she has been and is prodigiously
fruitful: To be purifying the soul in obeying the truth unto more and more
unfeignednesse in faith, love, meekness, patience, and in every other 1 Pet.
1. 22 Ezekiel. 36. 27. 2 Timothy 1. 14
grace: to walk in Gods statutes, to keep his judgments, and to do them: and to
keep the faith committed to our trust as a thing deposited. In all these the
actions are ours, the ability is the Spirits: these are the works of the Spirit
sanctifying us.

3. Manuduction, or leading by the Romans 8. 14.
hand: the new born and sanctified are at first weak as children, and ever
after in this life stand in need of a guide, such a guide as might inwardly
act, sweetly and powerfully draw, graciously support, and gently lead, all this
the Spirit does for the children of God; this work is accompanied with familiar
sense of love and faithfulness, taking and holding us by the right hand that
our souls might follow hard after him, these mighty dawnings Psalm. 63. 8.
and sustentations the more they are felt, the more are they prayed for, that
they might run after Christ, and the more the soul is powerfully enabled in
these pursuits, the right hand and dexrous power of the Holy Ghost is put forth
to uphold us so much the more; and this work is expressed further with counsel,
as David Ps. 73. 23, 24.
said, thou will guide me with thy counsel; and with inward prompting and
whisprings as of a voice behind them, saying, this is the way, walk in it, when
ye turn to the Isa. 30. 21.
right hand, and when ye turn to the left.

4. Teachings as the anointing; this teaching is with sweet and piercing
efficacy, as oil that suppleth and enters soakingly into flesh and bone; and
it is 1 ^oh. 2. 20, 27.
with the perfume of the aromatical spicery of graces, like the holy anointing
oil under the Law mentioned, Exodus 30. 23, 24, 25. It is also with great
establishment in our Royal Priesthood, and in the truth of the Gospel which we
learn by this teaching; therefore the Apostle John says, we have an unction
from the holy one, 2 Cor. 1. 21.
we know all things: the effect hereof is great peace of heart, as it is said
in prophecy concerning the true Church, especially under the New Testament
Ministry, All thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the
peace of thy Isa. 54. 13.
children.

5. Consolation; he is the Comforter, by leading into all truth, by bringing
all things unto our remembrance, by filling Joh. 16. 13. 6. and 14. 2
us with joy and peace in believing, by making us to abound in hope of glory
through his power, (for the work is of Romans 13. 13. and 8. 15, 16. 1 John 5. 6.
Romans 8. 26. 2 Cor. 1. 22. and 5. 5. Ephesians. 1. 13. and 4. 30.
great and infinite power to set the heart of earthy man, of sinful clay, and
keep it up steadfast so high as eternal life in the world to come, and in the
third heaven;) by being in us the Spirit of Adoption in his work upon the
heart, by witnesse-bearing, by making intercession in us and for us, by being
the earnest in our bosoms, and by sealing us up to the day of Redemption.

6. Direction inward, a most secret 2 These. 3. 5.
work which has two branches or parts: first, the directing of the heart
renewed and sanctified into every particular acting of every grace received,
especially of love and hope. Secondly, the directing of the heart into a very
sensible taste and experience of comfort. The words of the Apostle when he
says, The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, this love of God may
be understood actively of the love wherewith we love God; or passively, of the
love wherewith God loves us.

7. Corroboration; this renders the sanctified mighty in doing and in
suffering; enlarged to receive, and hold the strong wine of Gospel mysteries,
and to walk at liberty in the ways of Gods Commandments, making their way
through all impediments and oppositions, confirmed in the truth, and enabled to
stand, fight and overcome in the spiritual warfare; This strengthens with might
in the inner man, (the regenerate and no other have an inner man;) this is from
the gracious free-gift of God, as the Father of Christ according to riches of
glory, according to his Ephesians. 3. 14, 16, 20, 19. Col. 1. 11.
glorious power; and from the energy, the effectual working of the power of God
working in us exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think; and this
work is unto the dwelling of Christ in the heart by faith, unto our rooting and
grounding in love, unto capacious comprehensions of the every way unmeasurable
measures of the love of God and of Christ, unto all patience and long-suffering
with joyfulnesse in the profession of Christ's name and Gospel, and unto the
filling with all the fullness of God, even the fullness of his image.

8. The giving of supplies; which for the manner of the work is by influence
from Phil. 1. 19 Ephesians. 4. 16. Col. 2. 19.
Christ the head to believers as his members; for measure it is in a proportion
agreeable to the measure of every part; for the things ministered grace and life
spiritual; and for the next end, nourishment more firm, knitting to the head,
and to every fellow-member, and increase with the increase of God, that is,
with a mighty increase, an increase which bears before it the work and
blessing of no less, nor of any other than of God himself.

9. The shedding abroad of Gods love in Christ, even the sense of that love in
Romans 5. 5. with the context from ver. 1. to the 11. ver.
and upon the heart: that lies now next the heart; nothing comes between this
love and the heart, it is plentifully poured on it; this work strengthens
hope, patience, experience, joy in tribulations, even unto glorying and holy
humble boasting, peace of conscience, faith in Jesus Christ, liberty of access
into the favor and free grace of God, and standing in the same, so that we joy
in God against whom we have sinned; this causes all gladness, more than that
gladness of Psalm. 4. 7, 8
corn and wine abounding, more than all the comforts of this earthly Creation;
and it setleth the soul in holy safety and security.

10. Assistance in persecutions; this appears by special teachings of the
Spirit to Mat. 10. 20
wisdom, power and utterance which the Adversaries cannot gainsay or resist;
and by the resting of the Spirit on us as the Spirit of glory against the
shame, and as the Spirit of God against the pain of the Cross; by delivering
also from the spirit of fear, even a low, pusillanimous, slavish, 1 Pet. 4. 14.
base, fearful, perplexed, selfish, revengeful, giddy, turn-coat, unsound,
carnally politic temper of the soul, and be in us the Spirit of power, of
love, and of a sound mind: and by giving suffering 2 Timothy 1. 6, 7.
graces and comforts fitted to the present suffering condition whatsoever it
be. Lastly, by enabling ^o come to God in prayer when the extremities of
sufferings, the darkness of Gods ways in that dispensation, and the
difficulties of the times in which we are placed, and the perplexednesse of our
and the Lords cause we are to stand for, by men's subtleties or otherwise is
such, that we know not what or how to ask as we ought, yet even in this case
the Spirit it self makes intercession in us with sighs and groans that cannot
be expressed; this is the proper sense of the Apostle in that place to the
Romans, Chap. 8. verse 26.

11. The making us Gods habitation; he makes first his own way into the sinful,
Ephesians. 2. 22.
secure, proud, hard and stony, and dead heart, and then he prepares for God an
habitation there; he makes us a spiritual house, and an holy Priesthood in that
spiritual house; he builds us to be a Temple to God, that he may walk in them,
and 1 Pet. 2. 5. 2 Cor. 6. 16
dwell in them; this he does by building us as lively stones on Christ the
choicest foundation stone, by furnishing us with the Temple-furniture through
the doctrine of Christ received, and by consecration. And he makes believers
Priests by consec^ation with the anointing and by the besprinkling of the blood
of Christ; by clothing with the Priestly Robes of justification and
sanctification; and by bestowing on them the hearts and dispositions of
consecrated Priests.

12. Mansion, or abode for ever in Gods people. This work is most comfortable;
the world cannot receive the Spirit, they know him not; Christ's true Disciples
John 14. 16, 17.
know him and receive him; and he comes, and not as a guest for a night or so,
but as the inhabitant that dwells in them as in his house and Temple, and
abides therefore ever; he dwells in them as the Comforter and the Spirit of
truth; he supplies Christ's room and presence, therefore they are not Orphans;
here is the anointing, the Chrisme that abides in them, teaching 1 John 2. 27.
with ver. 20. and 24.
them of all things that are delivered in the Scripture: in which doctrine of
the Word of truth, the true Christian makes conscience to abide and continue
as ever they would continue in the Son and in the Father.

13. The uniting them to Jesus Christ the husband of the Church and to all true
1 Cor. 16. 17.
Christians as all of them make up one body and Bride of such a Lord, the only
Son of the living God, and God blessed Rev. 22. 17.
for ever; in uniting true believers to Jesus Christ as Bridegroom, he raises
in them espoused conjugal love and fidelity, vehement desires after his
love tokens, the kisses of his mouth, familiar talkings and confabulations,
walks together, feastings mutual and embraces; these are set forth in that most
spiritual book the Song of Solomon, and the more they enjoy this hidden
communion with Christ, the more the Spirit raises in them desires unfeigned
and fervent after, with love of, and waiting for the presence of Christ in his
second coming; which is the marriage-day; the nearness of this union is such,
that it is thus expressed, he that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit; and
that is far nearer and more excellent than to be one flesh, as man and wife are
one: the work of the Spirit is also to unite to Christians in such wise that
they are all one body; this is called the fellowship of the Spirit, and the
unity of Ephesians. 4. 4 Phil. 2. 1. Ephesians. 4. 3
the Spirit; union with Christ and with Christians is the glorious work of the
Spirit, the ground of communion, of communication, and of sympathy or
fellow-feeling.

These are the saving works of the Spirit in the Elect and Redeemed, thus
enumerated Arrha docet, renevat, juvat, obsignatque. salutem. Spiritus ecce
docet, renovat, copulatque, regitque; and consolatur Arrha salutifera.
for the help of memory, but not determining that they are wrought in this
order; there is an old received verse, a pair of verses which name some of
them, but I hope none that are judicious will either say that there are none
else, or that these abovenamed so fully described in plain Scripture, and so
comfortably experienced by the Saints, are not the saving workings of the
Spirit; but how lively, quick, significant and discriminating of this saving
work are the Scripture expressions and praises attributed to the Holy 2 Cor. 4.
13 Zach. 11. 10. Isa. 4. 4.
Ghost? they are these, the Spirit of faith, the Spirit of grace and
supplications; the Spirit of judgment and of burning; the Spirit of holiness,
or of sanctification; Romans 1. 4. and 8. 5. Rev. 11. 11 Romans 8. 2. Ephesians. 1. 17
Isa. 11. 2, 3 2 Timothy 1. 7. Joh. 14. 17 Ps. 51. 11, 12. Ephesians. 1. 13. Psalm. 45. 7.
1 John 2. 20, 27. Joh. 14. 16 1 John 5. 6, 10. Ephesians. 1. 14. and 4. 30. Romans 8.
23 Ezekiel. 36. 25. Joh. 4. 10, 14. and 7. 38, 39. Cant. 4. 16 Hos. 14. 4. Mal. 3.
11. Tit. 3. 5. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. To. 8. 26. Joh. 14. 26 1 John 3. 9. Joh. 15. 26,
27.
the Spirit of adoption, the Spirit of life, the Spirit of life which is in
Christ Jesus; the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Christ;
the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and might; the
Spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord; the Spirit of love, power,
and of a sound mind; the Spirit of truth, Gods holy Spirit, Gods free or
princely Spirit; the holy Spirit of promise; the oil of gladness, the
anointing, the comforter, the witness, the earnest, the seal sealing, (for the
Saints are the seal sealed;) the first fruits; clean water, water of life, a
wellspring of living water, the North and South wind that blows upon the
gard^n, the dew and fire: the renewing of the Holy Ghost, the sanctification of
the Spirit, he that makes intercession in the Saints, he that brings all to
their remembrance, the seed that abides in them, he that enableth the belieer
to bear witness to the truth of the Gospel with the spirit of a Martyr. All
this glory manifested in these saving works, the children of God do feel and
have the joyful experience of it in this life.

14. The last saving work is for and in another world, to be done at the last
Romans 8. 11
day; and that is, The quickening of their bodies out of the grave: they shall
be raised by the Spirits quickening of them as members of the body of which
Christ is the head; this is peculiar to the Saints who are sanctified by faith
in Jesus Christ; the Spirit which now dwells in them, will in the Resurrection
at the last day, quicken their mortal bodies.

These are great things, but most sure and certain: for the Holy Ghost, who is
the power of the Highest, undertaketh this work as his Office; which is the
third thing proposed to be unfolded.

SECT. 4.
2. That the Holy Ghost is in Office to do all this saving work, and is
faithful in this his Office.
Here are two things to be considered, 3. He is in Office to do this work.
the office of the Holy Ghost: and his faithfulness.

1. The holy Ghost is in office to make good this work; this is manifest;
first, because he is sent, sent of the Father; sent of Christ, sent into the
hearts of believers, Joh. 14. 26 and 15. 26. and 16. 7. Gal. 4. 6. 1 John 2. 1.
Romans 8. 26.
sent upon these works. Secondly, He has names which denote this his Office:
He is called the Comforter. Another Comforter. Jesus Christ he is one
Comforter, an Advocate with the Father, now in heaven appearing for us. And the
holy Spirit he is not Christ, he is Another, he is another Comforter, An
Advocate in us; he encourages, backeth us, exhorts, helps to hand over, and
puts into us desires, and makes intercession, ayding with groans unspeakable.
He is called The unction, the anointing, or Chrisme* 1 John 2. 20 Joh. 16. 13
Romans 8. 15.
He is called The Spirit of truth, the Spirit of Adoption.

2. The holy Ghost is faithful in this his Office: this fidelity is many ways
expressed: first, in actual performance in Joh. 16. 13 14, 15.
us of those works for which he is sent, and in regard whereof he bears his
names: He the Spirit of truth, he will guide into all truth: as in John 16. 13.
in like manner is it true of every other work; he is the Spirit of Adoption,
and he enables to cry in prayer Abba-father, that is, to call on God with
fervency of faith, so as to express the heart of a child toward God, as to a
father in Christ promised in the Old Testament, ant sent accordingly in the New
Testament. In both Testaments together is set forth the glory of the Father,
and of Jesus Christ his Son to the full, written in the Old Testament in
Hebrew, and in the New Testament in Greek; and the Spirit frames the heart of a
child, and fills with the cries of a child in prayer answerable to both
Testaments manifestations; and therefore it is said the Spirit causes them to
cry Abba, ho Pater, Father, Father. Secondly, In speaking nothing of himself;
he took on him nothing apart from, or otherwise than what he had in charge from
the Father, and the Lord Jesus: but what he hears of the Father and the Son,
that he speaks. Even as Jesus Christ showed his faithfulness to the Father
that sent him, in that he spoke nothing but what he had heard of the Father; he
spoke altogether what was agreeable to the old Testament Doctrine, ver. 13.
Thirdly, in glorifying Jesus Christ; He shall receive and take of that which is
Jesus Christ's, and show it unto us. John 16. 14, 15. and hereby we may know the
Spirit of truth from the 1 John 4. 3, 4, 5, 6.
spirit of error: as the Apostle John gives the rule to try the spirits by.

SECT. 5.
4. The peculiar works of the Spirit, in order to the saving work.
Moreover, great must needs that 4. Peculiar works of the Spirit, in order to
the saving work.
work be, which has marvelous works of the holy Ghost to be wrought and
wrought every day, and perfected long ago; that it may be performed now in
order to the great saving work; there are peculiar and wonderful works, and
they are manifold: some respect Jesus Christ, some the Scriptures, some the
Church, and some the Ordinances: take a brief of them under these four heads.

1. Such works of the Spirit as respect 1. Respecting Jesus Christ.
Jesus Christ: And so,

1. The holy Ghost formed Christ's humane nature in the womb of the Virgin Mary,
and of her seed; this the Angel Gabriel declared in his answer to her enquiry;
the holy Ghost shall come upon thee, Luke 1. 35, 36.
and the power of the highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy
thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God.

2. The holy Ghost anointed Jesus Isa. 61. 1. and 11. 2, 3. Act. 10. 38 Joh. 3.
34. Luke 4. 14, 18. Joh. 1. 31, 32, 33. Mat. 3. 16.
Christ as he was man with gifts and graces, so that he had the Spirit not by
measure: And having thus consecrated him, and furnished him for the great
office and work of Mediator, he with God the Father sent him.

3. The holy Ghost by descending from heaven, and resting upon him visibly in
the shape of a Dove, did publicly show him, and seal him in his Baptism.

4. The holy Ghost witnesses that Jesus Christ who was crucified, is the Son
Act. 5. 31, 32. Romans 1. 4.
of God the true Messiah: he also witnesses to the doctrine of Christ's
resurrection, in which the deity of Jesus Christ is declared with power: and
likewise to the doctrine of his exaltation at the right hand of God the Father.

2. Such as respect the Holy Scriptures; 2. Respecting the written word. 2 Pet.
1. 20, 21. Act. 1. 16. Mark. 12. 36.
as,

1. He inspired the holy men of God, and infallibly dictated unto them, and
guided them in committing the Word of God unto writing. No Scripture is of
private motion; the holy Ghost spoke by David, by Moses that faithful servant
of God in all his house, by Isaiah, and by all the Prophets of the Old
Testament: Heb. 9. 8. Act. 28. 25 1 Pet. 1. 12 Luke 1. 41 67. Act. 2. 1 Cor. 2.
10, 13.
the holy Ghost speaks by them; so he inspired Elizabeth the Mother of John the
Baptist, and Zachary his father; the holy Ghost came down from heaven upon the
holy Apostles on the day of Pentecost, the fiftieth day after Christ's
Resurrection, induing them with power from on High, and revealed to them all
the deep things of God, all the mystery of his will; the Spirit both revealed
to them the things of the Gospel, and gave unto them the words in which they
should speak them, and leave them in writing, and these words from his own
teaching.

2. He quickens the Word, so that the Word is Spirit and life: the Word is his
Joh. 6. 63. Ephesians. 6. 17. Heb. 4. 12 13. 1 Cor. 2. 4.
sword; he puts an edge upon the Word, making it quick and lively in operation,
to the dividing between the soul and spirit of man, and to the searching of all
the secrets of his heart, that all may be naked and bare before him, with whom
he has to do in the Word.

3. He makes the word to be with demonstration of the Spirit, and of power:
that is, with such power and efficacy in the heart, as arises from no less
than the mighty working of the Spirit, and that in a way Demonstration: in
which demonstration the Spirits light, testimony and persuasion is so strong,
that faith is wrought, faith in God, and that faith stands founded and rooted
upon the power of God.

3. Such works of the Spirit as respect 3. Respecting the Church.
the Church of God: Now these respect either Church Officers, or else the whole
Church, or those members which are called out to Martyrdom;

1. As touching Church Officers, the works of the Spirit are these,

1. He gives them their gifts, which design them out to the Church, unto their
places and stations therein; thus the Deacons Act. 6. 3. Romans 12. 8 1 Timothy 3. 9.
were pointed out by the holy Ghost, in that he filled some members of the
Church at Jerusalem with gifts of wisdom and of mercifulness, and of
simplicity, and of knowledge of the mystery of faith held and kept by them in a
pure conscience; and this last was the special note of the four, by which the
Church should be guided in the election of Deacons, whom the Apostles upon such
choice were to appoint and ordain, that they might have those men in that
administration whom the Holy Ghost had gifted and fitted for the work.

2. He places them in their charges, as you may see concerning the Bishops, or
Elders, the Ministers of the Church of Ephesus, of whom it is said that the
holy Ghost made them Bishops over the flock of Act. 20. 28
God there. Our Translators render the word overseers, but in the Greek it is
Bishops; neither can any good reason be alleged, why in this place as well as
in others of the New Testament they should not use this word Bishops.

3. He disposes of them, so that they are fit for one place rather than for
another; Peter was the Apostle of the Circumcision: Paul had the uncircumcision
committed unto him. Although Peter first of all the Apostles, preached the
Gospel to the Gentiles, as we read in Acts 10. yet Paul is called the Apostle
of the Gentiles; when nevertheless the Apostles Mark. 16. 16.
all of them had the whole world given them in common, as their charge in these
words, Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. And that
the Holy Ghost does in special and eminent manner dispose of the Ministers
where they shall perform their Ministry, consider these following Texts, Act.
13. 4. and 16. 6, 7. and 11. 12. and 8. 29, 39. Luke 2. 27. there is not only a
providential work of God about it who sets the bounds of men's habitations, but
there is a work of the Spirit which may be known by his work both upon the
heart of the teacher, and also upon the hearts and spirits of the hearers; and
lastly by the judgment and sentence of the Assembly of Pastors and Teachers;
the spirits work upon the teacher, is his enclining and suiting of his spirit
to the work of the ministry among them upon spiritual grounds and ends. The
Spirits work upon the hearers, is his opening a door by enclining their hearts
to 1 Cor. 16. 9
receive him, by stirring up many with desires to hear and receive the
doctrine, although there be many adversaries, and many difficulties. The
sentence of the Presbytery is also the work of the Spirit when it is done upon
mature deliberation, and is regular and impartial, approving, ordaining, and
appointing that Minister to dispense the Gospel to that particular people.

4. He enableth them to their ministerial work with utterance, and with a
sufficiency for meditation and for ministration. And this work of making able
and sufficient to the ministry of the New Testament, is necessary to the
performance Act. 2. 4. 2 Cor. 3. 5, 6.
of every new acting of the Ministers, who after abilities and gifts received,
still remain insufficient for the least action Ministerial, yea for so much as
a good thought in that way; thus Paul acknowledges of himself; so absolutely
necessary is this concurrence of the enabling power of the Holy Ghost.

5. He makes their ministry effectual; that is, to be the ministry of the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. Romans 15. 18, 19. Romans 15. 16.
of life, of righteousness, and of glory, ministering these: and thereby to
make some of the hearers obedient: (for God sends not his Gospel to any place
where he has none to call and save,) and to sanctify the offering of the
converted and obedient ones up unto God as an offering.

6. He enableth to solve cases of conscience, to the comfort and settling of
Isa. 50. 4.
dejected humble souls, and of doubting and trembling feeble-minded ones, and
weak in the faith; this is of high price among the Saints to have a minister
that knows how to speak a word in season to the weary soul.

7. He guides them in Councils and Synods, while their debates and
determinations Act. 15. 28 Mat. 18. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 5. 4.
are directed by the Scripture: and he is present, and guides in the
Administration of Church Discipline, unto the performane whereof Assemblies in
Christ's name ought to be kept up.

8. He raises the slain witnesses, which are called the two Prophets, whose
work is Rev. 11. 1^ with v. 2. ^*
to Prophecy, and the days and time is the space of a thousand, two hundred
and threescore days, which space is forty and two months, all which while the
holy City is trodden under foot of the Gentiles; even of those over whom the
beast that arises out of the bottomless pit rules, and his whore the whore
of Babylon sits and Rev. 11. 7. with Rev. 17. 8 15.
: these are therefore not the Magistrates, whose work by virtue of their office
is never called Prophesying; nor is it to Prophecy, but to bear the Sword: and
they are not just two, but the small yet sufficient number of faithful
Preachers, during all that space which in Prophetical computation makes 1260.
years; they shall be slain, but that is the work of the beast that ascends out
of the bottom-lesse pit; It is the work of the Spirit of life from God entering
into them, to raise them, and make them stand upon their feet.

These are the works of the Spirit respecting the ministry for the saving
works sake.

2. As concerning the whole Church, the work of the Spirit is seen first in the
Act. 19. 6. 1 Cor. 12. 4 8, 9, 11, 7, 28.
gifts which he has given for the good of the whole, he has given
extraordinary gifts, Apostles, Prophets, Miracles, gifts of healing, to speak
with tongues, to Prophecy or foretell things to come, with the like: Secondly,
in the gifts which he does give, they are diverse, making up the Churches rich
embroidered garments, and all of them for the edification of the whole society
or body.

3. As concerning the Martyrs; he Act. 6. 10. Rev. 12. 11 and 13. 10. and 14.
12.
enables them to speak with wisdom irresistible, to witness to the truth with
courage undaunted, yet attended with love, meekness and soundness of mind,
and to suffer for the truth with patience invincible; of which it may be said,
Here is the patience of the Saints. These are victors, Renowned Conquerors, the
Churches Heroes, the Lords Worthies, the noble Army of the Lamb.

4. Such works of the holy Ghost as respect the Ordinances; as,

The Word: In the Word the Spirit speaks to the Churches; he gave the Rev. 2.
7. and 3. 22. 1 Timothy 4. 1 Act. 11. 2* Rev. 14. ^^
Word by breathing it at first into the holy men of God; he by Covenant goes
along with it, breaths and works in it, speaks in it, writes it in the fleshly
Tables of the heart; every part of the Word is the speaking of the Spirit, even
that wherein he warnes of seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils. And he
says, yea to Gospel sentences.

The Sacraments, Baptism and the 1 Cor. 12.
Lords Supper: The Spirit accompanies both, as the band of union, he makes
the partakers to be one body together of one head. By one Spirit are all
believers Baptized into one body, and in the Lords Supper they all drink into
one Spirit.

All these mighty works the Holy Spirit does in order to the work of saving
application of the grace of the Son our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the love of
^od the Father. This is the fourth thing proposed for explication. The fifth
follows, which also does greatly commend the saving work; and that is,

SECT. 6.
5. The Inhabitation of the Holy Ghost.
Where the Holy Ghost is given manifesting his presence in his saving working,
5. The inhabitation of the Spirit where he is thus given. Romans 8. 9, 11. 1 John
4. 13 and 3. 24.
there he inhabiteth, or dwells in them; the Apostle distinguishingly and
searchingly putting all believers upon the trial of their estates says: Ye are
not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in
you, and this is so Characteristical that he adjoyneth: now if any man have not
the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. He that has the Spirit, has him
dwelling in him; hereby also we know that God dwells in us, and that we dwell
in God, and they that have the Spirit given and dwelling in them, they know it;
1 Cor. 3. 16
Know ye not that the Spirit of God dwells in you? And for this condescension
of exceeding grace, how great is it! for he dwells in them; first, as in his
Temple, his holy consecrated house and habitation; he knows no Temple or house
on earth, but the broken and contrite heart, the poor in spirit; and when he
had a Temple at Jerusalem, it was to signify this, and not owned of God, but
with respect to this Temple. The regenerate Isa. 57. 15. and 66. 1, 2* 3.
are his Temples; the Holy Ghost makes himself an habitation, and then dwells in
the Temple which he has made; the glory of the work is heavenly and excellent,
for this Temple is an house not made with hands, no, nor of this building, 1
Cor. 6. 19.
of this kind of make, of which is this fabric of soul and body in this
visible creation: although it be reared and set up in this building. Again, The
very bodies of the regenerate are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, though they be
houses of clay, and the leprosy of sin is not clean washed and scraped out
while they live in this world. Secondly, he dwells in them as in the living
members of Christ's Romans 8. 2.
mystical body; he is the Spirit of life in Jesus Christ their Head, and from
him as from their Head flows into each of them. Thirdly, he dwells in them
as he is the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus Romans 8. 11
from the dead, even in the exceeding greatness of that power, according to
the working of the might of that power which he wrought and put forth in Christ
when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the
above-heavenlies, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
far above all principality and power, and might, and dominion, and every name
of Renown, that is named and Renowned, not only in this world, but also in that
which is to come, and put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the
head over all things to the Church, which is his body, the fullness of him that
fills all in all. Fourthly, he dwells in them as the Spirit of the Father,
and as the Spirit of the ^onne; he who takes them to be his Sons by
Adoption, he sends the Spirit of his Son into their Gal. 4. 6. 1 John 4. 8,
9, 10, 13.
hearts. God is love; here is love; God the Father sends his Son into the
world; God the Father and God the Son send the Spirit into the hearts of
those that shall be saved; God the holy Ghost given unto them sheds abroad upon
their hearts this love; he dwells in them doing this work, and by him the Father
and the Son dwell in them; from hence they cannot but say with the beloved
Disciple, Here is love: that God through Christ by his Spirit should dwell in
them, that by the Spirit through Christ they should have access unto the
Father. Fifthly, he dwells in them in all the f^re-named eminent and peculiar
works of saving application, and in the presence and efficacy of all his
glorious salvifical Epithetes and Appellations, Names and Titles; he is in them
the Spirit of faith, the Spirit of truth, the Spirit of grace and prayer, the
comforted, the anointing, the earnest, and so of the rest; and in this glory
the Spirit dwells in them; the Holy Ghost delights to fill his house with
his glory, and to rest there: this is his in-dwelling, which raises and
advances all which has been hitherto delivered.

SECT. 7.
6. The time of the coming of the Holy Ghost.
Now for this great work there is a season 6. The special season of his coming.
in which the Spirit has his day; for as the Son came down from heaven in the
fullness of time, sent of God the Father according to the promises in the Old
Testament delivered, and had his day with the Church of God on earth; so the
Holy Ghost he came down from heaven in his proper time according to promise,
sent of God the Father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ. And although the Spirit
of God was given and wrought by the Word savingly in the times of the Old
Testament, and from the first preaching of the Gospel to our fallen first
Parents in Paradise, and down-wards in the old world, and from the flood till
the giving of the Law by Moses; yet in respect of the promised effusion, or
pourings out of the Spirit, and in regard of the clearness, eminency and ample
largeness of his presence and workings as such, his giving, coming and sending
has a peculiar season, therefore it is said, the Spirit was not yet given,
because Jesus was not yet glorified; and Joh. 7. 39.
Christ says, If I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I
Joh. 16. 7.
depart, I will send him unto you: This season began on the day of Pentecost
next after the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, the History whereof
we have in Acts 2. And this season of his presence, and power has continued
and does continue all the time of the New Testament Ministry; and the glory of
the season is according to the power, plenty and purity of the preaching of the
everlasting Gospel; for seeing the Spirit accompanies the Word, look as the
Gospel had its time when it began to be preached in all the world, so the
Spirit also was sent; and as the Gospel goes forth, so is the Spirit given:
the Holy Ghost came upon the Apostles, and endued them with power from on High
that they might be able to deliver the whole Counsel of God, all the secrets
and mysteries of salvation, that they might preach it to all the world, to all
Nations, and it might bring forth fruit in the conversion of multitudes, and in
the planting of Churches every where, and that they might leave the same in
writing, giving us the New Testament, and perfecting the whole Canon of the
Scripture, and all this infallibly. And in and with this Gospel, to which never
one line more shall be added, the Holy Ghost is present, and works and rules
in the place of Jesus Christ until this second coming to judgment.

Under the Old Testament the Spirit was as a Spirit of bondage, because the Law
was clearly delivered, but the Gospel darkly Romans 8. 14, 15.
under the whole form of shadowy Ceremonies; under the New Testament the Spirit
is as the Spirit of Adoption, for the Gospel openly delivered, the things
themselves that were prophesied of, shadowed out and promised, are given, and
the great mysteries of the Gospel, and all that concerns them are fully and
perfectly made manifest. Now also are Converts born of water and the Holy
Ghost, that is, of the Holy Ghost whose working was 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 4. 1 John
4. 4* 5.
foretold to be like the pouring out of water, and like the opening of springs
in dry ground; now are they baptized, (washed, plunged, dipped,) with the Holy
Ghost and with fire: that is, with zeal answering the glory of the light. The
godly under the Old Testament had Gods holy and free Spirit, but then agreeable
to that Ministry, Gal. 1. 8, 9.
and now as is agreeable to this. And thus the Apostle teaches in Gal. 4. 1,
2, 3, 4. And as there is but one Gospel, and but one Spirit, and never any
other coming of the Spirit, so it is as sure there shall never be any other
dispensation or ministration but this of the New Testament, which is that which
remains; unless you could look for another Christ, or that Jesus Christ had
not fully accomplished the 7. This work of the Spirit is peculiar to the Elect.
work of Renemption, and is not for ever set on the right hand of Majesty, but
must come again to do somewhat which he left undone, and so must to the Tree
and Cross again; there is now no coming of any Spirit, but the coming of
Antichrist, and of the spirit of Antichrist, the spirit of error, of whose
coming the Holy Ghost by the Apostles speaks expressly, therefore all
Pastors and Teachers are bound up to the Word, to the Scripture, and to turn
from that, is to be turned after fables; to teach any other than what they hear
from the Apostles writings, is to sheak of the world, and not of God; to
receive any other, is to run to another Gospel, to pervert the Gospel of
Christ, to run from the blessing, the holy Spirit of promise: and to run
under the Gospels curse.

SECT. 8.
7. The peculiarity and appropriation of the saving work of the Spirit unto the
Elect and Redeemed.
That which commends this work of the Spirit yet further, is this, that is, is
peculiar and appropriated unto the Elect of God the Father, and to the Redeemed
of Christ the Lord. The Spirit of truth is the Comforter, his work under the
New Testament as Comforter, is such a work as none but the chosen of God, the
Redeemed 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20.
of Christ, to whom he was promised, do partake of. There is another work of
the Spirit of truth, the Comforter, which is conviction, not conversion, and
that Joh. 16. 8, 9, 10, 11.
he works on the world, as well as on the chosen of God. This conviction is
such illightning by the Word of the Gospel that thereby the world (that is, the
men that are yet still under the power of sin, possess't with the love of the
world, and whom God leaves to their own reason and lusts) stands clearly and
fully resolved and persuaded of the matter in hand, and set down and concluded
under it, so that they are self-condemned, if they do ought against that light.
This conviction by the Spirit is of three things: first, of sin; even of
unbelief and disobedience to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, that that unbelief and
disobedience is a sin. Secondly, of righteousness, that the civil
righteousness of men, the righteousness of men's own works is no garment to
cover man's nakedness to hide his sins and shame: it is too short, it is too
filthy, like a menstruous ragge; it is tattered and full of holes; no web, no
texture which can hang together to make a garment, or any cloth of it to wear
in the sight of God; but it is Christ's righteousness consisting of his
obedience and suffering to the death of the Cross performed by him as the
second Adam, the Surety of a sinner; it is this righteousness alone which is a
perfect righteousness, or righteousness which God accepts, as appears in
that Jesus Christ ascends to heaven, and goes to the Father, the Father
receiving him to highest glory as he that has done and accomplished perfectly
the work for which he sent him into the world, and he shall never come more to
be seen of the world in that form of humiliation in which he came before.
Thirdly, of judgment, that Satan the Serpent and his seed are condemned or
sentenced, and are going irrecoverably to perdition, but Jesus Christ and his
seed justified by his knowledge, are certainly blessed; yea, of judgment upon
the world: Idols and all false religions and of judgment found in the true
Christian Religion alone, and in the judicious orderly government of Christ set
up in his Gospel, and thereby in the hearts and lives of true believers that
embrace the same unfeignedly, in and by which the power of Satan is broken, and
his works dissolved.

This work of conviction is an excellent work of the Holy Ghost, it is also
wrought upon the Elect; but it is common, the world thus far feels the mighty
power of Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6. Joh. 16. 13, 14, 15.
the working of the Spirit in the Gospel; but the work of the Spirit on the
Church of the saved ones is conversion or regeneration, as was said before, in
this work the light is the light of life, the knowledge in renewing. In this
renewing there are two works of the Spirit; the taking out of the sinner the
heart of stone, and the giving to them an heart of flesh; the Spirit so
applies the love of God in Christ, that it melts the flinty heart down to
godly sorrow for sin, as against such a God, so gracious, it turns it quite
about to God, and centers it on God and Christ; it cures the soul of three
evils otherwise incurable; alienations of mind and heart from Timor cultus and
culpa.
the life of God, offence-taking at his Works and Word, and Impenitency: it
puts into it the holy fear of reverence and to offend: it raises high
estimation of God in Christ, as of our chief good, with hungrings and
thirstings out of poverty of spirit, a meekned soul and contrite heart: it
raises appetite to the means sanctified of God, and having the promise of the
Spirit, as after the Word, the Sabbath, the Ordinanc^s of Ministry and
Worship, the Ordinances for fellowship, and for the exercise of the power of
the Keys, as to means of communion with God and Christ; this making anew is
with union and unction, union to Christ and Christians, by union with Christ,
they have union with the Father, and this union is to Adoption and
marriage-union, and from this union comes continual influences, and for ever;
unction is to be Kings and Priests to God the Father of our Lord Jesus; this
first work of grace is wholly above the work of conviction; and the Spirit
works that and all the rest as an Agent within; thus you have the seven
things proposed for explication.

It is also profitable before we come to application of this Doctrine, that we
briefly show thee why, the grounds and reasons.

SECT. 9.
The Holy Ghost is the applier of salvation. The reasons why the work of the
Spirit is to apply.

1. Because salvation is the work of God who is three in persons; it is the
work of the three persons in the manifestation of their distinct glory which is
ad intra, within the Godhead; mark that I say, the manifestation of the
distinct glory of each, wherein each person being distinct, and the works of
each distinct, (the Father begets the Son, the Son is begotten of the
Father, the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son;) the glory of
each distinctly is manifested, (as far as it can be communicable) in this work
of salvation: the Father loves with the love wherewith he loves the Son, and is
Father to them in his Son; this is the love of the Father, the Son is the
Mediator to bring them to the Father, by redeeming them, giving himself a
ransom to his Fathers justice, bringing in an everlasting righteousness to
cloth them withal, purchasing for them the Spirit and all spiritual blessings
in the heavenly places wherewith his Father may bless them: this is the grace
of the Son, the Holy Ghost he communicates the love of the Father, and the
grace of the Son, and is the Spirit of Regeneration, the Spirit of Adoption,
the Spirit of sanctification, the Spirit of union and unction abiding in them
for ever to their preservation in Christ Jesus, and in the Father, so that they
are and continue in the Father and in the Son; this is the communion of the
Holy Ghost.

2. Because this is the order of the working of the three persons in the
Godhead; God the Father begins the work, God the Son is the person through
whom as his eternal wisdom he does the work, God the Holy Ghost is the person
by whom as by the eternal power of the most High both the Father and the Son
do complete the work; therefore in the work of salvation God willing and
determining to imprint upon the saved ones, the name of the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, in their distinct glory to Mat. 28. 19
the uttermost, according to the distinct manner of subsisting or existing
distinctly that each of them might be experimentally known, believed in and
worshipped of them he will save, the work of application is proper to God the
Holy Ghost.

3. God the Holy Ghost must be the Applier, the Comforter, or else none could
be saved, none partake of the comfort of this salvation; for all men are dead
in sin, lie among the dead, none can quicken their own souls; they are from
beneath, under the power of sin, and Satan, and the Law; they are in a state of
enmity, alienation, impenitency and unbelief invincible to any created power or
means; there is a Christ, there is a Father, and let this be told us a thousand
times over, and we left to our best abilities to receive this declared love and
grace, this is all we can do, we can draw back, but cannot draw near to the
saving of the soul; we can behold with our rational abilities, and wonder, but
then we despise and so perish: we can discern it but under carnal notions and
count it foolishness, we can but receive it in vain; we can but turn his grace
into wantonness; we will be establishing our own righteousness by all that is
delivered in the Gospel, and so become more stout, proud, formal and secure;
and Christ crucified, who should be precious and our only glory and rejoicing,
will be to us a stumbling block and a Rock of offense; and under the form we
will be the more stiff, though perhaps the more secret sometimes, and ever
among men the more plausible deniers of the power of godliness. Oh let the
holy Spirit of life and power come by the Gospel, and bring it home with much
power and much assurance, or else all perish; we all perish for ever, with
Christ in our ears, in our mouths, in our best natural understandings, with the
Gospel preached in our streets, with high and low applauding of the mercies of
God.

4. God the Holy Ghost must be the applier, that all the love of God the
Father, and the grace of the Son set forth in the Gospel may be thorough and
effectual even to one awakened to see his sin and cursednesse, and that we
once brought to faith in Christ might be for ever safe. An awakened sinner how
will he run from God, run into the gulf of despair, or gad about to change
his way, or caught at straws to save from sinking! but when Christ is proposed,
he cannot lift up himself to draw near to meet him in the ways of his grace.
No, the Spirit of truth must come as the Comforter, as the Arm and right hand
of the Lord to bring Christ and the soul together, to comfo^t and revive the
broken in heart; he must create the fruit of the lips of Ministers to be peace;
the believing and revived souls how soon would they lose their graces and
comforts, were not the Holy Ghost the Comforter given unto them to dwell in
them for ever! here, here is our safety.

5. By the Word which the Spirit ingrafts, the Spirit comes in his communion,
that the believer might have the witness within him; and then can nothing
deprive him of the comfort of his salvation.

SECT. 10.
The Use of this Doctrine is first for Information.
This truth, that the Holy Ghost makes The use of this. 1. Information.
the application of the salvation of sinners by Jesus Christ, is for singular
use; for Information, and for Exhortation. First, for I^formation; it informs
us of four things; first, of the excellency of the Word of God, the Scripture,
and in special of the Word of the New Testament; it is the Chariot of the
Spirit, in which the Spirit of truth comes into our hearts; the Spirit
breathed it at first, and in it still the Spirit breaths. It is never without
the movings and workings of the Holy Ghost in strivings, in convictions upon
all men to whom it comes, and in conversion to the chosen of God. It is the
power of God to salvation to all that believe, whether Jews or Gentiles.
Secondly, of the excellency of the Ministry of the New Testament which
ministers or. 3. ^
the spirit, and is the Ministry of the Spirit; which makes the receivers of
the Gospel to be the Epistles of Christ, written not with ink, but with the
Spirit of the living God; not in Tables of stone, but in fleshly Tables of the
heart; and all this ministered by the Ministers of Christ, by which God makes
manifest the savor 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16.
of the knowledge of Christ, unto God a sweet savor in them that are saved, to
whom ir is the savor of life unto life, and in them that perish, to whom it is
the savor of death unto death, but in both a sweet savor unto God; and by it
he perfumes the world. Thirdly, of the worth of a true Christian; the Spirit of
God and of Christ dwells in him, he has the witness in himself, he has
this anointing. Fourthly, of the excellency of the work of grace in the Convert
above all that is found of virtue, praise, or worth in any other people in the
world. The Gospel Convert is the spiritual man, he is one in the Spirit, one
after the Spirit, he is one spirit with the Lord Christ; their very bodies are
the consecrated Temples of the Holy Ghost; this makes one a good man, this
makes a difference among men; some have the Spirit; some though they may
pretend to it, yet seeing they are not delivered from sensuality, nor from
selfconceitednesse Jude 19. (...).
which shows it self in removing all the bounds which God has set between
his Church and the world, and in setting no bounds, or in setting bounds of
their own, they have not the Spirit.

There are other spirits besides the Spirit of God: and there are who have the
Spirit of God, and yet they have not the Spirit in that sense of which we speak
here.

There are five sorts of spirits which are not the Spirit of God, and they have
a Five sorts of spirits that have much power on men, which are not the Spirit
of God.
great stroke upon men.

1. The spirit of man which knows what is in this man; this is the soul which
animates the body, which is endued with reason, which has understanding and
will, which has conscience, that is, a power to reflect upon himself and upon
all within him, to view and know his own thoughts and counsels, and all his
desires and actions, and then to make up a judgment upon it for God with or
against the man; the soul in respect of this power, 1 Cor. 2. 11, 14.
called the conscience, is the spirit of man; but this animal man receives not
the things of the Spirit of God, nor can know them; they are far above, out of
their reach.

2. The spirit of the world; this is the wisdom of the world wherewith
Philosophers, Princes, wise Statesmen and Politicians, learned men, Inventers
of arts, trades and manufactures, Merchants, Rich men, Navigators, warlike
Heroes, Renowned men have excelled; whose power and force lies within the
compass of humane reason, and is accounted the perfection of the mind. This
spirit the world is proud of; this says Paul, we leave to the world, to the
men of the 1 Cor. 2. 12.
world, this spirit is not sinful in it self.

3. The spirit of lust that dwells in Jam. 45. ^ ^oh, 5. 19. and 2. 15, 16
us; this is the spirit of that world which is placed in wickedness, of that
world which is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of
life; this is a sinful spirit, and it reigns in all men by nature, and
beslaveth the two former spirits; the wisdom of the world, and the very soul
and conscience of man; this is the impulse of the former spirit of the world,
the life and power of it, the malignity and wickedness of it. And this spirit
is the spirit of envy, pride, ambition, revenge, self-love, atheism,
profanesse and superstition; it is the spirit of timidity or base pusillanimous
fear, and of tyrannical, domineering oppression. The more basely fearful, the
more proudly tyrannical.

4. The spirit Satan, who works effectually in all men by nature; he is the 1
John 4. 2, 3, 6. 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. Zach. 13. 2 Rev. 16. 14
father of lusts, and the father of lies; and in that regard he is the spirit
of error, the spirit of Apostasy, and of the doctrine of Devils; we read of
unclean spirits, the spirits of Devils which come out of the mouth of the
Dragon, as well as out of the mouth of the Beast, and our of the mouth of the
false Prophet; these are those men who love to broach such lies in Religion,
colored over with hypocrisy. Romans 11. 8 Isa. 29. 10, 14. and 6. 9.


5. The spirit of slumber, which is sent of God in his righteous judgment for
hardnings and rebellion against the light of his Word, and for gainsaying of
unbelief under the Gospel. This is a stupid, sottish heart, hard and hardened,
benumbed, aston'd as with a lethargy, that feels not, nor understands divine
and spiritual things, although it be never so much rouzed, punched and gored,
so that they startle, but presently nod, and fall fast asleep again. And here
not only the heart is so secure, but there is also a force and impulse of Satan
sent of God as a righteous judge, which carries them mightily and beyond what
is ordinarily found in things which men do alone as men; this is called a
spirit of slumber; the like reason is to be held in the forenamed spirits.
Error is called the spirit of error, and envy the spirit of envy, and the
wisdom of the the world is called the spirit of the world, because of this
force appearing in it, acting of it, which force comes from the energy or
effectual working of the Devil, who is an evil Angel, a spirit indeed.

But besides these spirits, there is the 1 Cor. 2. 10, 12.
Spirit of God, considered as set in opposition to the spirit of man and of the
world; this is the spirit spoken of in this Doctrine; yet one that has not
this Spirit of God as the Spirit of grace, may have the Spirit of God in some
lesser and lower workings and presence; he may have some excellent gifts of the
Spirit of God; as for instance, he may have the Spirit of government as King
Saul had: he may have the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, gifting him with
faith of miracles, Mat. 7. 21. 1 Cor. 12.
with tongues, with prophecy or with wisdom, and the like: he may have the
ordinary gifts of the Spirit, such are all ministerial gifts: he may have the
common graces of the Spirit, as general illumination, convictions, faith
historical and temporary, and thereupon tastes of the good Word of God, the Word
of the Gospel, and of the powers of the world to come, and many fruits arising
from thence: insomuch that by falling away willingly, and sinning against such
grace, he may resist the Holy Ghost, and may run so high in this way to
commit the sin against the Holy Ghost, that unpardonable sin, that sin
unto death: he Heb. 6. 3, 4. and 10. 26, 29.
may have the spirit of bondage, which is a good work, but not enough to life
and salvation. It is the work of the Law accompanied with the Spirit quickening
that part of Gods Word upon the soul, and working lively and powerfully in the
Ministry thereof.

Now the work of grace is above all this, and the Christian in respect of this
renewing and sanctifying work of the Spirit is more excellent than any other
however otherwise qualified. Pharaoh admiring in Joseph the work of the Spirit,
as the Spirit of prophecy, and of the interpretation of dreams, said of him,
Can we find such a man as this is, a man in Genesis 41. 38
whom the Spirit of God is? but much more worthily may these words be applied
to the regenerate and sanctified by faith which is in Jesus Christ, which makes
them workers of righteousness, and no more workers of iniquity, which is that
good work which he that has begun in Phil. 1. 6.
any, will not cease nor fail to perfect it till the day of Christ.

SECT. 11.
The Use of Exhortation in the first branch of it.
Therefore let the Exhortation take place with you both to seek the Spirit, and
Use 2. Exhortation to seek the Spirit. The way and means to receive the holy
Ghost in ten directions.
to be rightly ordered toward him when you have him.

1. Attend the way and means whereby you may receive the Holy Ghost; Seek the
sense and comfort of the gracious presence and the lively working of the Spirit
of Sanctification and Adoption; for this purpose these are choice directions.

First, Come out from the world, and give thy self up to the Word. The world
cannot receive the Spirit; thou art among and of the world by nature; Come out
from among them, and touch not the unclean thing; come out from the worlds
lusts, the worlds vanities and pomps, the worlds traditions, the worlds Idols
and superstitions, the Religions and Devotions, as ever thou would have God
to receive thee into fellowship with Jesus Christ his Son through the
communion or communication of his Spirit; say of all these, What have I to do
any more with you? the Spirit is the holy Spirit; the world and the things of
the world are the unclean thing. The word is the vehicle, the Chariot of the
Spirit; he spoke by the Prophets and Apostles, and he for ever works in and by
their doctrine. By the Word engrafted, the Spirit dwells in the heart; Receive
the Word, let it be in the truths contained in it, as a heavenly Cyons, which
entertained with meekness, and with laying aside all superfluity of
wickedness, may be so naturallized into thee, that thou may be turned into
the nature of it, and then thou shall find the Holy Ghost enter into thee, and
take up his habitation in thee: Let the Word of Christ dwell richly in thee in
all wisdom, and the Spirit of Christ will fill thee with grace and glory. The
Scripture is the storehouse of Wisdom; Wisdom speaks there; justify
Wisdom, and thou art a child of Wisdom whom the Holy Ghost has regenerated;
this is the incorruptible seed of which Gods children are born anew; who is the
spiritual, but he that is made up of the Word of God? he who has the Word of
Christ to be the reason of his reason, the light of his mind, the life of his
heart, and the rule of his life, he is the Christian indeed.

Secondly, but when thou come to the Word, thou will be sure to meet with
reproofs; no looking into that glass, but thou will see all amiss. Christ
knows he shall find thee a fool, and a scorner; simple, and loving
simplicity; ignorant, and hating knowledge; now know he will reprove, but yet
with serious exhortations and alluring invitations, calling and crying after
thee; what then is to be done? Turn, Turn at wisdom's reproofs, and the promise
of the pouring out of the Spirit unto thee is thine.

Thirdly, Behold the Promises, and how they are made. I will put my Spirit
within you says God, then shall ye remember Ezekiel. 36. 25, 31, 32.
your own evil ways and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your
selves in your own sight for your iniquities and for your abominations.
Remember thy ways and doings that have not been good, and loath thy self,
that is all the qualification that is required of thee, that thou may enjoy
this great and all other the precious promises of the Covenant of grace.

Fourthly, Wait on the preaching of the Gospel, for that is the Ministry of
the 2 Cor. 3. 6, 8. Gal. 3. 2.
Spirit: The Spirit is given and received by the preaching and hearing of the
Word of the Gospel; the faith and not the Law; by hearing that glorious,
heavenly Law of faith which excludes boasting, not the Law of works.

Fifthly, Consider the gift, and who it is that bestows the gift, appointed
to Joh. 4. 10.
that work of God the Father; even Jesus Christ the Son of God sent in our
flesh, made of a woman, and made under the Law to redeem us from under the Law;
and consider that God the Father is in and through this Christ our heavenly
Father: Luke 11. 13
Consider these three things, and then ask the Holy Ghost by prayer, for he is
promised to those that ask him. The gift indeed is great, but no less a gift
will do us good; is it great, and is it not worth the asking? it is too great
and good for us, but Christ is the giver, the Father is the giver; he that gave
freely for a sinner, for chief of sinners his own Son, and gave himself a God
in Covenant, and a Father in that his Son, he will not think the gift too
good and too great, to give his holy Spirit. Ask then, Ask of thy heavenly
Father, Ask for his Son Christ Jesus sake, not for thy own sake; this gift
may be had for asking.

Sixthly, Let thy utter destituteness and want of the spirit the more felt, the
more make thee athirst; and then let thy thirsty soul call and cry for this
living water; Isa 43. 3.
Mark the promises I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and stoods upon
Joh. 7. 37, 38.
the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon
thine offspring. The thirsty coming unto Christ and believing on him, shall
have the Spirit given unto him.

Seventhly, Cherish the motions of the Spirit in and by the word moving upon
thy heart. Its motions, that we may know them, are these. 1. The revealing of
things supernatural, and the setting home of holy truths; he causes by the
Word, the light to arise and shine upon thee, and lets it in by the
understanding upon thy heart, and thus is striving with thee to give it
entertainment. Shut not thine eyes, draw the curtain of neglect and security:
open the doors and let the truth come close to thy heart, and sink down deep
into thy soul. 2. The discovery of our sins and sinfulness, and rebukes to
astonishment general, and to sorrow special, unto the manifesting of the
unreasonablenesse of our carnal reason, and of the misplacing of our
affections; and in both these laying low the stournesse and haughtiness of
man, a most necessary work; for we are not more sinful then proud and lofty, as
appears by our scorning, and our delight at least in the secret disposition of
a scorning heart at all the counsels of wisdom that tend to the power of
Godliness. 3. The leading to Christ crucified for justification, presenting
Gods great mercy, and Jesus Christ's obedience and sufferings to the heart, and
carrying out the heart to it with such heart-breakings as produce
supplications, and with such persuasions as produce joy and peace. 4. The
framing and fashioning to holy obedience with soulpurifyings, and with
readiness and liveliness. 5. The raising of strong lustings, that is, holy
hatred, fear, sorrow, carfulness, blushings and shame, vehement desire,
indignation, reve^ge and endeavors to grow better and better by all the means
of grace, by failings, by falls, by experiments, by mercies, by corrections, by
word and works, by all occurrences joyous or grievous, and all the creatures.
These are the motions of the Spirit; now then cherish these.

Eighthly, Take ^eed of Intemparency; that is, all excess in the use of things
lawful, of things which we must use of necessity and of duty. It is excess
when the use of such things (as of meat, drink, apparel, and honest
recreations) causes uncircumspect walking, takes off from wise Redemption of
our time, deadeth or wastes spiritual mirth and melody of heart and behavior,
destroys thankfulness to God as Father through Christ, and lifts up from
submission one to another in the fear of God. The Context in Ephesians. 5. from
ver. 15. to v. 22. teaches this.

Ninthly, Obey God in his Gospel, and in the ministry of it. This obedience is
Act. 5. 32. Act. 2. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42.
expressed in repentance, and the works of the truly penitent: in glad
receiving of the Word; in receiving the ^o^pel-Ordinances, and continuing in
the use of them* in forsaking the ways of an untoward generation, cross and
opposing together with their society: and in embracing the ways and society of
the faithful and godly, together with the godly faithful Ministers who labor
among us, and admonish us.

Tenthly, Love the Lord Jesus Christ, Joh. 14. 15 16. 1 John 3. 22 23, 24.
and out of love to him, have, hold and keep his Commandments of faith and love
which he has given in charge: the Spirit who glorifieth Jesus Christ will
dwell, and will not abide to come, but to those who delight in doing Christ's
Commands, and the things that are pleasing in his sight.

This is the first branch of Exhortation: the second follows concerning

SECT. 12.
The ordering of the believers aright toward the holy Ghost given to them.
When we have received the Spirit, let us have our hearts upon the duties which
To be ordered aright toward the Spirit.
we owe toward him; they are these: they order us aright in two particulars:
First, that we avoid all sinning against the Spirit. Secondly, that we express
the virtue of his Communion, and manifest his name put upon us in our Baptism,
and his glory dwelling in us, and resting on us.

There are many ways of sinning against In five rules for avoiding evils
against the Spirit.
the Spirit, all which are the more dangerous because not discerned by the
world, and chiefly because they are against the applying of the remedy provided
for sinners in Jesus Christ, lest it should be received in vain, and lest any
should fail of the grace of God. Herein our duty is laid down in five rules.

1. Quench not the Spirit; this is done, 1. by neglecting or despising the Word
1 These. 5. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 14. 2.
and the means of grace which have the promise of the Spirit, especially among
all the means, that of Prophesying, or the Preaching of the Word. 2. By
permitting 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. with chapter 4. 2, 3.
any thing to put our hearts out of a gracious f^ame. And this is a gracious
frame, a heart seeking others edification, full of love and goodness, joyful
in the Lord Jesus, prayerful, thankful, nourishing the gifts, graces and
motions of the Spirit in our selves, or any others in whomsoever we perceive
them stirring them up, and blowing that holy fire, highly esteeming the gifts,
operations and administrations of faithful preaching, bringing all to the
touchstone of the Word, tenacious of that which is good, fleeing the appearing
of sin of all sorts, and seeking growth in sanctification; this is gathered
from the Context in verse 14. to the 24. of 1 These. 5. The Spirit is like fire:
fire consumes stubble, purifieth metals, illighteneth and heateth, and is of
vehement and powerful acting to turn all into fire, and make all things like it
self. So the Spirit, it burns out our lusts, it purifieth the soul, it gives
light and heat of knowledge and zeal, it makes spiritual, and that which is of
the Spirit is Spirit. The Spirit is like the holy fire which came down from
heaven upon the Altar, which the Priests by Office were to keep in that it
might never go out. Shall we quench the Spirit without which there is neither
light nor hear of saving good, or salvifical upon the face of the earth? shall
we that are a spiritual Pri^^t-hood, let this heavenly fire go out for want of
stirring it up, and of fuelling it? Now as fire, so the Spirit may be quenched:
It Is workings of a lesser and lower degree than of renewing grace may be
utterly extinguished; its gifts may grow rusty, and the Spirit in that working
may depart wholly, as it did from Saul, and an evil spirit come in the room of
it. His peculiar works and saving may be weakened and lost for acts and
degrees, and sensible feelings, as in David, Take not thy holy Psa. 51. 11.
Spirit from me, Restore me the ^oy of thy salvation.

2. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4. 30. with the context in ver. 25.
to the end of the chap.
by the usual and accustomary evils of the tongue in lying and corrupt
communication: by the sins of unbridled passions, of idleness, and whatever it
be that breaks out against kindness, tender-heartednesse, and readiness to
forgive. A gracious and pure language, a diligent and liberal hand that labors
to have whereof to give to him that needs, a calm and quiet breast, a loving
heart full of the bowels of Jesus Christ, these rejoice and glad the Spirit of
God: All the other (which are sins that discover themselves after calling) do
sad the Spirit whom we should make joyful, as our best guest, our best friend,
who comes and dwells in us purposely to seal us up unto the day of redemption:
these and all sins unmortified (I mean, not singled out particularly, and
brought under the work of mortification and put into that furnace,) after
conversion do spoil the sealing of the Spirit, that it cannot come off fair
and full; these also are against the comfort we should have in the day of
redemption, when Jesus Christ shall come in glory to receive his redeemed ones
to himself, and manifest to all the perfection of that work in righteousness;
how shall he condemn the world for idle words, and his Redeemed ones live with
idle hands and filthy rotten discourse? or shall he receive those for adopted
sons and daughters, when they are of spirits as implacable, proud, passionate
and malicious as those who are without Christ in the world, in whom the spirit
of Satan works effectually?

3. Resist not the holy Ghost much less, for that is a higher degree of
sinning; to resist is out of an uncircumcised natural heart and ear to rise
up, and to be of an hostile mind and behavior against the ministry, and to
fall foul upon the doctrine delivered according to the Word of the Old and New
Testament, or upon Act. 7. 51.
the Ministers for their doctrines sake.

4. Tempt not the holy Ghost; by pretending Act. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 9.
such works of faith, love, and obedience which are most eminent fruits of the
Spirit in the truly and eminently gracious, answerable to the times of light,
and the state of the Church which we live in, when indeed it is but a pretense,
and we know that we play the hypocrites, lying, dissembling, and dealing
falsely therein, as if we had not to deal with God, with God the holy Spirit,
but with men whom we may easily deceive.

5. Defile not his Temple: that is, pollute 1 Cor. 3. 17
neither your own selves nor other Christians, neither yours nor their souls or
bodies, either with corrupt and unprofitable doctrine, or with corrupt and vain
manners; or with dividing principles or practices, causing rents and schisme^,
parties and factions in the Church of Christ.

Again, that we may be rightly ordered In five rules to show the virtue of the
Communion of the holy Ghost. Jude 20. Ephesians. 6. ^8. 1 Cor. 2. 4. Col. 1. 8. 1
Cor. 12. 7 Gal* 5. 25. Act. 9. 31.
toward the Spirit, we ought to show forth the power of his Communion, the
manifestation of his residence in us, and the glory of his name put upon us in
our Baptism in these duties following.

1. Perform all duties, and exercise all graces in the power of the Spirit;
pray in the holy Ghost, Preach in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit,
love in the Spirit, let the exercise of all gifts be the manifestation of the
Spirit: live inwardly in the Spirit, walk in the strength of the graces, in the
power of the spiritual Gospel truths, the articles of faith, and in the
comforts of the holy Ghost, even of the exceeding great and precious promises
of the Gospel quickened upon the heart by the Holy Spirit of promise.

2. Be filled with the Spirit; here can be no sinful excess; excessive
fullness is ^ph. 5. 18. (...) ^3. ^2
the just and due measure and proportion in which we should desire the Spirits
presence and working. The Holy Ghost sometimes fills with special force and
po^e^ to some particular Acts of duty: So P^t^r and all the Apostles after
solemn pr^^er, were silled with the holy Ghost enabling to speak the Word with
boldness, with liberty of Spirit and of speech. Sometime he fills with great
joy: as in the Disciples when they saw the courage of the Apostle Paul and
Barnabas under expulsion, and the wise and gracious guidance of Gods expelled
servants for the spreading of the Gospel, and propagating thereof to other
parts of the world. Act. 7. 55. Act. 6. 3. 1 Cor. 1. 5. 2 Cor. 8. 7.
Sometime with the might of patience, and power of hope, and of all graces,
fitting for Martyrdom, as in Stephen. Sometime he fills some members with
special abilities and gifts, as with wisdom, with utterance, with all
knowledge, with all diligence.

All this fullness of the Spirit God keeps in his own hand to give when he
pleases, and it is of reward: but all graces that accompany salvation, that
have salvation in them, of them we should e^pecially desire to be full; as of
faith, of love to God, to Christ, to the Word, and to the Saints, and of a
lively patient hope; this is our work, and is of the ordinary working of God
through Christ in his live-members. And not only should we seek to be full of
these graces, but of them and of the holy Ghost: (as in all the places above
mentioned, the words run and not in vain) that is, filled full of a singular
presence, force, and working of the holy Spirit, acting and directing the mind
and heart unto that which is good and holy, with efficacy and power.

3. Preserve the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; this we ought to be
endeavoring, Ephesians. 4. 3 Phil. 1. 27.
though we cannot effect what we would by reason of the destroyers of this
unity, and though we have many failings unbeseeming this unity. It is an
Evangelical command and endeavor; we may, we ought to stand fast in one
spirit, striving together for the faith of the Gospel; when the faith of the
Gospel is opposed, and is in the conflict, we ought to strive and wrestle,
taking the Gospels part against the adversaries thereof; and this we should do
together with all the Saints and faithful, especially with those with whom we
live: and with them let us stand fast in one Spirit. The unity of the faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God in his Gospel which is but one, and
the same word of truth, should unite us in love, and bind us to the peace, with
lowliness and forbearance, and with due respect to the variety of the gifts of
the Spirit, which are the Spirits rich embroidery, the ornament of the Church,
no way of themselves hindering unity, and orderly employed, and improved are to
the singular profit and benefit of all and every one of the members of Christ's
mystical body.

4. Sow to the Spirit; lay out your substance, Gal. 6. 8.
and your worldly goods to spiritual uses; to the maintenance of Christ's
Ministry and Ordinances, to the promoting of the Gospel, the Church, all grace
and holiness, and the hopes of glory. Seek first Gods Kingdom and
righteousness; Mat. 6. 33.
buy the truth and sell it not; say not, I must provide estates for my
children, maintain my family, raise my posterity. God cannot be mocked; if thou
honor not the Lord with thy substance, thou do but sow to the flesh, and of
the flesh thou shall reap corruption: but he that sows to the Spirit, shall
of the Spirit reap life everlasting Say not, I have already done this and that
good work; have thou an opportunity? do still more with thy wealth and
temporals: be not weary of well-doing, the reaping time will come in due
season. Faint not therefore, neither flag in the sowing time; there is now the
seed time, the harvest day is to come in another world.

5. Lastly, as it is in this Text, Walk after the Spirit, and not after the
flesh; this duty makes up the description of the spirituals of the true
Christian; the person whom God has loved to life everlasting, and for whom the
Son of God came into the world, and gave himself to the death. This is the
second Consideration of the words of the Apostle, which now comes to be
perused, and that as they give us the third Doctrine, which is the more
necessary, the more excellent than the two former are, and the more desirable,
the more searching and differencing the children of God from the men of the
world.

CHAP. X.
Treating of the third great truth; The lively description of the persons that
shall be saved, and do partake of this salvation by Jesus Christ, viz. They are
such who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

SECT. 1. Doctrine 3. The persons for whom God gave his Son, and the Son came
into the world, and gave himself, are those that walk not after the flesh but
after the Spirit.

THe third great doctrine delivered by our Apostle in these verses, this.

They that walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, these are they for
whom God sent his own Son to become flesh, in the likeness of sinful flesh,
to be a sacrifice for their sins, and whose sins God condemned in the flesh
of his Son, that in and for them the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled; or take it thus:

Those in whom the Spirit dwells, applying savingly the love of the Father and
the grace of the Son, in them he so mightily rules, that they walk not after
the flesh but after the Spirit.

That we may not be deceived in a matter of such importance as this is of, let
us

1. Understand the force of the words. 2. Take them asunder in particular
Opened in six particulars.
doctrines. 3. And then Consider the Regency of the flesh. 4. The Regency of
the Spirit. 5. The walk after the flesh. 6. The walk after the Spirit.
And seventhly, the uses of the whole.

First, for the meaning of the words: By flesh, is meant the unregenerate part
1. The meaning and force of the words. Col. 2. 18. Mat. 15. 19 20.
in the sanctified believer; the man as defiled with sin; the nature of man,
of man corrupted by sin. By flesh is not meant, 1. Flesh in the substance of
it, the body opposed to the soul, but both body and soul made flesh and carnal,
as carnal is opposed to spiritual; there is the fleshly mind; the soul as well
as the body is defiled with sin and depraved; the soul defiles the body; out
of the heart comes that which defiles the man; by flesh therefore we must not
understand the substance of flesh which is Gods Creature, and therefore good:
and has no cause of sin in it, for God is not the Author of sin: neither may
his workmanship be blamed, without committing that great wickedness of casting
reproach upon our Maker. This is to be held firm against the vile and
pernicious opinions of all ancient Heretics, and our newly up-start erroneous
spirits: and against the received sayings of Philosophers, and the dangerous
tenets and expressions of some Divines, as if the mind and soul were pure, and
receives its defilement from the body. By flesh is not meant, 2. Flesh in the
natural desires of food, sleep, generation, raiment, recreation, motion, rest,
and if there be any thing else that accompanies the life of man in this world.
These are not evil in themselves, it is inordinacy that makes them evil, faulty
and sinful. Nor does flesh note out, 3. Humane wisdom and reason, and the
moral actings and projectings thereof: All which kept within their own sphere,
and acting regularly, are most useful to societies, commendable among all, and
serviceable to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. Nor much less by flesh may be
understood 4. The sparkles of the light that is born with us and in us, or the
relics of Gods Image in body or soul, or in the whole man. Nor yet under the
word flesh may we understand 5. The necessary helps of this present life, as
lands, money, friends, with the like subsidiary ayds. Nor 6. Natural diseases,
infirmities, or defects of body or mind. In this sense there is an honor due
to the flesh, and a lawful satisfying of its desires and needs: and to deny
them to it, though Col. 2. 23.
upon devout pretense, is sinful, and falls under that Commandment, Thou shall
not kill. But by flesh is meant the sinful disposition; and this is called
flesh, not as if this sinfulness were first in the body; for the soul, the
fairest part of it, the top of it, the mind is polluted; we are strangers from
God in our minds; the spirit (...). Ephesians. 4. 23. Col. 1. 21.
of the mind must be renewed, ere ever it will be good.

Quest. Why then may it be said, Is corruption of nature which is first and
most notably in the chiefest faculties of the soul, called flesh?

Answ. First, Because the very soul is flesh; that is, it is defiled with
sin, and tied down to the senses. Secondly, this pollution is innate and
connate, it is born in us and born with us. It is as old as we are. It was in
us in our very conception, it is bred up with us; It discovers it self as we
discover the use of our reason, and it will be in us while we are in this frame
and building. Thirdly, because we are as tender of it, as we are of our very
flesh. Fourthly, because there is a body of it, a whole consisting of many
members joynted together, and ministering nourishment to every part for the
increase of the whole. A whole composed heap, not only spreading it self
through the whole man, and discovering it self in every member of the body; but
having also all the several wickednesses which ever were committed in it, in
the seed and spawn of them: It is not some one transgression, but many; as the
body is not one member, but many; and these many are knit together in an
hellish order. Fifthly, because this is propagated, as our bodies and flesh is
propagated, but our souls are not. God is the Father of our spirits, but men
the fathers of our bodies; therefore it may well be called flesh. Sixthly,
because the motions of this original pollution are in the members of our bodies.

By spirit is meant, not the soul, nor the mind, or understanding faculty, the
highest that is in man; nor conscience, the Character of the reasonable
creature. But by spirit, is meant the Spirit of Christ sanctifying the man, and
dwelling in him through the Word of God engraffed: and the regenerate part, the
Divine nature or disposition wrought by the Spirit of God, the holy Ghost, and
conformable to the Image of Jesus Christ. I^ this work there is the seed;
first, of all grace, and that under the New Testament, in a largeness;
Secondly, it is in the whole man, in soul, spirit, and body; Thirdly, and that
too in truth or sincerity. Fourthly, it is of God in Christ, for its original.
And fifthly, for its continuance, it is of incorruptible seed and abides for
ever. Sixthly, for its piercing effectualnesse in operation, it leavens the
whole man. It is deepest and chiefest in the soul. It is spreading, and through
in what it works. It is active, according to its own sphere, which is
supernatural, and celestial, yea supercelestial, and according to its rise
which is from the Spirit; for whatsoever is of the Spirit, is Spirit.

After, notes the rule and guide; and from that rule the force which swaies and
carries out the man in his actions.

Walking, notes 1. The course taken upon choice: and 2. The progress in that
course or way: with 3. Pressing on still forwards: and 4. With perseverance,
and constancy till we come to the end.

Not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. That is, refusing that, and
choosing this for guide: and removing from the ways and walks of the flesh, to
go in these that are after the Spirit.

Walking after the flesh is mentioned to show that Original sin is the sin
that reigns; every actual sin has its strength in the corruption of nature.
Thither we must ascend in the work of mortification; if we would kill sin,
dead the root. Crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof. The
lopping of a tree, destroys not the tree; he that would not serve any sin,
must destroy the body of sin, and not some one or two members only: and he
that would destroy the body of sin, must crucify the old man.

Walking after the Spirit, shows that all grace is brought into us from
without, from above, from the holy Ghost. It is not from a seed in us which is
born with us, and lies as the seed of Corn does awhile buried in the earth. It
is not from any power or spirit that is in the Creature, or in this visible
Globe, or in the Creatures Angelical. It is from the Spirit of the Father and
of the Son. Again, this shows that all grace is yet truly in us, from the
holy Ghost dwelling in us through the Word engraffed, or the revealed truth of
the Gospel; from the holy Ghost thus dwelling in us, and renewing, sanctifying,
acting, and leading of us. And lastly, that we are born anew of the Spirit, are
in the Spirit, do live in the Spirit, and are after the Spirit, and then we
walk after the Spirit. We must first be, and live, and afterward walk.

Thus you have the force of the words.

SECT. 2.
The particular truths or doctrines which 2. The words taken asunderin nine
doctrines.
are wrapped in this description, are these.

1. In those that are in Christ, in them there is the Spirit of Christ. The
Spirit in renewing, unites to Christ: their union with Christ is spiritual, not
physical, not moral alone, not personal at all. The Spirit of Christ is in
them, and uniteth them to Christ, and Christ and they are one Spirit, as Man
and Wife are one flesh; this truth arises from this description as it is
referred to the words before in ver. 1. of this Chapter. To them that are in
Christ there is no condemnation. Now this is to be understood of the holy
Ghost, as he is the Anointing wherewith Christ is anointed, even Jesus Christ,
not considered as he is the Son of God simply and absolutely, but as he is
the Christ, God-man: and wherewith from Christ that Holy One, they are
anointed: the work is the work of the third Person, but not a work that makes a
personal union of them to the Holy Ghost.

2. Where the Spirit of Christ is in any, there is also flesh, whiles they are
in this life; where there is grace, there is corruption: though it holds not on
the contrary, where ever there is corruption, there is grace also. Nay, it is
far otherwise, until regeneration there is nothing but corruption in any or
all the men in the world, no, not in the elect of God: but where the Spirit is,
there is flesh, although not walked after. This is gathered from the
description as made up of a negative first, and then of an affirmative, which
shows a nature or disposition in the described here, which is declining and
renouncing one principle, and cleaving to and following sweetly another
principle. Therefore with the regenerate it is thus, their works are mixed,
their actings of their graces are mixed and maimed: All their best duties smell
strong of the flesh; therefore the Regenerate ought to be watchful, and jealous
over themselves, humble to Godward, meek toward man, and making use of Christ
and faith in him in all, doing all in his name or mediation, and looking for
acceptance of all in him alone.

3. That flesh, even in the regenerate and spiritual is so sinful, that if it
were followed, it would destroy them; therefore it is sin in it self, and in
the lusts of it, even in the regenerate; for if it were not sinful, why should
it be renounced? why should it not at some times, and in some cases be allowed?

4. These two, the flesh and the Spirit, Gal. 5. 17.
are contrary one to another. When the Spirit comes in and rules, and the flesh
or corruption of nature cannot rule more, yet it will never yield, it will
never be good: it is not subject to the Law of God, nor can be; the best that
can be made of it, is to mortify it, crucify it, fight it out against it;
therefore from these two contrary principles in one and the same man it is that
in the godly there is a continual fight or deadly war; and cursed be that that
would make up a peace between these two; therefore hence it is that he that is
born again, is born a Soldier, lives by his spiritual sword and valor, and
dies in the Field, and so never dies but is a Conqueror in his death.

5. Where the Spirit is, he rules and reigns; he will not be underling, he
leads where he is; all that is born of God overcomes the whole world. And the
Spirits rule is set up by pulling the flesh out of the Throne, and subduing its
Dominion; therefore the least measure of true grace, the least speak of this
holy fire, be it but as that in smoking flax, is Sovereign, it is judgment
which will come unto victory.

6. The Regency of the Spirit appears in ordering the walks of every one in
whom he is; he renews and sanctifies throughout, he makes a new creature, a new
man, from the spirit of the mind to the outward members; he creates a new
heart, and a new spirit, that there may be a new walk.

7. Those who walk after the flesh, have not the Spirit at all; and therefore
they are not in Christ.

8. By our lives and conversations we may infallibly know w^ether Christ were
sent for us; whether our sins were condemned in his flesh; whether God the
Father loved us so as to send his own Son for us to be our propitiation, or the
Son became flesh, became sin for us; whether he be our righteousness, our
redemption; or whether the Spirit of the Father and the Son has taken
possession of us to shed abroad the Fathers love into, and sprinkles the Sons
blood upon our hearts; whether these be so or no, may be known by the walks of
our lives.

9. So it is, and so it has ever been, and it will for ever be so in this
life, that even among Christians who profess the true Religion, there are two
sorts, some that walk after the flesh, contrary to their profession; and some
that walk after the Spirit, and not after the flesh.

SECT. 3.
Let us now therefore consider of the The Regency of the flesh discovered
generally in ten things.
reign of the Spirit and the flesh, that so these two sorts of Christians, the
carnal and the spiritual, the true and false may know themselves; and because
the flesh is the elder brother in the world, he shall have the honor to be
spoken of in the first place.

The Regency of the flesh may be set forth more generally, or more
particularly; in general, the flesh's Regency consists,

1. In its lonenesse; if there be in us John 3. 6. Joh. 3. 3, 5
nothing but flesh, then be sure the flesh reigns; we are first in the flesh,
conceived and born in sin. If there be nothing but nature, and that which is
natural, the flesh is regnant; for that which is of the flesh is flesh, it can
never arise higher than the compass of its own principle, it can never get up
to things that are above; there is nothing but flesh, unless we be born of the
Spirit; there is nothing but flesh and nature where the Spirit by the Gospel
has had no changing work; and where man's righteousness, or the righteousness
of works, whether of our own works, or of the works of the Law, is still sought
after, and the sinner never yet so far humbled, that now Gal. 3. 10, 12, 18.
Phil. 3. 3, 6, 7.
he has no confidence in the flesh any more.

2. In the love of the lusts of the flesh; these lusts are of three sorts: the
lust of ^ Joh. 2. 16.
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, which do all of them
spring from the love of the world; this is the worlds trinity in unity, which
all men by nature do serve. If the love of the world be in us, the love of the
Father cannot be in us.

3. In the acknowledgment of the Edicts Romans 6. 13
and Commands of the flesh; sin reigns where the lusts of it, that is, the
motions of sin in our members are obeyed; obedience to it proves its
Sovereignty: it is an undeniable truth, his servants we are to whom we obey.
The offering up of the members of our bodies to be weapons to fight for it, and
to be instruments to work for it, shows that flesh is in the Throne.

4. In making provision to ful^ill the To. 13. 14
lusts of the flesh; there is a lawful ((...)) Acts 24. 3. 1 Timothy 5. 8 To. 12.
17
providence and forecast for the discharge of the duties of our particular
callings; for making provision for ours, and for those of our families, for
things honest in the sight of all men; but none ought to be for the flesh, or
for our corrupt nature. The providence which is lawful has this character, to
take the seasons and to improve them with diligence; thus the wisdom of God
teaches, saying, Go to the Pismire thou sluggard, consider her ways and be
wise, which having no Prove. 6. 6, 7, 8.
guide, over-seer or ruler, provideth her meat in the s^mmer, and gathers her
food in the H^rvest; the sluggard is he that sleeps out his Summer season,
and lets slip the Harvest, goes forth in the dead of Winter to gather in
the fruits of the earth; the sinful providence has two marks: first, to make
it a business to project and lay out for the flesh: secondly, to aim at the
satisfying of the lusts thereof; when the flesh has the ((...)) providential
projecting and fore-casting ability at command, and at her service, it is
certain her supremacy is in the full. It is the infallible sign of the
renewing of the mind when the providential ability is sanctified, and is ready
under the command of the Word and Spirit.

5. In sensuality; when the senses bea^ rule, when what is pleasurable has the
Luke 17. 27 Mat. 24. 38. Jude 19. 2 Timothy 3. 4 Phil. 3. 19. Job 31. 7. Jam. 3. 15
stroke with us, and not what is honest, righteous and holy; when we are lovers
of pleasure, more than of God; or those whose God is their belly: that live to
eat, that mind earthly things; those whose hearts walk after their eyes, and
their souls are tied down to their senses; who are mere animals, whose wisdom
is earthly and sensual, their wisdom is also Divellish.

6. In minding and savouring only fleshly things; as to relish temporal things
only or chiefly, and to have no relish of spiritual things, the things of
Jesus Christ, or to savor spiritual things no otherwise than carnally; as
when our Savior spoke of the gift of the Spirit, that living water, to the
woman of Samaria, she said, Lord, give me of this water that I may not thirst,
nor come to this Well to draw. Job. 4. 15.
And when he said to the Jews that there was bread of life, of the which
whosoever should eat, he should never dye; some cried out, Lord, evermore give
us this bread. Good words, but arising Joh. 6. 33, 34.
wholly from earthly apprehensions of the things of which Christ spoke.

7. In the reign of some particular lust Gal. 5. 19, 20.
or known sin, as uncleanness, covetousness, malice, pride, profane
swearing, railing, drunkenness, gluttony; when we live in any manifest work of
the flesh.

8. In the power of carnal princ^ples, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
reasonings and objections against faith and holines^e; these are strong holds,
these are the flesh's fortifications which while they stand undemolished, the
flesh reigns; these be the in-works; when they are taken and slighted, the
flesh is dismantled, and led Captive, but not till then.

9. In the hatred of the godly, the hatred of the brethren, which is the not
loving Gal. 4. 29. 1 John 3. 14, 1.
of them; we cannot know them to love them, but can find them out to reproach,
to shoot out the mouth at them; a strange perverseness, when we can quickly
discern them to slander them, and call them hypocrites, who though they will
not swear, yet will lie; when we cannot see who are godly, Do not all offend in
many things? yet can privily Psalm. 11. 2.
shoot at the upright in heart; when we can see them well enough to shoot at
them, but we cannot see Christ in them to do them offices of love; brethren!
Mat. 25. 43, 45.
we cannot love this brotherhood; what is this communion of Saints? well said,
here is flesh all over.

10. In the speaking evil of the Gospel, and of Christ's name or way, and in an
heart alienated from the life of God; 1 Timothy 5. 14 Ephesians. 4. 18.
from a godly life, a life in which God is seen, and in which it is evident
that the man has seen and known God as he has revealed himself in his Word;
he is an adversary that is glad of an occasion to speak reproachfully of Gods
way; he is in the power of Heathenisme whose heart cannot close with the power
of godliness.

Thus far for a more general discovery of the reign of the flesh.

SECT. 4.
In particular; the flesh being a close enemy, and in the times of the Gospel
it And in matters of Religion its reign discovered; as,
standing with the State policy of this Queen Regent to have somewhat of God
and of Christ seemingly, and for a color, that she might sit fast in the
chair and reign still indeed, let me show you her in the Throne, and descry
the Regency of the flesh in the choicest works and means of Religion. And here
we lay down this for a certain truth, that

There is not any outward duty, profession or privilege of Gods people, which
the flesh will not take to, and suck to her self advantage out of it; she is
such an hypocrite, and in her wickedness has wit at will. Therefore see her
Regency,

1. In prayer; they that live and walk 1. In prayer. Prove. 28. 9 Isa. 1. 15.
in sin and disobedience to the Word of God, may make many prayers; but an
abomination to the Lord are all their prayers, and the Lord says, I will not
hear when ye multiply prayers: for the flesh has the rule in them while they
pray, and it is thus discovered.

First, if an Heathenish spirit act them, Seven ways. Mat. 6. 5.
which thinks God is well-pleased with the work done, or the cries of a
natural heart, with a few good and holy words, with much speaking, or with the
number and tale of our prayers, a touch and outside of the duty.

Secondly, if a Pharisaical spirit act Mat. 6 5.
them, which thinks to merit at the hands of God, and prays to be seen of men,
and to be accounted for devout.

Thirdly, if things spiritual be asked as savoured only under carnal notions,
and for carnal and worldly ends chiefly.

Fourthly, if the things of this life be asked only: as there are multitudes
who never offered any desires to God that were the desires of their hearts, but
what were for health when they were sick, or for success in their earthly
Affairs, or for deliverance when they were in distress and dangers, or for a
plentiful Harvest and good Crop, with such like; or if the things of this life
be asked chiefly; if God should give us Solomon's privilege, and then we have
not Solomon's heart, nor David's one thing, nor Agurs discerning fear of sin
and temptations, with preferring of contentation with food and raiment; if the
requests we offer up in the words of prayer be never so spiritual, and in the
work the affections stir, and are jogging, and make a great noise, but it is
all but for the time of prayer, when the constant bent of the heart is for
covetousness, and the heart is set upon riches or the things of this life; or
if the things of life be asked as temporals, and not that they may be
spiritualized and sanctified to us in their use; they cry as the young Ravens
cry, and pray as the Lion hungry roars and seeks his meat of God.

Fifthly, if temporal afflictions and judgments make us pray and cry, but not
sin nor spiritual judgments; such prayers have not the heart to God in them,
they are the howlings of wolves, and God Hos. 7. 14
so reckons of them. Travelers, captives, sick folks, seamen, and all under
extremities will cry unto God in their troubles, and the Lord hears so as to
deliver them out of these distresses; but if when they are delivered, sin be
still their Idol, and spiritual plagues are not felt, lamented, nor prayed
against, but rather danced under, their prayers are but the cries of swine when
they are pinched, and the cries of nature to the Lord of nature.

Sixthly, if sin and the wrath of God, because of guilt and consciences
gripes and sentence; or if the Laws threatenings and denunciations of judgments
out of the word, and the work of the spirit of bondage which is upon us; if
these do cause us to pray, cry out and repent, but yet there be no workings of
the Spirit of grace and of Adoption, nor sins filthiness and offense do put
us to grief, and be a burden and heavy load, further then it is abominable to
the light of nature, and is cried shame on in the world; this kind of sorrow
for sin is no more than what may be found in a Cain, or in a Judas.

Seventhly, if we pray, and because we pray* we now think our selves free to
commit sin; we have been at prayer, therefore we may be at our lewdness; we
have been at Church in the fore-noon of the Lords day, therefore we may dance
about the May Pole, and keep Revels in the afternoon; this is like the Harlot,
who says to the young Wanton, I have peaceofferings with me, this day have I
paid Prove. 7. 14, 15.
my vows, therefore came I forth to meet thee.

2. In reference to the Law of God; for though the flesh is not, nor will be
subject 2. In reference to the holy Law. Sixwayes.
to the holy Law, yet the wily wisdom and subtilty thereof will make use of
that also, and that most perniciously. And the Reign of the flesh shows it
self herein diversely; as,

First, when we seek righteousness and Romans 6. 14. and 9. 32. and 10. 3.
salvation by the Law; while under the Law, we are under the Dominion of sin;
so long as we go about to establish our own righteousness, as did the Jews
and as it is found in all men by nature; (a Phil. 3. 4, 5
draught) whereof we have excellently and to the life drawn up in Mat. 19. 16,
17. to ver. 24. this is to have confidence in the flesh.

Secondly, when we take the Law to be no more than as a Law commanding the To.
7. 7, 9. Mat. 5. 21. to the end of the chapter
outward man, and to forbid nothing but gross acts of sin, or to require no
more than the outward duty; and so we are alive; we know not sin which
reaches to the heart, and has its seat there in the deceitfulness and
wickedness thereof, nor know we lust or inordinate affections and
concupiscence to be sin, and therefore we bless our selves, or flatter our
selves in our own eyes in our natural estate.

Thirdly, when and whilst that we cannot endure to hear the holiness of the
Law opened and urged; and we love not the righteousness and purity of the
Commandments; yet we will have the saying of the Commandments and the public
reading of them as part of Divine service, and hold this better than all
preaching, and without this we care not for Minister or preaching.

Fourthly, when all the fruit of the coming of the Law and Commandment is only
to revive sin, and to strike us dead. I take the Apo^^les phrase, the meaning
whereof is this, That the Spirit of God does accompany the Law, and the
spiritualnesse of the Law being such as Romans 7. 9.
reaches to the thoughts and desires of the heart, as well as to our words and
deeds, when it is opened, the Spirit of God brings it home to the conscience
with power, this is the coming of the Law; now when the fruit of it thus
coming, is this only, to revive sin, and to kill the sinner, to ptovoke
sin, so that it works in the sinner all manner of concupiscence, and then
comes the threatening and the curse and slays us, and strikes us dead; if this
be all that we receive by the Law, the flesh yet will hold the Chair; for we
will dislike the preaching of the Law, we cannot endure these men of sour
spirits, these Legal Preachers, we will lay the fault on the Minister, and if
we can but get from under this dinne, oh we like the respousal to every
Commandment, Lord have mtrcy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law;
this God shall have, and then we are at quiet and alive again, though our
sins live in us, and we live and continue in them, love and plead for them.

Fifthly, when there is nothing in us that is subject to the Law of God;
nothing that holds proportion with the platform of holiness laid down in
the Law, Romans 8. 7.
but that only is found in us which rebels, frets, pulls away the shoulder and
esteems all grievous; for then we are wholly flesh.

Sixthly, when we never received any further work of the Spirit, than that of
the spirit of bondage, and yet because thereof we conclude we have repented,
and our estate is good, whereas by the Law we should be shut up to the faith of
Christ in the Gospel, which having changed and made us anew, we should live to
God and delight in the spiritualnesse and purity of the Law, with judging and
condemning our selves thereby, and justifying God therein; the work of the
spirit of bondage is to bring to the knowledge of sin, to work the sense of
Gods wrath against sin, and to fill with terrors upon awakenings; and there
is no further work of the Spirit, when there is no h^tred of the pollution of
sin, no heart-forsaking of the sins of the heart, no hatred of sin in the
sinfulness of our nature, whence all transgressions do come; when no further
work did we ever find than the convictions of the spirit; light great, and
convictions strong, but the will, the heart, not created anew that there might
be conversion and healing; now though these convictions may be not only of
sin through the Law, but of the sin of unbelief, and of righteousness, and
of judgment, even of Christ and his Kingdom, and righteousness through all
the good Word of the Gospel, yet the flesh may and will still keep the Chair.

3. In reference to God and his worship, 3. In reference to God and his
worship. Two ways. Col. 1. 21, 22. Isa. 66. 1, 3 Psalm. 106.
the flesh can yield to assume unto it, and choose both Gods name and service
with great state, and thereby perk up the higher.

First, with the mixture and blending of men's devices, our own inventions, the
commandments of men to teach the fear and worship of God, and the rudiments of
the world, these are savoury, these are devotions, humility and wisdom, these
are the rules to which the flesh lies level.

Secondly, with philosophical speculations, wisdom of words, great swelling
words of vanity, and the worshipping of Angels: disputes about words and
genealogies, Col. 1. 18. 1 Cor. 2. 3 1 Timothy 6.
oppositions of science, fables, depths, unwritten traditions vented for
Apostolical; these and such like, the fleshly-minded is puffed up withal; it
loves to be intruding into things it knows not; it would be reputed seraphical
by amazing the simple with high-flown notions.

4. In reference to Christ and to his 4. In reference unto Christ. Eminently in
Antichristianisme.
Gospel, his Profession, Ministry and Ordinances; all these to choose: never
did the flesh get more by any thing, she appears like a Lamb, she puts forth
the two Horns of Christ's vicegerency and beauty external, she gets on the
sheeps skin and clothing, she hasps to her both the Keys, the Key of
knowledge and the Key of Discipline, the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven; she
will be infallible, and give the sense of Scripture unerringly, be the Holy
Father, and the Holy Mother Church; she will exercise and conjure the Devil,
and cast him out, and do a thousand more such feats to admiration, till she in
her bastard imp, the man of sin be brought to light, and he exalt himself above
all that is called God and worshipped, and sit in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God, confirming his doctrines of Devils with mighty signs
and lying wonders; the Devil on the flesh got Antichrist the great, and
surrogates him as Beast under the mantle of sacred Christianity by the cunning
of name and show severed from the thing and verity; for the flesh domineers and
is discovered, domineering as the Mistress and Lady of Whoredoms, in this
respect, these ways.

First, when Christianity is turned into And five ways. 2 Timothy 3. 5
a matter of form, and into a theatrical pomp and show; as when the
temptations, sufferings, crucifyings and resurrection, with the rest of the
great works of Christ for our salvation, are acted, represented and learnt in a
Lent, a Maundie Thursday, a Good Friday, an Easter Festival, an Holy Thursday,
a Whitsontide, a Christmas, a Candlemas, (as they are Idolatrously named) with
such goodly trash and trumpery; when Christ crucified is learned in a Crucifix,
in the s^gn of the Cross; and the Lords Supper instituted for remembrance of
Christ, is turned into an Altar-service and Sacrifice with stately Altars,
Altar-cloaths, Tapers, Pavements, Ascents, Priests in rich embroidered Copes,
Surplisses, Cringings and Bowings, Elevation of the Host, as it is fond and
superstitiously called, kneelings, knockings of the breast, and other gestures
of Adoration; sumptuous Temples, Partitions and Chancels, Processions, carrying
of the Host about, sacring Bells, and the like of that rabble. What is Popery,
but the outside of Christian Religion, dressed up with trappings and trinkets
of humane inventions and ceremonies to take the outward man withal, and keep
that employed? for which cause doctrines erroneous must be taught and added to
the doctrine of the Gospel, that whiles this is done, covetousness, pride and
ambition may be fed, and the head and members of a belly-God Clergy from the
Pope to the Apparitour may be stuffed and ruffle; and the Christian seduced
people from the Emperor to the Vassal may give them the honor, and cramme
them with the best and choicest of all their temporals, that they may have the
favor to live on man's dung, their own and others meritorious good works
instead of the only merits and Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ: there are
degrees of this formality; for although in the Papacy you have Pharisaisme
enthro^iz'd, yet wherever the form of godliness is held to, with disregard of
the power of it, there is Pharisaisme in the form, though it has not the
upper-seat in the Temple of God, and there the flesh has the rule. And how
great is this wickedness of formality, that the Word of life from the living
God, setting forth Jesus Christ the Lord of life, for the eternal life and
salvation of the sinful children of men, breathed by the Holy Ghost the Spirit
of life and power, should be turned into a dead powerless show, and the true
Christian Religion be turned into a form, a carcass, and then all the care is
to embalme it according to art to keep it from stinking; and with such folly
and madness to dote upon this form, that they will persuade themselves it must
needs commend them unto God, and to Angels, and to Men; and if any would
otherwise persuade them to be either sullen and pleased with nothing, or in a
rage and fury; the formal have ever been the most absurd and unreasonable to
deal with, and the most fiery bloody persecutors of the godly in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, when Christ, the Gospel, Profession, with the rest is taken up to
Gal. 6. 12, ^3. (...).
make a fair show in the flesh; to carry a face, and act a part which may
please men, and win glory with those of corrupt judgments, and thereby avoid
persecutions for the Gospel, and for righteousness sake. This way they take
out of softness and delicacy, and out of ambition; these are theologi gloriae,
not theologi crucis; Divines that hunt after glory, and not Divines of the
Cross. These Christians are Christians of the Church triumphant, and will not
be of the Church militant; they frame their Religion to ^ doctore glorioso, a
pastore contentioso, ab inutilibus quaestionibus, liberet ecclesiam suam
dominus. Joh. 5. 44.
hold with the times, and to get reputation with men; they will be godly,
because it is in fashion: and that is now adays their best interest in worldly
and state affairs. This course is inconsistent with faith in Christ, as our
Lord says, How can ye believe who r^ceive honor one from another, and se^k
not the honor that comes from God only? this is altogether repugnant to the
Character of a true Christian, which is, to be one crucified with Gal. 6. 14.
Christ, and to glory in the Cross, whereby he is crucified to the world, and
the world to him.

Thirdly, when outward privileges, Phil. 3. 7. Judge. 17. 13. Joh. 8. 39, 41.
and 9. 28
profession, and performances are accounted gain to us; as Micah said, Now
know I that the Lord, the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my
Priest; and the Jews stood upon this, We have Abraham to our father. We are not
born of fornication, we have one Father, even God. We are Moses Disciples.

Fourthly, when we will heap to our selves teachers, after our lusts, having
itching ears, 2 Timothy 4. 3.
but will not endure sound doctrine: we will not be without Preachers, but they
shall be Women-Prophets, such as dawbe, and can sow pillowes under all
arm-holes; we love trencher-Chaplains. Christ by his Spirit carries on his
saving work by Preaching, writing of good books, Catechismes, bodies and
Systems of Divinity, Rules of holy life, Expositions of Scripture: and
Antichrist he will have his order of Preachers, College of Jesuits, Monks,
Friars of several orders, Catechismes, Books of good life, Annotations upon the
New Testament, as that of the Rhemists; and such Writings of all sorts to
bolster their lies and superstitions, and hinder the propagation and obscure
the light of the truth of the Gospel, that he will herein out-bid all the
Churches, since so it is that they cannot keep up any longer gross ignorance,
a^^ the Scripture and Religion in an unknown tongue.

Fifthly, many there are who bear reverence and observance to the faithful and
Mar. 6. 20.
godly Ministers, when yet (with Herod) they have their Herodias, their
Minionlust which they will not part with: and here let many be warned who seem
to be gracious, how they put the stay of their hearts for their spiritual
estate upon this, that they hear choice Ministers as sweet men, and call their
preaching such; or (...)
upon this, that they tongue it now in the Dialect and language that has a
strain of more than common plain expression of the things of Christ, and take
to some word, or tone, or mincing of words or utterance, as if it hung between
the teeth when they speak; as if yea, were better than yes, or I: or Gad, were
better than God. It irketh me to name these, but the good and honor of the
godly which I tender, compels me, for I know these things are not spiritual,
and of the Spirit.

5. In reference to the godly with whom we live. The flesh reigns 5. In
reference to the godly* three ways Jam. 2. 1.


First, when we have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory,
with respect of persons; when worldly things give them the room in our hearts,
either in our choice for society, or in our Church Assemblies. When the Gold
Ring on the finger, or rich apparel bears the sway, and not the riches of
faith, which is the true riches.

Secondly, when the times and respect to a Jehoiada, and the presence of an
Isaac 2 King. 12 2. Genesis 27. 41 Gal. 4. 29.
fashion the outward man to some correspondency and conformity with and to
them, as in Joash, and Esau: but hatred and persecution of mocking were never
cured. When we are the Israel of Kings and Parliaments, and not the Israel of
God, as holy Greenham distinguishes them.

Thirdly, when the utmost we seek is a trim Lamp of true and pure profession
Mat. 25. 1. to the 10.
burning, and look not to have oil in our Vessels, the Spirit of grace, and a
lively faith in the heart; when it is enough for us if we be Virgins for truth
of doctrine in profession, and in tenet, and that we join our selves in
Church Fellowship, and in society in conversation to the wise Virgin-Professors.

6. In times of diversity of opinions, and sects in Religion, as in such days
as 6. In times of diversities of opinions, ways. Mat. 16. 14 15.
ours are. The flesh reigns

First, when we cannot tell what to be or hold: and grow so unsettled, that we
tend to be Neuters in Religion, or to be of no Religion; and unto this
Neutrality are all those subject to fall, who have no farther knowledge of the
mysteries of godliness, than that which flesh and blood, the light of wisdom
that is in all men does reveal.

Secondly, when we run into divisions Romans 16. 17, 18.
without care had, either of the truth of doctrine, or of giving offense.

7. In times of extremities, the flesh 7. In times of distress three ways Hos.
8. 2, 3 Jer. 3. 5.
rules

First, when we are full of large claims of interest in God and Christ; and of
confident Profession of our assurance; and full of arguments pleaded from
experiences of outward blessings, deliverances, preservations and successes:
and yet the former life not led by the rule of the Word, nor the former sins
about which God strove with us; these in the present extremity are not made the
matter of humiliation and self-accusation in the presence of God, nor is the
heart right with God in things we do profess, nor are we Psa. 78. 34, 35, 36,
37.
steadfast in his Covenant.

Secondly, when we are like Esau the profane, who preferred the saving of his
Heb. 12. 16 17.
life before his birthright, that is, before his title to the Promises of the
Messiah. Esau's case was the danger of present death; no less; but he had not
the faith of Abraham his Grand father, for then that faith would have carried
him out prevailingly to the lively hope of a resurrection, unto which, God that
is able to raise the dead could bring him; and therefore thus trusting God, he
would have dyed a thousand deaths, rather than have parted with his
birthright. How many Esau's, and more profane than Esau the Son of Jacob, are
there in the visible Church, which will part with the promise (wherein the
title to Christ does lie) for a far lighter thing than life!

Thirdly, when though we enquire of God in our distress, in his own appointed
1 Samuel 28.
and instituted way, yet like Saul, if we be hard-bestedd, we will out to
unlawful and forbidden means, as he did to a witch. We will leap the hedge,
and not keep the way of God till he therein accomplish our desired end, and his
own promise: and we will reason thus for our practice, Why should we wait on
the Lord any longer? 2 King. 6. 33.


8. In times of persecution, the flesh reigns

First, when humane reason in the principles 8. In times of the fiery trial,
four ways. Psa. 14* 6.
thereof against the Cross, does so savor and sway with us, that we deride
and shame their counsel and course* who will hold fast, and endure and live by
faith to their greatest hazard and extremest loss. Satan took hold of Peter,
and he justly bare from Christ the name of Satan, for counselling and
admonishing out of humane principles, though with very entirely-loving Mat. 16.
23.
affections: but he suffered the just rebuke, and did not nourish his humane
wisdom with scorn of the way of Gods holy servants, who choosing
righteousness with the Cross, have preferred the life of faith before the
life of reason, and have patiently with joyfulnesse submitted their lives in
this world, and their all here on earth, to the holy disposing of the All-wise
and gracious God.

Secondly, when we cannot discern those that tremble at Gods Word, to own Isa.
66. 1, 5
them from Pompous hypocrites, who can easily find them out to hate them: when
we cannot see Christ in his Members, Mat. 25. 44, 45.
through a poor, naked, imprisoned outside.

Thirdly, when we suffer but in faction, and do drive on worldly interests and
designs, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 3.
and not out of love to Christ, his Gospel, and to righteousness: or we suffer
out of opinion of merit, not in self-denial: or out of vainglory, not with
lowliness and love of the brethren: or out of a Roman resolution, as it is
called, not out of a sound mind: or out of tenaciousnesse of what we have once
professed and maintained, not in obedience to the truth, ready to receive light
from the Word, in case that any could evidence by the Scripture our mistakes:
or when we suffer upon design to get the more, as Judas 2 Timothy 1. 7 Rev. 21.
forsook all and followed Christ, but he hoped to get by the bargain: or out of
heat of blood* when in cold blood we are void of the power of the Spirit, and
possessed with the spirit of base fear; the fearful and unbelieving go
together.

Fourthly, when we sort and suit out holy truths and practices, and con^oyne
with them errors that are plausible, or first-Table and Gospel-sinnes,
according as the times will bear to avoid persecution, Act. 20. 39 Psalm. 91. 1.
to get followers, and to satisfy one lust or other. We would dwell in the
secrets of men, of Princes, whereas we should dwell in the secrets of the most
High.

9. In extraordinary duties, and about the great work of Reformation, this has
9. In extraordinary duties, four ways.
been no unusual thing for the flesh to admit of these, and sometimes on
occasion to be forward in them, and yet clearly to be discerned to sit on the
throne: As for extraordinary duties,

First, All of them called for, and delighted Isa. 58. 1, 2 3.
in, so that we may hold our special sins of violence, oppression,
uncleanenesse, filthy lucre or the like.

Secondly, All these continued, but Zach. 7. 5, 6, 7.
Refo^mation according to the Word neglected.

Thirdly, God sought with droves and herds for sacrifice, with outward
performances Hos. 5. 6. Mic. 6. 6, 7. Hos. 14. 2, 3.
and flashes of Devotion, sparing therein neither for pains and cost, and
price, but not looking to the Sacrifice of righteousness, the sacrifice of a
contrite and broken heart, nor with renouncing of carnal and forbidden
confidences.

Fourthly, When all our humiliations are Ahabs humiliations; such outward
penitentials proceeding even from the belief of an Elijah's threatening, that
they draw the eye of God and man, and receive some answers from God in temporal
mercies: and yet Ahab is Ahab still, 1 King. 21. 27, 29.
when that fit is over, and some breathing time given.

Again, in the work of Reformation, The unregenerate may cry, call Assemblies,
About Reformation five ways. Hos. 7. 14, 17.
promise reformation, and return too, (though not up to the most High,) but be
as a deceitful bow that is bent, has the arrow upon the string, and puts off
with a levelling at the white, but flies quite aside, mounts in the air, or
falls short, or ^ver many a score: and then the Lord hearing and giving
deliverance, they keep still their old wont, Reforming no further than will
stand with their worldly interests, and driving on their interest to the
endammaging of Christ's interest.

More particularly, in Reformation the fleshes Regency is discovered,

First, in a partial Reformation. This sin has been too too palpable with us
since our first just withdrawing from the bed of that Romish Jezebel, and
casting off the yoke of Romish Antichristian tyranny. In the days of Henry the
eight, the Popes supremacy was cast off, but other parts of Popery retained:
Witness, the six Articles, for refusal of which Articles many faithful
Christians burnt at the stake. In King Edward the sixth's reign, a gracious
young Prince, when the worship of God was so far restored as to be Celebrated
in the Mother tongue, and gross superstitions abandoned, the six Articles
taken away, truth of doctrine held forth, nevertheless, in some the flesh so
cunningly wrought that Leiturgy and Prelacy were retained, and by a Law many
holy days (as men call them) ranged in the same rank with the Lords day. In
Queen Elizabeth's days of blessed Memory, the mind of the flesh was so potent
in many, that there was kept up a reading Ministry, Non-residency, and
Pluralities, Ceremonies with subscription, leiturgy with an increase of length,
Prelacy, the Royal Chapels and Cathedrals with chantings, Altars, Copes,
Bowings at Altars, and at the name of Jesus kept up, Cross in Baptism urged
unto Suspencion, and ejection of many choice Ministers, Canons, Canonical
obedience, and the abuse of excommunication, with the spiritual Courts, as they
were carnally named. In King James's Reign, besides all the former continued
with many accessions, the book of sports was given out. In King Charles his
Reign, many corruptions in Doctrine vented, the book of sports urged upon
Ministers to publish it, the new-Canons with an oath made by the Convocation
house, Altars and Organes brought into Parish Churches, with other of the like
leaven: So that Reformation was highly needful. In the time of the Parliament
in 1642. and forwards Reformation was solemnly Covenanted. An Assembly for
that end called, the things of Jesus Christ Covenanted, were prepared and
pre^ented; but how far they took any effect, is at present by the godly
soberminded laid to heart and bewailed. And now though no Popery, Prelacy, nor
Leiturgy, blessed be the holy Name of our God: yet there is no confession of
faith for unity in Doctrine, no Directory for uniformity in worship, no
Church Discipline or Government, no Catechism, no Communion of Congregations,
of Churches, of Ministers settled. Thus in the edificative part we may say,
where shall our Reformation be found? our Covenant Reformation where is it? The
Lord has been upon the work of purifying and refining his Church for the space
now of above one hundred years, even ever since the year 1517. and he will
effect it; shall he begin, and shall he not make an end? how is it that we are
slack and follow not the Lord more fully, and observe not more his goings forth
with Hosanna's, saying, Save now we beseech thee, send now prosperity. It was
the Ex. 10. 24, 26.
ancient voice of the godly in this Land, a hoof must not be left behind; let
us reassume it, let us rest assured that inventions of men must not come in.

Secondly, in abhorring one sin (as to the outside) and setting-up another;
as when it may be said of us, thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit
sacrilege? To. 2. 22.
thou pullest down all the relics of Superstition, and suffer not a Cross
in a street, nor on a Steeple, nor an image painted in a Church-window, nor a
consecrated Font for Baptism, and thou do well; and will thou continue in
the sin of sacrilege; shall the maintenance of the Ministry that labors in
the Word and Doctrine remain impropriated, in that very day when thy Supreme
Governor who undertaketh great things righteously for the good of the Church
in all the world, cuts off all unnecessary expenses for his Court, needs
great supplies, does yet freely give home the first fruits and renths (which
none ever before did do) to provide that there may be no scandalous livings in
the Nation, whiles he endeavors the ejection of scandalous Ministers? is that
no scariledge now adays, which was sacrilege, and so preached and proved to
be in all parts of the Land by the faithful Ministers in the days of Queen
Elizabeth?

Thirdly, in the execution of judgment, and in pursuing Reformation to be like
Jehu; zealous for the Lord of Hosts in fulfilling 2 Kings 10. 28. 29, 30, 31.
the Word of the Lord against the Idolatry of the house of Ahab, when he could
not live by faith above his carnal reason, that the ten Tribes should not
return to the house of David in the line of Solomon, if they should all come up
to Jerusalem yea^ly to worship God according to Gods command; and therefore he
would keep up Jeroboams Idol-calves, and not depart from his sin: oh this
reason of state, what evil work has it not produced! How has it turned a man,
a brave Prince 2 Kings 8. 12, 13.
into a dog! David was a man after Gods own heart, who did live by faith, in
the matter of getting and keeping a Crown and a Kingdom.

Fourthly, in pretending zeal for Reformation, and against Gods dishonor, Rev.
19. 18
and when God makes a Feast in the slaughter of his enemies to fall from the
work begun, and to be like Vultures and Kites, and Birds of prey, feeding on
the flesh of Kings, Captains, and mighty men, and ^ied by the teeth on the
Collops, Flanks and fat of rich Demeans, Lands and Estates; whereas when God
gives great reward for service done, we should be the more, and the more
faithful in the work of the Lord.

Fifthly, in seeking to join with the sincere in building the Lords Temple,
that we may corrupt the structure, or hinder the work, like the Adversaries of
the Jews Ezr. 4. 1, 2, 3.
in the days of Ezrah.

10. In great undertakings; the flesh may rule where the enterprises,
achievements and successes are above her^ical, and the right hand of God is
lifted up on high, as the Medes and Persians are called Gods mighty ones, and
his sanctified ones; Heathens may be Saints, Saints of the Isa. 13. 3.
most high God in this sense; so these were Saint-souldiers. And Christians may
go farther, and yet be under the Regency of the flesh.

First, they may enquire of God by his Prophets, by the Scriptures in their
great expeditions; but herein they are like Ahab, who said there is one
Micaiah, but I 1 Kings 22. 6, 8.
hate him; or they are like Johanan and his company, who will needs be
satisfied what the Lords mind is, and promise obedience, and bind it to the
utmost; but when they understand that it is against their mind, they will
absolutely refuse, and hold their own will and way; and Jeremy the Prophet must
be charged with speaking falsely in the Name of the Lord. Jer. 42. 1, 2, 5, 6,
10. and 43. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 1 Kings 22. 4.


Secondly, they may use the friendship, and seek and hold correspondence with
the truly godly, but it is like Ahabs compliance with Jehoshaphat, upon earthly
grounds, and for worldly ends.

Thus have I endeavored to discover the flesh maintaining her state through
spiritual walks; the next that follows is to set out the Regency of the Spirit.

SECT. 4.
4. The Reign of the Spirit may be seen in a six-fold discovery of his working;
for 4. The Regency of the Spirit in six works.
where he is, he works, and where he works, he works, but not as one that does
his work in a corner, and his work is with efficacy and power, his work is like
himself; thus then,

1. The Spirit carries him in whom he is, unto the Word, and in the Word unto
Jesus Christ; he carries to the Word Psalm. 19. 7. and 119. 1. 64
which he breathed, and in which alone he savingly works: he that has the
Spirit, says, The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24.
the soul. Blessed are the undefiled in the war, who walk in the Law of the
Lord; O teach me thy statutes. The Gospel of Christ is to them the power of
God, and the wisdom of God; likewise in the Word, the Spirit carries to Jesus
Christ, Prove. 8. 35
he waits there to find Christ, and in him favor with God, and life
eternal; he s^ith, O that I might be found in him; in the Lord Jesus Christ
have I righteousness and strength. And in the knowledge of Christ revealed in
the Word, the Spirit carries to faith and love which is in Jesus Christ, that
is, which is set on Christ as the object, which is formed by the Gospel Isa.
45. 24.
of Jesus Christ, and which is truly Christian; now the heart is for such
faith, and such love, and not content with any kind of faith in God and
Christ, or any kind of love to God.

The Spirit is the Spirit of faith, and the Spirit of love, in converting a
sinner to Christ, the Spirit makes faith and love to abound in the exceedings,
above the 1 Timothy 1. 14 (...).
power of inbred, unbelief, and hatred, beyond the power and malice of men or
Devils to destroy, and with the living, increasing aspirings to perfection from
degree to degree.

2. It makes very sensible of spiritual wants and evils, and fills with desires
like hunger and thirst after spiritual good things. Where the Spirit of Christ
is, (for where he is, there he reigns;] that man is made sensible of the flesh,
even of the corruption of his nature; I am carnal, sold under sin; I was
conceived in iniquity, Romans 7. 14 Psalm. 51. 5. Romans 7. 18
I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good. These are the feeling
expressions of the godly; that man is sensible of his special sins, I do know
mine own iniquity, and my sin is ever Psalm. 51. 3.
before mine eyes; that man is very sensible of inward sins, of the sins of
his thoughts, his heart-impurities, the deceitfulness and hardness, the
desperate wickedness of his heart, so that it needs a new Creation, and the
renewing of a right Spirit, a new heart, and a new Spirit: that man is sensible
of the evils of his best Isa. 64. 6.
works, all our righteousnesses are as a menstruous cloth: that man is sensible
of the utter need he has of Christ for righteousness and for strength, and of
his want of spiritual blessings, and saving graces. A poor, empty, vain,
foolish, and lost creature he finds himself, without Christ, without God, and
without hope; his invincible desires are after reconciliation; Cause thy face
to shine, Lord, lift thou up Ps. 80. 3, 7, 19. Psalm. 4. 6. Hos. 14. 2.
the light of thy countenance upon us; Take away all iniquity and receive us
graciously; these invincible desires after reconciliation through Jesus Christ,
to enjoy Gods reconciled face in the Atonement made in the blood of his own
Son, are in that Psalm. 4. 6. Psalm. 26. 3. and 17. 15. and 30. 5. and 63. 3.
man set to attain it, to retain it being had, and to recover it if any way
lost, and to walk in the light of this his countenance as his true blessedness
and chief good: that man's desires also are invincibly set after renovation;
Create in me a clean heart O God; Turn us, and we shall Ps. 19. 15. Ps. 51. 10.
be turned.

3. It fills full of grace and supplications, with mournings, bemoanings and
self-abhorrings; Jer. 31. 16. Zach. 12. 10, 11. Ezekiel. 36. 31. and 16. 61 To. 6
21. Ezra 9. Jer. 31. 18, 19.
the confusion and shame for sin wrought by the Spirit given, is voluntary
and of choice, not without some pleasure taken therein; (I will declare mine
iniquity, I will be sorry for my sinn^,) the confessions of sins guilelesse
and open-hearted without hiding and cloaking, and with holy blushings in Gods
presence; this is true of him now ashamed.

4. The Spirit where he comes, he gives a new light, even the light of life,
a new savor and relish to mind and relish the things of the Spirit; new
inclinations, a new bent of soul, a new by as on the will, set, fixed, centered
and pointed Heavenward, Godward, Christ-Ward.

5. The Spirit disposes to do all good; first, from a spiritual principle of
faith Ephesians. 5. 9 1 Timothy 1. 5
unfeigned, of a heart purified, of a good conscience, and of love. Secondly,
with a godly force and impulse. Thirdly, in obedience to the Word, and by the
Rule of the words of the new creature made up of the Word. Fourthly, with a
searching heart, a Spirit making diligent search that all be done with
repentance because of the evils of the best we do; and with faith in the blood
of Jesus Christ for acceptance: for our repentance needs still to be repented
of; and none can live an hour in the sight of God any other way than by faith
in Jesus Christ. Fifthly, and unto high and supernatural ends; as 1. To the
glory of God, and not to our own praise and glory. 2 To the salvation of our
own souls and others. 3. To the increase of grace in our selves and in others.
4. And to the adorning of the Gospel, and of our holy profession. And that all
may thus be done, the Spirit disposes to delight in the Law in our inner man,
to rejoice to work righteousness, to glory and make our boast in the Lord
Jesus, and in him only to serve God with our spirits in the Gospel of his
Son, to solace our selves in fellowship with Christ, and through him with the
Father by the Holy Ghost, according to the Covenant of Grace, now set forth
fully in the Gospel. It disposes to follow the Lord fully, as did Caleb and
Joshua, Number. 14. 24.
in the times of murmurings, declinings, and evil and hard reports brought upon
the ways of God, to walk with a right foot in the Gospel, when patties and
divisions tempt to dissimulations and haltings. To make more straight steps to
our paths, and strengthen our feeble hands and knees in all pursuits of
holiness with peace and quiet submission, when sore persecutions abide or
threaten us.

6. The Spirit at his first entrance into a sinner, in his renewing act and
presence heals the soul for ever of sore and grievous wickednesses, which show
their poison with strength in every natural man; they are four:

First, Impenitency, such a hardness of heart that it cannot repent, but it
abuses To. 2. 3, 4.
the riches of the goodness of God their Creator, and the riches of the
patience and long-suffering of a gracious God. Repentance unto life Christ
gives; and in the Regenerate a spring of godly sorrow is opened, and the
flint-stone of the heart before hard as a Rock, now gives floods; before he had
a heart that could not repent, and now he has an heart that cannot but mourn
for sin.

Secondly, Pronenesse to be scandalized, and to take offense; 1. At the
afflictions, Mat. 13. 21.
tentations and persecutions which comes for the Gospels sake; 2. At the
fewness, meannesse, infirmities, sins and sorrows of the godly; 3. At Joh.
6. 60, 61. 1 Cor. 1. 23
the truths of the Gospel, cross to our corrupt sense and reason; 4. At Christ
crucified. 5. At the simplicity of the Gospel, and of the Gospel Ordinances,
their poor mean outside, and among them, of plain edifying preaching in
demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power, and not with wisdom of words nor
Philosophy, and such vain deceits. 6. At the purity of Gods commands, the
hardship of mortification, the strangeness, and as we naturally think, the
unreasonablenesse and folly of a Saints life, the life of a stranger and
pilgrim, the life of faith; what? can we be Saints on earth? shall we live like
no body? we must live, and we will trust God with our souls: when the Spirit
comes, he works such great love to the Word, that nothing shall offend them;
such knowledge and assured faith of the Messiah the great Prophet who has the
words of eternal life, and Ps. 119. 165 Joh. 6. 68, 69.
none but he, that they shall never go away from his blessed Gospel, although
at the first they are not able well to apprehend many truths there delivered.

Thirdly, The hatred of the godly and of holiness, and the speaking evil of
both: when the Lord by his Spirit g^aciously visits their souls, now they have
another language, they glorify God for and in the godly, to whom before they 1
Pet. 2. 12
could not afford a good word; now they are to them the only excellent ones in
the earth: holiness has now their hearts, and that for ever; and therefore
the Saints are their delight.

Fourthly, Insensiblenesse of, and under spiritual plagues; now they feel and
fear, Isa. 63. 17. Zeph. 3. 18.
and pray against a heart hardening and hardened under afflictions, and from
Gods fear, they mourn for the famine of the Word, for the want of the solemn
Assembly, the taking away of faithful searching preaching; they fear to be left
to their own hearts, to walk in their own counsels; they are sensible of the
hiding away of Gods face, and of loss of the joy of Gods salvation; they fear
to have their Table made a snare, and to have their temporal blessings cursed
to them, and not sanctified to them; they know it for a great curse to have
success and prosperity in an evil way. A spirit of slumber and carnal security
they so dread, that they love an awakened, and preserve atender conscience, an
awakening Ministry, and dare not live without a watch set chiefly over the
heart and mouth, and in holy jealousy over themselves they pray Ps. 141. 3.
Ps. 141. 4.
to God that he would set the watch; they so fear the prosperity of wicked men,
and the heavy judgment to be left of God to incline in heart to the liking of
their condition and estate, that it is their earnest prayer that they may never
choose or desire in heart to eat of their dainties. Thus of the Regency of the
Spirit.

SECT. 6.
5. The walk after the flesh, is a life led
First, After the course of the world, 5. What the walk after the flesh is, in
eight things. Ephesians. 2. 2, 3
after the will of men; in their religions, idolatries, superstitious vanities,
and the inventions of men in doctrine and worship, in Philosophy and wisdom of
words, devotions and ways of Religion, Traditions and Commandments of men to
teach the fear and service of God; there are that speak of the world, and the
world will hear them; the world has not only his profane ones, but his sacra,
his 1 Pet. 4. 3
holy things, and the world has his just ones, and his devout and holy ones;
here lies one special part of the way and course of the world, and so is the
will of men that people should walk after that course, but so is not the will
of God. To live after the course of the world, is to live after the lusts of
men, to live the life of the Gentiles, following and imitating their manners,
hunting after their favors, this is the broad way where most go; this is the
way of the men of this world. To live after the course of the world, is to live
seeking what the Gentiles seck Mat. 6. 32.
after, what we shall eat, what we shall drink, wherewith we shall be clothed,
how we may rise, grow rich and great, how we may build, plant, purchase, leave
our names great on earth, and leave our children so, and thus eternize Psalm.
49. 1.
our selves here as the men of this world do, that mind and are addicted unto
this present life, seeking their good things, and making up their portion in
this world; Ps. 17. 14.
how also they may do well to themselves, fare deliciously, wear gorgeous
artire, swim in vanity, jollity and pleasure; this is their way, and their
posterity like and applaud it, and others that have neither power nor hopes to
attain it, count these the happiest under the Sun; and though the Spirit of
God says, it is their folly, and they shall never see light, yet this the
world does as their [(...)] their eternity, as if there were no other life, nor
other world.

Secondly, After the lusts of the flesh, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. Gal. 5. 1^
that is, in some manifest work of the flesh, a manifest wickedness either
against piety or against charity, or righteousness, or chastity, or temperance.

Thirdly, after Satan, as if joined in 1 Timothy 5. 15.
marriage with him, so the Apostle expresses it; that is, to live in love,
fidelity, and obedience to the Devil, lo^ding it in lying vanities, in
darkness of sin, in ignorance of God, and in unbelief ruling; he is the liar
and the murderer, the father of lusts and of lies of all sorts; the enemy and
envious one, the tempter, the accuser of the brethren, and the back-biter: now
when Satan may in his temptations play with us, touch us with his love-touches
in any of those wherein his works consist, from which he has those his former
proper names and titles; may bed with us, and we with him; when he may enter
into us, as he did into Judas Iscariot, and fill our hearts as he did the heart
of Ananias and Sapphira, and take us Captives as fish that love the bai^, at
his own will: when we keep open house for him, by giving place to wrath,
revenge, uncleanenesse, covetousness, idolatries, lies taught in hypocrisy,
hatred of the godly, cavilling at the Word of truth, or at the way of
holiness, or the like: or when we keep the house empty, not stored with holy
truths and graces, the furniture of the mind and heart: when our hearts are
true to evil motions and lusts, but false to Gods Commandments and Gospel, and
we pass not much that it is so, then we live after Satan. These are they in
whom Satan works effectually, and Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.
they fulfill the desires of the flesh, and of the mind.

Fourthly, In darkness: no discerning of men, either of the godly to make
their companions, and to choose their portion and lot, even the reproaches of
Christ; or of the wicked, to avoid their company, counsel, way, and chair;
although they Psa. 11. 1, 2 1 John 4. 1.
can find out the godly, even the upright in heart, to shoot privily at them,
no discerning of spirits; of Ministers and Ministry: nor of things and
doctrines, unless it be this, to account the things of the Spirit
foolishness: no discerning of Joh. 10. 4, 5.
graces from moralities and civilities, which they prefer before the fear of
God, and faith in Christ, the love of the Saints, and the patience of hope. No
discerning of ways; the way which is called holy, from the way of the
worldling, profane Luke 12. ^6 2 Cor. 6. 2. Mat. 16. 3. Luke 19. 44
or formal. No discerning of the signs of the times; the seasons of grace, the
day of salvation, the day of their visitation.

Fifthly, a life led in security; no wonder if the dark and blind who see not
their 1 These. 5. 5, 6, 7. Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
danger, be altogether secure; the night is for sleep; they that sleep are of
the night, and of darkness; they that are of the night are sleepers. No
questions; no cases of conscience; the flesh blesses them in their evil
imaginations, and flatters Psa. 36. 1, 2
them in their iniquities; no serious enquiries about their spiritual estate,
or about their ways; about these two are all the main cases of conscience; no
watchfulness over the heart, the mouth, the eyes, the feet, and all their
goings. A man must be awake before he can watch.

Sixthly, In vanity of mind, and of conversation. In vain principles,
reasonings, thoughts and inventions: they walk in emptiness of the power of
saving truths Ephesians. 4. 18 1 Pet. 1. 18.
and graces, the conversation vain, foolish, unprofitable, void of godliness
in power, the words idle, unsavory, not good for the use of edifying, and the
works not directed in truth according to the doctrine which is after
godliness; this is upon them at the best, and many times they break out to
that which is vile and abominable.

Seventhly, In hypocrisy, with fleshly 2 Cor. 1. 12 Mat. 6. 1, 2 and 23.
wisdom; hypocrisy, either natural, or pharisaical. The natural hypocrisy
may stand with a particular uprightness, as in Abimelech, of whom God
testifies that he did in the fact about Sara, Abraham's Genesis 20. 5, 6.
wife, that which he did, in uprightness: and it may stand with a general
uprightness to the light of a natural self-deceived heart, and to the light of
the Law in a man that seeks righteousness in his own works: An uprightness
legal, Act. 23. 1. Phil. 3. 6, etc.
such as was in Paul before his conversion: but not an uprightness
Evangelical, which consists in renouncing all confidence in our works, and in
the flesh, or outward duties, and privileges, or inward self-abilities; in the
life of faith, in heart-purifyings, and a Gospel conversation, in rejoicing in
Christ Jesus, and our interest in him, and in conformity to his death, in
hatred of all sin we know, in bearing respect to all Gods Commandments, and
in all these, in humble strenuous pressings on to that which yet we have not
attained, but is before us, with an heart and eye upon the prize of our high
calling, to which we are called in Christ Jesus by the Gospel.

8. In natural Atheism, in alienations of heart from the life of God, in
impenitency and unbelief. It is with them as with Israel, back-slidden Israel
of old; they Hos. 5. 4.
cannot frame their doings to return, they can do any thing, but to order their
ways, to return they will not; they have no heart: and when urged to it, and
the threatenings of God applied, they say, no, there is no hope; if nothing but
a Gospel Conversation, an holy life according to Gods Word will serve, then
there is no hope. It is as bad as to be damned to hell, to be pressed to
holiness. God shall have any thing at their hands, if he will spare them in
this. Ah, alas, for a spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of them; and their
sins are their Idols: they hold fast deceit, and refuse to return.

Brethren, shall I hence describe unto you a natural man? He is one that leads
The Character of a natural man.
his life (whiles perhaps Ingenious, witty, of fine parts, well-tempered,
civil, moral, honest, fair in his dealings, and in some particular actions,
yea, and in his general course, upright and blameless according to his natural
and acquired light, yet he leads his life) as if his eternity and his good were
in this present world; his height and glory is to be humane and rational, or
learned and philosophical, or devout in the way of Religion which his own heart
chooses, and which the people he lives withal do like of; whose wills he
follows, and whose favor he hunts after, with an eye to his worldly
pleasure, or profit, or honor, or all; ever nourishing one or more manifest
works of the flesh, unto which his heart is true, as one that is wedded to the
Devil the father of lusts and lies, a voluntary captive to his will, and taking
pleasure to bed with him in his effectual working, and to fill his soul with
loves; he is in darkness, loves darkness, and walks on in darkness without
any spiritual discerning, though he be under the Gospel Light, and have his day
of visitation; he sleeps in deep and dead security, without any true awakenings
to holy enquiries or watchfulness. Empty of saving truth and graces in power,
his Conver^ation is at the best but vain, from the vanity of his mind in which
he lives, and thence he will not be moved, for his fathers and forefathers did
so before him. Fleshly wisdom frames his conversation in strength of
hypocrisy, if not pharisaical, yet natural: And he never yet knew, nor can be
persuaded by all the preachers in the world, that secret Atheism, estrangings
from God, much less enmity to him, impenitency, and unbelief do reign in him,
or that these in him are any great fault.

Oh the miserable estate of such a one! A Lamentation.
oh, how many such are in the world; there is a world of them: a world of them,
even of those who bear the best of names, which is Christian. Who can withold
from sorrow and sighings, if he understand and know things as they are? oh that
we could mourn over you who cannot mourn for your selves! or that one could
bear you on his heart, and bring you to Christ, that he might place you under
his love so melting, and put you into the laver of his own blood, till washed
there you might come forth other men, even new-men. Oh that the Spirit of life
from Christ would at length breath upon you, till he breathed in you. May it
be, may it not be? could you but unfeignedly desire it, should it not be? We
leave you and the work with the Lord; and how ever it may fare with worlds of
men in this sad estate, yet as for you among us, if there be no remedy, this
shall be your privilege, you shall not go down to the Chambers of hell
beneath, unlamented; you shall not descend to that infernal pit not mourned
over: since such as you are, drew tears in abundance, such was his heart, from
the eyes of Jesus Christ our Lord and Master, when he came not to condemn, but
to save the world: and being the Minister of the Circumcision, beheld so many
of his charge to perish everlastingly, notwithstanding he would so often have
gathered them together, as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and
they would not; he would, but they would not.

SECT. 7.
6. The walk after the Spirit, is a life led
First, After the Word: therein he that 6. What the walk after the Spirit is.
Ps. 1. 1, 2. and 119. 1, 2, 5, 6.
is in the Spirit exercises himself with delight day and night; thereafter he
walks with desires and endeavors from the whole heart to be undefiled in
that way; and with earnest prayers unto God that his ways might be directed to
keep Gods testimonies, and to have respect unto them all; this is the light and
the Lamp of the Lord; and his heart says, Come, let us walk in the light of
the Pro. 6. 23. Psalm. 119. 105. Isa. 2. 5. Isa. 2. 3.
Lord; there he finds Christ teaching Gods people of his ways, and therefore
taught there of God, he resolves he will walk in his paths prescribed in his
Word; this is the holy Canon, and therefore he Gal. 6. 16.
will walk according to this rule, for so do all the Israel of God; this the
Holy Ghost breathed, whose breath being the breath of Christ's lips, is his
life, and kills none but Antichrist and Antichristians with the men of the
world; and therefore he subscribes to this closing acclamation, That man who
ere he be is (...) worth his ears given him of his Maker to hear Rev. 2. 7,
11, 17, 29. and 3. 6, 13, 22.
withal, who will not hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches: the
Scripture is his Rule for faith, for worship, for holy walking, in sobriety, in
righteousness, in godliness, in all estates, in all relations, in the Family,
Church and Commonwealth, and in his particular calling, and for holy order and
discipline, and for incident cases, with professed subjection, 2 Cor. 9. 13.
(...). A subjection of public profession. Gal. 2. 14. (...). Luke 1. 6.
against which he can do nothing, and for which he can do any thing; and all
this now according to the Gospel Dispensation, in which his honor is to walk
with a right foot, or to foot it right. This spiritual walker is righteous
before God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord
blameless.

Secondly, After the power of inward graces; of these the Spirit is the
Author, and the root, and these are the fruits of Gal. 5. 22, 23. Ephesians. 5. 9.
Gal. 5. 25. (...).
the Spirit; this holy walker as he lives in the Spirit who is the principle of
life within him, spiriting and quickening his soul with his graces, so he walks
in the Spirit, himself clothed, and his conversation fashioned and ordered by
these graces of the Holy Spirit; he gives all diligence to add, seasonably
bringing forth into practice, one grace to another, and 2 Pet. 1. 5, 8.
that orderly; that all graces being in him and abounding, he may not be barren
nor unfruitful in the knowledge and profession of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. In the walk in this light of graces, as a child of light, he is
proving what is acceptable Ephesians. 5.
to the Lord; and that he may so walk he shunnes all fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness; these are his study and endeavor, this is the
way which he does choose.

Thirdly, After Christ, as those that are betrothed unto him, and cleansed by
his blood, and anointed by his Spirit, are married unto him, risen from the
dead, and now they would keep themselves chaste to him in the simplicity and
purity of his Gospel and Ordinances, and in the sincerity and incorruption of
the love of their hearts, they would imitate him, walk as he walked, and be as
he is, even in this world would they be such; they would maintain communion and
fellowship with him in the bed of his green and flourishing Ordinances, in
their ways, conversings, relations and enjoyments of the creatures, and in the
secret lonenesse, and the chamber of their hearts.

Fourthly, In light; this they love and come unto, because it is that which
makes manifest; they would walk as understanding, Joh. 3. 20, 21. Ephesians. 5. 10,
17. Phil. 1. 10.
wise and prudent, proving what the will of the Lord is, and approving what is
excellent, and things that differ; this is their armor which they Romans 13. 12.
put on and wear, knowing their spiritual holy walk cannot be kept, further
then it is maintained by a War.

Fifthly, In searchings of heart, awakenings of conscience, and holy
watchfulness; God awakens theit ears morning by morning; and with those
awakenings bores the ears, bows the heart, and in the bowing makes teachable
and godly wise that they hear as the learned, as the taught of God; these
gracious walkers are inquisitive, asking the way to Zion with their faces
thitherward, inquiring for the old and good way; they are seekers of the Lord,
of his face and strength; they seek and keep the Word of God, they keep and
seek it, as not to seek of Word, Ordinances and means of Gods own giving and
sanctifying which have the promise of his presence and Spirit: these they have,
and in them they seek the face of the God of Jacob; they are full of the
communings with their own hearts, their spirits make diligent search within
them that they may settle their state spiritual, their doubts, their ways
through serious examinations by the Word. They come to the light daily, to see
whether their Joh. 3. 22.
deeds be wrought in God or no; this is the manner of their walk, they consider
Ps. 119. 59
their ways, and turn their feet unto Gods testimonies.

Sixthly, In the power of supernatural Phil. 1. 27.
truths. This walk is a Conversation becoming the Gospel; the Gospel frames and
influenceth their conversation. It is a Conversation in heaven where their
Savior Phil. 3. 20, 21.
is, and whence they look for him to change their vile bodies (in the
resurrection) into the likeness of his own glorious body; these spiritual
walkers do live their Creed.

Seventhly, In sincerity, such holy plainness, 2 Cor. 1. 12
perspicuity and transparent clearness which God works and witnesses
withal, no way hypocritical and varnished over, but in simplicity purging from
and stirring up himself against the hypocrite, and the hypocrisy of their own
hearts. And all this by the grace of God, the free grace of God which destroys
the dominion of sin in them, which thing the Law could not do; and by the
which they are what they are in things pertaining to salvation; and by the gift
of inherent grace which is now the leading principle guiding their conversation
toward all men, and in the Church of God.

Eighthly, In repentance, faith and love; that is, they make it their every
days work to be renewing their repentance toward God, their faith in Jesus
Christ, and their love to the Word, to the Saints, and to all men.

All this the spiritual do do, not without the feelings and motions, but with a
contrary Gal. 5. 17.
stirring, egging and workings of the flesh, insomuch that they cannot do what
they would, yet they truly would what they should, and cannot do as they would.
In all the eight forenamed, the flesh being contrary, is in them lusting
against the Spirit, but is not yielded unto, nay, it is resisted with mighty
lustings, and still these walkings are chosen; their hearts and lives speak
thus, Not the flesh, but the spirit; not the world, but the Word; not lust, but
grace; not Satan, but Christ; not in darkness as a night bird, as one of the
night and of darkness, but in light, as a child of light, and of the day; not
in sleep of security, but in awakings of tenderness of a good conscience; not
in vanity, but in the power of Gospel truths; not in hypocrisy with fleshly
wisdom, but in godly sincerity by the grace of God; not in with-drawings and
forgetfulness of God, but with drawings near of faith in power to the saving
of the soul; not in those, but in these would I unfeignedly have my walks; not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit will I walk, is the language of the
spiritual.

Again, the order of placing is very significant in this description; he that
is now in the Spirit, was first in the flesh; he who now walks after the
Spirit, had his former Conversation corrupt and after the flesh; therefore the
spiritual man's walk is thus: he is ever putting off, and Ephesians. 4. 22, 24, 25,
etc.
getting further from his former corrupt Conversation, and is putting on a
renewed Conversation day after day.

Beloved, shall I hence present you The character of a spiritual man.
with the draught of a spiritual man? The spiritual man is one, who, (being
regenerated and sanctified by the Holy Ghost, who in that work gives him a new
life, no other than eternal life in the beginnings of it, and comes into him to
rule and frame the whole soul, spirit and body in the power of the new life
received,) he gives up himself unto the Word that he may be for ever under the
governance of the Spirit; he dares not compass himself about with sparks, nor
walk in the light of a fire of his own, or of man's kindling. The Law of God is
in his heart, guiding his steps that none of them do slide; he is a walking
bible; he is the Epistle of Christ of the best Edition, so fair written that it
is to be seen and read of all men. Grace in his heart is stamped upon his daily
course; from a good treasure within he brings forth good things; he is
married to Christ risen from the dead, that he might bring forth fruit unto
God; to him to live is Christ, being of the truth, and of the day; he walks
Gospelly-genteel (...). Romans 13. 13.
in a truly honorable dress; comely, beautiful, and terrible as an Army with
Banners. That others sleep, keeps him the more awake; and his security is in
his keeping the watch and ward of the awakened. His conversation is on high, as
is his high and heavenly calling, with the Moon under his feet, and himself set
above himself, and above the world, while he treads on mould, and dwells in a
leprous house of clay. He cannot abide hypocrisy, and loves nothing below that
conversation which the grace of God in Christ teaches. He is passing on from
faith to faith, from glorious grace to glorious grace, from strength to
strength, as one called* to glory and virtue; but speeding his way through
daily mortifications and crucifixions of a home enemy within his own bowels, he
walks in the Spirit, and so fulfills not the lusts of the flesh; he walks not
after the flesh, that he might walk closely after the Spirit; he that walks
after the flesh, knows not the flesh so well as he; he avoids and passes by, he
comes not near, but goes away from the flesh's walks: for he hates the garment
spotted with the flesh. He would not defile his garments; for fine linen,
clean and white is his clothing, even the righteousnesses of the Saints, all
wrought without hands, as himself is the workmanship of God in Christ Jesus by
the Spirit in a new Creation: yet since that the flesh will be with him, the
height of his spiritual temper is this; he will take his garments and his fine
array, and wash them white in the blood of the Lamb.

O spiritual man! O Saint of the most high! blessed be thou; blessed be thy A
blessing of his happy change.
way: blessed be thy counsel in choosing this way; thou art blessed in such a
leader, the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of life and power: what eye salve but that
which Christ alone is Merchant of by a Monopoly that enriches all the Church,
and infringes the liberty of none, what eye salve but that, could have made
thee so welsighted clearly to discern these twofold leaders, walks and
walkers; and as if thine eyes were in thy feet, to turn thy way with such
exactness from the one, and turn thy walks unto this other? Grace is in thy
walk, and Glory will be thy Crown. Christ is not ashamed to call them brethren,
though he be in glory, and they on the dunghill. Of this brood of travelers
let my soul be; it shall be my hi^hest honor among all men to be of this
brotherhood which is so nearly allied and so fast, that they are all but one
body animated, acted, and lead by one Spirit, and have all one way and walk,
and one description agreeing to one and all.

Thus far of the six things proposed for explication of this description, which
makes up the third great doctrine of this text: now follow the uses to be made
of this whole truth.

SECT. 8.
The use is threefold. 1. Of Trial. 2. Of comfort; and 3. Of exhortation.
Three use^ of the whole. 1. Of trial.


1. This doctrine is full of trial; it is of a distinguishing and differencing
nature, such are all descriptions; they describe not, if they distinguish not,
that one thing may not be taken for another; and the excellency of this
description is that it is plain and manifest; he that runs may read who is in
Christ by faith, and who is not; the Apostle would not have given it twice in
one Context and in the same words, in matters of such hi^h concernment, and on
purpose to settle us in sure consolation, had it not been most easy to be
discerned, and palpable to all, though malice will not suffer the tongue to own
what they cannot but know in their heart. The walk, the conversation shows the
man; try then who has the command of our lives; observe that; for if we live
after the flesh, we shall dye for ever; but if through the Spirit we mortify
the deeds of the body, our members that are on earth, Romans 8. 13
as uncleanness, covetousness and the like, we shall live for ever, and never
be damned. There are but two principles that rule the man; one of these have
the command of all men; where the one commands, there the other cannot; that
commands that has power over the conversation. It Is lustings and motions are
reigning indeed, that frame the walk of a man. It is then no difficult thing to
know what we are by our walks; look upon your walk, and see your estate. The
works of the flesh are manifest; read, and see Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. And the
fruits of the Spirit are many, and go in a chain unsevered; Gal. 5. 22.
they are sweet; and ripe, not rotten, not hedge-fruit they are such against
which there is no Law, although they are Gospel-fruit, and never grew but in
that soil. Did ever any men make a Law against them? and the Law of God is
wholly for them. Be not deceived by profession and persuasion that thou have
spiritual life within thee, if that inward spiritual life do not come forth in
power to frame thy conversation after it, and no more after Gal. 5. 25, 26.
the flesh. If we says our Apostle, do live in the Spirit, let us walk in the
Spirit; have you spiritual life in you? have a spiritual conversation also;
have a spiritual conversation, and you shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh, though you have flesh, and the flesh lusting in you. The sins of the
godly are not as the sins of the wicked; and the manifest difference is this,
the godly have no way of wickedness in them, no sin is their way Ps. 139. 24
and trade, no sin commands their walk; they may fall into a sin, as a
wicked man may sometimes fall upon a duty, but that is not their course, they
up again, and walk on in Gods way which their souls delight in and choose,
humbled and ashamed, and speeding their way the more; their delight is in the
Law of the Lord; now that allows no sin, neither do they; every word of God
is pure, so is their way, and purity of way is that they love; there is no
wickedness in all the words of wisdom; he that delights in the Word of God as
his guide, shall of necessity be led in ways wholly differing from the
counsel, course and chair of sinners, ungodly and scorners. Gods children have
spots too many, but not the spots of unbelievers and hypocrites. The spot of
Gods children, is not the spot of carnal Israelites, or carnal professors of
the Gospel; whatever be the spot of the spiritual, this is his beauty, he walks
after the Spirit; he walks not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Mark here
these three distinguishing points in the trial of our estate.

First, the spiritual takes the Spirit for the Commander and Orderer of his
conversation; as he would have the Holy Ghost live and rule in his heart and
his soul live in the power of the Spirit given to him, and dwelling in him, so
he resolves to walk in the Spirit; the spiritual man's walk is a walk after the
Spirit.

Secondly, he walks thus, refusing and watching against, fleeing and warring
against the flesh, and against the affections, and the lusts thereof; this the
words import, not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, is the spiritual man's
walk.

Thirdly, and whereas the flesh would impose upon the most spiritual, he
glorifies the Spirit, and condemns the flesh; the flesh is rejected, but the
Spirit is chosen for guide and leader; this refusing and choosing is his daily
work; daily and continually in his ways and walks, he is refusing to walk
after the flesh, and choosing to walk after the Spirit; the language of his
walks and conversation is this, not the flesh, but the Spirit; not the walk
after the flesh, but the walk after the Spirit.

2. Therefore for the second use, here is 2. Of comfort.
singular comfort to all whose ways are holy; who have the Spirit of Christ
the orderer of their lives. God will account of thee by the course of thy life;
the wicked while their lives are vain, earthly, carnal, and they like not the
way of the holy, and choose not the Word and Spirit for their rule and guide,
they plead Ps. 50. 16.
and please themselves in the goodness of their hearts; God knows them for
wicked, and so will judge them: thou complainest of thy heart, and mournest
over thy vain thoughts, thy weaknesses, but hold fast the way which is
called holy; thy walk is directed heavenward. Remember now, God reckons thee
to be as the way is which thou have chosen; whose walks are spiritual, they are
spiritual, they Romans 8. 1.
are in Christ Jesus, and not in Adam: flesh may lust in them, but they fulfill
not those lusts; for look upon their conversation, they walk in the Spirit,
they walk after the Spirit, and that from the power of the Spirit in them as
the spring of life, as the quickening, commanding, renewing inward life. The
Holy Ghost has his Throne in the heart of those whose walks he frames, whose
walks are after his mind; these holy walkers are in the Spirit, in the Son,
and in the Father, as their walk does evidence undoubtedly.

That this comfort may flow forth clear and strong, it will be needful to give
here somewhat of Consideration, and somewhat of Caution.

SECT. 9.
For Consideration, Consider seriously Where, four relieving considerations. 1.
What of the flesh may be, where the Spirit rules; cast under seven heads. Jam.
1. 14, 15.
these four things following.

First, What of the flesh may be where the Spirit reigns; there may be

(1.) The lustings of the flesh contrary to the Spirit. In sin there is first
the evil suggestion, or first motion, the first rising* and peering out of
sin. This is in the most gracious and spiritual, but with great difference;
for to the unregenerate and wicked it is the babe of his bosom, but to the
godly it is the brat of Babylon; happy would he be esteemed of him, that could
take and dash them against the stones. Secondly, delight ensnaring and
bird-liming the soul; this may be in the godly, but it is stolen, and of
treachery from the inmate the flesh; for his chosen delight is in the Law of
God, his delight is to do Gods will, that is within his bowels; but as for the
wicked, his Psalm. 1. 2. and 40. 8.
inward parts are very wickedness, he looks and welcomes, and with the whole
heart closes with the ensnarings of sins motions; he would not willingly have
it to have check in any case, no, not so much as from his conscience within.
Thirdly, Consent of will; this in the godly is but partial, but in the
unregenerate it is a full consent. Fourthly, the Act or Commission in a formed
thought, in word, or in deed; This in the godly is seldom, and then that which
he would not; but in the wicked it is common and usual, and yet not so often as
he would. Fifthly, persisting in it, and making the actings of sin their way
in which they choose to stand and walk, taking pleasure therein; this in the
regenerate is never, much less does the godly man continue in sin
obstinately, pleading for it, and scorning reproof; much less does he take a
pride in it, and boast of accomplishing his sinful desires, blessing the wicked
whom the Lord abhors, and hating the godly that fear to sin, in whom the
Lord takes pleasure.

(2.) Sins motions may be lively in To. 7. 23.
the members of the truly godly; but not so as to be able to bring forth fruit
unto death, as the phrase is in ver. 5. of Romans 7. for as lively as they be,
the godly watch them the more, that they shall not be fruitful. Death is not
their Lord, nor has them under its power now, as it was while they stood
married to the Law, the Covenant of Works; but God is their Lord unto whom they
bring forth fruit, as married to Christ risen from the dead. Therefore sin
may stir lively, but not be fruit-bearing in them; but in the ungodly the
motions thrive, as the birth in the belly, which they seek carefully to midwife
and suckle, hug in the bosom, and dandle on their knees, because there is no
life of God in them, they being altogether in death, and abiding in death, as
the Apostle John's expression is in 1 John 3. 14.

(3.) Evil may be present, when they Romans 7. 21
would do good. To will that which is good, is present with the godly; but
through the flesh, that is, by reason of the corruption of their natures in
which no good dwells, there is evil adjacent to that willing, and easily
beletteth them.

(4.) Grievous untowardnesse, awkernesse, Romans 7. 14, 19, 20. Heb. 12. 1
indisposednesse, and averseness sometimes. And this is the more burdening and
pressing down, begirting and encompassing, the more they press unto the
spiritualnesse of any duty; nevertheless unto spiritualnesse in duty they
press on, they stir up themselves thereto; and their backwardness, dullness
and deadness with all formality they mourn over and judge.

(5.) The Law of the members, or corruption of nature, which no sooner stirs,
To. 7. 23.
but it is presently in the members of the body, and there is working as a Law;
this Law of the members, making War, and rebelling against the Law of their
minds; yet their inner man, (and such a man they have in them, and others have
not;) that is the Master they own; his Law is their Law; the other they own
not, but take for a Rebel, and his Law for tyranny.

(6.) Yea, there may be a Captivity Romans 7. 23, 24, 25.
under the Law of the members; but it is a captivity in their esteem, under
which they cry out of their wretched condition, cry for deliverance, and rest
not until they can upon experience bless God for Christ their deliverer.

(7.) Sometimes they may have a 2 Cor. 12. 7
thorn in the flesh; Some special sin troubling, some great temptation or
sore affliction, or some Satanical molestation with which they may be buffered
sorely, that they might be kept more humble under choice abilities and high
privileges, and might shade themselves under the power of Jesus Christ alone.

So much of the flesh may be where the Spirit reigns; this is the first
consideration to establish the comfort of the holy spiritual walker. Then again
consider

Secondly, There is a great difference 2. The difference between the reign and
the rage of sin.
between the reign and the rage of sin; sin may rage where it has lost its
dominion or domination; sin may rage where the Spirit dwells and reigns;
although it is true that it may rage in those also in whom it reigns; sin
while and where it reigns is sometimes dormant, and sometimes rampant; but in
them in whom it reigns, it rages and rampeth, because it is made much of and
fuelled, pampered and well-fed, and has its full swinge and scope; whereas in
the godly it rages, because it is stoutly resisted, and the death of it is
sought with mortal hatred, and with immortal hatred, with an hatred that would
have the very life and heart-blood of sin, and with an hatred that never
dies but increases more and more. There is a wide difference between the rule
and dominion, and the prevalency of sin. Where sin is not served nor
obeyed, yet there it may struggle, and for a time prevail; but this prevalency
is prayed against, till they can say upon comfortable answers from God to those
prayers, O thou that hear prayers, thou will purge them away. Ps. 65. 23.


Thirdly, Consider that the combat of 3. The combat of the Spirit against the
flesh. How known.
the Spirit against the flesh proves thy good estate. Not that it is good or
comfortable that there is flesh, and that it lusts; but that there is Spirit
lusting against it, and that there is a combating with it which thou desire
to maintain; this is good and comfortable. This combat is known thus; it is
not only between the conscience and the will, but between the will and the
will; it is in the same faculty of the soul, and in the will the love is to
righteousness, and not to iniquity; and the hatred is against iniquity, and
not against righteousness. Again, it is a fight against all sin that he
knows, and against inward sin, and secret in respect of other men's
knowledge, and not only against outward or gross sins, or sins which come
to light, or against some one sin. It seeks and attains to mortification, and
not only suppression, keeping in, and restraining. It is such as carries the
walk of conversation; it prevails to preserve a good principle, rule and end;
and not only to do that which is good for the matter with neglect of these. It
carries to the use of the means and helps against sin which God has
sanctified, and to the use of these means it carries us humbly and with desire
of fruit, with frequency, fervency and reverence, taking heed that frequency
abate not ^everence and fervency. It is maintained by spiritual weapons, not by
carnal; and in Christ's might pawned and promised in the Covenant of Grace, and
not in our own might; no, not in the might of grace already received, and still
afresh derived from Christ in the promise by faith acted on them anew. Lastly,
the weakness and foiles received in this fight, and the wounds gotten, and the
ground lost, are recovered by renewing our repentance and faith; and the
spiritual Warrior with all his might and achievements, his valiant acts and
victories are as before the Lord, looking at his approbation and his
acceptance for the worthiness and mediation of Jesus Christ alone, in which
he rests with self-denial.

Fourthly, Consider there is a Regency 4. The reign of the Spirit has a
threefold degree according to three ages of one in Christ. 1 John 2. 12, 13,
14.
of the Spirit differing according to believers ages in Christ; and so there is
a Regency in the b^b^ in Christ, seeking assurance of Gods love as a Father,
and expressing it self in desires, complaints and cries of a child in prayer.
And there is a Regency in the strong man, or young man in Christ, who is
carried on with the Spirit of meekness and love, skilful in the Word, and in
the use of that Sword, full of the power and vigorous actings of faith, and of
riches of assurance, full of exploits in the Field, delighting in putting forth
the vigor of his strength in deeds and conflicts; and there is a Regency of
the Spirit in fathers in Christ, full of settlednesse, of enlarged knowledge in
the great mysteries of the Gospel, and the perfection of his pure precepts, of
experiences, and of ability and dexterity for counsel and comfort. To each of
these three ages in Christ does this description here agree; they are all such
as walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit; nevertheless these walkers
in the truth, are not all of a size, but are of three degrees according to
their several ages; and God does not expect that of a child which he does of a
young man, or of a father; this he requires, that answerable to our time and
means of enjoying the Gospel, we should pass on from infancy to youth, from
youth to father-hood in Christ.

These four considerations are of singular worth and use to establish the (...)
of true believers, that their joy ^ight b^ full.

SECT. 10.
Now for Caution, whiles these truths A preserving caution that the spiritual
walk not as men carnal; In twelve carnal paths.
are opened to stay the heart, and to keep the consolation close to it, let all
the spiritual and gracious be warned that they walk not as carnal; for they may
walk so that they may look for all the world like carnal persons, and thereby
may dishonor Christ, the Gospel, and the Spirit of God, and destroy for the
present the comfort of their estate. Be warned; for to look like carnal
persons, to walk as carnal, is not far from this, to be no other than carnal.

Quest. Who look like carnal persons?

Answ. First, Those Christians (though they be regenerate) who are carried with
1 Cor. 3. 1, 3, 4.
envying, strife, divisions, and schisms in the Church, according to their
several ministers, though eminently gifted and holy; if one say I am of Paul,
and another, I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal? It savours of Schism, to call
any particular Church by the name of the Minister; for every Church is the
Church of God and of 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13.
Christ, not the Church of Paul, nor of Apollo; neither Paul nor Apollo was
crucified for them: nor were they baptized into their names: this very thing
causes divisions, envyings and strife among Christians. Christ's name is that
worthy name by which the Disciples are to be called. If Jam. 2. 7.
any make several Church-wayes and Churches according to several points of
lesser moment than the faith of Jesus and the Commandments of God, which are
of perfect unity and agreement, and in respect whereof there is but one body,
one Church, and one way: and all the particular Churches are all one in this
that makes them Churches, that is, they are Churches of God, which are in
Christ 1 These. 2. 14.
Jesus, holding the Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus; and the note
of distinction that differenceth them one from another, and by which they are
to be known one from the other is this; one is in or at Jerusalem, another in
Ephesus, some in Judea, some in Macedonia, with the like; all that otherwise
make Churches, and Church-wayes which so hold and join together in, they are
held and reputed for a particular Church, they make divisions, and set bounds
which Christ has not set, and therefore they walk as men, and not as
Christians; whereas unity of the faith and of the Spirit, (which is one and the
same thing) and love which that faith works with humbleness of mind, and
forbearance one of another expressed in our walks, is that alone which becomes
our holy calling by the Gospel.

Secondly, they that go to be made perfect in the flesh, by receiving the
opinions Gal. 3. 1, 3
that set up the power of man's freewill, or the merits of man's works, or the
works of the Law for justification of a sinner in the sight of God, or the
sufficiency of the light in man as he comes into the world, or o^ght else that
is of natural abilities, or that tends to the exalting of man's worth, or to
boasting or glorying in man, and not in the Lord Jesus alone, and in the riches
of Gods freegrace in Christ testified by the Holy Ghost in Scripture, all such
do savor of the flesh, and look like carnal men, and not like spiritual men.

Thirdly, they that bite and devour one Gal. 5. 13, 15.
another, whereas they should serve one another by love.

Fouthly, they that use their Christian liberty for an occasion to the flesh,
in Gal. 5. 13. with v. 11. Romans 15. 1, 2. Gal. 5. 26. 2 Pet. 2. 10. 1 Pet. 2.
13, 16.
self-pleasing, in vainglory, in avoiding persecution by pleasing and
humouring the persecutors in the matters of Religion, and in despising
dignities, and disobeying their lawful, though but humane and civil Laws*

Fifthly, they that are worldly, I mean, that take license to plunge themselves
into too many affairs unnecessarily for profit sake, or for honors or
pleasures sake; this is to live as the men of the world. Ps. 49. 11. and 17. 14.


Sixthly, they that are sowing to the flesh, more than to the Spirit; that is,
who bestow their temporal goods and lay them out for the profits, the honors,
Gal. 6. 6, 7, 8, 10.
the comforts, the necessaries of this present life, and not for the Gospel,
the good of the Church, the upholding of the true Religion, Ministry and
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, the relief of the necessities of others, especially
of the Saints; nor to get wisdom and spirituals, nor unto spiritual uses.

Seventhly, they that are indulgent to the body in its vanities for attire,
culture and dress, beauty-spots, paintings, crispings and curlings, and
womanish excesses; for delicious fare, spotts, idleness, empty visits,
gossipings as they are termed, expense of precious time in toyings and
unprofitable talk, and being busy bodies in other folks matters; together with
the unweaned use of things lawful, and the unmanly vanities about the hair;
they that are moll, soft and delicate ones, are like the worlds minions, and
unlike Christians who are called to self-denial, and to the Cross, and to
converse like Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem.

Eighthly, they that to enjoy their sensualities Jude 19.
will separate themselves from the grave, sober and mortified Christians.

Ninthly, they that have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of
persons; one in gay clothing is more set by than another, Jam. 2. 1, 2, 3.
though far more gracious than he, because he is but a poor man in poor
clothing; and this respect of persons takes place in Church Assemblies,
Administrations and Affairs, as well as in the heart, the converse and the
setting of our selves in Company keeping.

Tenthly, they that grow careless, and slighting of the Scriptures, the
Ordinances of Christ, and means of grace, upon what pretense soever, as if they
were above Ordinances, or seekers of another more spiritual dispensation than
that in and of the New Testament, whereas this shall remain till the great day
of judgment; or as if they were fed by immediate revelations and impulses of
the Spirit, or growing loose, or having a sufficient light within them, or
ought else which they may run into, being puffed up by their fleshly minds.

Eleventhly, they that are in their sorrows 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
for the death of their friends immoderate, and in their passions and
affections violent, in their speech foolish and jesting, in their behavior
light and vain, in their recreations excessive, and under wrongs and injuries
void of moderation of mind, and rigid exactors of their own right; whereas we
should in our own right be ready to abate and moderate our minds and affairs,
bearing, forbearing, easy to be entreated, and ready to forgive, Phil. 4. 5.
(...).
but in matters of Gods right we ought not yield an hairs breadth.

Twelfthly, they that watch not against the sins of lying, fraud and
overreaching in bargaining, with all deceit and guile.

These sins chosen and lived in, denominate us carnal; and if the regenerate
give way to them, and they begin to deface their conversations, they make them
look like men carnal, as if they would put on the old man again; as if they
were in the first Adam, old Adam.

So far of this caveat, and of the use of comfort.

SECT. 11.
Thirdly and lastly, be exhorted and 3. Of Exhortation to keep down the flesh.
By using ten helps to tame the flesh. Isa. 40. 6. 2 Pet. 1. 24, 25.
persuaded to cherish the Spirit, and keep down the flesh, and for this end
take the helps which God gives to tame the flesh; they are these,

First, the necessity of dying. Cry, cry, to thine own soul, All flesh is
grass, the grass withers, and the flower fades away. Nothing will abide
but that which is born of the incorruptible seed of the Word, the Word which is
preached, which lives and abides ever.

Secondly, The rejection of all excellenc^es Mat. 11. 5, 6. 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27,
28, 29.
in which the flesh glories, their rejection in Christ's Kingdom. The poor are
Gospellized, when the wise and rich are scandalized. God does choose the
foolish, weak, despised, and things that are not, and passes by the mighty,
noble, learned, and brings to naught the things that are; he does not always
the greatest works of conversion by the learned Ministers, or by men of
greatest parts and gifts.

Thirdly, An irrevocable curse is upon all that the flesh likes best; this the
book called Ecclesiastes shows; the whole visible Creation is under bondage,
and subjected to vanity; vanity and vexation of Spirit is attending man in the
enjoyment of all things under the Sun.

Fourthly, The harmless jollities of the Eccl. 11. 9.
flesh shall be brought into judgment.

Fifthly, A conscience checking, galling, and gnawing for the flesh's ryots.

Sixthly, The flesh's naughtiness is discovered in the Word of God. 2 Cor. 10.
4, 5, 6. To. 8. 13.


Seventhly, powerful means are given of God to crucify it; The Ministry, the
Spirit, the crucifyings of the Son of God; and exceeding great and precious
promises which present to us a draught of better things than the flesh can
propose.

Eighthly, In the Word, commands and directions are given how to use the flesh:
such are these, be temperate, be sober, beat down your bodies, bring them into
subjection. Accuse and condemn the flesh; silence her reasonings, lay-in
distinguishing and mortifying principles; they are such as these; The belly for
meat, and meat for the belly; but God shall destroy them both. The body is for
the Lord, not for lust. The body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost. The body
shall be raised out of the grave, but not as it is sown; both soul and body
are the more excellent, as they are less fleshly. All the things of this life
are such as perish in the using. The scheme or fashion of this world passes
away. All that is in the world, and is of the world, as the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, is not of the Father. All these
things that are of this lower world shall be dissolved.

Ninthly, A judgment day is appointed; and it shall as surely come, as it is
sure that men dye; then this whole visible Creation which the flesh abuses
shall be burnt with fire. The heavens shall shrivel together as a scrole, and
the earth with the works thereon shall be burnt up.

Tenthly, in the mean time, bitters are cast into all our earthly sweets; and
wasting judgments are abroad in the visible Church at this day. Meditate often
upon these things, enlarge your thoughts upon each of them. All these will eat
down proudflesh.

Thus of the three grand doctrines more expressly delivered in this text, the
last of which concerns the lively description of the believer by his walks; the
fourth doctrine follows.

CHAP. XI.
Contains the fourth and last great truth, which is, The fullness of the
assurance, and of the Consolation of those who are in Christ, and walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

SECT. 1.
The fourth doctrine arises from the The fourth doctrine.
coherence of these two verses with the words before and following, when we
observe how they are placed in the frame of the Apostles discourse; and it is
full of consolation, for it concerns the full assurance, and the safe estate
of all those who are actually in Christ, notwithstanding their sins. They
have flesh; a corrupt How raised.
nature dwelling with them, and many sins the issues of that flesh, but
walking not in them; they are in Christ, and therefore there is no condemnation
to them, as the 1. verse with these verses affirms and proves; for their
sins God has condemned in the flesh, or body and soul of his own Son; the
benefit of the salvarion wrought by Jesus Christ comes home to them, for all
that their flesh, that body of death can do, so that they may and ought to say,
I thank God through Jesus Christ, who has, and does, and will deliver me from
the same; this is evident by comparing these verses with the 25. ver. of Chap.
7. They should also rest assured of their blessed estate, when there is no
condemnation to them, and when the strength of this evidence of their interest
in Christ from their spiritual-mindednesse and savor influencing their walk is
life and peace, as these words looking backwards to the 1. ver. of this
Chapter, and forward to the 5. and 6. verses do plentifully show. And since the
scope of the whole discourse from ver. 1. to ver. 17. of this chapter, is to
support and encourage these spiritual, holy walkers in their way; the burden
and workings of sin in them should not break their spirits, or discourage them
in the course of their holy living; the miserable conflicting toil of a
gracious heart with the sin dwelling in him, is the thing treated of in the
person of holy Paul, representing all the regenerate, in chap. 7. the latter
part of it: and the 8. chapter to ver. 17. thereof is on purpose adjoined to
back on those Combitants in their war against the flesh; their sin must not
dishearten them in the combat; this is the force of that word, Now; it is a
word of encouragement; as if he said, therefore since Christ is your deliverer,
for and through whom ye may bless God, and rejoice with thankfulness, in the
very heat and worst of the battle with your sins; since flesh, and you who
are under the Law of your minds, and are regenerate, are two; Now, Now
therefore stand to it and fight it out, there is no condemnation to such as
you. And let this word for, in these verses of my Text be carried to the ver.
immediately going before it, and then they persuade* these holy walkers to give
up themselves fully, cheerfully, and without fear of miscarrying, to the Law of
the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus which will certainly carry through,
without peril from the Law of sin and death which threatens them. Having showed
the coherence, take the fourth doctrine in this proposition:

The sins of those that walk after the Spirit, shall never be to their
condemnation, neither shall they hinder to them the benefit of all the
salvation that comes by Christ, nor ought in the least kind to hinder their
assurance, or their comfortable walking in their obedience, their constant
combating against the flesh, or their full dedition to the Law of the Spirit of
life which is in Christ Jesus, as to that which will deliver from the Law of
sin and death.

For explication of this truth, observe The explication. 1. What is granted. 4.
things.
here in the first place what is granted.

1. It is granted, that the sins of those that walk after the Spirit are
sins, they are transgressions of Gods holy Commandments, they are filthy, and
do make them guilty: they are against God, and against Christ, and are
repugnant to the holy Ghost: they deserve condemnation, though they redound not
unto condemnation: they redound to their fault, and to their guilt, though not
to their ch^rge, for they are not imputed; nor to malediction; these Christ
has borne; nor to eternal punishment, for Christ has made full satisfaction.
That their sins condemn them not, is not from any less desert; they also
strike at the life of grace: though they cannot destroy the life of grace.

2. It is granted, that there is flesh in them; the seed and spawne of all sin
that ever man's eye saw, or ear heard of; of presumptuous sin, even of the
sin unpardonable, and unto death: but it is subdued, and broken or destroyed,
so that it has not dominion. There is not a full deletion and taking away of
the being of sin. He that says, he has no sin, deceives himself, and
there is no truth in 1 John 1. 8, 10.
him.

3. These holy walkers after the commands of another ruler, even of the holy
Ghost dwelling in them, do confess as much, and do retain the sense of their
sins, and sinful natures, and do hold them contrary to the Spirit, contrary to
its lustings, 1 John 1. 8, 9
and contrary to their walking.

4. There is not in them a blotting out, and taking away of all the sad ruins
which sin has made upon mankind: these shall not be taken away from them,
until the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ the second time, when the last enemy
death and the grave shall be destroyed, as it is promised in Act. ^. 19, 20.
then there shall not be so much as a scarre of the wo^nds which sin has made.

SECT. 2.
In the second place, observe when we say, that their sins should not hinder
2. Whose sins hinder not comfort, and assurance; and what sins.
their comfort or assurance; we ^peak of the sins of such as hold on in this
walk, retaining their integrity, otherwise the fall of a David, or of a Peter
will take away their comfort in holy ways, and the joy of their salvation,
until it be unfeignedly repented of, and they recovered of such falls. We
yield that all sins in their own nature, and by the law of works do make
against all comfort; but there are great sins, the manifest works of the
flesh, which the spiritual may fall into: and these for that time destroy the
comfort of the most holy of Saints who are guilty of them. Nevertheless, while
the regenerate are guilty of these sins after calling, these in them compared
with the unregenerate that live and walk in the same sins, may be said truly
to be of infirmity, and to be but falls in their walk, although they are not in
their own nature sins of infirmity. There are sins of infirmity: viz. Sins
of infirmity.
and there are sins that may be fallen into of infirmity.

Now the sins which are sins of infirmity, of these we speak in this
doctrine. These are such sins as have been found in the best and choicest of
Gods Servants upon earth, who have kept their holy watchfulness, and while
they have kept it. Infirmity is when the serious purpose What infirmity is.
of holy and humble walking with God, both general for our whole course, and
special for our particular ways and actions, is present and firm, but to
perform what we unfeignedly desire, and diligently endeavor is wanting.
Sins of infirmity Romans 7. 18 And what are sins of infirmity in genera^ Psa.
19. 13.
are such as unto which presumptuous sins are opposite. Sins of infirmity
are opposite to sin^es which are done willingly; to sins against knowledge
and conscience: I say not, sins with knowledge and conscience. The most
knowing and conscientious, being truly godly and gracious, may see those
sins which wicked men neither see nor feel: but those sins which are
against knowledge and conscience, they are as a thief in the candle, as gravel
in the shoe of a Traveller.

More particularly, sins of infirmity, In particular. Psa. 19. 12.
1. Are secret sins which we know not; yet knowing our ignorance, or defect
of full and clear sight whereby many sins may escape us, we repent of them,
as did David, saying, Who knows his e^ro^s! ^cl^nse thou me from secret
sins. 2. They are imperfections and failings cleaving to our good works, and
to our best actions. 3. They are such as arise from want of age in Christ, and
do accompany the state of a Babe. An infant is infirm. 4. They are such as
proceed from want of stren^th where there has been but little means, or though
great means, yet en^oyed but for a little time. 5. They are sudden,
indeliberate breakings out, contrary to our bent, and purpose: when our
judgments are clouded by some sudden temptation, after which we are sensible
of our failing, mourn, complain, labor to ^amend, and to get ground of our
corruption.

Sins of infirmity are found in the regenerate only, who have the life of
grace begun. No weakness where no life. Weakness is properly in those who
have and retain a sincere, universal, and constant inclination to spiritual
things as the best. No infirmity where the Spirit of Christ dwells not:
Although the inhabitation of the Spirit be no cause of weakness, but of
strength. No infirmity in those that have not gracious principles, for in such
the deadly law of sin has dominion. No failings, where no right judgment to
place us upon high and supernatural ends and aims. Infirmities are in those
only that have espoused love to Jesus Christ.

Infirmities, are those sins which are the matter of daily humiliation, and
the objects of daily mortification. It is not of infirmity to please our selves
in our weakness, to plead for it, or to allow of it.

There are infirmities which are not possibly to be rooted out, when yet the
upright strive daily against them: as forgetfulness, heaviness of Spirit,
distractions in duty, sudden passions, fears, secret fugitivenesse of heart
from under the presence of God, some kind of rashness and rudeness of spirit
in our approaches to God, covetings or hanckerings after the creature
inordinately, with many of like sort: and there are infirmities more easily
subdued, as are all the frailties which break out in gestures, words, and
actions; the Apostle gives us the ground of such a distinction, when he says,
In many things we offend all. If any man offend not in word, Jam. 3. 2.
the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body.

SECT. 3.
Now having treated thus of sins of infirmity, What is meant in saying sins of
infirmity shall not condemn.
this doctrine shows

First, that these sins of infirmity, shall not condemn those that are guilty
of them. Not as if their great sins shall condemn them: no, for Jesus Christ
mediates not only for lesser sins, but for the greatest sins: and God
forgiveth iniquity, transgression, and sin; sins of all sorts, and of all
sizes; but the meaning is, that Christ is such a propitiation that these are
covered; such an Advocate that he pleads to the Father, that these by 1 John 2.
1.
the tenor of the Covenant of grace be wholly passed by; he is such an high
Priest, as is touched with the feeling of our infirmities; for though he never
knew what it was to sin, no, not of infirmity; he knew no sin: yet he was
tempted, and so Heb. 4. 15.
is touched with the feeling of the state of one that cannot be free from some
touch of defilement when he is tempted. God is a Father who is so far from
being angry Psa. 103. 13 Mal. 3. 17.
with his children for these mere infirmities, that he pities them, spares
them, and makes them up as his Jewels; but as for their g^osse sins, they are
they for which their Father is angry, withholds his comforts, his Spirit, and
their joy: and no consolation to them in sins they indulge, until they be
humbled deeply. Again, understand this aright: These sins condemn not; not as
if lesser sins were not displeasing unto God their Father, to Christ their
Lord, and to the Spirit their Leader: nor as if they might not be so committed,
that they may become great sins, through carelessenesse and security, and so
as they may be circumstanced. Nay. A failing may be so allowed, so customary,
so malapertly, and frowardly excused and pleaded for, that it may have too much
of presumption in it: and so have much wickedness in it, and have much of the
nature of a great transgression; and therefore may have in it much provocation,
and that which calls for great humiliation, before any comfort can flow into
the soul of such a one.

Secondly, these sins of infirmity ought not to hinder assurance: that is,
the assurance of faith, and the ass^rance of evidence. There is the assurance
of faith, Sins of infirmity hinder not assurance.
which is our du^y, and ought to be held fast and maintained, whiles
uprightness is kept up in its constant course without interruptions, although
God do desert us, although God do kill us. There is the assurance of evidence,
which is not alone to have the promises for us, and we rest thereon, but to
have our evidences of our interest in the promises speaking fully, and our
spirits clearly reading them, and giving in their witness, and thence the
heart assured; this also, as the help of the assurance of faith, is belonging
to our duty; but there is the assurance of feeling, and of the T^stimon^ of the
holy Spirit of promise; this is a blessing wholely, this is in Gods hand, and
not in ours. And it cannot be in a better hand.

Qu^st. If any say: How can the assurance of faith be held fast. How can we
have our evidences fair and full, when there is such quick sense of sin in
the sincere believer? None so tender of Conscience, none indeed truly affected
with sins filthiness and burden but he. When also there is no less
apprehension of Gods wrath and displeasure, and of his forsasakings, and
withdrawings of the comforts of his Presence; he only knows what the shining
of Gods face in Christ reconciled means, and he only knows what the hiding away
of his face means. I answer;

Answ. Understand well these six things in the Covenant of Grace, which answer
all the fears of the upright.

First, That in this Covenant uprightness Genesis 17. 1. Pro. 11. 6, 5.
is required, and not perfection. The righteousness of the upright, is the
righteousness which God accepts: and he calls it the righteousness of the
perfect; that is, of the sincere and entire, who are sanctified throughout, and
in every part: though they be not perfect already in any part, in soul, in
spirit, or in body; they have in no part, the perfection of degrees, but they
Phil. 3. 12. Phil. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14.
say with the Apostle, I have not attained, I am not already perfect.
Uprightness is the reaching forth to that which is before, as not having yet
attained, as not already perfect, until we attain unto the blessed
resurrection of the dead. It is not to account ones self to have apprehended,
but to follow after, and to be upon the pursuit, if that we may apprehend that
for which also we are apprehended of Christ Jesus. It is forgetting what is
behind, and which we are brought to through grace, to press toward the mark,
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, that we may come to
the Goal, and receive the Crown of righteousness, and consummate holiness
and glory 2 Cor. 7. 2.
which is the hope of our calling. It is to be on clensing from all filthiness
of flesh 2 Cor. 7. 1.
and spirit, of body and soul, inward and outward, and on perfecting our
holiness in the fear of God. The Lord knows that thou believe but in part;
thou know but in part, and thou do all duties but in part. Why say
thou as one dejected, Oh, I have many failings, many sins are upon me! Say
the same (for it is very true;) say it as one deeply humbled, and spare not:
say it as one confessing with godly sorrow, with a spirit without guile: My
sins are more in number Psa. 40. 12
than the hairs of my head; when I think on them, they increase, and come so
fast on, that I am not able to look up: my very heart fails me. Art thou kept
in this frame to be a purifying, to be a clensing, to be a perfecting, to be
pressing on forwards still? thou art upright. Christ is thy righteousness,
thou art absolutely perfect and complete in him; for it is in the first Psa.
40. 12 with 6. 7, 8 verses.
place spoken of him thy Mediator and surety. It is most true of him who came
to bear the s^nnes of all the Elect; Innumerable evils d^d c^mpasse him about;
thy sins since calling, and all thy sins before calling, and all the sins
of all that ever shall be saved, were charged upon thy Lord Jesus Christ, so
that he says, Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able
to look up: they are more th^n the hairs of mine head, therefore my heart
fails me. Why say thou; should I be of the number of Phil. 3. 15.
the secure and lukewarm, which my soul fears and hates? hold fast the former
frame, and while thus minded, art thou not minded as all the perfect are? as
the perfect in the Gospel-sense, and in the language of the holy Ghost, who
ever gives right names to things.

Secondly, that perseverance is promised and given to believers, as well as
required Jer. 32* 40. 1 John 2. 27*
of them. I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart
from me; this is a Branch of Gods everlasting Covenant with his people in
Christ. The anointing which ye have received of Christ, abides in you: and
even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him. A precious promise. Why then
do thou say, I shall never hold out; I shall one day fall by the hands of
Saul; by this, or the other temptation or corruption? Remember these promises, and
stay thy soul on them: thy perseverance is from preservation, even as thy
spiritual life is from Regeneration.

Thirdly, The Law of this Covenant which thou art under, is the Law of f^^th,
Rom 3. 27, 28. Romans 10. ^. 6, 8, 9. Romans 4. 5. Romans 3. 24, 25. Romans 1. 17
and not the Law of works. The un^odly and sinner at the first is justified by
faith, freely of free grace through the righteousness and redemption which i^
in Jesus Christ, and in his blood; this is most true, the great truth of the
Gospel; and it is of the same Gospel Truth, that the ^ust, the justified
sinner, now made just and righteous by faith, and whose heart God has purified
and sanctified by faith, the just shall live by his faith: for the
righteousness ^phes. 1 6 and 2. 8, 9.
whereby he stands righteous, i^ revealed from faith to faith; and not first to
faith, and then afterward to works, and he is still by free grace accepted in
Christ the beloved, and is what ever he is by the free grace of God. We are
saved by grace through faith, and that is, not of our selves, it is the gift of
God, not of works lest any man should boast. Salvation is by faith that it
might be of grace: were it of works, it were no more of grace. Will any say,
grace is not grace? Why say thou, I, but I can do nothing, I have done
nothing, I still sin after forgiveness, I have upon me a very necessity? oh
my daily sins and debts, what will become of me for my sins, since God has
graciously visited and called me? Do we not see the Answer? live by faith upon
free grace, and upon the redemption which is in Christ, as thou did at first
when thou wast nothing but sin. God has begun thy salvation by faith, and he
will never turn thee over to the Law again, to be perfected by it. Will thou
begin in the Spirit, and then go to be made perfect by the flesh?

Fourthly, That all that is required of us, even repentance, faith, and
uprightness, as well as perseverance, is promised, given, undertaken for, and
wrought by God the Father, and by Jesus Christ the Son of the Father, and by
the Holy Ghost the Spirit of the Father, and of the Son. Why say thou
despondingly, I cannot repent, I cannot believe, I have a deceitful heart, I
cannot be rid of hypocrisy, vainglory, and secret self-confidence? art thou
sensible of these? condemn them, judge thy self for them: and go to him as a
child to a father through Christ, by the Spirit according to his Word for power
to repent, believe, and to walk uprightly. Owning thy disability, look to him
who whiles and in the bidding, exhorting, and promising, gives and works
what he commands. Say, Turn thou me and I shall be turned. Lord, I desire to
believe, help thou mine unbelief; accomplish in me all the good pleasure of thy
goodness, and the work of faith with power. Take out of me the heart of stone,
and give me an heart of flesh, give me a new heart, and a new spirit, and put
thy holy Spirit into me, which shall cause me to walk in thy Statutes, and to
do them. Lift up thy drooping soul and say, Let him command what he will, who
gives what he Commands, and gives by commanding.

Fifthly, That free grace is the ground of all, and abounds through all, and
reigns above all to eternal life. Why say thou as one discouraged, The
sense of my sin and guilt abounds: how then can I have comfort? In thy self
thou can not loath thy self; upon the account of thine own righteousness
thou can not, but in God in Christ, upon the account of his freegrace thou
may, and may the more; for all the mercy of this Covenant of loving
kindness, peace, and salvation was and is for sinners, guilty sinners, chief
sinners, that were under sin and death in their power, and for no other: that
where sin abounds, grace might super-abound: and was, and is from free grace
above, and against desert.

Sixthly, That Jesus Christ is the second Adam, and the Covenant is within, and
in him with us. Why say thou, How can it be that Christ's righteousness
should be mine? how can any be persuaded of this? Why say thou not, How can
the Romans 5 12 and forwards to the end of the Chapter.
first Adam involve me in sin and death? is not the answer clear and full; He
is the first Adam; and is not the answer as clear and full? Jesus Christ is the
second Ad^m; this he is to all who are in him; thou find the first Adam's
disobedience has made thee sinful, and brought in death upon thee: place thy
self under the Word of faith, receive what God there testifies to be true,
(and why not? for God is true,) and thou shall feel that the obedience of
Christ will make thee righteous, the f^ee-gift will come upon thee unto
justification of life. In this thing Adam was a f^gure of him that was to come,
even or the Lord Jesus Christ the second Adam.

SECT. 4.
In the third place, Mark well, The sins 3. Falls and backslidings though
repeated, shall not condemn the spiritual walker.
of those that walk after the Spirit, shall not hinder the benefit of Christ's
salvation from them; no, not their falls in their walk, not their
backslidings, nor their relapses into the same iniquity again. The Apostle
boldly affirms, there is to condemnation to them they are in Christ; and to
them that are in Christ there is no con^emnation. They that are in Christ, have
the benefit of all the salvation which is in him; salvation is full where there
is no condemnation. They sin, but Christ is their Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2. 1. Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20.
Christ is their prop^t^at^on. They bemoan themselves for their untractable
hearts, God owns them for children, dear by Adoption in Christ Jesus, he spares
and pities with fatherly yearning bowels, as Ps. 103. 13, 14. Their falls.
was said before. And as for their falls, their falls are with rising again,
with as it were another conversion, with a new setting in joint again. They
grow better by their falls, as did David and Peter, not that it is ere the
better that they fall, or that they are better than those that hold on their
way and walk in uprightness without falls; but thus, they are better than they
were before they fell, they recover the fall, and walk on with the more
selfdenial, watchfulness, holy jealousy, speedy steadfastness, and redoubled
zeal and power; they were over-taken in a fault, and they run the faster, tread
the streighter and surer. They did the Lord dishonor and disservice, they now
mind the more his honor, and some higher service: if none fall in their way,
they will make famous to his honor, their own shame owned in repentings, but
nevet more come near the very appearance of commission or perpetration of such
sin by their good will. Their falls therefore shall not hinder their salvation.

No; nor their back-s^idings. I distinguish Their backslidings.
them thus; A fall into some particular sin. A backsliding is a departing
from the faith, or from the holy way; backsliding is of the nature of
Apostasy in doctrine or practice: there is a new Religion, and another frame
of conversation in backsliding. As Apostasy is worse than Heresy, so
backsliding is worse than falling. A fall is taken in stumbling and tripping
in the way; a backsliding is a real change of the state of a man gone away
backward. God requires, and the spiritual answer his call therein, That they
Jer. 3. 14, 22.
return, that they acknowledge their transgressions, how they have
back-slidden, that they pray earnestly for pardon and power, and vow
Thankfulness and Reformation; Hos. 14. 4, 5, 6, 7. with ver, 1. 2, 3. Luke 15.
20, 22. to the end.
and this will be found upon them, and then God of his free-love will heal
backslidings, and bedew them to flourishing, sightly, sweet smelling, savoury
fruitfulness and growth. Oh the fatherly mercies of God to his returning
prodigal son; he is clad, he is adorned, he is feasted: heaven and earth is
filled with music and mirth.

Quest. But may the godly who walk after the Spirit, be guilty of relapses, and
may their backslidings be repeated? and if so, shall not that prejudice their
salvation?

Answ. It is lamentable to tell, but it may so be, they may fall, and fall
again and again; they may lapse and relapse, Their relapses.
and back-slide and again back-slide. It is not usual, but so it may be; and
though it be pitiful to tell, yet it must be told; for the Scripture mentions
it in Sampson and Solomon, two of the Lords Worthies.

Both falls or relapses, and backslidings or relapses do waste the conscience,
and destroy comfort and joy of our salvation; nevertheless they ruin not
utterly, they shall not be to condemnation; yet relapses go not without some
notable testimonies of Gods wrath in this world; and their Sun ^etteth
usually in a cloud, as did Sampsons and Solomon's. O all you eminent in faith
and grace, nourish your fear and humility, and your living by faith
continually; for, they that have discovered the greatest acts of faith, and
have been the highest for wisdom and grace, have fallen into the foulest
s^nnes, and dreadful relapses. Humble thy self to walk with thy ^od; the flesh,
even in the Saints, is a mad beast, a hellish mons^er, a subtle fiend, if it be
suffered to be wanton, and to play its pranks. Be not high-minded, but fear,
look to thy standing, thou sta^des^ by faith; Continue in Gods goodness, and
not in thine own, not in thine own received in the regeneration; and then shall
thou walk surely, and thy steps shall not slide. Abide in Christ, and let his
Word abide in thee, so shall thou bring forth much fruit; severed from him the
true Vine, though a branch full Joh. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
of sap, thou can do nothing, thou will dwingle an^ fade, an^ wither, without
the continual influence of his Spirit, the Spirit of life and power coming from
him Phil. 1. 19
into thee with fresh supplies.

SECT. 5.
In the fourth place, Ob^erve, the sins that attend thee in thy walk, whiles
yet 4. The sins of the upright, should not hinder their comfortable walking.
uprightness is held in faith an^ obedience with patience in the sight of God,
and in love without giving offense to men; or, when thy falls are recovered,
and thy backslidings healed, they ought not to hinder thy comfortable walking.
God said to Abraham, I am God all-suffic^ent, walk before Genesis 17. 1.
me, and be thou pe^fect; we are not self-sufficient, nor all-sufficient, much
less to our selves after faith an^ grace received; but God is to us both these
in his Covenant, the alone sufficient an^ all-sufficient for us; here is the
comfort of the upright in their holy walking. When God says to the Father of
the faithful f^ar not, he encourages to comfortable and cheerful walking;
nothing should daunt or dism^y nothing st^gger or cloud his Spirit in his way
of obedience; why so? he h^d his doubts, his failings he had his dangers, his
enemies; yet says God to him, fear not Abraham; not because thou art able to
defend thy self, thou art able to bless thy self; no: but because I am thy
shield, I am thy exceeding great Genesis 15. 1
reward. Now then if it be so, what should discourage in our obedience, who
have God the Almighty, and All-sufficient for us, who have God for our shield
to defend, who have God for our portion, our exceeding great reward, to bless
us? That God is ours, this carries in it all good, even eternal life through
and over death and the grave, and notwithstanding our sins, the Law, the
justice of God, and the wrath to come from which we are delivered. They that
walk in the fear of the Lord, should walk in the comforts of the Holy Ghost. To
them is that exhortation given, Rejoice in the Lord always; and again I say,
Rejoice. Act. 9. 31 Phil. 4. 4. Phil. 4. 6.
Instead of caring in any thing, they should in every thing be praying and
supplicating, but still with thanksgiving; such exhortation also is that in
another place, Rejoice evermore, pray without ceasing, in every thing give
thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning 1 These. 5. 16,
17, 18
you; the heart not kept in a thankful frame, is not fit for prayer, nor for
any duty to God or man. This is the description of the godly, he that
rejoices, and Isa. 64. 5.
works righteousness; and now under the New Testament, they are the
circumcision, Phil. 3. 3.
which worship God in the Spirit, (not in the Legal Ceremonies and Ordinances
of the worldly Sanctuary) and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
in the flesh.

But they may say, we have sins with

He that has God the Father, to be his God and Father, and to him a Father of
mercies, and God of all consolations; he that has God the Son, our Lord
Jesus Christ the consolation of Israel, to be his Comforter, sent as the great
Prophet who has given to him the tongue of the learned, that he should know
how to speak a word in season to him that is weary; he that has God the Holy
Ghost another Comforter, the name The Comforter given to signify his office,
given to him, and sent into his heatt to shed abroad upon it the love of God,
and to be and to abide in him for ever, the Spirit of Adoption; he may and
ought to walk in comfort. But the walkers after the Spirit have this God, three
persons and one God, theirs in this presence, and that by Covenant; therefore
they should walk comfortably. To open this truth further; understand,

Comfort consists in blessedness; blessedness consists in the fruition and
enjoying of the chief good. The chief good is that which when we have we are
blessed, but not having it we are miserable. The chief good is God alone; the
enjoying and fruition of God is true blessedness, and true comfort. This
cannot be to a sinner but in Christ who is the propitiation, the
reconciliation, and the atonement. Therefore God in Christ is the sinners chief
good. Christ cannot be received but by his Spirit given; thus then, to be the
Lord Christ's in body and soul, whether we live or die, redeemed by his Precious
blood from all our sins, and from the power of Satan, death and the grave,
and from the wrath to come; and through Christ to be the Fathers own po^tion,
received into his f^vour and grace, as his ado^ted child^en in Jesus Christ;
and to be under his fathe^ly care and providence, that without his will, not an
h^i^e can fall from our heads, and that all things are made to wo^k together
for our good: and to have the Holy Ghost given to us to renew us, to unite us
to Christ, to enable us to believe, to mo^tifie the flesh, to give up our
selves to obedience, to make us willing and ready to live to him, and walk
after him, and to assure of eternal life; this is the only true and sound
consolation both in life and death. And this is the estate of those that walk
afte^ the S^i^it. This true blessedness cannot be in this life in perfection,
but only in in^hoation, or a begun enjoyment of the same, and by faith and
hope in a lively expectation of the full and perfect fruition thereof; because
there is death, mortality, sinful remai^ders, the w^ath to come, which must be
utte^ly taken away, and the soul and body placed in a state of glorious
libe^ty, before there can be full en^oyment of perfect bliss; because also the
glory unto which we are called by the Gospel, is far greater than this world
is capable of: and soul and body in this earthly frame cannot receive it. True
blessedness cannot be at all of this world, nor of the things thereof, could
one man be possessed of them all, which yet never was, nor will be; for they
are mutable and passing away: and if they were abiding, yet they are not
satisfactory, nor can they fill all the capacities of the reasonable creature;
much less can blessedness be of the things of this life to a sinner; for by
sin they are become accursed to the sinner, and he accursed in their enjoyment.
They also cannot take away sin, make the sinner holy, bring him into favor
with God, and so bring him to blessedness; mistake not then:

Our comfort is not in this that we have attained, and that we are already
perfect; but that we are in the begun state, and that we shall assuredly attain
and shall be perfect.

Our comfort consists not in this, that we have no sin, but in forgiveness
at present, and in the full blotting out expected, when the Lord shall come
again in glory.

Our holiness or sanctification consists not in this, that no sin is at all
in us; but in this, that our old man is crucified, so that we be not servants
to any sin, and that we are become servants of righteousness.

Our holy walking is in finding out our sins, that they may not find us out;
and in eschewing them that we may tread the ways of God with a larger,
streighter, firmer step, and with an evener, quicker pace.

Our progress in holiness is by daily mortifying the members on the earth,
and by bringing forth continually more fruits unto God, as those that are alive
from the dead.

Our perseverance is the maintaining of the combat.

Our present state is that of David under the anointing, conflicting with our
spiritual enemies that either are like Saul and his confede^ates, or like
Absalom and his conspirators, so that we are singing a Psalm like the third
Psalm; and it is not that of David upon the Throne, singing the eighteenth
Psalm, whereof the title is, A Psalm sung when the Lord had delivered him
from the hand of his enemies; yet it is the estate wherein we are assured to be
singing it with perfect triumph one day.

Our comfort is begun and held, out of godly sorrow; we sow in tears, and go
carrying precious seed with us; our comfort is a seed-season, and the joy of a
harvest-home.

Our comfort is in Gospel-promises, blessings, privileges, graces.

Our comfort is not in freedom from troubles, temptations, persecutions; but
in a heavenly Fathers disposing the troubles, delivering from the power and
poison of the temptations, and of persecutions as they are persecutions,
putting us into the upper form of his Saints on earth, and placing us in
highest honor, and giving us the matter of greatest joy that can befall us in
this valley of tears.

God has registered and left upon file for a perpetual Record the way of the
Saints comfort on this wise: If when we are enemies, we were reconciled to God
by the death of his Son; much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by
his life: To. 5. 10.
If God be for us, who can be against us? he that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all; how shall he not with ^^m also fre^ly give us all
Romans 8. 31, 32. Ps. 56. 13.
things? Thou ^^st del^vered my soul from death; wilt not thou d^l^ver my feet
from fall^ng, that I may walk before ^od in the light of the living?

God has showed us the way wherein he Gods way of giving grace and comfort is
the sight of his grace in Christ, and not the eying of our duty or deservings.
2 Cor. 3. 18. and 5. 19. To. 1. 179
gives both at the first convers^on, and ever after all grace and comfort. It
is this, he sets before sinners brought to see themselves, their s^nnes, and
curse^n^sse thereby in the glass of his holy Law; the glass and mirror of
his Gospel, where in the beholding of the glory of God as he is in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, both Jews and Gentiles, concluded all under
sin, not imputing trespasses, and sending them to the Word and Ministry of
reconciliation, this sight of glorious grace changes and transformeth them.
And as th^s righteousness of God provided to cloth a sinner withal is
through the Gospel-glasse revealed more and more from faith to faith, from one
measure of faith to another greater and growing measure of faith, so will the
change and transformation be from glory to glory, from one degree of glorious
grace and comfort to another greater and growing degree of glorious grace and
comfort; and the work is no less nor lower than the work of the Spirit of the
Lord, the Lord, the 2 Cor. 3. 17, 18.
Holy Ghost setting the sinner in blessed, gracious and glorious liberty. We
work then at the wrong end, when we toil with our own hearts, pore upon our
sins, think we will believe, walk, obey, and the like, and so go on and
increase more and more, and then finding by experience how weak, unable,
wanting, and extremely failing we are, we become dejected, and sore perplexed,
and are ready to say, If God has given such promises to them that fear him,
why am I thus? and almost ready to say, As good give over all, it will ever be
thus with me, I shall never get the victory over my sins, I shall never attain
to settled consolation and assurance. Ah, poor hearts, take this advice, Go Gods
way to work, Go the way after faith and grace received, which God took with you
when you were in your sins, dead in sins. Go that way still, with
thanksgiving for what you have in the sense of your sins, and in ability to
fetch the next step in the ways of faith and holiness; be viewing the glory
of the free grace of God in the face of Jesus Christ, even of Christ crucified,
presented by the Holy Ghost in the Gospel which he breathed; oh this is the
sight which will make you more and more like him, and draw upon you to the life
the image of such glorious grace and love, to your exceeding joy. This sight
gives power to walk; take and hold this course, and thou shall say with David,
thy loving Ps. 26. 3.
kindness is before mine eyes, and I have walked in thy truth. This sight
impowring, is the joy and rejoicing of the heart; the joyful growing,
flourishing prosperity of the soul, consists in the walking in the light of
Gods countenance, Ps. 89. 15.
reconciled and reconciling us to himself in Jesus Christ. All power against
sin, and unto duty, and all comfort and joy, all healthfulnesse, soundness,
and thriving in our spiritual estate, is this way conveyed. It is not
attained or maintained by ecstasies and raptures, trances, ravishments,
impressions, impulses, revelations, voices, joys that come by Euthusiasme or
inward immediate force of the Spirit; these at the best are in Gods own hand,
and they may be given to a Balaam, a wicked man, a false Prophet, a Conjurer, a
Witch; they may be mixed with Satan's working, they may be of fancy, and not of
God at all, or of faith; they may be of Satan, Diabolical delusions.

Now in our upright walking, the joy of the Lord is our strength; preserve it.
If this ^oy may be hindered, Satan has his Neh. 8. 19
desire of us; let him not bereave you of it.

SECT. 6.
In the fifth place; the sins of these holy 5. Their sins ought not to hinder
their combating against the flesh.
walkers ought not to hinder their constant combating against the flesh; the
flesh lusseth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and shall
the spiritual yield the day? shall they s^ down discouraged? has the Spirit
undertook, does he lead, and cause them to walk after him, and shall the flesh
and its workings turn them off? Hear ye Christians of the Gentiles, your
Apostle, the Apostle of the Gentiles, this I say, (says he) walk in the
Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; the flesh lusts Gal.
5. 16, 17.
in you contrarily, but walk on, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh.

1. You have the better, and have no cause to be discouraged; these sins you
see and find are the flesh's forces: but they are but the scattered gleanings
of the Field which you have reaped, the broken leavings of the body of the Army
you have overthrown.

2. God could have driven them at once out of you, but they are left to learn
us the use of our spiritual Armor; without an enemy our prowess would not be
proved, our graces would not be tried, our warlike discipline showed, our
watchfulness excited, our strength exercised; Virtue lies along without an
Enemy.

3. We forget our state which is a warfare, we fotget it if we admit thoughts
of ease or fainting; we are to carry our weapons in the one hand, while we work
in the Lords work with our tools in the other hand; we must fight that we may
work, and fight out our way. Our walk cannot be maintained and held on but by a
war, and we war, that we may walk.

4. They should be so far from hindering, that they should raise our courage
and heat, cause us to smite our flesh with sorer blows, make us beat down our
bodies, and bring them into subjection; and teach us a point of heavenly
wisdom in this war, that is, to single out those sins as our special
enemies, and as the flesh's troops and lifeguard; say, See, here be these
hellish villains, and fall on with a shout against them.

5. They should make us the more to think of our Leader and Acter the Holy
Ghost; and to say, should such a man as I flee for fear? who of Gods Saints and
Soldiers would do it to save his temporal life or estate? nay, if the
rebellion should grow hot, high and prevalent, yet fight the more, and if we be
made to cry out Wretched men that we are, who shall deliver? yet never cease;
so our holy Apostle Romans 7. 23, 24.
gives us himself for a president.

6. And indeed there is no cause of fainting and flagging; for in the way of
righteousness there is no death: in this walk after the Spirit there is
nothing but life and peace: in the way that is called holy, there is no hurtful
thing; molestation there may be and will be; hurt and destruction there cannot
be while thou art in this walk.

7. Besides, the maintaining of the combat is no loss in thy way; the walk is
speeded, thou art not so much as diverted, whiles thou art mortifying these
earthly members; for this walk is not measured by paces, nor by tale of duties,
but by powerful conquests made over thy fleshly lusts: And every resistance is
a conquest.

8. Let them not put thee to a disorder or an hurry; keep thy mind sedate, and
thy walk steady; take heed of amazements; the Spirit delights in a calm
breast; stand still, and thou shall see the salvation of the Lord, and in
quietness and confidence of faith is thy strength.

SECT. 7.
In the sixth place, The sins of spiritual 6. The sins of the spiritual
should not hinder their full dedition to the Spirit. Romans 8. 2 Gal. 5. 18. To.
6. 14.
walkers should not hinder their full giving up themselves to the Law of the
Spirit. No, rather should they make us to do it the more; for 1. No other Law
but the Law of the Spirit alone delivers from the Law of sin and death. 2.
They are not under the Law, and while they were under it, they could get no
power against their sins, but sin had dominion over them; therefore to go
to the Law of works will not help them. 3. They have had experience of the
power of the Gospel, that Law of the Spirit: It has broken down the dominion
of sin in them, It has broken off their hearts from the love of sin; in the
love of sin lies the dominion of sin: and it will enable to mortify the deeds
of that body of death. It fills with the fruits against which there is no Law,
and it sets the soul at liberty. 4. They are no debtors to the flesh, they owe
it neither suit not service: but they are debtors to the Spirit: they owe all
they are and have toward salvation unto him. 5. They are servants to
righteousness; the Covenant of their hearts when To. 8. 17.
they first knew the grace of God in Christ to sinners, in truth, and they
first saw the Son in the Gospel, and believed on him, was to be bound servants
to righteousness, and disavow the service of sin. And the Covenant of grace
sets them free from sin, that they might be the more servants of
righteousness, which is absolute and perfect liberty: and this it does for
those that were servants of sin, and free from righteousness, which is
absolute and perfect vassalage. Who would run from his liberty to his bondage?
Who would be at full liberty, who is daily and hourly threatened and dogged by
that which would bring him into bondage and slavery? A slave in the galleys
would give himself up with all his heart to one able to give full deliverance;
and the more he has felt and tasted such a powerful gracious hand, the more,
so long as he is in any danger, would he give himself up fully into such a hand.

Quest. But do those that retain their integrity, do as well as they can, and
as they might according to the measure of grace received, and according to the
means of grace which they do enjoy? because some Ministers urge this much, and
do lay some stresse upon it, when they exhort Christians to do what they can,
and comfort them, if they do what they are able; and it is usual with all in
whom no work of grace discovers it self in the conversation, to plead and
rest much upon this that they do and will do as God shall give them grace, as
if there were no fault in them, and as if rather the fault were in God who
gives them no greater a measure.

Answ. This is a certain truth, There is no man that ever lived since the fall
of our first Parents, that walks up to the light he has received of God, or
to the means which God has given him; or, has done all that he might
according to the gift and ability which he has received; he is a sinner
against his light, he To. 2. and 3.
has his own thoughts accusing many times, he pollutes himself in his own
gifts. Both Jews and Gentiles are guilty in this kind; and as for the
regenerate;

First, They have a will graciously inclined so to walk; but this will is yoked
with another backward, cross and thwart will, which although it be subdued,
and be as it were under tribute, yet it is not quite destroyed, and sometimes
it is up in rebellion, and leads them Captive; they cannot do what they would.

Secondly, Their renewed will does rule their walks, and that so far as to
the measure of grace received, and of the means enjoyed in a prevailing
proportion. I say, prevailing, so far as to a greater strength than they
themselves had before they had that measure and enjoyed that means; but not to
a proportion of strength that answers fully the measure received, and the means
enjoyed. No Saint on earth which does all that he ought to do. No Saint on
earth that does all that he might do; and therefore we must be humbled for our
failings, stir up the gifts that are in us, watch against spiritual
slothfulness and negligence, suffer the word of exhortation, take heed of
quenching the Spirit, and of despising prophesying or faithful preaching, and
live by faith in the Lord Christ for righteousness, and for strength.

Hitherto of the explication of this comfortable truth.

SECT. 8.
The demonstration of this doctrine The demonstration of rhis truth; four ways.
in the general is worthy consideration, or the reasons why comfort and
assurance are not destroyed by the sins found upon those who walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit.

1. Because of the Covenant of Grace under which they are. If they were under
the Law, if they were to stand or fall by the Covenant of Works, their sins
would condemn them; but they are under the Gospel, the Law of faith, and that
proclaims a Jubilee unto them. Not that the Gospel allows of any sin; it
forbids all sin: These things, says John, I write Isa. 61. 1, 2
unto you that you sin not. It is as full and strict in forbidding all sin,
and as severe in condemning all sin, as the Law is or can be, and that to
those who have received the free-gift, even the justification of life, and the
Spirit of Grace and of Adoption. It is the voice of the Gospel, Abstain from
all appearance of evil, from all kind of sin, and from all appearance of
sin of what sort soever it be. It destroys the dominion of sin, which
thing the Law cannot do, because the Law neither knows of a Ransom, nor gives
the Spirit to renew, sanctify, and privilege, and form to Adoption; but the
Gospel ptoclaims a Jubilee, in that it brings in Christ a sinne-offeri^g, a
Ransom, an Advocate with the Father, and a Propitiation; and in Christ it
brings in God reconciling them to himself, not imputing trespasses; God in
Covenant, merciful to their transgressions, and remembering their sins no
more; and through Christ God pouring out the Spirit of grace and supplication,
and sending the Spirit of his Son into their hearts, God accepts them in
Christ the beloved, and by his Spirit through the Gospel he is perfecting that
which concerns them, never forsaking the works of his own hands in the
regeneration; he is accomplishing all the good pleasure of his goodness
toward them, and the work of faith with power in them.

2. Because of the indissolublenesse of the chain of salvation, in which in
their effectual calling they are actually taken half off; and in their
justification they are actually acquitted from their sins, and from
damnation, and adjudged unto everlasting life.

3. Because it is not they that do commit sin; it is their flesh that To. 7.
25. Gal. 5. 24.
does them, which they hale to the Cross, and have and do crucify. And while
the Spirit leads them, and has the guidance of their conversation, what ever
sin there is with them, it is but of an enemy troubling and yet kept under.

4. That which any man sows, that Gal. 6. 7, 8
shall he reap; now these believers sow not to the flesh, but to the Spirit;
but because they yet have many sins, and many a brush by them, they sow in
tears; nevertheless they go forth, they carry precious seed with them; sowing
Ps. 126. 5, 6.
they will be while they have time, be the season a dirty winter season;
therefore they shall reap in joy, they shall doubtless come again, and bring
their sheaves with them, they shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.

SECT. 9.
Come hither all you to whom the blessed Gospel of Jesus Christ is come; The
uses 1. Of information in four things.
and inform your judgments in these following truths which arise from this
comfortable doctrine.

1. Consider what is wrought for and in a poor sinful creature before he can
attain to this, to walk after the Spirit. First, the Word of Gods grace, the
Gospel of salvation is preached by the Apostles with the Holy Ghost sent down
from heaven, and by Pastors and Teachers sent of Christ, who in his exaltation
to glory in heaven has received and given these gifts for men; this Gospel is
brought even unto thee in its truth and purity in these latter difficult times,
although false teachers have and do abound. It is the first step of Gods
approach in his way of saving mercy coming down from heaven to bring thee to
glory. Then secondly, God by his Spirit through the Gospel preached which is
his testimony, illightens thee, and reveals the things of salvation, the
mysteries of hidden wisdom unto thy soul. Thirdly, he enables thee to choose
Christ Jesus and his Gospel above all other Religions whatsoever, abominating
them; and above thine own carnal thoughts, inventions, lusts and ways: and
above thine own reason, and thine own righteousness, and the righteousness
which is of the Law. Fourthly, the Spirit in and by the Gospel coming into
thee, sets thee free from the reign and dominion of the flesh, of its mindings,
of its wisdom, and of its wills, desi^es, affections and lusts; and turns thee
from its walks in which thou did before walk and live, and in which still the
world lives and walks. Fifthly, the Spirit quickens the and gives thee life; a
new life, life from above, the life of grace which will be glory, a life which
is eternal in the beginning of it; and being quickened and raised together with
Christ, sets thee on thy feet, takes thee by the hand, and teaches thee to go.
Sixthly, the Spirit gives thee an heart to order thy conversation aright,
acording to the holy Commandments as becomes the Gospel, from the power of
faith and hope which set thee on high, even to sit together with Christ in the
heavenly places from whence thou look for him, insomuch that thy
conversation is in heaven. Seventhly, he gives thee power to walk after him,
going before thee in the Gospel, engrafting the Word on thy heart, and thereby
counselling, teaching, exciting and inclining, or bowing thy will as powerfully
as sweetly, drawing and making thee to run in Gods ways. Eighthly, and with
this power he gives a quick discerning, and sense of the flesh, and of its
motions, counsels and ways, with resolutions mighty and prevailing to the
framing of the course of the life, not to walk after the flesh, but to hold on
thy walk after the Spirit, though the flesh be still contrarily lusting and
working, plotting and warring.

Thus the regenerate and spiritual, though hampered and toyled with his corrupt
nature, walks not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

Does so much go to make thee a holy liver, and is not the work very great? oh
have not any low thoughts of this high mercy, for which thou can never
sufficiently bless the Lord, nor can retain the thankful sense thereof
further nor longer than thou keep up the thoughts of thine own, and all men's
alienations by nature from the life of God.

Believe it brethren, it is not a mean, despicable work to frame the
conversation, or walk according to the Word of Christ. It is not little in it
self, although it seems to thee a small and little thing, through vehement
desires, and longings in thee after greater progress in the way called holy,
in which thy soul finds such pleasures that thou art impatient of contrary
workings, and of interruptions; let me tell thee who thus walk, the work is
so great, that it carries the heart to the leadings of the Spirit, and the
heart is powerfully wrought upon and changed, which none can bow and turn but
God that made it, or else it could not so powerfully order the conversation.
This is more then to delight in Gods Word and ways, and yet that is a mighty
work of grace; observe for this, David's prayer, Make me to go in the path of
thy Commandments, for therein do I delight. Ps. 119. 35. To. 7. 22, 18.
To will is of Gods gracious work; To delight in Gods Commandments is the top,
and that which shows and proves the truth of the work of grace upon the soul
enabling to will; but to do, to perform, is more by far. God and Christ by
the Holy Spirit have the last Phil. 2. 13.
hand put to the work of salvation as far as agrees to his Saints in this
life, when the Spirit rules thy walk.

2. Behold here the worth of such a Christian. He is Gods workmanship in Christ
Jesus, created again unto good works which God has foreordained that he
should walk in. In this walk, see the man come out of Gods hands in the
regeneration. This is a choice creature, made up to and by the will of the
Spirit, and his walk speaks it. Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no
guile. God has set out two admirable sights once in this sinful wicked world,
unto which all eyes should be turned; the Lamb of God that takes away the
sin of the world; and the Israel of God, delivered from this evil world,
redeemed from all iniquity, purified to be a peculiar people to himself,
zealous of good works. This a choice creature, as for privileges and dignity,
so for heavenly qualifications.

3. Take here the maine reason, why many under the Gospel attain not to a holy
life, which is this, they take up with that light and with those gifts, which
will not subdue, mortify and crucify the flesh; they profess the Gospel, but
the Gospel is not the principle they live by; and no other, no lower will
destroy the reign of sin; the holy Law will not, therefore no other Religion,
no Institutions of Philosophy, no light of the Law within man can subdue the
flesh; the Gospel alone, if received into the heart, will do it, because it
gives the Spirit; now they by the Gospel never received the Holy Ghost, the
Spirit of renovation, of Sanctification, and of Adoption. Until this be had,
none can attain to an holy life.

4. Take hence also the main reasons why the regenerate attain unto so little
comfort; for first, they place not as they should the groundwork of their
comfort, in this, That they are in Christ, which this their walk does evidence;
but they seek it in their walking, which, accompanied with sins and contrary
lustings, will bear no higher than to the power of an evidence, and to a
begun work which is true, but yet but in a part, and yet such as is tending
unto, and will attain perfection, but not in this life; but it is not a
righteousness to stand in, without spot before the Throne of God, it is not a
Righteousness to justify a sinner in Gods sight, it is not a Righteousness
that God ever appointed for such a work or purpose. And secondly, they think to
squeeze out the comfort of their being in Christ, and of the promises to those
that are in Christ by reasoning, objecting, and seeking resolution of their
objections, and by the examination of themselves by all the light they can get,
which things are good in themselves, and duties as we may have opportunities,
but not the main thing; for they should seek their comfort and settlement
chiefly by walking on holily; great establishment is in well-doing. Comfort
should not be expected presently, it must have a time to spring and ripen upon
a Tree of righteousness which the Lord has planted, and which brings forth
the fruits of righteousness, and than the blessing of comfort. By diligent
adding of one 2 Pet. 1. 5, 8, 10.
grace to another in our practice, we become fruitful in the knowledge of
Christ, and so we make our calling Isa. 32. 17.
and election sure. A barren life, be the knowledge never so great, and the
profession never so high, strict and splendid, will be but unsettled and
uncomfortable. The fruit of righteousness is peace, and the effect of it is
quietness and assurance for ever.

SECT. 10.
Be not therefore reasoning so much, but be walking up and be doing, and 2. Of
exhortation and encouragement.
the Lord shall be with you. Thou have great encouragement in thy leader, and
in thy way; the leader is the Spirit, the Spirit of Adoption, the Spirit in the
New Testament dispensation, the highest that ever shall be till our Lord Christ
appears in his glory and great power at the last day. Thy way, it is the way of
all Saints and believers from the beginning of the world; this was the
character of the godly in all ages, as Henoch, Noah, before the flood, Abraham,
David, Hezekiah, Zachary and Elizabeth, the holy Apostles, and all other the
Saints of God, to walk with God. It is the way of the upright not to look what
strength and measure of grace they have, and what they have done, or to think
they are already perfect, but waiting on him who is their strength to go on and
reach forth to that which is before, eying the price of their high calling in
Christ Jesus. It is the surest way to comfort, not to look chiefly to our
affections, feelings and joys, but to our walks; and this is most
distinguishing; this brings most glory to God, and edification to others.
Others by the story of our affections, joys, experiences, may be made
fancyfull, and put into a fools Paradise, and be raised to admiration of our
persons, which ends usually in imitating our evils, or in doting upon some
phrase of words, or notions and high strains of opinion, or in self-admiration,
as having themselves out-stripped us, and all others, and they are disdained
now as low and carnal in comparison of themselves, as much as before they were
exalted and magnified by them as the only spiritual. It is most comfortable
and excellent when our lives confute our reasonings, answer our objections,
show our faith, confirm our interest in Christ; as it is most comfortless and
abominable when our joys, persuasions, confidences, hopes, and our faith also
are confuted by our lives.

Walk then after the Spirit, and receive Of exhortation and direction.
the instruction and direction which lies in the bowels of this Exhortation.

First, The Word of God which is the Spirits testimony and witness, that is the
rule and way for thy walk; but remember, that the power to walk is from Christ,
flowing by his Spirit into thee through the Word; walk on then, but fetch power
daily from Christ, giving out his Spirit by the Word.

Secondly, be putting in still into thy aright ordered Conversation that which
is lacking; enlarge thy heart to all the Articles of faith, that their mold and
stamp may be upon thy life; to all the Commandments that the righteteousnesse
of them may be respected and expressed; and to all Christ's Ordinances that the
fruit and special ends of them for which they were instituted for the benefit
of Gods Elect may be attained, and be made more and more manifest, that they
are attained.

Thirdly, Be not harkening what thine own heart says, but what the Lord says
by his Spirit in the Word, who speaks heace to his Saints, and while he
speaks peace and no condemnation, Ps. 85. 8.
speaks as effectually that they turn not again to folly, but keep on their
spiritual walk.

Fourthly, Be not wicked overmuch; when thou carriest a strict hand over thy
sinful deceitful heart, look over thy ways with as prying an eye as can
malice it self, or thy vigilant enemy the Devil himself, so far as truth will
bear; judge thy self severely, and live as one condemned in the flesh; see
Eccl. 7. 17
what Christ has done for thee; what the Spirit has wrought in thee; be not
so foolish as to deny his grace in thee, which thy walk speaks and testifies
for thee to thy conscience, and before God and men; why should thou so
wickedly torment thy self, and dye before thy time? As it is evil to be
righteous overmuch by arrogating to thy self more than is right: so is it a
dangerous evil to be wicked overmuch in denying or undervaluing what God has
graciously wrought in thee. Condemn the flesh, but own and justify the Spirit.

Fifthly, Walk on, remembering the work is begun which God will perfect; the
greatest work is done already, even the quickening thee from the dead; (it is a
far greater work to give life from the dead, than to cause to walk, and to
uphold him that walks:) thou have been enabled to do, and have done the
greatest work already; thou have crucified the flesh with the lusts and
affections thereof; so says our Apostle, There that are Christ's, have crucified
the flesh with the affections and lusts. Gal. 5. 24.


Sixthly, When thou see abroad the Heresies, Divisions, Apostasies,
Backslidings, Superstitions, Formality, Conceited Pride of Spirit,
Luke-warmnesse, Sensuality, Security, Incorrigiblenesse, Impenitency, Atheism,
Earthly-mindednesse, Profanesse, and wickednesses of all sorts in many, in too
many: remember thou have flesh the seed of all this within thee, and get away
from thy self, loath thy self, and so walk on.

Seventhly, be not turned off by the flesh's lustings; walk, though the flesh
fret and grind; walk, though hell be moved; walk, though thy way be straightened;
walk, for thy estate is safe, thy way good, and on high; walk, though envy
spite thee, and the flesh way-lay thee; for God will keep thy foot from being
taken.

Eighthly, be not quarrelling with God, but walking humbly; say not, Why does
not God give me a full and perfect deliverance so soon as he converts me?
could thou have thought thou had had such a sinful nature as now thou
find and feel? or could thou ever have thought of the mighty and
glorious power of the Spirit in the least spark of renewing grace, which both
lives and orders the whole man, heart and life, in the midst of such floods and
seas of inbred ungodliness and lusts? say not, Why does he give desires not to
sin, and yet answers not, satisfies not those desires? they shall not perish,
they shall be satisfied and filled, whereas the desires of the wicked shall
perish: besides, than these desires there cannot be less, if the heart be
right; than they, there cannot be more, as to the matter of desires: say not,
How can I be comforted, when yet sin remains? rather, here could thou be
comforted in Christ if sin were not? how could all thy good be wholly of
grace? How altogether by faith? say not, how can I be right who sin
continually? may it not be said, How can he be but right who does not, and
resolves never to walk after the flesh, and lives judging himself continually?
say not, Wherein has God loved me? he gives thee himself, he gives thee his
Son, and it is undeniable; for see, he has given thee his Spirit, and thy walk
testifyeth it. Oh walk on, and let it so witness for thee more and more;
silence thy reasonings, prevent not the order which God has set; here we walk
by faith, not by sig^t; that is for the life to come.

Ninthly, be not desponding, and saying, I shall perish one time or other; the
Spirit in thee is the anointing: thou art King Elect, and shall thou perish,
who have upon thee the holy oil? thine enemy the flesh yokes thee, but the
yokes shall be broken, because of the anointing. Isa. 10. 27.


Tenthly, methinks I hear thee yet say, I am weary of my life because of these
daughters of Heth, these issues of the flesh; it were better for me to die,
than to live in this sinful world; what good will my life do me, if that which
my soul hates, must still dwell with me? hate thy sins yet more, but when
thou hate them never so much, art thou a greater hater of the flesh than God
and Christ, and the Holy Ghost? And can thou not abide where the Holy Ghost
is willing to reside and dwell? whom make thou thy self! consider who is thy
next neighbor; keep in the Communion of the Holy Ghost, and solace thy self in
thy Comforter who dwells in thee, that thou may never walk in fellowship
with the flesh.

Eleventhly, why go thou not the right way to work, even to give up thy self
unto the command of the Spirit, who treats with thee by the Word, and dwells
in thee whiles the Word of Christ abides in thee?

Twelfthly, pay the flesh home for its naughtiness and all its pranks, but
glorify the Spirit.

Lastly, believe in the Holy Ghost, and walk in his comforts, who will prompt
thee and say, This is the way, walk in it, Isa. 30. 20, 21.
when thou art turning aside to the right hand, or to the left.

My farewell to the brotherhood, and to all walkers after the Spirit is this:

Now I commend you to God, and to the Word of his grace, the holy Scripture,
which the Holy Ghost breathed, and which alone he accompanies for the making
sinners wise to salvation by faith which is in Jesus Christ; that you all may
be under the teachings, guidance and leading of that one Spirit, may in his
light behold the glory of these three witnesses in heaven, which three are one
Jehovah; and may in all Religious worship and service, and in all your ways
acknowledge, draw near and have access unto God the Father, through Jesus
Christ his only begotten Son our Lord, by the Spirit; so be it, even so be
it.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, these books following are printed or sold by Adoniram
Byfield at the three Bibles in Corn-hil, next door to Pope's Head Alley.
THe History of the Evangelical Churches of the Valleys of Piemont: Containing
a most exact Geographical Description of the place, and a faithful Account of
the doctrine, life and persecutions of the Ancient Inhabitants. Together with a
most naked and punctual relation of the late bloody Massacre, 1655. and a
Narrative of all the following transactions to 1658. Justified partly by diverse
Ancient Manuscripts written many hundred years before Calvin or Luther. By
Samuel Morland Esquire in fol.

Divine Characters in two parts, acutely distinguishing the more secret and
undiscerned differences between the Hypocrite in his best dress of seeming
virtues and formal duties, and the true Christian in his real graces and
sincere obedience, by Mr. Samuel Crook, in fol.

A Commentary upon the three first Chapters of Genesis, by Mr. John White in
fol.

An Exposition upon Ezekiel, by Mr. William Greenhil, in 4.

The humbled sinner resolved what he should do to be saved; or faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ the only way of salvation, by Mr. Obadiah Sedgewick, in 4.

The Riches of grace displayed, in the offer and tender of salvation to poor
sinners, by the same Author, in 12.

The Fountain opened, and the water of life flowing forth, for the refreshing
of thirsty sinners, by the same Author, in 4.

A short Catechism by the same Author.

Hidden Manna by Mr. Fenner, in 12.

Safe conduct, or the Saints guidance to glory, by Mr. Ralph Robinson, in 4.

The Saints longing after their heavenly Country, by the same Author, in 4.

A Sermon at a Fast, by Mr. Nathaniel Ward, in 4.

Moses his death, a Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Edward Bright Minister, by Mr.
Samuel Jacomb, in 4.

A short and plain Catechism, instructing a learner of Christian Religion what
he is to believe, and what he is to practice, by the same Author.

The hypocritical Nation described, with an Epistle prefixed, by Mr. Samuel
Jacomb, in 4.

A Sermon of the baptizing of Infants, by Mr. Stephen Marshal, in 4.

The unity of the Saints with Christ the Head, by the same Author, in 4.

FINIS.

