THE SOVNDING OF THE TWO LAST TRVMPETS, the sixth and seventh: OR Meditations by
way of Paraphrase upon the 9th. 10th. and 11th. Chapters of the REVELATION, as
containing a Prophecy of these last Times.

Digested by Henry Burton during his Banishment, and close imprisonment in the
Isle of GVERNSEY.

Revel. 1.11.11. I heard a great voice as of a Trumpet, saying, what thou see
Write in a Book, and send it to the Churches.

LONDON: Printed for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard, 1641.

TO The Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Honorable House
of Commons now assembled in Parliament.
MOst Noble and grave Senate, having by me a certain Idea of some Meditations
upon the sounding of the sixth Trumpet, which Idea I first conceived in my
close Prison and Exile, the womb of its breeding, forming, and growing to that
small stature it is of: and finding (by comparing with this trumpets sound, the
sight of those remarkable things within the circuit of our times) such an
harmony between them, as the things themselves seemed to return a full echo
to the sound; which as it afforded me matter to exercise and recreate my
thoughts, and so to deceive the natural taedium of so horrid a solitariness,
and to support humane infirmities with some hope, that it was not impossible
(all circumstances weighed) that such a dying life (merely upheld by a divine
power) might yet survive to be an eyewitness of the accomplishment of the
things then remaining to be fulfilled: so now (though so long since my return)
I have conceived it might be not altogether unseasonable for your godly
wisdoms to take notice of it, as who have no small interest in it, seeing it
has pleased the Divine Providence in so full and important a season to call
you together to be the grand Agents and Instruments of accomplishing his great
work falling within the sound of this Trumpet, and hastening on the terrible
summons and consummation of the seventh and last: to whom then should I now
dedicate these my Meditations but to your worthy selves, and that not only for
the interest you have of right in them, but in me also, whose deliverance from
Prison and Exile, your unanimous votes made the handsell and first fruits, and
so the happy Auspicia of this ever famous and unparalleld Parliament? so as I
have received, and do enjoy a second life, which under God I owe to the
immaculate justice of this Honorable House; nor a life only, but (which is
better then this life) a glorious liberty, and that not only from a perpetual
prison and exile, but (with many thousands more) from the bonds and chains of
a Babylonish and Antichristian captivity, from the remainder whereof (still
surviving) we hope and pray for a full deliverance by you. And for me, if my
late testimony against the Revel. 11.7.
Beast may come in for a share with those Ibid. v. 3.
two witnesses mentioned in this sixth Trumpet (which I am far from arrogating
to my self) then this I dare be bold to say, that your unanimous vote which
called me from Exile, is that Great voice from Heaven, saying to the
Witnesses, Come up hither. And was not that a Great voice, which was made up of
the whole House, none contradicting, when the widows petition for her exiled
Husbands liberty was read and granted? And the Order for his liberty came it
not to his Prison just in the beginning of that month, which made up three
years and half, answering to three days and a half, as here ye shall find it
calculated? But I submit all to the charitable and judicious interpretation of
your excellent wisdoms. But little thoughts had I of such a Parliament as
this, when these Meditations were a working. And this I humbly pray you to take
notice of, that I have, without any alteration, or addition, of second
thoughts, presented these my Meditations unto your Honors, as they were first
conceived, that wherein (at such a distance, as I then was) they have come home
to the Prophecy, God may have the Glory, and wherein short, or wide, humane
frailty may obtain pity and pardon. Now the Lord Jesus Christ be pleased to
continue his March before you, and fill your hearts more and more with all holy
Zeal and invincible courage, to fight his spiritual Battle against the Beast
and his Crew, that you being his Called, and Chosen, and Faithful, may with
the Lamb overcome, and reign with him for evermore, which is and ever shall be
the fervent prayer of

Your ever vowed Servant, Henry Burton.

The sounding of the two last Trumpets, The sixth and seventh: from Revel.
9.13. to the end of the eleventh Chapter: very useful, and much to be observed
in these last times.
AS the whole Book of the Revelation is a prophecy of the estate of Gods
Church, and of the grand enemies thereof, from John's time, till time should be
no more: So the sounding of the seven Trumpets is a special prophecy of
things to come to pass in the very last times, on which we are now fallen, and
more especially the sixth Trumpet points to these very present times, and the
seventh to the now approaching time, in the end whereof time shall have an end,
and so be swallowed up of Eternity. And for the greater both observation and
confirmation of this last prophecy uttered by the Seven Trumpets, it is
tribled in this book: first under the Seven Seals, Chap. 5.5. Secondly, here
under the Seven Trumpets, Chap. 8.7, 8. And thirdly, under the Seven Vials,
Chap. 15.16. The Seals are opened, that all may Cap. 6.1.3.5. etc.
see: the Trumpets are sounded, that all may hear: and the vials are powered
out to the destruction of the enemies of Christ, and to the consolation of his
Church. The whole Prophecy is set out in great State and magnificence: as by
Christ the Lamb, and Lion of the Tribe of Juda, and from him by his holy
Angels. All which should draw our attention, as to matters and mysteries of
highest excellency. And we may note how these three Sevens do (...) (as Mr.
Mede.
some have well observed) that is, are coincident, and all fall within the same
time, or like the wheels in Ezech. 1.16.
Ezechiel, have their motion one within another. As (Chap. 8.1.) no sooner is
the seventh Seal opened, whereupon follows silence in heaven for half an
hour: but John sees the Seven Angels standing before God, to whom were given
the Seven Trumpets, Verse 2. So as the issue of the Seven Seals falls upon the
Seven Trumpets, as having their accomplishment in them. But before they sound,
Another Angel stands at the Altar, the golden Altar before the throne, which
is Christ, offering up much incense, with the prayers of all Saints, here
below, which prayers, as incense, are accepted of God, Verse 4. and out of the
same Censer filled with fire from the Altar, the fire is cast upon the Earth,
whereupon the seven Angels with their seven Trumpets prepared to sound. And who
so compares their seven several Soundings, and the several effects thereof,
with the several pourings forth of the seven Vials, and the effects thereof,
he shall observe such a similitude between them, as will put him out of all
doubt, that the seven Trumpets and the seven Vials, are all one and the same
Prophecy. Take a brief view hereof. The Chap. 8 7. Chap. 16.2.
sounding of the first Trumpet, and the pouring forth of the first Vial smites
the Earth: the Chap. 8.8. Chap. 16.3.
second Trumpet and Vial, the Sea: the third Trumpet and Vial, the Rivers:
the fourth Trumpet and Vial, the Sun: the fifth Trumpet and Vial, the
Kingdom of the Beast, the throne whereof is chiefly in Rome; so as under this
Trumpet and Vial, the Beasts Kingdom is exceedingly Chap. 16.10. Chap. 9.1,
2, 3.
darkened, as with smoke out of the bottomless pit, and the limbs of the
Beast, the vass is of his Kingdom of darkness, even all such, as have Chap 9
4. Chap. 7.3.
not the Seal of God in their foreheads, are tormented by sundry plagues, as
Chap. 9. and 16.10, 11. So as this fifth Trumpet and Vial seems to set forth
(not excluding the former; for they have all a concurrence in some degree one
with another from the very first to the last) more clearly the State of the
Kingdom of the Beast, upon, and since the Council of Trent, whereby through
smokes out of the bottomless pit, his whole Kingdom and Throne grew more
dark, then formerly they had been; of that smoke, never such Locusts bred,
which for multitude, greatness, and power, far exceed those of Egypt, full of
Martial terror (as Chap. 9.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.) whose King over them is the
Angel of the bottomless pit, Abaddon or Apollyon, a most cruel and
merciless destroyer. And that this is that Great Beast of Rome, with all his
crew of Jesuits and Friars, no question is to be made. And here by the way, we
may clearly see, that by the darkning of the throne of the Beast upon the
pouring out of the fifth Vial, is not to be understood the destruction of Rome
it self (as some have imagined) but thereby is meant that universal darkness
arising from the smoke out of the bottomless pit, wherewith the Kingdom of
the Beast is altogether covered, like that palpable Egyptian darkness, the
immediate fere-running plague of the destruction of their Firstborn, and so
of Isreal's final and full deliverance, in the destruction of the whole power,
and flower of Egypt. That this is so, compare but the fifth Vial, with the
fifth Trumpet: in neither of which you shall find any touch or footstep of
Romes Ruin, but in both a wonderful darkness over that whole Throne and
Kingdom, so as unto them (by reason of the smoke out of the pit, namely
gross, palpable, and damnable colors and pretenses, as a black veil to
cover their Mystery of iniquity, most cunningly woven up in the Council of
Trent, but first contrived in the Popes Conclave, the Beasts Den, at Rome) the
Sun and air are altogether darkened, as with the black cloud toward the
Egyptians, while the bright pillar of the Gospel shines forth clearly to Gods
people. And that this is the sense aforesaid, is manifest, not only by
comparing the fifth Vial, with the fifth Trumpet, but also by considering, and
comparing the sixth Vial, with the sixth Trumpet. For if it shall appear,
that we are now come within the Sound of the sixth Trumpet, and under the time
of the pouring out of the sixth Vial: then certainly the fifth Vial, and the
fifth Trumpet are already past (saving only that all the Vials are still
pouring out, and all the Trumpets still a sounding, til they all conclude in
and with the last). And if (for the mayn) past, and yet Rome, the seat of the
Beast, unruined, then certainly by the darkning of the Seat of the Beast in the
fifth Vial, cannot be meant the destruction of the City of Rome. And thus
having by way of preface premised these things, which also may serve as a key
to introduce us now to take a view of our proposed matter, namely the sixth
Trumpet: we now come, by the same Grace of God, leading and guiding us, to
such Observations, as the Text all along presents unto us, and wherein our eyes
are infallible witnesses of those things which our ears do hear from the
sound of this Trumpet.

Chap. 9.13. And the sixth Angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four
horns of the golden Altar, which is before God, saying to the sixth Angel,
which had the Trumpet, loose the four Angels, which are bound in the great
River Euphrates: And the four Angels were loosed, which were prepared for an
hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third part of men,
etc.

In the former verse, after the sounding of the fifth Angel, it is said, One
woe is past, and behold there comes two woes more hereafter. Whereupon it is
added, And the sixth Angel sounded, etc. This shows us by the way, that the
sounding of these seven Angels brings with it so many woes; even as the seven
Vialls are called the seven last plagues. And these woes are denounced and do
fall upon the Beast and his crew: as those seven last plagues also do; as ye
may see, Chap. 9.4.20. Chap. 16.5.6.10. etc.

Now by the voice from the four horns of the golden Altar, which is before
God, is clearly meant Christ's own voice, who is that golden Altar, even that
only true Altar, whereof that Levitical four-horned golden Altar was a type,
and to which the Scripture here alludeth. For as on that Leviticall Altar all
Sacrifices and offerings were presented unto God, otherwise they were not
accepted: So Christ is our only Heb. 13.10.15. and
Altar, 1 Pet. 2.5.
in whose Name we offer up all our Spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by
Jesus Christ. And as offenders under the law fled for refuge to the horns of
the Altar: So we being offenders against God, by our sins, do fly for Heb. 6
18. 1 John 2.1.2.
refuge to Christ, so as the pursuer, man, or devil, may Romans 8.33, 34
not meddle with us.

Again, Christ's voice here shows unto us that he is the great King, and Lord,
that commands all things in heaven and earth, he it is, that sends woes and
plagues upon the enemies of his Church. He commands his Angels, and they
execute his commands.

Loose the four Angels (says he, to his Angel) which are bound in the
great river Euphrates. Before we can come to know what is meant by these four
Angels, it behooves us first to enquire what is meant by the great river
Euphrates. Of this great river Euphrates mention is made also in the Chap.
16.11.
sixth vial, answering to this sixth Trumpet. Now this great river Euphrates is
that, Herodotus.
which invironing Babylon, made it invincible, until Cyrus, King of Persia,
did by his million of men cause the waters thereof near about Babylon so to be
drayned, into many deep and vast sluices or by-channels, as the maine river for
a time becoming fordable, his men waded through it, and so Babylon was
surprised. And to this alludeth that which is written Chap. 16.12.
in the sixth Vial, of the drying up of that great river, that the way of the
Kings of the East might be prepared. Now the Kingdom of the beast, or his
throne, against which the woes of the seven trumpets are sounded, and the last
plagues of the seven vialls powered out, is that Great Babylon, the mother of
whordoms and abominations, and the great captiver of Gods people, as she is at
large, and clearly set forth, Chap. 17. and. 18. And the Great river
Euphrates, is that main strength and power of men, whereby Babylon is defended
against invasion. This main strength of this Babylon is at this day the King of
Spain, or the house of Austria, including the Emperor in Germany, and the
rest of that house, yea and all those of that faction and confederacy, as the
Hierarchy, or Prelacie, where ever it is, together with the wicked of the
World that are made drunk with the Whores golden cup. It follows then, that
those four Angels bound in the river Euphrates, whom Christ commands to be
loosed, are those christian Kings, Princes, and States, which for a time,
either standing Neuters, or being for Babylon, Christ raises and rouseth up to
take up arms, for the diminishing and draining of this great River Euphrates
by their numerous Armies, and potent preparations, v. 16. 17. etc. Nor is it
uncouth, to call Kings and Princes Angels; for they are often called Psalm 82 16.
Elohim, Gods, as also the holy angels are. And Kings and Princes being Romans
13.4.
Gods Ministers, and being especially sent by him upon any great business, as
here, they may therefore properly be called Angels, which signifies, such as
are sent. This is clear enough. As Chap. 1.20. The Ministers of the seven
Churches are called Angels. And Chap. 12.17. Michael, and his Angels, do fight
with the Dragon, and his Angels. And Chap. 17. Those Kings which once warred
for the Beast against Christ, even they shall one day hate the whore, and shall
make her desolate and naked. And the reason is there given (Verse 17.) For God
has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree, and give their
Kingdom unto the Beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled. And then
he will call and send them, as his Angels or Messengers, to execute his will
against the Whore. Even so here, the loosing of the four Angels, which were
bound in the great River Euphrates, is the raising up of certain Kings and
Princes, which shall remove out of the way the maine strength, whereby Babylon
is guarded. And although this her strength be very great, and as hard to remove
out of the way, as to remove the Great River Euphrates out of her vast Channel:
yet these four Angels thus loosed, shall so diminish Babylons strong
Fortresses, as a way shall be made for her surprisall, and utter desolation.

This then being so clear and plain, it points us as by the finger, to these
very times, wherein God has stirred up sundry Kings and Princes, with their
mighty armies to make war upon the Emperor, the King of Spain, and the house
of Austria, the maine pillars of the Popedom. As the King of Sweden, whose
continued army still keeps the field against all the Emperors power, also
the King of France, and the Princes of Germany, with the States General (and I
may say Generous) of the Low Countries. These may well be those four Angels here
loosed, which now make war against the strength of Babylon. These were ready
at an hour, etc. to obey Christ's Command, and will, (verse. 15.) for to slay the
third part of men. Look but upon the desolations of Germany, and look also upon
the late admirable victory, which the Lord of Hosts, of Sea, and Land, gave to
the States General against the K. of Spains great Navy in the narrow Seas,
wherein a third part at least of the men perished; And the war is still
continued on all sides against Babylons Euphrates, to abate the pride of her
swelling streams, wherewith Babylon is guarded.

Again, the Verse 16.
number of the Armies of these four Angels, is said to be, 200000 thousand:
such an army for number, as never was in the World. Cyrus (as is before noted)
had 1000 thousand to invade Babylon, which was the greatest army that History
makes mention of. But lo here an army, of 200 times so many, even 200000
thousand, to make war against spiritual Babylon, and her temporal power. Now
by this number so great, numbered by God himself in this place, is especially
meant such an army, as shall be invincible against Babylon, such an army, I
say, as never was in the world. For Gods numbering is his valuing, or as he
esteems, and accounts a thing. As when he was about to destroy that potent and
proud King of Babylon, Belshazzar, then Emperor of the World, with his Princes
and powers about him, he said unto him, Dan. 5.26.
God has numbered thy Kingdom, which is expounded by the next words, Thou art
weighed in the balance, and art found wanting. So as on the contrary, here,
where God numbers such an host, as here, to be two hundred thousand thousand,
the meaning is, that these four Angels with their army, shall be so potent
and formidable, and so victorious against Babylon, and all her forces, as if
they consisted of such a wonderful number. For otherwise, God stands not upon
numbers, it is 1 Samuel 14.6
all one with him to save by many or by few. And his few shall be, as many
thousand thousands, when he will get the victory by them. The King of Swedens
army, which he first brought into Germany, that got the victory over the
Emperors mighty forces at Lipsich, was far short in number of the Emperors
thousands.

In the next place is described the manner of the horsemen, and of the horses,
verse. 17. to set forth their power, and terror: Then the manner of their
fight: out of their mouths issued fire, smoke, and brimstone, wherewith the
third part of men were killed. Here we see the manner of weapons and fight of
these very times of ours, as by powder and shot, signified by fire, smoke, and
brimstone, coming out of their mouths, as out of the mouth of the Cannon,
those murdering weapons. With these are slain the third part of men. This,
desolate Germany can witness, now turned almost into a Wilderness. And in
that the horses are said to hurt with their mouths, and with their tayls:
thereby is meant, that there is no security from being hurt of them every way,
both before and behind. And in that their tayls are said to have heads like
Serpents, it does argue, that this army against Babylon is not only potent, but
prudent and politic in managing of the war.

And where it is said, Verse 20. That the rest of the men, which were not
killed by these plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that
they should not worship Devils, and Idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and
stone, and of wood, which neither can sea, nor hear, nor walk: Neither
repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their
fornication, nor of their thefts: hence we note, these particulars: Babylon,
against the Kingdom of the Beast, and the head and body of Popery. Secondly,
(for confirmation hereof) Babylon, notwithstanding all her smooth evasions, and
shifts to put it off (as the Prove. 30.20.
whore in the Proverbs, wipes her lips and says, I have done no wickedness)
is found to be a notorious and egregious Idolatresse, in as much, as all her
Images of gold, silver, brass, stone, wood, are here in plain terms called
Idols, as which can neither see, nor hear, nor walk. Yet Papists do give
that worship and honor unto them, as if they did both see, and hear, and
walk, yea, as if they had a very Deity in them. And this is that Spiritual
fornication of that great Whore, (Chap. 17.3.) with whom the Kings of the earth
have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have been made
drunk with the nine of her fornication; as being no less mad upon her Images
and Idols, and other service devised by men, then Drunkards are upon new Wine.
Therefore is this Babylon the Great called the Mother of whordoms, and
abominations of the earth, Ver. 5. But yet for all this you must not call her so,
She will be called no other, but the Holy Catholic Church, the chaste Spouse of
Christ. Thirdly, I note here, that all her idolatrous and servants. A hard
doom (you will say) but it is as true, as Gods Word here is true. Fourthly,
Notwithstanding all this, and that God plagues the Beast and his brood, and
wars against Babylon, with his terrible armies, and does and will prevail
against her, yet she is altogether incorrigible, incurable, though they see the
third part of them slain, yet the rest will not repent of their Idolatry, and
other Babylonian sins, as murdering of Gods Saints and Martyrs, using
Witchcraft and Sorcery, authorizing of public Stews, and that for money, and
robbing and cheating the simple people of their money by their Mountebanke
Masses, Dispensations and Pardons, and a thousand such like trumpery, being
those sins that are proper to Babylon, to this Kingdom of Babylon, and cuts
her short, and powers many and grievous plagues upon her, thereby to bring her
to repentance, or otherwise to leave her unexcusable. And so much of the ninth
Chapter.

Now follows the tenth Chapter, wherein are some things observable, that fall
under this Sixth Trumpet. And so what we find written in this and the next
Chapter, till we come to the Seventh, belongs all to this Trumpet. This tenth
Chapter is very mystical. For here are voices of seven thunders uttered, but
sealed up, and unwritten. Yet because the very sound of thunder leaves some
impression behind it, and though man's understanding cannot interpret it, yet
the Conscience, being struck with terror, will pick some meaning out of it:
therefore taking the Scripture still for our guide, we will assay to speak
something of this Chap. by the way. In the first Verse an Angel is sent out
with great Majesty. This requires attention to what follows: He has a Little
Book in his hand, Verse 2. Verse 2, 3, 4.
Of which more is spoken from the eighth Verse to the end of the Chapter. The
next thing of mark is the seven Thunders uttering their voices, but sealed up;
and this follows immediately upon the Angels setting his right foot upon the
Sea, and his left foot on the Earth, crying with a loud voice, as when a Lion
roareth. This is very mystical. But this Angel, by his description, should
be Christ: the same that is described, Chapter. 1.13, 14, 15, 16. His standing
with one foot on the Sea, and another on the Land, seems to allude to Exodus
14.15.16.
Moses, standing on the Sea side, and stretching his Rod over the Sea, and
crying with a strong voice of Prayer to God. Or it alludeth to the Josh. 3.14,
15, 16.
dipping of the Priests feet in the brim of Jordan, so soon as the one foot
touched the water, the Stream recoyled, and gave way. Both these were Types of
Christ, and of his Church. And this which is here written, falling under this
Sixth Trumpet, is a prophecy of the destruction of Babylon, and of the
deliverance of Gods people. Upon this cry follows the voice of the seven
thunders, but sealed up. The voice of Thunder is the Psalm. 29.
voice of God. So the Heathen called their God Jupiter Altitonans (...). Hom.
Jupiter, the thundering God. But this voice uttered, is sealed up. But these
thunders will speak plain enough in the next Trumpet, as also under the seventh
Vial, when they shall take their effect in blasting and consuming the Kingdom
of the Beast. For the voice of the Thunders is a Prophecy to be fulfilled in
the Next Trumpet. As also (Verse 5, 6, 7.) the Angel speaks what shall be
under the voice of the Seventh Angel. And there is a secret meaning in the
voice of the thunder, which is expressed, not in words, but in the effects. As
the Lord says, Psalm 81.7.
Thou calledst in trouble, and I delivered thee, I answered thee in the secret
of thunder. This is spoken of Isreal's deliverance from Egypt, where they cried
to the Lord; and he plagued the Egyptians by his thunder; and of their passage
through the Sea, when Moses cried to the Lord, and he answered his cry in giving
passage for his people, and in the secret of his thunder in destroying the
Egyptians. Even as David says also in another Psalm, where elegantly
describing that miraculous deliverance through the Sea: The waters saw thee, O
God, the waters saw thee, they were afraid, the depths also were troubled, the
clouds powered out water, the Skies sent out a sound, thine arrows also went
abroad: he adds The voice of thy thunder was in the Heaven, the Lightnings
lightened the World, the earth trembled and shook.

This is that thunder, in the secret whereof the Lord heard the cry of his
people, in delivering them, and in discomfiting and destroying their enemies.
And thus here, the voice of these seven thunders is sealed up, and reserved to
be interpreted by the voice of the seventh Angel, when these thunders shall
have their effect upon the Beast in his destruction. For thus also that which
follows (as before is touched) of the Angels Swearing, that time should be no
more, is to be fulfilled under the Seventh Trumpet, when also the Mystery of
God shall be finished, when all Prophecies shall be accomplished, and in the
end of the World, all time shall be swallowed up of Eternity, as before. Which
by the way notes unto us, that the Seventh Trumpet shall continue sounding,
and the seventh Vial pouring forth, until the end of time.

Shall time then have an end? certainly. Here then a question may be moved,
what shall become of the Sun and Moon, and Stars, whose motion is measured
out by time, and which distinguishes the Genesis 1.14.
times and seasons, days, months and years of this inferior world? For
answer whereunto in brief, because the question is full of curiosity, whether
those glorious creatures shall cease to be, or their motion shall cease, as
whereof there seems to be no more use, I find not clearly revealed: but this I
find; There shall be a new 2 Pet. 3.10, 12.
heaven, and a new earth, when the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved,
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth also, and the
works that are therein shall be burnt up. But how this shall be, or in what
particular State or form, it is not revealed. Only this resolution is the
best, which Peter gives: Verse 17.
Seeing (says he) all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought ye to be in all holy conversation, and godliness, looking for, and
hastening unto, the coming of the day of God, etc. Verse 13.
Nevertheless (says he) we, according to his promise, look for new heavens,
and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness.

It follows, Verse 8, etc. Here John is commanded to take the little Book,
which was open in the Angels hand, who takes it, and eats it up, which becomes
sweet in his mouth, but bitter in his belly: and thereupon he is bid to
prophecy before many people, and Nations, and Tongues, and Kings. And this is
the sum of the four last Verses of this Chapter. It is clear, that this
little Book signifies, or contains those prophecies, which John, and in him
Christ's Ministers under this Trumpet (called his witnesses in the eleventh
Chapter) were to publish to the World. For upon the receiving of the Book, he
is bid to prophecy. This place alludes to that in Ezechiel, Chap. 2.9, 10. and
Chap. 3.1, 2, 3. where the Prophet beholds an hand sent unto him, and a roll
of a book therein, which was spread before him within and without, and there
was written therein Lamentations, and mourning, and woe: and he was bid to eat
this roll, and to go and speak unto the house of Israel: which he eating,
found it in his mouth sweet as honey. A just parallel to this little book
here, all circumstances compared together. So as this little book contains
for the matter of it, those judgments of God, which John was to denounce in
his prophesying to fall upon the Beast, and his Kingdom. The sweetness of it
in his mouth, argues the Esaias 39.8.
goodness of Gods Word, even when it denounces judgments for sin;
whereupon if men be brought to repent, it is sweet as honey in the mouth: but
if they hear, and do not repent, it goes down into the belly, and the
effects thereof prove bitterness in the end. The Apostle says that Gods Word
is the 2 Cor. 2.15.
sweet savor of God in them that are saved, and in them that perish. Again,
this sweetness in the mouth of John, and bitterness in his belly, shows,
that Gods message should be sweet to his Mininisters, in receiving it, and
delivering it with their mouth, although in the issue it prove bitter unto
them, as being the cause and occasion of much trouble and persecution, which
they suffer of the World; such as befell the Prophets and Apostles, and
Ministers of Christ in all succeding ages; and as we shall see more
particularly in the next Chapter, to which we now come.

Chap. 11.1. etc. And there was given me a reed like unto a rod, and the Angel
stood, Saying, Rise and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that
worship therein: But the Court which is without the Temple, leave out, and
measure it not: for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall
they tread underfoot forty and two months. And I will give power unto my two
witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand, two hundred, and threescore
days, clothed in Sackcloth, etc.

Still we are to rememb r (as before is noted) that we are yet within the
compass of the sixth Trumpet. So as what is here laid down, until we come to
the Seventh Trumpet, Verse 15. must be interpreted, as appertaining to the
sixth Trumpet. Within this Sixth Trumpet then all this is done. John here
represents (as I said those faithful Ministers, or witnesses of Christ, here
mentioned, who living under this sixth Trumpet, must rise, and take the reed,
and measure the Temple and the Altar, but must not measure the Court without
the Temple, but leave it out. First, they m^st rise, that is, begin to bestir
themselves in their Ministry. And wherein must they exercise themselves? In
measuring the Temple, and the Altar, with the reed in the Angels hand. This
alludes to that measuring Reed which Ezechiell saw in a vision, wherewith he
measured the Temple etc. as Chapter 40. and 41. etc. Now by the Temple here is
meant the true Church of Christ, as is clear by many places, as 1 Cor. 3.16.17.
2. Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 2.21. And in many places of this book of the Revelation,
Temple is taken for the Church of Christ: as Chap. 15.5.6. and in the 19 verse
of this Chapter, and elsewhere. And by the reed in the Angels hand to measure
withal, is meant the straight rule of Gods word, by which alone the true
Church of Christ being measured, is thereby known and distinguished from all
false and pretended Churches. And that John, Christ's Minister is bid to rise,
and thus to measure Gods Temple, his Church, does plainly argue, that in the
time of this Trumpet the Ministers of Antichrist shall arise, and make a loud
claim to the title of the Temple, as pertaining properly to them, and to none
other. Among many other, take one famous instance. What a notorious book is
published of late by the Prelate of Canterbury? wherein he sweats and labors
to prove, that the only true Catholic Church of Christ over the world is made
up of the many Prelaticall Churches, as the proper members of the body; so as
he makes the Church of England and of Rome to be all one Church; and finally
shuts out all reformed Protestant Churches, that have no Prelates, as no true
Churches of Christ. And because his single word (which is his best and only
argument) may the better pass without control, he goes about tooth and
nail to cry down the sufficiency of the Scriptures, as being an imperfect
rule of it self to measure the Church by. And this his Book he has been so
bold, as to dedicate to the King, and makes it the faith of his Church of
England, as professing one Faith and Religion with Rome. Is it not high time
then for some John, or other faithful Ministers of Christ, to rise, and take
the measuring Reed in his hand, Gods Word, and therewith exactly measure the
Temple of God, Christ's Church, that it may be distinguished and differenced
from all false pretended Churches, and in especial from the Antichristian
Hierarchy, the prelaticall Catholic Church (as the In his last reprinted
Conference Epist. Dedic. p. 16. and elsewhere in his Book.
Prelate calls his Church) in which Catholic, his Church of England, and of
Rome are both one and the same Church; No doubt of that? They be the Prelates
own words. So as when the Prelate was so Zealous to bring Scotland to a
conformity with England, and when the Scots read in his Book Englands
conformity with Rome, as to be one Church, and to profess one Faith and
Religion with Rome: might not this (trow you) startle and move the Scots to
expel and repel, to thrust out and keep out at the Spears point this
Conformity? And so might not the Prelates false Hierarchicall Catholic Church,
(excluding all Protestant Reformed Churches from being any true Churches of
Christ) justly incense the Zealous hearts of Scotland, seeing Christ thus to be
dishonored, and thrust out of his Throne, and Antichrists Prelates to be so
mounted aloft, to cast out such usurping Lords, that so none but Christ,
according to his Word, and the Lords Anointed, according to his just Laws,
might rule over them? Thus we see how necessary this measuring of the Temple is
under this sixth Trumpet, and what a clear note it is of the time, wherein this
sixth Trumpet is sounded. So as we may boldly say, upon such clear evidence,
that now is the time of the sixth Trumpet, when there is such need of measuring
the Temple with the Reed, thereby to know and vindicate, and separate Christ's
true Church, from all counterfeit and Antichristian Churches, that at this time
do so boast themselves for the only true Catholic Church of Christ. As (in
Chrysostom) the uncertain Author upon Matthew, Chap. 24. has observed. Let
them which are in Judea, flee to the Mountains: that is, says he, let all
true Christians fly to the Scriptures: for in the time of Antichrist, it will
be impossible to know the true Church from the false, but only by the
Scriptures. So he. But the said Prelate of Canterbury rejects the Scripture
from being a sufficient and perfect measuring Reed of the Temple: and good
reason, because on the one side, the Prelate makes the Hierarchy to be of the
very essence of the Catholic Church: and on the other side, the Scripture no
where approves of Prelacie, or of Diocesan Lord Bishops, it knows none such:
yea, and both Matthew. 20. 1 Pet. 5. 3 John 9.10.
Christ forbade it to his Apostles, and they afterward never practiced it
themselves, but expressly condemned it in all; as in the Reply to the Prelates
Relation, the Author has clearly proved.

Come we now to the measuring of the Altar. As the Temple, and Tabernacle
under the Law, had their just measures and Dimensions prescribed of God: so
also the Leviticall Altar. Now under the Law there was but one Altar, one for
burnt offerings, and one for incense: both these, as one, were types and
figures of Christ, the true and only Altar under the Gospel. For as the Altar
under the Law did Sanctify every gift and offering upon it (as Exodus 29.37.
and Mat. 23.19.) so Christ is to us that only Altar, on which we offering our
selves and our Spiritual Sacrifices, both are Sanctified and accepted of God.
This is that Altar (Heb. 13.10.) of which the Apostle says, We have an Altar,
whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the Tabernacle. That this Altar
is Christ, and only Christ, is clear, because He being come, who is the true
Altar, the typical altar must altogether cease. Otherwise those who still
served the Tabernacle, might have had right to eat of our Altar, could the
Type and the Truth have consisted together. And the Apostle expressly applies
this Altar, which we Christians have, to Christ, as Verse 11, 12, 13, 15.
where he shows the proper use of this Altar in sanctifying our offerings,
concluding and saying, By him therefore let us offer the Sacrifice of praise to
God, continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name. By
him, that is, by Christ, our Altar, in his Name, we must offer up all our
Sacrifices, that so they may be Sanctified, and accepted of God. This is so
clear, that no sober Divine, that understands any thing at all, can deny. So
as the measuring of the Altar here, is (as the measuring of the Temple, whereof
we have spoken before) the vindicating of Christ to be the true and only Altar
of true Christians. And this is a duty enjoined all faithful Ministers, and
especially under this Sixth Trumpet, in these our very times, wherein we have
seen such furious Romish Zeal in hoysing up of Altars every where, and boldly
maintaining both in Doct. Pock in his Altar l. Christianum. Rather Dam^scenum.
Books and Sermons, the necessary use of such their devised Altars of wood and
stone, as without which God cannot be served, nor their Sacrifices sanctified:
whereas these their Altars, with all their Altar-service and worship of ma^s
devising, are not only derogatory from Christ the only true Altar, but also a
flat denial of Christ, and a very Mass of all Heathenish impiety, and
atheistical infidelity, and Antichristian apostacy. For that multitude of
wooden and stone altars, which our Prelates do erect in all their Churches, are
taken rather from the Heathen, as King 2 Kings 16.
Ahaz and his Priest framed their Altar according to the pattern of that at
Damascus, or from Rome, which took them from the Heathen, or from the Jews, but
if they say they take them from the Jews, (as they do many other of their
Rites) then they very much forget themselves, and that in two main points:
first, because the Church of the Jews had but 2 Chro. 32.12
one altar for Incense, and Sacrifice, and that was at Jerusalem, they might
not set up Altars in any other place, so as in their seventy years captivity
in Babylon they had no altar there: and at this day, the Temple and Altar at
Jerusalem being demolished, they have no Altar, as no Sacrifice, or Incense. So
as no Jerusalem, and no Temple there, no Altar now of wood, or stone, or any
other matter or mettle is to be set up in the worship of God. But the
Romanists, with all their Prelates, and Priests, do set up in their Temples,
not only one, but infinite numbers of Altars; according to that which the
Prophet says, of revolted Israel, Hos. 8.11.
Because Israel has made many Altars to sin, Altars shall be unto him to sin.
And According to the multitude of his fruit, he has increased the Altars. And
if they object, and say, Israel built Altars to other Gods: I answer, so they
did, and to the true God too, as they pretended, as at Bethel and Dan. But all
these their Altars were alike abominable to God, and for which he utterly cast
them out. And indeed all false Altars, with their service (what ever men
pretend to the contrary) are set up, and done to the 2 Chronicles. 11.15.
Devil, who in Ierobohams calves, and on those Altars was worshipped. And such
Altars, such service as men have devised, are not done to God, he utterly
abhors them. Such are all Popish Altars, and Altar-Service.

Secondly, as these Altar-worshipers transgress in the multitude of their
Altars: so also in the measure of them, they do not observe that due
proportion prescribed in Gods Law, but some are bigger, some lesser, some
longer, some shorter, some higher, some lower, as pleases man's fancy. And
therefore these their Altars are in no respect conformable to Gods law, but
they are mere heathenish Damascen Altars, either of man's, or of the Devils
devising, choose which they will.

Now such Altars, with all their pompous service, being in these our days, so
outragiously cried up in all prelaticall Churches, not only in dishonor, but
desperate defiance of Christ, the only true Altar of all true Christians: and
whereas under this Sixth Trumpet Christ gives such a charge to his servant John,
and so to all his faithful Ministers of the Gospel, to take the Reed that is
in his hand, his holy word, and therewith to take a just measure, as of the
Temple, his Church, that all may know and distinguish it from Antichrists false
Church; so of the Altar, which is himself, that all may know we Christians
have no other Altar, whereon to offer our Spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to
God, but only Christ, all other altars, being false and counterfeit, heathenish
and Idolatrous, and a service done to the Devil, and not to God, as being
altogether and directly contrary to his Word, and a flat denial of Christ the
true and only Altar: hence we may safely conclude, that this is the very time
of the sixth Trumpet, wherein we now live. How ought the true Ministers of
Christ then in these our days to bestir themselves, and fall a measuring the
true Temple and Altar, and that with no other Reed, but that in Christ's hand,
and with no other Rule, but his own word, that so his people (being truly and
thoroughly informed which is the true Church of Christ, and which the false and
Antichristian Church, which the Prelates place in their Hierarchy; and which is
the true and only Altar, whereon to offer all their Sacrifices, that they may
be sanctified and accepted of God, namely Jesus Christ, and that therefore all
other Altars, and Altar-Service devised by man, are abominable in Gods sight)
may have no more communion with such Altars, and such Altar-Service, then with
Antichrist, whose Altars and Service they be? Otherwise, such as communicate
with them cannot be called the people of God, but are indeed the members of
Antichrist. For, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor 6 14, 15, 16.
What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? And what communion
has light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? Or what
part has he that believes with an infidel? And what agreement has the
Temple of God with Idols? For ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has
said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people.

And so we come to the third thing here to be measured, and that is, Them that
worship therein; that is, those that are true members of Christ's true Church,
that are 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 2.21, 22.
living stones of that living Temple, that are the Ioh. 4.23, 24.
true worshipers, which worship God in Spirit and Truth, that worship at no
other Altar, but Jesus Christ, praying and praising God in his name. These be
they, here, whom, with the Temple, and the Altar, John, and the Ministers of
Christ, and more especially under this Sixth Trumpet, are to measure with the
same Reed, So as the true people of God may be known and distinguished from
those that be false and counterfeit professors, false and counterfeit
Christians. For under this Trumpet, how many thousands (I speak not of those in
the professed Popish Churches, but) even in the Church of England, where the
Gospel has been a long time embraced, preached, and professed, do Though now
since this Treatise was written, we see (blessed be God) by a late Order from
the honorable House of Commons, the Altars to be dismounted.
communicate with Altars, and with the Superstitious and Idolatrous worship and
service thereunto appertaining according to humane Ordinances and Inventions:
and yet would pass in the rank of good Christians and Protestants, who if
they knew what it were to worship at Altars, they would abhor all such
Service? How ought Ministers therefore in these times to take the just measure
of those that be true Christians, by teaching the people out of Gods Word what
a true Christian is, and wherein he must differ from all such false
Christians, as communicate with Antichrist in altar-Service and Worship, which
is so rife, and ruffleth so pompously in this our time, whereby it appears
plainly, that now the sixth Trumpet is a sounding? But perhaps Ministers will
plead for themselves, that if they shall so do, they must necessarily undergo
great persecutions, and suffer at least the loss of their Livings, and perhaps
of their liberty too, and of their blood, and members of their body, and of
all they have, as some others have lately done. If this they stand upon, and so
for fear forbear to do their duty: they may then sit them down, confessing
they are no faithful Ministers of Christ, as John here was for obeying the
command of Jesus Christ. Much less will such ever prove such witnesses, as by
and by are mentioned in this Chapter, who, forbearing testimony to the truth,
are willing to lay down their precious lives. But of this in its proper place.

Verse 2.
It follows: But the Court, which is without the Temple, leave out, and
measure it not: for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall
they tread under foot forty and two months. This Court without the Temple
alludes to that utmost large court, which was without the Temple in Jerusalem,
where all the common Jews assembled, as also those of other Nations. And this
court without the Temple here, by a Metonymie, taking the continent for the
thing contained, may signify the company of those in general, that profess
to be Christians, but yet are indeed and in truth no true members of the true
Church, they are not of and in the Temple, but they are out of the Temple. And
therefore that which is translated in our English, Leave out, is in the
Original (...), Cast out, as also the E^jce forat.
Latin, and the jette horse.
French rightly render it. This is, as the Lord says to Jeremy, Ier. 15.19.
If thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth. So
here, John having measured the true people of God, such as worship him
according to his Word: is bid here to cast out the refuse, such as do not
worship God in purity and verity, such as worship not in his Temple, and at his
Altar, to wit, in Christ's only Name; who though they bear the common name of
Christians, yet they are not within the Temple, but without, in the
common-outer court, which here is cast out, and not to be reckoned to be of
the Temple. And this court John must not measure: it suffices, that having
measured the true worshippers, by describing their true properties out of Gods
Word: it follows consequently, that all those, which are falls worshippers,
are those of the court without the Temple, and so to be cast out, (as Genesis
21.10. Gal. 4.30.
the bond woman and her son were cast out of Abraham's house) and not to be
measured, nor nu^bred with Gods people.

And it is added here, For it is given unto the Gentiles: that is, they of this
court are to be reckoned among the Gentiles, and to be accounted as Heathen,
and Infidels. For the purpose: what are all Papists, and all other
altar-worshippers, and bringers in, and setters up, and Conformists to strange
Service invented by men, but Heathen and Infidels? For as we said before, the
very setting up of an Altar, and Altar-Service, is a flat denial of Christ the
only true Altar, and so is mere Heathenisme and Infidelity. Or else by the
Gentiles here is understood the antichristian Kingdom, or the spiritual
Babylon, under which the formal Protestants and cold professors of this age,
under the sixth Trumpet, shall be brought in bondage, as backsliding Israel of
old was given into the hands of the King of Babylon. For these back-sliders and
Formalists, are those of the outer court, that is cast out, and the Spiritual
Babylon is properly so called, for her Heathenish and Babylonish manners, (as
Psalm. 59.5.8. David calls Saul and his bloody persecutors, Heathen: and Esaias
1.10. the Prophet calls the degenerate Princes and people of Israel, Princes of
Sodom, and people of Gomorrha, as being in manners like unto them) especially
her manifold Idolatries, wherein she resembles old Babylon, as she is set
out, Chap. 17. And how truly is this verified of our cold, or rather lukewarm
Laodiceans in England at this day? Is not all England in general, and for the
greatest part, brought under the Babylonish yoke in her universal conformity
to Popery in setting up of Altars and Altar-service, after the manner of Rome?
Are not all the Ministers and People therein (I say for the most part) made the
Prelates vassals, who have of late, more then formerly, set up the Image of the
Beast, and his Throne, almost in all the Churches, and over all the
Congregations of England? What Minister almost is there at this day, dare stand
against the Antichristian Tyranny, now so highly exalted over all men's
consciences? Are they not then brought under the Babylonish Captivity? Are
they not given to the Gentiles, into the power of the Spiritual Babylon, a
far worse and more intolerable bondage, then that of the ancient people of
God, either in Egypt, or Babylon? For that was a bondage of the body: but this
of the Soul and Conscience. And thus this very phrase, [It is given to the
Gentiles] alludes to the like speeches in the Prophets, concerning revolted and
degenerate Jerusalem, whereof it is said very frequently in Ier. 32.24, 25 28.
Jeremy, that the City is given into the hands of the Caldaeans, or
Babylonians. So here the Court without the Temple is cast out, and given to the
Gentiles, that is (as is said before) to the Kingdom and power of the
Babylonian Beast, which succeeds old Babylon in all her Idolatries, and
bestiall cruelty, in captiving of Gods people.

And it is added here, And the holy City shall they tread under foot two and
forty months. This holy City here alludes to the old City Jerusalem, as the
Gentiles here allude to old Babylon, which did tread under feet that holy City
70. years. But what is meant here by this holy City? This holy City is the
true church of God, called the Psalm. 46.4.
city of God, and the 1 Kin. 11.32.
elect City, and the Rev. 20.9.
beloved city, and again ( Revell. 22.19.) the holy city, and the Heb. 12.22.
City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem. This holy City, this Church of
God shall the Gentiles, to wit, the Spiritual Babylon, (called the Beast out of
the bottomless pit, Verse 7.) tread under foot, that is, shall exceedingly
oppress and afflict, making havoc of the Saints of God, the citizens of this
holy city, making no more account of them, then of dirt and mire in the
Streets; yea they shall defile and destroy the holy assemblies of the Saints,
by corrupting the pure worship and service of God, and crying down all
holiness, both of life and conversation, and Sanctification of the Sabbath or
Lords day, in the public assemblies, and private families, forbidding
preaching of the doctrine of Grace, and restraining Sermons on the Lords day in
the Afternoon, and persecuting all Godly, powerful, and painful Ministers,
and giving public dispensation to youth and others for following of profane
sports on the Lords holy day, to wit, his own day, and many such like outrages
they do. Thus they trample upon the holy city, as laboring to destroy, and
bring into contempt, as it were by setting their foul foot upon all holiness.
Like those wicked and false Shepherds in Ezechiel, Ezech. 34.18, 19.
that devour the good pasture, and tread the residue under their feet; that
drink of the deep waters, and foul the residue with their feet, so as the
flock of God must eat and drink that, which their filthy feet have trodden
upon, and fouled. Note here good Reader, that the Author writ this before this
time of Reformation happily in part begun and hopefully expected unto a
perfection.
Now when was ever the holy City, the true Church of God, in all these
respects, more trodden upon with the feet of false shepherds? when was all
holiness ever more hated and despised, and railed upon and reviled, and
persecuted, and oppressed, and trampled upon, then now in our time? that we
need not doubt, but that this is the time of the Sixth Trumpet, under which we
now live. How are the godly and painful Ministers of God in England misused,
their mouths stopped, their wives, children, and families dispossessed, and
cast out of their habitations, all holy and true professors among the People,
vexed, wearied, and even worried by the Pursivants, and courts of Prelates? so
as they are forced many of them to forsake their houses, and sweet native
country, to go seek for refuge among wild beasts, and wild Salvages, and
wild deserts, Heb. 11.37, 38.
wandering up and down (as the Apostle speaks) in deserts, and in mountains,
and in dens and caves of the earth, of whom the world is not worthy, etc. Thus
is not the holy City trodden under foot of these Gentiles, yea, worse then the
old Gentiles, the Babylonian Beast, and his brood, having lost all humanity,
and all the properties of reasonable men, like Dan. 4.
Nabuchadnezzar, when he grazed among the beasts of the field: when nothing
will satisfy them, but the utter desolation and extirpation of the Saints of
God, and of all holiness? What need then have Gods people to cry, and pray
with David, Psalm. 83.1, 2, 3, 4.
Keep not thou silence, o God, hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God.
For lo, thine enemies make a tumult, and they that hate thee have lift up the
head. They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against
thy hidden ones. They have said, come, let us cut them off from being a Nation,
that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. For they have
consulted together with one consent, they are confederate against Thee. But do
thou unto them as unto the Madianites, as to Sisera, etc. as it follows to
the end of the Psalm. Let them be confounded, and troubled for ever: let them
be put to shame and perish: that men may know, that thou, whose name alone it
Jehovah, art the most high over all the earth.

But Psalm. 94.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
how long shall these wicked thus triumph? How long shall they utter, and speak
hard things? and all the workers of iniquity boast themselves? How long shall
they break in pieces thy people, O Lord: and affl^ct thine heritage? How long
shall they slay the Widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless? How
long shall these Atheists say, The Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of
Jacob regard it? How long shall these Gentiles thus tread under foot the holy
City of our God? It is said here, Two and forty months. Surely, as the words
do sound, no very long time. Two and forty months make up three years and a
half, and not much more then those thousand, two hundred, and threescore days,
in the next Verse. Now whether these forty two months be taken literally and
strictly, or whether they signify some longer or shorter time is uncertain to
us: this we may certainly build upon, that the time of Antichrists afflicting
of Gods Church, under this Trumpet, shall not be long. But this number of forty
and two months being so precisely laid down, as containing three years and a
half, we may be the bolder to take it literally for this space of time. Nor is
it unusual in Scripture so to number, according to the strict letter thereof;
as of Isreal's affliction in Egypt, from Abraham's calling, just four hundred
and thirty years: and the Jews Captivity in Babylon just seventy years. And
in Daniel, Dan. 7.25.
A time, times, and half, or part of a time, is taken for three years, and
part of the fourth, wherein that proud King Antiochus (who was a type of
Antichrist) should and did afflict the people of God. A time, or times, being
interpreted by Daniel himself, to be so many Dan. 4.16. and 11.13.
years. The like phrase whereunto we have Revel. 12.14. that the Church should
be persecuted of the Dragon a time, times, and half a time. Which is to be
interpreted, according to those times in Daniel, three years and a half. And
hereupon it is, that the Jesuits, as Bellarmine, and others, stand so stiff,
that Antichrists Reign shall continue but three years and a half, by which
they think to excuse the Pope from being Antichrist. But it will not serve
their turn. For we easily grant, that three years and a half, being the sum
of forty and two months, is that space of time, wherein the Beast out of the
bottomless pit, that Antichrist, shall afflict Gods Church under this sixth
Trumpet. And so likewise this space of time does answer that time, times, and
part of time, wherein Antiochus the type of Antichrist, afflicted the ancient
people of God, which was a good part of three years and a half, as Tremelius
well shows in his notes upon Daniel. And if we consider the practices of
Antiochus in that time, and compare them with Antichrists practices in this
sixth Trumpet, we shall find a mavelous correspondence between them. Now of
Antiochus, Daniel says, Dan 7.25.
He shall speak great words against the most High, and shall wear out the
Saints of the most High, and think to change times and Laws: and they shall be
given into his hand, until a time, and times, and the dividing of time.
Whereupon Tremellius notes, that this Antiochus was most blasphemous against
God, and a most cruel Tyrant over Gods people; in so much as he took upon him,
and did arrogate unto himself divine authority in abolishing the Sabbaths,
and other Laws of God, and did institute and impose new Laws and Ceremonies
according to his own humor and pleasure. Now what does Antichrist, and his
Limbs the Prelates, in these our days? Do they not most proudly See the
Prelate of Canterbury his last Book throughout, together wi^h all his practices.
arrogate to themselves divine authority, and impiously blaspheme God and
Christ, in saying, Christ thought it fittest to appoint them as his Viceroys in
governing his Church? Do they not hereupon bear themselves as so many gods,
sitting in Christ's throne, imposing their own devices, Ceremonies, Canons,
upon the consciences of Gods people? Do they not vilify the holy Scripture,
as an insufficient and imperfect Rule of Faith, and prefer the Tradition of
their prelaticall Church before it? Do they not abrogate the morality of the
fourth Commandment, as not binding us Christians to keep the Lords day for our
Sabbath day? Do they not dispense with the profanation of it by most licentious
and lascivious Sports and Pastimes to all youth and others, thereby also
dispensing with the fifth Commandment, when Masters may not restrain their own
Servants, nor Parents their Children from their laudable Sports (as they call
them) that day? Do they not forbid Ministers to preach twice on that day? Do
they not altogether forbid sound preaching of the doctrines of Grace? And do
they not Dan. 7.25.
wear out (and to use their own Phrase) worm out godly Ministers, and good
people, and make havoc of all holiness (as is noted before) and commit all
manner of outrage and cruelty upon the Servants of God? And this their
extreme outrage and cruelty has continued now very near three years and a
half, or forty and two months, I say the extremity of it, Heb. 12.4.
as when they fall to shed blood, etc. though they have been playing their
pranks, and laying their plots a long time, but more covertly and insensibly,
till of later days, the flame of their Antichristian outrage has broke out,
ready to set all in a combustion. But I trust to see the expiration of these
two and forty months to run out very shortly. And were there not such a time
here limited, yet such has been the fury of these men, like a hideous storm,
or impetuous torrent, that it cannot be conceived it should last any long time,
but quickly run it self dry, or out of breath. And God being so desperately and
Giantlike provoked, it cannot stand with his patience, nor with his honor, to
suffer long such affronts. And he has promised to Luke 18.8.
avenge the cause of his Elect quickly. And therefore certainly it will not be
long, before he Esaias 59.1^.
repay fury to his adversaries; and the rather at this time, when the Lord sees
things so desperate, that there is no man to stand in the gap, no intercessor;
but that truth fails, and he that departs from evil, makes himself a
prey; and there is no judgment (as the Prophet there speaks) therefore his own
arm shall bring salvation, when he shall put on righteousness as a
breast plate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head, and the garments of
vengeance for clothing, and Zeal as a Cloak. Thus Heb. 10.37, 38.
he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. Now the just shall live by
faith.

It follows, Verse 3. Verse 3.
And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a
thousand, two hundred, and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth. Here it is
to be noted, that during all the hardship of Gods people under this sixth
Trumpet, wherein the holy City, Christ's true Church, is trodden under foot by
the Spiritual Babylon, or by the Beast out of the bottomless pit, yet God
will not want his witnesses to prophecy, and testify his truth even against
the most cruel and bloody persecutors thereof. And he will have at the least
two witnesses, by whose testimony Math. 18.16.
every word shall be established. Nor can it be expected, that in such a
terrible time, Amos 5.13.
an evil time, wherein the prudent do keep silence, there should be many
witnesses to be found. But that there should be some, at the least two, God
will raise them up, Christ will give them power. I will give (says he) power,
to my two witnesses. To do what? To prophecy, that is, to preach the truth,
to witness it against all opposition, to denounce judgments against the
Adversaries, and to comfort Gods people with his promises. As the Prophet
Micah, says, Mic. 3.8, 9. etc.
Truly I am full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of
might, to declare unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin. Hear
this, I pray you, ye Heads of the house of Jacob, and Princes of the house of
Israel, that abhor judgment, and pervert all equity. They build up Sion
with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity. The Heads thereof judge for reward,
and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for
money: yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? None
evil can come upon us. Therefore shall Sion for your sake be ploughed as a
field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the Mountain of the house, as the
high places of the forest. Thus the Prophet. Now who is he that would stand up
for a witness against wicked Prelates, Priests, and Prophets, against wicked
Princes and Rulers, against wicked Heads and Judges in a forlorn time, as here
the Prophet did, except the Lord had first filled him with power, judgment,
and might by the Spirit of God? Therefore says the Lord to Jeremie, when he
complained, saying, Ier. 15 10.
Woe is me, my mother, that thou have borne me a man of strife, and a man of
contention to the whole earth, etc. Verse 18.
Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, etc? Verse 19.20.
Therefore, says the Lord, If thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou
shall be as my mouth: Let them return unto thee, but return thou not unto
them. And I will make thee unto this people a fenced brazen wall, and they shall
fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee: for I am with thee
to save thee, and to deliver thee, says the Lord. And I will deliver thee out
of the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem thee out of the hand of the
terrible. And Esaias says, The Lord spoke thus to me, with a strong hand, and
instructed me, that I should not walk in the way of this people, nor to make a
confederacy with them. Thus there. And thus here the Lord gives power to his
two witnesses to prophecy, and bear testimony against the wicked and terrible
enemies of his Church here under the Sixth Trumpet.

In the next place is set down the time how long these two witnesses shall
prophecy, and that is, a thousand, two hundred, and threescore days. And this
answers to the forty and two months of Antichrists oppressing of gods people,
which is three years and a half. For a thousand, two hundred, and threescore
days, make up (within one week) just three years and a half. So as their
prophecy continues during the great affliction of Gods People under this Sixth
Trumpet. Whence we may note, here, God never leaves his people in affliction
without comfort, nor his truth without testimony, nor his adversaries without
conviction, but he sends his witnesses to prophecy eve^ in most forlorn times.

Then follows here the estate and condition of these two witnesses, expressed
by their outward habit, they are clothed in sackcloth; suitable to Elias, and
John Baptist. And suitable to their habit was their prophesying, preaching
repentance, and remission of sins to the penitent, and believers, and
denouncing judgments to the obstinate. And as was their habit, such were their
affections, men crucified to the World, forsaking all, and accounting all
things to be loss, and betaking themselves to their Sackcloth. It was no time
now, as the Lord says to Jeremy, Jer. 4.5.5.
to seek great things to themselves.

It follows, Verse 4. Verse 4.
These are the two Olive Trees, and the two Candlesticks, standing before the
God of the Earth. In these words is couched a great mystery, and a great work
signified, which the Lord is about to do in the time of this Sixth Trumpet. For
the finding out whereof, we are to compare these words with that prophecy
which we find written in the fourth Chapter of Zechariah, where (Ver. 1.) the
prophet is by the angel awaked as out of sleep. Which notes a stirring up of
the Prophet to great attention to what was now in a vision showed unto him, as
being a matter of great moment, and diligently to be marked. In the vision the
prophet Saw a golden Candelstick with Seven Lamps, and on each side thereof two
Olive trees. This vision came in the time when the Temple at Jerusalem was a
reparing by Zerubbabell, and it was by the word of the Lord to signify unto him
(as V. 6.) Saying, This is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel, saying, Not by
might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of hosts. This was to
comfort and encourage Zerubbabel in the work (as also Verse 9.) which the
enemies of Gods people did so much deride and mock at, as a work which could
never be finished; as we read, Nehem. 4.2, 3. Where Sanballat spoke to his
brethren, and the army of Samaria, having great indignation, and mocking the
Jews, said, What do these feeble Jews? Will they fortify themselves? Will they
sacrifise? Will they make an end in a day? Will they revive the stones out of the
heaps of the rubbish which are burnt? And Tobiah the Ammonite said, Even that
which they build, if a Fox go up, he shall eve^ break down their stone wall. Now
against all this the Lord incourageth Zerubbabel and his people by this Vision
of the Candlesticks, and two Olive Trees showed to the Prophet, whereof the
Lord himself is the Author, and not man. Therefore, he says, Not by might,
nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of hosts. That like as the
Spirit of the Lord showed this Vision to his Prophet, wherein is shadowed out
the indeficient and never failing Kingdom of Jesus Christ, who is the fountain
of grace, and the good To. 11.17, 24
Olive Tree, which runs and flows forth with Oil continually to supply
his Revel. 1.
golden Candlesticks, his Ministers and Prophets, by the light of whose
Prophecy (as the Temple was founded and finished by the Prophecy of haggai
and Zechariah the Prophets of the Lord at that time: so) the Church of Christ,
in all ages shall be built up, repaired, and in fine fully finished. But in
special this work, this great work of repayring the Temple, and restoring
true Religion unto its primitive purity, is to be accomplished under this sixth
Trumpet, wherein the Lord has his two witnesses (answerable to those two
Prophets, Haggai, and Zechariah, by whose Prophecy the ancient Temple, the
figure of the Church under the Gospel, was repaired) by the power of whose
prophecy, through the Grace and Spirit of Christ, his true Church and Religion
shall be repaired, maugre all the malice of Sanballat, and Tobiah, with their
Samaritan Army, to withstand the building, and notwithstanding all the scorn
and mockery, power and policy of Antichrist, and his nimble Foxes, that
think by their treading upon the wall to overthrow it. This work (I say) is to
be performed, and is now already begun to be acted under this Sixth Trumpet. And
therefore, has the Spirit of Christ in this place compared his two witnesses,
and their prophecy, unto two golden Candlesticks, and two Olive Trees that
stand before Zech. 4.14.
the Lord of the whole Earth, as it is said in Zechariah: as it were pointing
us with the finger to that whole vision of the Prophet, setting forth the
perfect reparation of that Temple; to the end we might be out of all doubt
that the Lord, under this Trumpet, is about the like great work of reparation,
and restoration of his Church and Religion, which shall prosper and be
accomplished not by might, nor by power of men, but by the Spirit of the Lord
in the mouth of his two witnesses, and by the word of their prophecy, crying
(as in Zechariah) Zech. 4 7.
Grace, grace unto it. And for our further confirmation in the truth hereof,
have we not a clear and evident demonstration of it in that admirable work
of Reformation of the Kirk of Scotland at this day, whereof we are all
eyewitnesses? And was this done by might and power of man? No. They indeed (as
Neh. 4 17, 18
those Jewish builders and repayrers, as aforesaid) began to build, working
with the one hand, and with the other holding a weapon, or having their sword
at their side, to defend themselves against the Antichristian yoke of the
Herarchie, as against Sanballets and Tobiahs; and chiefly to vindicate the
honor, crown, throne, Scepter, and Kingdom of Jesus Christ over his people
from Antichrists proud and impious usurpations, which all Christian Princes and
people are bound to do: as also they had their Prophets, with public fasting
and prayer (such as the Jews also used at the repairing of the Temple) whereby
they so prospered, and God gave them such favor in the eyes of their
Sovereign, that they altogether laid aside their weapons, and so not by might,
nor by power, but by the Grace of God, that great work (notwithstanding all
their adversaries plotting and laboring against it) was in some good measure
accomplished, to the everlasting honor and praise of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and to the renown of that King, the
Lords Anointed, whose heart was moved to become the Lords great Instrument in
permitting, and assenting unto so glorious a work; whereby as Christ's Kingdom
and Temple is now in a fair way restored and established in that Nation, and
freed from Antichrists yoke: So the Kings throne also is established in that
Kingdom, and shall be unto the coming of Jesus Christ, by whom alone Prove.
8.15.
Kings do reign, and Princes decree justice. And as the Lord has thus begun
his great and glorious work of repayring his Temple, and restoring Religion, so
evidently represented before our eyes, as in a most clear Vision, in this sixth
Trumpet, as has been showed by comparing this Prophecy with that in
Zechariah aforesaid: so certainly the Lord will finish his own work in other
Kingdoms also where both Princes and people are deluded, and brought into (at
least) Spiritual bondage under the Antichristian yoke, which though it be
curiously painted and gilded over, and as it were faced and lined with
Pharisaicall broad Phylacteries, woven with goodly words, As, The Church, most
Reverend Fathers, holy Hierarchy, Christ's Vice roys, and the like pompous and
pretended titles, yet these be but golden chains, and silken cords, purple
colored, wherein to lead captive even Kingdoms and States, to make up the
train of Antichrists triumph.

And here, for a close of this excellent Prophecy in this fourth Verse, give
me leave to relate a true story. My self having certain years agone
published in print, and that also by Authority, an Answer (entitled, The
Bayting of the Popes Bull) to a Bull of Pope Urban the eighth, which passed up
and down in England, inciting his Roman Catholics to stand for the Catholic
Cause: and having set in the Frontispiece of the Book, a Picture, representing
King Charles, with a sword in his hand, the point whereof was directed so, as
it put off the Popes triple Crown in the other picture over against it
representing the Pope, with Verses interpreting the same: and having a young
daughter then of three or four years old at most, to whom I (my wife holding
the child in her arms) showed this picture, interpreting the same unto her:
the child presently thereupon replied, O Father, Our King shall cut off the
Popes head: It must be so, It must be so. And this so redoubled, she spoke with
such an extraordinary vigor and vivacitie or quickness of spirit, and
utterance, as both my self and wife were struck with great admiration. Now if
a man should have said then, when this was uttered, that such a speech,
proceeding so strangely from a child was sure some Prophecy inspired into her
by Gods Spirit, of what should after come to pass, would have found but a few
to give credit thereunto, but rather would have been laughed to scorn.
Although I presently thereupon said to my wife, surely this in time may prove
to be a true Prophecy; God is able to bring it to pass, though never so
unlikely. But now that we see the Hierarchy utterly raced and rooted out of
the Kingdom of Scotland, and that by King Charles his Royal assent, ratifying
the same in Parliament: tell me, what think ye? Was not here a cutting off of
the Popes head by the King, as touching his Kingdom of Scotland? For is not
the Popes headship upheld in chief in the Prelates, and Hierarchy? Might not
then the childs speech be a Prophecy, being thus far verified in so great and
unexpected a work as this? And if so, why may it not reach to be a like
verified in cutting off the Popes head also in England, as it is now in
Scotland? Is any thing hard to the Pro. 21.1.
Lord, who has the Kings heart in his hand, as the rivers of waters, turning
it whithersoever he will? But for this we must patiently wait, and incessantly
pray, that the Lord will bring to pass his own counsel, and finish his work
thus begun, and that Antichrists Throne and Kingdom being thrown down and
destroyed, Christ alone may reign in the hearts and consciences of his people,
and the Kings Crown may ever flourish and shine forth in the beauty of
abundance of peace and prosperity, till time shall be no more. Nay, whither
the child prophesied, or no: here we have a most sure word of Prophecy, which
tells us what Christ is now a working, namely, the great Reformation of his
Church, and Restoration of Religion, which as he has so gloriously begun to
do in Scotland, so I trust he will show the like mercy to England, (though a
sinful Nation) in rooting out those wicked limbs of the Beast, by whom
Religion, and the whole Land is so of late, more than ever before since Queen
Elizabeth's days, defiled. Yea, we may be as sure hereof, as we are sure this
is Gods Word, that the Lord will, and that very speedily, so finish this work
now begun, within the compass of this sixth Trumpet, as not all the power and
policy of Antichrist and his Confederates shall be able either to prevent it,
or ever to overthrow it. For Christ's Word here must needs be fulfilled, which
says, These are the two Olive Trees, and the two Candlesticks, which stand
before the GOD of the earth: As if he had said, Even as the vision of the
golden Candlestick, and of the two Olive Trees on each side thereof, standing
before the Lord of the whole earth, was showed unto the Prophet Zechariah; to
be a word of the Lord to encourage Zerubbabel the Prince, and the people of God
in repayring and finishing of the Temple in Jerusalem, then in hand, which the
enemies of Judah resisted and withstood with all their might and malice, but
were not able to frustrate the work: So I have here purposely named my two
witnesses the two Olive Trees, and the two Candlesticks standing before the God
of the earth, that it may be the like vision (as it were) to my people living
under the sixth Trumpet to encourage them not only to begin, but to proceed to
the finishing and perfecting of the work of Reformation of Religion, and
restoration of my spiritual Temple, the Church; and though the adversaries be
potent, and labor tooth and nail to hinder the work, and my people are
weak: yet know, that it is Zechar 4.7.
not by might, or by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of hosts. For Esaias
46 10.
my Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. And as for thine
enemies, O my people, fear them not, but say unto them, Esaias 8.10.
Take counsel together, and it shall come to naught: Speak the word, and it
shall not stand: for God is with us. And I say to thee, O my people, Behold,
Esaias 54.16, 17.
I have created the Smith, that blows the coals in the fire, and that
brings forth an Instrument for his work, and I have created the waster to
destroy. No weapon that is formed against thee, shall prosper, and every tongue
that shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn. This is the
heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me, says
the Lord. And thus much of this Verse.

Now follows Verse 5.6. Verse 5.6.
And if any man shall hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth, and
devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner
be killed. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of
their prophecy: and have power over waters, to turn them into blood, and to
smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will.

In these two Verses is set forth the efficacy of that power, which Christ
gives to his two witnesses in their prophesying. And this power is such, as
that of Elias, and that of Moses was. For first, here is an allusion to the
power and spirit of Elias, in the fifth Verse, wherein this speech is
redoubled: thus, If any man shall hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth,
and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, he must in this
manner be killed. How is that? 2 King. 1.
Elias we know, when the first Captain with his 50 men were sent to fetch him
by force to King Ahaziah, saying unto him, Thou man of God, the King has said,
come down: answered, If I be a man of God, then let fire come down from
heaven and consume thee, and thy fifty. And there came down fire from heaven,
and consumed him, and his fifty. And the like befell the second Captain, and
his fifty. Thus fire came out of Elias his mouth, and it consumed or devoured
his enemies. And this was done twice. Accordingly, here it is twice repeated,
If any man hurt them, etc. Now by fire coming out of their mouth, is not meant
literally, that fire proceeds out of their mouth: but that, as Elias by his
word brought fire down from Heaven, wherein his Word took effect: so the
judgments, which these two witnesses shall denounce against their injurious
adversaries, the implacable and furious enemies of Gods Church, that will not
be brought by the word of their prophecy to repentance, shall as certainly
come to pass, and fall upon them to their destruction, as that fire did fall
from Heaven upon those men, according to Elias his word. I say, if they repent
not. For the third Captain with his fifty, we see humbled himself, and
entreated Elias, so as Elias went with him to the King; but being come, what
judgment he denounced against that wicked idolatrous King, fell upon him
also, that he died of his sickness. And in this respect Gods Word in the
mouth of his Prophets is compared to a fire; so as he that resists this word,
is as the foolish fly, that flappeth against the flaming of the Candle, and so
is consumed in the flame. And the like manner of speech the Scripture uses
elsewhere. As Revel. 2.16. Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and
will fight against thee with the sword of my mouth. And Chap. 19.21. And the
remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the horse, which sword
proceeded out of his mouth. Which is all one with that speech, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
And then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with
the spirit of his mouth. So we see what is here meant by the fire, whith
proceeds out of the mouth of these two witnesses; And this word, If any man
hurt them, in the original it is, (...), that is. If any man will do them
injury, or offer them violence against all law and equity: fire proceeds out
of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies: that is, the word of their
prophecy shall bring as certain destruction upon their injurious enemies, as
Elias his word brought fire from Heaven upon those that were sent to take him.
And therefore the word is here doubled (as before is noted) for the certainty
of it, as was Genesis 41.
Pharaohs dream.

Again, it is said here, These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in
the days of their prophecy. This also alludes to Elias, whose word of
prophecy did shut up the heavens, that it rained not for the space of three
years and a half, in the time of Ahabs Reign. So as here again is set forth
the power of these two witnesses prophecy, in bringing judgments upon the
Land, where Gods Word is not received and entertained in that love and respect
as it ought to be, but that the witnesses, even for no other cause, but the
words sake, which they prophecy, are injuriously and violently handled against
all Law and justice, yea, and all humanity, in all best iall cruelty. And
therefore no marvail, if in the time of their prophecy being thus evil
entreated, manifold judgments in sundry kinds do fall upon a Land, as the
Sword, Famine, Pestilence, or the like. Yea, and if God send extraordinary
foul weather in an extreme abundance of a long continued rain, and that
against harvest, as we have seen lately this very last Summer in England, so as
the harvest suffered much damage thereby: it were good, that they should
enquire, and consider what is the cause, that has so of late provoked God to
send forth from Heaven so many tokens of his wrath and indignation, threatening
even desolation to the whole Land, if they repent not. Are there no witnesses
abroad at this time? Or has not England defiled it self with the violent and
lawless cruelty of shedding the innocent blood of some at least of Christ's
witnesses? If it be so, as England can neither wash her hands from the guilt,
nor stop the ears of Heaven from the hideous cry of that innocent blood: no
marvail, I say, if England be many ways plagued. For these witnesses have
power to shut Heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy, as
Elias did.

Not only so, But they have also power over waters to turn them to blood, and
to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will. These words have an
allusion to Moses, as we said before; Who in Egypt had power given him of God
with his Rod to turn their waters into blood, and so smite the Land with
manifold plagues. And here seems to be more couched, then so, in this
parallel of these two witnesses power, to that of Moses and Aaron. For the
words here imply thus much, that as those many Plagues, which Moses brought upon
Egypt by his Rod and word of prophecy, were so many forerunners of the utter
desolation of hard-hearted Pharaoh, and his obstinate Egyptians, who would not
suffer Gods people to go sacrifice to the Lord their God: So those many tokens
of Gods wrath, which have bin powered upon England of late days, for their sore
afflicting and oppressing of Gods people by the Prelates and their officers,
those Egyptian Taskmasters, and not suffering them to enjoy that freedom and
liberty of conscience, which Christ has by his precious blood purchased for
them, but holding their noses to the Grind-stone (as we say) and enslaving
them to the Egyptian tasks in the observation of those many Popish Ceremonies
so tyrannically imposed and pressed upon them; as also for that most impious
crying down of the Sanctification of the Sabbath, and stopping Ministers
mouths for preaching the sincere Word of God, throwing them out of their
Ministry, and many such like, worse then Egyptian outrages, and such as were
never done in any Christian State since the Apostles times to this present:
those tokens (I say) do plainly show, that without speedy repentance, and a
through reformation of these intolerable iniquities, God will certainly bring
the Taskmasters to desolation, and in the same sea of destruction to the
Egyptians will make a way for his peoples liberty from that Egyptian bondage,
wherein they have been so long, so miserably captived. Nor let it seem
strange, that I match Englands Taskmasters with those of Egypt; for by and by
we shall find a spiritual Egypt, whereof that in England will hardly acquit it
self from being apart, or party at least, if all circumstances be but well
weighed. And so we pass to the Verses following.

Verse 7.
Verse 7. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that
ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall
overcome them, and kill them, etc.

Here begins a battle, wherein three circumstances are observable: 1 The time
when it begins: 2 The parties, or warriers: and 3 the issue of the battle.
First, for the time, it is, when the two witnesses have finished their
testimony. Then, and not before. Till then, the Beast has no power to set upon
them. Thus it was with the Captain of our salvation, John 7.8. My time, says
he, is not yet come. And, Verse 30. when his enemies sought to take him, no man
laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet come. But when his hour was
come, that he must lay down his life (as John 13.1. and 17.1) and when
hereupon his enemies came to take him, Christ says unto them, Luke 22.53.
This is your hour and power of darkness. Till now, they had no power, till
his hour was come. And when upon the Cross he came to say, It is finished,
then, and not before, he gave up the ghost. Thus he finished his Testimony
before his death. It is said of David, that Acts 13 36.
after he had served his own Generation by the will of GOD, he fell asleep.
And Paul says of himself, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7
I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. And
the reason is added in the next Verse. I have fought a good fight, J have
finished my course. Thus when these two witnesses have finished their
testimony, the Beast sets upon them, and kills them. And here let me give you a
most remarkable instance, wherein God is the more glorified. Which at that very
time, when it was done, was observed by some neighbor Ministers in London.
Only this I deprecate, that none do imput^ unto me any vain humor of
glorying, as if I made my self one of those witnesses here spoken of, such an
honor I assume not to my self. Only (I say) I crave leave to relate a truth.
It is this. I having been See a notable parallel hereof in Ezech. Chap 3.24,
25, 26.
shut up in my own house, by the Prelates Pursuivants daily and hourly
watching for me at my gates, the space of almost two months, in which time,
notwithstanding their continual rapping and ringing at my gates, I was a
compiling my Book of two Sermons, which I had preached in my Church the fifth
of November then last past; and fitting it for the Press, that so it might be a
testimony to all the World of that truth, which I had therein delivered, and
for which I was then questioned and troubled by the Prelates: the which
testimony, as also my Apology for my Appeal, being now finished, and fully
printed, and some Books for the King and Council bound up and brought unto me,
the same day at night (and not before) came from the Lord of London, then Lord
Treasurer, a Serjant at Arms, with a number of Pursuivants and Officers with
swords and staves, in the evening, and with great violence assaulted my doors,
and brake them open, though very strong, and so came and seized on my body,
sitting, with my family, in my gown, and making no resistance at all. This I
thought here not unfit to be noted, as not altogether impertinent to this
Prophecy, to which this example may seem to have some correspondence. And so
much of the time, when this war begins; even when these two witnesses have
finished their testimony, and not before. The Beast, for all his roaring, yet
has not the power to set his paw upon Christ's witnesses, until they have
finished their testimony. And is it not lawful for me to add one truth more,
that God may be glorified, and the hearts of his people raised up, and filled
with rejoicing in him? This it is. Not all the Beasts hundred eyes, not all his
quick-sented bloud-hounds, the Pursuivants, for all their vigilant and eagre
hunting, could find out, or discover, where this testimony (to wit, For God and
the King) was printed, though they left never a Printing house about London
unsearched over and over, day by day, the Lord in his providence preserving not
only my person, but my testimony also, that it should not be prevented, but
come forth into the open light.

It follows: When they had finished their testimony, The Beast that ascends
out of the bottomless pit begins to make war against them, as I have told
you before. Here then we are to consider the second circumstance of this
war, the two adverse parties, the one, the Beast, etc. the other, the two
witnesses: the Beast is the Assailant, and the two Witnesses are the
Defendants. For the Beast, he is here described from the place whence he
comes, the bottomless pit: and secondly, by the manner of his issuing thence,
(...), he ascends out of the bottomless pit. His rise is groundless,
bottomless, out of the bottomless deep, and his motion is Ascendant, yea
(...), ascending (being a participle of the present tense) still aspiring with
Esaias 4.
Lucifer, to place his throne above the stars, yea, above God himself. He is
ever ascending, but still out of the bottomless pit, as if he could never get
out of it. This bottomless pit is hell, the Den, where this Beast is bred, and
whence he is nourished. And who this Beast is, ye may easily know, by his
Picture lively pourtrayed, Chap. 13. and 17. compared together. He has his
seven heads and ten horns: Monstrum horrendum, ingens: the like Beast again is
not in all the World. And the Dragon, the Devil, gives him power, Chap. 13.2.
and Verse 5. Power is given him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome
them. The very same Beast here, which makes war with Christ's witnesses, and
overcomes them. This is that Beast of Rome, plainly described, Chap. 17. And as
this seven-headed, and ten-horned Beast, has his ascent, rise, and original
out of the bottomless pit: so also his brood and offspring, as those Locusts,
Chap. 9.3. who are this Beasts Warriers. Thus we see who this Beast is, from
whence and whither he ascends.

Now let us see what he does. 1 he makes war against the two witnesses. 2 He
overcomes them. 3 he kills them. First, he makes war against them. Alas
poor witnesses, for such a great and monstrous Beast, with his numerous brood,
to make war against them. Such a power to make war against two? ^ut by this
time Christ's witnesses may be increased, and multiplied to a greater number,
and that by the example of the two here spoken of, whose more eminent and
mighty testimonies cannot so go alone, but they will draw many others after
them, to testify the same truth. Though it pleased the Holy Ghost to point out
but two witnesses only, and in such wise to set them forth, as thereby we might
come to know the full intent and meaning of this Prophecy, as has been
showed. Now the Beast having mustered his forces together, makes war against
the two witnesses; not only against Them, but against all other whom he finds
endued with the same spirit, namely, such as prophecy against the Beast and
his Throne, and all those, that by their constant profession of the Truth, and
refusing communion with the Beast, do become thereby the witnesses of Christ.
For the Beast wars with the Saints. Chap. 13.7.

But what be those weapons, and what those forces, wherewith this Beast warreth
against Christ's witnesses, and Gods Saints? Surely, he uses all manner of
weapons whereby to execute his beastly cruelty. And these may be reduced to two
kinds: The Spiritual Sword: and the Temporal Sword. His Spiritual Sword is
the brute Thunderbolt of his execrable Excommunication, direful Curses, and
dreadful Courts, as his Court of Inquisition, and of High Commission, and
other his Prelaticall and Hierarchicall Courts, which are so many Dens, wherein
this hideous Beast once enclosing the Saints, does prey upon them, he and his
Cubs. But if this his Sword prove not strong enough as meeting with some mettle
too tough for it to ^^^rce, then he can command with a wet finger the help of
the Temporal Sword, which is like Tamberlains black and bloody Banner, which
being displayed by the Beasts power, and inspired with his fiery-mettled
spirit, breathes nothing, but either fire and faggot, or Pillory, with shedding
of blood, perpetual close imprisonment, banishment, and all other evils of
this life, more bitter and cruel, by many degrees, than death it self. And
this is his kind of war. But how comes he to do these things by the help of
the Temporal Power, when commonly all his proceedings are without either law,
or color of justice, except according to the Beasts own lawless Law? For
this, he wants not his devices: for he will so contrive the matter, and lay
his snares, as either the innocent (being brought into the Temporal Court,
where also he himself will sit a Judge, and where his spirit is wondrously
predominant) shall be forced to assent to the condemnation of his own cause
before the hearing: or else, if he refuse so to do, he shall be censured as
guilty of all those heinous crimes laid to his charge, though never so false
and maliciously devised; yea, he can so handle the business, as the censure
shall be agreed upon, and concluded, before ever his day of hearing come, and
when it is come, his Legal Defense shall never be heard. This needs no
application. And this is the Beasts manner of warring, right; nor should it be
properly the Beasts war, were it not altogether bestiall, void of all Law, or
conscience, or honesty, or humanity. And ever his mayn forces and battery are
bent against the two witnesses, namely such as do constantly testify and
maintain the Prerogative of Christ's Kingly Government over his Church against
the Beasts proud and tyrannical usurpations; and the truth of the Gospel and
Word of Christ, against all Antichrists lies: and the authority and
sufficiency of the Holy Scripture against the Beasts unwritten Traditions, and
Ecclesiastical Canons, the authority whereof he prefers above, and
opposes against the Law of God. As for all wicked, profane, and impious
persons, his Holiness has no quarrel against them; for either they are such,
as belong to the Beasts Den, or at least, though they be not of it, yet they
are not much against it. Thus he warreth.

Secondly, as the Beast warreth against the witnesses, so he shall overcome
them. How shall he overcome them? Their faith and testimony he shall not
overcome, so as to force them to recant, or desert their cause, or betray their
conscience. For (Chap. 12.11.) those on Christ's side overcame the Dragon, by
the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their Testimony, and they loved not
their lives unto the death. Nor shall the Beast be able to overcome them by
force of arguments and reasoning: for he is a Beast, yea, the Beast of all
Beasts; his Arguments are fire and faggot, Pillory and bloodshed (as before)
downright club-law, or a push with his ten Revel. 17.12.
horns, or a by-back-blow with his paw. So as thus he comes to get the
conquest over their bodies indeed, he can shut them close up, he can pillory
them, he can mangle and torture them, and a thousand ways subdue Matthew. 10.28
their bodies, but can do no more. Luke 12.4.

Not only so, but (in the third place) he shall kill them. Famous is the Beast
for his infinite bloody victories over Christ's Witnesses in this kind, by
putting them to death. But now there is a twofold kind of death, which he puts
them to. The first is, by a violent separation of their soul from their body;
as in the flames of Martyrdom. This has bin the Beasts practice of old. But
this subtle Dragon, finding by experience, that his kingdom rather suffered
damage this way, then won any ground, and that it proved rather an advantage
to his Adversaries, and brought much hatred to his barbarous cruelty in so
putting them to death: he has found out another kind of death, and that,
though not in show, yet indeed far more cruel than the other; and that is,
by a violent and perpetual separation of a living man from all the delights,
comforts and contentments in the World, from his wife and children, from his
means and livelihood, friends and acquaintance, from the Communion of Saints,
yea, from all society of men, and in a word, from all the means of comfort in
this life, Spiritual, or Temporal. So as a man in this case may be said to be
killed, or deprived of life, when he is deprived of all those things, without
which life cannot well be called a life, but a death rather, or such a life, as
that in hell, where not one drop of comfort is allowed to those tormented
souls. And as dead men neither see, nor hear, nor speak, nor write, nor have
any commerce with the living: So these may neither see their living friends,
nor hear from them by letters, nor speak, nor write unto them, nor have any
commerce with them. Thus far dead they be. And in this sense we have seen some
eminent Witnesses of Christ (yet living in their close Prisons in remote Lands)
thus to be killed in these our days. Which being so, may it not be one
evident sign, that we are now in the sixth Trumpet, wherein we have seen so
many things to be come to pass and fulfilled, so particularly set forth in
this Prophecy.

It follows, Verse 8. Verse 8.
And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City, which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. And
they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and Nations, shall see their
dead bodies three days and a half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to
be put in graves: And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them,
and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets
tormented them that dwelt on the earth.

Now these dead bodies (as we said before) may be so called, in respect of a
civil death, as dead to the whole World in a civil respect, having no
communion nor commerce with the World. And the bodies are here named, not the
persons, because persecuting Tyrants (as we touched before) have no power over
the soul, but only over the body; this they may torment, imprison, Matthew.
10.28.
kill: but that's all they can do. Well, what of those dead bodies, take them
in any sense? They shall lie in the street of the great City, which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. What
great City is this? Surely it can be no other, but the City of the Beast,
together with the Suburbs. And the Suburbs are all those Cities or States,
which are either subject to, or confederate with the Head-Citie, which is Rome.
We can not have a fitter exposition hereof, then that which the Prelate of
Canterbury gives us in his reprinted Conference with the Jesuit Fisher. For
there he says; That the Church of Rome and the Church of England (as also all
other Prelaticall or Hierarchicall Churches) are all one and the same Church;
no doubt of that, as he says, and as is noted before. This is his Catholic
Church. And so this is that great City, which stands in opposition to the Holy
City, and treads it under feet, as Verse 2. For as Christ's Church is called a
Holy City, though it be dispersed over the World: So Antichrists Synagogue is
here called a Great City, as comprehending in it all those Cities, and States,
which make up one body of the Beast. This great City is spiritually called
Sodom and Egypt: Sodom, for the wickedness, voluptuousness, profaneness,
pride, and other sins of Sodom, reigning therein, and where they make open
war against all holiness, and all good Laws of GOD and Man. And secondly, it
is called Egypt, for its tyranny in oppressing and afflicting of Gods people
with their intolerable burdens. And for this, they have their Taskmasters, to
wit, the Prelates and their multitude of officers, who force Gods people
through their whole Egyptian Provinces to fill up their tale and task of
bricks, in the strict observation of all their Rites and Ceremonies,
Constitutions, and Canons, the Spiritual burdens of their spiritual Egypt,
and for default thereof in the lest degree, or kind, the Taskmasters beat and
abuse them, and if they Exodus 5.15.
complain, it is to no purpose, they can have no remedy. Thus not without cause
is this City called not only Great, but spiritually Sodom and Egypt. So as in
what Country soever in the World, this Beast sets his paw, that is, where ever
he has his Taskmasters, the Prelates and their Officers (as where almost are
they not? there is the Kingdom of the Beast, there be the Suburbs of this
Great City. And whatever Country or State does incorporate it self into an
union or confederation with this Papal Hierarchy, becomes thereby ipso facto
a member of this great City, which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt. And
this being so, tell me, o England, art thou not become a member of this great
body, of this Great City, of this spiritual Sodom, of this spiritual Egypt?
For wherein do thou differ from Rome it self? Does not thy great
Arch-prelate who is as thine Oracle, profess in thy name, and in Print, with
an unblushing forehead, that England is of the Conference Reprinted Epist. Ded.
page 16. And page 376. and 338. etc.
same Church, same faith, same Religion with Rome? And does he not shroud this
his Book under the name of the highest Authority in England, as commanded by
the King to be published? And have thou not set forth Edicts dispensing with
the open profanation of the Sabbath by heathenish Sports, and others,
prohibiting Ministers to preach in the after-noons on Lords Days: as preferring
thy profane Sports before the holy and divine Ordinance of Preaching, and so
consecrating at least the one half of the Lords Day to Bacchus, or Belial? Art
thou not then a part of that great City, which is spiritually called Sodom?
Again, do thou not permit (if not command) thy Prelates, the Roman Pharoahs
Taskmasters to vex, afflict, and grievously oppress the people of God, with
the intolerable burdens of their and thine endless Ceremonies? And not These
things were then in force when this Treatise was written.
content with the old, thou addest new burdens, as the Egyptians did in
denying straw, and those most abominable, as thy Superstitious, yea, Idolatrous
Heathenish Altars, with all their Idolatrous Altar-Service, wherein thou art
utterly fallen from being a member of the Holy City, which thou treadest under
thy feet, and even professest thy self to be of that Great City, which for
its inthralling and oppressing of Gods people, is spiritually called Egypt? O
England, England, Repent hereof, cast out thy cursed and cruel Taskmasters,
like as thy Neighbor Scotland has done, and so suffer thy people, Gods
people, to serve their God as he has commanded, and to enjoy their Christian
Liberty which Christ has deerly purchased for them, and no longer to be under
the Antichristian Babylonian yoke, and the Egyptian Taskmasters.

Thus we have seen, as it were in a Map, the large Territories, and bound less
bounds of this great City here mentioned, spiritually called Sodom and Egypt;
in the street whereof lie the dead bodies of Christ's two witnesses: and where
(as here is added) our Lord was crucified. Which is to be understood, not
simply and personally of our Lords crucifying, but mystically. For our Lord in
Person was crucified at Jerusalem, and yet not within the City, but without
the Gate. And yet Christ in his Person was crucified by the first Roman Beast,
the Emperor, whose Successor both in his Seat, and in the Image of his Power
and State, and in all his bloody persecutions of the Saints, the Papal Beast
now is; as also of the Scribes and Pharisees and High Priests, who put Christ
to death, and so he with them is guilty of his blood: as Matthew. 23.35, 36. and
Verse 31. But he is crucified mystically in his mystical members, even in the
open Streets of this Great City. Witness all those persecutions and
Martyrdomes, which the Beast in all Ages and Countries has caused, wherein the
Lord himself has been crucified, to wit, in his Saints and Witnesses. And
what think you of those Witnesses, of whose crucifying on the Pillory in the
open street, or rather spacious Palace-yard in the City of Westminster, we
have been all eyewitnesses, and spectators? Was our Lord there, then, in them,
on those Pillories, crucified, or not? If he were, and that upon such an
eminent Theater, and in the view of that Court, where they were so censured,
the High Priests themselves, with others of high note, beholding and pleasing
themselves with such a Tragedy of the Beasts cunning contriving, and cruel
execution: was not this, trow you, a part of that Great City, where our Lord
has been thus crucified? O England, blush, and be abashed, yea, confounded in
thy self, at these things: return at length to a sober mind, repent, and
reform thy self, lest thou perish with the Beast and his Kingdom, whose
woeful ruin hasteneth on a pace; as Verse 14.

But now what becomes of these thus dead bodies? Surely they lie in the Street
of the great City unburied. How long? Three days and an half. How so? The
people, kindreds, tongues, and nations seeing them, will not suffer them to be
put in graves. Just so did the barbarous heathen with the Martyrs, not
permitting their bodies to be buried, (...), as Eusebius. Eccl. H is it. l. 5. c. 1.
Eusebius reports. Thus our Antichristian heathen or Gentiles here, so called,
Verse 2. as before. Now for dead bodies to lie in the open street unburied,
three days and a half, is enough to make their smell odious and abominable in
the nosthrils of all men. So as this appears to be the meaning, these
Witnesses being slain, or so, as is before said, they are kept above ground to
become an object of abomination to all that behold them; and by their long
keeping, they are made so to stink, as men pass by them stopping their Noses,
and will not, or do not, or dare not come near them. And who does, or dare
visit the dead bodies of those Witnesses aforesaid? But they are not in the
Street. True: they are dragged, or drawn out of the Street, they do so stink
in the nosthrils of the Beast and his kindred, and people. But yet they are
above ground, they are not yet buried under the earth, though they lie buried
within strong walled vaults, that none can come any more at them, then at the
dead bodies of those that lie in their graves. But not lying in the street, and
having lain now above three days and a half, yea, some of them three years
and a half, and the least and last is now going upon the last half year: how
come they to be reckoned here in the account, and numbered with the dead bodies
of these two witnesses, lying three days and a half in the street of the
great City? For this, we must take the sense, and not the strict Letter. The
lying of dead bodies three days and a half in the open street, where all
passengers are to pass, is to note unto us, that (as is before noted) they lie
so long, till none can endure their smell, but of force they must be removed
out of the way. And is it not so done with these? Their smell grew so strong,
that they were feign to remove them. Whither? Into their Graves? No, they are
above ground still. For it is added here, The people, and kindreds, and
nations, and tongues, will not suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves.
Who are these people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations? Surely all those
of this great City, which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, such as are
the members of the Beast. For though sometimes, these terms, as people,
kindreds, etc. are taken in the good part, for those of Christ's Kingdom, as
Chap. 7.9. and 10.11. yet here they are taken, as Chap. 17.15. for those of
Antichrists Kingdom. And for proof hereof, they will not suffer the dead
bodies of the two witnesses to be buried. As we read of the Pope (as I
remember Hildebrand) who after he had by his Thunderbolt of Excommunication
blasted the Emperor, Henry the Fourth, and driven him out of his Kingdom by
his own Son, and he dying in that his exile, his Holiness would not suffer him
to be buried, so as his dead body continued unburied for five years space. So
here, with the same spirit of Charity do these his people, and kindreds, and
tongues, and Nations, the whole body of that Beast, not suffer the dead bodies
of these two witnesses to enjoy the ordinary honor of Christian burial, which
even the Law of Nature, and common humanity commands. The sum of it is, they
will not allow them any benefit, nor any right, which by the Law of God, and
the Law of Nature and Nations is due unto them in that case: So as being
banished in a remote Country in a close imprisonment, living indeed, but as
dead men (as before) they may there rot above ground, before either Wife, or
children, or friend, or acquaintance shall be suffered to come at them to
perform that last duty, which all are bound unto, the burial of their dead.
Thus if any shall deny this also, (concerning these (...), or dead bodies) to
be a true (...), a Symptom of this Trumpets sounding, which we ought not to
think gives an uncertain sound: he may with as good reason deny the fulfilling
of all Prophecies, even then, when their proper effects, being seen of all
men, become to every man's reason and understanding, clear demonstrations
thereof. Except we are yet to look for more monstrous beastly cruelties under
this Trumpet, which can hardly be imagined by any Creature.

It follows: And they that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice over them, and
make merry, and shall send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets
tormented them that dwelt on the earth. These Earth-dwellers are the same, with
those people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations, those of the Beasts
Kingdom, in the former Verse. These are said to dwell on the earth, because
their Kingdom and happiness is altogether earthly. They mind earthly things,
and place their felicity in them: contrary to Gods children, who living on
earth, yet have their conversation in heaven, and their treasure in heaven, and
their Country Heaven. So as to be said to dwell on the earth, is opposed to
those, who are Heb. 11.13. 1 Pet. 2.11. Genesis 47 9. Exodus 6.4. Psalm. 119.54.
every where in Scripture called pilgrims and strangers in the earth; and the
earth it self called, not their habitation, but the land or house of their
pilgrimage. Whereas on the contrary, to be said to dwell on the earth, is
usually put in Scripture for all the wicked of the earth; as els-where in this
Book, Chap. 8.13. and 13.12, 14. and 17.8. Where we see, that these
earth-dwellers are all those people, over whom the Beast reigns. And so, on
these, all the plagues are powered: as Chap. 8.13. and 12.12. and 16.1. Luke
21.35. and in many other places. And in this Verse it is twice repeated. Thus
we see who they be. Now what do they further? First, These earth-dwellers
rejoice over the dead bodies of the witnesses: Secondly, they make merry:
Thirdly, they send gifts one to another, by way of congratulation. And the
cause is added, because these two witnesses tormented them that dwelt upon the
earth.

First, they rejoice over their dead bodies; as the Philistines did over
Sampson, when they had put out his eyes, they made sport with him, as with a
Fool in a Play. He whom they durst not look upon, when he had his eyes, and
liberty, now they insult over him at their pleasure. So these people of
Antichrist do with the dead bodies of the two Witnesses, Sir Phil. Sydneys
Arcadia.
as the cowardly Shepherd did in Arcadia with the dead body of the Lion, he
came and trampled upon him, and beat him with his sheephook, and spoke big
words unto him, and when he had done, boasted he had overcome the Lion. So
these here do with these witnesses: in the seventh Verse the Beast overcomes
them: and here his brood triumphs over them, who living were a terror to the
beast, and all his crew.

Secondly, they make merry. The Father in the Gospel when he had received his
lost Son, is said (...), to make merry; the same word is used here, upon the
slaying of these witnesses, as a fat Calfe, to feast withal. And such a kind
of mirth is here employed, as is used at feasting. As in Amos (Chap. 2.8.) They
drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God; to wit, of those
whom themselves have unjustly condemned. So these. Perhaps they have their
Minstrels too, as Fiddlers and Pipers, and dance about the May Pole, and that on
the Sabbath day, in despite of these Witnesses, who while they lived spoke and
wrote against these inhabitants of the spiritual Sodom. But let their mirth
be what it will: in the third place, they send gifts one to another. They do
not send gifts to the poor, of whom they can receive none again: but one to
another, by way of retaliation or congratulation: this is their charity, as if
they would now celebrate the funeral of these dead witnesses, would they but
suffer their dead bodies to be buried.

But what is the matter they are so jocund and frolic? Even this, because these
two Prophets had tormented them that dwell on the earth. It seems they were
such tormenters of these Earth-dwellers, as the Prophet Kings 22.8.
Michaiah was of Ahab; who therefore hated him, and could not endure him,
because (says he) be never prophecieth good to me but evil. So these two
Prophets, they tormented all those of the Beasts Kingdom by prophesying of
judgments and punishments that should fall upon them from God for all their
idolatries, superstitions, humane inventions in the Service they pretend to
God, for all their abominable infidelity in their Altars, and Altar-worship,
for their open and avowed profanation of the Sabbath, for their stopping of
the mouths of Gods painful Ministers, for oppressing and silencing the
Doctrines of the Gospel, and of the Grace of God, for overturning all true
Religion, for persecuting of all true godliness in Ministers and people, for
their favoring of drunkards, adulterers, swearers, Sabbath Breakers, and all
manner of profaneness in their Courts, with other the like things, as tedious
to rehearse, as to them to hear. Thus these Prophets tormented them. Now I
pray you what torments shall such find in Hell for their living in all kind
of sin, when they find Gods Word it self to be a tormentor of them, in
reproving their sins, and moving them to repentance? Is it a marvel then,
that all the woes in this Book fall upon these dwellers on the earth? They do
so dwell on the earth, that they are glued unto it, so as they will not upon
any terms, no not to get Heaven, and so escape Hell, part with the love of it,
and with the lusts of it. And therefore they hold none their greater enemies,
then Gods Prophets, that tell them their own. And of other profane Worldlings,
none hate Gods Prophets more, than the Beast, and his Hierarchy. For their
Kingdom being altogether earthly, and sensual, (I might add also the
Apostles third word, which he applies to the wisdom that is from beneath, from
the bottomless pit, and that is, Iam. 3.15.
Devilish) they cannot endure Christ's Kingdom, which is altogether
Spiritual, nor the Heralds thereof, who proclaim war against the Beast, and
his Armies, for his notorious hypocrisy, who under the titles of Holiness,
and Spiritual, and the like, advance their earthly Kingdom both above and
against Christ's Kingdom.

It follows: Verse 11. And after three days and a half, the spirit of life
from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell
upon them which saw them. We showed before what is meant by the three days and
a half, namely, the time, in which the Beast and his people do expose these
witnesses to derision, denying them even that common humanity, which the very
Heathen freely afford to all, as burial of the dead. And although the time of
their suffering may be much longer then three days and a half, yea, three
years and a half, yet it is reckoned here but three days and a half, both
because the Beasts cruelty is so great, that he takes no more compassion or
consideration of the time of their suffering, though long and tedious, then as
if it were but three days and a half: and secondly, because such is the
patience and alacrity of these Witnesses in suffering for the Name of Christ,
and for the love of the Truth, that the time, though long, and the afflictions
they endure, though very grievous, yet it seems to them but 2 Cor. 4 17.
light, and momentany, and as it were but of three days and a halfes
continuance, in comparison: and Thirdly, it is expressed here by three days
and a half, because the Lord himself will shorten the time, and hasten the
deliverance in due time, in due time, I say, because it is a certain time,
determined and prefixed of God; as three days and a half; and because but as
three days and a half, therefore it is a very short time, as will appear
more fully, when the deliverance comes. But lastly, by three days and a
half, we may understand three years and a half, as in Daniel 7.25. by a
time, times, and part or half a time, three years and part of another. As
Revel. 12.14. And why should I here conceal that speech which I used to some
Ministers at Coventry in my passage to Lancaster Castle, who being sad at my
departure, I said unto them, Come, be not sad, for three years and a half hence
we shall meet again, and be merry. And truly (absit invidia verbo) reckoning
from the fourteenth of June 1637, whereon we were censured in the Star Chamber
to perpetual imprisonment, it was just three years and a half when we
returned from exile, even in the last month of the three years and a half, my
self being sent for the very first day of that month.

Well, when this time, appointed of God, is expired, what then? Then, after
three days and a half, the spirit of life from God shall enter into them: and
they shall stand upon their feet, and great fear shall fall upon the
beholders. All this shows unto us thus much, that God shall miraculously
restore and deliver his witnesses, even as the restoring of the dead to life
again, to the astonishment and terror of all their enemies, who shall behold
them. But now a little more, particularly to clear the words: we showed before
how the Lord's witnesses may be slain two ways, either corporally, in
separating their souls from their bodies, or mystically, and in a similitude or
parable, in a separation of their life from the world, that is from all
co^merce and communion with the world, so as their life is made no better, but
rather worse then death. Now for them that are slain after the first manner, we
are not to expect, that God will according to the Letter raise them up from the
dead, as here, after three days and a half. And for them that are slain after
the second manner here specified, though God should not deliver and restore
them from that their civil death, (though he be able to do it, and will do
it, if he have so determined) unto their liberty, and communion with humane
society, as formerly: Yet this we are sure of, as Gods Word here must needs be
true, that of the very dust and ashes of his dead witnesses under this Trumpet
(in what manner so ever dead) he will raise up again to life, and that in the
time of this Trumpet, either those very witnesses in their own persons, or else
in the Spirit of these he will raise up other witnesses, and such, as if they
were those very witnesses formerly slain. Thus we read of Elias, Mal. 4.5, 6.
Behold (says the Lord) I will send you Elias the Prophet, before the coming
of the great and dreadful day of the Lord, and he shall turn the heart of the
Fathers to the children, etc. Now this Elias was meant of John the Baptist,
that morning Star, that ushered in the Mal. 4.2.
Sun of Righteousness, that was to prepare the way before him. Luke 1.17.
He (says the Angel to Zachariah) shall go before him in the Spirit and
power of Elias, to turn the heart of the Fathers to the Children, etc. Whence
it is plain and clear, that John the Baptist was that Elias there prophesied
of; and he is called Elias, because he came in the spirit and power of Elias.
And therefore Christ faith to his Disciples, when they objected, that Elias
must first come: Math. 17.11
I tell you (says he) that Elias is come already, etc. whereupon they
understood, that he spoke unto them of John the Baptist. And Matthew. 11.14.
Speaking of John Baptist, he says, This is Elias, which was to come. Thus we
see, how the Prophet Elias, being dead and buried many hundred years before,
yet was as it were raised up from the dead, to be Christ's harbinger. But how?
Not in his person, but in his spirit and power. So as John Baptist, coming in
the spirit and power of Elias, is called Elias, and in him the Prophecy is
fulfilled, that Elias should come, and now in John he was already come. Now
according to this sense, we may safely interpret this Prophecy also in this
place: After three days and a half, the spirit of life from God, shall enter
into them (to wit, into the two slain witnesses) and they shall stand upon
their feet, etc: that is, after a short, but set time with God, the spirit of
life from God shall raise up his former witnesses, that were slain, though not
in their own persons, yet in other witnesses that shall succeed them, who
shall be endued with the same spirit and power, which they had been endued
with all. And this is that spirit of life from God, which entering into his
servants, raises them up to be lively witnesses of his truth, full of vigor,
strength, courage, zeal, constancy, Revel. 12.11.
not loving their lives unto the death, but as it is said of Paul and Barnabas,
such as had Acts 15.26.
(...), abandoned, or given up for lost their lives for the Name of Christ. So
that, as the same spirit of life from God entering into John the Baptist, made
him to be called that Elias, who had been endued with the same spirit, and was
foretold to come again, which was fulfilled in the Baptist: So here, the same
spirit of life from God (nor is it said to be their own spirit) which the
slain witnesses had, now entering into other witnesses succeeding them, they by
the same reason may be called those very witnesses as being now by the Almighty
power of GOD raised from the dead, as John the Baptist was called that Elias,
because he came in the spirit and power of Elias. And in this respect, seeing
the raising and restoring of these two witnesses, is perhaps not personal, but
spiritual, it is not necessary, that we tie or restrain the succeeding
witnesses strictly to the number of two only. For as it was said of old,
Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae, The blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the
Church: and as one seed or grain sown, and dying, brings forth much fruit (as
John 12.24.
Christ says) so as one corn brings forth the increase of a hundred, and some
of a thousand, as in some Countries, as of Virginia: So these two witnesses may
in the multiplication of their spirit and power, and of that spirit of life
from God, bring forth an abundant harvest, even great plenty of more witnesses,
that shall stand up for that Truth, for the which these two were slain. What
shall we say of those many witnesses, whom the Lord lately raised up in
Scotland, standing up upon their feet to mayntain their Christian Liberty
against Antichristian bondage, and to vindicate Christ's Scepter and Government
over his Church there out of the tyrannical hands of that proud usurping Beast
out of the bottomless pit, who by his Egyptian Taskmasters the Prelates so
oppressed Gods people, as they were made weary of their lives? And when were
these witnesses raised up? Surely, not much after three days and a half, that
the two witnesses were slain, those (I mean) who suffered worse then death,
for bearing witness against the Tyranny of the Romish Beast, and his cruel
Taskmasters. And what other spirit, but that spirit of life from God, could
raise up so many witnesses, so unanimously, and with such a wonderful wisdom,
discretion, judgment, zeal, and courage, to stand up in defense of Christ's
Kingdom against Antichrists Tyranny? Yea, and what other spirit and power, but
that of God, could move the heart of his anointed Vicegerent, to assent to his
peoples just and religious plea, to have Christ alone to reign over his
peoples souls and consciences, which is his peculiar and incommunicable
Prerogative. Nor could the King either have advanced higher his own Royal
honor, or more surely have established his own Throne in the uniting and
fastening of his Subjects hearts and affections in all love and loyalty unto
him, then by giving Christ his due honor, who has said, 1 Samuel 2.30.
Those that honor me, I will honor: and they that despise me, shall be
lightly esteemed. Now blessed be our God for evermore for this his great and
glorious work: and he ever bless his King, that as he has made him a
mighty instrument thereof; so he would strengthen him to the finishing of that
work, which yet remaynes to be done in the purgation and reformation of his
other Kingdoms, that so he may prove the most glorious Prince that ever
reigned in the Christian World.

And it is said here, And great fear fell upon them which saw them. That is,
when they on the Beasts side saw those witnesses (whom the Beast had cruelly
slain, and whose dead bodies they had barbarously used, not suffering them to
have common burial, but insulted, and triumphed over them) now to be as it
were revived and raised from the dead again, when they behold such a
wonderful increase to come of their blood so cruelly shed, such a spirit of
life from God so to possess many other witnesses, as those slain seem Here let
the Reader still remember, that this Treatise was written before his return
from banishment, and so toward London, on that Saturday, the solemnity
whereof was so conspicuous and glorious, as it does, without any other
application, even naturally apply it self, as if it were the most proper
fulfilling of this Prophecy, if either we consider the manner of that return,
or the effect it wrought in the adversaries thereof, which caused in them
extreme indignation and rage, even unto gnawing of their tongues, and gnashing
of their teeth. And yet fear so possessed them, that all their power and
policy could not help.

now to live again in them: they are struck with terror, they are surprised
with fear. For whereas they fondly imagined, that the slaying, or cruel
handling of two or three prime witnesses, making them sure, as dead men, would
so have queld all the rest, that not one durst ever after peep: contrary to
their expectation they see a generation of witnesses to rise up after them, and
so to affright their enemies, as if they saw an apparition of the Ghosts of the
former witnesses returned from the dead. And if a man did now but feel the
pulse of those Prelates in England, who have seen their brethren Prelates,
late of Scotland, to b^ cast out of Church and Country, and utterly cashiered,
without all hope of restitution: should he not (trow you) find the spirit of
trepidation leaping and panting as it were for life, as if their own turn
should be next? But it follows:

Verse 12. And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto them, Come up
hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld
them.

They (that is, the two witnesses thus raised and restored to life, as before)
heard a great voice from heaven. Here Christ, either by an extraordinary voice
inwardly calling, or by the ordinary voice of his word outwardly, calls his
servants to take Sanctuary, as in heaven. Now heaven, here may be taken for
the Church of God hereupon earth. So it (...) often taken in this Book. As in
this Chapter, Verse 19. So Chap. 12.1. the woman there in heaven is the Church
Militant here on earth, as appears plainly in the whole Chapter, as Verse 3.
and 7. and 8. and Chap. 13.6. and in other places. Now the Church of God here
on earth is compared unto, and called Heaven, as in many other respects, so
specially in this, because it is holy and pure, being purged, both for
Doctrine, and Discipline, from all damnable Heresies and errors in faith, and
from the vain Inventions and Traditions of men in the worship of God, Revel.
14.4.
following the Lamb whithersoever he goes, that is, in all things obeying
Christ, and observing his Ordinances, and subjecting their souls and
consciences to none other King, but only Christ.

They from this Heaven, hear a great voice: this is Christ's voice in his word,
calling his witnesses from having any more to do with the Beast, and his
brood, having sealed this their testimony with their blood, which the Beast
has sucked and drunk up. So as he now being found to be incorrigible, and
incurable, so as he grows worse and worse, is to be utterly abandoned. As the
Lord says in Jeremy, Ier. 51.6.45
Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul: be not cut
off in her iniquity: for this is the time of the Lords vengeance, he will
render unto her a recompense. And the reason of Gods peoples thus abandoning of
Babylon, is rendered, Verse 9. Verse 9.
We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her, and let us
go every one into his own Country: for her judgment reaches up to heaven,
and is lifted up even to the skies. And the like warning God gives to his
people ( Revel. 18.4.) concerning the spiritual Babylon, where John says, I
heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her my people, that ye be
not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues: for her sins
have reached unto heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities. So here, the
witnesses hear a great voice from heaven, saying, Come up hither; as much to
say, as, Have no more to do with Babylon, nor with the Beast and his members,
who will hear no reason, but have now filled up the measure of their cruelty,
not only to you, but to all my witnesses that went before you, so as now there
is no more hope of them, 2 Kings 17. See also 2 Chronicles 36.16.
no remedy for them, being like those incorrigible and obstinate revolted
Tribes of Israel, or like the Jews, that persecuted my Apostles, and Acts 13.46.
drove them away to the Gentiles: therefore come out from among them, admonish
them no more, but come up hither, keep you close to my Church, which I have
altogether purged and purified from the dregs of Babylon, and there only hold
your communion. Come up hither.

And (as it follows) they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies
beheld them. We read, that Elias was carried up to heaven in a fiery Chariot.
And Christ ascended up to Heaven in a cloud. Here these witnesses ascend up to
heaven in a cloud. But to Heaven (as before is showed) namely, from their
enemies to take Sanctuary as in the Church of God here on earth; it being
compared to a high and holy Mountain, to which we must ascend. So as this
ascending in a cloud, and that in the enemies view, sets forth the admirable
providence of God, who will miraculously make his Church a sure and safe
Sanctuary (as Heaven) to his persecuted ones under this Trumpet, from the power
and fury of their enemies; who may behold them afar off, but are not able any
more to touch them, for they are now out of their reach, as being in Heaven.
For in this Trumpet, God is preparing a way to the seventh, and last Trumpet,
wherein he will take full vengeance upon Babylon. And therefore before the
storm come, God has a hiding place, to secure his. As he says in Esaias, Esaias
4.5, 6.
The Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Sion, and upon her
assemblies, a Cloud and Smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by
night; for upon all the glory shall be a defense. And there shall be a
Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a place of
refuge, and for a covert from storm, and from rain. Exodus 12.
Thus the Lord did, when he was about to destroy the firstborn of Egypt; he
shut up his people in their houses, sprinkling them with the blood of the
Paschall Lamb, Exodus 13. and 14.
that the Avenger should not touch them. And when the Egyptian host pursued
them as far as the Red Sea, the Lord separated them by the pillar of a Cloud
by day, and of fire by night, until he had overwhelmed the Host in the Sea.
And when he was about to destroy Sodom, he first separates Lot from among
them. So before he destroy Babylon, he Revel. 18.4. etc.
calls his people out of her, and then quickly after in the same Chapter follows
her ruin, and desolation. So here, the Lord calling his witnesses away, and
they ascending up to their Sanctuary in a cloud in the fight of their enemies,
it is a sure and certain sign, and immediate forerunner of the destruction of
this Babylon, that great City, which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt.
And it is very remarkable, that before the destruction of all these three,
Sodom, Egypt, and Babylon, the Lord does immediately before separate his
people, and provide a Sanctuary for them. Yea, not long before the utter and
final Josephus, Of the wars of the Jews.
destruction of Jerusalem, (which was once Gods true Church, but now was become
the Synagogue of Murderers, and Persecutors of Christ, and his Saints) there
was a voice heard in the Temple, as from Heaven, Migremus hinc, Let us depart
hence: whereby Gods small remnant yet there, being warned, presently fled to
Pella, a Coast-Citie in Judea, and not long after followed the sacking and
burning of the City and Temple, with the inhabitants therein. Thus by these
many famous examples we may clearly see what God is now about in this Trumpet
to do, when he calls away his Servants out of Babylon, and Egypt, and Sodom,
and the Synagogue of Antichrist, and puts them in a safe Sanctuary, even
because he will speedily bring destruction upon those his enemies.

It follows, Verse 13. Verse 13.
And the same hour was there a great Earthquake, and the tenth part of the
City fell, and in the Earthquake were slain of men seven thousand, and the
remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of Heaven. See here, no
sooner have the witnesses taken Sanctuary, but by and by, even the same hour,
there is a great Earthquake. Now though there have been in the World (and still
fall out) sundry great Earthquakes in diverse Countries, as in Asia, and other
places: yet in this place, under this Trumpet, this great Earthquake here is
not to be taken literally, no more then heaven in the former Verse, for the
place of the highest heaven. But the great Earthquake here is to be understood
of the great and terrible shaking of the Kingdoms of the earth under the sound
of this Trumpet, as namely by great Commotions, Wars, and the like, especially
in Christendom, throughout the Kingdom of the Beast. And when was
Christendom ever more embroyled in wars, then at this day? But here it is
said, that the tenth part of the City fell. This is joined to the former, as
an effect of this great Earthquake. First, what is meant by the City here?
Surely that great City, mentioned, V. 8. Which we have before described; even
the Kingdom of the Beast. And still all the plagues and woes, which both the
Trumpets sound forth, and the seven Vialls power out, fall upon the Beast, and
his Kingdom. So as there is no questi^n, but this City here is that great
City, Antichrists large Kingdom. And what is meant by the tenth part of the
City? For resolution hereof, we read, that the Chap. 17.7.
Beast with seven heads has ten horns. And these Verse 12.
ten horns are said to be ten Kings. These ten Kings are said to be the ten
horns, because they are the strength of the Beast. And the ten Kings have
their ten Kingdoms, which make up the Beasts Kingdom, or his great City. Now
what Kingdoms are those, which are said to be of this great body of this great
City? Surely those, which do admit, and maintain the Papal power. The
Papal power is maintained by Civil States or Kingdoms two ways. Either when
they directly and professedly subject their Thrones and Crowns to the Pope, as
to the Head of the Church, by virtue of which title he arrogates to himself a
Supreme power over Kings and Princes (which is to 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
exalt himself above all that is called God) to depose, and dispose at his
pleasure: or when they do it only implicitly, or by some privy compact or
league, or otherwise, by admitting in their Kingdoms the Popes Hierarchy (for
the Hierarchy is merely Papal, where ever it be erected) which Hierarchy
consisting in the Prelates, as it is in it self a proper and principal member
and prop of his Kingdom: So it is a mighty and maine instrument of bringing
into Subjection to the Pope those Kingdoms and people, wherein, and over whom
they are exalted in their Episcopal Thrones, as they call them. And although
in a Civil Kingdom or State, where the Gospel is professed, and the Popes
Supremacy dis^lamed, and the jurisdiction of Prelates by Law limited, as being
of humane institution merely, and not by divine authority, Prelates, when they
are pinched, and held close to it, may perhaps pull in their horns, and
arrogate no more unto themselves, then the Laws of the Land, or pleasure of the
Prince do allow unto them: yet when their inbred pride and ambition (an
inseparable accident, or rather essential quality of a Prelate) finds
opportunity, meeting with a debonaire and benign Prince, into whose gentle
breast they can easily insinuate themselves, and by their dexterity in the art
of flattery, and nimblenesse of tongue and wit, persuade and work upon his
sweet nature so, as to draw it to conceive a reverend opinion of their
counterfeit sanctity, which they set out in a goodly garb of their
superstitious guises in their will worship, and by this means to a credulity in
believing all to be Gospel, which they say: as for the purpose, that they are
the true Church; that they have a power to ordain Ceremonies in the Church:
that Christ ordained them to be his Reprinted Conference, p. 200. 210. 211
Viceroys: that they are the only Judges in controversies of faith: that
Princes must leave all government of the Church to them, as the sole Fathers
thereof: and such like Prelaticall Principles, which are not to be found in
rerum natura, as they beg: when once they have obtained credit to these things,
how do they then bestir themselves, especially where a pragmaticall pate, and
the Metropolitan Chair meet together? Then, what Laws of the Kingdom shall bind
them? Who shall dare to control them? If Parliaments (whose Laws they break
as straws) offer to meddle with them, presently they must be dissolved, and
with their good will there shall never be Parliament more. And in fine, they
grow to that height of insolency, that their mere lust must be a Law, as all
their practices proclaim. Reprinted Conference, p. 338. 376. etc.
Nor do their practices only overthrow all true religion, but they come to
make open profession, that the religion and faith of Prelaticall Protestant
Churches, and by name of that of England, is one and the same with that of
Rome, and the Church of England one and the same with that of Rome, with many
such like bold assertions, all which tend to make a reconciliation and a
reunion with Rome, to whom al Prelaticall Churches in the World (and they
allow no other Churches for true, but only the Prelaticall) do make up one
entire Catholic Church. Now all these being summed up together, what do they
amount unto, but this, that all Prelaticall Churches hold with Rome, as members
of the same Catholic body, and the Pope being the Head of this body, at least
Page 183. 184.
ordine primus, which the Prelate says is necessary: Ergo, all Prelaticall
Churches are members of that Church, whereof the Pope is the Head, or at least
ordine primus, and consequently all Civil Kingdoms and States, where the
Prelacie or Hierarchy has got any footing, and much more where it has gotten
head, must be a member thereof. Now this being so (as so it is) the way is now
made plain, to come to know what is meant by the fall of the tenth part of the
City. What is it, but the fall of one of the ten Kingdoms from the Pope,
which are the ten horns of his Hierarchy, in the time of this sixth Trumpet?
But where shall we find such a Kingdom, as was one of the ten horns of the
Beast, and now broken off and fallen from that great head? Where? What say you
to the Church of Scotland? Had not the Prelates there thrown down to the
ground Christ's throne, and consequently with it, the Kings Throne, his
Vicegerent, and in stead thereof mounted aloft the Throne and Kingdom of the
Beast, with their Tyrannical and lawless Government? But now we see the
Beasts Throne in that Kingdom dismounted. For now the Prelates with their
Hierarchy are there cashiered. And thus the tenth part of the City is fallen.
But what was the occasion of this great fall? Surely, Pride will have a fall.
The Prelates intolerable insolency and unsufferable Tyranny did cause it.
Which makes me remember a notable saying, or I may call it rather a prophecy,
of a Mr. Throgmorton.
godly Minister late of London. As (said he) nothing cures the biting of the
Scorpion, but the oil of the Scorpion: So nothing will cure Popery, but
Popery. And this was here verified. What cured the Popery, which the Prelacie
had brought and set up in Scotland, but their extreme haste, and mad zeal to
finish the building up of Rome in one day? To this purpose I remember an other
usual saying of another Minister also late of London, who when any spoke of a
bad, or mad Prelate, he would still say, The worse, the better, and the better
the worse. His meaning was, that the worse the Bishops grew, and the more
insolent, and tyrannical, the more they did hasten the fall of their proud
Hierarchy. As Christ said to the Pharisees, Fill ye up the measure of your
Fathers. As the people of God could not come to their promised inheritance,
till the Genesis 15 16.
sins of the Amonites were grown to their full. And the Revel. 14.18, 19.
Angel thrust not his sickle into the earth, to gather the Vine thereof, to
cast it into the great Winepresse of the wrath of God, till the clusters were
ripe. And now in Scotland the clusters of the Deuteronomy. 32.
Vine of Sodom were grown ripe, and so they are cut down. And thus the tenth
part of the City is fallen, thus the Beast has lost one of his ten horns. And
to conclude this, The immediate isntrumental cause of this fall, was the
Earthquake. And an Earthquake (we know) is the immediate work of God alone.
So as this shows unto us, that it was Gods own hand and work principally,
that did overthrow this tenth part of the City, and Kingdom of the Beast. For
it was a building too deep-founded in the earth, for man's either power to
overturn it, or policy to undermine it. And therefore let all the glory be
given to God alone.

It follows: And in the Earthquake were slain of men seven thousand. We
showed before, that an Earthquake may be taken tropically for some civil
Commotion in a State, as of late in the state of Scotland, when all stood up as
one entire body to vindicate their liberty from the Beasts Tyranny, which the
Prelates did exercise upon the people; so as the issue hereof proved to be the
fall of the tenth part of the City, or Kingdom of the Beast, in Scotlands
falling quite off from the Papal Hierarchy. Now these words [And in the
Earthquake were slain of men seven thousand] have reference to the same
Earthquake Objection.
. But no men were slain in that Scotland Earthquake: and here seven thousand
men are said to be slain. It Is true. But as the Earthquake is taken
tropically, so also the slaying here; as we spoke before of a slaying of the
two witnesses, in a civil respect, or in a figure: So here, by slaying, we
understand a ceasing of a thing to be that, which it was before. As a man is
said to be Romans 6.2.
dead to sin, because he no longer lives the life of sin. Now for the seven
thousand here slain in the Earthquake, seven, we know, is a perfect number, and
often comprehends a whole society, or all of such a Profession, or quality, in
the same place, or Country. As the Chap. 1. and 2.
seven Churches, the seven Stars, the seven Candlesticks, comprehending all the
Churches and Ministers in Asia the less. So 1 King. 19.18.
seven thousand men were reserved of God in Israel, even all those who did not
bow to Baal. And so here seven thousand may comprehend all those, who in the
said Earthquake in Scotland were slain, that is, were cast out of their
places, and so ceased to be that, which they were before, and those were the
Prelates, with all their Officers, and train, even the whole Hierarchy. And
the word (...) in the text, is not altogether to be slighted; for it signifies
not only names, but men of fame and Genesis 6 4.
renown, such as were the Giants and Tyrants of old, and those Genesis 11.4.
Babel-builders, who would get them a Name by building that Tower. And such are
those men we speak of, these Giants, Tyrants, Babel-builders, they are (...),
or, (...), men of Renown, terrible men, yea, not only the Lord-prelates
themselves, but their whole retinue, for not a Pursuivant and Apparitor, and
the least Boy in their Kitchen, but he is a mickle man. Well, all these (...),
even seven thousand, the whole generation of them in Scotland is slain in that
Earthquake, that is, utterly cast out as dead men. For still (I say) these
plagues fall only on them that have the Beasts mark, or the number of his
Name, as the Prelates, and their followers. And if any here stand strictly upon
the just Number of seven thousand, I answer, whether there were more of them,
or whether fewer, the Number of seven thousand being a perfect and complete
number, is sufficient to comprehend all of that rank in that Country. This
number here being like that, Chap. 9.16. an Army of Horsemen of two hundred
thousand thousand. Which number comprehends all those in the Armies, though
they were by many degrees short of that huge number, as before. And so here.

It follows hereupon: That the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the
God of Heaven. The remnant, whether the whole people in that tenth part (as
aforesaid) or whether those that were a kind of Retainers, or favorers, or
parties siding with the Prelates faction, or altogether, they were struck with
fear, as beholding the Almighty power of God in the effecting of that great
and admirable work, and thereupon gave glory to the God of Heaven. I will
conclude this with that of David: Psalm. 64.7, 8, 9, 10.
But God shall shoot at them with an arrow, suddenly shall they be wounded. So
they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves: all that see them,
shall flee away. And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God:
for they shall ^isely consider of his doing. The righteous shall be glad in the
Lord, and shall trust in him: and all the upright in heart shall glory. Even
so, Amen.

Now a word of the next Trumpet, the seventh, or last. But by the way we find
these words; Verse 14.
The second woe is past: and behold the third woe comes quickly. Chap. 18.13.
We find three woes, woe, woe, woe. The first woe belongs to the fifth
Trumpet: as Chapter 9.12. the second woe to the sixth: and the third woe to the
seventh. So as the sixth Trumpet being ended, it is said here, The second ^oe is
past: and the seventh Trumpet now following, is it added; And behold the third
woe comes quickly. That is, the seventh Trumpet comes quickly, bringing its
woe with it to the Beast and his Kingdom.

The seventh and last Trumpet.

Verse 15.
And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying,
The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever, etc.

This seventh Trumpet, as it brings woe, even the last woe, that is utter
ruin and destruction to the Beast and his Kingdom, to Antichrist, the Whore
of Babylon, that great Ver. 8. and Chap. 17.18.
City, and to the whole Hierarchy, where ever it be in any part, or Kingdom
of the World: so it brings great joy and triumph to all the people of God under
the Sun. This is that great voice from Heaven, yea great voices, that is,
general acclamations of the whole Church of Christ in all places (which is
here called Heaven, as Verse 12.
before) Saying, The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our
Lord, even of God the Father, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever
and ever. That is, when this Trumpet shall sound (which shall be quickly, as V.
14.) all the Kingdoms of the World shall consent to the rooting out of
Antichrist and his kingdom, they shall cast down his Throne which is exalted
in and by the Hierarchy, and his whole Hierarchy shall they cast out, and
shall set up Christ's throne over them; and shall subject the Kingdoms to
Christ's Government, in submitting and conforming to his Doctrine, and
Discipline, according to his Word. For till they do this, so long as they
uphold and take part with the Beast, in admitting and mayntaining his
Hierarchy in their Dominions, they Chap. 17.13.
give their strength and power unto the Beast, and subject their Kingdoms unto
him, making war against the Lamb Jesus Christ, and so their Kingdoms the
while, are not Christ's Kingdoms, but Antichrists rather. A thing well to be
considered of Christian Kings and Princes, and States. But when this seventh
Trumpet shall sound (which will be shortly, if not rather already begun)
then is that time fulfilled, which was forelimited of GOD, when they, even the
ten Kings, to wit, all Christian Kings and States, which before took part with
the Beast, against the Lamb, even Chap. 17.16, 17.
these shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat
her flesh, and burn her with fire. For God has put in their hearts to fulfill
his will, and to agree, and give their Kingdom unto the Beast, until the words
of God shall be fulfilled. And although this may seem strange and almost
incredible to man's reason and apprehension: yet God shall as certainly bring it
to pass, as his Word has said it. And that we might not be diffident herein,
God has given us a famous and remarkable instance, and as it were a sensible
taste hereof, in that late glorious work of his in the Kingdom of Scotland
(which we noted before) in throwing down that proud Antichristian throne of the
Beast, which the Prelates thought impossible to be done, and which seemed at
first but as a Psalm. 126.1.
dream, even to Gods people, when the Lord brought again the captivity of his
Sion in that Land in so good a measure begun: whereas now that outcast
Hierarchy has as little hope ever to be restored, as in their prosperity
they had fear or doubt ever to be so cast out. Yet we see it with our eyes,
that God has brought to pass this great thing. And shall we doubt of the
rest, when he has given us such a sure earnest of his never failing word, and
of his invincible power? He that has pulled off one of the the Beasts horns,
shall shortly break off all his horns; as the Lord says, Psalm. 75.10.
All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off: but the horns of the
righteous shall be exalted. And then, then (I say) when the Kingdom of the
Beast, that Whore (which yet desperately triumphs in the confidence of her
stately Babylon, Chap. 18.7.
sitting in her throne, and saying in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no
widow, and shall see no sorrow) shall be destroyed Verse 8.
whose plagues shall come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine, when she
shall be utterly burnt with fire; for strong is the Lord who judges her: and
so, when all the Kingdoms aforesaid shall resume their power and strength from
the Beast, Esop and Horace.
and leave him naked, (as the Birds did the Crow, when each bird took his own
feather, wherewith the Crow had pranked himself, exalting himself above his
fellows;) and when they shall submit their Scepters unto Jesus Christ, by
receiving his government over them, as aforesaid: then their Kingdoms become
the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and
ever.

But we find, Chap. 18.9. how the Kings of the earth, who have committed
fornication, and lived deliciously with the Whore of Babylon, seeing her ruin,
shall bewail her, and lament for her, etc. and yet Chap. 17. that the ten
horns, the ten Kings, that gave their power and Kingdoms to the Beast, shall
hate the Whore, and make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire. These two places seem to contradict one another. But being
rightly understood, there is no contradiction. For first, most sure it is, that
the ten Kings aforesaid shall hate the Whore, and be the instruments of her
desolation. God will surely bring his word to pass. But yet some of those
Kings may at first be brought to it against their wills, or with an ill will,
having been formerly so much enamoured on the gay painted Whore, and made
drunk with the wine of her fornication. We see, those two milch-kine of the
Philistines by a strange instinct carried God's Ark to his place, yet lowed all
the way after their Calves (1 Samuel 6.) So the Lord will have his work done upon
the whore, though some of the chief instruments may have still a yearning of
affection after the Whore, for old acquaintance sake. Yet, though some, for
their own persons may do this for a time, and because the Whore falls with her
goodly Babylon notwithstanding, because the Kings alone shall not make Babylon
desolate, but their Kingdoms, to wit, their people taken altogether: therefore
the particular pity of some for a time shall not hinder the general hatred of
the Whore, and so the Kingdoms of this World mainly and universally shall
become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ. And this making desolate of
the Whore by the Kings and their people, shall be with such violence of
passion, and zeal, which God shall kindle in their hearts and breasts, as when
it is done, they shall stand amazed to behold the smoke of her burning, and
spend some human compassion and pity upon those terrible and sudden
desolations. Even as Titus, that noble Roman General, when through the
obdurate obstinacy of the Jews in their extreme misery, his soldiers were so
enraged, that not only the City Jerusalem, but the most beautiful Temple it
self were set on fire, he beholding it, wept over it, to see such a goodly
and glorious building so miserably destroyed: the like compassion may even
those Kings have, in weeping over Babylon, when they shall behold the ruins
thereof, wherein themselves notwithstanding, with their people, were the chief
Actors. Thus the same Kings, whom the Lord shall employ in the making desolate
of Babylon, may be moved with humane compassion, when they behold even those
ruins, which themselves by divine instigation have made. And as the same
Titus, though he cried to his Soldiers to save that glorious Monument, the
Temple, and not to burn it, and seeing it notwithstanding all on a flame, cried
out the more vehemently to quench it, but could not prevail to rescue it: So
the Kings of the earth, when they shall see the smoke of Babylons burning, and
shall thereupon be moved to lament her, saying, Alas, Alas, that great Citiy
Babylon, that mighty City: yet such is the Lords fury kindled against her,
that they shall not be able with all their power, though they would never so
fain, to rescue her out of the flames. For the Lord will have it so; and
therefore as he has put in their minds to fulfill his will in giving their
strength and Kingdom to the Beast, until the words of God be fulfilled: So,
when the words of God shall be fulfilled, he will also put in their minds, to
fulfill his will, in the utter destruction of Babylon. And from this time Christ
shall reign for evermore over his people, when the usurping Beast, with all his
power shall be put down, and so when all Kings, Princes and States shall submit
their Scepters to Christ's authority, as before is showed.

Then shall be great joy, and thanksgiving in the Church, as Verse 16.17: and
in the end of this last Trumpet (which how long it shall sound, and the
sounding thereof last, he only knows, Acts 1.7. Matthew. 24 36.
who has reserved it in his own breast) shall come the general judgment of
quick and dead, wherein God shall power wrath upon his wrathful enemies, and
shall reward all his faithful servants, as Verse 18. Now there be sundry other
things very mystical and dark, which seem to come under the time of this
last Trumpet, as (besides the remainder of this Chapter, Verse 19. which gives
some light of the general conversion of the Jews) the whole twentieth Chapter
of this Book: but because they be very obscure, and will require longer time
and stronger Prayers for assisting and illuminating grace in the opening of
them: therefore I will here put an end for the present, till it shall please
God to give a further opportunity. In the mean time, Chap. 11.17.
We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art and wast, and art to come,
because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and have reigned. Even so,
AMEN.


