By Reason of the DISTRACTION that is in The Roman Empire, These be Delivered
Especially to the Emperor, and then also to all other Potentates, Kings,
Princes, Rulers, Governors, and Magistrates, in all Europe; Who ought to
consider, according to Conscience, what their Office and Place is; and not to
Rule, Judge, and Domineere, without Righteousness, or against GOD: as has been
done for a long while

By the workings of Satan in this false Jerusalem: and yet is still so done
more and more apparently.

Printed in the Year. MDCXLVIII.

THere are many within and without the Roman Empire, who ascribe these times of
distractions, desolations, and utter destructions of Countries and of mankind,
both in soul and body, according to their own affections; and lay the fault
thereof sometime upon this, sometime upon that cause, and every one that is
most engaged and interessed would shift the blame from themselves; but very few
hitherto have been found who have discovered the true principal ground from
whence these distractions took their original at the beginning, and have broken
forth in such a consuming fire of the anger of God, that people fall into the
hands, and upon the swords of one another.

For they are but Petitiones principii, to alledg one while that the fault is
in the contrariety of opinions in Religion, and the various misunderstandings
about reconciliation of matters in Religion; another while, that the fault is
in the exorbitancy of this or that person, or in the too greedy desire of some
to domineer and aspire to great Dominion: and such seeming pretenses they
propound to be the causes of it. But the question still remains to be made,
whence the particular causes of the strife about opinions in Religion, of that
exorbitancy, insolency, and greedy desire to domineer, and make all others
servants and slaves to them, has its original ground? Out of what evil Well or
Fountain do these deadly poisonous streams break forth and so mightily prevail,
to produce such destruction and desolation so powerfully; and who, among the
children of men, is the chief cause thereof?

Here, if the Emperor in particular, because of the distractions in Germany,
and every one else, rightly consider and weigh the cause in their hearts and
consciences, according to the Testimony of God, and the power, and the truth of
his Word, without the pre-imagined conceits and humane inventions, they shall
find no other fundamental cause but this, That the spiritual Clergy, who
usurpedly set up and institute themselves, and elect and choose themselves to
be such, are the chief Cause of these Distractions and Confusions in all
Nations.

FOr after they had forsaken the Covenant of the second or New Testament, Joh
12.
[which teacheth] to walk in the Light according to the Law of the Spirit,
which makes alive in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.
they blasphemed the way of Truth, 2 Pet. 2. Phil. 3 1 Cor. 3.11 1 John 1.24 1 Timothy 2 Hos. 8.10, 12
rent and separated themselves with Schi^^^ and Divisions, and so are not
united in God; and they being without the spiritual Communion which the true
faithful Believers (through the only Mediator Jesus Christ) should have with
God, every one of them, some here, some there, according to their own
pleasures, have erected or congregated Churches and built Altars of
Abominations, Jer. 11.13. whereby people, in the inward ground of their Hearts
or Consciences, Mat. 24 Ephesians. 4. Col. 3 Romans 16. Psa. 12.80 1 Pet. 5. Eze. 34.
Jer. 8.12 14.23. Is. 29
by breaking the bands of the Peace and of the Love of God, have separated from
one another, whereby the vineyard of the Lord must needs come to be destroyed;
whereupon then all the flocks were scattered in themselves by one another and
by the faith or belief which they have covenanted and sworn to keep, are made a
prey to people void of Consciences, no better then wild Beasts, Murderers,
and Tyrants, for the disagreeing, distracted, and confounded Contentions of the
Pastors and Hirelings, who only serve the world and their own bellies, 1 Timothy
6. Joh. 10. 1 John 4 Phil. 3. To. 16. 2 Pet. 2 Psa. 12.14. 59. Col. 2.
and seduce many innocent hearts with sweet words and pleasing Sermons: And now
the people, who walk in their destructive ways, in Error and Darkness of
Conscience, Ephesians. 4.5. with Hypocritical works, which themselves have contrived
in their reason, 2 Pet. 2. according to the Commandments and Ordinances of Men,
will make as if themselves were excellent, honest, pious, holy and righteous.
Man 7.15, 23.

Hereby it is further made known and discovered, 2 Cor. 11 Luke 17 2 Cor. 3.4 1
Cor. 4 Romans 1 Psa. 12 2 Timothy 3 2 Pet. 2 Mat. 24 Mark 13 1 Cor. 6 Epist. Jude.
Romans 3.5, 6 Col. 3 Rev. 18 Is. 13.34.56
that it might be considered, after what manner Satan has changed himself into
an Angel of Light, and has clothed himself with a false show, and in and by
them has darkened the Kingdom of God in the hearts and souls of other men, and
wholly abrogated the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. And on the contrary has renewed
and set up his own Kingdom, the Kingdom of Pride, Subtilty, Craft, Lying,
Covetousness, Wrath, Contention, Strife, Murder, Hatred, Malice, Envy, and
Eternal Death in the sinful birth of the Humane Nature; in that they pretend as
if they in their contentious and confused doings, had full power of the Keys,
or Ju^ Divinum over Heaven, to bring the old Adam thither by their word and
promise, where with they had allured the wicked souls. to them; whereupon the
abomination of desolation is come into the holy place, viz. into the Humane
Soul, wherein there should be a Temple or habitation of God built and set up:
from whence, such hellish fruits of sinful actions of the old birth have
changed it into a Cage of Devils, of all unelean spirits and hateful birds
which have broke forth from thence, and so have gotten the opper hand in this
world, as is manifest, Mat. 24 Isa. 42.43 2 Timothy 3 Luke 17.18 Mat. 24. Ro^. 1.
Is. 1.3 5.59 4 Esd. 5, 6, 7 8, 9.14, 15, 16 Jer. 7.8.9.18 2 Timothy 4 Mat. 24 Mark
13 Zech. 13 Epist. Jude. 2 Pet. 2 Jer. 5.23 Ephesians. 4 Mark 13 1 Timothy 1.6
and as clear as the Noon day, and long ago foretold by the holy Scripture, and
declared by the Word of God, viz. That in these last days horrible times shall
come, wherein there shall be neither Faith, Love, nor Righteousness to be
found, but Oppression, Mischief, all kinds of malice and wickedness,
undermining crafty cunning subtilty and unrighteousness shall get the upper
hand among the children of men, and destroying works of iniquity shall get to
the highest pitch, which yet the Teachers in the outward Temple or in Babel do
boast in, saying, here is Christ, or there he is: so that if it were possible
for the Devil, that arch enemy, hereby to seduce the Elect of God, and allure
them to all wickedness, they might be constrained to do evil.

Now because every-unclean spirit of his Crew and Sect, who depend on him, or
are addicted to his external matters, is persuaded and flattereth himself, as
if, one in this way, another in that way among them, being unregenerated in the
spirit of his mind, do but use their Ceremonies, or follow their Church way,
are true Christians: and then according to their Scholastic doings, people
think themselves bound to maintain their way against all other, by the sword:
From thence it is come to pass, Rev. 16. Gal. 5 4 Esd. 5.9.15.16
that for these many years the inward fire of the angry wrath of God has been
stirred up and kindled in the hearts of those men by the contentions,
disputations, and bitter croakings of Frogs; whereby one People, one Kingdom,
County and City so furiously burn in outward strife and contention, and rise up
against another; 2 Chro. 15 1 Cor. 3. Isa. 42.57. Mat. 13. Tit. 1 2 Timothy 2.
J^^. 3.4. 1 Cor. 4 Ephesians. 4 Heb. 10. Col. 1.3 Mat. 5. Tit. 2.3. Psa. 10
36.68.80.83 94. Ephesians. 4 Romans 1.3 These. ^ 2 Timothy 2 1 John 3.
and yet they all boast and proclaim, that they do it to defend and protect
their Religion, and the glory, and name of God therein, and for the rooting out
of wickedness, which makes Satan now laugh in his sleeve, to see that he has
set those together by the ears that boast themselves for Christians, in such an
unchristian, and worse them bestial hostility, for which they have not the
least precept, example, or testimony from Christ, nor his Apostles, or
Disciples, and so put them beside the Kingdom of Grace which should be in their
hearts, consisting in Faith, Love, Peace, and Unity, Truth, Mercy, and
Righteousness. Thus subtly, under color of an angry zeal and imagination, as
if they did God good service thereby in his Kingdom, he sets up Wrath,
Anger, Enmity, Pride, Covetousness, Envy, Unrighteousness, and Unmercifulness;
and so by strong delusions hathled them captive, and entangled them in his
fetters and chains, and compelled them to do according to his will and meaning,
and that which is according to his disposition and nature; which is indeed the
abomination of desolation, Mat. ^4. Mark 13. Dan. 8.9.
which is now set up in the holy place by the departing and falling away from
Christ; from hence the abomination is grown, which is now made manifest and
risible to the eyes of the whole world.

For all such things done by this or the other party about the outward
distractions, 2 Chronicles. 15 4 Esd. 9.15. Ior. 30. Syra. 15.1 Ioh. 3.4. Rev.
9.17.20 Ioh. 8. Ephesians. 4 5. Psalm. 36.58.59.64.73 141. 2 Timothy 4. John. 16. Neh. 3.
Zep. 3. Ier. 2.7. Zach. 11. Ps. 44.74 Ezekiel. 22. Ier. 5.8.18.23. Romans 1. Acts
20. Ezekiel. 6.7.8 9.13. Psa. 5.55.58. Gal. 5 1 John 4. Psalm 144. 1 Cor. 13. Luke
6.11. Psalm 12.49.109. I am. 2.3 4.5 Ephos. 5. 1 John 3. Genesis 4. Rev. 16.19.
Hebr. 4.10 Romans ^.14.
or customary committing of wickedness, whereby mankind is oppressed,
suppressed, tormented, vexed, wasted, desolated and destroyed both in soul and
body: These are not the works of God, who is the fountain of all goodness, and
is love it self; but they are the fruits of the bottomless pit, and works of
the Devil, who is a liar and a murderer from the beginning, and the author of
all evil and mischief; who yet under a glorious and holy show, especially in
these whom the world calls spiritual, with a very fine cunning slight of
argument can persuade Kings, Potentates and Magistrates, that they please God,
and do him very acceptable service, when they raise such murdering Massacres,
and bloody Wars; and when disturbances and tumults are made for the upholding
of their unspiritual affairs, though the poor souls thereby come to be torn,
murdered and slain in a cruel manner, Countries and people miserably wasted and
desolated, yea brought to utter destruction: and when once the burning fire is
kindled by their artificial sorcery, and more and more inflamed, then he
knows how to wrest and pervert the holy Scripture cunningly after his lying
manner very peremptorily, and to use and turn it to be a cloak to cover his
abominable unrighteousness, wickedness and knavery; whereas the Scripture does
witness clearly, that the wicked ways of the bloodthirsty and deceitful are an
abomination unto God, and that they are not of God who do not love their
neighbors, and help them in their want, let them boast as much as they will of
God, and of their works, all is false; for though they should suffer their
bodies to be burned, and give all their goods in alms to those of their own
opinion, it is mere hypocrisy: and the works of the desolation of the poor,
needy and afflicted, testify of their malicious, wrathful, envious, bitter and
deceitful hearts, and of their spirit of darkness; and that they are of the
number of Cain, whose works are naught, wicked and abominable, and therefore
they always persecute, destroy and slay their honest brother Abel: But ere long
they shall feel in their hearts the Judgment of the Word of God, which
penetrateth through all things as a sharp two-edged sword, and judges and
reveals the thoughts of man: And in the other world they shall (...) the
sentence of their horrible Judgment; Mat. 7.25.
Depart from me ye evil done, I have not sent you, neither have I known you:
Psalm. 50. Luke 36.12
Also away from the ye enised into everlasting hell fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, ye have eryed Lord, Lord, and have taken my Covenant into
your false mouths, Mat. 7.21.25
and yet you have not done according to my will; for I have been poor, nalied,
hungry, thirsty, sick, in prison, and in misery in my members, and you have not
only not administered to me, Ierem. 30. Amos 5.8. Mich. 3.6.
or helped me, but you have taken away from me that which was mine own, and men
over said me inprison, persecuted hunted, worried and vexed me, and have upheld
your unrighteousness and wicked doings, with the swear and blood of the poor,
James 5.
and have made your selves fat and fair for the day of slanghter, which will
come upon you for these things.

According to this, 2 Pet. 3. Isaia. 3.6.8.9.24. Ierem. 5.7.9.11.14.16. Hosea
4. Collos. 2.
now every one that is subjected under the outward desolation, and incorporated
with at, and is not wilfully hardened and blinded, may very well find, and know
well enough in his heart and conscience, that such abominable and destroying
works of the present desolation cannot be protected in the sight of God, the
righteous Judge, by an imagined absolution, or by some great commendation,
preached in a formons by the unspiritual CLERGY, or spiritual, elected and
chosen by themselves to that office, who teach, that God has service done him
thereby. Heb. 10.12. Mat. 13. Re. 14.15.20. Mala. 4. Epist. Jude. Ephesians. 2. Col.
1 Rev. 19.20 Romans 1. Zeph. 3. John 5. Mat. 13.23. Ezekiel. 13. 2 Pet. 2, Mat. 7.
Mat. 3. Ia. 5 Mich. 3


For in this so long appointed and denounced day of harvest, wherein the
sentence of God shall be revealed, and the books of the consciences of every
one shall be opened, 4. Esdras 6.16. God will send down afar other kind of
Judgment upon the unbelieving and ungodly hypocrites, scorners and despisers,
then the unspiritual or fleshly dreamers expect, who instead of the Kingdom of
Grace, or of the heavenly essentiadity, into which the faithful should be
ingrassed by the redemption of Christ, they have set up and propagated to the
Kingdom of the Devil, and of all disturbance, of anger, contention and
division, of hatred, envy and bitterness by their own appropriated and usurped
authority, which in a proud: sta^^^y manner, Isai 28. they all for their
hypocrisy and lies uphold which Kangdom or darkness they also now will desend and
maintain by those who follow after their destruction in the broad way, and are
bewitched by them and their false spiritual show, wherein they set forth
themselves among them, with the strength of the Land, viz. that which they get
by hook and by crook from the poor people.

But seeing by this so desperate, yea devilish a purpose, Rev. 13. Romans 14.
Dan. ^.7.
the Kingdom of God is not only hindered, which is righteousness, peace, and joy
in the Holy Ghost, on which the universal, temporal and eternal welfare of
mankind does depend; Luke 17. Isai. 49.51 2 Timothy 3.4 Rev. 6. Psalm 12.
but Christ also in his members is put to open shame, about the knowledge and
profession of the Word, or holy Name of God, and they are hated and persecuted
for the truths sake; and for that cause, from the beginning to this time, so
many witnesses of God have been in most lamentable manner condemned and put to
death; and the poor people are not only thus desolated, but by the instigation
of such sorcerers, Ezech. 13
Malachi 3. Every one of whom will preserve and defend his own by that means:
James 2.
they are in many places and Countries most unmercifully, tyrannically, and
almost utterly destroyed, and rooted out with their own sweat and blood, Psa.
52.109
which these filthy men devour and gluttonize withal, 2 Pet. 2.
wherewith they patch and stitch to their Babell those who never desire to
return to God, that they may thereby uphold the Kingdom of darkness, Rev. 16.20
wherein one man is become a Devil to another; Mark 13.
therefore it shall be judged in such a manner, that not one stone of this
false Jerusalem will be left upon another. Mat. 24.

For the day of the Vengeance of God, 2 These. 1. Luke 18.21 Ieramiah 25 1 Cor.
3 Ep. Jude. Psalm 14. Isaiah 52. 2 Cor. 11. Ezekiel 22 Isaiah 28. Rev. 20 Acts 20.
Mat. 7. John 10. Titus 1. Ezekiel. 13 Deu. 1.10.17 Syrach. 10. Mich. 7. Psalm.
58.92. Ier. 5.10. 4 Esd. 11.12.15 Mich. 7.6. Rev. 16.
Isa. 61.63. for the deliverance of his Elect, shall begin or break forth with
the overthrow and destruction of the glorious building of the Pastors or
Shepherds, which every one has heaped to himself, 2 Timothy 4. in his own
Religion, Sect or Schism, 2 Pet. 2. who do nothing but devour the people, to
nourish and maintain themselves; they have a long time blasphemed the Name of
God, as to the redemption of Sion, and have most of all chiefly with-stood the
servants and witnesses thereof for the truths sake, 2 Timothy 3. whom God has a
long time winked at, and their murdering of bodies and souls, which chiefly for
their deceit sake in all places and Countries, has been exceedingly practiced,
and yet have been absolved Ep. Iud. by the false, theevish office of the keys
of those horrible devouring wolves and hirelings, for their bellies sake, their
filthy lucre, a bit of bread, and for a handful of barley.

But being the office of Judgment, Rule and Government here upon earth does nor
belong to man, but to the Lord of Lords, and to God the supreme Judge, Wisdom 6.
And being it does not belong to any Ruler or Magistrate to domineer according
to their own perverse wills and pleasures in the world, therefore it is fit
that the Potentates should know the ways of the Lord, and the Laws and Rights
of their God; as in particular, because of the distractions in Germany, the
Emperor, and all other Potentates, Kings, Princes and Judges, who would avoid
the remaining vials, or woes and plagues of the anger of God, should have long
ago considered what they had to do in these so long continued great miserles
and warlike distractions, Luke 21. Psalm. 2.76. Nahem. 3. Zach. 11. Psalm. 12.94.
Isa. 52. Rev. 20. Ezekiel. 13 1 Timothy 4. 4. Esd. 15.16 2 These. 2. Romans 9.11. Ier.
30.50.51. Isa. 13.14.30.
by which Satan is altogether let loose with raging and raving fury, murdering,
stealing, robbing, kiling, and shedding of blood in the distraction of the
poor, and especially in the oppression of the faithful, concerning whom the
Name of God is blasphemed; they should no longer trust to any of their false
Prophets, who flatter and sooth up every one in their party, Jeremiah 28. and
especially look no longer supersicially with hardened hearts, and blinded eyes
upon the hipocritical cunning slights of Satan, because of the desolation and
fire that has risen from thence, as is manifest in the external distractions,
and horrible ruins of Countries, which have been caused to break forth thus by
the working of the Devil; but they should consider them seriously by entering
deeply into their consciences, that God may not have cause to multiply and
enlarge the misery and stormy tempest of his fiery wrath, according as he has
begun upon him and other Potentates. Psalm 137.

For the false Prophets, Mat. 24.
who from the clear and plain testimonies, which for a long time have been
revealed and brought to light, because of their bewitching Babilonish doings,
Isaiah 47.
should have given place to the Spirit of God, or the Testimony of Jesus Christ
inwardly in themselves, and yet have not grown sober thereby, 2 Timothy 2. Zeph. 1.
nor ever desired to acknowledge their cunning slights and abominations, nor
considered the miserable and deplorable condition which mankind is brought
into, chiefly for their sakes; but moreover do still, according to the working
of the Devil inwardly in them, continually allure, entice, 2 These. 2. Rev. 1.6.
Romans 1. 2 Pet. 3. Mark 13.
and put on people to the furtherance of all mischief and wickedness: These
together with those that uphold such wicked doings with their braneadoes, shall
be sent and thrown into hell, where such disputings and making of parties by
perverting teachings will avail no more the stool or throne of the beast, and
false Prophets. Revel. 16.19, 20.

Whosoever they be that have always contemned and scorned the admonitions,
warnings and threatenings of God, Isaiah 28. Epist. Jude. Mal. 3. 1 These. 5.
Psalm 109. Zeph. 1.3. 2 Pet. 3.5.
and have made a laughing stock of them, and resist God inwardly in their
hearts and consciences, with the sorcery of their false Prophets, and wholly
subject themselves to the Devil, in this ruining desolation, and destroying of
the just, the poor and miserable; they shall have only such a deliverance from
the day of wrath, Romans 1. and from the fiery Judgment thereof, as their fellow
scorners and despisers in former times have had, whom God drowned in the
deluge, and many other ways destroyed them, Genesis 6.7.19.
and cut them off. The people and nations of this present and last world, who
heap sin upon sin, Romans 1. Ier. 7.8. Ezekiel. 8.9. Isaiah. 29. Colloss. 2. Acts
17. 1 Pet. 1.2. Mat. 15.23. Gal. 4. Joh. 4. 1 Timothy 2. Romans 12. Phil. 2. Jer.
23. Isai. 66. Psalm. 51. Isa. 57. Ephesians. 5. 1 Pet. 4. James 4. Ephesians. 2. Epist.
Jude. Syrach. 35. Psalm. 10.72.75 Amos 6.8. Romans 1. Isaiah 8.28. Zeph. 1.3.
Rev. 9.17.20 4 Esd. 5. Isaiah 1.5.29.59. 2 Timothy 3. Mat. 24.
and persevere and go on in their damnable course, for a while hitherto; they
have not deceived God, but themselves, by their outward Church matters or false
worship of God, whereby they would fain he hidden in their flyness, or
abominations from God, who is every where present in Spirit, and is not blind,
nor does regard to be served in a well adorned Temple of stone, or Churches,
according to the accustomed traditions, and invented opinions: For all those
dwell and are in him, who are redeemed by Christ, and are built up and rooted
in him, Col. 1.3. therefore he must not be served superficially and carelessly,
in a show or in a custommary manner; but in the inward ground of the soul the
heart and conscience in spirit and truth, with holy, pure, clean and upright
thoughts, desires and actions, which he himself works by his word, and the
power of his Spirit in the faithful: For he is not a God that is afar off, that
stands in need of a Vicegerent; but he is ever filling heaven and earth, and
dwells by his word in them that are of the contrite and humble spirit of
grace, and loose them the band of darkness, and the snares of death, who are
such as do not purposely resist God, nor knowingly persist and go on in sin:
But to the proud, kist-necked, obstinate, wrathful, envious, covetous and
malicious, who live only according to the will of their flesh, of the world,
and of their reason, after their own lusts and desires, looking after nothing
but their own honor and glory, greatness and profit, and quite forget the
miserable, that lie in the dust and ashes of death; yea daily make it still
worse and worse by using their wicked power to maintain their perverse
Government and vain doings, to the perdition of whole mankind: To such he will
be nothing else but a stone of offense, Romans 9. 1 Pet. 2. and a consuming fire
of eternal burning. Isaiah 33.47.50.65.66. and they shall be swallowed up in
the bottomless pit, from whence such damnable works have proceeded, where it
will avail them but little, that they have prospered in their unrighteousness,
tyranny, pernicious power and authority, to their own perdition and eternal
torment of hell. Psalm 82.

Therefore every one of what state, dignity and authority soever they be, Jer.
5.9. Wisd. 2.12. Isai. 49.60. Isai. 3.42.50 59. 2 Cor. 4.
but especially the Potentates, Rulers, Magistrates, and Officers, who have
authority to rule others according to Conscience, and should be Cherishers and
Nursers of the Church or Congregation which God has purchased with his blood,
Act. 20. and who are not altogether held captive in blindness by the Devil, as
to this horrible distraction, and snailed in the net or caught in his snare,
they ought long ago to have opened the inward Eyes of their Conscience, Ezekiel.
5.6. ^ 9.11.12.14.22.23.36. Col. 3. Ro^. 1. Mat. 24 Ephesians. 5. Luke 19.20 Rev.
6.12.22 Isai. 5. Epist. Jude. Mat. 15. Acts 20. Mark 13. 1 John 1.2.4 Epist.
Jude.
and have had a care sometime to cleanse their hearts chiefly from the inward
abomination, viz. Covetousness, Bravery, Pride, Subtilty, Circumvention, Force,
Injury, Infidelity, Unrighteousness, and all other the works of darkness; from
whence existeth all outward perdition, viz. Robbery, Murder, Theft, for which
nothing but death and the eternal damnation of hell is deserved; that thereby
some may be kept out of Hell, which now stands wide open with its jaws or
soul, and be delivered from the bands of eternal blackness, and so might be
plucked out of the fire, and henceforth not suffer themselves to be tied and
bound by humane Ordinances and Traditions to those men who preach perverse
doctrine, whereby they seduce the whole world, and set themselves up to be the
heads of the Churches among those people who are not of the Congregation of
God, every one promising Heaven to the adherence of their own Sect or Schism,
whereas themselves are but the slaves of perdition. 2 Pet. 2. Ministers or
Servants, 2 Cor. 11. Stewards or Deputies of Satan, 2 These. 2. Math.
3.13.23.24. Joel 2 1 Cor. 15. 1 Pet. 2.4. 1 These. 5. Heb. 7.8.9.10.12.13. Ephesians.
1.5 Col. 1. 1 Cor. 6.7.
But according as every one acknowledges his long-practised wickedness and
abomination, has remorse or repenting sorrow for sins, and misdeeds, and in
the inward ground of his heart or conscience desires to dense himself from
them, to be sober-minded, and henceforth resolves to keep himself merely to
Jesus Christ, the only high Priest, Arch-Shepherd and Bishop of the Soul that
he may attain unto the universal or Catholic union or unity of the Body or
Congregation where Christ only is the head of his Members, whom he has
redeemed with his blood, and delivered from the power of Darkness, and dearly
bought to his eternal Kingdom, 1 Pet. 1.

For the true faithful are not Clergy or Laity, Spiritual or Temporal, after
the manner of the world, pleasing to this or the other party, Romans 1.16.
who by the vanity in their Consciences are severed and departed from God, and
have cut or sent themselves asunder, Hosea 10. Ephesians. 4. 2 Cor. 10 1 Cor. 6 Joh.
16. Ro^. 8 1 Cor. 2.4.11 Ephesians. 4 Col. 2.3 1 Cor. 12.13 Romans 12.13 Joh. 13.15.
But they are all one Spirit with God, according the inward obedience of Faith,
so far as they do not resist him, but overcome themselves; they kill the doings
of the flesh by the power of the Spirit of Christ, and so in the Faith they
bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, and judge all things spiritually: In this
manner the body of Christ should have been edified and built, so that always
one member should feel the sufferings of his neighbors, or suffering
fellow members, by putting in the hearty compassion of the love of God, and
should take care for them, and take pity on their necessities, with all
goodness and well-doing, according to the Gospel of Christ, Rev 10
and not in the manner as hitherto has been (...) in the ^^^^^old Babel, and
as is still practiced more and more by the (...), Jer. 7. 8. ^9 Ezekiel. ^. 14
who according to their Ceremonial Church-^^^^^^, (...) our very steadfastly
(...) and (...) with their hearts to their (...) rough garments Z^^h. ^^ and
hold stiffly to the (...) of their misdeeds; wherewith they (...) worry, and
(...) one another like dogs* 4 Es^^ 9.15 Esa. 10.11.17.55. 56. 68. 7^ Man.
10.11 (...)
Rev. ^1. and devour one another like wild beasts, and persecute one another
with fire and sword, killing and ruining one another* ^^ther other regarding
God in Heaven, nor Righteousness in their damned (...), James 5. (...) th^^
those among them, who are as despised (...) in the dark, Jo^ 12. (...) sheep
scattered among wolves, cannot be known as to the outward (...) and Ceremonies
with which the hypocrites Isa. 1. 9. ^^ Romans 1. Isa. (...) Mat. 5. ^4 ^5. L^.
^. 19
and all the ungodly use to hide, color and (...) their (...) and ungodliness:
but God, who sees in secret, and (...) the hearts and (...), Rev. 2. he
knows them, J^^. 11. 12. 17. 23. and they (...) the light of their (...) of
Faith, their love and righteousness shine forth, as God has bestowed his grace
upon every one, Romans 1^.

5 Romans 1 1 John 3 4 Mat. 23. 24
But the world being so deeply drowned in wickedness, 1 John 5. will only uphold
it self, and its gli^^ering, vain and (...) doings in pomp; and therefore it
will not acknowedg God in those (...) are his, (...): but i^ (...) and
persecuteth them, because they (...) of the world, but expect another world or
kingdom, To^. 2. (...). 2, 3. 5. Heb.10. 11. 12. Col. 1. 3
for an (...) life and happiness* (...) they must (...) be ingrafted through
Christ, and (...) to themselves, 2 Cor. 5. but live to their Faith, H^^. ^. in
Righteousness, which is pleasing to God, Romans 1. 5. 10. Romans 5. 6. 14 Gab. 3.
5. Psa. ^^ Rev. 19. 21
And this is the most (...) Catholic and Apostolic Church, the Spouse and
body of Christ, or the Congregation of God, out of which there is no (...),
Act. 4. to which he (...) or calls all from the beginning of the world, as to
the marriage of the Lamb, or new (...).

And a^ the humane body, except it be a two-headed Monster, cannot have the
lively motion and sensibility of its members from a diverse head; and as a
(...), modest ^ife cannot have the knowledge of another man, then her husband to
whom she is married, wihtout committing adultery; So the true Catholic
Christian Church, or Spouse of Col. ^ John 10 Ephesians. 1. ^
Christ, can have no other visible, or invisible, or Ecclesiastical head,
Church head, or Bridegroom, then only Christ, who is the only Pastor of his
Flock, and Savoiur of his Body, which is the Congregation; and not as absent,
but as present, gives the fullness of his grace, Heb. 1.2.3.4 Ephesians. 3.4 Col. 1.
Rev. 21 1 Cor. 3 Mat. 7.12 ^^ 1 Cor. 5 Rev. 12.20.22.
Joh. 1.7.12.17. 2 Pet. 1. to all his members, both small and great, 1 Cor. 12.
who make themselves partakers of it in the faith, whether they be Kings,
Princes, Teachers or Hearers, who according to the Gospel of Christ, are rooted
and built up in him, 1 Pet. 2. or planted in him as the branch of a vine, which
is not dry and withered, John 15. but brings forth fruit: for every
regenerate, or new man, who walks in the power and spirit of faith, and light
of life, John 3.8.12. and not being dead, Isai. 26.28, he is to do in his
estate, condition, office, and calling, or employment, that which is acceptable
and pleasing unto God, and beneficial and profitable to his neighbors, Mat. 7.
1 Pet. 2 1 Cor. 3.12 Ephesians. 2 1 Cor. 3.6 2 Cor 6 Romans 12. 1 These. 4.5 Isa. 42.48
1 Pet. 2 Mat. 21 Mark. 12
and this is the precious foundation, or comer stone, upon which himself has
built his congregation and all its members; of which Peter and Paul were not
heads, but living stones; and has made it to be a spiritual habitation and
Temple, wherein Christ himself, and not Peter, or any other Minister, member,
or servant, is the bead, but the Lord himself, who dwells in the house, and
rules by his spirit; for he will not give his honor to any other: This
precious comer-stone, the supposed spiritual or Clergy have reseated in their
building, as the Pharisees and Scribes, or Scripture-learned, in former times
did among the Jewish Nation, Psa. 118. and lay another sandy foundation, Lev.
6. 1 Cor. 3. Mat. 7. Acts 20.24. according to their own sense and meaning in
their opinions, in a perverted manner out of themselves, Isa. 28 Epist. Jude.
Jer. 5.7 Rev. 16 Gal. 5 1 Timothy 1.6 Dan. 8.11 Heb. 4. Psa. 10.57.52.75 Isa.
3.29.57 Heb. 11.
upon which every one built to himself a several Church of their own, with a
pompious Crown or dress, that according to their thinking should continue in
this world steadfastly to the end, wherein yet the Devil has set up his
dominion and rule in their Consciences; which building is turned into a Babel,
and a house of consused verbal contentions and disputations, wherein they can
no more understand one another, and now are come to their ruin and perdition:
For there is still another time at hand, Dan. 8.11. in the world, wherein those
that are ceased from the power, havoc, tyranny of the wicked, and especially
those that are gone out from the decent of the false Prophets, and their
murdering souls and bodies, shall be delivered, Ezekiel. 13.22.34. But those who
according to the faith would come to God, and into his eternal Kingdom, Rev. 21
2 Cor. 6 Joh. 1.8.12 Isa. 42.60
or into the glory of the new Jerusalem, they must here be a Temple or
habitation of God; and for their salvation-sake should walk in the light, and
especially have respect to the glory of God, and the universal, temporal, and
eternal welfare of mankind; and in these present distractions do their
endeavor, Romans 9. Isa. 10.28.59.61.62.63 2 Cor. 10. Psa. 48.97 Jer. 10.30 Dan.
7.
that the spoiling destruction may be stayed, and that the righteous may be
delivered. But all Heathens, and Kings, which will not help, and serve, and
administer for God, according to the inward obedience of Faith, that Sion may
be built, they shall perish temporally and eternally, as members of the
abominable and horrible beast; and shall be ruined and utterly destroyed, Isai.
60.

Now if the Emperor chiefly, and all other eminent persons, do seriously and
deeply enter into their hearts and consciences, and so rightly consider the
testimony of God, in discovery of the knowledge of these present modern seducing
doings of Babel, and especially go out from the Idolatry and sorcery of the
Babylonish abomination, under which he with his fellows have committed
spiritual whoredom for a long while, and desist from those deadly damned
purposes, these base, false, pernicious thoughts, yea devilish doings, and
cleanse himself from other works of darkness, for which the wrath of God is
gone forth over all the world, and desire to grow sober minded; and then he and
they may expect grace from God so far as they do so, without any crafty
prevariation, fraud, deceit, or reservation, to which God has a piercing
watchful eye and circumspection, and will not be mocked or deceived in this
business of the suppressing of the faithful ones.

For a civil, or worldly Magistrate, who is ordained from God to rule and
govern, should judge no otherwise but according to Righteousness, for the
welfare of the subjects, and the universal, temporal and eternal welfare of
mankind; and especially as this so long continued desolating great necessity
and misery does require, that the poor and miserable may be delivered from the
power of the oppressors thereby: But not that the Elect of God should be yet
further condemned, judged, and abused, to bring them to temporal and eternal
perdition, as it has been for a long time hitherto, from whence so many great
plagues, lamentation and necessities have arisen in the Roman Empire, and Ruin
been brought upon one Country after another. But if the Emperors and they
should not regard these things, nor consider how God proceeded in former times
against others his fellows, King Pharaoh, and the King of Assyria and Babylon;
where his name was so blasphemed, and his people of Israel so ground, trodden
under-foot, and vexed, who regarded not the mighty arm of the Lord, or the
terrible deeds which God in former times, for that cause, showed upon his
Enemies, neither would they return and regard these threatenings and plagues, or
take them to heart, and consider them: And if he also should slight those
things which hitherto for his purpose against God he has so much experience
of, and felt them by a living knowledge of them, then it is to be feared, that
God will not only make an end of him and them, but that worse things shall
befall him and them, then in former times befell those to whom such deeds were
not so known and testified to, as they have bin to him; for God will not have
his admonitions, warnings and threatenings slightly passed over, though he be
long suffering, and of great patience, for afterward there will be no
deliverance out of his hand.

Therefore if the Emperor with his Reformation, or afflicting of consciences in
all places and Counties, does not leave it off and give it over, and will not
let those Captives or prisoners go free, which are already under the Babylonian
yoke and abomination, and let every one enjoy the liberty of his conscience,
and does not from the inward ground of his heart put away the devilish doings
and practices of the forcerers the false Prophets, which they entice him to, or
else God will destroy all that has remained and bin hither to saved and
preserved, and will proceed still further against them, and must be revenged on
him and his fellows, and bring those things upon his own head, both in soul and
body, which he will have cause to repent of here in this life, and in the other
Eternal.

Given

According to the Council of the Lord, Isaiah 8.30. Mat. 11. 1 Cor. 1.15. Psalm.
89.119. Isa. 5.51.59. Wisdom 5. Dan. 7.12.
and according to the mystery of the hidden Wisdom of God, and his Eternal
Divine Righteousness, according to which, for the deliverance of his Elect, he
willbring his Enemies, the opposers to an end. 2 These. 1.2. Luke 17.18.21. I^el
83.

FINIS.

