AN INDIVIDUAL LETTER To every man that calls himself a Minister of JESUS
CHRIST.

Penned more particularly for Mr. Christopher Love, upon some Observations from
his Sermon, preached Jan. 29. 1644. at Windsor, and re-preached at Vxbridge,
Jan. 30. 1644. upon Jer. 33.6. Whereby the Author does examine and enquire,
whether Master Love were ever called by God, and Jesus Christ, or directed by
the Spirit of Truth to preach the said Sermon: Or ever sent forth by Jesus
Christ to be his Minister. Being also for a Caveat or Memento to all others who
call themselves Christ's Ministers, to examine whether ever they had a Mission
or Commission from Jesus Christ so to do, they having embroyled the Land of
our Nativity in an unnatural War formerly one with another, contrary to any
command, precept, or practices of Christ and his Apostles, or word of Truth: By
whose evil practices they have caused the Gospel of Truth and Peace to be
evil spoken of, and have opened a torrent of Blood, which none but the
Heavenly Physician can stop and cure; To whom the Author entreats the People
to look, and pray, and wait for help, for vain is the help of man.

Behold the Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot save: neither is his
care heavy, that he cannot hear, Isa. 59.1, 2, 3. But your iniquities have
separated between you and your God, and your sins have hidd his face from you,
that he will not hear, verse. 2. For your hands are defiled with blood, and
your fingers with iniquity: your lips have spoken lies, and your tongue has
murmured iniquity, verse. 3. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge:
Because thou have refused Knowledge, I will also refuse thee, that thou shall
be no Priest to me: and seeing thou have forgotten the law of thy God, I will
also forget thy children, Hos. 4.6.9. And there shall be like people, like
Priest, for I will visit their wais upon them, and reward their deeds, verse. 9.
God is our hope and strength, and help in troubles, ready to be found: He
makes wars to cease unto the end of the world, Psalm. 46.1.9. He appeaseth the
noise of the Seas, and the tumults of the People, Psalm. 65. 7. Surely the rage
of man shall turn to thy praise, the remnant of the rage shall thou restrain,
Pfal. 76. 10. For the Pastors are become beasts, and have not sought the Lord,
therefore have they none understanding and all the Flocks of their Pastures are
scattered, Jer. 10.21. Written by an English man, Christ's servant, for Englands
remembrance.

London, Printed, Anno 1651 when the formal Presbytery received a wound, as
the Episcopal before, amd Independency in time will follow, if they do the
same works, and repent not.

A Premonition to all that call themselves Christ's Ministers, and all that
shall read herein P.N.B. Junior.
Friends, however I have set upon this work, know that I do not do it out of
envy to any of your persons, honors preferments, or profits, or esteems which
you have and enjoy by any of your Ministerial employments by the state or
people that accrue unto you thereby. Neither do I despise or triumph in my
Honored Christ: Love's misery, lying under a heavy answer, but desire to be a
mourner with any of you therein really and sincerely: Neither would I have any
to whose hand this shall come, to mis-conster me in my desires herein; but
humbly entreat God who is the giver of all wisdom, and reproacheth no man Jam.
1.5. to reveal it to him who has commaned me to write it, and is my witness
how greatly I long for all your salvations, as my brethren English men, and for
the glory of his great Name who is able to restore England, and every English
man, and to guide our feet into his fear, to write his law in our inner parts,
to unite us in love, to give us abundantly the truth as it is in Jesus; to
settle us in peace and purity; to keep us in peace, and to preserve us to his
own glorious presence, where we shall see even as we are seen which if we
please him here always as his Son did, or so endeavor, or delight to do; for
Christ says, Joh. 8.29. For he that sent me is with me: the Father has not
left me alone, because I do always those things that please him. And what those
things were, the word sets forth: which, when God shall send you forth as his
Ministers, he will enable you and the Elders also (if there shall be need of
you) as formerly his Apostles, and hold a Fatherly union with you, if you do
always those things that please him: wherefore, as Paul says, I Cor. 6.20. Let
us learn, that no man presume above that which is written, that one swell not
against another for any man's cause: for the Kingdom of God is not in word but
in power. For this is the Testament that God will make with us, if we be
Isreal's house: After those days faith the Lord, I will put my laws in their
minds, and in their heart I will write them, and I will be their God, and they
shall be my people. And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every
man his Brother, saying, know the Lord. For all shall know me, from the least
of them to the greatest of them, for I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and I will remember their sins and their inniquities no more,
Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. This is new Testament; this is Gospll although it may not
please men, this is not another Gospel as Paul speaks, Gal. 1.6, 7. Twice
though the Authors name be not to it: and this is not man's Doctrine, but Gods
which I have received from God, and his word. Peace be with the Brethren, and
love, with faith from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace be
with all them which love the Lord Jesus Christ to their immortality. Amen.
Ephesians. 6.23, 24.

James says, Cap. 5.19, 20. verses. If any man have erred from the truth, and
some one man has converted him, Let him know he shall save a soul from death.
I Write to you Master Love, and to every one that calls himself Chists
Minister, not out of Arrogance, or vain Glory, but out of Conscience, and
tender affection, to your self and others, entreating you all in Christ's name,
to be reconciled to him, and to read my lines, and to let me have your answer
really as the truth is in Jesus. For I hope you have the spirit, and are one of
Chists. It may be you believed better of the last Parliament of Lords, and
Commons, the Lands Physicians, as you call them, who are since cast out and
thrown down, then they deserved, experience shows it. Let us trust in the
living God, these aretituler Gods. I have said you are Gods, but you shall die
like men. Mr Love I read in your book called Englands Distemper, Page 38.
Truth may be adulterated as well as peace, in that book you have delivered
wholesome truths, but again you have set forth some Errors which questions
your Missions as Christ's Ministers, and favors much of man pleasing, and of
Worldly Wisdom, which is earthly, sensual and devilish. For though, I honor
Presbitery, it must keep to the word, closer in practice having the example of
Christ and the Apostles, as well the Prophets, then English Presbitry has
done. It must be more Heavenly wise, more self denying, and less Carnal,
less politic, though as wise as Serpents, yet innocent as Doves. I would
neither have them or any other say the Lord faith it, when it is only their own
sayings and inventions, for (thereby is the Gospel evil spoken off) and there
is not several Gospells, and though a man pervert the Gospel, yea were it an
Angel, I dare not hold him blessed in that as preaching man's Doctrine to
please men; I cannot in that hold him Christ's Servant, as faithful Paul has
handled, and God by Christ and the spirit, the Comforter, and his Word has
taught me, for which I desire ever to be thankful.

I read, David by the spirit of the Lord spoke, his word being in his tongue.
The God of Israel spoke to me, the strength of Israel said, 2. Sam. 23, 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7. And these are called the last words, of David. As David's are
called his last words having seen diverse Temptations, and evils for the
righteousness of them, so would I have yours for the truth. Again, though Paul
through Gods grace given him, laid a foundation, 1. cor. 3.10. But faith he,
let every man take heed how he builds upon it, for there is no other
foundation then Jesus Christ, and if any man build on this foundation, Gold,
Silver, precious Stones, timber, hay, or stubble. Every man's work shall be made
manifest for the day shall declare it, and the fire shall try every man's work
of what sort it is, and every man shall receive his wages according to his
labor, 1 Cor 3.8.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. In the twenty eighth and twenty ninth
page of your Uxbridge Sermon, you say, did they who made their footing to be
Jure Devino, which we have rather found to be Jure Diabolico (the Bishops is
there meant by you) think thus to be cast down before the People upon the
Dunghill, and made vile and contemptible; Did they ever think to lie under so
much disgrace (and others to be countenanced by the Nobles and Commons of the
Land) when themselves are an abhorring to all flesh, and their names a reproach
to all people, and are not these Dagons, Nobles, and Commons become so
likewise, ut supra, though you sought then to please them. I fear Col. Von,
once my Captain subtilty corrupted your young yaars. I entreat you and your
Brethren to these ensuing, to answer without reservation or guile which
concern the Gospel of Gods glory so much, though it cross man's affection, or
self-interests, yet as (God is truth) let every man speak truth unto his
Neighbor, though the Ministry say they have Ordination and succession. Yet
their lives, qualifications, or corruptions, or self-interests, gives the
Gospel a Check or lie, they following the whorish world; for they ought nor to
be men-pleasers, strikers, or fighters, or given to filthy Lucre, or Novices:
neither crafty and deceitful dealers in their lives, and rhetorical speakings
contrary to found and wholesome Doctrine; yea, the Apostle Paul faith, I think
that God has set forth us the last Apostles, as men appointed to Death; for we
are made a Gasing stock unto the World, and to the Angels, and to men: we
hunger, are naked, we have no certain dwelling place, are buffeted, reviled,
evil spoken of, and yet we bless, and pray, and suffer persecution, and
labor working with our own hands, 1 Cor. 4.9.11.12.13. The marginall notes,
faith, He that will take right view, how like Paul and the Pope such are, who
lyingly boasts he is his Successor, let him compare the Delicates of the
Popish Court, and St Paul's state, as we see it here (and how far was Christ's
state short of this I pray you) who says, the Servant is not greater then his
master: and since the Pope is granted to be that Whore, and the Bishops their
Successors with him to be none of the Apostles successors: And neither of them
are Jure Devino, but rather Jure Diobolico, and as you observe, abhorred of all
flesh, and a reproach to all people: And as amongst other things, for corrupt
Ceremonies in service and Doctrine for preaching up Tyranny and that People
must obey the Kings lust in all, laying their necks to the block, and not
defend themselves by force of Arms in any cafe, your Uxbridg Sermon, Page 16,
17. Now since both these have lost ordination, and succession, by your own
confessions, who upon earth I pray declare can give it. For lo they that
withdraw themselves from thee shall perish, as the Psalmist says. Thou
destroyest all that go a whoring from thee, Psalm. 73.27. This (all grant) and
your self proved, who then has I pray you, power to send out or ordain
Ministers for Christ. Is it from Heaven or from men, as Christ asks the
Pharisees of John's Baptism, which has brought me to the question asked by the
Bishops when they ordained any for the Ministry. Viz.

Bishop.

Q. Do you think in your Heart, that you be truly called, according to the will
of our Lord Jesus Cstrist and the order of the Church of England. Minister
answ. I think it; now did not he answer I think it, he could not be made a
Minister.

You say in the Appeal with your Sermon, by way of Apology, Page 8. some say I
intruded my self on the work, when diverse can testify how earnestly Captain
Hampton, the Governor of the Town did solicit me, with many others. Again
page, 9. 1. Objection, what ever your call was to preach, yet the matter was
unseasonable, 2. Objection. Why did you not write this vindication sooner,
these things by you are verbally answered, but your answer therein (is your
shame, and others like you) for though you preached the said Sermon in Winsor
Castle the day before; all this proves not your mission from Christ, or your
Brethrens, or your works to be spiritual, but carnal, or literal, or both:
It is not others report has corrupted your name, but the flies of your own
practices, and Doctrine, and (almost all of you preached another Gospel.) You
say in Page 14. of your Book, Prisons are many times or often times the greatest
inlets to many divine speculations, or the Servants of God in a suffering
condition, have ordinarily the most clear discoveries of the will of God, a
worthy Doctrine consonant with the Scripture: but then as Peter says, He that
suffers as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let none of you suffer as
a Murderer, or a Theife, or an evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's
matters, 1 Pet. 4, 14.15.16. But if ye be rayled on for the name of Christ,
blessed are ye, for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, which on
their part is evil spoken of; but on your part is glorified. Note, whereas you
say in your Sermon-Book, page 20. The Lord demands of the men of this
generation, will ye have the Gospel in power, etc? A reformation in purity?
your Assemblies refined? your Polutions removed? and the Government of my Son
established in the midst of you. Will you own my cause? fight my Battails?
avenge the wrongs and affronts which have been offered to my great name? will
you jeopard your lives for my sake? will you cleave to my Parliament in truth
and full purpose of heart? Certainly this is no Gospel Doctrine to provoke to
blood, and that blood should touch blood, which is reproved by Hosea from the
Lord, chap. 4 1, 2, 3. And for which our Land mourns, as is there declared
Neither was it ever any of Christ's Doctrine, or any of the Apostles, as will
plainly appear by Gods book, the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ which faith
also John 18, 36. Jesus answered Pilate, as often times he had answered the
learned Scribes and Pharisees, who fained themselves just men Luke 20.20. In
other cases: My Kingdom is not of this world: If my Kingdom were of this
world then would my Servants fight. that I should not be delivered to the Jews:
But now is my Kingdom not from hence.

I fear you, as many also of your Brethren, have impudently belied the Lord,
as Hananiah did, Jer. 18.10, 11. and other false Prophets, when he
contradicts Jeremiah the true Prophet, which in the 15. and 16. verse,
Jeremiah reproves again, saying, Then said the Prophet Jeremiah unto the
Prophet Hananiah: Hear now Hananiah, the Lord has not sent thee, but thou
make this people te trust in a lie; therefore thus says the Lord, Behold, I
will cast thee from off the earth: this year thou shall die, because thou have
spoken rebelliously against the Lord And in the 26. page of your Rhetorical
discourse, which seems to be pestilent witty, as many of your Brethrens,
contrary to Paul, 1 Cor. 2. I esteemed not to know any thing but Christ
crucified. Neither flood my preaching in the enticing speech of man's wisdom,
that your faith should not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God:
And we speak wisdom among them that are perfect; Not the wisdom of this
world, neither, of the Princes, of this world, which come to naught, 1 Cor.
2.2.4, 5, 6. Here is not a world of State-physitians and avengement, as in your
26. page, but giving God all power and glory, to avenge to whom it belongs. But
lless, rejoice, love without diffimulation. Be of like affection one toward
another: Be not high-minded: Recompense no man evil for evil. If it be
possible, as much as in you is, have peace with all men, Romans 12.9.14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19. Yet say you, much innocent blood has been spilt, which must be
avenged on us, or by us. Is this not another Gospel then Paul taught? who
says, Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath: For
it is written, vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. I desire you,
if you have time in this life, other wise any that call themselves Ministers in
any place of England, to answer these things faithfully herein mentioned, that
God may receive glory thereby, the people edification, and your souls the
comfort, which is the humble and hearty desire of

From my house of shelter through Gods mercy under my Father, near Sepulchers
Church, London, so called, July 7. 1651. Nath: Burt, Junior, a sinner, yet
hopes he is Christ's servant.

POSTSCRIPT.
COnsidering of how great concernment these things herein propounded are, and
of the affliction Mr. Love lies under, I was much prossed within me to print
this same before the sending of it; that if Mr. Love's convenience should not
afford him to answer it, yet that some other Ministers (as they call
themselves) might answer that great concerned thing or question, how they came
by the call from Jesus Christ to preach: seeing such are commanded to teach the
people to observe all things whatsoever Christ commanded them, Mat. 28.20. And
that Christ and his Apostles never commanded war and avengement: and these do,
and say, they are Christ's Ministers.

If ye bite and devour one another, take heed least ye be consumed one of
another. For all the Law is fulfilled in one word which is this, thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self. Gala. 5.14.15.

From whence are wars and Contentions among you, are they not hence? even of
your pleasures that fight in you members, James 4.1.

For where envying and strife is, there is sedition, and all manner of evil
(...)

FINIS

