For every individual Member of the Honorable House of Commons. Concerning
the Major, Magstracy, and Officers of Dover.
SIR,
ACcording to what is mentioned in the Letter, one of my services to my Native
Country, Parliament, and City of my birth; was the serveing an Order from
Grocers Hall, when the Parliament retired thither for safety upon the breach of
Parliament privileges, and the demand of five of their Members: and I believe
M. Corbets hand to it, which Order I served upon Sir John Byron L. of the
Tower, when none would readily attempt it, but my self, as some Citizens which
yet are living can testify; and then amongst the rest I watched the Tower,
both by Land, and Water, as Order was given, least Irish men should be let in
for a guarde, and it should be victualled also, and proved the dismounting the
Cannons then moun^ed in Terrorem, both to Parliament and City.

1. The gaining Mr. Willoughby of wapping a Commission, and discyplineing
himself and others for Officers, and about 140. volonteeres, soldiers for any
present Parliamentary service, in which I was L. to Cap. Willoughby, and was
with him, and these my fellow soldiers at the securing of Gravesend, and Essex
Block-houses, when Kent opposed (many of them) the Parliament, as Col. Dean can
testify, who I believed belongs now to the Navy as an Admiral, and was then
employed in Gravesend Fort, for and by my Cap. Willoughby; but whither or no
Col. Deane remembers I had no pay in this service, can I not tell, as in my
other I am sure I had none at all.

Then I was with Cap. Willoughby to secure the Royal Sovereign, a ship so
called, lay at Gillingham, which it was feared the Kentish men should fortify,
at another time, and I set a Guard and Watch upon it, till afterward the Guns,
Tackle and Officers were removed, and yet nothing paid to me.

Sirs, you may plainly see how Willoughby may well be rich, and I poor, he
received money.

Amongst my many services I went to Chichester in Sussex, I speak something now
in part of Col. Mor^ies knowledge, and spent near 4. months time before I
returned, whiles the Forces were raising, proceeding to Arundel, and had taken
in Chichester, wherein I was promised Captains pay for my assistance therein, as
some yet surely remember: And I was paid with a witness; for after we had by
Gods blessing possesed our selves as of Arundel, so of Chichester, my place I
had served in under L. Col. Roberts, Col. Stapely not being present by reason
he was sick, was by him either sold or given away for some reward to a Lawyer
of Lewis, who had not at all engaged, or some one advanced to make way for him:
and I was colourably confined to my Chamber, and set before a Council of
War, where my Adversary was my Judge, when Sir William Waller was departed,
and he wanting matter of charge to lay on me, made me prove how I came by money
to maintain my self while I was employed in that service, which being proved by
Cap. Temple of Essex Block House, a Sussex Gent. since a Col. who at first
persuaded me to go into that Country, knowing I had received money of my Col.
Sir William Brooks at Graves End, who had disbanded by Order not only for my
pay, as his Cap. L. But also for the Trophies of Arms for his Regiment, for
which I engaged my self to one Master Webster in Milk street London, an
Armourer, or such like, which moneys I carried along with me also, and out of
which moneys I paid Cap. Temple at his own house in Sussex, where he lodged me
the first night, for a Bay nagg he sold me, which was lost in the said service,
for which entertainment I thank Cap. Temple, but I do not thank him for keeping
Sir Richard Lashfords sword, I took when I commanded a party to the Lady
Shellies at Michell Grove, by Col. Morleyes Order, and others, to search her
house, where I took Sir Richard Lashford; and some Letters then come from
Oxford, which was a great furtherance to our taking in of Chichester; and upon
Cap. Temples knowledge of this truth, and others testimony, I was quitted at
the Council of War, and L. Col. Roberts gave me his pass under his hand and
seal, which I believe I can yet produce, which was as though I had leave given
me to visit my family for some time, and then to return to the said service
again; and I did not only here spend a sum of money of my own, and M.
Websters, which is since satisfied, but was also cosened and defrauded of my
promised pay, and yet never received any pay at all for Sussex service, one
thing I had like to have forgotten, I was sent out from Lewis in Sussex, with a
party and a Commission, or warrant to feize upon the man supposed, which since
was made Lord Culpepper, but remanded back, by a Letter which was written, must
be burnt by me at my return, which Letter, and Warrant, or Commission, I
believe I have still, and because I then disliked it I was after that abused;
as before related, as I conceive in part, both before and after this, I had,
and and was faithful and vigilant to discover Arms brought by water, and to
seize them when I had warrants, as will appear under many of the Lords and
Commons hands; and all gratis, without either bribe, pay or part datained, or
converted to, or for my own use; (which is enough to spend a vast estate, which
I am sure my dear wife and daughter, and other my friends have found by
woeful experience.) After this I yet helped my Cap. Willoughby again, hoping
he would be honester, the times requiring it, England growing into a lower
condi^ion, and he amongst diverse others had vowed to Almighty God, so to be by
Covenant: This made me accept of a Captains place under his Government; he to
be the superior Officer, and to command the said Regiment which indeed I should
have been the Major of the said Regiment, for I was the first Cap. and the
instrument to disperse the several Commissions, and to raise and form the
said Regiment: And though I lost my right of Majorship, I did not then desert
the said service, as I believe M. Bradshaw one of the Committee at Salters Hal,
does or may remember, which is since Lord President, who then labored with me
to deny my self, and refer my place and self to the said Committee, which I
then did: but preferment goes by favor, more then true and real deservings,
but how the said Willoughby abused me and defrauded me again, I have
sufficiently set forth in my protest made against him, printed and posted upon
the Royal Exchange, and other places, Anno 1644. For which afterward I was
imprisoned in Maiden lane Prison complete 4. months; because forsooth I had
expressed therein that the then Militia Committee of London, after so long
debate and report made thereupon, kept my report from me, and would not do me
Justice, which is truth: after these my losses and imprisonments, and trialls
by two several Counsels of War, and several suits by this caused, and by
combination of some was cosened of my lease of the Hermit of Wapping in my low
estate, being beaten out of trading which cost me about 230 l. besides other
household goods: And I went L. to sea, with one Cap. Hodges in the Lorne Frigot,
no purchase, no pay, and after 5. months service being possessed with
purchase, yet never had any shares, though they did amount to near 150. l.
upon this I set up to work at Dover: and you that read this my Epistle, It was
not for riches and honor, or favor of men only, that I engaged in this
cause, but for the honor and favor of God in christ, which says, 8. Mark
35.36. But whosoever shall lose his life for my sake, and the Gospel, he shall
find it. For what shall it profit a man, though he should win the whole world
if he lose his soul? Thus I have truly related some part of my services, and
sufferings: yet never received any advance money, place, profit, assistance in
trouble, justice upon complaining, or reward when others have been provided for
by place, or rewarded that have not done or suffered. 100. fold, what I have
done, but my reward is with Jehovah.


BEing encouraged by former presidents to you severally presented, and by your
favorable receiving thereof and prosecution therein for diverse of my Brethren,
fellow soldiers, and Citizens; It has likewise imboldened me who am a
freeborn Englishman, and free Denizon, who am thereby entitled unto equal
privilege with any of my rank, or descent, by which the Freedom and Liberties
of the Laws of England are intailed to me and mine, borne in England, or to be
hereafter borne: besides, the right that I have by right of Conquest, and as
23. October, 1642. 1 part of your Book of Declar. page 660. and our Trustees in
Parliament then declared, they were ready to lay down their lives to preserve,
affirming our Laws and Liberties the greatest earthly treasure we could or can
here possess, and likewise adjudged those who would not help in the day of
their straights profane Esaus, who would sell their birthrights, and
vassallage their posterity. Now before this time God stirred me ^p to stand and
act for Englands freedom, and Parliaments Privilege, who had enabled me to
withstand the ^llegality of Ship Money, and other abuses offered my ^eare
Contrymen, and fellow-Citizens, as also in the ^ower of London to withstand
heinous things of a de^tructive nature to the Subjects Privilege, where I
lived Anno 1638. and were by some there practiced, and because I would not
consent thereunto, I lost my Tower-place, and profits, as I have in other
places done seve^all times since, and am like now to lose my Lease of ^7. years
to come, and benefit of my Trade by those men's oppression and violence in
Dover; also God made me ^ctive and courageous both at home and abroad, in those
Martial abilities I was blessed withal of, or from him, as Mr. Corbet and many
others may yet please to remember.

I am confident some hundreds yet can testify what time the House removed to
Grocers-hall, in which services (for my native Countries Liberty, and
Countreymens safety, and Privileges of Parliament) I have spent and lost a
fair estate, which London the place of my birth and kindred, is sensible of;
yet God has been pleased to keep me faithful, and to uphold my spirit through
all tyrannical defrauding, oppressions and illegal imprisonments I have seen,
felt, and been under, both in London and many other places, indeed rather the
subject of a book then a letter, and I never was rewarded or gratified with any
place to restore my losses, neither have I pursued the same, but have labored
honestly for bread for my wife and daughter, whom in the worlds eyes are undone
by my zeal for my Countries good, rather then to live on the Nations loss,
which good I have always promoted before my own interest, or earthly profits,
as Jehovah knows, and having read your Declaration also Die Sabbati, 17.
Martii 1648. wherein you express the grounds of your late proceedings, and
settling the present Government in the way of a free State, wherein you declare
page 5. you are authorized for the common good, having contended against
Tyranny, and to procure the well-being of those people for whom you serve, to
remove oppression, arbitrary power, and all opposition to the peace and
freedom of the Nation, and to prevent their power to revive Tyrany, Injustice,
War, and all our former evils; this has very much encouraged me to protest
against Mr. Day, as Mayor, and other Justices, and Common-Councell-men of
Dover, and others, Constables, and grand Jurymen thereof, about 24, in number,
who yet continue in places unsequestred, though they have been as active as any
of those which have been sequestered for those open rebellions, and
Insurrections in Wales, Surrey, and Kent, as is set forth in your Act for
Thanksgiving, with the reason and grounds thereof, die Veneris, 1 Junii, 1649.
that you and the Army had not been thereby destroyed by the revolt of diverse
Castles at once, and the defection of a great part of the Navy; these men many
of them continue at this time in place, who are mentioned before, and protested
against by me for their hypocrisy and injustice, these are terms in the said
Act by you expressed, page 275. 276. these promoted that perfidious Engagement
by such an Authority, which might denominate the breach National, who yet
corruptly side and combine together, ruling according to their wills, and not
Law, they upholding a Monopoly in Dover, called the Leather-Corporation, which
was never granted by Parliament, for which they in my sight at one time
received six pound of money in Dover-Court, taking their goods away by force,
or otherwise, which will not obey thereunto, and imprisoning and prosecuting
all those to destroy them by illegal and delaying Suits in Law, who oppose
their arbitrary wills, yet they exact it expressly against Law, which things
you declare to be against that excellent Law of the Petition of Right done in
the Person of the late King, who was tried for the same, and why should not
these also be tried, as Declar. 17. Martii, page 7. and 14. and these
Anti-Magistraticall, Anti-Justiciaries, hold only the place, ruling by power
and policy, not by reason and honesty, they being tyrannical creatures, though
to the world pretend otherwise, according as their linsey-woolsey Priest John
Dix has in his Negative Oath plainly discovered to all judicious and
impartial judgments, yet these Ordinances of Parliament are against their
choice or sitting, if chosen, or their Voice to choose, they being incapable by
some of these Ordinances of Parliament, die Junii, 9. September. 1647. 4,
Octobris, 1647. by which these men outed their neighbors of Dover both from
Voice and Choice, as they outed Edward Ranger June the 8. 1648. by Act of
Common Council from the Foot-Posts place of Dover, for that he bare Arms in
the Engagement 1648. for which he has been sequestered and has agreed it, yet
many of them have done the same which are here charged, a fair president for
themselves. Again, Londons President, a rule sure for the whole Land where
Corporations are to choose Officers, die Lunae, 18. December. 1648. for the
choosing of Common-Councell-men for the year ensuing, and other Officers within
the City of London, and the Liberties thereof; and die Mercurii, 20. December.
1648. the Lords and Commons do ordain, that no person whatsoever that
subscribed, promoted, or abetted any Engagement in the years 1648. or the
treasonable Engagement 1647. or relating to a personal Treaty with the King at
London, shall be chosen Mayor, Alderman, or put into any of the offices or
places expressed upon the penalty of two hundred pound, by which Ordinances
London is made obedient, though these Dover-men presume to sit Mayor, Jurats,
or Justices, Common-Councell-men, Constables, and other Officers, contrary to
all these Parliament-Ordinances, and other presidents of London, Yarmouth, and
Weymouth, they being sequestrable as well as other their neighbors before
specified, in that they have been aiding some of them, by subscribing the
Petitions, others promoting and abetting the Engagement, 1648. for which your
humble Suppliant being a free Commoner of England, besides his protest he made
against them in the Sessions at Dover, May 24. 1649. in the name of all
freeborn Englishmen, which have not forfeited it, and in the name of the
Supreme Authority of this Nation, and since has petitioned also the honorable
Committee of Indemnity against them and their proceedings against
Parliament-Ordinances, and London, and other Presidents; yet still these
continue their places of trust, and upon your Petitioners Protest ut supra,
these men on the 29. of May, 1649. with the assistance of some other, ordered
your Petitioner to be committed to Dover-Castle without Bail or Maine-prize,
persuading Capt. Dixall (a Member of this House, then at Dover, he being the
Burgess thereof) that I was a Mutineere; but I suspecting their malicious and
illegal practices, came away from Dover about four hours before the
Castle-Souldiers came to my house to take me into their custody, having been
strongly urged by others so to do. Now I appeal to you, whether I am a
Mutineere for laboring to do the Nation and you faithful service and right:
What, because I claim the Law of the Land? which as Sir Edward Cook in his
Exposition of 29. Cap. of Magna Charta, distinction 3. Law (says he) is called
right, because it is the best right the Subject has, for thereby his goods,
lands, wife, children, his body, life, honor, and estimation are protected
from injuries and wrong, it being (as he says) the surest sanctuary that a man
can take, and the strongest fortress to protect the weakest of all, to every
one of us there comes a greater inheritance by right and the law, then by our
Parents; and for pleading this Law for my right and protection, and for
standing for my legall-Liberties given me by the Law of the Land, and your
Declarations, Ordinances and Acts; these men of Dover which sit as Magistrates,
yet act Anti-Magistraticall, they make their wills a Law against me, become
Judges in their own causes, making me fly from my house, family and trade, for
protection from their exorbitant wills, they living in a Seaport Town, where
no habeas Corpus they will suffer to be granted, though themselves would have
the benefit of the Law, so that no Law can or shall take place against their
lusts and corrupt wills, for they hinder any copy of Indictment, or any else to
be taken out to advise on, and the Lawyers there as well as the Priests are
joined in the work of their corrupt interest the better to vassallage the minds
of the ignorant, or fearful people to uphold their own dignity and wealth,
which must be of all the people Idolized through cringing, and readily
believing, honoring and obeying to them in their corrupt interests to enrich
themselves and destroy the people; as the lean and evil favored kine did
devour the seven fat kine, and it could not be known they were so evil
favored, Genesis 41.20, 21. though they had eaten them up, so these juggle and
dissemble with the people, and say, they have not done them wrong, but many of
us are sensible these of Dover, as well as others, do such things and do wrong,
which further to illustrate that they might keep the Inhabitants thereof in
fear, July 13. being Friday, they sent for me to come to them to their Court at
Dover, by one Walter Smith that then attended them, which I refused, telling
the said Smith that they ought first to appear to my Complaint against them in
the honorable Committee of Indemnity at Westminster, I having summoned them so
to do above fourteen days since, and I then going away to attend my trial
there, which message Smith having returned, they presently send one John Filly,
who said he was a Constable, and pretended he had a Warrant from Court to bring
me before them, who was accompanied with about six persons more, and two of
them, if not three, Constables, who had borne Arms in the Engagement 1648. in
that Rebellion and Insurrection, Dover-Castle being kept by the Parliament
Forces, and straightned and besieged by the County and Townsmen of Dover, of
which force some of these men are part now charged in the Committee in the
Inner Court of Wards, to which they have appeared unto, though eleven of the
twelve charged never yet was sequestered. Now I was forced to complain here
because of the great hypocrisy, partiality, and injustice I saw used by these
men and their friends, in the said Town and County, and most of the Town of
Dover being actors in the said open Rebellion, howsoever they would conceal it
or hypocritically cover it, most of them being of kin, or cemented by some
selfe-interest, or profit, and trade, and so loath to discover one another,
least they should lose the friendship of this world, which is enmity with God
and goodness; thus men live by sense more then by faith: Now the reason Filly
with his guard of incapable Constables took me not by force, was because my
door being shut, which was as a hatch very low, though Filly told the
assistants to him, if they would assist him therein he would break open my
door, and fetch me out with a witness, I then stood in my defense, and so I
told them, and would not yield my self, but withal I pulled out the honorable
Order of the Commit under M. Miles Corbets hand, then Chairman, dated June
11. 1649. which Filly had heard on sufficiently, yet Filly would not respect or
obey it, saying, what if this be M. Corbets hand, I know him well enough, but
what is M. Corbets hand worth in this place? saying, he would make me obey his
Warrant, but would not let me see it near enough to read it; at length Filly
departed, and bid the other stay of his assistants, saying, he would go and
fetch, or receive other Orders, upon which it was rumoured by the Town people,
that these roaring Lions or ravening Wolves, would break my bones e're evening,
as Zeph. 3.3, for said they, shift for your self, or else they of the Town Hall
will procure a Squadron of Souldies from Dover-Castle to take you, that they
might have their wills of you, thus they would use any means to satisfy their
envy, they invite the abusive soldiery against me, or possess the people they
would, upon which I caused my shop to be quite shut up, and retired my self
private for my more security and peace, knowing too well how my respective
friend M. Henry Teddyman was abused by the rude Soldiery then in Dover-Castle,
who came down some number about September last to him, to have him up to the
Castle upon some conceited affront, for which they would be their own Judges,
whereof see the effect, M. Teddyman would not render himself, but told them he
would be answerable by Law, these giddy, bloody, unreasonable soldiers shoot
in at his shut doors, and shot his wife big with child, and killed his daughter
about thirteen years of age by shot, and then went up to the Castle again
without the man; a lamentable story to tell, but very true, though few of Dover
would lay it to heart, but shuffled it off I now not how, though the Mayor,
which usurps the place, M. Day knew it too well; for he was Mrs. Teddymans
Chyrurgion till she was recovered, and for this blood no body sufferen, either
by Law Common, or Martial, which mischief of war to prevent, and malice of
my adversaries, I was forced to fly to London again the second time, and for
the ^afety of my dear wife and daughter, which is all the children I have left
of ten, since I have been contending in the field for freedom, right, and
liberty, as invited by your Declar. 23. O^tober, before specified, yet must I
now fly or die, it may be my wife and daughter too as M. Teddymans child before
spoken of, or lie in prison to satisfy the corrupt wills and ravenous
affections of my covetous, tyrannical, oppressing Judges at Dover, who amongst
them have sought my ruin ever since I came among them, because I would not
join with them to work unrighteousness, to rob and oppress freeborn
Englishmen, who have not forfeited their freedoms, some of them being of a
foreign blood or line, and favor a forraigner more then an Englishman, but
that almost al should do so, makes me much admire, and yet no man calls for
Justice, no man contendeth for truth, as the Prophet complains, Isa. 59.4. and
the Apostle says, rather reprove the works of darkness, then have fellowship
with them, Ephesians. 5.11. but it is no new thing to be hated therefore, for it was
so of old, Amos 5.10. they have ha^ed him that rebuked in the gates, and they
have abhorred him that speaks uprightly; and this foreign kindred or
Inhabitants, meddles not with men, but for their corrupt interest, neither know
they English-mens privileges, yea [too few Englishmen now do yet know it]
why, says our Savior, when he was on the earth, John 3.20, 21. He that does
evil hates the light least his deeds should be reproved; but he that does
truth comes to the light to manifest that they are wrought according to God.

I would ask mine oppressors and the peoples, why by force or fraud, injustice
or connivance, they seek to destroy me, as by their power of Judicature and
Council though usurped, and yet (say they believe) I will answer them, and all
who sit in power and place and do so. First from Psalm. 94. v. 23. Has the
throne of iniquity fellowship with thee. Secondly, wirh one of your own Declar.
1. part Book Decla. page 150. Magistrates are appointed for the protection and
preservation, but not ruin or destruction of the people, and the Mayor yet
threatens to lay me fast enough at Dover; and by the Laws of this Land, no
man is to be Judge in his own case. 8. H. 6. fol. 21. and. 5. Eliz. Dicr. 220.
and Doctor Bonhams case, eight part of Cooks reports. But could these Dover
men, of usurped place and power have gotten me to their Guild Hall, or by their
power and policy, have gotten me into their Goal; or Dover Castle, They would
then, and their having all power in their hands, as a seaport Town: and the
Burgess, and soldiers their friends, have been complaynants, persecutors,
witenesses, Jury and Judges of me as of Edward Ranger, and Hedge his man, and
of Edward Chambers lately they have been: then you may easily discern, what
would have become of me amongst them, when some of them were so audacious,
unchristian, and unmannerly, as to give me scurrilous and sore threatening
language, on Wednesday and Thursday the 26. and 27. of July last past in and
about the Court of Wards, as M. Day, M. Dell, M. Lawrence Knot, and M. Henry
Heart, as John Filly and John Kenton had done, July the 24. when Filly swear a
negative oath, or told an untruth, at which time some Officers of Court, viz.
M. Kerke, M. Leichman, and M. Danet reproved them, and caused Filly and Kenton
to go out of their room for their uncivil affronts in language: Now the case
depending in the inner Court of Wards, and much proved against most of them,
all but one, though nine witnesses are not yet appeared, 12. by me is charged,
as by the Articles and the Examinations taken, will appear upon hearing,
wherefore, I humbly entreat you to take it into your serious consideration,
against Friday the 10. of August instant, which is appointed by consent (if the
witnesses fail not) that so the case may be looked on without respect of
persons, either the Plantifs or Defendants, power or meaness: Ye shall do no
unrighteousness in Judgment. Thou shall not respect the person of the poor,
nor honor the person of the Mighty, but in righteousness shall thou judge thy
neighbor. Levit. 19.15. Ye shall not respect persons in Judgment; but you
shall hear the small, as well as the great; you shall not be afraid of the
face of man, for the Judgment is Gods.

Thus I commit my cause and my self, to your examination and trial; which by
your own Ordinances and Declarations named, appears to be the Nations and
Peoples, who has entrusted you, and you, and the People of the Nation into the
hand of Jehovah, the faithful Creator, blessed for Evermore, and rest,

Your Honors next the Almighties, to procure truth and Right. Nathaniell Burt
Junior.
London, August 8. 1649.
FINIS.

