Military Instructions, or the Soldier tried, for the Use, of the Dragon,
Being A part of Cavalrie, for fierings, on Horsback, as the Harquebusier, and
on foot, as Infaritry, very necessary for such as desire to be studious, in
the way of the Art military, never before published, by any, and now set
forth by Captain Nathaniell Burt
Fellow Soldiers,
For the marching postures of the Dragoone, they are like the 23. and 24.
Figures in the Book of Cavalrie; I could wish they might have Snap-hances on
their Muskets; then the postures mentioned at the end of the 30. Chapter would
serve them on horseback, to make ready. I hope there is no Musketier that is
any part a posture man, but will find way to make use of it, on horseback,
although to fire on horseback is not so fully known.
HAving upon some occasions viewed and looked upon some part of the Book of
Military Instructions for the Cavalry, etc. and finding it to speak so
disrespectively of the Books of Infantrie, without exceptions, and for that he
says, the Dragoone, or Musquetier, must exercise himself to give fire on
hotse-back, as the Harquebusier, etc. as you may read in his 31. Cap. page 44.
and yet leaves him to be directed therein, by the Infantry, I shall here take
occasion to speak somewhat for the complete and perfect method of the Young
Artillery Man, set forth by my honored fellow-souldier and acquaintance,
Lievt. Colonel Barriffe, which for its sufficiency, and plainnnesse, to speak
truly, I think as yet unparalleld in any language, which being perfectly
apprehended and understood, will furnish the Party that shall understand it,
in the Rudiments (God giving him courage to perform and act it sufficiently)
in most things. But I would entreat all soldiers to make use of, and store up
experimental ( a) I am persuaded there be many that have been abroad have
grown little in experience or valor, only in pride and covetousness, to
defraud: and I dare boldly say, such will never be soldiers, etc.
knowledge: for as this war differs much from other wars, so does the
several skirmishings, and occasions (therein:) and resolution goes very far
in it, so it be grounded upon judgment, and produces many fair effects,
through Gods blessing.

For the exercise of the Dragoone, firing on horseback, I will recite
somewhat, I have seen, though in a more confused manner and way, and give some
directions to perform the same.

Suppose the enemy retreating, and their horse facing while they draw off their
great guns, and baggage, marching away with their Infantry, they losing ground,
retreat entire, together, with their Cornets on the head of their Troops, they
being on a hill, having a deep and dangerous dale, to friend, fit to lay
Ambuscadoes in, besides the night approaching to help them, etc.

Here Dragoones may do better service, firing on horseback, then the Curasier,
the way being dubitable, etc. by advancing slowly after them, following them
about musket shot, the Curasier being withing such distance as is needful, to
relieve them, if that the enemy should seem to charge, or attempt it: for the
better performance thereof, they are to fire by ( b) First, firing of the
Musketier on horseback by introduction, which I am of opinion is not
overbalanced with danger, but the properest, one of them upon such an occasion:
but I leave it to the judgment of others, according to my request at the end,
etc.

The second firing of the Musketier on horseback.

3. The Dragoone to fire on foot, if that he shall see occasion, and after fire
given, to mount, etc.

4. The Dragoone service in a siege, and how he is to behave himself, and to
fire, etc.


introduction, on horseback; which is a passing through, or between the Files,
the files being at open Order: the first rank having given fire, by the
Commanders direction, let the bringer-up pass through the Files, which is
commonly to the left, placing themselves before their Leaders, in the Front,
and then giving fire, the rest of the Ranks acting the same successively, till
such time as they shall receive Order to the contrary, or to close their Files.
I am loath to form their place of march upon such occasions, but the Van, or
Flanks, is most advantageous, and necessary for them, because from thence they
can command, and send farthest, and make the best use, to line the hedges, or
to beat up their Ambuscadoes, if need require: but not knowing the situation
of the place, or the form of the enemy, which they may pursue, I leave it to
the wisdom of the Commander, etc.

Secondly, a party of Dragoones may fire retreating, on horseback, and do good
execution, they riding such a pace, as their occasion requires, or the ground
will permit, the last rank sometimes facing about, and firing upon the enemy,
then wheeling off to the right, or left, as the ground best affords. I would
advise them (herein) to keep their Files close, and place themselves before
their Leaders in the Front, till they receive order to the contrary. The
Dragoons having been sent forth for the taking some bridge, or stopping some
passage, the enemy having possessed himself of it before them, and advancing
toward their Quarters, whether in field or garrison, and being too strong for
them to encounter with, having retreated as before to their Quarters, or some
place of advantage, where they may secure their horses in the way, they being
acquainted therewith before, and what Scouts the enemy has out, may give the
enemy an unexpected volley of shot from some secret and unexpected place, which
may offer it self to their view, which having performed, to mount suddenly
again, for better and sooner expedition, etc.

For service to be performed by the Dragoone in a Siege, it is commonly on
Foot, wherefore I leave the direction thereof in firings to the several and
special occasions, as they shall arise, and their Commanders give directions,
further certifying, that by the skillful, and truly valiant, it is sooner
formed in field, then described by the pen, only finding the Cavalrie Book so
full of good language and learning, and the Dragoon, being made a part thereof,
and left to another direction, I could do no less then vindicate my deceased
fellow soldiers book, ut supra. And as a testimony of my love to the School of
War I was bred in, and my real and hearty affections to my Country, offer
this my mite into the Treasury, with my humble prayers to the Almighty, to
convert us all unto him in his good time, and to send peace in this distracted
Kingdom, etc.

Postscript.
Gentle Reader, accept of these lines in love, and correct them in love, so
shall I be engaged hereafter, further to publish such things as I shall find
occasion, for thy benefit, only for the present, I have commended to the
Cutters, or Ingravers of Copper, and so to the Press, for the seconding of the
young Artillerie-mans request, the Motions of the Posture for the Musket and
Pike in their several Garbes and Portraitures, as also the Postures of the
half Pike joined with the Musket, being at this time required either for
Musketier or Dragoone: but the present necessity calling upon this (as I
conceive) has caused me to set this forth alone: wherefore expect the other as
soon as it can be finished. Vale.

Your Friend, Nathanael Burt.


From the Hermit at Wapping, June 5. 1644.
Published according to Order.


