A Nevv-yeers-Gift

OR, A Gift of God to the Wife, this new year 1653 to make them a free
Commonwealth, if that they pursue therein. It being a Caveat to the reserved,
unconstant, ambodextrous engagers with this Commonwealth and present
Government, who being unstable in all their ways, are burthenous thereunto.

ALSO, England, (who are by Act of this present Parliament declared to be the
Commonwealth) to stand for their Rights and Privileges, and to claim their
Birthrights both of voice and choice therein, (in their several capacities and
places) which they were not only born unto, but also have been carefully left
them by their ancestors, as their undoubted Rights for ever; as Magna Charta
and the Petition of Right hold forth, and the particular and several Charters
in London and England declare and manifest, upon their examination. And this
present Parliament also do say they are resolved to renew the several Charters,
as they may con^ute with this Commonwealth and Government, as by their Order
and Letter made and written for and by their Committee to the Companies of
London, will plainly appear; which, for your satisfaction and encouragement, is
here also asserted. Here is also added two Letters which have relation or
dependence on the Parliaments Order, and a Letter sent to the several Companies
of London to bring in their several and respective Charters to be altered and
renewed, and all the Charters of the Nation: and two Petitions by the Penman
hereof: All which do partly discover the enemies and impediments of the common
peoples Rights and Privileges, or Commonalties, as in the several Charters is
terminated or called, in the Right of every freeborn English man's person and
capacity who has not forfeited it:and he is called also a successor thereof,
and thereunto; wherefore he is not to count it a vain thing, and to part with
it for slender promises of any Governors or pretending Officers in places
whatsoever insinuations, or any mercenary lying Lawyers alluring, sly
persuasions, or Sollicitors; but earnestly to contend for the same, lest with
Esau hereafter they repent it with tears, and their childrens children curse
the slavishness they are born unto thereby.

Printed at London, and are to be sold by Will. Larnar, at the sign of the
Black-moor near Fleet-bridge. 1653.

Tuesday Sept. 14. 1652. Resolved,
THat it be referred to the Committee for Corporations, to take into
consideration how Corporations may be most agreeable with, and suitable to the
Government of a Commonwealth; and how their respective Charters may be altered
and renewed, to be held from and under the authority of this Commonwealth.

Hen. Scobel, Cler. Parl.

By the Committee for Corporations, and renewing of Charters, Sept. 16. 1652.
THis Committee do appoint to sit in the Queens Court, on every Tuesday and
Thursday: whereof all parties concerned are to take notice.

Sa. O Neal, Clerk to the said committee.

This invited us to petition for relief and redress: and this large Petition
was preferred by us, about the 21 of October, 1652. viz.

To the honorable Committee for Regulating of Charters and Corporations:
The humble Petition of Daniel Potter, Nathaniel Burt, Roger Read, and Humphry
Millet, four freemen and members of the Corporation of the Mystery or Art of
Sadlers, in the City of London, as well on their own behalf, as on the behalf
of all the rest, of their Brethren, working Sadlers, the communalty thereof,
and Citizens of London of the same Mystery of Art, being well affected from the
beginning to all the honorable proceedings of Parliament.
Humbly shows unto your Honors,
THat whereas it has pleased Almighty God, by the Parliaments happy success
against the Enemy of the English Commonwealth, to free the English Nation from
the Norman Yoke of Kingly power, and Monarchical and Tyrannical Government; and
thereupon the honorable Parliament of England did long since declare that the
People of this Nation for the future should be governed by their
representatives in Parliament, the same being now made a free State, without
either King, or house of Lords; and therefore of late in their wisdoms, they
have appointed this honorable Committee, for regulating of Corporations set up
and ordained originally, by the late Tyrannical King, and his Progenitors and
Predecssors ever since King William the first invaded and subdued this Nation,
which have from time to time since being continued, renewed, and enlarged by
his successors, for corrupt and superstitious ends and purposes, as will appear
upon the due examination thereof.

And whereas, the Corporation of, Sadlers was first obtained in Edward the
third's days, and afterward confirmed and enlarged in Richard the second's
days, as appears plainly upon view thereof, for praying for Souls departed, and
such like superstitious uses, expressly contrary to several good Laws and
Statutes of this Nation; nevertheless there has been several confirmations
thereof, obtained from several Kings and Queens of this Nation, even to King
James his time; by means whereof, the Wardens or Governors thereof from time
to time have exercised a Tyrannical and Arbitrary Government under their
Charter upon several of the freeborn persons of this Nation, of the same
Mystery or Communality of Sadlers, and by misuser, abuser, and non-user of the
same, have since forfeited the same to the Keepers of the Liberties of England
by Authority of Parliament; and amongst other things, they govern the Company
by a Master and Wardens, where there is no such things granted unto them, and
daily vex, and disquiet, and exact diverse several great sums of money, for
quartridge and other sesments by them unjustly imposed upon your Petitioners
and other the freemen of the said Mystery Communality of Sadlers; and for no
other cause, but for that your Petitioners some of them have served the
Parliament from the beginning in the Wars and otherwise, they deny your
Petitioners the common privilege due unto them, as freemen of the said
Mystery and Communalty.

The Premises therefore duly considered,
It is most humbly prayed, that the said Charter and Books of Accounts, and
Book of Orders, now kept at Sadlers Hall, by the Master and Wardens and Clarke
of the Sadlers Company in London now in being, may be forthwith seized upon,
and brought in before your Honors; by which the truth of the Premises may more
fully appear; and that your Petitioners may be admitted, as well on their own
behalfs, as on the behalf of the rest their Brethren and Communality thereof
Citizens of London, Freemen of the said Art or Mystery of Sadlers, to propound
unto your Honors the form of a new Charter, for the better regulation of the
said Sadlers Company, and such as may best agree and consuite with the present
State-Government and constitution thereof, in opposition to Monarchical and
Kingly Government; by what names or titles your Honors shall hold most
expedient to incorporate the Sadlers Company, to exist and be.

And your Petitioners will ever pray for your Honors.
This Petition being read the 21 of October, procured us three several Orders
on the Commonalties part, against the usurping Master and Wardens: To answer to
the Petitioners grievances, one; to bring in the Charter, a second; and to
bring in their Books of Accounts, and Books of Orders, a third. And as they
were signed with five Parliament-mens hands, so they were served on them by an
Officer to the said Committee, on the day vulgarly called The Lord Majors day,
when Monarchy was in power; since known by the 29 of October: but is was before
they went to dinner, having been upon the water; and they were sober, the
Messenger said, or the Officer who served them. Which Orders follow, to show
the hope we may have, when our Charter is renewed, for your and all peaceable
English-mens encouragements and example, to stand for your Birthrights and
Liberties, which you were born unto, and by your Ancestors left you in
Charters, as the Title of this New-yeersgift sets forth.

By the Committee for Corporations, and renewing of Charters, October. 21. 1652.
Upon consideration had of the Petition of diverse of the Commonalty of the
Company of Sadlers, It is ordered that the Petitioners shall have librerty to
make known their grievances to this Committee, on the fourth day of November
next; on which day, the Master and Wardens of the said Company have liberty to
answer the same. Whereof they are to have convenient notice.

Richard Lucy. Tho. Atkins. Hen. Darly. Dan. Blagrave. J. Davers.


By the Committee for Corporations, and renewing of Charters, October.21. 1652.
Upon consideration had of the Petition of diverse of the Commonalty of the
Company of Sadlers, It is ordered that the Master and Wardens of the said
Company to bring unto this Committee, by the fourth day of November next, the
Original Charter whereby the said Company are incorporated; to the end that the
said Charter may be taken into serious consideration, and that the same may be
renewed, and held from and under this Commonwealth. Whereof they are not to
fail.

J. Davers. Dan. Blagrave. Tho. Atkins. Hen. Darly. Rich. Lucy.


By the Committee for Corporations, and renewing Charters, October.21. 1652.
Ordered that the Master, Wardens, or Clerk of the Company of Sadlers, do bring
unto this Committee, by the fourth of November next, the books of Accounts and
books of Orders belonging to the said Company. Whereof they are not to fail.

Dan. Blagrave. J. Davers. Tho. Atkins. Hen. Darly. Richard Lucy.


But our Master and Wardens being seemingly discontented with us; our Petition
and Orders served on them, and our proceedings, despised our advice. Whereupon,
we put in a second Petition, they appearing by Council, to delay us and the
Commonalty and Commonwealth, November.4. 1652.

To the honorable Committee for regulation of Corporations.
THe humble Petition of many of the Communalty of the Art and Mystery of
Sadlers, who have hereunto subscribed our names, and Freemen of the said
Corporation; who have heard of your Honors love, in answering a former
Petition, which was put in before this Honorable Committee in our behalfs, and
all others Freemen of the said Art and Mystery of Sadlers, who work, make and
fell the Sadlers wares, or can work them, for the renewing of the said Charter,
under the constitution of this present Government, and settle it according to
the charitable intents of our Predecessors, for reliese of us and our
Successors, and for our better Government in godliness and honesty; whereupon
it has pleased your Honors to command by your Orders the original Charter and
Books of Accounts, and Book of Orders, that when your Honors have considered
the same, how they may be renewed and held from and under this Commonwealth; we
in all humble manner return you hearty thanks, for your great love and care
therein, not doubting but that you will finish the said work in due time.

Whereupon we are humble Petitioners and humbly pray, for our selves and all
our Brethren, Freemen of the same Art and Mystery of Sadlers, that your
Honors will please to perfect the said work you have begun, that so under this
Commonwealth our Charter of Sadlers may be renewed, amplified, and enlarged
with such Privileges, Articles, Clauses, and Rights, as may be for the
Establishment, ordering and Government of working Sadlers; which is, both the
Art and Mystery thereof, that so both we, and ours in successive generations,
may have occasion to say and report, Many have done virtuously, but you have
surpassed them all.

And we shall ever pray, etc.
To which Petition they assented and consented, we protesting against their
Counsel, he acting against the Commonwealth and Committee; and then this
ensuing Order was made, as follows.

By the Committee for Corporations, and renewing of Charters, November.4. 1652.
ORdered by consent of Parties on both sides, that the Cause between the
Communalty of the Company of Sadlers, and the Master and Wardens of the said
Company, in the Paper of this day, be deferred till the second of December
next; by which day the said Master and Wardens are to bring unto this Committee
the Charter whereby the said Company are incorporated, and the Books of Orders,
and Books of Accounts belonging to the said Company: and this Commit do
appoint on the said day, to consider of the complaint of the Communalty against
the said Master and Wardens; at which time, the said Communalty have also
liberty to present further complaint, if they have any; and the said Master and
Wardens are to answer the same.

Dan.Blagrave. Roger Chr.Martyn. Will.Leman. John Pyne.


Hereupon they yet procured a months time, and never yet performed; in which
time there were Letters written to all the Companies of London, by the
Chairman of the said Committee, A true copy whereof follows.

Gentlemen,
THe Commit for Corporations, having taken into their consideration an Order
of Parliament, of the fourteenth of September 1652. touching the alteration and
renewing of the several and respective Charters or this Nation; and upon
serious debate had thereon (judging it most agreeable with, and suitable to the
Government of a Commonwealth, that they be held from, and under the authority
of the same) commanded me to signify unto you their pleasure therein, ( viz.)
That in pursuance of the said Orders of Parliament, you fail not to bring or
cause to be brought, unto the said Committee, upon the seventh of Deccember
next, sitting in the Queens Court in Westminster, the Charter or Chatters, by
which you are incorporated, This being all I have in command.

Westminster. Nov.30. 1652. Dan. Blagrave.


Hereupon, finding our selves delayed and abused, as well as the Commonwealth,
and that by daring mercenary Council who appeared against us the Committee and
the Commonwealth herein; I the Penman hereof, for the Commonweals utility and
profit, procured two Letters to be presented to the Chairman; one for himself,
and the other for the honorable Committee, who as they have taken our Petitions
into consideration, it is hoped (as they have promised, will also (in time)
when their emergenter occasions shall give them leisure to renew Charters, they
then will also renew the Sadlers Charter, whereof I am a member, and a
successor also unto, with as large privileges as in its pristine virtue our
Ancestors either procured or left it, though since, by the vicissitude of
persons and time, abused, to diverse persons.

Mr.Blagrave,
HAving twice petitioned the honorable Committee in the behalf of the
Commonalty of Sadlers, who are much abused; and also seen of your Letters sent
to the several respective Companies and Corporations in London to bring in
their Charter of Charters to be renewed and altered; and having observed the
general aversness thereunto, or ignorance, or wilfulness of diverse Citizens in
government and place; and also the evil Counsel by mercenary Lawyers given them
therein, to close with the present Government, or submit thereunto; I could not
rest in my thoughts, until I had penned these enclosed lines, which I humbly
entreat you to communicate or present (on mine and the Commonwealths behalf)
unto the honorable Committee: for which you shall oblige me to rest

From my house Windmill-Court, near Col. Prides, London, Dec.6. 1652. Your
servant, and (therein) the Commonwealths, Capt. Nath.Butt.

Indorsed thus: To the Right Worshipful William Blagrave Esquire, at his honse
at Westminster or elsewhere; from a lover of this Commonwealth and Government;
these present.

Honorable Sir,
I Salute you, as in the behalf of that Honorable Committee you are Chairman
of, to renew Charters and Corporations, wherein for the benefits and profits of
the Communalty of the working Sadlers, and all freeborn English men in this
Commonwealth I have labored abundantly, to settle our selves under this
present Government; also having laid hold on your own invitations by Tickets
set upon the posts over which you often fit, for the said end, to consider how
to renew Charters, as was therein expressed, as well as in your several Letters
by command sent forth to the Companies of London, to produce the bringing up of
their several and respective Charters; these also are to give you notice of the
evil example it will be to the Companies proceedings in London, and
Corporations of England, if that mercenary Council be suffered to appear
against the Commonwealth and present Government, as on the Sadlers Master and
Wardens and Assistance part has been already against the Communalty thereof;
which Council has twice appeared before this Honorable Committee, whereby the
Orders thereof have been made of no esteem, by the Master, Wardens, and
Assistants, and Counselor of the Sadlers Company and your Petitioners put to
much charge and trouble, and much delayed and vexed thereby, who have waited at
Master Farwels Chamber two days, to see the Charter of the Sadlers examined as
was ordered by this Honorable Committee, and it is not yet brought thither,
but your Honorable order is by them contemned; this I thought my self bound
both in duty to your Honors, the Committee, and present Government, as also
the dear relations to the settlement of my Native Country, and the Sadlers
therein as I am a free member thereof, for all whose prosperities and peace I
could desire to spend my self and be spent, and have already suffered much
therefore, and having observed many of the Actions, and transactions since this
time of Parliament sitting, and troubles in this Nation and Commonwealth;
wherein the delays of the House of Lords and others, when there was one, did
much protract, and hinder the proceedings and rights for the Nations peace and
safety (as by woeful experience has been felt, heard, and understood) by the
distractions, discontents, and confusion it did produce, is very well
remembered; which came to be promoted much also, by their and your suffering of
mercenary Counsel against the Commonwealth and Parliament; who thereby both
Counseled and exasperated this reserved, unconstant, Tyrannical, exsorting
City of London, who abound in oppression and destroy, slay or divide the
Communalty, as their mercenary and diabolical Counselors do by consent, etc.
and the unsettled Country corrupt Officers, who also pretended to have engaged
with the City, and under the present Government, without either King, or House
of Lords, and yet these cannot or will not submit to have their Charters
renewed by the said Parliament and Government, or affect such, who either
persuade thereunto, or act to help forwards this great work, so necessary to be
furnished, and without which cannot be a found agreement and settlement, etc.
Thus much premised, give me leave to mourn for the abuses I have observed among
several in trust at times, which are great obstacles (and have been) of our
peace and safety, both past and present, which has been much to this
Commonwealths detriment, and that partly much brought about by mercenary
Lawyers, yea rather liars, and busy insinuating setpentine Sollicitors; who
may be said to be of their Father the Devil also, (as Christ says) who has
been a murderer from the beginning, who does both seduce and harden the people,
and obstruct justice, and subvert Government, as may be easily proved, who may
fitly be compared to that impudent Harlot in Solomon's time, who would have the
living child divided or slain; so these impudent lying Lawyers, and serpentine
Solicitors seek not only to slay the people, and divide the peoples
inheritances, for their own sees and maintenance, but also they to please
others, labor to divide the living Government, and Acts of Parliament made for
the safety and good of the people therein, and by their impudency to stay it,
or to possess the people of the deadness of it, in respect to the life of
Monarchy in Charters: but as these are liars and abide not in the truth, so
their works are earthly, sensual and devilish, and descend not from above, but
tend to sedition, etc. My prayer therefore is, that the God of wisdom will
give you wisdom, to do justice to the Commons and Communalty of England; who
have and do adhere in singleness of heart, to settle the Commonwealth in its
Native rights, and undoubted privileges, as again and again by Parliament is
promised, and by your Committee held forth; wherefore suffer not these
mercenary Lawyers to lie any longer against the truth, or your Government in
the Commonwealth, and the peoples undoubted rights and privileges, which they
have bought so dear, or any interloping Solicitors; but extirpate and expunge
them; and you will not only excuse your selves, but also engage your Native
Countryman, and also the hearts and tongues of all the Freeborn English men
of this Nation to say, the wisdom of God does appear in you. So verily believes

From my house near Col. Pride's, London, December. 6. 1652. Yours (in the
Commonwealths service) Capt. Nathaniel Burt.

Endorsed thus: To William Blagrave Esquire Chairman of the Committee to renew
Corporations and Charters, to be communicated to the honorable Committee, etc.

A LETTER to incite freeborn Englishmen to stand and contend with a godly
jealousy for their Birthrights, their Liberties.
Written by a lover of Right and Liberty.
FEllow-Commoners, who are the Commonwealth, or Native Countrymen, or brothers
Englishmen; for indeed, if we had grace and heavenly wisdom, we should so
live, and so love, as brethren, as kinsmen in the flesh as Paul speaks of the
Israelites, Romans 9.3,4. yea, as David says, How comely would it be for
brethren to live together in unity in amity, Psalm. 133. which would be as a
precious ointment: Then would not those in place and power tyrannize over, and
oppress, or defraud, or falsely imprison those that are under them, or extort
from them any manner of thing, or suffer their Clerks therein, or other
Officers: then would be no impoverishments, by procured or provoked Lawsuits,
or delayings, demurrings, or false returns: then would be no quarrelings, no
bloodsheddings, no Wars or Rebellings, or tumultuous proceedings, or cunning
contrivements, by machinations or combinations, or excommunicatings; but those
of superiority would respect such of inferior rank, and those of inferior
degree would have occasion to speak well of and honor such as are or should be
in place of Judicature, or trust of superiority or power.

It is not my intention, herein, personally to recriminate any man, though I
believe, by my sufferings and innocence, through experience I could nominate
many in many places; but to invite to peace, to love; for fightings and
quarrelings will never settle this Commonwealth, and therein our common rights
and privileges; but petitionings, intreatings, conferrings, in its time,
place, and order, so it be not with vain janglings or obstinacy, but in love
and faithfulness to one another. Wherefore do but look back upon the love care,
and faithfulness of our Ancestors, who set forth Magna Charta and other good
Laws and Charters for our settlement and quiet Government, and for our utility
or profits and benefits for ever; and to allay the proud coruptions of such who
should usurp in Governing left power to the Communalty in their several places
of abode and capacities in England, and to every Freeborn English man therein,
whether in Counties, Cities, Corporations, Parishes, or Companies to choose
Governors, or Parliament Men, or all manner of Officers therein; and again, if
that any of these entrusted by the Commoners of England should abuse their
trust, then also they granted the Communalty power, when any should prove
unfaithful to their trust, and unjust in their several places, to assemble
together, and to displace and expunge such, and to choose others in their
places, who should be faithful Stewards for the peoples benefits, utility, and
profits, ever accompting the safety of the people to be the supreme Law, they
aluding to holy Writ, that they should choose out of the people, for Rulers or
Governors, men of courage, fearing God and hating covetousness. And in holy
Writ it is said also, that of the Children of Issachar, which were men that had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do, there there were
two hundred of them, and these were called the heads of them, and it is said,
that all their brethren were at their command. O my dear brethren of England,
your times of choice of Officers is coming, by your Charters, which are
promised by Parliament to be renewed, and your liberty and freedom confirmed
to you: be not therefore more fearful and stupid then ^alaams Ass who as Saint
Peter averreth spoke with man's voice, and rebuked the iniquity and foolishness
of the Prophet, in his 2 Epistle 2 chapter and 15 and 16 verses; and suffer not
your selves to be thrown into Prisons at the lust and pleasure of every one in
place, or their injurious Clerks, or abused, and threatened, or defrauded; but
put on courage, and in the name of the Lord claim your privileges, and rebuke
them or such openly: it is commanded by God, Lev.19.17. by Christ, Luke 17.3.
and by Saint Paul 1. Tim.5. 20. Wherefore he that will not rebuke his
neighbor, is said, that he suffers him in his sin, and hates his brother in
his heart; and Christ teaches it as a doctrine of love and charity, to rebuke
our brother if he trespass against us, or any one of us, and repent not of it;
or as Paul says, though he be an Elder, a Governor, or Magistrate, if he sin
openly, let him be rebuked openly, that the rest may fear. It is a brand of
infamy upon the Priests in Israel, Hos.4.6,7,8. that they did eat up the sins
of the people in those days, for which they were cast off from being Priests
unto God, and their glory turned into shame; because they listed up the peoples
minds thereby in their iniquity, by going out of the way themselves, they
caused many to fall, and they themselves became partial, and therefore were
they made vile, and despised among the people, Mal.2.5,6,7,8 9. and the Rulers
or Governors were so hardened thereby, that they loved to say with shame Bring
ye, Hos.4.18. that is, to take bribes or rewards, Mie.7.2,3. and who can either
trust a friend or a Counselor, as our Fathers were for bidden, Mich.7.5,6.
seeing a man's enemies are those of his own house? do not we at this time, pull
sin and shame, and suffering upon our own selves, for that we rebuke not such
men among us, do not we thereby eat up their sins, and by our cowardice and
partiality become guilty thereof, and they themselves despise us? and we may be
said to depart from the Lord our God, and for this to be captivated, and to be
reproached and subject to payments, as the Israelites were, and as Baruch
speaks, chap.3.7,8. and hereafter our children may say, it was for the
iniquity of our Fathers, as there it is said, that they are become so cursed,
and subjected, and reproached. Solomon says, Better is wisdom then weapons of
war, and that he knew a poor wiseman deliver a City, Eccles.9.15,18. Wherefore
let me entreat you mind your liberty in a loving peaceable wise way, but yet
claim your undoubted rights, and be not out-faced therein by usurping
Governors, Officers, and mercenary Lawyers (or insinuating serpentine
Solicitors) a sentence I inserted into my Letter sent to the Committee since
upon further observations, who privily lurk to betray English men of their
liberty and right; and I am persuaded, that though diverse of us has contended
with a sword in our hands for our liberties, yet by this viperous serpentine
brood of mercenary Lawyers, and letter-carrying convoying Solicitors, are we
daily pleaded out, and delayed of our just rights, and by their accomplices, and
betrayed therein, as experimentally I have often seen, and ever shall be so
long as they be cherished or countenanced, I could make this appear in several
cases, but I promised I would not personally recriminate; yet I must needs
commend that spoken, as is reported by Colonel Pride in Westminster Hall, that
it would never be well with England until that mercenary Lawyers Gowns were
hung up by the Scotch-Trophics: for indeed such Counselors are but concealers
of that Law, which is our rights and privileges, and act more politickly or
serpentinely, then really and truly, more for their own profits utility and
self ends, then the Clyents utility or profit, which the Law holds out to all,
without respect of persons; but these and the Solicitors are they who
Jesuite-like make distinguishings and distinctions, for their own and their
friends sakes, and ends, for filthy lucres fake; as the unjust Steward, in the
making his Lord and Masters accounts, yet he is said to be wise, Luk.16.8. and
so are these Lawyers and Solicitors commended by many, yea by most; but the time
may come they may repent of their mercenary and unjust moneys they have taken
to betray the peoples rights; as Judas that betrayed the Lord of life and
glory, whose service is perfect freedom, to which I commend you all, that shall
read herein, humbly desiring Gods glory to be advanced, your souls eternally
saved, and freeborn Englishmen kept from oppressions, frauds, extortions,
taunts, provocations, and false imprisonments, that so having their undoubted
rights, the privilege of their fleshly bodies here, they may be enabled
thereby to serve God in their Spirits, and to do no evil, that so they may be
set at liberty as the sons of God.

So prays the Penman hereof for you all, that so there may be no more
cryings or fightings heard in our streets, but that we may walk and live in
love, must ever be the Prayer of

Your kinsman in the flesh, Nathaniel Burt, A servant of Jesus Christ in spirit
and a member of this Commonwealth, a Freeborn English man.
From my house Windmill-Court, near Col. Prides, London, Dec.28, 1652.
Postscript.
Reader,
UNdoubtedly know this, that by receiving thy undoubted right of Voice and
Choice of Officers, which is thy Birthright, if in a capacity to pay Tax and
Tallage, in time you may see a Reformation thereby: for, by discoveries of men's
trusty actions and their unfaithfulness, they may be either confirmed, or
expunged out of place; and in time, it may be a means to promote truth and
righteousness, by breaking of combinations and factions in Guild-halls,
Corporations, Fraternities, Common Councels, Assistants, or Committees, who are
cemented usually by Oaths of Secrecy, or strong promises of Confederacy;
which in such places, or in Committees, cannot be discovered, but by their
Assistants, Clerks, or Sollicitors, who have been known (for their own
advantages and lucre) to convoy Letters of intelligence, or carry or send
Letters of discovery to such party or parties the Committee or others shall
affect: or otherwise, I have also known Committee Men (though Parliament Men)
write Letters against the innocent person who has pleaded before them by
virtue of Parliament-Acts and Ordinances broken; and they have cleared the
guilty and offenders, and acted thereby against their own Acts and Ordinances
of Parliament, then and still in force: by which example, others have been
encouraged so to do, etc. to the great damage of the party or parties, and the
ensnaring of the Commonwealth and people, they practicing like sons of Iezebel,
or sons of Belial, 1, Kings 8. 10,13.

Lord, thus are thine Heritage killed, spoiled, and destroyed, as of old; and
they eat up thy people all the day long, and labor to root out their
inheritance, by buying their Debenters at small rates (which is as the price of
their blood) and the Lordly buyers thereof receive the full rate of 20s. in the
pound for them, when its likely they gave not above 3s. 6d. in the pound for
them; and some of these oppressors Parliament Men. Yet David, a King, and a
Soldier in the field, and in distress for water, which three of his Commanders
(breaking through the enemies host) fetched, he would not drink thereof, but
offered it to the Lord, and said, O Lord, be it far from me to do this thing:
Is not this the blood of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives? 2 Samuel.23.15,16,17. Thus some of them we fought for to maintain,
Do drink our bloods, as 'twere a thing most vain.


At Dover I once saw a Mayor, who the first time he did sit on the Bench in
their Guild Hall, after that he was sworn Mayor, he silenced and would have
turned off the Bench one of his Brethren, a Jurat there (which is as an
Alderman in other places) upon the Bench, because he would not agree with him,
the present Mayor in being, in a piece of injustice; and the reason the Mayor
showed, was, that the said Alderman or Jurat had not been new sworn to secrecy
or privacie since he had been sworn Mayor; I could name the parties, but I
forbear: I could also nominate several injuries done in Guild Hall London, and
in the Committee of the Militia and Court of Aldermen, and of some by Common
Counselors and Companies with their Assistants and Clerks, and that by
combination of, and with their Clerks, and Officers, and Assistants, and how
by their Oaths of secrecy or promises, and consederacie, and private choosing
of Officers, or fore-running their choice, to the out-facing the Law, and
perverting or Judgment, and oppression of the freeborn people the
Commonwealth, whom they also diverse times have been fain to arm for their own
preservations to fight, although they will not allow them voice or choice, even
when judgment has followed them at their heels, for their iniquities,
promising their destructions, and I do believe this truth is known to diverse
also, though the persons and injuries are not nominated; which for future to
prevent, next unto your reasonable service performed to Jehovah, your
vigilancies over those in places, and by a laudable and free choice, displacing
such as are not trusty and faithful, and laboring, and protesting also against
false Oaths, for because of Oaths our land does mourn, and much more for such
as are Oaths of secrecy: but wait you with patience in brotherly love, bearing
one another burdens; that we or ours hereafter may happily arrive at the
fruition of liberty and rest from this sea and calamity of oppression and
trouble; that our children may say of us, their deceased Fathers hereafter,
they acted courageously as freeborn English men in their generation, wisely as
Commonwealths-men in their places and capacities, and lovingly and patiently as
Christians, through whom we have had deliverance, and are become a happy
English people born, and left to freedom and liberty.

By N. B. a lover of the English people, and its Native rights and liberties,
and a constant contender for the same.

FINIS.

