THE LITTLE Bible of the Man OR THE Book of God opened in Man BY THE Power of
the LAMB.

Wherein God is the Spirit or inside of the Book, and Man the Letter or
outside of it.

In whom, as in a Glass, you may both behold the Spirit and Letter of the holy
Scriptures in the new Man; fulfilled and Explained from Genesis to Jeremiah.

This is the first Volume of Gods Book in Man.

Written by a weak Instrument of the Lords, Capt. T. BUTLER.

LONDON, Printed in the first year of Englands Liberty, 1649 For Giles Calvert,
at the black spread Eagle at the west end of Paul's.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord of Pembroke; AND To the Right Honorable the
Lord of Mulgrave, all Peace and Happiness.
My Lords,
IT is the Design of Heaven to pull down the pride of all flesh, and to have
the Lord alone Exalted, that no flesh might glory before him, but all that
glory, may do it in the Lord God, they being the Lords; For the day of the Lord
is come upon all flesh to destroy it like grass, but the Word of the Lord
abides for ever, and he that is built upon that Rock the gates of hell can
never prevail against him; though the Lord comes to shake terribly the Earth
and the Heavens also, yea though the mountains and hills remove out of their
places; though the stars fall from heaven, and the Sun be turned into darkness,
and the Moon into blood, by this terrible Earthquake, yet, the foundation of
God stands sure, their Sun never sets, nor their Moon changes; For the Lord
himself is their everlasting Light, and thy God their glory: And though the
fashion of this world perishes, waxing old as does a garment, and as a vesture
shall thou change them, yet thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, O God, and
thy Dominion throughout all ages; thou changest not, but art the same to day,
yesterday, and forever: thou shall reign till thou have made this world become
the Kingdoms of our Lord Jesus Christ and of his Saints, and great shall be
the day of the Lord.

My Lords, I could do no less then recommend this new born babe unto You,
which has been brought forth in sorrow, and much weakness of flesh, though in
the willingness of spirit, the Lord gives it his grace and blessing, that it
may be growing up in you in strength and power, which shall be the joy and
desire of

Your Servant T. Butler.
From my Quarters in Blackfriars, Mr Delaines, February 8. 1648.
To his Worthy Friend, Mr Tho. Appletree.
Worthy Friend,
LEt him that stands, says the Apostle, take heed least he fall, and be not
high minded, but fear, for God gives grace to the humble, and exalts the meek,
but the proud he beholds afar off; it is good therefore for every man to look
to his feet, and consider how he stands, by sense or by Faith, by Flesh or
Spirit, by Grace or by Works; and where he stands, on holy or unholy ground, or
the Sand or the Rock, upon the Sea or the dry Land, on Earth or in Heaven, in
himself, or in God; whether the Moon be under his feet, and he clothed with the
Sun, whether he serve God or Mammon; for if we stand in the Lord we are safe,
but if we stand any where else we sink and fall: the Lords Angels pitch their
tents about his, to preserve them in all his ways; they shall walk and not be
weary, run and not faint; they walk as wise men, and not as fools, redeeming
the time, because the days are evil. And while God gives You opportunity do
good to all, but especially to the household of Faith, and be not weary of well
doing, for in due time you shall reap, if you faint not; faithful is he that
has promised, who also will do it. Your labor of love is well known to many
Saints in Dedington and thereabout, in Oxfordshire, whose bowels You have
refreshed; the Lord make You more and more to abound in Faith and Love, that
You may never see Christ naked, hungry, or in prison, but You may minister to
him, and relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless and widow, and let the
cause of the poor be maintained, still keeping Faith and a good Conscience in
all things, that Your good example and counsel may win upon many; and if J or
my poor endeavors herein may advantage You any way in this kind, it will be the
travel of my Soul, and the joy of my Spirit,

Sir, Your Friend and Servant, THO. BUTLER.

TO The Virtuous LADIES, Mrs Elizabeth, Mrs Anne, Mrs Margaret, Mrs Katherine,
and Mrs Lettice Babingtons, my dear and precious Sisters, together with the
rest of that noble Family.
My deer Sisters,
AMongst the Catalogue of Gods great mercies to me, I account it not the least,
to be of the number of that sweet and precious society and Family, and to see
how the Lord has multiplied his mercies toward us, as not only to make us
one Body, but also one Spirit, giving us the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace, whereby we have fellowshp with the Lord, and one with another in the
Spirit, praying, rejoicing, conversing, walking, and living together
continually; this never dies, neither can it be parted; its such a threefold
cord, that nothing can break it; such a fellowship, nothing can divide it; and
such a joy, and life, none can take from us. I have, through the love and
goodness of the Lord to me, drawn some spiritual Discoveries upon a part of the
Scriptures, as God gave me opportunity: Only, my dear Sisters, let me desire
this from you, What you find herein of God, glorify him for it, and what is
not of God, as you apprehend, judge it not after the flesh, but judge righteous
judgment; and withal remember the weakness of him that was but a poor
instrument in it: And if it may by the blessing of God give any light to you,
God speaking the same things in a vail to it in your spirits, how will it
rejoice mine. Thus leaving all to the good guide of the Spirit of Truth in all
things, I take leave, and remain,

Your loving Brother T. BUTLER.

TO THE READER.
JVdg not, says the Apostle, that ye be not judged, for with what measure you
meet it shall be measured to you again; and what you would that men should do
unto you, even so do ye unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets; but
Christ and the Apostles go further, and would have us do far better to others
then they do to us, give them good for evil, knowing this: now J cannot but
persuade my loving Reader to lay aside all malice, wrath, envy, guil and
hypocrisy, and in love, meekness, patience and much goodness read and
consider, trying the spirits, whether they be of God or not: And thus J shall
say with thee, if there be any thing, as questionless there is, of flesh,
darkness, or the spirit of this world, that all of it may come into Judgment by
the Spirit of the Lord, and consume them like stubble here and within me: Thus
desiring the Lord to give thee understanding to take the good, and refuse the
evil in this, and all things else; For his good, and thy glory, I Rest,

Thy Friend, T. Butler.

THE TABLE OF CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
CHrist the Sum of all Things. Page 1. The true Ministry. 2. Christ the true
Temple-Sanctuary. 3. Christ the true Tabernacle. Ibid Christ is the heavenly
Thing in Christians. Ibid. Christ is the new Covenant in the new Creature. 4.
What is that Covenant he will write in us; first what it is not, then what it
is. 5. How this Covenant differs from all others, it being in Spirit. 6. Christ
is in us Gods Dwelling; and his Writing. 8. What this new Covenant is further
to us. 10. The high excellency and virtue of it in us; what it does for us, and
is to us. 11. The Lord setting forth a book to the world. 13. What be the
things God makes use of in writing this Book Man. Ibid. Gods making man's heart
plain and fair for it as paper. 14. What God minds and loves, it is to live
with us, and in us. 15. What is, shall be of the Lords Will, and Law, and
nothing else. 17. His own Laws he keeps, and them he will have us keep, one Law
for both. 18. All Gods Laws a whole volumn within us. Ibid. Man's blessing or
curse is within himself. 20. What God writes in us, is such writing as nothing
can blot it out. 21. Where God begins to write, he perfects it in us. 22. The
writing of God in us is by degrees. 23. Gods magnifying himself in Man. 24.
The state of the two Adams. 26. The Lord is all the Book and Scripture his
people have; him they preach, hear, read, practice. 27.
CHAP. II.
The first Book that God writes in Man is called Genesis. 29. The six days
works in Man brought forth first. 30. The second work in Gods day in Man. Ibid.
The third work of God in his day. 31. The fourth work in the day of the Lord.
Ibid. The fifth work in the Lords day. 32. The sixth work in the Lords day. 33.
The end of the work of God. 34. The Paradise of God in Man. Ibid. The Adam and
Eve there in Paradise. 35. The Tempter, the Fall, the Serpent. 37. How all
things are made new in the beginning of this book. 38.
CHAP. III.
The second Book that God writes in Man is called Exodus. 40. God calling his
Son out of Egypt. Ibid. God leading his Son through the Wilderness. 43. What
this Wilderness is. Ibid. What God does for his Son in the Wilderness: three
or four things especially: The first thing is, the several forms of Rest. 44.
The second thing that God does for his Son in the Wilderness, is, His giving
the living Law with the Tables, by the Spirit of Christ, from Mount Zion. 47
The third thing in the Wilderness, is, The Tabernacle of God with his Son. 49.
The total Circumcision of Flesh, and final destruction of the fiery Serpent.
50.
CHAP. IV.
The third Book that Gods writes in Man is called Leviticus. 52. The Levites
garments that minister to the Lord. 54. The spiritual Service in the house of
the Lord. 55.
CHAP. V.
The fourth Book that God writes in Man is called Numbers. 65 How every thing
is numbered by the Lord in them. 58. The true Serpent healing us. 59. The Arc
of Gods presence. 61.
CHAP. VI.
The fifth Book that God writes in man is called Joshua. 62. The true Joshua
saving us, in fighting to deliver us. 63. The seven blessings he delivers to
us. 64.
CHAP VII.
The sixth Book that God writes in Man is called Judges. 66. The Spirit of the
Lord the best and just Judge. 67. The Sampson and Gideon that is in us. 68.
CHAP. VIII.
The seventh Book that God writes in man is the two first books of Kings. 70.
The Kingly Scepter ruling in us. 71. The outside of the Book opened. 73. The
inside and the Spirit in it opened and revealed there. 74. The Reign of the
Spirit of the Lord the true David. 76*
CHAP. IX.
The eighth Book that God writes in Man is the third Book of Kings. 78 A
Kingdom divided cannot stand, Christ is not divided. 80.
CHAP. X.
The ninth Book that God writes in Man is the fourth Book of Kings. 82. The
opening of the Temple, and the repairing it. 84.
CHAP. XI.
The tenth Book that God writes in Men is the two Books of Chronicles. 85. How
we are made Gods Chronicles. 87.
CHAP. XII.
The eleventh Book that God writes in Man is the books of Ezra and Nehemiah.
The restoration of all things. 89.
CHAP. XIII.
The twelfth Book that God writes in Man is called Esther. 92.
CHAP. XIV.
The thirteenth Book that God writes in Man is called Job. 94. What is the
Mystery of this History of Job in Man. 95. The latter end of a Saint better
then the first, the longer he lives the better. 96.
CHAP. XV.
The foureteenth Book that God writes in Man is called Psalms. 98. Psalms, and
Hymns, and spiritual Songs in us all. 100. The new Song in the new Jerusalem.
101. The chiefest sinner shall rejoice most. Ibid. All Gods workings in us come
to a Song at last. 102 And what this Song is in the Saints. 103. The Lord alone
is the Psalm, and the Hymn, and Song in us. 104. There is no singing in the
strange Land, till we come to the Lord himself. 106. To sing with the Spirit
and with Understanding. 108 A Psalm. 109 A Hymn. Ibid. A spiritual Song. Ibid.
CHAP. XVI.
The fifteenth Book that God writes in Man is called Proverbs, 110. The Spirit
that interprets secrets and proverbs, where it is, and dwells. Ibid. The sum of
the history of Proverbs spiritually in us in five particulars; The Father God,
the Mother Wisdom, the Son the Saint. 111.
CHAP. XVII.
The sixteenth Book that God writes in Man is called Ecclesiastes. 114. The
vanity of all things in the outward man, or world. Ibid. The earthly man is the
vanity of vanities, and the vexation of spirit. 116.
CHAP. XVIII.
The seventeenth Book that God writes in Man is called the Song of Solomon.
117. Christ Kisses, and his Mouth, what they be. Ibid. The ointment poured out.
118. What the Kings Chamber is, to be brought there. 119. What the blackness
and the comeliness is. 120. What the brothers are angry at, and what is the
keeping of other Vineyards, and not the true Vineyard. 121 It is God that
justifies, that is our comeliness. 123. The true Vineyard. 124. Three things
thirsted after by him, that is, as the Spouse here has tasted any thing of the
Life of God. 125. The bread that satisfies not, and where our rest, fullness,
and fatness lies. 126, We shall never be taught well till the Lord teach us.
127. The teachings of God more excellent in three things then men's teachings.
129. This teaching will make us perfect. 131. Nothing can quencle, kill, or
separate this love. 132. Christ loves where it is, is in the heart and spirit,
with all our souls, strength and might. 134. The five things that are excellent
in this love of the Spouse, called the soul love. 135. The strong grounds of
the souls love to God, when as Gods love is such to us, and much more abundant
also. 139 The Soul that loves Christ desires to live with him. 141. The Soul
that loves Christ desires to live upon him, feed on him. 142. The Soul that
loves Christ will as he lives. 143. They love if they live. 144. If we love
Christ we shall love the flock of Christ. Ibid. Christ and his flock are
together. 145. The flock of Christ has a place to lie down in. 146. Satan has
his flock also. Ibid. Though we we know not many things, yet we are fair. 147
Who is like to thee, O Israel, for fairness and beauty. 148. Thy cheeks, neck
and feet comely all over. 149. The exceeding great beauty and delight that is
in the Saints through the Lord their God. 150. The Rose, and the Lilly, and the
Apple tree. 151. The soul brought from the shadow to the banqueting house, the
substance. 152. And having once tasted of the Lords love, she counts flaggons
of wine was one love, and apples also, and not leaves, now can comfort a soul,
153. The left and right hand of the Lord about us. 154. The Lord living by
degrees from weakness unto strength in us. 155. He will stand no more behind
the wall, door, or the window. 156. The Lord calling his love to come away.
157. The Lord loves to bring his people out of the clefts of the Rock to see
his face. 158. The Foxes that spoil the Vines. 159. My beloved is mine, and I
am his. 160. The day breaks, and the shadows flee away. 161. The Soul loving,
seeking, finding, holding, and never parting. 162. The Lords high commendations
of his Church and Spouse, here in part described. 163. There is no spot in her,
she is all fair, yea altogether lovely. 165. The sending forth of his Spirit
into our hearts, to make us to abide in the Lord. 166. The sum of the fifth
Chapter of Solomon's Song. 168. The Lord comes to the breaking of bread, and
drinking of wine, to a feasting in us, to eat his supper there. 169. The Lord
comes to awake us out of sleep. 170. The Lord overcomming her heart with love.
171. The great wickedness of the Spouse to Christ. 172. The transcendent beauty
and glory of the Lord Christ, the Souls beloved. 174. The Queens, and
Concubines, and Virgins without number that praise the Spouse which is but one.
176. The beautiful feet of the Kings daughter. 177. The Lord sets us as a
seal upon his heart, the strength of the Lords love to us, and ours to him.
178.
CHAP. XIX.
The eighteenth Book that God writes in Man is the book of the Prophet Isaiah.
180. The two sons and seeds, one of Flesh and another of Spirit, that is in us.
Ibid. How the fleshly is eaten up of the spiritual. 182. The great Vision which
the Prophet saw, what it is, and what it means. 183 The Spirit interpreting the
Vision to be in us. 185. The stay and the staff of the Creature broken, but the
stay and the staff of the Lord himself remains for ever. 186. The beautiful
Branch of the Spirit of the Lord, and all the fruits thereof holy. 188. The
Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, and the men of Judah. 190. The second Vision of
the Throne, and of the Temple, and him that sits there. 191. The Lord ruling in
the midst of his people, judging all within and without in righteousness. 193.
Rezin and Remaliah's sons confederacy, their tails and evil counsel like
firebrarnds. 195. The waters of Shiloah, or the soft and still voice condemned
by most, and Rezin followed; the Law and Testimony where to be found. 197. The
joy of the Lord, and the people that sat in darkness, and see light, and are
governed by the Lord himself. 198. The proud Assyrian is brought low, and
Israel to be exalted. 200. The peaceable and righteous Kingdom of the Branch,
and the great increase thereof, from the four corners of the earth. 202. The
day of the Branch brings joy and thankefulness. 204. The destruction of Babylon
in us, the glory of the earth. 205. Israel ruling over her oppressors. 206.
Moabs destruction also. 207. Fat things made lean, and high things low. Ibid.
Egypt, Assyria, and Israel shall be made one by the Lords blessing. 208. The
whole Earth dissolving and burning. 210. The feast of fat things. Ibid. The
strong City, whose Wall and Bulwarks are Salvation. 211 The Leviathan slain.
212. Against pride and drunkenness. 213. The wise and the fool both alike in
the sealed book till the Lord open it. 214 The counsel that is not of God
perishes 215. Nothing below God any thing. 216. Righteousness and Judgment King
and Prince. 217. Who shall abide the everlasting burning, and not be consumed
therein. Ibid. The wrath of the Lord revealed against earth and heaven. 219.
What strange things the Lord does amongst us by his Spirit. 220. Sennacheribs
and Rabshakehs blasphemies against the servants of the Lord, in whom they are
comforted. 221. How the Spirit of the Lord, given to his, does overcome all the
evil and blasphemies of the devil, and is stronger then he or his. 224 How the
Lord makes sick and well, kills and saves; and he is glorified in all he does.
226. Babylons letters and presents to betray us and our treasures into his own
Land. 227. The Comfort that the Lord comforts his people withal, as the fruits
of his coming. 229. The Worm Jacob made strong. 231. What the Lord does for his
Servants. Ibid. The sweetness and love of the Spirit of Christ in his. 233. The
smoking flax, and the bruised reed in us, the little measure of the Spirit.
234. Flesh is deaf and blind, the Lord seeing all things. 235. The blind and
the deaf shall be Gods Witnesses. Ibid. I the Lord do all things. 236. God not
like the golden idols. 237. The shame and the nakedness of Babylon. 238 I have
showed thee what thy Idols could not. 239 The Lord from the womb forms us to be
his Servants. Ib. Look to our Rock whence we are hewn. 241 Thy beautiful
Garments. 242. Shake thy self from the dust. Ibid. The Lord rules over us, and
speaks in us. 243. How beautiful the feet of them that do bring the glad
tidings of peace are. 244 Thy God reigns in the Zion of Saints. 245 How thy
God does set thee apart; and how, though thy outward man be vile, yet the
inward glorious 246. The Arm of the Lord. 247. The plant growing up out of a
dry ground, with sorrow to the flesh and the world, but with joy to the Lord
and his Spirit in Saints. 248. The Lamb that opens not his mouth, but by
suffering overcomes. 249. Christ makes his grave with the wicked and the rich
in his death. 250. What it is to have the pleasure of the Lord for to prosper
in his, or in our hand. 251. The Lord shall see us as the travel of his Soul.
253. We are the Lords spoil and portion. Ibid. The Lord makes the barren to
sing, and to bring forth gloriously. 254. The seed of the living God out of a
barren womb wonderful. 255. The Lord thy husband that comforts thee. 256. I
will be thy God and Husband from everlasting unto everlasting. 257. The
foundation, windows, and gates of the Saints, the Lords house and building, of
what precious stones it is. 258. The Lord is that water, that wine, and that
milk to them that thirst after him, and that hunger in him. 260. Three things
to be observed here, more especially on the best wine kept last. 261. That
which is bread, and satisfies, and is good and delights the soul, and makes it
live and prosper in fatness, is from the Lord alone. 263. Christ the true
Witness and Leader to the People. 265. The people that know thee not shall run
afterthee, for the Lord has glorified thee in their eyes, and their thoughts
and ways shall be as the Lords thoughts and ways are. 266. The Word that comes
from Gods mouth shall prosper in what it is sent. 268. No man is just, but he
to whom Salvation is come. 269. The stranger and the Eunuch joined to the Lord,
and made sons and heirs to God. 270. The righteous man perishes, but not his
righteousness, yet none lays it to heart. 271. The Lord will dwell in Holiness,
both on high and below. 272. The sin and iniquity of Jacob, the Fast that is
the Lords, the good and acceptable day, that he chooses, how we must love one
another, and walk in the light, and not in darkness, as the Lord does to us.
274. The exceeding sinfulness of sin, the misery that it brings, till the Lord
arise against it in Justice and in Truth. 277. Arise and shine, for thy light
is come. 279. The glory given to them whom God does glorify. Ibid. All Glory
comes when Gods Glory comes. 280. I will bring gold and silver, strength and
beauty unto thee. 281. The Lord thy everlasting Light, thy Sun and Moon, that
shall darken all other Suns, and turn them to blood, but himself, in the end.
282. The Spirit of the anointing of the Lord, what works it does, binding and
loosing, doing all good. 284 Our righteousness brightness, and our salvation a
burning lamp. 286. The Lord thy Watchman day and night. 287. The Lords dyed
garments coming from the great slaughter of his enemies, sin and Satan. 288.
The Lords coming down with power to destroy flesh. 289. The Lord God is found
of them that sought not after him. 290. How all things are made new of God.
292. Though heaven and earth be my house, yet I will dwell in you. 293. Zion
brings forth, yea a Whole Nation in a day, and that without pain. 294.
THE Sealed Book of GOD, opened in MAN.
The Mystery of the holy Scriptures, the Volume of Gods Book written in man's
heart in the Spirit, and to be read in his life in the Letter.
HEB. chap. 8. verse. 10. For this is the Covenant that I will make with the
house of Israel after those days says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their
mind and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they
shall be to me a people.
CHAP. I.
NOw of the things which we have spoken and write (says the Apostle in the
beginning of the chapter) this is the sum, Christ is the sum of it; all the
Figures, Types, Priest-hoods, Sacrifices, Temples, Tabernacles, Prophets, and
Prophesies, in their several parts, Christ is their total sum: Let them be
all numbered together they all make up but one Christ, who is such an High
Priest, as is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the
heavens; they all give him. 1. The right Hand. 2. The Throne. 3. The Majesty.
4. The heavenly Thing, in the Priesthood, and in all things else* has this
pre-eminence.

SECT. II.
A Minister of the Sanctuary and of the true Tabernacle, which the Lord
pitched, and not man; Christ is the sum of all the Ministry: there is no other
Ministry but Christ and Christians; who make but one Spirit; he the male, they
the female, whom God the Father has joined together, his Spirit poured out,
and married to their flesh; the Divine Nature, the Male, and our Humane, the
Female, making one Emmanuel, God with us; so that as the two witnesses agree in
one, so be these.

SECT. III.
CHrist was also the Sanctuary, the Temple of God; upon the Altar of which
Temple he offered himself a Sacrifice to God, Soul and Body, so are Christians.

SECT. IV. Christ the true Tabernacle.
CHrist also is the Sum of the Tabernacle, God dwelling so richly in him, the
Tabernacle of God was then with men, the life was manifested, the true
Tabernacle the Lord pitched, and not man, so are Christians.

SECT. V. Christ is the heavenly Thing in Christians.
ALL which serve for the example and shadow of h^avenly things, as Moses, when
he was admonished of God about making the Tabernacle; See, says God, that thou
make all things according to the pattern showed thee in the Mount. Now the
truth and substance, the heavenly Thing, and the good Thing to come, is Christ
and the Christian; this is the Tabernacle that God pitches, even the man
Christ, there he will dwell, that is his House: Now Christ brings forth more
excellent things then any in the Mount, you have seen them all, the Ministry,
Tabernacles, Sanctuary, Sacrifice, the whole Worship, the Law and Covenant
also, they all wax old, and vanish away from the Mount; but not the other

SECT. VI.
BUt now Christ has obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how much also he is
the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon better promises:
It is a Ministry in Spirit, a Covenant in Spirit, making intercession in our
spirits, an establishing in Spirit, and precious promises written in our
spirits, so that if the first Covenant, Promises, Ministry, Tabernacle had been
faultless, pure or perfect, there had been no need of the second; but the Lord
finding fault with the first, and the Worship and Worshippers thereof; He
says, Behold the days come, that I will make a new Covenant, a new Promise, a
new Tabernacle, a new Ministry, and all things new; a new Heaven and Earth,
with the House of Israel, and the House of Judah. In those days, says the
Lord, all old things shall then pass away, and all things become new, and all
things shall be of God, who has reconciled us to himself in Jesus Christ.

SECT. VII.
ANd this Covenant shall not be according to the Covenant that I made with
their fathers, in the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the
Land of Egypt, because they continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them
not, says the Lord God. No, no, that was in Letter, outward, dead, in tables
of stone, read, seen, heard, but fat from the heart and spirits.

SECT. VIII.
BUt this is the Covenant: 1. That was with their Fathers; This with the
Children: 2. That was for a day; This for many days: 3. That was to take them
by the Hand; This is to take them by the Heart: 4. That was to lead them; This
to write in them: 5. That was to lead them out of Egypt; This is to lead them
from Flesh to Spirit, from Earth to Heaven, from this world to that to come: 6.
That was to forsake them, if they forsake me; This is never to forsake them,
nor they me; I will be their God, and they shall be my people; that I will be
their God, if they be my people: 7. That was to be taught of Men; This is to be
taught of God; they shall all know me: 8. That was without Mercy to their Sins,
it was all for Sacrifice: but now I will have mercy, I will be merciful to
their sins: 9. That was to take notice of, and remember sin, to break the
Covenant; This remembers sin no more, but to forgive and forget, though we
offend him seventy times seven in a moment: 10. That made us faulty and guilty;
This makes us faultless and guiltless: 11. That made us old Creatures; This
makes us new Creatures: 12. That made us happy in the Flesh; This makes us
happy in the Spirit. Thus Christ Jesus is become the sum of all things, Gods
true Ministry, true Tabernacle, Sacrifice, Gods true and new Covenant made with
Man; All was complete in him, and so Christians.

SECT. IX.
NOw if any man be in Christ, or Christ be in him, he is a new Creature in
Christ, or Christ a new Creature in him; Then as Christ was and is, so shall he
be the true Tabernacle in whom God shall dwell; the Priesthood, the Sacrifice,
the Covenant of God written in him: In the volume of his heart shall be
written, Lo I come to do thy will, O God: Yea, thy Law is written within my
heart: So that whatsoever is applied to Christ, shall be also to the Christian.
What great things are spoken of the beloved City of God? how are they called
Gods Heaven and Earth, Gods Throne and Footstool, Gods Paradise, His Rivers,
His Lands, and Being, his Inheritance, Psalm. 2. His Husbandry, His Building,
His City and Temple, His Birds and Beasts, His Sons and Heirs, His Jewels and
Treasures, yea, all that is or can be named. But amongst all, I would speak of
two, and show you how the Saints are a household of Faith, how they are Gods
dwelling House, which I must refer to some other providence, to bring forth
what God has put into my heart, concerning that House, and the building
thereof, and now wholly address my self to the other, which is this, How the
Saints may be called, and how they are made, the Bible or Book of God; the Book
of Life, God living in them; they are made the very Oracles of God, speaking as
moved by the holy Ghost, whose hearts are Gods Closets and Study where he keeps
his Library, all his Writings, Inditings, Laws, Decrees, Purposes, Counsels,
Precepts, Promises, Prophesies, all this, and their very lives, preach their
hearts and apply their texts, their outward man the Commentary or Exposition, a
very Sermon of the inward grace, and word of Life there: What shall I say to
speak nothing of the Temple, Altar, Shewbread, Candlestick, Laver, Incense,
Mercy-seat, nor of the Ark, but only of the Tables in the Ark; nothing of the
House, Houshold-goods, Treasures, only a little of the Writing of God there in
letters of gold.

For this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel in those
days, says the Lord. SECT. X.
IT is not the old Covenant renewed, but a new one, made not out of us, but in
us; not in letter, but in Spirit; not in word, but in deed and in truth;
wherein God does bind himself under hand and seal, to make good what he
promises and what he will perform to us, the Oath sworn to our forefather
Abraham that he would give us, that he would deliver us from the hands of all
our enemies, within and without. And secondly, That he would make us a people
fit to serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness, in love, all the
days of our life, and in him all we should be blessed.

SECT. XI. The high excellency and virtue of it in us;
THis new Covenant makes men new Creatures, that have it written in them; It
gives them a new Nature, and new names accordingly.

2. It is the very gate that enters into the City, the new Jerusalem; All that
enter therein go through this gate, which is the gate of Heaven.

3. All things in this Covenant are of God, nothing at all of Man; God makes
it, keeps it, and performs every thing in it that concerns us.

4. This Covenant is our marriage with the Lamb, our Union and our Communion
with God, and that in Spirit; It is the very uniting in spirits, and keeping
the bond of peace.

5. This Covenant is the life of all the old; they were but the shadows of
this, were all fulfilled in it; and this must be, that the Scriptures may be
fulfilled, which prophesied long since of it; and we are waiting for it, having
received the first fruits of it, some Lines and Precepts.

6. This Covenant is the Liberty of the Sons of God, by this they are made free
from Sin to do Righteousness; and free, being enlarged and released out of
bondage by the spirit of truth, in Christ Jesus; Stand fast therefore in the
liberty wherewith Christ Jesus has made you free, and be not entangled with
worldly rudiments any more.

7. It is a free Covenant, as well as a full or a new one, freely made, freely
promised, freely wrought of God.

8. And it is a sure one, being Gods, and everlasting also; It does also agree
in one, and makes all one, whether male or female, bond or free, high or low,
rich or poor, we are all made one in this Covenant, in the Spirit.

SECT. XII.
I will put my Laws in their minds; this is the heavenly resolution, to set up
his Press in our Hearts, and print in us whole volumes, and from thence it
shall be published to the world, what God has done in the secret
printing house of the heart; and whatsoever comes out to the world, that is not
of his printing and licensing, shall be suppressed by the Spirit, as not having
the handwriting that makes free; and none shall buy or sell but those that
have his mark.

SECT. XIII.
ANd when the Lord God does thus, he will make our hearts his table-books,
washing them clean and pure, fit and prepared to receive any impression; his
letters shall be all Spirit, and his words life, his Precepts and Commandments
perfect Liberty; as for the Lords Pen, it shall be the Finger of the Spirit of
God, the Inditer God himself; the Ink, it shall be the pure Crystal waters of
Life and Grace, that proceeds from the Throne of God, and of the Lamb, the
everlasting Fountains of Love, the Writings and Printings shall never perish,
it shall be for a perpetual Memorial to all generations, the Lords Hand and
Seal shall be set to the Book, he will not be ashamed of his workmanship, nor
his writing therein; it shall be also dedicated to all the world, Angels and
men, for all to read, his Name shall be to it, and the Title shall be this, The
Book of Life, Printed in the year of our Lord, the fullness of time.

SECT. XIV. Gods making man's heart plain and fair for it
I Will put my Laws in their minds: this is the mind of God, to have them of
one mind with himself, minding the same things: His mind in their minds; God
would fain put his new wine into the new vessels of their minds, knowing full
well how much vanity, for the most part, lodges there, like the Inn that was
full of guests, that there was no room for Christ to lay his head, so it is in
most minds; enough of every thing, but little enough of this love of the Spirit
of Life. What said the Lord, Now I will come into the temple of man's mind, and
cast out the buyers and sellers, overthrow the tables of the money changers,
drive out the beasts and birds; and the house that was full of murderers, aden
of thieves, I will make a house of prayer before I leave them.

SECT. XV.
BY this we may see the mind of God, what he minds most amongst men, what he
loves best where he desires to live; it is the minds of men. Again, we see all
those Sacrifices under the Law that were commanded to be offered to God must be
of the best, the male in the flock, not the sick, blind, lean or lame, all
which was abominable to God: so here, this is the male in the flock God will
have offered to him; his Laws put into our minds, and if this be not, all is
nothing: Thus it was with David surely when he said, Oh how do I love thy Law,
it is my meditation day and night, and again, Psalm. 1. 2. Blessed is the man
whose delight is in the Laws of the Lord, surely, it was because God had put
his Laws in his mind. As it was in the Temple of God which was a shadow of
good things to come; there was, we read, in the most holy place, the Ark of the
Covenant, surely this Ark was a kind of figure of what God would do in these
last days, in our Temples in the most holy place of our hearts, even in the
Ark of our minds, he would place his Covenants and put his Laws in that Arc.

SECT. XVI.
ANd in that it is said (my Laws) it shall be a living Law, a holy, heavenly,
wise, gracious, good, Law. God himself shall be our Law and our Example, in all
things follow him: the Governments shall be upon his shoulders, he will Rule in
us and over us, and be our King, Priest and Prophet; Happy art thou, O Israel,
a people governed by the Lord: He is your Lawgiver, and it is given to the
spirits and hearts of men; where he rules and sits, brings al things into
subjection to himself. I will break every other Law of man, all your Laws,
either in Church or in State, either in the inward man that convinces, or in
the outward that restrains, that are not mine, shall be rooted up, those yokes
and burdens you shall no longer bear, but take my yoke it is easy, my burden
and Laws are light, and in them you shall find rest.

SECT. XVII.
ANd in that he says my Laws, see how good and gracious God is, he will lay no
other burden then what he bears himself; live by one Law, one Mind, one Life,
one Spirit, one Truth, one Peace, one Righteousness, one Kingdom; the Law God
walks by, lives in, the way he goes, that which is his own very heart and
nature; the same he would give us, that we may be as God is, holy as he is
holy, just as he is just, that we may be the children of our Father which is in
Heaven.

SECT. XVIII.
ANd it is observable, he does not say, my Law, though all his Laws agree in
one, and are as one, but shows us further, that how the Word of the Lord shall
dwell in us richly, and not sparingly, we shall not abound in some grace, but
in every grace, nor in some knowledge, but in all wisdom and knowledge, not doing
some of the Will of God, but instructed in the whole Counsel of the Lord; we
shall have Laws in us of all sorts, the Law of Faith, the Law of Love, the Law
of Truth, the Law of Life, the Law of Righteousness, the Law of Meekness, the
Law of Contentedness; nay, there is not a Law in Heaven, nor a Law in the Heart
of God, but he will put it in our hearts, for we shall be men after his own
heart. And this we must know, God is the searcher of heart and mind; it must be
such an eye, and such an arm as must be stretched out to reach the bottom and
depth of our minds; all that is in the world is too short: we may speak to
them, present the forms and patterns of things given to us in the Mount, to the
eyes, ears, and outward view, and hearing of men in the world, and there we
must leave it; then comes God and gives the increase, he puts it farther, he
does the work powerfully; We can but, John the Baptist like, say, I indeed
baptize with water, but he that comes after me, it is he that must do all,
without him all is nothing, so here, unless Christ come after, as here he has
promised, and put his Laws in our minds, we shall hear, pray, and do all in
vain.

SECT. XIX.
WHerefore my dearly beloved, what is Paul? or what is Apollo? or ^ephas? It is
the Lord alone that will be exalted; he will put his Law there, where all the
devils in hell, all the powers of flesh and spirit cannot prevail against it;
if he put it there what shall be able to separate, remove, or pull it out of
his hands, or out of our hearts?

SECT. XX.
ANd I will write it in their hearts: It is the heart of man that God ayms at,
and therein are the issues of death or life, there is every man's Heaven or
Hell, his blessing or his cursing: for if our own hearts condemn us, shall not
God much more? If this Tree be good, then all the fruits are good, but if it be
bad, then all is corrupt; look to your hearts then, for from thence is
discovered your weal or woe.

SECT. XXI.
ANd here see how the phrase is changed to enlarge the sense, what before he
called his putting into our minds, he enlarges it to the writing, or rather
explains the manner how he will put his Laws in our hearts, and that is by
writing them in our hearts; or else what he will do after he has put his Laws
in our minds, how he will preserve and keep it there, that it may never be
forgotten, but abide in us for ever, by an eternal written character that shall
never be blotted out, Sin may, but Grace cannot; and when it is thus printed in
us, no thieves can steal it, nor rust corrupt it, nor fowls gather it, but it is
safe, under Hand and Seal, and we never have sure comfort till then; we may
then say, I know that my Redeemer lives, and I see him, and I know whom I have
trusted: I am persuaded fully, that nothing is able to separate me from his
love, nor blot me out of his Book; I was in much doubt of his word and promise,
before I had this Hand writing; but now I thank God I have obtained the victory
by the Lord.

SECT. XXII.
NOw be assured of this all you that know any thing of God, that when the Lord
puts his hand to the pen, and the pen to the paper, which are the tables of our
minds, it will not be in vain, he stays not there; it is for this very end, to
write something therein; either a protection to keep thee, I will be with thee;
or else a warrant, to do something in his name, and he will deliver thee; or a
Commission to go and teach all Nations, to go forth to conquer and overcome,
fearing nothing.

SECT. XXIII.
ANd when the Lord begins his writing, it may be in weakness, in a letter;
first because of the smoking flax, and bruised reeds, and from a letter to a
Word, a Word of Life, and from a Word to a Promise; and from a Promise to a
Precept; thus going on with line upon line, and precept after precept, here a
little, and there a little, till he has finished it, his whole Will in us,
that in the volum of our hearts we may see it written; Lo I am prepared to do
thy Will, O God. When we shall see all his Words, Promises, Precepts,
Prophesies, Exhortations, Consolations, Doctrines, Reproofs, Uses, Means,
Motives, and all completed in Man: It may be in the beginning like a grain of
mustard seed, but comes to a tree; it is begun in free grace, but it ends in
full Glory; it is at first God manifested in the Flesh, and thence justified in
Spirit, at last received up into Glory; this is the writing called the Lords.

SECT. XXIV.
ANd all this is done for his own name sake, to make his Glory and Name known,
that he is the Lord, the only God, and there is no Beloved like to this
Beloved; this made David in his eight Psalm magnify God, so when he looked
upon the threefold writing of God: 1. That in Nature, saying, O Jehovah, God,
how excellent is thy Name in all the world, thou have set thy Glory above the
Heavens: this he read in Natures Book. The second Book or Writing is in Letter,
Word, or Promise, and in this he is magnified in the same Psalm, Out of the
mouth of babes and sucklings thou have ordained strength, stilling the enemy
and avenger. The third Book is in Spirit in Man, and that is the highest of all
Gods Writings, there he is read plainest and best: first, in the first Man
Adam; secondly, in the new Man Christ; thirdly, in the new Man the Christian;
this made him say more, When I consider the the Heavens, the works of thy
hands, Sun, Moon and Stars, which thou have ordained, Lord think I then what is
poor man, that thou art so mindful of him; or the son of man, that is, the
second man, that thou have so much visited him, as to dwell in him, and be God
with him, making him a little lower then the Angels in his flesh, and crowning
him with so much glory and honor in Spirit in us, as to think Heaven, Earth,
Angels, Men, Creatures, Scriptures, Means, Sabbaths, Ordinances, Graces,
Promises, Ministers, Magistrates, things Temporal, things Spiritual, Christ,
God, the Spirit, all is ours; therefore I must say once again, O Lord our God,
how excellent is thy Name in all the world.

SECT. XXV.
THe Lord is pleased to make man an epitome of all things, as he is a little
world created of God, Heaven and Earth being in him, and he made up of both; so
the fullness thereof is in him a compound of all, at first, as he was in the
first Adam.

But now in the second Adam, in the generation of Jesus Christ, as he is
brought forth a new to God, dying to the World, and living to God in spirit, in
a new world, whereof this first is but the image; so is he the sum of all that
spiritual state: For as Christ in the flesh was the sum of all the legal Rites,
Ordinances, Sacrifices, Worship, and All; so is Christ Jesus in spirit, in the
new Creature, the sum of Gospel Ordinances, Prayers, Hearings, Writings,
Preachings, Church Fellowship, Breaking of Bread, and Excommunications.

SECT. XXVI.
NAy, the Lord will be to us Heaven and Earth, Lands and Livings, Father and
Mother, Sister and Brother, Children and Friends, Master and Servant, Gifts and
Graces, Knowledge and Wisdom, Temple and Sacrifice, Sabbath and Sermon,
Creature and Scripture, yea Doctrine and Psalm, Revelation and Consolation, New
Testament and Old, Law and Gospel, Letter and Spirit, Promise and Precept,
Writing and Printing; our Bible and Book, all things past, present, and to
come: Therefore he says, when he comes to do this, I will write; What a
Writing shall that be, think you, which God will write? What a Book shall that
be? Every word a word of Life, all the leafes leafes of Life; the whole Book
must needs be the Book of Life, but the outward Cover and Binding shall be Man;
it shall be covered in a fleshly Cover: As the Tabernacle, of gold within,
stone without, so this Book of the will of God, written, printed, or dwelling
in us, shall be opened within, yet sealed without, as to the world; they can
neither see, nor read, nor understand, nor believe it, it being sealed up, the
back and outside being toward them, and the opening inward, they know nothing
in it; and all preaching, praying, hearing, reading, writing, receiving,
meeting must be from this written Word; there must be your text and groundwork
to build upon, and what is not read there, or writ there, is not thine to give:
but let every one speak as the Oracles of God, and preach as he finds it
written in him from the Word of the Lord there, and so expound and read to us,
in the letter of Words or Life, what God has written within, as an epistle
read to all friends, so is the teaching written to be read to the world.

CHAP. II. The first Book that God writes in Man. 1.
is called GENESIS.
NOw the beginning of this Book of God in Man, bound up there, and hid in this
wall of Flesh, as the Law was in the Temple, and revealed and found by the
spirit of God, it is called the book of Genesis, or the book of the beginning
of Gods Book in us: This is the first book, wherein God appears as their
Genesis creating all things, Heaven and Earth a new in them, making a Firmament
between Flesh and Spirit to separate and divide the one from the other, the
waters above from waters below, creating light in them, the Lord their light
scattering and dispelling the darkness, and the Spirit of the Lord living,
moving, and dwelling there in this new world Man, in his Genesis or beginning;
herein the Lord brings forth all things in their beginning, progress and
perfection.

SECT. II.. 2.
The six days works in Man brought forth first.
THe Light first to enlighten every thing that comes into this world, for as
darkness was upon the face of the deep in the old world first, so here in the
true world of man's happiness in God, first Light is brought forth to be upon
the face of all things; this is the Candle of the Lord set up in his
Candlestick Man: This is the first days work, or rather the first work in the
day of the Lord.

SECT. III.. 3.
The second work in Gods day in Man.
THe second work of God in Man, his new world, he creates of himself to dwell
in, is, a Firmament, to divide between the old and new man, or old and new
world to distinguish between Heaven and Earth.

SECT. IV.. 4.
The third work of God in his day.
THe third is the gathering of all things together into one, the chaff to be
burnt, and the wheat to be laid in the garner, when the Lord comes with his fan
thus to purge his floor Man, and by the breath of his Spirit dries up the
waters that divide, and makes all to be a fruitful land, bringing forth herbs
meet for the dresser, receiving blessing from the Lord; every plant in man of
Gods planting, bearing every year twelve manner of fruits, and the leaves of
the trees for the healing and saving of Nations.

SECT. V.. 5.
The fourth work in the day of the LORD.
THe fourth Work is the Lords going on to perfection, setting up greater lights
in us, where light was as a day breaking in us; now he is come to be the rising
of the Sun in us, and Moon and Stars, light swallowed up of this great light of
the Sun, the Lord God himself, according as it is written, The Lord himself
shall be the light thereof, and also shall be the rule thereof, saying, Come
let us walk in the light of the Lord, and the light shall make no difference in
days, times, months or seasons.

SECT. VI.. 6.
The fifth work in the Lords day.
THe fifth Work is the several Mansions the Lord has prepared for his higher,
and lower, and middle stories and chambers, according to the degrees of Grace
and Light of the Lord in us; a higher for the birds and fowls, the Doves and
Eagle-sighted; a lower for the beasts, that have only the light of the Moon a
sensitive light; and a middle for men, which are between both, but upper for
Angels; so that every one as he has attained, so let him walk, and this is but
for a while, till we come all up to the unity of Spirit, when all partition
walls shall be broken down.

SECT. VII. The sixth work in the Lords day.. 7.

THe sixth is the Lords creating us yet in greater perfection, and that is when
he brought forth himself completely in us, which is not only his image or
likeness, which was in the first man earthly: there is therefore an image of
God in all such earthly things; an image of God in this world, and all that in
them is: But in this new state of things, God himself comes in the room, and
supplies the place of all such things, he being the heavenly Thing himself, the
Heaven and Earth, the Day, the Light, the Sun, the Firmament; he is all this in
us and to us: So that all former things are put under us, and we have dominion
in the heavenly things, and rule in Spirit, and reign with God for ever.

SECT. VIII.. 8.
The end of the work of God.
THe last days work, or rather the end of all his works, is the Lord our
Sabbath and Rest, having perfected his will in us, and brought forth his Rest
there from all his works and travel, now inheriting all things, having entered
us into his Rest, where is all fullness and pleasures for evermore; no hungring
nor thirsting any more, fully satisfied in him: And now the Lord looks upon all
his works, rejoicing in all and over all, having his praises perfected, and
himself sanctified by all.

SECT. IX. The Paradise of God in Man.. 9.

NOw the next thing is Gods creating a new Paradise, where he lives and dwells;
Christ is our Paradise, inasmuch as he is called the Tree of Life therein; and
the Spirit of the holy God is the living Fountain in this Paradise, watering
and cherishing, quickening and refreshing every plant and tree planted by the
rivers of the water of Life, bringing forth their fruits at all seasons, whose
leaves wither not, much less their fruits: Now this is the delight of the Lord,
saying, I will come into my garden, my Love, my Spouse, and blow upon it, that
the spices thereof may flow forth; and there I will feed among the lillies, and
eat my honey comb with my honey, and drink my wine with my love, satisfying my
self abundantly in love. This true Paradise, which God planted in man, Christ
formed in us, and the Spirit of God living like a fountain of water with us.

SECT. X. The Adam and Eve there in Paradise.. 10

ANd further, as from the Paradise and River of Life the whole world is
refreshed, for from hence come the streams of life, and divide themselves into
all parts of the world, teaching in his Name wonderful things; so the Man and
the Woman that lives in this Paradise with God, the Adam and the Eve, is Christ
and the Christian, Christ the Man, and the Christian the Woman, both living in
one Paradise, brought together by God, married and given in marriage by the
Spirit of God, making Christ and the Christian one; this is the Mystery of God
manifested in the flesh, or God dwelling in us, becoming a second Adam to us,
feeding us with the tree of Life in us, and refreshing us, as with living water
which he gives us, and the tree shall not dye but live; need no clothing, or
any Tabernacle, or Shrine, or Fig Leaves, but the nakedness of God appearing in
the Righteousness of Christ, not having our garments, which are hairy, but the
smooth and naked clothes of Christ, and we shall not be ashamed.

SECT. XII.. 12
The Tempter, the Fall, the Serpent.
NAy further, the Tempter here in the New Creature thus written by God, is the
good Tempter, the Spirit of the Lord tempting us, and leading us into all
Truth, and Lord lead us into this temptation for ever; and this Spirit is not
like the beast of the field, but like the Doves of Heaven, it is as wise as
Serpents, but as innocent and harmless as a Dove. Now the great Fall of this
New Man, is a total and final fall from sin and Satan, or a Being taken up in
Clouds from the earth, a receiving out of their sight to live with the Lord; as
also the curse, there is nothing but blessing, there is neither pain nor
sorrow, conceiving nor traveling; there is neither Lord nor servant, but all
are made one in Christ Jesus.

SECT. XII.. 12
How all things are made new in the beginning of this book.
LAstly, to conclude the writing of God in short, for the book of the beginning
of the new Creation, or Book of life in Man; Here is no carnal generation, no
living after the Flesh, no knowing one another after the Flesh, but in Spirit
and Truth; a spiritual increase and multiplying. Here is no death at all, but a
long life, even for ever and ever: Here is no marrying, nor giving in marriage,
but they are like the Angels of God: no violence, but all meekness and love:
Here is no wrath, nor destruction, but eternal love and consolation: Here is no
repenting, the Lord he made Man, but it rejoices him at the heart to see him:
Here is no Deluge, but the pouring out of the Spirit; no Ark, but the Lords
presence in our Ark; we are the house of God; no perishing, but Flesh; no
Sacrifice but the Spirit; no Covenant, but the new one in Man; no Rain, but
that of the Word of Truth; no Flesh, but Spirit, to feed upon; no Milk, nor
Herbs, but Grace; no Vinyard, but that of the Lords love, no Altar, but God; no
Call, but that inward Call, to forsake thy Fathers house: No House, nor Father,
nor Mother, nor Land, nor Portion, but the Lord; none to serve, nor follow, but
him; no Circumcision, but in Spirit; no bond woman, nor her children, but the
free woman, the spirit of liberty from sin and death; no Well, but the deep
Rivers of Salvation; no Vision, but of God; no Famine, but of Flesh; no Corn,
nor Wine, nor Oil, but the Light of Gods countenance lifted up upon us.

CHAP. III. The second Book that God writes in Man
THe second book is the book of Exodus, for where the Lord has once begun a
writing or a work, a word or a line, he will build up, finish, and make an end
in his due time; but now he is but beginning and going on from one strength to
another, appearing in us; now he comes with an outstretched arm to deliver,
before he came to pull down, and to build up, to lay the foundation, now he
comes to deliver from the enemies of our salvation.

SECT. II.
THerefore, says he, I have called my Son out of Egypt, that is Christ is
called out of the grave, death, darkness; this is the Son called out of Egypt,
the Flesh, to live in Spirit in his members and body: Now in this Egypt of our
flesh and filthiness dwells nothing but Thunder and Lightening, Darkness,
Plagues, and Crosses, for all these lay upon the Son, while he is and was in
our Egypt or fleshly Nature; but he must rise the third day; the Son shall not
always lie thus in the grave; the Spirit shall not always strive with Flesh and
be buffeted and betrayed by it, as Israel after a certain time was called
forth; the Lord hears the groans of his Son on the Cross, and Israel in Egypt,
and the groans of the Spirit in these Tabernacles of Flesh, willing to be
delivered, waiting for the day of Redemption; not out of a part of Egypt, to
live in the suburbs, or as near as may be, but far off, to get into another
land and kingdom, even the kingdom called the Lords: And though Flesh and
Blood, Principalities and Powers, spiritual wickedness in high places, Pharaoh
and all his Taskmasters, the Magicians, and all the host of Egyptians, rise up
against this Call and power of God to withstand it, as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, and as the Scribes and Pharisees, placing the watch and ward,
laying the stone upon the grave of Christ, sealing it, withstood God, and as
Antichrist withstands the two witnesses, but all in vain, till the power of God
entered into them all, bringing them forth with a mighty hand, saying, Come up
hither; and fire came out of their mouths, and the sea, to consume and devour
them; They, I mean all their carnal and spiritual enemies, may come after them
as far as the red sea, but then no farther: As soon as his Son the Lord Christ,
or the Christian, has passed through the red Sea of the sufferings of Christ,
Flesh and Blood dare follow them no further, nay, here dies and perishes all
this carnal power and enmity.

SECT. III.
BUt though Gods Son Christ Jesus be called out of Egypt, and is led from
thence, and Egypt destroyed in the Red Sea, there the Flesh suffers; yet there
is another Call, God leaves not his Son in the Wilderness, whom he has once
called; but then he calls them on, and allures them, there speaking comfortably
to them; This Son of God, called out of Egypt thus, and now all his children in
the Wilderness, is brought to straits, and knows not whither to look, standing
between Heaven and Earth, Flesh and Spirit, both fighting the one against the
other.

SECT. IV. What this Wilderness is.
FOr this Wilderness in us is nothing else but the warfare between Flesh and
Spirit, light and darkness, between Michael and the Dragon, with their Angels;
and it is a long time before it be altogether finished, we go on as we overcome
through faith, still gaining ground, overcoming by little and little, till at
last all the two and forty years are expired; along time God had many battles
in them, searching and smiting, drawing and healing, but at last the Lord
overcoming; and they sing with Deborah and Barack, and with Moses and the
Virgins that follow the Lamb, having their harps in them, the new song, the
Lord omnipotent reigns; and, as Paul said, I thank God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom I have obtained the Victory.

SECT. V. What God does for his Son in the Wilderness:
BUt there are three things remarkable in the wilderness, and another at the
end of the wilderness, before they entered the Land: For the first, how many
several rests and standings, turnings and windings they had there, at the least
forty two; and all this time were these witnesses prophesying in sackcloth,
Judah and Israel, or Moses and Aaron; for they could not in the Wilderness
sacrifice well, nor serve God, nor keep their Feasts, nor their solemn
meetings, for fear of their enemies; So is it in the warfare between Flesh and
Spirit, as long as there is any flesh reigning, living, fighting, opposing,
there is little Sacrifice, Obedience, Worship, Praise, or serving of God,
because of these enemies, we are kept under, in bondage, being in fear of them;
so in these several stages, forms, or seats, that Israel had, it was given them
because of their weakness; had they been able, God could have brought them
sooner, but their wickedness makes these standings, lest they should faint in
the way; And we shall find it hindered them much, and because of their dullness
and deadness, their unbeleef, they went no faster on; so is it in the
experience true, in the spiritual state and travel in this Son Christ
traveling in us, till he is brought forth into rest; the Spirit is willing,
but the Flesh is weak, and we make many false rests, and say, Lo here is
Christ, and lo there: Now we are well, and may stand still, and go no further;
and anon a little further, and stay there again; Thus our pressing from one
Form, Presbytery to Independency, and to Anabaptism, and so further, we are apt
to flatter our selves, they be our Rests, and many a Proselite having
fellowship with some Church to be a member, and have such and such a Pastor,
and breaking bread with such believers, and in such a pure outward way, as they
conceive here, they are happy, and lay themselves down to rest, thinking they
have purchased a good degree to themselves, when they may be as far from the
Kingdom of God as before.

SECT. VI.
NOw the second thing in the Wilderness is this, The giving of the Law upon
Mount Sinai, this is Hager and her children; the bond woman and her son shall
not be heir with the Son of the Promise; the one is of the Flesh, and the other
from the Spirit; The one from Mount Sinai, the other from Mount Sion, the City
of the living God, the new Jerusalem; and we have our Laws from Mount Gerizim,
and not from Mount Ebal, and our Laws from Mount Zion, not by the hand of
Moses, nor by the Ministry of Angels, nor yet in Tables of stone, which are
only the patterns of heavenly things, but by the hands of the Lord himself, by
the Ministry and Writing of the Spirit, and that in the Tables of the Lords
will planted in us, which are the very heavenly things themselves; and here
shall the Vail be taken away, and we shall say no more, now, Let not the Lord
speak to us, lest we dye; but we shall say, Let the Lord alone speak to us,
that we may dye and he may live, and there shall be no more here the Thunder,
nor the Lightening, nor Earthquake seen, but the still Voice of the Lord
speaking within us, and setting up his lively oracles there, that he that
preaches may take out his Text from the Law of God within him; and he that
speaks may speak as in the name of the Lord: that shall here be fulfilled:
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord: And this is that which will
carry us through the Wilderness indeed, through all Trials, Troubles,
Temptations, Persecutions, in whose heart the Law of God lives, when those that
have it only written with pen and ink, shall perish in the mid way.

SECT. VII.
THe third thing I spoke of is the Tabernacle; now having a Law given them,
they must also have a Tabernacle for the Congregation to meet and hear the Law
read and expounded also, and here must they bring their sacrifice and worship
the Lord; this being the holy place of the Lord, that he has chosen to dwell
in; so that all this is true in us; Christ is the only Tabernacle, where the
Godhead dwells, there is the glory of the Lord filling that Tabernacle, and
here is all the Sacrifice and Worship of God in Spirit and Truth, here all the
Congregation, all that we have, or are, is offered up to the Lord as a burnt
offering; wherefore he says in a certain place, The Tabernacle of God is with
men, and he dwells amongst them, and he will be their God, and they shall be
his people: And further, here is the Law of God revealed and taught, as from
the Tabernacle; God speaking with a lively voice in them, and calling the whole
Congregation of Heaven and Earth, Flesh and Spirit, Men and Angels, to draw
nigh to him, to his Tabernacle, which is his presence, saying and writing this
in them, I am the Lord your God which brought you out of the house of bondage,
thou shall have no other Gods but me.

SECT. VIII. The total Circumcision of Flesh, and final destruction
THe last thing I only mention is the Circumcision in the end, as they were
going to enter into the Land, this was the last fiery trial; the same is also
made good in our spirits, that Gilgal, where we must be first of all Malice,
Guile, Hypocrisy, of Altar Forms and Notions, only circumcise from all our
filthiness of flesh and spirit; this is the book of Exodus God makes good in
us, in bringing us forth with a mighty hand from all the powers of flesh and
Satan, that keep us in bondage from serving the Lord in freedom of heart; and
this is his Call, Let my people go, that they may serve me: To this purpose
speaks Zacharias, Oh that he would grant unto us, that we being delivered from
the hands of our enemies, may serve the Lord without fear, in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life. I know, says the Lord, that Pharaoh,
that proud flesh, will not let my people go to serve me; But they, says Christ,
shall go in spite of all to serve the Lord; I will make all their enemies their
footstool, says the Lord.

CHAP. IV. The third Book that God writes in Man is
NOw the third Book is called Leviticus. This also is made good in the Saints,
in the truth of it; the spirit of that Letter dwells in them, and the substance
of what is written in that Book concerns them chiefly, as this; All the
Sacrifices looked at them, they are to offer up the Sacrifice of Righteousness,
of which all the legal were but Types; Secondly, the Sacrifice of a broken and
contrite heart, and then their souls and bodies to be offered up as living
Sacrifices to the Lord, holy and acceptable. And what were all the Calves,
Lambs, Doves, but merely figurative, not only looking at Christ but Christians;
also they must be the Lambs of God, Doves, Turtles, and Christ presents them
thus to God; therefore the Apostle says, We shall be presented harmless and
blameless at his coming. And again, I beseech you present your selves a living
Sacrifice to God. And again, Ye are a holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual
Sacrifice to God; so that the Apostle makes them, and all that they do, to be
Sacrifices to God, and the Lord smells a sweet savor in them; nay he tells them
they are the Lords Levites and Priests, to make prayers and supplications to
God; yea to offer the Sacrifice of thanksgiving, and to call upon the Name of
the Lord; these are they that are to stand before the Lord of the whole earth:
the anointing of the Lord is upon them, to minister before the Lord God, not
only oil, but the oil of Life and Grace; the Spirit of the Lord falls on them,
and has anointed them to preach the glad tidings, Thy God comes, O Zion.

SECT. II.
NAy, yet more, all the fine linen the Priests did wear, what meant it, but
the white garments, the walking with God in white, the pure white linen, the
Righteousness of Saints; what was the Ephod and their Brestplate, their Urim
and their Thummim, their Bells and Pomegranates, the names of the twelve Tribes
on their Brestplates, their Incense, their ministering before the Lord, their
entering in with blood to the Temple, all these are fulfilled spiritually in
Saints; the mind of God is with them that fear him, they have a Brestplate of
Righteousness, the Name of the Lord written in their hearts, and they have the
Names of the Tribes, all the people of God are fellow Members and fellow
Feelers one of another.

SECT. III.
THeir Incense they have, is, The sweet perfume of the Spirit of Grace in them,
that runs all along their garments; their Bells and Pomegranates is the
everlasting Gospel of God made known by them in truth and evidence of the
Spirit every way; these are they that minister before the Lord day and night,
they kindle the fire upon the Altar, and do not offer up strange fire, keep the
Lamps in the House of the Lord, that they go not out; all these things, and
many more, are proper to the Saints, they have the Lamps of the Lord burning in
them, never decaying, having the Olive trees, always feeding them; so that
whenever the Lord comes, these wise Virgins are with their Lamps prepared,
and they receive this fire from Heaven to consume every Sacrifice, and not
false fire; the fire of the Lords Love and Zeal, the Zeal of his House eat them
up; they look to the doors of the Lords House, and see that no lame, blind,
sick Sacrifice be offered, but the best in the flock, not the female, but the
male; they think it not a weariness to serve the Lord, neither do they make his
table contemptible; they have the Tithes of all, all things in Heaven and
Earth, they have the first fruits, all do homage and yield obedience to them,
all the sheaves bow to them, the whole world shall bring their glory into them,
and they shall be the storehouse of the Lord.

CHAP. V. The fourth Book that God writes in Man. 1
is called NVMBERS.
THe fourth Book is the Book of Numbers, where you have the Lords people to be
the Sum of all that is therein contained; it is fulfilled in them, and
completed spiritually by them; they are Gods Numbers, they are all numbered,
in his Books are all their names written; nay their thoughts and actions
numbered, a Book of Remembrance writing down what they say of the Lord, Mal. 3.
Their very bones, nay the very hairs of their heads numbered, much less will he
have any one of his number lost; though the shepherd had ninety nine, he would
leave all to seek after the one, because of all that is his, he will lose none,
he keeps a perfect account of them, and of every sort of them; so many Tribes,
so many of every Tribe, of all tongues, languages, kindred and people, he has
his Numbers; besides he has the number how many lambs, how many babes, how
many strong men, how many fathers, how many hired servants, how many sick, how
many well, how many strong, how many weak, how many fat and lean, poor and
rich, male and female, bond and free; in all such things the Lord is
instructed, taking care of all, and providing for all.

SECT. II. How every thing is numbered by the Lord in them.
AGain, numbering their gifts and graces, their growth and age, till they come
to that perfect number and stature in Christ, having their days and age filled,
being full of days, and of the holy Ghost: Besides this, the Armies of the
Saints their Banners, Christ their Camp, Righteousness their General, the Lord
of hosts their Pillar of Fire, and Cloud by day and night; the presence of the
Lord, even the Angel of his presence, their matches, from strength to strength,
going on to perfection, forgetting the things behind: Their Trumpets sounding
is the Voice of the Lord heard amongst them, calling and gathering them
together; their Sacrifices Praises, their Meat Manna, their Flesh Quails, their
Drink out of the everlasting Rock, the Lord a Well of living water; their spies
viewing the holy Land, and bringing the first fruits, is the earnest of the
Spirit, giving us a view of Heaven, and a taste of the Milk and the Wine
therein, with the clusters of Grapes brought from thence to refresh us withal.

SECT. III. The true Serpent healing us.. 3.

THe brazen Serpent, healing their stings, is nothing but the power of the Lord
breaking in pieces, and slaying the head of the Serpent, the Devil: Christ
Jesus, the seed of the woman, breaking the Serpent head: Jesus, saving us from
our sins, pouring out his wine and oil into our wounds; the Lord healing our
Rebellion. The Canaanites destroyed, is the flesh crucified, dead and buried.
The removing every unclean thing out of the Camp, is the sanctifying of us in
Soul, Spirit and Body. The false Prophet brought to curse us, but cannot, is
the spirit of Antichrist, dwelling too much in every one of us; when Flesh
glories in it self, the Blessing of the Lord is the turning of every one from
his iniquity. The Inheritance is the Land of Peace, the Kingdom of the Lord
himself; the dividing of it is the Mansions prepared of God for us all. The
Rest on this side the river is the living any where below God, like the dove
that stood upon the ark before she was taken in; so here, its the outside only
made clean, which is but the hem of a Christians garment. The murmuring and
returning back again to Egypt, is the beginning in the Spirit, and the ending
in the Flesh; the dying, and having their carcasses to fall in the Wilderness;
the running well, who hindered them? so run that ye may obtain; so that for want
of faith and patience they do not inherit the Promise; Wherefore he says, let
no man take thy crown, he that is faithful to death, shall have a crown of
life; and he that continues to the end, shall be saved.

SECT. IV.. 4.
The Ark of Gods presence.
THeir Ark carried before them, is the power of the Lord leading them forth:
The standing of the Ark, is the Lords resting upon them: Their arising with the
Ark, next day, is the Lords making way and preparing it daily for them, through
mountains, hills, plains; drying up the waters, destroying enemies, all is to
show us how he will bring forth judgment unto victory, bringing down our
haughtiness, that the Lord alone may be exalted amongst us in that day.

CHAP. VI. The fifth Book that God writes in Man
THe book of Joshua, or Jesus, who is the Lord God, the Commander and Leader of
the people, commanding all that is in them, their minds and spirits carrying
them through Jordan, or the midst of many afflictions in spirit, giving them
his grace, which is strength enough; and though his rod and staff be upon them,
yet it shall comfort them, if the Lord be with them. Moses could not bring them
in their Rest, but it must be Joshua that must do it; not men, but the Lord;
not the Ministry of Flesh, but Spirit; Moses dyed, Joshua lived; it is not the
dying man, but the quickened Spirit.

SECT. II.
JOshua fought all their battles for them, overthrew their enemies, took their
strong holds, bound their Kings in chains, and Nobles in fetters of iron: This
honor have all his Saints, Praise ye the Lord. Joshua never left them, till he
had settled them in the good Land: He followed the Lord he knew not whither,
but when he knew, he did althings as the Lord commanded him: So is it with our
true Joshua, Christ Jesus in us does fulfill all things that are given him of
the Father, and never leaves nor forsakes us, til he has possessed us, and
desposed all things else for us. Joshua overthrew the walls of Jericho with the
blast of Rams horns, went forth conquering and to conquer, till he had made his
enemies his footstool, and the footstool of Israel; and when they had overcome,
then he, and his house would serve the Lord, and so he dyed in the Lord; So is
our Joshua, by the breath of his mouth all the foundations of the earth are
shaken, yea Heaven and Earth: His Enemies are subdued, yea, the devil is made
subject to him; and his giving them power over Serpents, and Scorpions, and all
manner of creeping things, that nothing shall hurt them, thus overcoming all
things, giving them the spoil, opening the Kingdom of Heaven to them that had
been so long shut from it.

SECT. III. The seven Blessings he delivers to us.
ANd now, having overcome* all things through the spirit of the Lamb, they
shall inherit all things; the oppressor shall pass through them no more, the
Lord shall encamp about them, they shall now serve him.

1. They shall eat of the tree of Life for Food.

2. They shall not be hurt of the second death.

3. They shall have the new name and white stone, the Palms in their hands, and
Vials or Harps, the hid Manna.

4. They shall have power from God to rule over Nations, yea, they shall have
the morning Star given them.

5. They shall live in that Land, they shall be clothed with white raiment, and
they shall not be blotted out of the book of Life for ever; and they shall be
confessed before God and Angels to be worthy.

6. They shall be Pillars in the house of God, they shall not go any more out,
they shall have the name of my God, and the name of the City of my God written
upon them.

7. They shall sit upon my Throne, as I am set on my Fathers Throne; Thus
Christ our Joshua, and his house, the Saints, shall serve the Lord in one
Spirit.

CHAP. VII. The sixth Book that God writes in Man
THe next book is called Judges in Scripture, and this also is written in us by
the finger of God; We are his Judges to sit upon his Throne judging
righteously; We shall judge Angels, says the Apostle, yea the world* also; how
much more the smaller matters? And again, they shall sit upon twelve seats
judging the twelve tribes of Israel: thus judgment is committed unto the
Saints; this honor have they: Nay, they can much more judge and condemn sin in
themselves, having their senses exercised to discern between good and evil;
judging every thought, word, and work.

SECT. II.
WHen the Spirit of the Lord is our Judge, then we are as Israel was here,
having good Judges, they were delivered from the cruelty of enemies, and
rejoiced: But when the Flesh sits as judge, and will rule, the bramble will have
the command of all the trees, then there is sorrow of heart; then we are like
Israel, under the Philistines and other enemies, till the Lord raise up his
Judges again, the Spirit of life, to break their yoke off our necks; So that
many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them from them
all, fightings within, and fightings without, but more then conquerors in all,
having such a Gideon and a Sampson as the Spirit of the Lord is; the Barley cake
that must overthrow every tent that stands against it, and carry away all the
gates that oppose, though they be the gates of Hell; it prevails against all,
there is no standing before it, no binding it with cords or chains, they are
like tow and flax before the fire; all Delilahs cannot betray it: the Flesh may
lie in wait, and the wiles of Satan, to weaken and quench the Spirit, but all
in vain. The Army of the Midianites, like grasshoppers, that lay in our flesh,
as their camp, a world of serpents and lusts, are all afraid of the judgment of
the Lord: The spirit of this Gideon makes them melt away like wax before the
Sun.

SECT. III. The Sampson and Gideon that is in us.
THus the upper and the neither springs, Jabin and Sisera, Deborah and Barak
with their triumphant Song, and Jael with her hammer and hand, Gideon and the
Midianites, Sampson and the Philistines, Israel against Ben^amin in the Levites
behalf, are nothing else but the contentions of Flesh: And, as the Apostle
says well, from whence come wars and fightings? Come they not from hence, even
from our lusts that war against the spirit? And again, are ye not carnal, when
there are envyings, and wrath, and evil speaking amongst you? when ye admire
men and means, but say little of the Lord, this is a glorying in Flesh, and not
in the Lord. So here we see it is the Lord our Judge that must sit upon the
Throne, and take to him his great power, and assemble all the Nations of the
earth, all flesh together, judging it, like grass, casting it into the oven,
destroying it by his two edged sword, and cause the enemy and the avenger thus
to cease by his might alone, the Lord our Judge in us.

CHAP. VIII. The seventh Book that God writes in Man
THe book of the Kings is next; the Lord goes on thus making us Priests,
Prophets, Judges and Kings, here; We are the true anointed ones of the Lord, of
which all Kings are but shadows, having received the power of Kings, to command
all things, subdue all things, the great Leviathan himself, and to tread them
under our feet.

2. The Crown of Kings, a Crown not only of gold, but of grace and glory;
Christ is our Crown, a Crown of twelve Stars, of the Lord himself our Crown and
Glory.

3. The Throne of Kings being exalted above all that are called gods, above all
Principalities and Powers, to the right hand of God, having Heaven for our
throne, and Earth for our footstool.

4. The Robes of Kings, and the attendants* clothed with the Sun, guarded with
the heavenly Host.

Lastly, The spirit of Kings, a noble and royal spirit, the Spirit of the holy
God, the King of Kings, from whom we are descended; So that we cannot but be
strong and of a good courage, having the unction and anointing upon us; giving
and making Laws to bring every thing in obedience to the Lord in us.

SECT. II.
HAving also the Scepter of Kings to break the Nations in pieces with a rod of
iron, and to dash them in pieces like potters vessels, but to defend and
maintain the subject of the Lord, the whole Land and Kingdom of the Lord, in
all their Laws, Liberties, Privileges, Charters, Grants, given under the Hand
and Seal of the Almighty King himself, That all that live under his Wings, lodge
in his Boughs, or dwell in his Land, or inherit his Kingdom, may fear any
thing, for not a hair of their heads shall perish; the Lord is their defense by
day and night, watching over them and caring for them in all things, what they
shall eat, drink, be clothed with, how kept and preserved by his power unto
salvation, which is to be remembered in the last day, and coming of the Lord,
which we wait for: For his first was to make us Priests under the Law. His
second, to make us Prophets under the Gospel. But the third and last is the
chiefest, and that is to make us Kings to reign with him, and to sit upon his
Throne; and as he is, so we to be in him.

SECT. III.
SO Hannahs prayer and song, Samuels call and prophecy, Eli's falling
backward, and dying; the Ark of the Lord taken by the Philistines, Dagons fall,
the Ark sent back, Isreal's false gods cast away, Israel meet at Morpeth, are
humbled, and subdue the Philistines, they will have a King, Saul is anointed and
prophesies; Samuels integrity; Saul spared the best, and Agag the King, David
is anointed, and Saul rejected; David slays Goliath, that defied the Armies of
Israel; Jonathan and David love; Saul's envy to him, hunting him like a
Partridg; Saul sends for David to play and still his spirit; David escapes his
hand; Nabals cruelty to David; Abigals wisdom and marriage to David; Saul going
to the Witch of Endor, shortly falls by his enemies, and kills himself, etc.

SECT. IV.
ALL this is now verified in our spirits, opened and explained there by the
Spirit, which pours that prayer, signs that song, making melody to the Lord in
our hearts; it is that which calls once, twice, thrice, and ceases not till it
be heard and obeyed, making us prophecy; it is that which keeps us from
falling backwards, and death leading us forward to life; it is that which keeps
the Ark of the Lord amongst us, which is nothing else but the Lords presence;
it is the Spirit of the Lord that destroys the Antichristian Philistin in our
flesh, and his god Dagon dashing them in pieces; Gods presence lifted up again
upon his people in the Arks returning; Israel broken by the Lords Spirit, and
made weak, are then most strong to subdue flesh, according as it is written, My
grace is sufficient for thee, and my strength seen in the midst of thy
weakness: Thus God gives grace to the humble, and exalts them above then
enemies. The fleshly man will have a King, and a Kingdom, he would fain reign
that as sin abounds, so grace might much more abound; and yet would pretend
loyalty to God, and would give liberty to conscience and the Spirit, but it is
only to murder, and not worship, like Herod; so is this Saul in our flesh,
seeks Christ to kill him; thus the persecuting Saul worships in lips, but the
heart is far from God, sparing Agag the Amalekite, offering only the poor and
blind, not the best, keeps that, and sacrifices it to its own lust. This is the
proud King, the fleshly Saul, that exalts itself, and loves sacrifice better
then obedience, robbing God of all for it self: But the Spirit of the Lord, our
David, comes at last to be anointed, and appointed to reign in us and over us;
and now Saul's Kingdom must cease, though he may envy, persecute, hunt to death,
and crucify the Lords David and Spirit, yet it shall live and reign in the
spite of all, and all powers and principalities are nothing to it. The
uncircumcised Philistin, the mighty Goliath in the world of darkness, and depths
of Satan, this Spirit of the Lord, as a David, with its stone and its sling,
its rod and staff, makes way, strikes dead to the ground whatsoever stands up
and oppose, laying all their glory in the dust, making the Lion and the Churl
to be like Lambs and Doves, silencing all the unclean spirits, and establishes
its throne in the midst of us.

SECT. V.
BEsides this, Israel chose David, now Saul is dead, for her King, and Judah
and Israel have one King; the Lord our Righteousness, of which David was a
Type, shall rule over all; where it was said. Ye are not my people, it shall be
said, Ye are the sons of the living God; for they shall seek the Lord, and fear
his goodness in the latter days, and be a long time without a King, Priest or
Prophet, and then they shall turn to the Lord; yea the Philistines also shall
have the Lord our David for their King, the Heathen shall be his Inheritance;
the Kings themselves shall be wise, and come and kiss the Son; David daunceth
before the Ark, and would appear more vile to Michal, if that was vile in her
eyes, she being childless; this is the glory of the Saints, the Ark the Lord,
his Glory its their song and daunces, they sing after his Instruments, and this
joy of the Saints, and spiritual daunces, all within us leaps for joy: Michal
this barren dry flesh scorns all such things, as Ishmael scoffed at Isaac, so
does flesh the spirit; David prays, the Spirit prays; Villainy is condemned,
Innocence in Uriah protected, Adulteries, especially spiritual Adulteries,
mortified, Nathans truth confessed, Parables opened and applied, treacherous
Absoloms, incestuous Ammons, Rebellious Shebaes, cursing Shimeies, all of them
consumed, hanged and beheaded, being judged to death by the King of
Righteou^nesse, David; But the Worthies, the Ionathans, and all the faithful in
the Lord renowned, and David's choice is followed by all the Worthies, rather to
fall into the hands of the Lord, then the hands of men, and the plague fell
upon all flesh, and his blessing was still with his spirit.

CHAP. IX. The eighth Book that God writes in Man is
SOlomon is anointed King, his mother asks Abishag for her son Ado^ijah,
Solomon would have her ask for the Kingdom as soon, Adonyah fled, David's Charge
to his son Solomon, Solomon's wisdom given of God, the Justice he did the two
mothers about the child, Solomon's building the Temple, his workmen, his peace
and plenty, his own house, his many wives, his blessing and prayer, his Kingdom
divided, Jeroboam King of Israel, Rehoboam of Judah, Ieroboams Calves,
Rehoboams counsel from the young men, refusing the old, Ahabs wicked reign,
Elijahs power, the people halting, Baals Priests destroyed, the prayer of
Elijah heard, the water dried up, the Heavens give rain at his prayer, Ahabs
false Prophets, Ahab goes to battle, but prospers not, according as Micah said.
Now all these things, are they not written in the Books of the Lord opened in
Man, which are the true Books of Israel; There Solomon Christ Jesus, the son of
David sits upon the Throne of his Father David; it is given to them for whom it
is prepared; and he that has Abishag the Queen, has the Kingdom also, so he
that has the Queen of Grace, has the Kingdom of Peace, which here Solomon's
wisdom shows us. The hunger and thirst after Righteousness, the seeking the
things of Christ, and not our own, the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness,
and all other things, are added to us; this is the desire in the Saints, the
only necessary thing how to go in and out before the Lord, how to live before
him all his days. Again, The wisdom from above judges all things, knows whose
the living child is, and whose the dead, and knows that the Lord will have a
living child, My son, give me thy heart; and not a dead child, or half a child,
to serve God and Mammon. Solomon builds a Temple; thus the Lord builds a Temple
in us, we are the buildings of the Holy Ghost, the Temple of the Lord.

SECT. II.
THe Kingdom divided cannot stand, Satan's Kingdom divided must fall; Christ's
is not divided, neither can be, yet many Kings, and many Lords, many men and
means, flesh and form divides. Paul, Apollo and Cephas they were divided in
men, but united in Christ, and having several forms, yet one Spirit; but when
we come to the unity of the Spirit, then we shall say, many Lords and Gods have
ruled over us, but to us now there is but one God and Lord, the Father of all,
that is within us all. And neither Jeroboams false Gods, nor Rehoboams heavy
finger, nor folly, in neglecting the old Counselors, shall divide us, but we
shall walk together in the light of the Lord our God; no Ahab shall reign
amongst us, nor Baals Priests trouble us, but the power of the Lord, in his
Elijah, shall be like fire out of their mouths to slay them, and there shall be
no halting any more between Baal and God, Flesh and Spirit, but the knowledge of
the Lord shall increase, and they shall serve the Lord alone, they shall shut
Heaven, and open it, the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven shall be given unto
them, and all Ahabs and Jezabels shall be given over to believe lies, till
iniquity be their ruin, seeing they refused to be instructed, and would none
of the Lords counsel, the Lord will mock at their calamity, and laugh when
their fear comes.

CHAP. X. The ninth Book that God writes in Man
THe fourth Book of Kings opened: Fire from Elijah that consumes the Captain
and his fifty; Elijahs blessing upon Elisha, Elijah taken up into Heaven,
Elisha received his Spirit, divided the waters, healed them, makes the Ax to
swim, visits the Shunamite, blesses her case, is fed by a Raven, Hezekiahs
and Josiah's good reign: all which we are the truth and substance of: thus the
Lord does with us, we are a fire and a flame to our enemies, to burn up stubble
before us, and all that shall fall upon us shall be broken in pieces, but on
whomsoever we shall fall we shall grind them to powder; we are to be taken up
in the fiery Chariot of the Lords love, burning like fire, and let all our
dross and flesh fall from us like dross to the earth, like his Mantle; and we
have also received the spirit of Elisha in a double measure, not only his
Mantle, but his Grace, and Gods gracious presence, not only to divide the
waters, and heal them, but also to divide between Light and Darkness, Heaven
and Earth, Flesh and Spirit, Sweet and Bitter, Good and Evil, Day and Night,
and to turn the evil into good, the night into day, that they that sit in
darkness, and in the region and shadow of death, light might spring up; this is
the healing of the water, and the making the Ax to swim, to take away the heart
of stone, and to give them a heart of flesh; as also to grow in grace, and
multiply and increase in knowledge and love, as the oil did, and the meal, the
more she gave the more she had, so its truly in the Saints, a little grace goes
far, does many cures, answers all things; as it was with the few barley loaves,
and the little fishes, how many thousand were fed, and the twelve baskets full
of fragments that was left, this was wounderful; so it is in us here, a little
grace overcomes a world of sin, like a spark of fire to a deal of gunpowder,
and as a little leaven that leaveneth the whole lump, and as a grain of
mustard seed that grows to a tree suddenly, so is the Righteousness of God
revealed.

SECT. II.
JOsias and Hezekias good reign, how they opened the Temple, restored many
things, found the Law hid, and caused it to be read, and sanctified the people,
and to make the table of the Lord holy; this is the Lords doing to find the
Law that has been lost, to restore it in us, and all things else, that we may
see how we are purged from dead works to serve the living God: and thus he is
the good Hezekiah, that opens that Temple of the Lord, preparing a way for him,
making the everlasting doors to fly open at his voice and knock, that the King
of Glory may enter in, who is the Lord of Hosts.

CHAP. XI. The tenth Book that God writes in Man
THe Book of Chronicles, this also God writes in us, he does these two things
according to this twofold Book, for there is two Books especially to be taken
notice of, wherein God writes his Will: The first is called, or may be the
substance of the first Book of Chronicles; and the other of the second Book of
Chronicles: answerable to these Books in Letter, we find two Books in Spirit:
The first is called Gods Book of Life, and that is when the Lord God writes his
Name in our hearts, his new Man, and his new Nature and Life, there then we are
his Book of Life. The second is called our Book of Life, that is the Book
wherein God writes our Names, according as it is written; Rejoice not so much
in any writing as in this, that your names are written in Heaven. Now this
Heaven, and in the Book of Life, is all one, that is when we are beloved of
God, or when the Lord seals us a seal upon his Heart, or as a signet upon his
Arm, to be written in the everlasting Love of the Lord, which is his Heart and
Bowels, and there to live by the Life of Love; this is the writing in the Book
of Life indeed; and though we have our names written upon our towers, walls,
houses, histories, and generations of the whole world, yet it falls at last, but
this only endures; the memorial of the other shall rot, when the memory of
these shall be blessed; these be the two books of Chronicles indeed, and yet
both agree in one, and are indeed one; for where the one is, there will be the
other; If we be written in Gods Book, or Heart, then be sure God will have his
name written in our hearts and spirits.

SECT. II.
THus the whole book of Chronicles, We are the sum of them all, Chronicles of
his Love, Chronicles of his Mercy, the Chronicles of his Grace, the Chronicles
of his Power, Goodness and Greatness, and the Chronicles of his Wisdom: We are
his generation of off spring; all our lives, as well as lines, descended from
him; He was and is the Father of us all; He knows every Soul and Family apart,
Tribe by Tribe, He knows our names, and our fathers house; he Chronicles and
sets down the time of our birth and baptism, who was our father and mother, and
in what Country, whether a freeborn or a stranger, all our travels, even our
whole pilgrimage written, our lives, deaths, resurrections, and mansions. Are
not we his Chronicles then indeed?

CHAP. XII. The eleventh Book that God writes in Man
THe books of Ezra and Nehemiah opened in Man: The returning out of captivity;
the leading captivity captive, and receiving gifts from above, according as it
is written, when the Lord turned back the captivity of Zion we were like men in
a dream, till we were thoroughly awakened; and then we sang the songs of Zion,
when we were in our own Land; just like Peter, when the Angel smote him, and
made way for him, open the iron gates and did deliver; he was in a trance, he
thought he had seen a vision at first till afterward: So is this deliverance
from the whore of Babylon, that has bewitched us all with sorceries more or
less: Oh what a joyful thing it is! And then can they tell what God has done
for their souls, and magnify the Lord, saying, By the rivers of Babylon we
have sat: This Sodom has been a Paradise to us; But now, if I prefer not
Jerusalem above all, having seen it, and now come tolive in it; before we had
nothing but sadness; a laughter that was but madness; there we howled, but here
we have our harps and songs full of joy.

SECT. II.
THe number that are delivered, the journey, God was with them on their way,
the laying the foundation of the Temple, the building it, the Spirit of the
Lord strengthening them in it; the enemies that oppose the building of the
Wall, Sanballats rage against it, the sword and the trowel finish it; The
strange wives put away, the Law read, the Reformation made: All which is most
true, if applied in the truth of it to the workings of God amongst us, whom the
world and flesh has made a wilderness, a desolation, a place for Dragons,
there God intends to lay his foundation, which is Christ Jesus, in us, the hope
of Glory; other foundations can no man lay else: then the building is the
Temple of the Lord, which is his Spirit in us; and the Walls are the arms of
the Almighty stretched out, these everlasting arms of love that are about thee,
O Israel; the one arm under thy head, the other upon thy heart: these be thy
walls, thou needst not now fear any Sanballat, Tobiah, any Ashdonians
whatsoever, that like Foxes would spoil thy vines, or else climb thy walls to
pull down thy glory, but they shall not, All that hate thee shall be ashamed.
And whereas ye say, it is not time to build my house, says the Lord, and ye to
live in your seiled houses, and to let my house lie waste, ye shall not
prosper: For if any man hides his sin, he shall not prosper; but he that
confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy. So the strangers and strange
wives are removed, there shall no unclean thing live there any more: Whatsoever
lives in that, is a stranger or a strange wife; any thing thou art wedded or
married to, that is not the Lord, is a strange wife, that steals away thy
heart, and the Lord will give thee a bill of divorcement to put her away.

CHAP. XIII. The twelfth Book that God writes in Man. 1
is called ESTHER.
THe book of Esther opened in Man is nothing else but the state of a poor
earthly creature in whom there is nothing, when once beloved of God the Lord
has a favor to it, and sends forth his Spirit to prepare it all things
according to his heart and mind; and so is brought forth in great glory,
washed, perfumed, adorned, justified, sanctified, and so glorified with the
Lord, to be betrothed to the Lord, in truth, in judgment and in righteousness.
And as it shows how the Lord exalts the lowly and meek, the worm and nothing,
above all things; so it also holds forth the pomp, pride, and glory of all
flesh, and the fall thereof is great, and that in Haman a lively figure and
representation of this, how flesh and blood is exalted, and what favor, honor,
friends it may have, yea, what obeisance and homage; how it may have a glorious
footstool, and as stately and magnificent a crown as the god and king of this
world can give him: And what shall not be done to the man whom the whole world
jointly intends to honor? Here all things below are theirs, yet behold of a
sudden he is cut down like the grass, and cast into the oven, Cry then, All
flesh is grass, and the glory thereof like the flower of grass, so soon it
withers away, and we are gone: surely all flesh is grass, but the Word of the
Lord endures for ever: His Grace and Truth, throughout all generations, his
Garments, do not change, neither his feet weary, nor his shoes wax old, but all
is more beautiful for the wearing; This is true in Esther and Haman, the one
Grace advanced, the other Flesh disgraced.

CHAP. XIV. The thirteenth Book that God writes in Man
THe book of Job opened in man; And herein you have the life and state of a
Christian held forth, dying in the flesh and to the world, and then living to
God, and rising in Spirit above this world, entering into another world, his
life with God in Christ; this Job shows us in this history, the true pattern of
the other; as for example, first, The Christians dying in the flesh, and to the
world, is clearly manifested in Jobs miseries, how Satan set upon him, his wife
tempting him, Satan accusing him, God hiding himself for a moment from him,
Satan buffeting him; his children destroyed, his cattle consumed, his houses
burnt, his lands and living impoverished, his spirit troubled, his health
broken, his body bruised, even from the crown of the head to the feet, all over
afflicted, his friends forsake him, his comforters torment him, all his
Physicians of no value; thus he lies in the bed of sickness, death seizing
upon all he has.

SECT. II. What is the Mystery of this History of Job in Man.
I Pray what is this but the Christian crucified to the world, and the world
crucified to him, a Christians dying daily, mortifying his members here upon
the earth; For this is the Will of the Lord, even the denying of our selves,
and the bearing of our cross, and following him: And is not all this taught and
learnt here in the spiritual state? But mark the conclusion; It dies in
weakness, but it does rise in power; it is sown a natural body, but it rises a
spiritual body; it dies in the flesh, but rises in the Spirit: So much is clear
in the other part of the History. All that God took away from Job in the Flesh,
he gave him again in the Spirit; so is it in the Mystery, what we lose one way,
we gain another way; we lose, according as it is written, He that loses his
life shall save it, and he that would save his life shall lose it. And again,
He that loses or forsakes father or mother, wife or children, lands or
livings, for my sake, shall have a hundred fold in this life, and in the world
to come life everlasting.

SECT. III.
Therefore, says the Text, The latter end of Job was better then his beginning;
so is it indeed in the spiritual state, the latter end is better then the
beginning, he goes on to perfection, his last works are the best; therefore Job
said again, I have heard of thee with the hearing of the ear, but mine eyes
never saw thee till now, wherefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes. The Lord
had given him eye*salve to see clearly the Glory and Beauty of the Lord God
himself, and what he heard he sees true, so is it in the pure spiritual state:
We see as well as hear the wonderful things of God; what others eyes have not
seen, nor ears heard, we can utter. And lastly, The more Job saw of God, the
less he saw in himself; the more his flesh was dead and buried, I abhor my
self, says he; so is it true in us also that know the Lord, That the nearer
the Lord appears to us, the more we like wax melt away; the more we enjoy of
him, the less we enjoy our selves.

CHAP. XV. The fourteenth Book that God writes in Man
THe Book of Psalms opened in Man: He is the Harp in the Lords hand, the still
and loud Instrument, the Psaltery, the Organ, Sac but and Dulcimer, tuned
aright by the Lord; and therein the Lord God makes melody with a loud Voice,
their Sun and Moon, Heaven and Earth, Fire and Vapors, all fulfilling his
Word: Fruitful Trees, and all Cedars, Gardens and Fountains, Mountains and
Hills, Men and Angels, yea every thing that has breath praise the Lord, as
David says, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me praise his
holy name. And again, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget none of his
benefits. And again, Yea while I have any breath will I praise the Lord. And
again, Lord let me live, that I may praise thee. This is the Will of God in
Christ Jesus, concerning us, in all things to give thanks: Wherefore says the
Apostle, Be not filled with wine, wherein is excess, but be filled with Spirit,
wherein there is no excess. This is the wine indeed, that he that drinks
abundantly thereof, it will make him merry and wise, according to the Apostles
rule, If any man be merry, let him sing Psalms, if afflicted, let him pray. And
indeed when we are full of the Holy Ghost, we shall be like men full of new
wine, every one shall be heard in that Spirit, praising the Lord, and speaking
of the wonderful things of Heaven: Wherefore, says the Apostle, When ye are
thus full of the Spirit, then ye shall rejoice in the Lord. And again, Ye shall
rejoice, singing to your selves Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs; that
is, there shall be music, all sorts, and tunes, and melodies heard.

SECT. II. Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs in
FIrst for Psalms: In the beginning of the breathings and breakings forth of
the Spirit, the Psalms are for the weak ones, the babes in joy. The second,
Hymns are for the fathers in joy; but the Songs are for the strong young men,
whose joy is full; so that by these three I understand only the several degrees
of joy, and also the various operations of the Spirit: The Psalms are
doctrines, mutually mixed with Praises, the Hymns thanksgivings purely, and the
Songs the ravishments of love: Psalms are the tastes we have of him, the Hymns
are longings after him, but the Song is the full possession of him, My beloved
is mine, and I am his; he comes to his garden: so that one Saint has a Psalm;
another that is higher, a Hymn, and third, a spiritual Song; and that all from
one and the same Spirit, but the inspirations more or less.

SECT. III.
ANd as for David's new Songs, he speaks so often of in his Book, we have the
same written in our Books, Psalm for Psalm, Prayer for Prayer, Hymn for Hymn,
Song for Song, even a Song for every Season; the new Song is like to the new
Name, the new Covenant, the new Jerusalem, the new Creature; so is this new
Song only to be sung by such, therefore called the Song of Moses, and of the
Lamb, and none can sing it, nor knows the tune of it, but the Virgins that
follow the Lamb; it is in Spirit full of Glory.

SECT. IV.
ANd again, As our sufferings have abounded, so shall our consolations; he that
has suffered a little, shall have a Psalm or a Hymn; but he that has abounded
in sorrow, in affliction, shall have this Spirit of Joy above his fellows, he
shall sing aloud, and shout for joy of heart; wherefore he says, Blessed are
the meek and hungry, and that mourn, these shall all be comforted; but when he
speaks of this, Blessed, says he, are they that are persecuted for
Righteousness sake, for they shall be exceeding glad and rejoice; their joy
shall exceed others, and as sin also has abounded, so shall Grace, and Glory,
and Honor, and eternal Praise, and Joy abound also: Wherefore its well said of
Christ, That as his sorrow, was such as he says, Behold, if ever sorrow were
like unto my sorrow, when he cried, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
So behold his joy, never joy was like it, at the conversion of a sinner.

SECT. V.
THis Book of Psalms in Man, it is all but one Psalm, it is an eternal Song, a
praising God for ever and and ever, without end; this is not with our mouth,
but the Lords mouth and heart, not with lips, but the kisses of his mouth, and
the breath of his Spirit; and indeed all the workings of God are in joy, they
all bring forth the first fruits of Righteousness in peace and joy, all things
working together for good; all our sorrows, travels, crucifyings, self-denials,
crosses, losses, miseries, deaths and torments, they all bring forth a Psalm, a
Hymn, and a Song; this is the man child that shall be born after all: Now it
may be God is only making or beginning this Psalm in us, yet a little while and
it shall be finished, and the noise thereof heard from one end of the Heavens
to another.

SECT. VI.
ANd the Song shall be this, Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath; Thou art
worthy of all Honor, Glory and Praise, for thou have redeemed us to thy self.
And again, The Lord, the Lord, the Lord God omnipotent reigns. And again, We
give thee thanks, Lord God Almighty, that thou have reigned, and take this
great power to thy self, and that thy time is come, and that the Kingdom of
this world is become the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his Saints.
Rejoy^^, O ye Heavens, and all that are in them, for thy God reigns.

SECT. VII. The Lord alone is the Psalm, and the Hymn,
BUt yet further, The Lord God is our Song, our Blessedness, that David speaks
of, and the Law that we delight in, and tree of Life that brings forth all good
fruit, and all flesh is the chaff, and like the wind, the Spirit of the Lord
shall scatter and divide it all, bringing it to Judgment, and flesh is that
which rages and imagines vain things against the Lord, and it is the Lord alone
that shall sit upon the holy hill of Zion, and breaks all flesh in pieces with
its scepter. Our flesh is the enemy that increases and rises up against us and
the Lord, and it is the Lord, that Spirit, that smites this enemy in the cheek
bone, and breaks the teeth of the ungodly; so all salvation is the Lords, and
his blessing is his people. Again, The Lord is their Sacrifice of
Righteousness, their Wealth and Health, and all the light of his Countenance
is that which is their Life indeed; the Lord is their Life and Peace, that
makes them to dwell in safety alone; their wine, and corn, and oil, it is all
with the Lord alone, and nothing else. What singing was there* at the birth of
Christ Jesus after the flesh? How did the Angel, Shepherds, Joseph, Mary,
Zachary, Elizabeth, Simeon, and all sing? How did they all magnify the Lord,
and bless the Lord God of Israel? What is it but an example of the heavenly
Thing, that when Christ Jesus is born in us, and framed there, there is
singing, and will be where the Lord lives; But all the minstrels in the flesh
are turned out, and it calls them all madness: yea, there is a singing though
we be in prison outwardly, and great misery, yet our joy none can take from us;
nothing can break out peace, nor interrupt our melody, nor quench our joy; no
man nor devil can take it from us.

SECT. VIII.
YEt a word more, this glory and perfect joy is not for them that live in the
flesh, nor in darkness, or in the Kingdoms of this world; There is nothing but
howlings, sorrows, gnashing of teeth, weeping and lamentations here, as Israel
in Egypt and in the wilderness were weary in their lives, and full of
groanings, strivings and fightings: But the songs are heard neither in Egypt,
nor in Babylon, nor in the Wilderness, but in Canaan; here we hang up our
hearts and mourn, but in the strange Land are we more strangers; While we are
present in the body, we are absent from the Lord; But when we shall absent from
the body, and be present with the Lord, and not live by faith only, but by
sight; when we shall not read of him, nor hear of him only, but when we shall
see him face to face, then shall our joy be full, then we shall sing the song
of Zion: When we are entered into the joy of our Lord and Master; when the day
of the Lord is come, the voice of the Bride and of the Bridegroom is heard, and
the marriage of the Lamb is come, then shall the Song be sung, it is prepared
for that day; then shall the voice of the Turtle be heard amongst us, and the
voice of the Lord himself rejoicing over us: And we rejoicing and singing in
the Lord and in nothing else, we shall sing, O Lord our God how excellent is
thy Name in all the world! Let the Heavens praise thee, O Lord, yea, let all
the world give thanks unto thee; yea, let all things arise, O Lord, and call
thee blessed.

SECT. IX. To sing with the Spirit and with
THis made the Apostle say, I will pray with the Spirit, and with Understanding
also; I will sing with the Spirit, and sing with Understanding also: He then
that has not this spirit cannot sing with understanding; he is as he that
speaks in an unknown tongue, a Barbarian; except the Spirit interpret, it is but
howling and no singing; but where its filled and enlarged with love; where the
Spirit of the Lord is heaped up and running over, it must break forth, and
overflow, it will not be hid; it is like a fire in the bones, like the sea at
full tide, like a full wind at sea, filling the sails; such is the powerful
presence of God overshadowing us.

A Psalm.
THe Lord, the Lord, the eternal God,
who lives and reigns to make us glad;
Our Psalms, our Hymns, our spirits songs,
our melodies in him alone.
We are his Organs and his Harps,
he tunes and plays upon our hearts.
He sings and makes most pleasant noise,
filling us full of mirth and joys.
A Hymn*
O Glory, glory, to the Lord,
his Name be blessed all abroad;
Our life, mirth, love, and joys,
lives and lies in his glories.
A spiritual Song.
O Holy, holy,
God on high,
Eternally,
Our melody,
Above the sky,
Never to dye,
But thus to cry,
Glory, Glory,
To God on high,
Eternally,
Happy, happy.
CHAP. XVI. The fifteenth Book that God writes in Man is called PROVERBS.
SECT. I. The Spirit that interprets secrets and
ALL dark sayings, mysteries, secrets, wonderful things, deep and high, sealed
and concealed, old and new, there is a Spirit, even the Spirit of the holy God,
which dwells in them that are gods, which can reveal secrets, expound parables,
find out the pearl hid in the field, and interpret dreams and hard sayings; He
that plows with this heifer shall find out all these riddles and parables made
plain in us. And for the most part all these Proverbs without came from Wisdom
and Understanding, which dwelt in Solomon, and spoke these things from within.

SECT. II. The sum of this history of Proverbs spiritually in us in five
particulars; The Father God, the Mother Wisdom, the Son the Saint.
HEre is five things spoken of.

First, The Father, and that is the Lord God himself.

Secondly, The Mother, and that is Wisdom, so she is called; Wisdom is
justified of her children, which is Christ; God, the Father of Judgment;
Christ, the Mother of Wisdom; here is Judgment and Wisdom together.

Thirdly, The Son, that is here spoken of in the history of the Proverbs, and
that is the Child of God, the Christian, or Saint, that begotten Son that came
from the bowels of Wisdom, traveling with it, and from the spirit of Judgment;
this is the Son that is so much admonished and taught of God every way; it must
needs be a wise Son that has such Parents; and it cannot stand in need of any
thing that has such a Father, it must needs be brought up in the nurture and
fear of the Lord, filled with all wisdom and understanding. A wise son, says
Solomon, is a joy to his mother, but a foolish one is the sorrow of her heart;
So here, Wisdoms children are a joy to her; She can say, Lord, here am I, and
the children thou have given me I had from thee, thine they were, and thou
gave them to me, and I give them to thee again, and my self with them.

Fourthly, The strange woman and her sons, the woman that flattereth with her
lips, and speaks lies; what is this woman, but the world? and the children of
this woman, but the children of the world? This flesh that dwells in us, is the
strange woman, and the woman that flattereth with her lips, and betrays us,
tempting us to come in unto her, and see what she has prepared. This is the
Antichrist that lives in flesh, and would feign her self a Prophetess, and
would have all turn in to her, and drink of her fornications, and eat of her
idolatrous sacrifices, which she has prepared. And all her sons are the brats
of Babel, the concupiscence or lust of the flesh. 2. The lust of the eye and
heart. 3. The pride of life. These three be her darlings and Delilahs that are
nourished and brought up by her daily, the strange woman and her children.

Fifthly, The enemies of Wisdom, and these be called fools and scorners,
sinners and strangers; these hate knowledge, and reject the fear of the Lord:
She has called, and they would not answer, yea, cried, but they would not
hear. She has prepared her table and her banquets, and cried in the high ways
and concourse of people, to come in to be her guests, but they have all turned
aside, yea, they hate her dainties, and despise her counsels, preferring, with
Esau, a mess of pottage before either blessing or birthright.

CHAP. XVII. The sixteenth Book that God writes in Man is called ECCLESIASTES.
SECT. I. The vanity of all things in the outward
THe book of Ecclesiastes opened in Man; Wherein you have the vanity of all
earthly things discovered, how this world and the fashion thereof perishes;
all the fullness thereof exhausted, her treasures corrupted, her glory stained,
her riches moth-eaten, her dwellings rotten, her friends consuming, her life
dying, and all her attire fading; This is the state of this life, this old
world, this outward man of ours, the tabernacle that is groaning and burdened,
ready to be dissolved; yea, heaven and earth, and all the creatures are (the
Apostle says expressly) groaning for the redemption and the manifestation of
the sons of God: The whole generation of the first Adam, his whole kingdom and
dominion, the world, wherein he ruled, is all melting with fervent heat; yea,
his more excellent things are vain, his righteousness, wisdom, knowledge,
learning, arts, sciences, laughter, and joy, yea, his whole study and practice,
yea, all his sobriety, chastity, charity, fortitude, temperance, patience;
there is vanity in it all. Besides, the things that are outward, as his
buildings, stately possessions, pleasant gardens, and orchards, all his
precious substance, his royal attendants, his faring deliciously every day,
there is a deeper vanity upon these.

SECT. II.
ANd all this comes from man, which is a bundle of vanity, yea less then
nothing, vanity and vexation of spirit; The vainest thing that is, says the
Prophet, is man, that is, the natural man, the earthly man, the imaginations of
the thoughts of his heart are evil, and that continually; from his evil heart
proceeds all evil; for unto the defiled and unclean there is nothing pure or
clean, hut all he touches, tastes or handles, is defiled, till he be cleansed
within, being like the lepers that infected all about them, houses and walls;
So here, O vain man, the worst of all things, in whom dwells no goodness; nay,
he makes all other things vain: but it is not so in the Kingdom of God, nor in
the World to come, by Christ therein; every soul, that tasted and received of
the Father, sees nothing but excellency and everlasting comfort; there is no
vanity, nor vexation of spitit: there is nothing but holiness to the Lord;
there is durable riches, and eternal mansions, and no alteration or shadow of
changing; for all things are there of God, etc.

CHAP. XVIII. The seventeenth Book that God writes in Man is called The Song of
SOLOMON.
SECT. I. Christ's Kisses and his Mouth, what
Christ's Song, and the Spouses Song; The kisses are the Testimonies of the
Spirit, the manifestations of his presence: His mouth are the divine oracles
that breath into her, the giving her the holy Spirit, opening his mouth, and
breathing into her that spirit that may quicken her, and teach her all things.
And kisses, the more the better, the running over of his spirit and presence.
For thy loves, His kisses are his love tokens. Are better then wine, The light
of his countenance, the least presence of him, a kiss, a look, a touch, a
taste, far beyond all the world.

SECT. II. The ointment poured out.
THe savor of the good ointments poured forth. This is Christ's Fullness, Grace,
Glory and Truth, full of Grace and truth, full of Spirit and Life; this is then
good ointment poured forth; freely he has received, and freely he gives, For
of his fullness we all receive, grace for grace.

Therefore do the Virgins love thee. This is a pure undefiled love, therefore
called Virgins, when it is begotten only by the pure ointments of Christ
pouring forth, and nothing else; this is the fire that kindles it, and the oil
that maintains it, burns the purest flames, admits of no mixture whatsoever,
but keeps it Virginity, and chaste pure love, for the Lord Christ, and no other.

SECT. III. What the Kings Chamber is to be brought
3 DRaw me, and we will run after thee. They must needs run whom God draws, and
love will not only draw but constrain, and it is the love shed abroad in us;
this anointing poured forth will ravish us, and its nothing but the inward
anointing that draws, the outward teaching is nothing without it. The King has
brought me into his Chamber. This is the place of Rest, no where else, no
society else, but the presence Chamber, nay the bed Chamber of the King
himself; none of his Attendants will serve no other room, but to live alone in
him, and in the same Chamber, and glory with him, and no other, this anointing
draws us thither. We will be glad and rejoice in thee. This is the fullness of
joy, now she is in Heaven full of joy; now, and never till now, can we be glad
and rejoice. We will remember thy love more then wine; the upright love thee.
We shall never part more, I am brought to his Chamber, but nothing can draw me
hence again: Come let us take our fill of love, and forget all sorrow and
enmity, remember nothing but love alone, and no love but thine, that is the
love that makes us forget all things else, and love thee above all things, to
live with thee.

SECT. IV. What the blackness and the comeliness is.
4 I Am black, but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem. It is not the outside,
the form, the image or shadaw you are to look at, that is black indeed, but all
my comeliness is in Christ, it is in the Lord, he is my Beauty and Splendour,
my Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; but I am black, my
flesh, and nothing but blackness and darkness from it; this I was, but the
other I am; now this I have put off, the other is put on: Nay I am black, you
may think and call it so; it may be so to you, black heresy, blasphemy, and
yet it may be comely to me; it may be judged black by men, and yet be approved
of God; for that which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers.

SECT. V.
5 LOok not upon me, because I am black, because the Sun has looked upon me.
That is, you are my friends, and have accounted me your brother; you now look
scornfully upon me, casting me out of your Synagogue, because the Sun has
looked upon me, and the Lord has anointed me, and enlightened me above my
fellows; envy me not for that, neither look at that which is outward, but at
that which is inward, for all my glory and excellency is not in me, but in the
Lord God that lives with me. My mothers children were angry with me. We that
were one, and agreed in one, when we lived both in the flesh, are now angry at
me since I have lived in the Spirit: You, my own mothers children, that have
one Mother, Nature and Country, go about to kill and crucify me; they would
sell me away, do any thing with me, betray me into the hands of all my enemies,
they are set spitefully against me, as they did Joseph, and Christ, and Abel,
at the beginning, and all because their works are evil, and mine good, they see
the Lord is with me and blesses me. They made me the keeper of the Vineyards,
but my own Vineyard have I not kept: That is, while I ruled, others was set
over us, and had a glory and pre-eminence in the flesh above others, teaching
them, and governing them; I my self in the mean time became a castaway, and I
received honor that came from men, but not from God, and I was sent of them,
and called by them, and ruled as a man, but I was not called by God: I
condemned that in others which I found in my self; I lived according to the
flesh in the Letter, but not according to God in Spirit; I saw others moats,
but not my own beams; such a hypocrite I was, thus I followed a false Christ,
and not the true, and so was a false branch, and not a true.

SECT. VI. It is God that justifies, that is our
6 TEll me, O thou whom my soul loves: It is God that justifies, who is it
that condemns? It is God that sanctifies, who is he that defiles? It is God
that is with us, who is he that is against us? It is God that makes us comely,
what shall make us black? Tell me therefore, and say unto me, Thou art all
fair, my love, there is no spot in thee; and then though my mothers children be
never so angry with me, or do condemn me, yet there shall be no condemation to
them that are thus in Christ Jesus, and do not walk after the flesh, but after
the Spirit; he has justified, and that shall be justified: If this be vile, I
will be more vile; I value not their anger then, for I have thy love.

SECT. VII. The true Vineyard.
AGain, I have followed false christ's, and worshipped strange gods, and those
have been my blackness: In that I have lived in the Vine Christ, as a Branch
therein; I have lived in the Vineyards of men and means, they have planted
Vineyards, and made Sermons and Worships, and these I have kept before I
recived thy anointing, and had almost forsaken the living Fountain, the
Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts.

SECT. VIII.
TEll me: There be three things that every soul, that has tasted any thing of
the heavenly Life, thirsts after.

The first is, To have the everlasting Love of the Lord to be revealed to him,
which is better to him then life it self, better then all things.

Secondly, To see a love from the Lord, a fire from Heaven falling in our
hearts, and kindling an everlasting flame of heavenly love in us to him again,
that from a coal from his Altar we may be all a fire of love with him, that the
zeal and love we have to the Lord may eat us up.

Thirdly, That the love wherewith God loves us, and the love wherewith we love
God, we may also be taught to love one another, and all these three loves may
thus agree in one; we should not then be angry at our mothers children without
a cause, and hate them, but love and pity them.

SECT. IX.
TEll me. I shall insist something more largely upon this, having had my
enlargement and commission from God to speak more from hence, upon sundry
occasions. And first, That when we are wearied out in following and keeping
many Vineyards, many men's works and labors; when we are weary of all, and
loaded after all, and as far to seek, then at last, as at first, then here is
our Rest after all, this is the Vineyard, Come unto me, and I will give you
rest. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; In me shall ye have peace and
perfect freedom: When you have emptied all the Cisterns, I am full; when their
Lamps are grown dim, and almost spent, I will be thy sun, shield, and great
reward; Why do we spend our labor then for that which is not bread, and our
money for that which profits not, and our strength for that which satisfies
not? Hearken unto me and your souls shall live; ye shall eat that which is
good, and delight your selves in fatness.

SECT. X. We shall never be taught well till the
TEll me. When men can teach us no longer, then God can and will; and may I not
say, as the Apostle said, Whereas for our time we might have been teachers of
others, we have need that one teach us again, what be the principles of the
doctrine of Christ: And what is the reason of this? because we have been taught
of man, and by man, and so shall never come to the knowledge of the truth that
way, unless the Spirit teach us all over again; then we shall profit indeed: We
shall never be well taught till then; For flesh and blood can never reveal such
things unto us; as in the 16. of Matthew, says Christ, What do men say that I,
the Son of man, am? that is, what do the Scribes and Pharisees, Rulers and
Sadduces, the wise Doctors and Rabbis, those as well as others, what do they
teach to the people, and say, or speak, of me? Peter answered; Some say thou
art Elias, others say thou art Jeremias, others, John Baptist is risen again;
and others, one of the Prophets. Thus these great wise learned men were at
variance, and said nothing to the purpose: For God had hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto babes. Therefore said Christ
again, But what say thou that I am? thou that art taught of God, thou that
have none of these outward glories after the flesh, thou that art a fool to
them, what say thou? Peter answered, Thou art the Son of the living God: this
was a lively voice that spoke thus in him. Well, says Christ, I would have you
know, That flesh and blood could never tell thee this, but my Father which is
in heaven, he has told thee it.

SECT. XI. The teachings of God more excellent in three
A Gain, the teachings of God are more excellent then any other whatsoever in
these three things.

First, His teachings are plain.

Secondly, Pure.

Thirdly, Powerful.

First, Plain, as the Apostle said, Now thou speak plainly, and not in
parables. And again, Show us plainly of the Father, that we may see the Father,
and it suffices us. And again, Thou have the words of eternal life, whither
should we go? And again, When Christ comes he well tell us all things, in
Heaven and in Earth, in Scriptures and Prophesies; he will open all to us, and
we shall have all things naked and open, Death and Life, Hell and Heaven, Flesh
and Spirit: There shall then be neither proverb, nor parable, nor dark saying;
no sealed books, nor sealed fountain; no secrets nor mysteries; but all things
shall be manifest, for the Day shall declare them.

Secondly, Purely, now he is the pure Being and Fountain of all things, in whom
is light, or he is light, and in him is no darkness at all: There is no mixture
at all with God, the throne of the Lord and the Lamb, from thence come the
crystal waters of life pure and clear.

Thirdly, Powerfully, he speaks with Authority, and not as the Scribes; he
speaks, and brings forth his word, and it is done: All things are at his
command, he calls, and all obey, Lazarus come forth, and it is so; Be it
according to thy faith, and it was so: I will be thou clean, and it was so:
Awake thou that sleep, and I will give thee life; And how is this? He is the
resurrection and the life: thus he that receives power to believe in him,
though he were dead, yet shall he live.

SECT. XII.
THe best have need of his telling; none knows so much, but he can tell them
more, and when they think they know something, and are puffed up, they know
nothing yet as they ought to know, for I may say in very many things we are yet
ignorant; but we shall not always know in part, we shall know as we are known;
and when that which is perfect is come, that which is imperfect is done away;
and indeed it is God alone can tell us best; When none is nigh us, he has a
sweet, still, secret way, a voice behind us, telling, This is the way, this is
right and truth, That is not; Hear him, what the Spirit says.

SECT. XIII. Nothing can quench, kill, or separate
O Thou whom my soul loves! This is a heavenly voice breathed out by the
Spirit, a divine flame of love; by which it appears, how the Spouse was sick of
love, and nothing but death without his presence, And also, that all Gods
teachings and workings, toward his people, are all in lone; His very Rod and
Staff is in love; He loves every Child whom he corrects: And so the Soul
that loves the Lord truly, though the Lord kill him, yet will he put his trust
in the name of the Lord. Such a thing is love, that though it wander a while in
the wilderness, and lose it self, yet it will find out the way; nothing can
quench it, no waters; nothing can kill it, no death; nothing can separate it,
no torment, no defense; nothing can diminish it, or any way choke it, but the
thing it lives upon; and where it loves, there it lives. What other argument
could the Spouse bring to move God; As his love constrains us, so will our love
to him constrain him, draw him, and he will run after us, fall about our necks
and kiss us. I remember, in the history of Lazarus, that Mary and Martha sent
to Christ this message, Lord, he whom thou love is sick. They thought that
was enough; he knew well whom they meant, and they knew well how much that
would prevail upon him, to which Christ returns, This sickness is not unto
death, but for the glory of God, and so it was: His love to Christ made him
sick, and Christ's love to him made him well; Therefore says Mary, Lord, had
thou been here, my brother had not dyed. Christ's absence was his death, and his
presence brings him life.

SECT. XIV.
THe love we have to Christ must be with all the soul, or else it is not love;
he will have the whole child, or none of the child; he is the right mother that
bare us, he cannot endure to have us divided between God and Mammon; he will
say to u^, as he said to Peter, Love thou me more then these, that is, more
then gold, silver, lands, livings, wife, children, lusts, sins, gifts or
graces, men or m^ans; then its well if we can return the answer better, I mean,
upon better grounds then he did, not from a Confidence in the Flesh, but in the
Spirit, saying, Lord thou know that I love thee better then all things.
David could many times say so, O how do I love thee Lord above my rest or
appointed food. O how do I thirst after thee, and when shall I appear before
the living God? And again, One thing have I desired of God, and that is, that I
might always live in the house of the Lord. Such a love as is between man and
wife; they have but one life, one love* one soul; so here is one spirit, when
it is so rooted in love, and stablished in God, that nothing can move or shake
it; it can do all things, and endure all things, deny it self, take up its
cross and follow him through fire and water, life and death, and rejoice in him
in the midst of all, fearing nothing as long as he loves them, and his love is
with them.

SECT. XV.
NOw there are five things that shows forth the excellency of this love of the
Spouse to Christ, that it will deserve the name of a soul love, and a sound
love.

The 1. is, Where this love is, it is a love above all loves whatsoever, no
other love comparable to it, it endures to the end, it will bear all things*
believe all things, hope all things, and endure all things; though other loves
fail, but this does not, it is of a more excellent Nature, from an excellent
Principle, from a divine Spirit; there is no love in the world like it, it
being transcendent and supernatural.

Secondly, It is a love before all other loves, this the best, the love that
commands all the rest: For where the soul is, all else is; there is mind, will
and affections; it sits at uppermost room, has the highest place in our
hearts, all the rest bow down to this sheafe, to this love; here they all cover
their faces, and pull down their top sails.

Thirdly, This soul love is a love beyond all loves whatsoever, beyond the love
of husband and wife, parents or children, beyond the love of other men, women,
brethren or friends, nay Angels themselves; for all these loves may exceed
their bounds, and then prove hurtful; but let them keep their bounds, and then
they fall very short of this infinite and exceeding weight of love: For though
the Lord has set bounds to Seas, and other Creatures, nay to men, women and
children, thus far you must love, and no further; but here are no bounds nor
limits to this soul love: Love him with all thy soul, thy heart, thy strength:
It is a love beyond all love whatsoever, it is larger, higher, deeper, longer,
broader then any love else; that made the Apostle cry out, and this will, if
rightly understood, make us cry out, O the height, depth, breadth, length of
the love of Saints to the Lord! O thou whom my soul loves.

Fourthly, It is a love without all, a naked, free, pure love, not for ends,
gain, or ought else, not for any reward or wages; as Satan would have accused
Job to God to have done, saying, Does Job serve God for naught? No, no, Job
knows what he does, and knows what he gets by it, or else he would never be so
serviceable as he is; whereas indeed Job served God without all, but simply and
truly, for the Lords sake alone, and not his own sake at all: this is called a
love without all, out of love, and not of fear to him.

The fifth and last is, To love the Lord in all, which is indeed good, though
it be not so high and excellent as the other, for to love God without all, as
Job did, when the Lord stripped him, as I may say, stark naked, left him hardly a
rag, nay almost took his life away besides, yet in the midst of this it is
said, he sinned not, but blessed God, who gives and takes; blessed be the
Name of the Lord. And again, Though thou kill me, yet will I put my trust in
thee. This is a greater degree of love, nay a stronger love, to love the Lord
without all, as the Disciples said, Lord we have left all and followed thee.
There is more of God in this, then to love God in all, when we have what heart
can desire, the Lord filling full our cup, every one that has the smoking
flax, can be praising God when they are well and prosper, enjoying richly every
thing; but few in death, sickness, wars, misery, want, nakedness in the Cross,
can say, Blessed be the Lord.

SECT. XVI.
ANd is there not much ground for this love, with all our souls to God, if well
and rightly consider?

First, Is it not he first that loves us above all things, Heaven, Earth,
Creatures, Angels, putting all things in subjection to us, to make us to have
dominion over all? The Apostle can tell us, He took not upon him the nature of
Angels but man's.

Secondly, And is not the Lords love to us with all his soul, when he again
loves us before all? before either Hills or Mountains were brought forth, or
any world was, even from everlasting to everlasting, has he, and does he love
us. We were the first in mention, though the last in execution.

Thirdly, The Lords soul love is beyond all; O the height depth, breadth,
length of this Love! John 3. God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. And again, Who loved us, and washed us from our sins in his
Love. And again, When we were sinners and enemies, Christ dyed for the ungodly.
And again, God first loved us, and behold what manner of loveit was, that we
should be called the sons of God.

Fourthly, The Lords Love it is without all, without money, or money worth, Ho,
ho, every one that thirsts, come to the waters and drink, come, buy wine and
milk without money, and without price. And again, When he saw us in our blood,
he said unto us live, then was the time of love.

Fifthly, And his love is within all; for all things are beloved and preserved
for our sakes and good; he blesses all we take in hand, goings in and comings
out, abroad and at home, in soul and body, being his trees planted by his
living waters, and always bringing forth his fruits, and whatsoever we do he
prospers it: This is the Lords love to his people, and how can they choose but
love him thus then, and make him the Beloved of their souls, for he alone is
worthy; for he is sweet, gracious, holy, heavenly, wise, blessed, the fairest
amongst ten thousand; he is all fair; indeed there is no spot in him.

SECT. XVII. The Soul that loves Christ desires to live
WHere thou feedest. The Soul that loves Christ desires to live no where, and
no longer then she may live with Christ; for her life is hid with God in Christ
Jesus. She says, as Ruth said, As the Lord lives, where thou go there will
I go, thy Country shall be my Country, thy Friends, my Friends; thy God, my
God: and nothing but death shall part thee and me. And is it not so here with
the Spouse and her Beloved? as Man and Wife they will live together and not
asunder; the Woman forsakes Father and Mother, and all, to be joined to her
Husband: So here, the Soul is restless till she be with him.

SECT. XVIII.
AGain, the Soul that loves Christ desires not only to live with him, but to
live upon him, to feed as he feeds, to sit at one table with him, in his
Kingdom; to lie in one bed with him, and to fare as he fares, to feed upon his
dainties, his honey and honeycomb, his corn, wine and oil: to feed upon his
love, mercy and truth, his grace and righteousness, to hang upon his lips, and
Christ Jesus to be his daily Bread, that Manna that comes down from heaven,
that he that eats thereof shall never hunger more; So that his presence and
pleasures are its appointed food. And again, To know and do his will, shall be
her meat and drink.

SECT. XIX.
NAy yet further, the Soul that loves Christ desires not only to live with him,
to feed upon him only, and nothing else, but it farther desires to live as he
lives, in the same life, the same way; to live as the Lord lives, be it in
shame or in honor, in mourning or in joy, in peace or trouble, in want or in
abundance, in having nothing or in having all things; all is one, yet herein is
their desires perfected, in being made like unto him in all things, not only in
the Cross, Death, but in his Rising, Ascending, in the Throne with him; in this
they rejoice, and are exceeding glad.

SECT. XX. They love if they live.
AGain, they that love Christ thus they live no longer then he lives and loves
them: When he does but hide his face, they are troubled: when his love ceases,
their life cease; for they live in him, and by him, and through him.

SECT. XXI.
ANd where thou make thy flocks to lie down at noon. If we love Christ, we
shall also love the flock of Christ: If we love him that begat, we shall love
him that is begotten; He that says then that he loves God, and hates his
brother, is a liar, and the truth is not in him, For he that loves God, loves
his brother also; He must needs love that which God loves, and hate that which
God hates, and so be like unto God: For this is his Commandment, That we love
one another, as we have him for an example; And if we say we are in the light,
and do not love our brethren, we are altogether in darkness, and know not the
light.

SECT. XXII.
CHrist and his flock are always together; there Christ is, and there they are;
He their Shepherd, and they the sheep of his pasture; They shall not want for
any thing that is good, either for pasture of still waters of comfort, or
garments of righteousness, or guiding, the Lord leads them; or for oil, or
their cup filling, or their table spreading, they have all things: Thus he
feeds them like a shepherd, not on Commons, but by the rivers of waters, He
watches over them day and night, so that not one of them is lost; If one of the
ninety nine stray, he gathers it in again, and with his rod and his staff he
comforts them.

SECT. XXIII. The flock of Christ has a place to lie down in.
THere remains yet a Rest for the people of God, a place to lie down in safety,
When none shall make them afraid, when there shall be no Fox, nor Wolf, nor
Lion, nor Bear, nor any thing to do hurt in all his holy mountain, says the
Lord; this is the time of refreshing that we look for from the presence of the
Lord; for it is he alone that makes us to lie down in safety, and rise again;
he susteins us; it is he that makes us to feed, and to lie down, and to rest
at noon.

SECT. XXIV. Satan has his flock also.
FOr why should I be as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy companions?
As Christ has his Way, his Truth, his Life, his Love, his Light* his Spirit
and Kingdom; so has the Devil his flock, his ways, his rest, his spirit and
kingdom; but one contrary to the other; But the Lords Spirit shall lead us into
all Truth. Thus the Devil can turn himself into an Angel of light, and make
himself God, and be worshipped as God, sitting in the room of God; this is the
great mystery of iniquity. Indeed many think they be Angels of light, when once
they be but outwardly transformed, whereas indeed they are devils still, only
transformed; a devil in the spirit speaking lies, etc.

SECT. XXV.
IF thou know not, O thou fairest among women! If any soul want wisdom, let him
ask it of me, that give to all liberally, and uphraid none: We may know many
things, and be ignorant of many other; there is more unknown of God then well
known. The Lord knows us far better then we know him; If we be out of the way,
he is so ready to put us in; If we fall too, willing to help us up; if weak* to
strengthen us; and if backwards, to draw us; in all things the Lord is prepared
for our good; and it is no shame for poor souls to confess their ignorance,
that the Lord may instruct them, then to be puffed up, and think our selves
wise enough, when we know nothing.

SECT. XXVI.
O Thou fairest amongst women! Here is Christ's soul-love after her; We may see
the glory and beauty of the Church, the Lords people, above any other
whatsoever, Rev. 12. having crowns of Stars; clothed with the Sun, gut about
with a golden Girdle, the Moon under her feet, so comely and fair we are in his
eyes, even without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: I have compared thee,
for fairness, to the stately Horses in Pharaohs Charets; I am this Pharaoh,
Heaven is the Charet, you are the Horses that carry and bear my Kingdom and
Glory about with you; I ride upon you, and conquer in you, and by you.

SECT. XXVII.
YOur cheeks how fair are they, and comely, with rows of jewels, and thy neck
with chains of gold! This is all glory in the Spirit, and the beauty of the
Lord dwelling with us; his face shining on us: nay, we will have, says the
Lord, nay, make thee also borders of gold; all thy garments shall be glorious;
nay, thy borders shall be gold, with studs of silver: What is this but glorious
from the crown of the head, even to the lowest border and sole of the foot.

SECT. XXVIII.
THy spikenard and sweet spices, when the Lord thy King sits at his table
within thy heart and spirit, coming to sup with thee, for joy thereof, sends
such sweet smells, delights the Lord, who will not only feed at his table,
but rest all the night, and be like a bundle of myrrh between thy breasts: and
thus thou shall be satisfied with his abundance of love: and also, a cluster of
Camphire in the vineyards of Engedi: Behold, thus thou art fair, and ha^^ doves
eyes, so chaste, pure, and lovely, and exceeding pleasant to look upon, the
King delights in thee: Thy bed is also green, still flourishing and ripe, a
continual spring is upon thy cheeks: Thy house and dwellings behold they are
eternal, in the Heavens: Thy beams are Cedars, and thy rafters Fir, thy windows
chrystals, thy gates pearls, thy pavement gold, thy walls precious stones, thy
coverings salvation, thy bed peace, thy fire the Lords love, thy garden the
Lords presence, thy walks the Lords unsearchable wisdom; and art thou not then
fair, even the fairest amongst women? this then is most true, we are the
building of God.

SECT. XXIX. The Rose, and the Lilly, and the Apple tree.
WE are the roses of Sharon, and the lillies of the valleys, the pleasant
flowers of the Lord for sweetness, fairness and pleasantness. And as the
lillies amongst thorns, so are we the Lords loves and lillies amongst the
daughters, excelling them; and the lillies shall grow, notwithstanding the
thorns, and among the thorns appear the more comely, a lilly among the
daughters, and an apple tree amongst the sons; Christ is the apple tree, and
the Christian the lilly; Christ the son, and the Lilly the daughter, and both
from one father, and thus they be sister and brother, husband and wife. The
Lilly sits down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruits are
ple^sant to her taste: this is nothing else but the time of the we^kness of the
Spouse, living under shadows, forms and signs, and the Lord even makes them
fruitful to her, and she sits down there with great delight, till the Lord
raise her up higher

SECT. XXX.
ANd from thence the soul is brought higher; as first it was a Rose, then a
Lilly, then in the Valley, then amongst thorns, then sitting under the apple
tree, under the shadow of that fruit, or creature, and that with delight, in
all, and bearing fruit in all; but now is brought to the Lords banqueting
house, and after that under his banner, for his banner over me was love. Now
she is exalted indeed, passing from fear to love, from Sinai to Sion: This is a
banqueting house indeed, from sitting under the shadow of an appl^ tree, to
the ministration of the Spirit, is to be brought from the shadow to the
substance; from darkness to light, a banqueting house, the nearer we are
brought to the Lord God.

SECT. XXXI.
STay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick with love: His
left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me. This
banqueting house makes her so sick of love; she is so ravished there with more
Glory from the Lord, that she cries out, More Glory, Lord, more Grace, more
Wine, more Love, whole flagons to quench my thirst: I am so tormented with love
after me, Oh ^tay me with flagons of wine, and comfort me with apptes; No more
shadows now, but fruits: it is not the sitting under the shadow of the tree,
but eating the apple, this is the pleasant fruit indeed, this is Christ and his
Spirit: For it is not the knowledge of Christ in the flesh can profit us any
thing, we may sit there long enough; but Christ in the Spirit is the fruit that
must comfort us, O comfort me with this, this healing and balm to my sick soul,
and nothing else.

SECT. XXXII.
I Charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hindes of
the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he please. Here she is
at rest, in a sweet calm, not wounded, but comforted, not sick, but well; the
Lord is embracing her with both hands, Heaven and earth about her, Christ and
his Spirit with her, Grace and Glory on her; these be the two hands, left and
right, embracing her, Form and Power: And now I am laid at rest, and the Lord
is at his rest, awake him not, till he please; he is my love, stir him not,
disturb not my peace, grieve not my spirit, awake not my soul.

SECT. XXXIII.
THe voice of my beloved! behold he is coming over hills and mountains, leaping
and skipping. The Lord is risen and ascended, and comes again; he has absented
himself, but is now drawing nigh to me; he has hid his face for a moment, but
with everlasting love will he return unto me; he is coming, Yet a little while,
and he that should come, will come, and will not tarry. His first coming was in
Flesh, but his second will be in Power and Spirit: His first was low, in the
Valley, dark and obscure; his second shall be in brightness, every eye shall
see him, he shall come leaping over the mountains, and hills that before
concealed him, they shall now be all under his feet; all this in us.

SECT. XXXIV.
THe voice of my beloved! He speaks as he comes; the voice prepares for him. My
beloved is like a Roe, or a young Heart; he stands behind the wall, looking
forth at the window, shows himself through the lattess. This is the Child Jesus
coming, and it shows the degrees of his coming, growing up still daily. First,
his voice comes, then he stands at the door and knocks, and then he breaks the
wall of partition; and all the windows and glass that he makes use of, and the
walls also that he stands behind, and the windows or ministrations that are
more clear, he appears in them a while, but at last appears nakedly in himself,
stripped of all these robes, and sweet attire, in the brightness of his Spirit,
which is far best of all; and this is our beloved, and thus we look for him, he
is now at the windows.

SECT. XXXV. The Lord calling his love to come away.
ARise my love, my fair one, come away. This is through the window also, the
Lord calling his love out of the window, and draws her nigh to himself, and not
to stand at that distance. Arise my love, stay not there, arise, go on, come to
me; my love, my fair one, come away, how do I long for thy possession, and to
enjoy thee wholly for my self. I will prepare the way also for thee, The Winter
is gone, the rain and the cold is over, the heart of stone removed, the flowers
appear in the earth. I have put my desire in thee, the time of the singing of
birds is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land. My Spirit is
singing to thee, chanting of thee, and my Turtle it mourns for want of thee,
and I cannot be at rest without thee, Arise my love, my fair one, therefore,
and come away.

SECT. XXXVI.
O My Dove, that art in the clefts of the Rock, in the secret place of the
stairs; let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance comely. Now the Lord is exalting and raising up his
people; indeed they that are in the clefts of the Rock, in the secret places of
the stairs, that is, such as are yet weak and tender, ashamed to come before
the Lords presence, and see him as he is, but as Moses run to the Rock, and the
clefts of the Rock, and there behold him, only his back parts; but the Lord
would have them appear with an open face before him, and see face to face; the
Lord longs to see our countenance, and to hear our voice, for its sweet and
comely to behold us living in God; how does the Lord delight in the prosperity
of his servants.

SECT. XXXVII.
TAke us the foxes, the little foxes that spoil the vines; for our vines have
tender grapes. These foxes are such as Christ speaks of, The foxes have holes,
and the birds of the air nests, but the Son of man no where to lay his head.
These birds and foxes are nothing else but the unclean fowls, and the birds of
prey, and the unclean beasts that lodge in us, even in our flesh, there they
live till the Lord takes them and destroys them, not only the great foxes but
the little ones also, not the least vanity shall be suffered to remain in us,
for the flesh persecutes the spirit, and spoils the vines, nay the tender
vines, the fruits of the Lords Spirit in us; for the Flesh lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh.

SECT. XXXVIII.
MY beloved is mine, and I am his, he feeds amongst the lillies. Now the
foxes are gone, here is nothing but love and joy, My beloved is mine, and I am
his; though the foxes prevailed much, yet I thank God through the Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom I have obtained the victory. Here is a community of all things;
what I have he has, and what he has I have, all things common: He was made
sin for us that knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in
him. This is the ministry of Reconciliation given to us, who has reconciled us
to himself by Jesus Christ: So that as the Apostle says to the wife, her body
is not hers, but the man's, and to the man, his body is his wifes: So here the
Lords Spirit, his Life, Grace, Righteousness, and Kingdom is not his but
theirs; and to them, their peace, faith, strength, goodness is not theirs, but
the Lords; for they are, though two, yet one in the Spirit.

SECT. XXXIX.
UNtil the day break, and the shadows flee away, turn thou my beloved, and be
thou like a Roe, or a young Heart upon the Mountains of Bether. This is a sweet
and gracious desire of the Spouse from her Lord, to have a greater fellowship
with him, and know him better, to have the vails taken away, and the Lord turn
in the room of them, which are the flying away of the shadows, and the breaking
of the day. When the day Star from on high has visited us, to give knowledge of
salvation to his people by the remission of sins, and then to guide our feet
into the way of peace. For the Lord is that Spirit that must do that; and where
the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty and day breakings. Now we all,
beholding as in a glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed from Glory to Glory,
as by the Spirit of the Lord; till then the Lord will be nigh unto us, not far
from us, upon the Mountains of Bether; some Mountains, like shadows, hinder,
but when the day breaks they shall become a plain, and then the Kingdom of God
shall come amongst us, and dwell within us; as it is said, The Kingdom of God
with in you.

SECT. XL.
BY night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves. I loved him, and could not
but seek him, and am beloved of him, and so cannot live without him: My love
continues seeking and waiting for him at all times, places, night and day,
street and City, abroad and at home, and amongst the watchmen, but I found him
not in any of these places or persons; but when I had passed them all, lived
above them, and beyond them, then I found, and was found of him whom my soul
loves; I laid hands on him, and would not let him go, but brought him to my
mothers house, even to the chamber of her that conceived me; this is to live in
us, where his Word and Spirit was before preparing away for him.

SECT. XLI.
CHrist Jesus our Lord having adorned and beautified his Saints, he so commends
them, that he makes it his delight to look upon them, and rejoice in all the
works of his hands in them and over them.

First, Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair, thou have Doves
eyes; a pure wisdom from above, and peaceable.

Secondly, Thy hair is like a flock of Goats, as white as snow, noting old age
found in the way of Righteousness: A Father in Christ, and not a Disciple only,
and old Saint.

Thirdly, Thy teeth like a flock of sheep, clean, washed and shorn, and none
barren amongst them, notes soundness of Judgment, Meditation, doing nothing
rashly, noruttering ought rashly before God, till it be well chewed with the
teeth: Its the trying of all things, the discerning whether things be of God or
not.

Fourthly, Thy lips like a thread of scarlet, simple and honest, unfeignedly
spoken.

Fifthly, Thy speech comely, speaking with power and authority, with the Spirit
and with Understanding also.

Sixthly, Thy temples like a piece of Pomegranate within thy locks, stately and
comely, fresh, and never unmindfull of the Lords Mercies.

Seventhly, Thy neck like the Tower of David, builded for an Armory, wherein
there hangs a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men; this is the
strength of Faith prevailing with God, and doing mighty things, by which the
Elders of old obtained such good reports, as that their shields hang as a
memorial.

Eighthly, Thy two breasts like two young Roes twins, which feed among the
Lillies: These are the fruitfulness, and abundance of Consolations in the Lord,
she has and gives to others, comforting them with that comfort wherewith she
is comforted of God.

SECT. XLII.
THere is no spot in her, that is, she is all light, and in her is no sin nor
darkness at alll, being all light in the Lord; the chains of her neck ravishes
the Soul of Christ, being such a Pearl of heavenly Truth. Thy love like wine,
and the smell of thy ointments like spices: This is all sweet and gracious
Spirit, ministering Grace to the beholders. Thy lips drop the honey, the honey and
milk are under thy tongue. This shows a right dividing of the Word of Truth,
milk to babes, honey to stronger, and bread to the strongest. And the smell of
thy garments like the smell of Lebanon: Such a sanctified and perfumed
Conversation has she. A garden enclosed, a spring shut up, a fountain sealed;
that is indeed, a garden planted by the Lord, and watered and increased by him,
enclosed all by his goodness, as a wall of fire about it, a spring that shall
spring up, and shut from the Philistines to corrupt it, and such a fountain of
Grace therein sealed, that it shall not tend unto wantonness not uncleanness;
yea, what heavenly pleasant plants are in thee; a well of living waters, the
Spirit flowing forth in them.

SECT. XLIII.
AWake, O North wind, and come, O South wind, and blow upon my garden, that the
spices thereof may flow forth, and then let my beloved come into his garden,
and eat his pleasant fruits. This is the Spirit, the Lord pouring forth, and
causing his Winds, which are in his Treasuries, his Spirit, the Wind of Heaven,
to blow in his Garden, yea all his Winds for good; the several operations and
administrations of the Spirit, for several Gifts and Graces; the North wind for
the Lilly, and the South wind for the quickening and making this, the North for
convincing and renewing, but the South for converting and comforting, the one
to wound, and the other to heal, and both good for the garden; the one for the
weeds, the other for the herbs, and both for to have the spices flow forth to
abound in Grace, and come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits. For is
it not good reason, that he that plants a Vineyard should eat of the fruits of
it: So for the Lord, that has planted us for the self same end, and blown
upon, to be glorified in us and by us, seeing we are his husbandry.

SECT. XLIV. The sum of the fifth Chapter of Solomon's Song.
THis Song of Solomon is very excellent, and almost all is opened in us, to our
hands, by the Spirit of the Lord; for the very Letter makes the Spouse, and the
Lord Christ, the sum of it all, wherefore to proceed in the various conditions
the soul is cast into, here in this fifth Chapter we have not as in the former,
the Spouse at first seeking the Lord, and the Lord commending her; but we have
the Lord seeking us, and calling and knocking upon us, and all to awaken us out
of sleep, and being awakened, leaves us his footsteps to follow him with our
cross, and the soul enquiring after him, setting forth his beauty and
excellency from top to bottom, all over.

SECT. XLV.
FIrst, I am come into my garden, my Sister, my Spouse: This is Christ's
dwelling in us, by his Spirit inviting him thither; I have gathered my myrrh
with my spice, I have eaten my honey comb with my honey, I have drunk my wine
with my milk; eat, O friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved* Thus the
Lord comes and sups with us, and he accepts the widows mite as the wedg of
gold, and eats the honey comb, as well as the honey, and drinks the milk, as well
as the wine, so that the weak and strong are accepted of him: thus eating and
drinking in our presence, breaking bread in us, and eating and drinking in us,
and going from house to house in us, rejoicing and eating with singleness of
heart, and magnifying himself; so that the soul may say as David did, He had
anointed my head, filled full my cup, spread my table, and has also sat at my
table prepared by him, and we have eaten together, and made merry, yea feasted
abundantly.

SECT. XLVI.
AGain, I sleep, but my heart waketh; it is the voice of my well beloved that
knocks, saying, open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for my
head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night: Thus the
Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak; the Spirit can watch and pray, and
overcome to temptation, but the Flesh can do neither, but falls into
temptation; yet my heart wakes within, and there I hear a voice, and I know the
voice, it is not a strangers voice, but my beloveds voice, he calls, and
knocks, and complains, I hear him, it is he; yet so sleepy, she rises not, she
dreams of him, and is not so thoroughly awake; nay, she hears not only a voice
but a knock, her heart beats and aches; the Lord is knocking there, yet flesh
and sleep prevails; nay she hears him complain at last, O my love, dove, why
art thou so sleepy? with what sweet voices and blessed motions does he work
upon her, overcoming her evil with good; he says, My head is full of dew, and
my locks* with the drops of the night; so that the Lord has not only suffered
in Flesh for us, when he swet drops of blood in that dark night; but he suffers
in his Spirit also for us, weeping and mourning for us, being afflicted and
despised often by us, and his locks with the drops of the night; the grieving
his Spirit, and crucifying it by our flesh.

SECT. XLVII.
I Have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how
shall I defile them? O foolish woman, who has bewitched thee, that thou
should not obey the truth; having a form of godliness here, and yet denying
the power thereof; nay, a lover of pleasures more then of God, yea, what a show
and appearance this has? yet in hypocrisy she draws nigh with her lips, and
cries, Lord, Lord, yet does not the will of her Lord, as if Sacrifice were
better then Obedience; thus it is to love our selves, and to consult with flesh
and blood, it can never inherit the Kingdom of God; it says now, as Peter said
once to Christ, Master, have a care of thy self: so here, Satan would fain have
her careful of her self, and her life, and her ease, whereas indeed the devil
should have been resisted, Get thee behind me Satan: what a put off this is
like the men invited to the marriage, I have bought a yoke of oxen, etc. and I
pray have me excused: Nay, had an enemy done the Lord this wrong, but his
Spouse, and his familiar friend, to say, I have washed my feet, and how can I
defile them?

SECT. XLVIII. The great wickedness of the Spouse
HE cries, my love, my dove, my undefiled, my head, my locks, the dew, drops,
night, all torment me; open sweet love to me, my sister: and I cried I am
asleep, and in bed, I cannot rise, I have put off my coat. O ye of little
faith, and of little love indeed! O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that stonest them
that are sent to thee, how often would I have gathered thee under my wings, as a
hen gathers her chickens, and she would not: Farewell Jerusalem, thy land
shall be left desolate; for the things are hid from thy eyes that do belong to
thy peace. And further, she is loath to foul her feet, she has washed them,
how shall she defile them? these waters of Marah must be made sweet for her;
she calls clean, foul, and foul, clean; sweet, bitter, and bitter, sweet.

SECT. XLIX.
MY Beloved did more for me; he would not leave me so, but put his hand into my
heart, opened the door almost, but made a great wound and hole in my heart, and
then my bowels were moved within me for him, and then I felt his power upon me
that set me upon my feet, and raised me up, and my heart loosed, and I was
opened, and enlarged the precious smells and blessed myrrh he had left behind
him upon the lock, made my hands and fingers to drop with sweetness: I opened,
but my love was gone, and my spirit fainted in me: I went after, but I could
not find him: I called, but none answered. O whither shall I go to find him?
The watchmen wound me, the keepers of the wall take my vail from me; thus I am
afflicted: I charge you all, if you see my love before me, tell him I am sick
of love, and shall dye in love for him: He has stolen away my heart in the
night through the hole of the door; and he is only worthy of it, he is
altogether lovely, white and ruddy, pure and perfect, the fairest amongst ten
thousand: His head like gold, his power glorious and pure, his locks bushy, and
black as a raven: His counsels unchangeable and steadfast: His cheeks as a bed
of spices, so sweet and lovely as sweet flowers: His lips like lillies,
dropping sweet smelling myrrh, the grace that he administers, and the wisdom,
to all hearers. His hands as gold set with Beril, working all things together
for our good: His belly is as bright Ivory overlayd with Saphirs, full of
bowels and tender mercies. His legs like pillars of marble, being the
groundwork and pillars of truth: His countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as
the Cedars. His mouth is most sweet, yea, he is altogether lovely: This is my
beloved, and this is my friend, O ye daughters of Jerusalem. This is my boast
and glory, the Lord.

SECT. L.
IT is good to seek the Lord, though alone, and in it we may provoke others
also to seek him with us, God bearing witness to us, as they do here, What is
thy Beloved above our beloveds? Nay, then, if he be so as you speak of, and so
much goodness in him, come, we will seek him with thee; Come then, let us go to
the gardens, to the beds of spices; he feeds there, and gathers lillies: we
find him in himself, in the midst amongst us, there he meets us, and we meet
him; My Beloved is mine, and I am his: and upon this exchange we are beautiful
as Tirzah; strong and terrible as an army with banners, and yet sweet and
comely as Jerusalem: Our eyes overcome him; Queens, Concubines, and Virgins
without number wait upon thee; we are but one in the Lord, not many; the only
one of our mother, and the choice one of her that bare us: The daughters see
us, and they bless us, yea, the Queens and the Concubines, and they praise us,
when we look as the morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, terrible as an
army with banners. I went down to the garden of nuts, in the valleys, and
before I was aware, my Soul was like the Charets of Aminadab.

SECT. LI.
THe Lord makes our feet beautiful, shod with peace and glad tidings, like
Princes Daughters, lively to run the Lords ways, made with thighs like jewels
by the hands of a cunning workman, the Spirit of the Lord; yea, how fair, and
how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights! Thy stature, in grace and
spiritual strength, like to a palm tree, and thy breasts to clusters of grapes,
give nourishment, and abounding with fruits, full of the blessings of the Lord,
and all manner of pleasant fruits, new and old, laid up for thee, in my heart,
O my beloved.

SECT. LII.
THe Lord Christ, that was our brother, and sucked the breasts of the Spirit,
our mother; if I should meet thee, I would kiss thee without, and not be
ashamed; my love is so strong to thee, I will lead thee into my mothers house,
and there thou should instruct me, and I would drink of the spiced wine
prepared for thee of the juice of the pomegranate, and whither soever I went I
would hear thee my beloved, Set me as a seal upon thy heart, for love is strong
as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are coals of fire,
which have a most vehement flame. Many waters cannot quench love, neither can
the floods drown it; if a man would give all the substance of his house for
this love of the Lord, it would utterly be contemned. We have many little
sisters, virgins that love the Lord; what shall we do for her in the day that
she shall be spoken for, to be married to the Lamb? if she be a wall, the Lord
will build upon her a palace of silver: and if a door, she shall be enclosed
with boards of Cedars; whatsoever she wants shall be completed. Lord, we are
thy vineyards, and the vineyard that is thine, is before thee: Thou Lord must
have a thousand, and those that keep the fruit of the vineyard two hundred.
Thou that dwell in the vineyards, all therein hearken to thy voice; cause me
to hear it. Make haste, my beloved, and take me to the mountains of spices, and
to the hills of frankincense.

CHAP. XIX. The eighteenth Book that God writes in Man is the book of the
Prophet ISAIAH.
SECT. I. The two sons and seeds, one of Flesh and the
THe book of the Prophet Isaiah opened in Man, both his Visions and Prophesies
from the Lord; and first, you have the carnal and spiritual seed of the Lord;
the bastard and the son, the child of the Flesh, and of the Spirit, the son of
man and the Son of God, held forth. The first of these the fleshly seed, that
serve God after the flesh, and call themselves by the name of Israel, and the
children of the Lord; thus says the Lord, ye are not sons, but rebels; you
know me not, neither will I know you, nor consider you; you are a sinful
people, laden with iniquity: I have smitten you, and you go worse and worse;
you are all over corrupt; within full of wounds, bruises and sores, whatsoever
you pretend without; your head and heart, and all, is out of order; the
strangers live in you, and devour you; and the fire of lusts burn in you, and
eat you up; you are children of Sodom more like then of God. And as for your
Worship and Sacrifice, in multitudes, your appearing outwardly, and treading in
my Courts, your new Moons, Sabbaths, calling and sitting of assemblies, and
solemn meetings, your appointed Feasts and Fasts, your spreading forth your
hands and making long prayers, I abhor it all, it is detestable; my soul hates
all these, and I never required them of you; your hearts and hands being full
of blood, and all kind of iniquity; your silver dross, your wine water, your
Ptinces rebellious and thieves.

SECT. II.
I Will therefore stand up in judgment against you all, and consume your dross,
tin, blood and filth, ignorance and baseness; I will mollify you, and bind
you all up together, and if sons of the Flesh, I will make you sons of God in
Spirit; you shall not have the image of Sodom, but Jerusalem; no Hypocrisy,
but Power: I will wash you thorrowly, and purge you by my Spirit of judgment
and burning, that all your iniquity shall pass from before me, and no evil pass
through any more; you shall not be bloody, but white as snow; I will receive
you to favor, you shall not rebel any more, but altogether willing and
obedient; if I say do this, ye shall do it, or that it shall be fulfilled, and
the sword shall be broken in pieces, and there shall be no dross amongst your
silver, nor water with your wine, but all things shall be of God, Zion shall be
redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness; and the
destruction of transgression and iniquity shall be together, and whatsoever
forsakes God consumed; be it an oak, or a garden that has no water, they shall
be burnt together, and none shall quench them.

SECT. III. The great Vision which the Prophet saw,
THus much for the Prophecy; now for the Vision which the Prophet saw,
concerning Judah and Jerusalem, it was this, The Prophet looked, and behold he
saw the earth full of hills and mountains, and so full that they could hardly
stand one by the other; and the valleys were drowned by the mountains and the
hills; and he looked till he saw the mountains and the hills wage war one
against another, and he saw them that lived in these mountains and hills, were
Soothsayers, Philistines, strangers: and the mountains and the hills were full
of silver and gold, no end of their treasures: full also of horses, and no end
of their charets: full of idols, and no end of their bowing down to them: and
full of swords and spears, and no end of their blood, till at last in the end I
saw a little hill arise out of the earth, amongst the midst of the hills, from
the valleys, it ascended like the little hill Hermon: and this hill, in the
rising of it, did terribly shake the earth, and in time grew to a great
mountain, and neither by sword, nor spear, nor might, nor any such thing, but
by my Spirit, says the Lord; it waxed exceeding great, and the hills and the
mountains melted before it, and would not stand when it appeared; all that
opposed it were broken in pieces, and on whomsoever this mountain of the Lord
fell, it ground him to powder; And this holy hill and high mountain came at
last to get all other hills and mountains under its feet; and it was
established upon the top of the mountains, and then there was no living or
safety, but only here; even all the Nations of the earth came flocking hither
to the Mountain of the Lord, and cast all their idols away, and forsook their
own Country, and fathers houses, their own hills and mountains, and fly to this
Rock, for there was darkness and death upon all the rest; here was the light of
the Lord, and they said one to another, Come, let us walk in the light of the
Lord.

SECT. IV.
THis is the Vision, and herein the Spirit of Truth will open and interpret it
to you; the mountains and hills are proud, rebellious, lofty looks, and
haughtiness of men's hearts; the treasures, charets, horses and idols, what are
they but the pleasures, vanities and lusts of the flesh? the fighting, what was
it but the torment and disquiet that flesh has, there is no peace there, says
God; and what is the hill arising out of the valleys, the Spirit of God arising
a little in us, and shaking the foundations of flesh and earth in us, and
becomes powerful and mighty, making all her enemies her footstool, triumphing
gloriously, and destroying flesh with her Principalities and Powers, leaving
her dead: and this is the Day of the Lord upon all things, to bring to naught
the things that are, and establish what is not.

SECT. V. The stay and the staff of the Creature
ANd this is not all, but the stay and the staff shall be taken away, the staff
of bread, and the stay of water: This is the vanity of the Creature, that shall
be removed and broken in pieces, whatsoever is a stay or staff besides the
Lord, be it meats or drinks you make so, your Judges or Prophets you make so,
your mighty men of War, or your honorable House of Commons, I will then break
them, and turn them all to nothing; your Princes then shall be children, so
your ancient men fools, your strength rottenness, your gods, idols, I will
corrupt them all, and these shall not rule over you: Nay, if you make any your
stay or staff besides me, says the Lord, I will take the life away, and the
comfort away; I will take your clothing and glory, so that none shall rule,
saying, they have neither clothing, bread nor water, and they cannot rule over
the ruins of the people, but the Lord alone shall thus reign and rule over in
glory; they shall be ruined and fall, and then I shall stand alone, and be stay
and staff; thus woe shall be to the wicked, the reward of their hands given
them, but well to the righteous, that have me for stay and staff, the fruits of
their hands shall be given them; and thus the Lord shall enter into Judgment
with the oppressor, and violent man, the ancient and the honorable, the proud
and the base, and stain all their glory, smite it with a scab, even the crown
and head of it, to the feet also; and where the sweet smell was, shall be a
stink, for a girdle, a rent, for hair dressed, baldness, for a stomacher, a
girding with sackcloth, and burning, instead of beauty; all these mighty
things shall be, and fall by my Sword, the Spirit, and lament, and be left
destitute; this is the Decree of the Lord God.

SECT. VI.
IN that day, further, we shall all that know the Lord, whether weak or strong,
take hold of one man, which is Christ the Lord, and the seven women shall be
married to him; this is the male and female, bond and free, made one in Christ;
this is surely the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; and then all
reproach shall be taken away, and we shall eat every one his own bread, and
wear his own apparel, and this one bread shall be the bread of Life, and this
one apparel the Robes of Christ himself; and now shall the Branch of the Lord,
the Spirit of Grace, budding like Aarons Rod, be glorious and beautiful, and
the fruits of the earth excellent and comely, and that amongst them that are
escaped of Israel; the outcasts shall be received in, and they that are dead
shall live, and every one that lives then shall be called holy, no other life,
but that written amongst the living; and then the Lord shall wash away both
filthiness of flesh, and blood, and spirit also, by the Spirit of Judgment and
burning; and the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of his Tabernacles
and Assemblies, clouds by day, and a pillar of fire by night; for upon all
their glory shall be a defense to keep from rain, and storm, and heat, that
nothing shall hurt.

SECT. VII. The Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts, and the men of Judah.
AGain, The Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts declared in a parable; and that in a
Song of the Lords Beloved: The Lord has a Vineyard planted on a fruitful hill,
hedged, fenced, gathered from stones, and planted with Vines, dressed, dug,
and a winepress dug therein, and a tower build thereon, looking for fruits,
and it brought forth wild fruits. Judge now between me and my Vineyard; I will
tell you what I will do with it, I will take away all from it, leaving it
naked, and depart from it, and then it shall be full of briars and brambles.
What is all this but the good work of the Lord upon his; We are his Vineyard,
the Lord God is the Husbandman, Christ the Vine, We the Branches, the Spirit
the Fruits, the Lords Grace the fruitful Hill, the Lords Peace the Hedge and
Wall, the Lords Power the Tower, Righteousness his Vine, Love his Winepress;
and this is watched and watered from Heaven, and gives always increase,
abounding with fruits to the Lord. But as for the flesh and earthly man, the
corrupt nature, formerly the Lords Vineyard, when he leaves it, O what is it?
Nay, the very best of us, if the Lord absent himself, take away the hedge, wall,
vine, winepress, then what a miserable thing is man? then he minds nothing but
earthly things; woe unto him when I leave him: Woe to him that joins house to
house, then that is his treasure, making provisions for the flesh* that is his
feasts; but hell and darkness opens her mouth wide, and is enlarged her self,
and all their pomps and glory descend thither.

SECT. VIII.
A Second Vision from the Lord: There was a mighty high Throne, and it was
lifted up gloriously, and the Lord sat upon the Throne, high and lifted up;
and there was a Temple also, the Throne was in the Temple where the Lord sat,
and the Lords train filled the Temple also full of Glory, and above the Throne
and about it stood the Seraphims, and every one had six wings, with two he
covered his face, with two his feet, and with other two he did fly, and as they
fled they cried one to another, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts, the
whole earth is full of his glory: And moreover, the voice that cried was so
great, that it shook and moved the posts of the door of the Temple, and the
house was filled with smoke, and it shook and terrified the Prophet also, that
he cried out, I am undone, I am undone, I am unclean all over; and as I cried
thus, I am undone, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts, that
then the Lord of Hosts sent a Seraphim to me, that came flying with a live
coal, taken from off the Altar, with the tongs in his hand, and he came and
laid it upon my mouth, and took away with it my iniquity, purging away sin, and
cleansing my lips; then saying to me, Who will go for us? whom shall I send?
And I said, here am I Lord, send me; and the Lord said, Go and show this people
what thou have seen, make their hearts fat, and ears heavy, and shut their
eyes, for they understand not; and do, so long, till the Land be utterly
desolate; for a remnant only shall be left like an oak, whose leaves are dried
up, and the substance in the root, so shall the holy seed be the substance
thereof.

SECT. IX.
NOw what is all this that the Vision means, but the Lord God coming to
Judgment, and sitting upon the Throne of Righteousness, which is high and
lifted up, to rule the Nations, and judge the Earth in Righteousness; and
inasmuch as the Throne was lifted up in the Temple, which Temple are we in the
Lord, there God has his Throne in the midst amongst us, and none other, and
from thence he will send forth Justice and Judgment, that shall run along the
streets of the Cities and Countries, but there shall his Throne be; and what
are the Seraphims but the ministering spirits from the Lord, praising the Lord,
and fulfilling his Word, crying, Holy, holy, holy continually? and what is the
train that fills the Temple, are not we in the Lord, or are not all his
Excellencies* Grace, Power, Wisdom, Truth, Mercy, Love, Peace, are they not his
train that fills the Temple of the Saints? All his Attributes, Blessings,
Comforts, Gifts, Graces are his train, and to the filling of the Temple, and
from thence he sends whom he will from the Temple where he is, into the Land,
to convince them of sin, righteousness and judgment, etc.

SECT. X. and Remaliah 's sons confederacy, their tails and evil counsel like
firebrarnds.
THis is is a Prophecy now of Rezin the Syrian King, and Remaliahs son the
Ephraimite, being Confederates, and taking evil counsel against the Lord, and
his people in Jerusalem, saying, Let Us go up and vex it, make a breach in it,
and set a King over it of our own, or else destroy it. This news made the house
of David, Judah and Jerusalem faint for fear, like the trees moved with the
wind, because of the tails of these two firebrarnds raging against them; but
the Lord sends the Prophet with a message to comfort them, and not to fear, for
he will break and destroy them both, their evil council shall not stand nor
prosper; and the Lord sent them a sign also, either in heaven or earth, which
they refusing, the Lord himself gave them a sign, saying, Behold, a Virgin
shall conceive, and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name Emmanuel; and
then the Land and the enemy that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her
Kings; if thou believe this, thou shall be established; and weary not the
Lord, as ye have wearied men. This is the will of the Lord, that though the
heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing, and the Kings and the
Princes take counsel together against the Lord, and his anointed, Judah and
Jerusalem, the house of David, the Lords heritage and people; yea, though all
the enemies of our salvation, and all the host that flesh and blood can make
against us, should compass us round about, yet the counsel of the Lord that
shall stand, and he will comfort his people, and say unto them, their sins are
forgiven, and their warfare accomplished, and they shall receive double for all
their miseries, and this shall be their sign; the Virgin conceiving, and
Christ's forming in them shall be the Emmanuel God with them, to deliver them
out of all the hands of their enemies, and establish them a glory to the Lord.

SECT. XI. The waters of Shiloah, or the soft and still voice condemned by
most, and Rezin followed; the Law and Testimony where to be found.
THe people that refuse the waters of Shiloah, that go softly, and rejoice in
Rezin, and Remaliahs son; the Lord shall hiss for the Fly that is in the river
of Egypt, and for the Be in the Land of Assyria, and they shall devour thy
Land, and the mighty river shall overflow thee, and reach even to the neck, and
the lifting up of his wings shall fill thy Land, O Emmanuel; yet Emmanuel shall
break you all in pieces: though you associate, confederate and band your selves
never so much, yet the Lord God himself, whom they sanctify, and who is their
dread, shall be their Sanctuary to them, but for a stumbling, for a rock of
offense, a snare, a gin to others, here they shall fall, be broken and taken;
but the stone which the builders rejected, is become the head of the corner,
and it is the Lords doing; and the Law and the Testimony shall be bound and
sealed in my Disciples, and they shall go no more to them that have familiar
spirits to be taught, but shall be taught of God, not of the dead, but of the
living, and they shall go to this Law of Life in them, and speak according to
that Light of the Lord that shines in them.

SECT. XII.
THe people that sit in darkness shall see great light, and those that walk in
the region and shadow of death, light shall spring up there, and thou shall
multiply their joy as the joy of harvest, and as them that divide the spoil;
this shall be the Light of the Lord shining in them, their joy, and the Lord
shall break the yoke and burden of the hands and traditions of men; nay, their
bonds and bondage, the staff, and the rod of the oppressor, and this shall be
with burning and with fuel of fire, by my Spirit, faith the Lord; For unto them
is born a Governor, the wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace, the Government is upon his shoulders, and of the
increase of it there is no end, it shall be established in Justice and
Judgment: Rejoice therefore, O Zion, thy God reigns; and instead of the
bricks that shall be thrown down, and the Sycomores, we shall have hewn
stones, and Cedars instead of earth, and fleshly things spiritual, in the room
of all the Land; this Government of the Lords Spirit shall throw down all
other, and endure for ever, and the Lord shall joy in nothing but this
Government; for the wrath of the Lord shall darken the land, and burn the
thorns and briars; and eat the flesh of their own arm, every one pulling out
his eye, and cutting off his hand, casting them from him as unprofitable
members; and all manner of divisions shall then be reconciled, the Lords anger
turned away: When this Government is established, then neither shall Manasseh
vex Ephraim, nor Ephraim, Manasseh; nor both against Judah; brother shall not
condemn, nor cast out, or betray brother; but they shall have the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace.

SECT. XIII.
THe unrighteous Decrees of men, that turn aside the needy from judgment, and
the poor, to take away their right, robbing the fatherless, and making a prey
of the widow; but the day of visitation shall take them all away, and leave
them without help or glory; the tyrant shall cease from any oppressing: And the
Assyrian, the rod of anger, with his pride, that rules in fleshly power and
glory, lifting up it self above all, when I have done my work with him, I shall
make him to cease, and pull down his stout heart, that boasts of his Princes
and his idols, as if they made him to prosper, and he knows not me, says the
Lord: Thus the Ax, Saw, Rod, Staff, boasts, and lifts it self against him
that made and rules it, and can take it and burn it; but the Lord will send a
leanness upon them and their proud flesh, and the light of Israel shall be as a
fire, and the Holiness of Judah like a flame, and it shall devour the thorns,
and consume his glory and his fruitful fields, and all his idols, but Israel
shall turn to the mighty God, and stay* her self in him, for a remnant shall be
saved; And as for the Assyrian, all his yokes shall be broken off thy neck,
because of the anointing of the Lord thy God upon thee.

SECT. XIV. The peaceable and righteous Kingdom of the
THe branch of the Lord (Christ Jesus) shall grow out of thy roots, and the
Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon thee, in wisdom, understanding, counsel,
might, and of the fear of the Lord; and it shall make thee of quick
understanding, in the fear of the Lord, and not to judge after the sight of the
eyes, or reprove after the hearing of the ears, but in spirit and truth shall
he judge and reprove all things, and smite the earth with the rod of his mouth,
and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked; and righteousness and
faithfulness shall be our girdle of loins and reins: then and thus shall the
Wolf and the Lamb, the Leopard and the Kid, the Cow and the Bear, and their
young, all lie down together, and feed together; the Lion eat straw like an Ox,
and a young child shall play on the hole of the Asp, and a weaned child put
his hand on the Cockatrices egg; for there shall be no poison nor hurt in all my
holy mountain, says the Lord; for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of
the Lord God: and to the ensign upon this mountain shall the people seek for
rest, which shall be glorious: and from the four corners of the earth the Lord
will gather them in, even the outcasts of Israel: All envy and adversaries
shall depart, enmity, and all, between Ephraim and Judah, brother and brother;
we shall flee upon the shoulders of the Philistines: Edom, and Moab, and Ammon
shall obey us, and join hands and hearts together; and the tongue of the
Egyptian sea shall be utterly destroyed, and her mighty rivers dried; they
shall be no more a let to my people. Here is much glory indeed, both a
restoration, reconciliation, and gathering all into one head, the Lord:

Then old things shall pass away, and all things become new indeed.

SECT. XV. The day of the Branch brings joy and
ANd in that day, the Branch being grown up, all boughs and branches shall be
cut down, and spread under his feet, in the way, in joy and thanksgiving, and
the babes and sucklings shall say, Blessed is he that comes, Hosanna, Hosanna,
to the highest: Thy anger is turned away, and thou comfortest us; behold thou
art our salvation, strength and song; therefore rejoice, and draw water of his
wells of salvation; Sing unto the Lord, for he does excellent things; and this
shall be known to all the earth, and great is the Lord in the midst of thee.

SECT. XVI.
BAbylons destruction, the Lord musters the Army, they are sanctified ones, and
the only mighty men, such as rejoice in his highness, and these shall destroy
and overcome her, such as were tormented by her, and pangs shall take hold of
her, and the sinners destroyed out of her; her Stars shall fall, her Sun shall
be darkened, and her Moon turned to blood; yea, thy heaven shall be shaken and
the earth removed out of its place, yea, thy children dashed in pieces, thy
young men thrust thorrow, houses spoiled, women ravished, and a man shall be as
precious as gold, yea as fine as the gold of Ophir: And this Babylon, the glory
of the whole earth, and all flesh comprehended in it, shall be overthrown, as
when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.

SECT. XVII.
BUt my people Israel shall rule over their oppressors, they shall be their
servants in the Lords land, and their captives: Babylon is fallen, is fallen;
the Lord has broken the staff of the wicked, and the scepter of rulers: He
that smote, is broken, and none delivers her; The whole earth is at rest and
quiet, they break forth into singing; now Babylon is fallen, Hell is moved for
thee, saying, Art thou come to the dead? Earth is troubled, for that is thy
pomp; in the grave the worms spread over thee and cover thee; this is Lucifer
fallen from heaven, the man of sin, or the mystery of iniquity working in us,
setting up it self as God, till the power of the Lord thus overthrows it, as
Sodom, though an Eden to flesh.

SECT. XVIII. Moabs destruction also.
MOab laid waste and brought to silence, weeping and baldness, with sackcloth;
their waters desolate, hay withe^ed, grass fading, and no green thing found
therein; there is no cry, but destruction. Moab shall be as a wandering bird
cast out of her nest, now the Lord shall inherit all things, and the foxes no
where to lay their heads; thy harvest, vineyards and winepress cease: all
their mirth, howlings, her glory contemptible; but she shall be weary of her
pride, and high places or idols, and come to the sanctuary to prevail.

SECT. XIX. Fat things made lean, and high things low.
THe farness of Damascus, Syria, and all flesh, made lean and feeble; ready to
dye, its made so thin and small; great things made low, and small ones, great:
Then, when all flesh thus cease, a man shall have his eyes to his Maker, and
not to the Altar, Groves, or Images, the works of our hands, thus the Lord will
turn them. Woe to the multude of many people, that make a noise like the sea,
and do rage, the Lord will still and quiet them: And blessed shall the poor,
peeled, scattered people be, that shall bring a present to the Lord, whose Land
has been spoiled, and they meted out and trodden under foot; they shall be
raised up, says the Lord.

SECT. XX.
EGypt melted and her idols at the presence of the Lord; for he is riding on a
swift cloud into Egypt, and will set Egyptian against Egyptian, Brother against
Brother, City against City, and Kingdom against Kingdom; and their familiar
spirits and counsel shall fall, their brooks be dried up, their sisters lament,
and they that work curious works: Pharaohs wise counselors brutish, they know
not the Lords purpose of Egypt; and the land of the Lord, Judah, shall be a
terror to Egypt, and the counsel of the Lord therein torment her; yet the Lord
shall prevail over five of her Cities, to turn to the Lord, and shall speak
Canaans language, and there shall be the Lords Altar therein, and his Pillar,
to be for a witness to the Lord, to save them from all oppressors; and the Lord
shall be known in Egypt; the Lord will smite and heal them: and Assyria shall
be as Egypt, both one; and Isr^el shall be the third with Egypt and Assyria,
and a blessing to them both; And then the Lord shall say, Blessed be Egypt my
son, or people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance.

SECT. XXI.
BEhold the Lord makes the earth empty and waste, he turns it upside down, and
scatters the inhabitants thereof; he spares none, Priest or People, servant or
lord, poor or great; Thus the world languishes, and the haughty people fade
away: the earth is broken down, dissolved, and moved exceedingly, yea, the
whole earth reels to and fro like a drunken man; and the high ones, and Kings
of the earth shall perish; they shall be gathered to the pit like prisoners;
their Moon shall be confounded, their Sun ashamed, when they shall see the Lord
reigning in Mount Sion and Jerusalem before his ancients gloriously.

SECT. XXII.
PRaise the Lord for his wonderful things, faithfulness and truth, his
counsels; for making the strong weak, and being a strength to the poor and
needy, a refuge, and a shadow from heat and storm; and in the Lords Mountain,
his people, he will make a feast of fat things unto all people, of wine and
marrow, and fat things full of joy, but the covering, the vail; yea, death, and
all tears, and the reproach of my people shall be destroyed; this is the Lord,
we have waited for him, we will be glad in him, and rejoice in his salvation.

SECT. XXIII. The strong City, whose Wall and Bulwarks
IN that day this Song shall be sung, We have a strong City, Salvation will God
appoint for Walls and Bulwarks, the Gates open for the righteous Nation to
enter in, and perfect peace shall be therein, for they trust in thee; in
Jehovah, God, is everlasting strength: thou weighest the path of the upright;
in the way of thy judgments have we waited on thee: for when thy judgments are
in the earth, they will learn righteousness; let favor be showed to the wicked,
yet they will not learn; thy hand is lifted up, but they will not see, but they
shall see; and thou shall ordain peace for us, for thou have wrought all our
works for us: we have been in travel before thee, Lord we have brought forth
little but wind; but if thou say the word, that our dead men shall live, and
with thy dead body shall arise: Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, for
thy dew is as the dew of the herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead*
Come, my people, enter thou into thy chamber, and shut thy door for a little
moment, until the indignation be overpast.

SECT. XXIV. The Leviathan slain.
THe Leviathan, and the Dragon in the Sea, and the piercing Serpent, shall the
Lord slay; and my vineyard of red wine I the Lord will keep and water every
moment, night and day: Israel shall blossom like a bud, and fill the earth with
fruit; and they that are ready to perish in Assy^ia, and the outcasts of
Israel, shall come to worship the Lord in mount Zion.

SECT. XXV.
THe crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden under foot, and
the Lord shall be their Crown of Glory and Beauty, being filled with the
Spirit; yet many have erred in vision, and stumble in vision through strong
drink. Whom shall the Lord teach knowledge? them that are weaned from the milk,
and drawn from the breasts: For with another tongue will he speak to this
people; and this shall be the Rest to them that be weary, and till then the
Word of the Lord shall be precept on precept, line by line, here and there a
little; lies and falsehood shall be no more a refuge. I will lay a foundation in
Zion, a sure, tried One, and he that believes shall not make haste.

SECT. XXVI.
I Will fight against Ariel, and speak to her from the dust; and all the earth
that fight against Zion my Mountain, I will fight against them, and they shall
be as men dreaming, they eat and drink, and are satisfied; but behold, when
they do awake they shall be hungry and thirsty; so shall the imaginations or
dreams against thee be: And the Lord says, Forasmuch as this people honors me
with their lips, and their hearts are from me; they are drunk, but not with
wine, but a deep sleep has seized on them, like a sealed book all things are
to them, that the learned is as the unlearned, and the unlearned as the
learned, neither understand me, knowing only the doctrine of men: and I will do
this wonder amongst them, for the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the
understanding of the prudent hid: But the deaf shall hear, and the words of my
Book shall be revealed to the blind; the meek increase their joy in the Lord,
and the poor amongst men rejoice in the riches of the holy One of Israel; they
also that erred in spirit, shall come to understanding, and they that murmured,
shall learn doctrine; this Wisdom of the Word becomes foolishness, and the
foolishness of the Lord true Knowledge and Wisdom indeed.

SECT. XXVII.
WOe to the Counsel that is not of me, and from my Spirit or Mouth; wherefore
all things shall be your shame, and without profit, all help else is in vain,
write it in a table book thus, which say to the Seers, See not, teach smooth
things, go out of the way, cause the holy One of Israel to cease before us. And
as for quietness and rest in the Lord alone, you would not; yet the Lord shall
wait for thee, and thou shall have aword behind thee, teaching thee when to
turn to the right and the left, and the Lord shall give thee rivers on the top
of the mountains, and knowledge shall increase: when the Lord heals the breach
of his people, the light of Moon like the Sun, and the Sun sevenfold brighter;
then shall the perfect day be, and that shall cause his voice to be heard.

SECT. XXVIII.
WOe to them that go downwards for help, looking to any thing below God, for
their men and means, and not God; when the Lord stretches his hand, both he
that is helped, and that helps, shall fall down, and they shall all fall down
together, teacher and hearer without him. The Lord like a Lion shall keep Zion
his prey, and like a bird fly to their defense; and all the earth shall be
afraid of the Lord, and run to their strong holds, for the Lord has his fire
in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem, says the Lord.

SECT. XXIX.
BEhold, Righteousness thy King, and Judgment thy Princes; as rivers of waters,
as a rock in a weary land, so is thy Lords Grace to thee; no dimness, nor
dullness, nor villainy, but Righteousness abounding; behold, the palaces shall
be forsaken, the Cities left, the forts and towers, dens; until the Spirit be
poured out from on high, then Judgment shall be in the Wilderness, and
Righteousness the Field; and peace, and quietness, and assurance the fruits
thereof for ever.

SECT. XXX.
THe spoiler spoiled by the Lord, for he is exalted, he fills us his Zion
with Judgment and Righteousness, Wisdom and Knowledge; the stability of of thy
times, and strength of salvation, and the fear of the Lord thy treasure. Now
will I arise, says the Lord, be exalted, and lift up my self. Ye shall
conceive chaff, and bring forth stubble, my breath as fire shall devour you,
and you shall be as the burning of lime, as thorns cut down, so burnt in the
fire. Hear ye both far and near, acknowledge my might; the sinners afraid, the
hypocrites trembled for fear of the devouring fire, and the everlasting
burning; but he that walks uprightly, and speaks righteously; he that is
against the gain of oppression, that shakes his hands against bribes, that
stops his ears from blood, and his eyes from evil, he shall dwell in the midst
of the fire, as Moses bush, and the three children, and not be consumed; he
shall dwell on high, his defense the munition of rocks, he shall have all
bread, his waters sure, his King beautiful, and before him, and see things afar
off: Look upon Zion and Jerusalem, our solemnities, and our quiet habitation, a
Tabernacle, not to be removed, not a stake ever to be removed, she is so rooted
and stablished in the rock, not a coard broken, but there the righteous Lord
shall be to us abroad river; for the Lord is our Judge, Lawgiver, King and
Savior, and the people dwelling therein shall be forgiven their iniquity, they
shall not be sick; praise the Lord.

SECT. XXXI.
HErein is revealed the indignation of the Lord against all unrighteousness of
men, which hold the truth in unrighteousness, bringing them all to the fiery
Vengeance. First, Let the Nations and people, the earth, yea the whole world,
and all therein, draw near, hear and hearken what God will do with them and the
world, That he will pour out his wrath and fury upon all the earth, it shall be
dissolved and delivered up to the slaughter, cast out, and left as stinking
carcasses, melted into blood; nay, his wrath is revealed against Heaven also,
they that boast themselves they are gods, having heaven in the flesh, a carnal
heaven* only in show and appearance, not in heart, it shall be bathed against
the whole host of them, and they shall all, in heaven and earth, be sacrificed
to the slaughter, for it is the day of the Lords vengeance and recompense upon
them, for their enmity to Sion; and their streams shall be pitch, their dust
brimstone, and the Land a burning, tormenting all them that live in the earth;
and it shall not be quenched, till all be finished in that day.

SECT. XXXII.
THe Lord will make your wilderness to rejoice, and the desert soul to blossom
like a rose abundantly, and he that is as a wilderness to rejoice and sing; the
weak strengthened, and the feeble confirmed; the fearful in spirit encouraged,
the blind eyes opened, the deaf ears unstopped, the hard heart mollified, the
lame to walk and leap, the dumb to sing, the parched land a pool, and the
thirsty land springs of water; Here among these shall the Lord prepare a way,
it shall be called, The way of holiness; no Lion shall be there, nor any such
beast, but the Lambs of the Lord shall walk therein.

SECT. XXXIII. Sennacheribs and Rabshakehs blasphemies against the servants of
the Lord, in whom they are comforted.
SEnnacherib comes with an Army against Jerusalem, to besiege and take it;
Rabshakeh sent to summon it, with fair promises, to enjoy every one his own,
and to be brought to as good a land as their own, and not to trust in Hezekiah,
nor his confidence, or vain words; nor in Egypt, a broken reed, nor in the
Lord, for there is no God that can deliver you or your land out of our hands,
or our King, the great King of Assyria; for neither Samaria, nor her gods, nor
any other god was able to deliver them out of his hand; and if they did refuse
and rebel, they should eat their own dung and drink their own piss, and be
afterward destroyed with the sword; for thus says the great King. Now all
this is true in the application of it to our selves, The world and the flesh,
or the evil spirit in both, Rabshakeh like, reviles and speaks evil against the
Lord, tempting and summoning us, bringing an army of evil and strong delusions
to ensnare us, promising, if we will yield up all, soul and body, and all, that
God has given us, to him, falling down and worshipping him, we shall have all
glory, and be like gods; and withal telling us many lies, that God does not,
nor can deliver us; he sees not, neither cares for us, saying, God has not
said it; and as for Hezekiah, believe him not, nor stay your selves in the
Lord, for I am the God of this world, and give honor and glory, and riches to
them; I will be, I am exalted on high in these Kingdoms; All bow down to me,
and serve me; and they that serve me, the god of this world, I preserve them;
and if not, I persecute, hate, destroy, kill, murder, and torment: Woe unto
them, if I am set against them: This is the railing R^^shakeh contending for
the poor creature, and rending it; but the servant of the Lord is silent, and
mourns, waiting patiently on the Lord in all things, and commits it self wholly
to him against all temptations and blasphemies.

SECT. XXXIV. How the Spirit of the Lord, given to his,
YEt further, when the evil spirit that dwells in us, or sent to us from the
powers of darkness, shall grieve the Spirit of the Lord in his Hezekiahs, or
servants, by high imaginations or abominable blasphemies against the holy
Spirit of the Lord in his, lifting up it self against the Lord, then a greater
power of the Spirit of the Lord comes upon us, and his Word strengthens us,
saying, Grieve not, nor be troubled at the blasphemies of Sennacharib and
Rabshakeh, those spirits of Satan; for I will be with thee, and I will let all
the Nations of the earth see, that I am the Lord God, and there is none besides
me; and that you are my people, preserved by my power: I will put a bridle in
his mouth, and my hook in his nose, and overcome him; and fall backwards, and
perish in his own land; and the Angel of my presence shall fall upon his host,
with the breath of my mouth, and slay them all, you shall find in the morning
nothing but carcasses; this shall they have that rage against the Lord and his
Spirit; above a hundred thousand, nay, almost two hundred thousand, slain in
the field, but a remnant of the Lord shall take root downwards now, and bear
fruit upwards manifold, and rejoice in the Lord of the whole earth. And again,
we see, that though an evil spirit of wickedness or blasphemy, like the beast
in the Revelation, may for a while triumph over all, and speak great words, and
do mighty things, yet the Spirit of Truth and Glory consumes it all at last.

SECT. XXXV.
THis shows how those whom the Lord loves fall sick through boyls and
distempers of flesh, the corrupt nature is sickly and perishes, and how it all
turns to the glorifying of God, and the good of the soul, as in the 11. of
John, says Christ of Lazarus, this sickness is not for his death, but for the
death of sin in the flesh, and for his life; for the Son of God in him shall be
glorified by it, and it was so: And even so here, Hezekiahs life is renewed, he
dies after the flesh, to this life and state, and lives to God after the
Spirit; dies to himself to live to God, as he says, now shall I live to praise
thee: Thus the Lord makes us sick and well, dead and alive, wounds and heals,
takes and gives, after his good pleasure, sets all in order, the fire, the
faggot, the sacrifice, the knife, and all the whole sacrifice; the whole man,
with his whole house; and it is not to kill the Lamb, but the Ram; not the
Sinner, but the Sin: and the Lord healed him, and defended his City, all his
with him, house and all, prolonging their lives, giving them a long life, even
for ever and ever, and a sign, The Sun returning, or going backwards ten
degrees, which showed the return and fall of his enemies, or the forgiveness of
sins, and the restoration of souls.

SECT. XXXVI. Babylons letters and presents to betray us
LEtters and Presents from Babylon, and her King Baladan, upon Hezekiahs
recovering, hearing of it, pretends joy for it: Thus the Flesh lies in wait for
the Spirit; Antichrist for Christ and the Christian: if we recover from falling
on the left hand, we are presently tempted to fall and err on the right hand,
Here the Devil is transforming himself into an Angel of light, and deceives and
betrays us basely, pretending to be outwardly for us, giving us his letters and
presents, and is inwardly against us; so creeps in unawares, and like a
serpent, subtly gains upon us, undermines us, finds and feels our strength,
and eats and drinks with us, and is received into our heart and treasure, we
being all opened to him, nothing in us but made known, and yet really know not
whence he comes, a stranger from a far Country to see us, and rejoice with us,
but not out of love, but envy, like them in Paul's days that preached Christ out
of envy: But the Lord remembers us, and finds out all our enemies for us, and
smites us when we do amiss; so that as Hezekiah received these messengers and
presents, and withal showed his treasures and glory in house and kingdom to
them that would, carrying it all away one day; and take them captive, so it is
with many taken away by sorceries.

SECT. XXXVII.
THe Lord comfort his people with these things:

1. That their warfare is shortly accomplished.

2. Their sins pardoned.

3. The way of the Lord to be prepared in them, the mountains there to be
removed, and the valleys lifted up there, which is the poor in spirit to be
comforted, the rough ways made plain, and the crooked thoughts made straight.

4. Their flesh to be made like grass and toyling; so that all flesh is grass.

5. That the glory of the Lord is to be revealed, and all flesh shall see it
together, for the Lord has spoken it.

6. That Zion shall have all glad tidings in her; that she shall cry, behold my
Lord and my God; for he shall come with a strong hand, and his arm shall rule
for him: Behold his reward is with him, and his work before him.

7. The Lord himself shall feed us as a shepherd does his flock; he shall
gather his lambs with his arms, and carry them in his bosom, leading them that
are with young.

8. Holding the waters in his hand, spanning the heavens, comprehending the
earth, weighing the mountains; To whom the Nations are a drop, and the Isles a
little thing; calling the stars by his names. To whom then will ye liken me,
says the Lord, the everlasting God, the Creator of the ends of the earth, that
never faints nor is weary, whose understanding is unsearchable, that gives
strength, life, and being, to all things, and to them that wait upon the Lord,
he renews their strength, that they mount up with wings like Eagles; they shall
run, and not be weary; walk, and not faint.

SECT. XXXVIII. The Worm Jacob made strong.
FEar not, thou Worm, Jacob, for I will help thee, and be thy Redeemer; I have
chosen thee, thou art my Servant, and I will not cast thee away, but will
uphold thee with the right hand of my Righteousness: I will plant thee anew,
and none shall root thee up, and every plant or idol that is in you, shall
become an abomination to you; yea, and the works of your own hands vanity and
nothing, and ye shall rejoice in the Lord, and all that strive with you shall
perish.

SECT. XXXIX.
BEhold my Servants whom I have chosen, mine Elect in whom my Soul delights;
I have put my Spirit upon them, and they shall bring forth Judgment to the
Gentiles: They are mine, and not their own; mine, and not men's; for no man can
serve two Masters: Behold, they are excellent Servants, whose service is
perfect Freedom indeed and pleasure; all his Words and Works, Joy, Peace and
Righteousness for ever. Again, they are Servants of my own choosing, calling,
fitting, trained up by my self in my own house, to serve me in Righteousness
and Holiness before me. And in whom my Soul delights: Whom the Lord chooses,
he delights in them, though they be but Servants, the unworthiest of them; nay,
and that with his Soul, delighting himself in the prosperity of his Servants;
and whom he delights in, he puts his Spirit upon them, he can keep no good
things from them, yea, all is theirs, Heaven and Earth, Christ, the Spirit,
God, and All. And lastly, they shall by this Spirit overcome all things, and
bring forth Judgment unto Victory indeed.

SECT. XL.
HE shall not cry, nor lift up his voice, nor be heard in the streets; a
bruised reed he shall not break, nor quench the smoking flax, till he bring
forth Judgment unto Victory; he shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till he
has set up Judgment in the Earth, and the Isles shall wait for his Law. Thus
shall it be with the Children of Jesus, in whom Christ is formed; the Spirit of
Jesus is Love, Meekness, Sweetness, Patience; it seeks not revenge, but in all
things behaves it self comely in the streets abroad, toward them without, and
at home toward them within; it will offend none, but help all.

SECT. XLI.
THe smoking flax, etc. The lowest and darkest appearance of him is glorious;
he comes to his own, and receives it, if but a smoke, he makes it a flame, and
such as sit in darkness, he makes them to see light, and where there is smoke,
and trouble of heart, he takes away the dimness, and makes the smoke to vanish,
and the fire of the Lords Spirit must burn us as flax and tow, decay to nothing
before we shall be good for any thing. And the bruised reed also the Lord will
not break, he does cherish and nourish it, as the husband does his wife; the
Lord rather does bind up the reed then bruise it, and makes the reed become a
rod of iron, to break in pieces the Nations, the Potters vessels, the fleshly
man; for the Lord can do nothing against himself.

SECT. XLII.
ANd the Lord will give himself for righteousness, strength and light to the
people, eyes to the blind, freedom to the prisoners: I will no more give my
glory to another; I will make waste their mountains and hills, dry up all their
herbs, and dry up all their pools, and then will I bring the blind by a way
they know not; I will make darkness light before them, and crooked things
straight; all flesh shall be deaf and blind, and then shall they see; even my
Servant, and my Messenger shall be blind, that he that glories may glory in
the Lord.

SECT. XLIII.
BRing forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears, for
they are my Witnesses and my Servants whom I have chosen, says the Lord. For
they believe, understand and know that I am he, and there is none besides me. O
Israel, fear not, for I have redeemed thee, and called thee by my name, thou
art mine: Wheresoever thou go, I am with thee, through waters, rivers, fire,
and all; for thou art precious in my sight, and honorable; therefore I will
give men for thee, and people for thy life. Behold, I will do a strange thing,
I will dry up all rivers, and make a new river in the Wilderness, and the Beast
and the Dragon therein shall honor me for it, and drink thereof, and change
their natures.

SECT. XLIV. I the Lord do all things.
I Am the Lord, and there is none else; I the Lord do all things, I make the
Heavens to drop down from above, and let the Sky pour down Righteousness, and
the Earth open, and let them bring forth Salvation, and let Righteousness
spring forth together; I, the Lord, have created it, and will have it so: I
have raised thee up in Righteousness, and thou shall built up my City, not for
silver nor reward, but for my name sake; yea, all shall bow down to thee, and
make supplication to thee, saying, surely God is with thee, and in thee, and
there is none else; the idols shall make you ashamed, but I will save you world
without end. Look unto me, and be ye saved, for there is none besides me, in me
you shall be justified, and shall glory.

SECT. XLV.
TO whom will you liken me, says the Lord? to your dumb, dead idols, that
cannot stir, overlaid with gold, yet without life, whereas there is no God
besides me? I will bring near my Righteousness, and my Salvation shall not
tarry, and I will place my Salvation in Zion for Israel my Glory.

SECT. XLVI. The shame and the nakedness of Babylon.
O Virgin, daughter of Babylon, come, and sit on the ground, for thou shall no
more be called tender and delicate, thy nakedness and shame shall be seen; get
thee into darkness, thou art no more a Lady of Kingdoms, thou shall have no
more pleasure, in a moment childless, and a widow, for thy sorceries and
enchantments, trusting in thy wickedness, saying, Thou art, and there is none
besides thee; wherefore a mischief and a desolation shall come on thee
suddenly, and thou shall not know it; let all thy Confidence or Counselors
stand up and save thee from the evil to come on thee; thou shall be as stubble,
the fire shall burn them; and thus the whole glory of flesh is destroyed.

SECT. XLVII.
I Have showed thee new and hidden things, what is, and has come to pass, and
what shall be, and none of thy idols could do it, then did I tell it thee, yet
is thy neck stiff, and thy brow hard: I, even I, have spoken it from the
beginning, and if thou had hearkened to my Commandments, then had thy peace
been as rivers; and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea, thy seed as the
sand, and thy offspring as the gravel thereof, nor thy name cut off or
destroyed for ever.

SECT. XLVIII. The Lord from the womb forms us to be
THe Lord has called me from the womb, from the bowels of my mother has he
made mention of my name, and made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of
his hand has he hid me, and made me a polished shaft in his quiver, making me
his Servant, in whom he will be glorified; then I said, I have labored in vain,
and spent my strength for naught, yet surely my judgment then is with the Lord,
and my work with my God; though I be nothing, yet he is all things; Kings and
Princes shall arise and worship, because of the Lord thy God with thee; and
then you shall feed in the ways, and their pastures in the high places; you
shall not hunger nor thirst, neither heat or Sun smite them; for thou have
mercy on them, and leads them by the springs of water, and there thou will
guide them. Sing, O Heavens, Earth and Mountains, for the Lord has comforted
his afflicted, and I will not forget you, and none shall condemn you, the
smiters shall not trouble you: He that fears the Lord, and obeys his voice,
though in darkness, without light, shall trust in the Name of the Lord, and
stay himself on God; but whosoever shall kindle a fire of confidence for
themselves, shall lie down in sorrow.

SECT. XLIX.
LOok to the Rock, whence you are hewn, and the pit that dug you: the Lord
will make the deserts like Eden, and your Wilderness like a Paradise; though
all fa^l, yet your Salvation shall remain for ever; and your Righteousness
never abolished. Awake, awake, O Arm of the Lord: It was not our Arm, but
thine, that has done terrible things. Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem,
thou have drunk a cup of trembling; the sword, the plague, and the famine has
taken hold on thee: I will give thee a cup of Salvation, and remove the other
from thee.

SECT. L.
ZIon, or the Saints, shall put on strength, and have the beautiful Garments of
Life and Immortality, Grace and Glory, Righteousness and Truth, as their
clothing and beauty, and there shall not any thing defile thee; the
uncircumcised and the unclean, the filthiness of all flesh and spirit shall
pass away from thee, from henceforth, even for ever; thou art all fair my love.

SECT. LI. Shake thy self from the dust.
THou shall shake thy self from the dust, and all thy earthly tabernacles and
buildings shall fall in pieces, they shall hold you no longer, nor keep you
captive; I will loose thy cords and bands, and thou shall be at home in the
Lord, and be absent from the body, from flesh, sin, death, and all misery: I
will redeem you without money, freely from all, though you have sold your
selves for the world, and to the world, which is as good as naught; For what
will it profit you to gain the world, and lose your soul*

SECT. LII. The Lord rules over us, and speaks in us.
I The Lord will rule over them, and none other, they shall howl no more, but
rejoice, and my Name shall no longer be blasphemed amongst them, but hallowed;
for my people shall know it, and have it written in them, and upon them, and
know that I am he that speaks; behold, it is I; the word in their heart, and
from their mouth, it is not theirs, but mine to give; and they shall not take
care what to speak in that day, for the Father that dwells in them shall
teach them.

SECT. LIII.
THe instrument of Gods praises is honorable for the work sake; Blessed is he
that comes in the name of the Lord, but thrice more, the Lord himself coming
in his own Name and Glory; if the feet of them that bring but the glad tidings
be beautiful, if they that bear the Ark glorious, if the figure, form or type
be glorious, what is the Head, the Lord himself, the Truth, and Glad Tidings
themselves? If those that were about King Solomon, and heard him, and waited on
him, were so happy, how much more then is Solomon himself happy; for the feet
of Christ is the lowest and weakest of Christ's people, called Christians, the
poorest amongst them; if they that are but the feet, like doorkeepers in the
house of God, be so beautiful, and full of joy, and glad tidings, having but
the earnest and feet of the Spirit; O what are the eyes and hands of the Lord?
How glorious are the highest Saints? Nay, what is the King of Saints? Then who
can tell us, if his feet, which is Christ manifested in the Flesh, be so
beautiful, what is his Head then, which is Christ justified in Spirit? If the
Feet of his Humanity be such, what think you must the Head and Heart of his
Divinity be?

SECT. LIVE. Thy God reigns in the Zion of Saints.
THe only glad tidings is this to all Zion, Thy God reigns: This is their
greatest joy, and without which all other joys are soon quenched; This is the
Day of Salvation, Redemption, Remission, Justification, Sanctification, and all
blessedness, the acceptable year and Jubilee of the Lord and his Zion, then when
their God reigns; and where must he reign? not only in heaven and in earth, but
in men, in the midst amongst us; then is his Kingdom come, and Will done on
earth as it is in heaven, when thy God reigns, O Zion.

SECT. LV.
DEpart ye, depart ye, shall the Lord then say, get ye out from hence, and
touch no unclean thing; I have received you, go out of the midst of her, and be
altogether in my holiness, and live in me, for I will lead you, and go before
you, and be your rereward, and come behind you, so that nothing shall come nigh
you, but my self; I will compass you so about, and deal so prudently with you,
that I shall only be exalted and extolled amongst you; and though his outward
form and visage, in whom I dwell, be so base and marred by reproaches, more
then any other in the world, yet I will stop the mouths of Kings for their
sakes, and my glory shall break forth in the midst of them; and that which had
not been told them by flesh and blood, shall they see by the Spirit of my
Father; and that which they had not heard, neither could they believe, shall
they now know, and be fully satisfied in; and all this shall be in the day that
thy God reigns in Zion.

SECT. LVI. The Arm of the Lord.
THe Arm and Strength of the Lord are we in the Lord, and it is revealed to us
in Christ, who is this Arm of the Lord indeed, and we cannot but report so; the
Lord is with us, and his Arm upon us, when it is so indeed, when the Arm of the
Lord goes along with the report; and indeed how can we that have been saved and
healed by the Lord and his Arm, but go about testifying what great things the
Lord has done for us, and magnify his name, and declare his goodness, whether
they will believe it or not, I am constrained to report it, to prepare his way.

SECT. LVII.
ANd this Arm of the Lord, as it is revealed and comes that way, before it can
be reported by us, flesh and blood reveals it not, but our Father which is in
Heaven; so it grows up as a tender plant of the Lords own planting: Christ
planted in us grows up like a plant, and takes root from the Father, and brings
forth his branches and fruits in the dry ground of our nature, in our sinful
state, poor, barren flesh: and when this tender plant, Christ Jesus, grows up,
it shall be at first in weakness, without form or comeliness after the flesh*
nay without beauty that you should desire him after the flesh, for he comes to
crucify flesh and blood in us; and therefore the natural man will despise him,
hide his face and not esteem him; for the plant of the Lord will be a man of
sorrow and grief to his flesh, as the Lord Jesus was to the Jews in his day.
And further, this Arm of the Lord will bear all our griefs and sorrows, all our
smitings, strikings and afflictings of God and men, besides the principalities
and powers of Satan which dwell with us, it will bear them all, yea the wounds
of our transgressions and the bruises of our iniquities, wounding and bruising
him; he heals them all, and overcomes them, reconcileing us to God, slaying the
enmity, taking away the wall of partition, becomes a Mediator between God and
us, uniting us in one.

SECT. LVIII.
THis arm of the Lord finds us lost and going astray, like sheep, out of his
way, and turns us into the way, and leads in the way of righteousness, bearing
all our iniquity, both in the way and out of the way, that lies upon us; its
the Lords pleasure to remove them that they lie not in our way, nor keep us
from the way, nor turn us out of the way; and as a Lamb, so opens he not his
mouth, though oppressed, afflicted, smitten, and slaughtered, but by patient
suffering overcomes all, and is glorified over all, and is taken out of prison,
and from judgment, and who shall declare his generation? for when he was
oppressed and smitten, he was in prison in flesh; but when the Lord rises in
us, and leads us captive after him, then he is out of prison, and destroys
flesh; he is not here in prison, he is risen.

SECT. LIX.
BUt this Lamb, though he lies in the prison of flesh, and is in the wicked as
in a grave buried and imprisoned, yet there he will rise; and as his grave is
with the rich, that have righteousness, but not from the Lord, he rises amongst
them; so that the Lord makes his grave in his death with the wicked and the
rich, and makes them both one in his death, and buried with him into his death,
and lie with him in his grave, and rise with him in the Spirit, by making
wicked and rich both happy in himself alone.

SECT. LX. What it is to have the pleasure of the Lord
IT pleased the Lord to bruise his Son, and so his Saints, often to put them to
grief in the flesh, that they might rejoice in the Spirit; and to sow that seed
in them that might prolong their days; and to let them see the seed of his
soul, and love; and the seed of their soul, joy, and praises; and so to have
the pleasure of the Lord to prosper in their hands, as it did in Christ's, and
to have the Lords pleasure to prosper in the hands of Christ, and no other
hands, for it cannot; if taken out of his hands, all decays and withers, every
branch or work; but in him is all fruit and prosperity found; the pleasure of
the Lord is he, and the pleasure of the Lord is his work and way, and it is to
save sinners, to dye for sinners, call sinners, justify sinners, and to make
them Saints and sons, the soul of the living God blameless, harmless, glorious,
beautiful all over; this is the pleasure of the Lord; nay, to have him bruised,
smitten, to have his grace, love, mercy, patience, goodness, bowels, wisdom,
power, all employed for our good; this is the pleasure of the Lord; and it did,
and does prosper in the hands of Christ, and that is the next thing, when it
makes us like Christ, and like God, when the will of the Lord is done in us,
when God dwells in us, of a truth, when we are made one with the Lord, when we
reign with him, when the Lord is all, when we are his pleasure and will.

SECT. LXI.
ANd the Lord Jesus shall beget us, and conceive us in the womb of his tender
mercies, and travel in birth with us; and in the Day of the Lord we shall,
though with sorrow, be the travel of his Soul, and we shall see it, and the
Lord shall look upon us; and notwithstanding all former sorrow, it shall not be
remembered, for joy that we are brought forth holy to the Lord; and the Lords
Will and Pleasure, Wisdom and Power, Love and Mercy, shall be satisfied in us.

SECT. LXII.
ANd the Knowledge of the Lord shall be known, and his Wisdom understood, and
the righteous God shall be justified, and we justified by him, and in him, for
his Righteousness shall be in us, and upon us; we shall be his spoil and
portion, the Lord shall take us for his lot, and the Lord shall be our portion
and great inheritance.

SECT. LXIII. The Lord makes the barren to sing, and to
FEar not, neither be ashamed of thy reproach, poor heart, that art left like a
widow, and childless, barren and fruitless, thou that have not traveled though
thou wast married, but not to the Lord: Thou have had many lovers and husbands,
but not thy maker thine husband, therefore thou art confounded, and in bondage,
weeping and lamenting, as being left desolate; Hear now what the Lord God,
whose name is the Lord of hosts, thy Redeemer, the holy One of Israel, the God
of the whole earth, what he says, Sing O barren, and break forth into singing;
for the Lord thy God will overshadow thee, and thou shall conceive in
righteousness, travel in truth, and bring forth faithfulness: the Lord will
marry thee to himself, and thou shall bear many sons and daughters to the Lord;
for Righteousness shall be the fruits of thy womb, and Peace thy daughters, and
Truth thy offspring.

SECT. LXIV.
THe Lord thy Husband, will enlarge thee all over, none shall surpass thee,
thou shall have more children then the married ones, or the concubines, thou
shall excel them all, in singing, bearing, and bringing forth a multitude of
Glory to the Lord; thy womb shall be opened, thy heart enlarged, thy spirit
strengthened, thy seed multiplied, thy bed stretched out, thy tents widened,
and the curtains of thy habitation, thy cords and stakes lengthened, for the
Lord, will make the fruits of thy soul like the stars of Heaven, or the sands
on earth for number, all the Plants of the Lord, all his own begotten Sons and
Daughters, and born by the Spirit, in whom he is well pleased; thou shall break
forth on the right hand, and on the left, every way beautiful, and thy seed and
children shall inherit and inhabit the desolate places; and where it was said,
Ye are not my people, there shall it be said, Ye are the sons of the living God.

SECT. LXV.
THus the Lord has dealt with thee, when thou wast as a woman forsaken and
grieved in spirit, nay, refused and rejected by all, I found thee desolate, and
I married thee, and received thee to my self, and lay thee in my arms and
bosom, made thee to bear children; thus with great mercies have I gathered
thee, though for a small moment thou wast forsaken; and in a little wrath I hid
my face from thee, but I am returned to thee now with everlasting kindness; and
I will have mercy on thee without end, for I am thy Husband and thy Redeemer.

SECT. LXVI.
NAy, now I will do more for thee then ever, I will never depart more from thee;
I will swear to thee as I did to Noah, and give thee a better sign then I did
to him, the Rainbow in the Heaven, that I would no more drown the Earth; so
will I do to thee, the waters of my wrath shall never be upon thee, my light
and countenance lifted on thee, but never taken off thee; and this shall be thy
token, I will give thee my self in marriage, and be thy Husband, and thou shall
be without rebuke, nay, though mountains and hills be removed, all thy comforts
and comforters depart from thee, yet shall never my kindness, nor the Covenant
of my peace, be removed, but I will keep thee in perfect peace; for in the
world, flesh and darkness, there is nothing but trouble, vanity, anguish,
torment, and vexation, but in me, my Love, Heart, Spirit, Light, Life, Truth,
and Kingdom, thou shall have peace; be therefore of good comfort, for I have
overcome all to thee.

SECT. LXVII.
SEe further, how fruitful the Lord will make her, and how beautiful all over,
though tossed and afflicted, discomforted and perplexed, behold the Lord will
be thy foundation, the living Stone shall be thy corner stone, the Rock thy
root and bottom, wherefore says the Lord, I will lay thy stones with fair
colors, and foundation with Saphirs; thy windows of Agates, thy gates of
Carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant sto^es: And all thy children shall
be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy children: Thus will
the Lord glorify thee, for in righteousness shall thou be established, that
shall be thy fair colors and Saphirs, and without either oppression,
oppressor, fear, or terror; and all that gather against thee, shall fall by
thee, for I am with thee; and as whatsoever is in thine hand has this
blessing, it shall prosper; so this shall be a curse to thine enemies, that no
weapon formed against thee, my Holiness, shall prosper: and every tongue that
rises up against thee, by preaching, praying, counselling, or threatening,
shall be condemned: This is the heritage, blessing, promise, and portion of the
servants of the Lord, and all their worth and righteousness is from thee; thou
art the Lord their God, thou sanctifiest them.

SECT. LXVIII.
THe Lord Jesus Christ is all true and saving comfort, and all kind of food is
in him: He is water to the thirsty, wine to the heavy hearted, milk to the
hungry; He is water to the weak, milk to the faint, wine to the strong; and yet
one and the same Lord God that gives, water, milk, and wine; and this he does
in the revealing of himself more or less to us. And do but observe the Lords
sweet grace, in calling us to this feast or banquet that he has prepared for
us, Ho every one that thirsts, taste how good and gracious the Lord God is,
taste of his after all: when thou have drunk many waters, and tasted much wine,
and eat the milk of many creatures that have stolen away thy heart, then do
but come to this living water after all, and indeed if we knew the gift of God,
and the virtue of this water, and who it is that calls us to come to drink, we
should say, Lord give me evermore of this water, or else I dye, and that I may
never thirst again; but as long as we have any cisterns, Jacobs wells, or any
such creature wisdom, or broken vessel, we are apt to forsake the living
fountain; but after all, when all that fails us, and cannot quench our tongue
enflamed, nor cool it, nor give us the least comfort, then shall we fly to the
rock where we are comforted.

SECT. LXIX.
DO but consider these two things here:

First, The Lord invites us to the waters, and then to the milk, and after to
the wine: first to thirsting, then to buying without money, and lastly to
eating; so tender, careful, and wise is the Lord to us, weaning us by degrees
from grace to grace, and strength to strength, becoming all things to all to
win soul^.

And the second thing is, to remember the Governor of the feast in the marriage
of Cana, that after all the bad wine was drunk, commended the water turned to
wine by Christ above all that ever he drank before, and demanded why he kept
the good wine till now; so is it in the way of the Lord here, when men have
drunk their fill, and tasted, and filled themselves with the creatures, if the
Lord makes them but to thirst after this water and wine, and give them to
drinking, they shall also say as this Governor here, Lord God, this is the
water and the wine indeed, all that ever I did drink before is nothing to this:
thou have kept the best last.

And also, do but observe one thing more, The best things are best cheap; this
water is not to be purchased with money, the gift of God comes not that way; No,
no, our money, and mony-worth, and all such things perish; it is free and full,
and the Lord gives it liberally, and upbraids none.

SECT. LXX.
HEarken diligently unto me, I am the Lord thy God that will help and have
mercy on thee, and show thee what is good; I will not give thee stones for
bread, nor serpents for fish, neither will I take thee, or thy money, thy labor,
or strength, or any such thing, to deceive thee; but I will, out of my love to
thee, and bowels of compassion, knowing this, thou art deceived; I will give
thee bread indeed, content and sufficiency of all things, that which is bread,
and that which satisfied, which is my grace and peace; Hearken therefore unto
me alone, and take what I shall give thee; my water, my wine, and my milk, it
is mine, and its water of life, milk from my everlasting breasts, my own
comforts from my heart, my Wine and Spirit, it is all good, exceeding good, the
riches of my goodness; taste it, it will delight thy soul, strengthen thy
heart, enlighten thy eyes, and revive thy spirits; its fatness indeed, its honey
and marrow; it will make thee fat, and fair, and well-liking; thy soul shall
prosper by it, and delight it self in fatness with it; I will be all this to
thee; and you shall live in the fatness and fullness of all things: if thou will
live with me, thou shall no more labor in vain, nor spend money in vain after
those things that perish; but I will take thee to my self in Covenant, stature,
life, spirit, even an everlasting Covenant, the sure mercies of David; I will
deal in mercy with thee, and no other way, even from henceforth for ever; I
will make thee live in peace and happiness, and live and feed, walk and stand,
and lie down for ever in sure mercies: this shall be thy habitation for ever;
and I will be thy labor and money for ever, that is, thy riches and strength am
I, and thy exceeding great reward.

SECT. LXXI. Christ the true Witness and Leader to
ANd behold your light shall so shine before men, that they shall see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven: I will give Christ to be
the true and faithful Witness in you to the world, and your Leader and
Commander in all your goings out, and comings in, to glorify me in the midst
of a crooked and perverse generation; and you shall have no other Witness, no
less a Witness of my Covenant and sure mercies with thee, then the Son and
Spirit of mercy himself, Christ your Lord my Witness in you.

SECT. LXXII.
BEhold, again, I will not only give them water* wine, milk, and all manner of
good things, but I will satisfy them, make them delight in fatness, they shall
live with me, I will make also an everlasting Covenant with them, I will be
their Witness in all things, to justify them, and comfort them, and to discern
between good and evil in them: and moreover, I will call whole Nations, that
thou know not, to bear witness to thee, and to follow thee, for they hear
and see that the Lord thy God is with thee, and they that know not thee shall
run after thee, because of the savor of thy good ointments, and they shall come
into thy chambers, and have fellowship with thee, for their fellowship shall be
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, so because of the Lord thy God
they shall be drawn, and because of the holy One of Israel, for he has
glorified thee, therefore shall they glorify thee, and be glorified together
in the Lord also with thee, and so shall seek and worship the Lord in one
glory; for the Lord their God has found them, and therefore they return to
him, and seek him, and is found of them, and appears nigh unto them, so they
cannot but call upon him, and he again upon them, he calls the sinners to
repentance, the wicked to forsake his evil way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and to turn to the Lord; for he will have mercy on them, and to them,
that call him the Lord their God; for he can and will, and none else,
abundantly pardon them: and though your thoughts, and ways, and mine, be as far
distant as heaven and earth, and as far below me, yet I will make your thoughts
mine, and your ways mine; you shall think as I think, and say as I say, and
live as I live, and in every thing do as I do, agree in mind, spirit and
judgment with me; think of your selves and ways as I do think of you, and think
of me and my ways according as I think of my self, and think of others, and
their ways, as I do; and then though my thoughts before were in heaven so high,
and yours on earth so low, yet now you shall no more be in earth, but in heaven
with me, and in earth with me, and in both like me.

SECT. LXXIII. The Word that comes from Gods Mouth shall prosper in what it is
sent.
NAy furthermore, I will pour out my Rain and my Snow, my Spirit and my Word,
from my heavenly Glory, upon you, that are like the earth, sinful and carnal,
and my Spirit and Word shall not return in vain, it shall water you, and make
you fruitful, and bring forth seed to the sower, and bread to the eater; for as
it came out of my Mouth, as from heaven, so it shall descend in the heart of
the earth, and plow up the fallow grounds, and sow in righteousness, and reap
in joy; it shall accomplish that whereto I sent it, and prosper in the thing I
take in hand; it shall make you bring forth, and go out in joy, and be led
forth in peace; the mountains and hills shall break forth into singing, and the
trees of the fields clap their hands for joy, for high and low, rich and poor,
shall praise the Lord; no thorns, but fir trees; no briars, but myrtle trees;
and it shall be to the Lord for an everlasting sign of praise, never to end.

SECT. LXXIV.
BLessed is the man that keeps judgment, for judgment shall keep him, and
that does justice, for that shall preserve him; for to him my Salvation is
come, the Salvation of the Lord, and to him my Righteousness is revealed;
blessed is the man that has this, and that lays hold on it; for he shall
keep the Sabbath from polluting it, and serve the Lord; he shall keep a rest
and a holy day for ever to the Lord; he shall do no evil, neither shall any
iniquity be found in his hand.

SECT. LXXV.
THe stranger and the Eunuch that are joined to the Lord shall be sons and
heirs, neither shall they say, we are separated from the Lord any more, nor
from his people, but are united to them; nor shall the Eunuch say any more, he
is a dry tree; but the Lord God, who joined himself to them, and given them his
Spirit, even the Spirit of Holiness and Rest, to keep a Sabbath within them,
God will give them a place and a habitation within his house, and a name better
then of sons and daughters, even heirs, and an everlasting name that shall
never be cut off: I will bring them to my holy Mountain, and make them my House
of Prayer, and I will rejoice in them, and accept of all their burnt-offerings
and meat offerings upon my Altar, and my House shall be called, The House of
Prayer for all people; though their watchmen be blind and dumb dogs, yet I will
be their Watchman, says the Lord.

SECT. LXXVI.
THe righteous man perishes, though his righteousness endures for ever, yet
none lays him or his righteousness to heart, nor considers his death or his
life; and he, and his righteousness, is taken from the evil to come; for what
has righteousness to do with unrighteousness, or light with darkness? So he is
taken from men to God, and shall enter in his peace, and lie down in his bed of
rest, and walk for ever in his righteousness: But the sinful and wicked man he
perishes not, but lives and prospers in the world for a moment, but yet his
triumph is short; this is the Adulterer and the Adulteress, and her whorish
brood, that make a wide mouth; speaking blasphemy; false children, full of
iniquity, sporting themselves with vanities, and inflamed with idols in every
place, in valleys and hills, and have joined to another, and enlarged thy bed,
and have not at all remembered the Lord, nor laid him to thy heart; for these
lovers and lusts have stolen away thy heart, thy vanity shall take thee away,
and none shall deliver thee; but they that trust in me shall be delivered, and
inherit rest in my Land quietly.

SECT. LXXVII. The Lord will dwell in Holiness, both on
NAy further, Thus says the Lord to them that fear him, whose name and nature
is holy, and his dwellings in eternity holy, that wheresoever he is he makes
all things holy, and like him; if he dwell above or beneath, in height or in
depth, in rich or in poor, in high or low, strong or weak, fathers or babes,
which is called the high and holy place, or in the humble and contrite, yet he
is Holiness in all estates and degrees, and revives the heart and spirit of the
humble, and creates peace also in all their borders, both to them a far off,
and to them nigh at hand; neither will I contend in wrath for ever, least I
should destroy the souls that I have made; but I have seen his ways, and will
heal and restore comfort to the mourners, and peace where there is no peace.

SECT. LXXVIII.
THe Lords people, even the house of Jacob, have their sins and transgressions
as well as others, and the cry of the Lord is loud against them, he will not
spare them above all, they shall see it; and these be their sins.

1. They seek me daily, but its with the lip only.

2. They delight to know my ways, but yet hate to be reformed, and do it.

3. They ask of me the Ordinances of Justice, and yet forsake the Ordinance of
their God.

4. They delight in approaching before God, yet they say, Wherefore take thou
no knowledge of it?

5. They fast, and yet find pleasure; they fast but from sin, but fast to
strife and debate; you fast not unto me, your fast is not the acceptable day of
the Lord, that is, Joy and Gladness; yours is rending of garments, putting on
of sackcloth; you have chosen out a fast to your selves, which I know not of,
nor delight in; the Fast that I choose is the abstinence from all appearance of
evil, a rending of the heart, and not the garment, a blessed joyful mourning,
its to loose the bands of wickedness, and to undo the heavy burden, and to let
the oppressed go free, and to break every yoke of oppression, as taxes, rythes,
free quarters, besides the fightings within to be laid low; as also to deal
bread to the hungry, drink to the thirsty, and not to say, be thou warmed, or
be thou clothed: this is the new Commandment, to love one another; then shall
we walk in light, and not in darkness, and our light shall break forth as the
morning, and thy health like the noon day; thy righteousness shall go before
thee, and the Lord thy God thy rereward; we shall no sooner call or cry, but
the Lord shall answer, and say, Here I am: When the yoke of sin, and speaking
in vanity is cut off, then thy soul will be drawn out to the hungry, and the
afflicted shall be satisfied, and thy obscurity shall be as the light, and thy
darkness as the noon day, for the Lord will satisfy thee, and give to thee as
thou do to him, so will the Lords Soul be drawn out to thee, and make thee a
watered garden, a living fountain; nay, the Lord shall make thee a repairer of
the breach, and a restorer of paths to dwell in; for the Righteousness of the
Lord is upon thee, and the Lord shall be thy Sabbath and pleasure, thy holy day
and delight; thy ways and words, being lost to thy self, and remaining only the
Lords, delighting thy self in the Lord, riding to and from upon the high places
of the earth-triumphing over all things.

SECT. LXXIX.
BEhold, the Lords Hand or Power is never shortened, that it cannot save even
from the grave; yea, though they were dead, yet can he say unto them, live; nor
is his ear at all heavy, but he can hear the complaints of the distressed soul;
nor his eyes closed, but he can see their misery; nor his heart sealed, but he
can pity, and have mercy on them, if he please; but our sins and iniquities
shorten our hands, close our eyes, deafen our ears, and harden our hearts that
we shall not understand, and so separate us from the Lord, and from his face,
driving us out from his presence, that he may not hear, thus making us trust
altogether in vanities and lies, conceiving nothing but mischief, bringing
forth nothing but iniquity, breeding cockatrices eggs in us, and weaving spiders
webs, wickedness in a mystery, so keeping us far from the way of Peace; and as
for Judgment, that is turned backward behind us, Justice stands afar off, Truth
falls in the streets, and Equity cannot enter, therefore the Lords Arm is
stretched out, he sees what is done, and puts on his Armor, his Brestplate of
Righteousness, his Helmet of Salvation, his Clothing of Vengeance, and his
Cloak of Zeal to repay and recompense fury on his adversaries, our iniquities
and sins, lifting up his Spirit like a Standard against them, and bring them in
like a mighty flood, destroying iniquity and sin; and this Covenant will I make
in them and you, my Spirit shall be with you, and my Word in your heart and
mouth, never to depart from thee, nor thy seeds seed for ever.

SECT. LXXX.
THe Lord, thy Light, O man, is come, he is risen, and shines most gloriously,
and awakening thee to arise and shine in him, and with him, for his Glory is
rising on thee, dispelling all manner of darkness from thee, and gathering all
things to the light; yea, Kings and people to his brightness, far and near,
sons and daughters, to see his Glory; they shall see and flow together, be
enlarged, converted, because of the abundance of the Glory of the Lord
revealed; they shall come flying as Clouds, and as Doves to the windows, and in
thy light see light, walking every one in the light of the Lord.

SECT. LXXXI.
THy Temple shall be glorious for the Lord to dwell in; Kings and Princes,
strangers and friends, gold and silver, yea all precious substance, the
excellency of creatures shall be brought to thee, because of the Name of the
Lord thy God, for he has glorified thee, therefore they shall bring their
glory unto thee, and glorify thee; as the wise men that brought their gifts to
Christ, the Babe in a manger, gold, frankincense, mirrhe, and worshipped him,
because God had glorified him above his fellows; so here, them that are Christ's
shall be glorified, and the Nations and Kingdoms, that will not serve the Lord,
kiss the Sun, and have him to reign over them, shall perish, and their Land
left desolate.

SECT. LXXXII. All Glory comes when Gods Glory comes.
ALL Glory shall come unto thee, when the Glory of the Lord is revealed, the
glory of Lebanon, the Camels and Dromedaries of Midian, the Flocks of Kedar,
the Rams of Nebaioth, the Ships of Tarshish; yea, the Nations and Kingdoms all
abroad shall fear thee, because of the Lord thy God that is with thee, and
shall come from far to worship thy God with thee, and they shall be a beautiful
Sanctuary to the Lord, and the place of his feet amongst them shall be glorious,
the meanest and weakest of the Saints, Gods lower parts; thus God will make
thee an everlasting glory, and eternal excellency, a joy to ages.

SECT. LXXXIII.
ANd I the Lord, thy Redeemer, will make thine enemies bow down to thee, yea all
thy high imaginations, and spiritual wickedness, that hated and afflicted thee,
and I will bring my Glory and Treasure to thee; I will bring gifts unto thee, I
will multiply my Mercy, Grace and Peace to thee; yea, I will give thee gold and
silver for brass and iron, the precious for the vile; yea, I will make thy
officers all peace, ruling in peace, thy exactors righteousness, doing truth
and justice, so they shall learn to war no more, neither shall the sword any
more devour flesh; and it shall not be your bow, sword, spear, or might, but my
Spirit that shall glorify me, and you also; for all manner of violence will I
cause to cease, wasting and destruction no more seen; for our weapons are
spiritual, our God glorious, our dwellings on high, our walls salvation, and
our gates praise; thy God thy glory.

SECT. LXXXIV.
WHen this great light of the Lord himself is come, then shall thy stars fall,
and thy lamps grow dim; the heaven and earth, in thee, melt with fervent heat,
at the glorious presence of the Lord: when he comes with so much brightness and
glory, then shall our Sun and Moon, that is, all our heavenly gifts, graces,
ministries, and administrations, cease, and go out; give up their light and
life as being darkened by this everlasting Light and Glory: And the Moon turned
to blood, that is, all our natural excellencies, gifts, parts, relations,
portions, possessions, qualifications, conditions whatsoever, all our reason,
knowledge, wisdom and understanding here below, shall then appear as blood,
loathsome and filthy to us; yea, all shall appear vain and empty; and instead of
this Sun and Moon, that is, all earthly and heavenly things, thou shall inherit
the Lord God himself most gloriously to be thy Sun that shall never set, and
thy Moon that shall never change; for then thy God shall be thy glory, and thou
shall be righteous, and all thy people, and shall inherit the land for ever,
the land of the living, the living Lord, to be planted as his branch there,
living in him as their vine, even the work of his own hand that he has
glorified; and a little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a great
Nation; for the Lord will multiply and increase them, yea, the Spirit of the
Lord shall grow upon them and in them, they shall put on strength daily from
strength to strength.

SECT. LXXXV. The Spirit of the anointing of the Lord,
THe Lords anointing of us with the oil of his Spirit, makes our hearts to
overflow, and speak of the loving kindness of the Lord to the humble and meek
spirit; its a spirit of binding and loosing, binding up the wounds, and loosing
the wicked bands; a spirit of liberty to righteousness, and opening, and
enlargement to the prisoners; a spirit that does, and proclaims the acceptable
works of the Lord, a spirit of vengeance against sin, and yet a comforter to
the mourners: it is the Spirit of the Lord that does this; it overcomes the
spirit of sorrow and heaviness, death and darkness; it gives beauty for ashes,
joy for mourning, praise for heaviness; it makes them trees of righteousness,
the planting of the Lord, to glorify him: its a Spirit that is building up; it
does nothing for destruction, but all for edification; and what unclean spirits
have wasted, and spoiled, and wounded, and consumed, this Spirit of the Lord
comes to us as a repairer of the waste places, and the desolations made, and to
restore what is lost; it makes us this anointing of the Spirit, the Lords
Priests, yea the Ministers of God; it shall fall upon the Gentile as well* as
the Jew, and they shall eat the riches of his grace together; I will give them
everlasting joy, and bring them into my everlasting Covenant; and their seed
shall be the seed the Lord has blessed; thou and thine shall be like the bride
and the bridegroom, decked with ornaments and jewels, salvation and
righteousness, for their garments: And thou shall be like a fruitful garden,
righteousness and praise shall spring forth from thee, and be the fruits in
thee.

SECT. LXXXVI.
THe Lords zeal for Zion, and his love to Jerusalem, will not give him rest,
nor peace, till he has made our brightness righteousness; and our salvation
like the burning lamps, for ever flaming, and yet never ending, being fed with
eternity, and all see the glory of thee; and the Lords new name shall be in thy
forehead, which he shall give thee, and write on thee: We shall be the pure
crown of gold, which is a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and as a
royal diadem with our God: We shall be no more accounted forsaken, or desolate,
as we were once; but be termed Hephz-ibah, the Lord delights in thee, and thy
land called Beulah, thy land married; for thy God shall marry, and rejoice over
thee for ever.

SECT. LXXXVII.
THe Watchman upon thy walls, O Soul that never slumbereth nor sleeps, cares
for thee, and keeps not silence, but remembers thee day and night; neither will
the Spirit of the Lord rest, till thou art established and made a praise to the
Lord in the earth: Thou shall not be spoiled any more by strangers, nor thy
corn, wine and oil devoured by them any more; the enemy, sin and Satan, shall
wrong thee no more, nor the flesh plunder thee, for thy salvation is come, the
Lord God is his name, his reward with him, and his work before him: and the
Lord shall call thee, his People, and his Redeemed, sought out, and not
forsaken, the habitation of the Lord through the Spirit.

SECT. LXXXVIII.
THe coming of the Lord is with dyed garments, glorious apparel, traveling in
the greatness of strength and righteousness, to save us with might, all over
red with the winepress, treading it alone, trampling upon all thine enemies,
and mine, in wrath and fury, till the blood comes; for I will take vengeance on
all my adversaries, now my Redemption is come to thee, and I will help thee,
though there be none left else besides me; I am alone, and I will bring down
all strength, glory, haughtiness and pride, to the earth, there it shall lie in
the dust; then shall thou remember my loving kindness alone, and praise me for
all that I have done for thee: When I was afflicted for thee, and the
chastisements of thy peace lay on me, my presence saved thee, and my love and
pity redeemed thee, and carried thee along in safety, leading thee by the hand
through the terrible wilderness, and made my name glorious: you are the
habitation of my holiness, I cannot forget you, yea Abraham may, though your
own father or mother may cast you out of their Synagogue, yet I will have thee
to rule over them.

SECT. LXXXIX.
LOrd bow the Heavens, and come down, let the mountains melt at thy presence;
come amongst us like a melting fire to burn away all dross and iniquity, that
thine adversaries may tremble and perish in us, and amongst us, and do terrible
things that we looked not for, let sudden destruction come upon all flesh while
it cries peace, peace; for eyes have not seen, nor ears heard, neither can the
Natural perceive the things that are prepared of God for them that wait on him,
and that are to be fulfilled in him; but thou art our God we know, and we thy
clay, and thy work, thy people and souls thou have made, lets not be destroyed,
but make us a beautiful house, to praise thee; build us up, and let not thy
pleasant things lie waste, but bring thy treasure to thy house and land.

SECT. XC. The Lord God is found of them that sought
I The Lord am sought and found by them that never knew me, nor sought me, but
I them, and they loved me, and beheld me; I opened my heart to them, and spread
forth my hands, and drew them from g^rdens, altars, graves, and groves,
mountains and valleys, and from eating swines flesh, and abominable things, and
from thine own holiness and filthiness, which was like a smoke and filth to me,
to my own self, and my own mountain to dwell in; for my blessing that is
amongst you I will not quite destroy you, but my inheritance shall be with you,
and I will dwell with you, and all that is with you, and in you, that forsakes
me, I will number to the sword, and bow down to the slaughter all that is
disobedient to me; and thus I will do to you my servants, in you and amongst
you, you shall eat, drink and rejoice, but what is my revenge in you and
amongst you, you shall hunger, thirst, and be ashamed, and cry for sorrow of
heart, and howl for vexation of spirit, and slain, but his servant shall be
called by another name; and he that blesses himself in the earth, shall bless
himself in the God of earth; and he that swears in the earth, shall swear by
the God of the earth; so that heaven and earth shall give glory to God, and all
that dwell therein.

SECT. XCI.
ANd behold I make all things new, and these shall be remembered but all the
former forgotten, and thou shall rejoice forever at what I create, for I create
truth, peace, salvation and righteousness, yea, my rejoicing and my praise,
there shall be no more an infant nor a father, but all shall be as one strong
man in Christ, yea they shall have houses, vineyards, possessions of their own,
and no others; they shall no more labor in vain, nor bring forth for trouble,
but you shall be called the blessed of the Lord and his offspring; thy God I
will be, that hears and answers thee, who lives and abides with thee; there
shall be nothing that does hurt in all my Mountain, but the Wolf and Lamb, Lion
and Bullock, shall lie down together: there shall be nothing else but rest
amongst them, all living in one.

SECT. XCII.
ANd though heaven be my throne, and the earth my footstool, yet this is not my
dwelling, nor the place of my Rest, but in the houses and dwellings of men; you
are my building and house, the humble and the contrite heart will I live with;
and till I come to live with them, all their worship and sacrifice, yea their
lambs, and offerings are abominable to me, I hate them all, till I am formed in
them, and when I am thus formed in thee, all that hate thee hate me, then your
souls shall not delight in these things which I delight not in, nor when I call
shall they not answer, but they shall delight in the Lord alone, and nothing
else.

SECT. XCIII.
THe soul that trembles at my Word, though he be cast out falsely for my names
sake, and think they glorify me in it, yet let them know their zeal is without
knowledge; and who has required this at their hands, but you shall be
justified, and they ashamed, and the Voice of the Lord shall be heard from his
Temple with us, that Zion travelleth, and is delivered without pain: Was ever
such a thing heard or seen, that a whole Nation should be born at once, and
brought forth in one day? And why cannot the Lord do it? Shall he bring to the
birth, and not cause to bring forth, or then shall the Lord shut the womb? No,
no, be glad and rejoice with her all ye that love her, take of the breasts of
her consolation, and be satisfied, delight thy soul in the abundance of her
glory, for her peace shall be like a river, and her glory as a stream; you
shall be born on her sides, and be dandled on her knees; I will comfort you as
a mother comfort her children; for by fire and a sword shall the Lord plead
with all flesh, and make it as a loathsome carcass, but you shall remain for
ever, and worship before me.

Thus I have finished this Book of Isaiah in much sorrow, weakness and trouble,
and dare not yet venture to proceed, till I find a more convenient time for
it, then I have had for this first Volume, it being brought forth in the midst
of our troubles here at London, while the Army was amongst you, and these great
things acted, as the Charge, Trial and Execution of the King; in all which time
this was some repast and refreshment to write these things, though it was by
fits and starts, yet the Lord may make it useful, in some measure, for the good
of others: Being called away now from London, I am forced to break off here in
the midway, else I might show you the Book of Jeremiah opened in Man, Ezekiel
and Daniel, with the lesser Prophets, one by one fulfilled in us; as also the
New Testament, how we have the everlasting Gospel taught us by the Spirit of
Christ in our hearts, together with his Birth, Life, Doctrine, Works and Death
of Christ formed in us; as also his Resurrection, Ascension and Glorification
within us, Christ risen. Again, how we are the Acts of Christ, and how Christ
is all our Acts and Works; it is he does all for us, and in us. And again, how
we are his Epistles, yea the heavenly and holy Epistles of Christ, written by
God on the Tables of his Hand, our hearts known and read of all men; how we are
the Lords Church, Spouse, Members and Body, his Building, Planting, Temple and
Dwelling. Lastly, how we are the Lords Revelations and Visions to whom he shows
himself, and the things that are, have been, and are to come, things past,
present, and to come, afar off, or nigh at hand; we are these whom the Lord
ravishes in Spirit, in his day, when that comes upon us, and then he tells us
all things, and takes us up to heaven to see himself in all, and all in
himself, opening heaven, and revealing his whole Will and Counsel: We are that
sealed Book, whom the Lamb takes and opens, for he is worthy, and we are these
that shall have the honor to say, Come, come, come, Lord Jesus, come quickly:
Thus the Bride shall say, and we are those that shall have either all these
Blessings, Graces, Gifts, Mercies, Promises, Comforts and Glories that are in
heaven and earth written or revealed in the whole Scriptures, or else all the
curses, woes, lamentations, miseries, threatenings and torments written in the
whole Book of God to fall upon us; thus eternally happy, or eternally
miserable: but all these things I leave to the Day of the Lord to bring forth
in me, to perfect his praises, that as the Lord has began, so he would
continue, and bring to the end of this Book of the Scriptures, that we may be
in the Lord God both the Alpha and the Omega of it.

I Know many things are amiss here, the faults can hardly be numbered, that
come either from the Author, Writer, Printer, or Reader, I pray thee pass them
by, amend what is amiss, and make use of what is good, trying all things,
holding fast that which is good, considering thou also may do amiss; and
truly this is all I can say in excuse, that I wanted time to write what was in
my mind, only made use of the night, never read it much, less time to correct
it, but am importuned to print it, and to press thy patience with it, let
patience then have its perfect work here*

Thine T* Butler.

FINIS

