The Peacemaker: OR, Solid REASONS, persuading to PEACE: Grounded upon the
late Solomn Covenant.

By H. B.

ESA. 52. 7. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that
brings good tidings, that publishes Peace, that brings good tidings of
good, that publishes salvation, that says unto Sion, Thy GOD reigns.

ZACH. 8. 19. Love the TRVTH, and PEACE.

LONDON. Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle near the West end
of Paul's. 1646.

A Pacifique: OR, Solid Reasons persuading to Peace* Grounded upon the late
solemn Covenant.
SWeet is the name of Peace; but the thing it self, when enjoyed, much more
sweet, and most of all* after long War, as a Sunshine after a Storm. But what
Peace? Or with whom? Surely at least a Civil peace, and that with ^ll men, if
possible; so far as peace with men, breaks not our pe^^e with God. Not a peace
with Amaleck* or Antichrist, with whom the God of Peace will have immortal
War. But peace amongst those, that profess to be the children of peace, and
friends to Truth: as all those do, who at this day in City and Country are
engaged in the common Cause, against the common Enemy. Peace I say, even
amongst dissenting brethren, is that, here aimed at, and desired.

Now the Reasons persuading to this peace, are chiefly taken from the late
solemn Covenant, for Reformation, and for the uniting of the three Kingdoms
against the common enemy: So as unreasonable it were, for any so to strain the
genuine sense of the Covenant, as to wring blood out of it, by forcing it
beyond its bounds. And therefore for the removing of all Bars obstructing the
way to a safe and sound peace, let us seriously weigh some principal passages
in the said solemn Covenant.

The first is, That we shall sincerely really, and constantly, through the
grace of God, endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation
of the Reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government, against our common Enemies. True, Against our
common Enemies: And who are they, but the whole faction of Papists, the
Antichristian Adversary, who seek to destroy all that Religion, which is termed
Protestant, and Reformed? Against these, I say, we do by this Covenant oblige
our endeavor to preserve, etc. But hereby we do not bind our selves to set up
in England the Religion which is in the Church of Scotland, as making that a
pattern, and a binding Law to us. Surely we never intended any such thing in
the taking of it; otherwise, how could we without dishonor to God, engage the
Grace of God, saying, Through the Grace of God. For we should be a very
ungracious and unworthy Nation, without any further caution or proviso, to tie
up our Consciences to a conformity to another Religion, (although we may have
a charitable opinion of it) before we have first examined it in all points,
whether it be according to the Rule. Yea, we did express thus much, when we
took the Covenant. For we hold no Church, nor Nation to be infallible, nor any
Church Reformation so exact in all points, as to challenge to it self a power
to bind other Churches. It is not for a freeborn People, especially Christ's
freeborn, to swear to any such blind obedience. Yea, we should therein swear
to a gross contradiction in our Covenant, where we promise to extirpate all
Popery, whereof blind obedience is one of the main Pillars, as without which,
what were the Papal Supremacy, but as a brutum fulmen, a buzzing Be without a
sting? And yet we may see, into what an inextricable Labyrinth this one blind
misconceit would lead us, through the gross and intolerable mistake of this
first passage in our Covenant. In so much, as ^^ this miserable mistak^ be not
the more speedily corrected and cured, it threatens at this very time utter
ruin to ou^ City and Country. Good God! What Is become of ou^ common prud^^^*
not to see our danger, through importune haste to ^^^o our selves? O^^^ver let
it be verified of England, of London, prophesied long ago* (Esaias 29. 14.)
B(...) will proc^ed to do a marrvellous work amongst this People, even a
mavelous work and a wonder. For the wisdom of their wise men shall perish,
and the understanding of the prudent men shall be hid. And wherefore?
Therefore, says the Lord there, Even because (ver. 13.) This People draw near
me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me but have removed their
heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men:
Therefore, etc. Read the word and apply it. We swear to a Reformation in
Religion. What? Whose? O you worthy Senate of London, hear, and fear, and be
wise. Remember you are English bred, nay (I hop^) Heaven-bre^^ Subject not your
Consciences to men* for he that is Lord over the Conscience is Lord over all.
We love our neighbors the Scots, as they have deserved, and we are ready upon
occasion to defend them against the common Enemy, according to our Covenant:
but all must be usque ad aras, not to subject our Consciences to them.
Therefore, my good hearts, let not any spirit of error possefle you. And let
not the Crown of Honor, which God ^^th put upon London, in using you as
instruments to rescue this Kingdom, be now cast in the (...). The Parliament
loves and honors you: so do you it. Let none divide between you. Wait upon God
in all your desires, who has hitherto (...)ously appeared for the Parliament
both in Providence, and Power^ (...) Gods ti^^ is, and what seems good unto his
Wisdo^^* you shall obtain of him above your desires. And assure your (...)*
through our disunions the Parliament should miscarry in the (...) C^^^e in
hand, not all ^u^ (...)st professed friends in the world (...) us from
perishing. It was a bad sign to Jerusalem, when it was said, A Jer. 5. 31.
wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the L^^d* The P^^phets prophecy
fa^st, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my People love to have it
so: And what will you do in the end thereof? The Lord deliver this City from
all such sad presages.

But I pass to the second main Passage in the Covenant. The Reformation of
Religion in the Kingdom of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government, ACCORDING TO THE WORD OF GOD. Here is set down the
sole and suprame Rule of Church-Reformation. THE WORD OF GOD. That this is the
sole Rule, we all agree. So that this must be the Touchstone, to try the Gold,
whether it be as pure for substance, as in appearance. To this Rule, the
Reformation both in Scotland and England, must be reduced. Therefore although
we shall endeavor (as before) the preservation of that Reformed Religion in
Scotland against our common Enemies; yet we do not bind our selves to the
erection, and so preservation of the same in England.

But it is added; And the example of the best Reformed Churches. Well: but
first, let it be tried, which be the best Reformed Churches. If that of
Scotland plead for it, we desire a clear demonstration of it. But why not the
Churches of New- England, which are of the latest Reformation, and therefore
likeliest to be the Best? And if the Best reformed, we must, by our solemn
Covenant, look over rather the great Ocean to New- England Churches, than over
Twede to that in Scotland. But indeed simply to neither, but in relation to THE
WORD OF GOD. Those being the Best reformed Churches, which come nearest to the
Rule, THE WORD OF GOD. To the Law, and Esa. 8. 20.
to the Testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is, because
there is no light in them. As Aug. said to the Arian: Neither Res cum re, causa
cum causa, ratio cum ratione, Scripturaram authoritatibus concertet. Aug. cont.
Maximinum Arrianorum episc. lib. 3. c. 14. to. 6.
do thou allege the Council of Ariminum, nor will I the Council of Nice:
Neither am I bound by the authority of this, nor thou of that: but let thing
with thing, cause with cause, reason with reason contend by
Scripture-authorities.

But now all sides allege Scriptures for them: who shall judge? Even the
Scripture, which remains the same still, in the midst of our differences. And
that way of Reformation which is purest from humane mixtures, and comes closest
home to the Rule, that certainly is the best. So as we have need to prove all
things, and 1 These. 5. 21. Phil. 1. 20.
hold fast that which is good; and to approve the things that are excellent,
above those of inferior rank. And both Scripture and Reason teach us, that to
depend upon Christ, and Scripture only for a right Reformation, is better, than
to depend upon humane power and authority. And it is a s^^er and better way to
give Christ all his honor, than to give any part of it to m^n. Considering
Actum est de Religione, ubi vel minimum detrahitur de Dei gloria.
that excellent saying of Calvin, Religion is at a loss, when never so little
is taken away from Gods glory. Again, where there is most of Christ, and least
of the world, where most self-denial and resolution for Christ, in daily
exposall to the odium and reproach of the world: certainly ^^ comes nearer to
Christ's rule, and example, than where the world most reigns. Good therefore
we should compare these things together, and see which does best agree with the
Rule.

And as for Uniformity in Religion in the three Kingdoms, truly that also must
in all things be reduced, and hold conformity to the same Rule: As many as walk
according to this Rule, Peace be Gal. 6. 16.
upon them, and mercy and upon the Israel of God. And this Uniformity is in
spirit and truth, and not in external forms devised and imposed by men. Much
pains is taken for compiling a Confession of Faith: O let Christ be confessed
in his three offices, all which the Scripture clearly sets forth unto us; and
(...) let the Form of Church Government hold forth Christ as well in his
Prophetical and Regal office, as in his Priesthood. And for Directory for
Worship and Catechizing; Sure we are, the Scripture is complete, which to
contract into a short model, is to epitomize the globe of the earth and sea
into a small map, where (...) goodly country is not to be found; as one (...),
gloried (...) great lands, being brought to a map, he could not find (...) of
it.

2. For extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, and Prelaticall Church Government, etc.
and all other Ecclesiastical O^ depending on that Hierarchy. And if so, what
shall become of all th^se Ecclesiastical Officers who had, and still have
(...) very (...) of their Ecclesiastical Office from that Hierarchy, and
(...) their Being still depending upon, and subsisting in that Hierarchy? How
is the Extirpation hereof endeavored? Where is he that has renounced his
Order of Priesthood received (...) that Hierarchy? Is this nothing? And as for
Schism; it is not a separation from all manner of corruptions, and from such
congregations as have no right of a Church body according to the Gospel: but a
Schism is a rending from, or of, a true church (as 1 Cor. 11. 18.) framed as a
house of fit materials, and compacted as an organical body of living members.
And in such a church (if any where) sound* doctrine, and the power of
godliness should be found* Whereas sound doctrine; especially of Christ's
kingdom, and of his Kingly office and government over consciences and
churches, where (almost) i^ it preached, much less practiced, in many hundreds
of Parochial congregations? And for the power of godliness, how little of that
also to be found, either under a Ministerial conformity, or National
uniformity, as we have seen by woeful experience?

3. And for mutual preserving the Rights and Privileges of Parliaments, etc.
Never was there greater need, than in these our distractions, and especially
when we see ^esuiticall plots creeping forth, disguised under the terms of
friendship and confederates, with bold compliance to make up a destructive
fraction and breath as between the Body and Head, that so both might become a
miserable prey both to professed enemies, and false friends: The preventing
whereof lies not a little in the power of this noble and famous City, while it
cheerfully continues necessary supplies, and due encouragemen^^ unto: the
Parliament. I remember an Apologue of Mene^ius Agrippa, who in a great
defection of the people of Rome from the Senat^, came and told them this: That
on a time the Members of the Body conspired against the belly; that they did
all labor* and all to feed the Belly, which wrought nothing at all* where^pon
^^ey concluded to withdraw all sustenance from the Belly (...) so to starve ^^.
^ut within two or three days they found their er^^^, when the face grew pale,
the cheeks thin, the hands feeble, the feet f^ltring, etc. so as they saw a
necessity of providing for the Belly, whose office is to digest and distribute
nourishment into every part of the Body, without which it could not s(...). And
(...)rewith the People was so affected, as that they un^^ mo^s^y retu^^ed, and
reconciled themselves to the Senate. It needs no application.

(...)

4. The nex^ thing in the Governant is, for discovery of such as go about to
make any faction or parties among the People, contrary to this League and
Covenant, that they may be brought to public trial, etc. Much more those,
that, under what plausible pretense soever, shall go about to undermine the
City, and to divide it from the Parliament and Armies, to combine with them to
bring to pass their design, which what can it be else, but ^^ ruin
Parliament, City, Kingdom, and themselves too.

And 5. and 6. We promise, Not to suffer our selves directly nor indirectly, by
whatsoever combination, persuasion, or terror, to be divided from this blessed
union, or to make defection to the con(...)y part, or to give our selves to a
det^stable indifferency, or neutrality in this Cause, etc. But we shall
reveal and make known, etc. And therefore much less should we directly or
indirectly, by whatsoever combination, o^ subtle insinuation, for fear, or
favor from any that carry two faces under one hood, suffer the least
alienation of our affections, or d(...)nution of our loyalty to our
faithfullest and fastest friends; who watch, that we may sleep; and war, that
we may enjoy peace; and lie on the cold ground, while we in our warm beds; and
what not?

Now all these things laid together, and well weighed, what s(...) stand in our
way, to separate us one from another, either in affection, or a mutual
combination, to stick close ^^gether, and to contribute our utmost abilities to
the helping on of the common cause, to come to a timely perfection in an
universal fruition of Truth and Peace in this Kingdom, and so in this fa^ous
City? And for this cause, let the dividing terms of Presbyterian and
Independent come under an A^^^stia, and not once be mentioned among us; whereof
that Noble and Vi(...)us Army gives us a worthy example, where, difference of
Opinions though there be, yet there is such an unity and symp(...)y of
a(...)ble Affections, as if they were so many Member^ (...) (...) natural
Body, and acted by one Spirit. So as there i^ spirit of Peace, in the cl^^^ing^
of War; bright Sunbeams, in (...) of Storms; the LORD of Hosts, their GOD of
Con(...)* So ^^ ^ ^^y be said of Number. 23. 21, 23.
them, as once of the camp of Israel, There is no (...) against Jacob, nor
divination against Israel: t^^ Lord (...) God is with them, and the shout of a
King is a(...) ^ that this spirit did thus act among us here at home, by
bearing and forbearing one another in love, not withstanding ou^ difference in
judgment; waiting till God shall reveal the same truth to those who are
otherwise Phil. 3. 15.
minded. And let each of us practice the counsel of the Holy Ghost: Who is a
wise man, and endued with knowledge among you, Jam. 3. 13.
Let him show out of a good conversation his works, with meekness of wisdom.
But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not
against the truth. This wisdom descends not from above; but is earthly,
sensual, devilish. For where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and
every (...) work: But the wisdom that is from above, is first, pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits,
without partiality, and without hypocrisy; And the fruit of righteousness is
sown in peace, of them that make peace.

And for the procuring and preserving us in the keeping of the unity of the
spirit, in the bond of peace; what can be a stronger tie than the solemn
Covenant, which was taken to unite the three Kingdoms together in a mutual
engagement against the common adversary, being taken in that sense only which
is bounded by the Word of God, without which, whatever Covenant is made, is
ipso facto unlawful and invalid, and so does not bind the conscience. So as we
are to measure the mind of our Covenant by the Word of Jer. 4. 2.
God, which requires an oath to be taken in truth, in judgment, and in
righteousness. And therefore as the making, and taking of this Covenant had
this main end in it, thereby to glorify God in a conscientious observing of it
for our mutual good (which is, in truth, and in judgment) and not to the hurt
or prejudice of any, (which is, in righteousness) So the constant keeping of
it, is the very ground and foundation whereon our peace is firmly built, as on
a rock. But if any violence be offered to the true sense of the words, and that
so a wrong interpretation obtruded upon any man's conscience, as pressing either
the taking, or the keeping of it in such a sense, as i^ directly contrary to
the Word of God: surely thus it is made an o^sion of the violation of peace,
yea and of causing and fomenting heart-burnings between brethren, and (that
which is directly cross to the express meaning of the Covenant, and quite
destroyed it) it cuts in sunder the very knot that should tie the two Kingdoms
together inviolably, while some would force upon us a confirmity to that
Religion, Worship, Church government, and Discipline, which is already
established in the Church of Scotland. Which as it is no part of the Covenant,
bearing no such se^ formerly proved: so is it flatly against the Word of God,
and against a main principle in Divinity, and of the Law of nature, to force
any man's conscience to a conformity to any platform of Religion set up (...)d
it in a violation of the law^ of Nations, for (...)sse and force upon another
f^ State and King(...) law for the ^lating of it in m^ Divine worship; yea it
is an A(...)stian usurpation^ ^^sides the unreasonablenesse of it in S^
policy, the usual Cynosure or Pole Star by which the cou^ of National
Church Government is steered; So as in this consideration, that which may suit
with one Nation for Political (...) peculiar unto it, will not suit with
another Nation, as being of a different constitution. For instance: The Church
of Scotland has been formerly en^d to the Presbyterian Church Government (as
they call it) so as they have had experience of it, and they can well comply
with it generally in Scotland: But the English Nation never knew yet to this
day (at least by experience) the nature of the Presbyterian Government, and so
cannot (...) an estimate how it may sort with our English tempers, so w^ with
the Scottish: and besides, there are (...) thousands in England, who are in
their consciences convinced, and that strongly by the Word of God, that there
is another kind of Churchgovernment, and that Presbyterian too, properly so
called, but improperly (as an improperium) Independent, which the Scottish
brethren are strangers unto: And therefore to press the Scottish Presbytery
upon the State of England (...) possibly breed some bad blood, and cause di^ers
in (...); and the rather, because God has appeared to own many of those that
are so called (Independents) for his own peop(...) most gracious eye upon them,
in crowning them with many ^vert^es, and many glorious Victories over their
puissant (...) to whom they are become a terror; As on the other si(...)verse of
their country, very gracious and amiable in (...) whole Nation, unless of such
as have lost their (...) of common humanity; in which respect, it w(...) only
against Divinity, but even against (...) policy to force upon such W(...)
to(...) a Church Government, as their consci^^ces (being ot^^^w(...)
doctrinated by the Word of Christ) (...)y brook. An^ so much the more, in
respect of one (...)h they hold That CHRIST is the only King and Law-g(...)
Consci(...) and Churches, and not any power on earth w(...). And never did
Christ in these* later times appears (...)y i^ his Royal power and
so^eraig^ry, to any, (...) ^^ (...) Men, working even wonders by them to
ad(...) ^^ ^f this were the very time of the fulfilling of that Prophe^^^,
where John ^ee^ H^aven opened, and behold a w^ite horse, and ^^ that s(...) him
Rev. 19.
called Faithful and True, who in righteousness does judge and (...) war,
clothed with a garment dipped in blood, and his name is called THE WORD OF GOD;
with his Armies following him on white horses, clothed in ^^^^ linen, white
and clean; with his sharp sword in his (...) Nations, and (...)g them with his
iron rod; having on his vesture and thigh (...) written, THE KING OF KINGS, and
LORD OF LORDS. And thus, (as chap. 6. 2.) He rides on his white horse,
conquering, and to conquer. Now this Prince, and Lord of Peace himself, give ^^
^eace always, by all ^^^^es; even all that love the Truth and Peace, (Zach.
(...)) The Lord be with you all, 2 These. 3. 16.

FINIS.

