Nobody his Complaint A Dialogue between Master No Body, and Doctor
Somebody. A delightful Discourse. By GEORGE BARON.

Nobody. Why do thou father all thy Lies
On me? heaping Indignities
On one that never injured thee?

Som-Body. My Words and Acts hurt Nobody.

Nobody. Som-body has belied me much,
Nobody sure has cause to grutch.

cartoonish representation of two well-dressed male figures SomeBody

NoBody



London, Printed by B. Alsop, dwelling near the Upper-Pomp in Grubstreet, 1652.

No-Bodies Complaint. A Dialogue between Master Nobody, and Doctor Somebody.
Nobody. OH my friend, M. Somebody, the heavens be thanked that I have so
fortunately met with thee, to make thee acquainted with my sad condition; for I
protest, that above this three months together, I have been so sad, so
troubled in mind, and so perplexed with melancholy thoughts, that it has
almost brought me into despair.


Somebody. Alas Mr. Nobody, these words of yours strikes grief unto my soul:
for I never grieve more then when I hear that word, Despair. I desire you now
without delay to tell me the occasion why, and wherefore you are so troubled.


Nobo. Ha: I verily thought to have told thee but I will refrain, I know thou
can do me no good, nor none in the world.


Some. None in the world! me thinks that is very strange; surely you are
troubled with a disease that none in the world is besides.


Nob. That which troubles me so, is no disease, therefore you are mistaken in
that; but I must confess to thee, that I think it will bring diseases upon me.


Some. Let me desire you then in the word of a friend, not to keep close to your
self those things which so much trouble you but impart them to me; you know I
have been your old friend, and have always wished you well: Hearken now to my
counsel you know not how much good I may do you; I have been a Doctor in all
parts of the world, and have cured many which I verily believe have been worse
then you are, and here in my native Country I have performed cures, which I
think you must needs hear of; and you having been troubled but three months,
you will be the sooner cured.


Nob, I know as good a Doctor as you are: and for all you have cured so many,
yet nothing that you can do can cure me; for although I have been troubled in
mind but three months, yet I have been past cure many thousand years: Were I
as wise now as I have formerly been, I had never disquieted my self so much as
I have done: but I must tell thee too, so many thousand years I have lived in
hope that things would have grown better and better but now I see they grow
worse and worse, which has brought me into this lamentable condition.


Some. You speak as if you were very old, and it is a common saying, that the
older folk grow the more wit they have; but I perceive the older you grow the
more fool you are. Me thinks you had done wisely, if you had slighted those
things which did not please you, and so your thoughts had not been disquieted;
but this that you have said now is a Paradox to me, I know not what your
meaning is, in saying, that you have been troubled in mind but three months,
and have been part cure thousands of years: I desire therefore, that you would
demonstrate to me how this can be!


Nob. Alas poor soul, I should be very willing to demonstrate to thee that my
words are true, were I in the least hope that thou could do me any good: but
knowing that thou art not potent enough to do it, I will never declare what it
is that has brought me into this sad condition, but keep it close to my self.


Some. You may tell me however, whether I can do thee good or not; you know that
I cannot make you worse, it may be I may make thee better; but I protest unto
thee, that I never heard any speak such words as thou have done, to say that
thou have been past cure thousands of years, I never heard nor read of any that
has been troubled in mind so long as you have been, but either they have been
cured in a short time or else come to some desperate end; and more, I never
heard or read of any that lived a thousand years, and you speak as if you were
ten times as old as Methusalem.


Nob. Thou tellest me thou can not make me worse I am sure thou can not
make me better; and yet let me tell thee how thou can make me worse: Thou
may make me worse by thy abundance of words, for my mind is troubled enough
already, but these tormenting words of thine, if thou hold not thy tongue,
will make me far worse then ever I have been yet: me thinks I am ashamed that
thou being a Doctor, should speak such simple werds, to say, thou can not
make me worse. But the truth is thy pocket ( I think) is empty of money; thou
would be tampering with me to give me Physic: but know, that no Physic in
the world can do me any good, and I know Doctors love money very well. Thou
say thou do wonder that I should say I have been troubled in mind but
three months, and have been past cure thousands of years; thou need not to
wonder at it, for what I have said is nothing but truth, and more I will tell
thee that as I have a name by my self, so I am troubled about that which none
in the world is besides my self.


Some. Alas sir, I am sorry I should be a means to make you worse; for I
ingeniously profess unto you, that I love you so well, that I should be almost
contented to die, so that it might be a means to make you better: but I find
now your mind is changed, for at my first meeting with you, you told me that
you thought your self infinite happy because you had so fortunately met with
me, that you might acquaint me with your sad condition, and indeed I thought my
words would have prevailed so much with you, that I should have driven away
those sad cogitations, which do so perplex your mind; you need not be ashamed
for that I said, I thought I could do you good (if you would tell me the
occasion why you were so troubled:) if I had tried and could not, I hope you
would have accepted the will for the deed, and for saying I dissemble and what
I speak is for nothing but to get money out of you. I protest you do me a world
of injury, I thank God, I have money enough but had I none it would be great
necessity which should drive me to take money of you; and I must tell you more,
that we Physicians are undeservedly scandalized by all sorts of people, whose
saying is, that all of us love money very well, but alas it is contrary, for I
think we value money less then any do, though we have more reason to love our
money more then any do: I believe wise men will say so, if they consider the
world of pains we endure rising out of our beds all hours of the night, and
walking about all the day long to visit our patients so that we have scarce
time to eat either dinners or suppers; I protest it is enough to bring diseases
upon our selves, and what would the people do then for Physicians? You say I
need not wonder at what you said that you have been troubled in mind but three
Months, and have been past cure thousands of years, you show me indeed a
reason why I should not wonder at it because that I never heard any of your
name besides your self, and as you have a name by your self, so you say you are
troubled about that which none other is: But I pray you once again to tell me
what it is; I am the more earnest, because none else has been troubled with it.


Nob. Surely you are long winded, and love to prittle prattle; but Physicians
are so for the most part, they can tell a tale two or three hours together; but
I do not say you can therefore excuse me: you know I love to be merry sometimes.


Some. Hah, do you love to be merry, and said but now that you were almost in
despair these three months together? I perceive you can lie as well as others:
surely what you have said is not true, but only to see what I would say to it.


Nob. What I have told you is true and if I should tell you my grief it would
but grieve you.


Some. Why do you tell me so? I should rejoice rather, for the assured hope and
confidence I have to cure you, would make me rejoice.


Nob. Cure me! me thinks thou speak like a very fool: thou talkest of curing
me if I would tell thee my grief; I have told thee already, and that is not
enough, but thou must know the cause of it; Physicians desire no more but to
know the disease. But surely thou art no Physician, but some Farrier, fitter
to cure a horse tha^ a man, and now thou professest thy self a Doctor.


Some. Sir me thinks you speak more like a fool then J; for though Physicians
desire but to know the disease that avails not you for you have confessed that
yours was no disease, but perplexity of mind; if J knew what did perplex thee,
J might persuade you out of it. it is good counsel (if any thing) that must do
you good, and this is the reason why J am so importunate: if this desire be
simple, J have no wisdom in me. J beseech you let me make one more acquainted
with the condition you are in, and J will be judged by him, whether or no that
which J have spoken is simple; but why should J be so desirous to get means to
cure you, seeing you so abuse me to my face, in calling me Farrier and more
fitter to cure a horse then to undertake to cure a man, J took you always to
be my friend, but J perceive now that you are so far from it, that you are my
absolute enemy, or else you would never have cast such aspersions upon me;
what J have desired all this time that J have been present with you, has been
for your good and not for mine if you were so deep in despair, and it were
impossible to cure you you know it will be nothing to me, J should never be the
better or the worse, but being one of my old acquaintance, therefore J should
be sorry to see you grow in despair: and for all you have abused me so to my
face, yet J will never abuse you so, but esteem of you as my friend, J can
forget injuries presently, you see how soon anger slies out of my breast J
cannot retain it a moment within me: and now Sir, J would desire you to be
wise, as you esteem your own good, and be not so self-willed in your ways.


No. What do thou think I am a fool, and have lived so long in the world: I
am as old (almost) as Adam, and will thou teach me to be wise, no know that I
have wit enough, and I pray thee be not so angry, because I said thou art
fitter to cure a horse, then to undertake to cure a man for I protest I am
sorry for it, and furthermore I tell thee, it proceeded more out of my passion,
then any ill will I have toward thee and therefore pardon me for it, I know
thou have performed great cures, which I have heard diverse men report, and I
assure my self it is true: but me thinks thou did ask me one simple question
even now; which was, that thou desire to acquaint another in what a condition
I am in, but I must tell thee that I am so far from yielding to thy desire,
that had thou not been one, whom I thought I might put confidence in, thy
self should never have known it: furthermore know that I am past all cure, and
none can do no good.


Some. Sir me thinks I am not simple, because I desired you to permit me that I
might make another acquainted with your distressed estate; for thinking my self
almost out of hope to prevail with you therefore I desired to acquaint another
with it, to see whether he could prevail with you, and also to judge, whether
that I spoke before was simple, and seeing you will not permit me to do this, I
tell you plainly I am out of hope, that ever you will tell me what it is that
troubles your mind.


No. Me thinks that in all this time thou have been discoursing with me, thou
might have found out thy self what is it that has almost brought me into
despair.


D. Some. Alas sir, I think it is impossible for me to dive into your thoughts,
and by your discourse I cannot tell what it is.


M. No. Impossible! that is not true, for I verily believe, had you as much wit
as you profess you have; you must needs know.


Some. Sir, I am no Devil nor Witch (though I am a Doctor) to tell such strange
things: you told me I might have found it out having so long discourse with
you; but truly I think, should I discourse ten times as long again with you I
should not know.


No. No, Devil nor Witch I believe you are not, but I cannot believe, but that
you know already, what it is that troubles my mind so much.


Some. I must thank you for the good opinion you have of me, but truly I must
tell you again, I know not, neither do I think (without you tell me) I ever
shall.


No. Mr. Doctor, you need not be so desirous to know, but I think your
Conscience accuses you.


Some. Accuse me! I desire you would tell me for what, for truly I know not.


No. I must tell you plain, if your conscience do not accuse you, it may do
justly.


Some. I desire to know again what my conscience should accuse me of you have
put me in great admiration, I know not what it should be unless some busy
body has told some false-tales on me.


No. No Sir, know that none in the world ever told any tale to me, but what I
know my self.


Some. I desire then you would tell me what you know your self of me.


No. Know of thee? I shall tell presently, thy self is one that has almost
brought me into despair.


Some. Oh woe is me, am I one that has almost brought you into despair? the
heavens forbid it I should think I were the most unfortunates wretch in the
world, should I be guilty of so heinous a crime.


No. Now I perceive thine ignorance thou little think wherein thou have
almost brought me in to despair, and for all thou say thou would not for
a world be guilty of so heinous a crime, yet I tell thee that thou art; but
more I must tell thee, that there are thousands in the world that are more
guilty then thou art.


Some. You talk that I am guilty, and thousands which are more guilty, but all
this time I know not of what I am guilty off, I would I were so wise to know,
and then I doubt not, but I shall sufficiently satisfy you.


No. Satisfy me! I know thou can not satisfy me that thou art clear, for I
am sure of the contrary, and I tell thee again, that thou, and more then
thousands, yea the whole world, has abused and wronged me.


Some. Is that it that troubles you so much? me thinks this is the strangest
thing that ever I heard of that all the world should abuse one man, I desire
you would tell me how they have abused you, and then I will believe it.


No. I can easily make it appear unto you in what the world have abused me: but
what need I? I know thou can not help it: one thing I tell thee more that
these days of late I am more scandalized and wronged then ever I was
heretofore, that I think the Devil is in them all.


Some. Sir, pray be not so passionate, I think you will be frantic as you have
said, I desire you would tell me how I have abused and belied you, and after
you have told me, I desire you would proceed to tell me how all the world have
scandalized you.


No. Well, seeing you are so earnest to know I will tell you; but first thou
must tell me, whether in all thy life thou have committed any faults?


Some. Alas Sir, there is none in the world but commits faults either one time
or another ( I think) I am sure for my part I have.


No. Thou have resolved me in this, now resolve me in one more I know thou
can do it, have thou denied thy faults when thou have done them, or no?


Some. Truly Sir, I must confess unto you, that I love quietness very well,
and when I have committed a fault, I do the best I can to excuse my self.


No. That is not the thing I desired thee to tell me; I requested of thee when
thou have done a fault whether thou did deny it, or no?


Some. Then truly Sir, to tell you the truth, when I have committed a fault I
denied that ever I did it?


No. Who have thou laid the fault on, or who have thou said did it.


Some. When I was asked who did it, I made answer that Nobody did it which I
knew.


No. Now have I found out by thy own words how thou have abused and belied me,
oh dissembling wretch, thou did always pretend, that thou desire to know
what it was that had almost brought me in despair for my good; but now have I
found out to the contrary: thou would not for a world be the cause of any
ones falling into despair, and thou have been one cause of mine, I perceive thy
dissimulation; I charged thee with it before, but thou did deny it: now
therefore tell me why thou castest such aspersions upon me, and so belly me,
that when thou had done faults to lay it upon me.


Some. Sir, you have put me in a maze I know not (as yet) what to say, but I
desire you that you would give me a little time that I may answer you.


No. Thou may well be in a maze, for I know thou can not answer for thy
self, thine own conscience is as a thousand witnesses against thee: thou did
think certainly that I would not have thought, that thou had abused me; but I
know thou have put many abuses on me: Now therefore confesss thy wickedness
unto me, and that thou have belied me, and I will forgive thee; provided, that
thou will never do so again.


Some. Truly Sir, I must confess that many thousand faults which I have done, I
have denied, and when another has been asked, he has denied it, and another
he denies it, and so all denies it, and at last it is concluded that No body
did it: I confess I was ignorant of this, that I abused you.


No. Ignorant of it, I cannot believe thee. thou art a dissembler, and J took
thee always to be my friend, but J perceive now thou art mine enemy, or else
thou would never have cast such scandals on me behind my back.


Some. Mr. Nobody, as long as I live I shall be ever bound to pray for you; for
I protest I have learned more wit of you then ever I had in my life before, and
now I beseech you sweet Sir, to pardon me for the abuses J have done you and I
shall ever hereafter be careful that I tell no more lies on you, and once
again sweet Mr. Nobody forgive me.


No. Well, seeing thou have so earnestly desired me to forgive thee I will,
but be sure thou never tell more lies on me as thou have formerly.


So. I never thought you had so much wit in you, as now I see you have, and me
thinks you having so much wit might free your self from the aspersions of the
world.


No. That I can never do for I am not able to bind peoples tongues, and so long
as they have them at liberty, so long shall I be abused.


Some. You speak very true Sir, and now I pray show me how many things the world
lay to your charge.


No. That I will though to my grief show thee, and first I will begin with the
high crimes, murder shall be the first; when any murder is done, I am accused
for it, when inquiry is mode after it, none will own it, so it falls on me
poor Nobody, but I would have the world know, I am not guilty of such heinous
crimes, and therefore when murders are done again, I would desire all people
not to charge me with it.


Some. All that you have said now is true, for I have been where men have been
murdered, and when search and inquiry have been made for them that did it,
they could not be found; so then the searchers have said surely this is
strange, Nobody has done it. And now Mr. Nobody I tell you, if I am in place
where murders are found out again; I will do my best endeavor to clear you
and not suffer such things to be laid to your charge.


No. I thank thee kindly sweet Doctor I shall now esteem thee as a dear friend,
but I know thy endeavors will be in vain, and therefore trouble not thy self,
for if there was any means in the world I should have found it out before this
time, and now I will proceed to tell thee some other crimes which are laid to
my charge, but I know it is impossible to tell thee all


Some. I desire you (sir) to stay a little while before you proceed, that I may
ask you a question; whether you were ever taken upon suspicion of such things?


Nob. I was never taken; for I am so swift of foot, and so vigilant, that it is
impossible; also I am here and there in a moment.


Some. You may rejoice much that you cannot be taken: and now you have satisfied
me in this, I would desire you to proceed.


Nobod. When Rogues have broken up houses, and stolen things, if they chance to
escape, then I am accused for it, No body has done it: what a most sad
condition am I in, that must be thus abused.

When Robberies are committed upon the highway, if they escape also, then I am
accused for it; for they cover their faces with visards, thinking to make it
like mine, when (alas) I am ignorant of it.

When Houses are set on fire by Rogues, then I am accused for it; for they run
away, and when enquiry is made for them, they are not to be found, then some
say, This is strange, Nobody did it.

Again, I am accused for swearing, though I never swore an Oath in my life; For
when the Constable comes, and demands ten groats for every Oath, then they
straightway deny it, and say, they knew No body which swore: and thus you see I
am abused, this is like to all the rest.

Again, When a lying Pamplet comes out against the State, none owns it, so I am
accused for it.

Again, I am abused by Tradesmen, for when they buy a parcel of ware, and
steal the Excise, and when the Excise-men come and demand it of them they deny
it, and say, They knew No body which did it.

Again. When Young Fellows have got Young Lasses with Child, then I am accused
for it for they deny it, and say No body did it which they knew; all roguery
falls on me, I must endure all.

Again, In poor men's houses, both in City and Country I am abused, for when
their children get to the Cup-board, and eat up the Bread and Cheese, and when
their Parents ask, Who did it? they deny it, and say No body did it.

In the houses of Kings, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen,
Tradesmen Yeomen. Farmers, Husbandmen, yea, and poor Laboring men, in all
their Houses, the faults that are done are imputed to me; what a lamentable
condition am I in, that should thus be scandalized before the whole world, what
a grief is this to my soul, but I must be contented, I could tell thee
thousands of ways more how I am abused, but I will omit them till I have told
thee the pains that I take too.

When Gentlemen, Knights, and such like ride journies and have no serving men
to wait upon them then I am fain to be their foot boy to run by their horse
side.

When folks are gone all out of their houses, then am I fain to be there,
vigilantly to look to it, and keep it from all harm.

When young fellows leaves their work and goes to play, then am I fain to work
in their stead, that their masters may not be displeased with them.

When soldiers are placed in a Castle to keep it, if it chance that an enemy
comes against it, they like cowardly rogues steal away by night, and I am left
(only) to keep it, thousands more I could tell thee of, but that I think it
will be a vexation unto thee, yet however I will tell thee two or three more;
the first is that when men are put to hard work, and cannot tell how do it,
then I am fain to do it.

When men neglect their business, and will not go to do it, then am I fain to
go.

Again, business that none in the world is able to do, that I am put to do.

Again, when Knights Gentlemen, or others have any stinking meat in their
house, that the dog is not able to eat, then I must; thus they requite me for
my pains; oh ungrateful wretches look to it, for be confident that one day you
shall all dearly rue for it: oh in what a deplorable condition I am in, to be
abused by the whole world, is not this enough to bring me into despair.


Some. Enough! yea half of them it is enough to bring any one into despair, and
for my part Mr. Nobody, I will always lament your sad condition and pray that
you may be delivered from them all.


No. Ah, I thank thee kindly, what a great comfort have I in the enjoying of
thy sweet company, would thou could continue with me always I should think
my self then happy, though I have so many afflictions, and being I love thee so
well, I will proceed to tell thee more.


Some. Let me tell you one thing first which is a comfort to you.


No. What is that?


Some. Why this it is (as I conceive) when one Gentleman invites another, or one
Lady another or more if they fail to come: then you are there in their stead so
that by this thing you get a world of good cheer, and have all the dainties
that is to be gotten; is not this true?


No. Yes it is true that I am fain to be there, but the Devil as soon as any
dainty I eat: but if I did, do thou think that it would be such a comfort
unto me; no know, that I am not such a belly-God: but my afflictions strikes
nearer to my heart then all the comforts in the world do; do thou think I
take comfort in any thing? no no, I do not.


Some. Alas Sir, the more sorry I am to hear it, that you take comfort in
nothing oh I am grieved as much as you, to hear these deadly words: but one
thing grieves me more then all the rest, that I must of necessity be gone from
you for my occasions are so great, that if I should not go it would be n
eternal infamy to me.


No, Ah Sir, must you depart? I am sorry to hear it; but pray tell me why would
it be such an infamy to you, if you should stay.


Some. Sir I Will tell you, this morning I was with a sick patient of mine, and I
promised in two hours to be with him again, and I have been above six hours
from him, and truly I left him extreme ill, and should he die in the mean time,
it would be an eternal infamy unto me.


No. You speak very true, and seeing your occasions are so great, that you must
be gone, I would desire you to appoint a time when we shall meet again, for I
have not discovered half my griefs unto thee.


Some. I cannot appoint a certain time when I shall meet you, but be confident
Sir, that the next convenient opportunity I have, I will wait upon you.


No. Well, be sure thou fail not in thy promise, and remember what I have said
unto thee.


Some. Yes Sir, I will remember all that you have said unto me, and so farewell
till our next meeting.


FINIS.

