A DEFENSE OF THE LAVVFVLNESSE OF Baptizing Infants. As also of the present
Baptism, as it has continued in the several ages of the world, from John
Baptist the first beginner thereof: In way of Answer to something written by
JOHN SPILSBERIE against the same.

1 These. 5. 12. Try all things, hold fast that which is good.

Psalm. 105. 8. He has remembered his Covenant for ever, the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations.

Deuteronomy. 30. 6. And the Lord thy God will circumcize thy heart, and the heart of
thy seed, etc.

LONDON, Printed by M. Bell for Benjamin Allen, and are to be sold at his shop
in Popes head Alley at the sign of the Crown. 1645.

To the Reader.
THe holy Scriptures do inform us of two several persecutions raised by Satan
against that innocent part of the Church (to wit, Infants) beside the
persecutions which inclusively they at several times have suffered with the
rest of the Church. The first was by Pharaoh, that sore oppressor of Israel,
that held them in such cruel bondage. The second was by bloody Herod. Our Lord
himself in this latter was personally concerned, he then being an Infant, and
Rachels Infants suffering for him. In both which it is considerable the time
when: In the first, it was when the Israelites were near deliverance from
Egypts bondage. The second was when the Deliverer was come to Sion, and
deliverance it was near at hand. In like kind now in this last age; now God
is delivering of his Church from the long and sore bondage of spiritual
Babylon (called Sodom and Egypt) he returning to her as in the days of old.
There is even now also a sore persecution against this innocent part of the
Church, which is so much the more sad and grievous in these three respects:
First, in that it is raised and carried on by such as pretend to be friends and
lovers of Sion the Church of God; if it were by open and professed enemies, it
were more easy to be borne. Secondly, in that they pretend to the glory of God
this their persecuting and casting out a part of his heritage; as did of old
those that cast out their brethren, and said, Let the Lord be glorified, Esaias
66. by which means many are deceived. Thirdly, in that their opposition is
against them in a spiritual regard, it being against their relation to God, to
his Church, to his gracious Covenant, or Covenant of grace: from all which they
seclude them, driving them out of Gods heritage, that they may go serve other
gods, spoiling them of all their external rights and privileges, and so
leaving them among the dead; to wit, in trespasses and sins.

Pharaoh endeavored to destroy, and Herod killed a part of this part of the
Church. But these in a spiritual sense have destroyed all this part of the
Church; not one left alive, in way of relation to God, or interessed externally
in Jesus Christ.

But this hard and injurious dealing Jehovah that is mighty, and Jesus Christ
that is gracious, who manifested much tender respect unto these, will plead
their cause and right their wrong against such as rise up against them as he
did of old, for he takes it as done against himself.

Courteous Reader, in the behalf of these innocent Saints, to whom the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ is most free, they having nothing to bring unto him
(no not so much as good words) I do make defense in their cause, as touching
their right in the Covenant of grace, and part in the Church of God, to whom
they having relation as to a father, and are therein blessed, as such are whose
God is the Lord.

Now I have thought good to offer it to thy view, in regard that a great part
of what I have said for them, and against their opposers, runs in another
line something different from what is usually pleaded in their behalf; that it
might be considered of, together with an answer to some things controvertable
in that way, about the raising of Baptism pretended to be lost, but indeed
continued by the power of God under the defilements of Antichrist. The
exceptions against the said continuance I have made answer unto, as also some
other particulars handled; all which I have referred to thy judgment,
forbearing such confident expressions of proof and full proof (as is to be
found not in a few of this way and others also) that in the judgment of the
Reader have made proof of nothing at all. Indeed such confident praising of a
man's own work is a certain sign of the weakness of it. Use thy rightful
liberty (good Reader) in the consideration of what is said, and be impartial,
seeing thou art free.

Now for my particular Opponent, I profess as much respect and tender of love
to him as to any of that way, and therefore desire that nothing may be
misconstrued in regard of the manner of any proceed, nor of any phrases;
wherein I intend no hurt, but to quicken the Reader, and to make the matter
more plausible to some that are dull. If any ask, why I answer only a part,
and not the whole book published by my opposite: I answer, first, that a great
part of it was an answer to some others, to whom I leave it to make reply if
they please. Secondly, in regard that some other part of the Book is in way of
opposall of their opinion that hold not alike the truth of the Church and
Baptism in the defection, but hold the truth of Baptism only. I might do
them wrong, for want of ability, to manage and make out the matter, therefore I
have forborne and left it to themselves, if they please to make defense.

In regard some part of this Contest is of personal Reformation and proceed
from corrupt ways; to serve God purely, the maine work of this present age, I
shall take the boldness to forewarne in love and sobriety all persons to take
heed to their setting out at the first; for want whereof this and other errors
have been fallen into by not a few. A person missing his way at the first
setting out, the further he goes the further out and to seek; even so it is
in this, one error begets another, and another; and there is no end till
men sit down in darkness.

That person that cast away the truth of his relation to God, to Christ,
externally, because of defilements, will never be able to make out his relation
in a way of purity. Other foundation can none lay then that which is laid
already, no not ingard of outward Religion and the service of God. It is safest
keeping to this, lest men make their ease like those that coming from
captivity sought their descent and could not find it, and so might not be
admitted to special Ordinances, but by Vrim, etc. Esra 2. 62. 63. Their labor
is to be pitied that know not the way to the City; how shall such be ever
stayed in their course, or settled in their way, or free from error and changes
from one to another, that hold not the truth of Gods holy Ordinances to have
continued in the world, but to be ceased by means of the defilements that have
attended them. Consider of it, courteous Reader, and of the whole ensuing
matter, which I commend to thy consideration and the blessing of God, to cause
thee to profit, which if in any thing thou shall do I have my desire, and so
rest

Thine in the service of love P. B.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. COntaining an Answer to nine Reasons against the baptizing of
Infants. fol. 1 CHAP. II. Containing a discovery of the vain pretense of
finding Baptism lost, and fallen out of the world, in the holy Scriptures of
God. fol. 17 CHAP. III. Containing a defense of the judgment of such as hold
that Baptism has continued the Ordinance of God under the defilements of
Antichrist. fol. 32 CHAP. IV. Containing a defense of their judgment, that
hold no right, or orderly ministerial Church, without or before Baptism. fol.
57
A Defense of the lawfulness of the Baptizing Infants.
CHAP. I. Containing an Answer to reasons set down in page 25. why Infants
should not be Baptized; the several Reasons being set down in order, their
several and respective Answers do follow.
BEcause there is neither command nor example for the baptizing Infants in the
New Testament; the order and government of which is no way inferior to the
old: But in the old there was an express rule by command from God what
Communicants were to be admitted to Circumcison, and other Ordinances of that
nature, and what not: But this order is no where found in the New Testament for
the baptizing of Infants, and therefore the same is not to be practiced.

That there is neither Precept nor Example for baptizing Infants) which they
affirm there is. Again, this Reason is wholly by way of deduction and
inference, without any Scripture either for ground or confirmation of it, of
which he complains in his Epistle, and yet he practices it himself, and
that in his first Reason.

Secondly, it is observable how he by this Reason excludes a great and maine
part of the Scripture, namely, necessary consequence, and right inference,
being such a way as our Lord himself used to confute the Sadduces withal,
Mat. 22. 32.
I am the God, etc. God is not the God of the dead: here is neither command nor
example, and yet the truth fully evinced, the mind of God manifested, and the
Sadduces confuted.

Thirdly, it is an unsound conclusion, that because there is no command or
example in the New Testament, therefore not to be done. There is no particular
example nor particular command for women's partaking in the Supper, yet they are
judged lawful Communicants. There is no example nor particular command for
translation of Scriptures, or that such translations be used in
Church-meetings, yet it is lawfully done. Lastly, there is no command or
example for an unbaptized person to baptize himself or others. So as if this
first Argument were true, I. S. and those of his way would be in a poor case.

Fourthly, it is untrue that which he infers, there being both example and
precept in the Scripture for the baptizing of Infants, though he cannot see it,
1 Corinthians. 10. Matthew. 28. compared with Esaias 52. 15. which shall be further
showed hereafter in making it to appear that children are yet a part of the
Church; and so, both precept and example being for the washing of the whole, it
must include them necessarily as a part, Ephesians. 5. 26.

It is a high contempt and injury to Christ, as he is Husband of the Church his
holy Spouse, to force on him a natural wife, himself being spiritual, and
desires the like associate; as such a Church is founded upon nature, namely,
Infants; because commonly to one borne of the Spirit there is twenty borne of
the flesh.



Secondly, this Reason accuses God himself, in giving the Church of old,
namely, those seed of Abraham by generation (which he calls carnal) to
Christ his Son to wife; Jesus Christ our Lord being the same spiritual Head
and Husband, Yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8.

Thirdly, it is no injury to Christ or contempt of him (though without any Word
of God he so say) for Christ to have the heathen Psalm. 2. 8.
given him for inheritance, and the ends of the earth for his possession. It is
no injury to him (though the Disciples thought it was) to have little children
brought to him, his Kingdom consisting of such (in quantity as well as
quality) Matthew. 19. 13.

Fourthly, why cannot Children be spiritual and holy as well now under the
Gospel as they were under Abraham and Moses; when they as well as those of
years were an holy people to the Lord God Exodus 19. 6, 7 Dent. 6, 7. Esaias 9. 2.
? and the same is said of the Church now: but ye are an holy Nation, a peculiar
people, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Beside, what spiritualnesse was there in the five foolish
Virgins Matthew. 25,
, I would know, that is not, or may not be in children? and is not there as
much injury offered to Christ in giving them to Christ to wife? Truly this is
weak and inconsiderate so to reason, not minding that many are called, and few
chosen, Matthew. 22. 14.

Lastly, this Reason is wholly upon supposition, the accusation without proof:
who forces on Christ? It is his pleasure to take such, and reproves such as
would hinder them, and says, Suffer such to come, they being of my Kingdom,
Matthew. 22. The computation in the end is as weak as all the rest, for it was
so of old, no new thing at all; all are not Israel that are of Israel, Romans 9.
27.
and if the number of Israel were as the sand of the sea, but a remnant shall
be saved.

It is a practice that over throws the body of Christ or holy temple of God,
for in time it will come to consist of natural and carnal members; amongst
whom if any godly be, they will be brought into bondage, and become subjects of
scorn and contempt, and the power of government rest in the hands of the
wicked.

John Baptist though sent of God, yet he cries, as it is written. Matthew. 3. 3.
I. S. is a stranger in his reasons to what is written, though, as we noted
before, he does account it such a faulty thing in others, yet he pleases
himself all along in his reasons to infer this and the other thing to little
purpose, unless to deceive.

Secondly, this practice of old (namely of propagating the Church by
generation) was so far from destroying the Church, as that it did tend to the
increase of it greatly, and was a means of Genesis 17. 20. 22. 17. 26 4 24. Esaias
4. 8, 19. Psalm. 105. 8.
the continuing of it according to the gracious Covenant of God to a thousand
generations, and his promise to the seeds seed. Esaias 59. 14.
Now that Covenant is yet in force, and that promise Yea, and Amen 2 Cor. 1. 20.
in Christ, as are all other of like nature.

Thirdly, this is an inference savouring of ignorance, or else diffidence, or
both; has not God said that he will pour his Spirit upon their seed (to wit
of his Church) and his blessing upon Esaias 44. 3.
their offspring? and that all their children shall be Esaias 54. 13.
taught of God? that his Church shall be a praise in the world Esaias 62. 7.
when he shall return in favor to Sion, that the Gentiles shall bring their
riches to her Esaias 60.
? nay, has he not said, that the kingdom and greatness thereof shall be
given to the Saints of the most high, Dan. 7. 27.
and that this honor have all the Saints Psalm 144 9.
?

Last of all, what ever is or can be conceived in this reason, either in the
parts of it or the whole put together, cannot amount to make good the charge,
the whole supposed proof reaching but to the wel-being and purity of the
Church at the most, and not to the being of it, it being so far from destroying
of it, as is affirmed; the which I leave to the judgment of the Reader.

It is unlawful to baptize Infants, because it is a ground both of ignorance
and error; for it holds people in blindness, that they cannot come to see and
know the nature of that holy Ordinance, nor what the same requires in the
subjects thereof; and also it causes the simple to conceive that Baptism is
of necessity to salvation.



Secondly, this Reason savoureth of arrogance, and intrencheth on the wisdom
of God that established this very thing in the substance of it in circumcision
of old, it being then no ground of ignorance nor error; neither is it now,
though he so say, there being no more cause given to simple now to think so of
Baptism, then was given them then in case of Circumcision. Indeed it is rather
likely their keeping such ado about Baptism, and building such high things
thereon may occasion some strange thoughts to such as are simple, as surely it
does.

Thirdly, I ask what should be the reason they cannot see the nature of the
ordinances, etc. The Baptizing of Infants does not let or hinder the knowledge
of persons of years, those are not the persons he means surely; for I appeal
to himself, whether he in particular be hindered at all thereby. Nay further,
it hinders not Infants when they come to years from understanding the nature
and ends of the Ordinance, no more then it did in the case of Circumcision the
Israelites of old; it being Gods appointment, that children Ephesians. 6. 4.
now, as of old, should be trained up in knowledge and understanding. If any
be hindered from understanding the nature and ends of this Ordinance, such are a
great cause of it, in regard of many that are of the judgment and practice of
I. S. who being so mutable in their course, one while laying down, another
time taking up, and then casting away again. And beside altering the ends of
Baptism and rejecting the proper subjects of it, namely, the lineall seed of
the faithful, that many they converse withal are at their wits end, and know
not what to hold or settle upon. And that it is so, and also that this reason
has no force in it against the baptizing Infants, I leave the Reader to judge.

It keeps up the state of Antichrist, by granting of him this so chief a
cornerstone of the Lords House to lie in his foundation; for that Church where
Baptism is the true ordinance of God in the administration of it, is by the
rule of the Gospel a true Church; so that if Antichrists Baptism, which he
administreth be Gods Ordinance, then that Church wherein he does so administer
the same must be also the Church of God, and those in sin that refuse
communion with it.

to the Law and Testimony, Esaias 8. 20. but I. S. seems to be a stranger to
that, and chooses inferences, such as he found great fault with in his Epistle.
No man needs to believe what is said in this Reason unless he will.

Secondly, who grants this to lie in the foundation of Antichrist? surely I.
S. surmiseth and takes for granted that which is not acknowledged; if any do
or have done, it is not for want of ignorance. Jeroboam made a schism, set up
an idolatrous way of worship and calves; and yet notwithstanding that way of
his, there was Circumcision, the Ordinance of God, and no part of the
foundation of his idolatrous way, nor any cornerstone in the building thereof.
Neither is Baptism now any more a part of the foundation of Antichrist, or
cornerstone in that building. And if I. S. were not ignorant of this mystery
of iniquity, he would not thus reason as he does. This mystery of iniquity it
wrought in the Church 2 These. 2.
in the Apostles time, when Baptism was Gods Ordinance, and no part of that
foundation or cornerstone in that building, as neither is now any part of it.
Let I. S. if he can, show when Baptism became such a cornerstone in the
foundation of that building; or why it should be so, more then Circumcision of
old was a cornerstone in that idolatrous state and way of Jeroboam and the
Calves: let him show how long it continued Gods holy Ordinance, and when it
ceased so to be.

Thirdly, Christ is the chief cornerstone, and this Cornerstone is in Ephesians.
2. 20.
that dessection (yet no part of it;) I suppose I. S. grants it, and will not
deny it, That there is in many in this Kingdom (especially) and John Hus and
alia.
else where, as it was also formerly, such as in whom Christ and his Word and
Spirit dwell, yet are not come out of that state according to his sense. Now to
grant this is more likely to keep up the state of Antichrist; and to deny this
sure he dare not. Let him see how he will avoid his own Argument upon his own
ground: Surely some have seen this, and thereupon have held no faith, no
grace, no Christ till so separated from Babylon. Sure he must either renounce
his reason or fall under the condemnation of it, if he be true to his own
principle. In this particular that now I set down, if my judgment fail me
not, he will never be able to avoid it, by granting the Scriptures translated
to be the Word of God, and useful in the Church; which Babylon has
translated, keeps and holds forth and builds upon. Now for him and others
to receive, hold, and keep the same, and to acknowledge them as Gods, it must
sure be, according to his reason, a keeping up the state of Antichrist, by
granting this foundation to his building, and this Cornerstone Jesus Christ;
for of the Scriptures its said, and are built upon the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Christ the chief corner Ephesians. 2. 20.
Stone.

But now in stead of the Word of the Lord, for proof of what he had affirmed
in his reason, he gives only his own saying to very little purpose surely;
That Church, says he, where Baptism is the true Ordinance of God (as if God
had some false Ordinances) in the administration of it. Observe, he has got
the word true to help him along; that Church, says he, by the rules of the
Gospel is a true Church; what rule or rules he means is hard to guess, he
sets down no place of Scripture. Again, it is observable how he closes
with them he opposes, making the Word and Sacraments infallible marks of the
Church; yea, one of them alone, to wit, Baptism. And yet he holds a Church
may be Christ's without Baptism, as in his book may be seen.

He infers further, and thereby will prove (for want of Scripture) that if
Baptism be true, the Church is true. I ask Master I. S. if the Apostate ten
tribes were a true Church, for it is certain their Circumcision was true. So
as here the Reader may see how he makes the Church and Baptism such special
relatives, as the one gives being to the other, as the father does to the
son, etc. and yet he holds an unbaptized Church, as we noted before.

He adds further, That it being the Church of God, it is sin in any not to
communicate with her. A confident charge, but where is the proof? alas, it is
altogether wanting: Communion with a Church is the question to which I shall
say a little, and leave the Reader to judge. First, I distinguish of Churches;
secondly, of Communion: Churches are either pure and undefiled, or otherwise
corrupt, and in sundry things polluted. Communion, it is either general,
consisting in owning, acknowledging, and standing for, or it is special and
peculiar in fellowship and worship.

Now for a Church corrupt and defiled, general communion only can lawfully be
extended; especially, if she be greatly defiled, for we may not partake of
others sins, though we are to own their virtues and good things that are in
them, and hold relation to them while they 1 Timothy 5. 22.
hold the head: but with a pure Church we may and ought to extend communion in
all the parts of communion. But the question being of communion with a corrupt
Church, I say, we are to hold general communion with the same, and to own it
for the relation it has to Christ, so long as it holds the head. And if
particular communion in Ordinance can be extended without partaking in sin,
we should not be wanting that way, as occasion is offered. But though with such
a Church in general, and further as we can without sin, yet not with her in
sin; we are to keep our selves pure, as before. And in this case, that is
very considerable, Revel. 18. 4. Come out of her, my people, that ye partake
not of her sins.

So that here I both grant and also deny that which I. S. affirms. I grant,
if it be a Church, though corrupt, yet so long as it has relation to Christ,
it is sin not to own her and acknowledge her relation. I wish I. S. were
free from this sin that condemns as no Churches of Christ all the Churches
of God in the world; only those of his way. I pray him to consider of it.

I also deny what he says, being referred to that special communion in
ordinance and worship, which we are bound no further unto then as we may
partake with them without sin and defilement; the seven thousand could not,
might not, ought not to have bowed to Baal, or kissed the calves, or gone to
Gilgal to transgress; Romans 11. 4. Hosea 13. 2. Hosea 4. 15. Amos 5. 5.
nor yet join with those Priests made of the lowest of the people, yet were
they the Church of God, and Circumcision and other of Gods Ordinances might be
done lawfully of them. Yea, those of the Church did not sin in abstaining
communion in Judah it self in the time of Ahaz and Manasses; for, as in going
to Gilgal, so in going to Jerusalem they should have transgressed.

All which considered, I conceive it will appear to be very fabulous which I.
S. affirms of Infants Baptism keeping up the state of Antichrist; for indeed
the contrary is rather true, That the denial of them right to that holy
Ordinance, does rather keep up that state by the hardening them, that otherwise
would come out. And also by the great confusion (like another Babel) which this
opinion and practice produces. All which I leave to the judgment of the godly
wise.

It is unlawful to baptize Infants, for that is to build faith upon humane
testimony in matters fundamental; for such as are baptized in infancy, have no
other way to satisfy themselves or others but the bare word of man that must
stand in the place of the Word of God, for such their truly receiving so holy
an Ordinance of God.

I. S. he promises fair for gravity and wisdom, etc. but surely such a
shallow and unsound Argument was never framed before: I suppose it is not his
own, but that he has received it without consideration from some one that he
was highly taken withal; and being a new thing, it pleased him, and he set it
amongst his reasons why he would not have children baptized, that they might be
something for number, though nothing in substance and weight.

His scope is easy, but his expressions dark and covert; I shall go over
them by way of quere. First, I would feign know what faith he here means,
whether Historical or of some other kind. Secondly, I would know what he
means by building faith upon humane testimonies. Thirdly, I would know what
he means by matters fundamental, and how the receipt of the Ordinance can be
a matter fundamental, when the person may not only be matter, but part of a
Church without it, as he holds. Fourthly, I would know how the word of man
stands in the place of the Word of God, and what he means by the bare word of
man in this matter of fact. Lastly, I would know what he means by truly
receiving this holy Ordinance (and whither he hold there be a false receiving
this Ordinance, and yet the Ordinance holy and true to them that receive it.
This Reason, as it is set down, I take to be something like a spell.

The sum of it in other words. I take to be this, Infants are not to be
baptized, for that they cannot be assured when they come to years that they
were baptized, but by the witness of man; and if that fail, then there is no
way of satisfying of themselves that they were at all baptized.

To which I answer; first, that I would not much strive with a person in such a
case: If that were the cause that the probablenesse of his not being at all
Baptized were the cause that moved him to desire to be Baptized; especially if
it did appear to them by whom he should seek to be Baptized, that he had not
been Baptized at all. But surely this is far from the case in question; wherein
men get themselves baptized: not that they think they were not baptized at
all, but that they judge it was not the Baptism of Christ, because of the
corruptions in the subject, instrument, or the manner of their being baptized,
which made the matter null and void.

Secondly, I would have it minded how a person circumcised in youth could be
assured when he came to years, especially if his Circumcision were gathered and
grown, so as he could not see the print in the flesh: For this Reason, if it
has any force in it, it has the same against Circumcision in Infancy as
against Baptism; for such so circumcised, could be no otherwise assured then
such a way as will come within the compass of humane testimony. If it be said,
They might satisfy themselves by the sight of the print of the flesh; I
answer, that might be gathered and grown so as not to be seen. And again, if it
were not, that fight is not the Word of God; and beside, they might be
mistaken, or be circumcised unlawfully.

Thirdly, that others were circumcised of old, or are baptized now, especially
those to be joined with in public Ordinances and special communion. Now how
could the Israelites know of old, or how can it be known now in particular, how
will I. S. to put the case to himself, how will he, I say, know and be assured
that such and such as he holds communion withal are baptized, but by humane
testimony, instead of the Word of God, as he says; he must take their own word
in their own case, whether it be not humane, I leave it to him to judge.

And I demand further, whether upon this his ground any can in faith join in
fellowship and special communion, or could of old with any they did not see or
have not seen circumcised of old, Ephesians. 44. 9.
or Baptized now in this dispensation of the Gospel; for suppose they were
Baptized in Holland or in some part of this Kingdom, nay in this City, and I
not see it done, where am I then? by his ground, I must believe the bare word
of man in stead of the Word of God in a matter alike fundamental according to
his account.

Fourthly, in matter of fact, I judge Faith of such a nature as we have now in
hand, is to go upon humane testimony (if I. S. will have it so called) and
that such testimony is of divine authority and every way satisfactory to be
rested in; for at the mouth of two or three witnesses every truth stands
ratified. In matter of fact, I Matthew. 18. 16.
make it appear thus:

That such a people are Christ's Church; a Church being a fundamental thing,
men's witnesses must carry it and give satisfaction, especially in regard of the
first beginning of a Church, which some much stand upon.

Again, that such a person is the lawful Minister of Christ and his Church
lawfully chosen and ordained, what way is there of satisfaction but the word of
man to any but only to those that were at the acting of it?

Excommunication is an ordinance alike fundamental with Baptism, it is to be
done in faith; the practike part of it is to be built upon the testimony of
men, at the mouth of two or three witnesses; so as here expressly the word, the
bare word of man carries the same.

So as I conclude, as this reason is a foolish fancy, so it premiseth wholly
upon untruth, and raises unprofitable doubts, and has the same force against
other Ordinances of Christ as it has against Baptism of Infants, that it can
by no means reach so high, as to hinder Infants Baptism, all which I leave to
the judgment of the Reader.

To baptize Infants, makes the Ordinance of God a lying sign, because none of
those things can be expected in an Infant, which the said Ordinance holds forth
or signifies in the administration of it; which is the parties regeneration,
and spiritual new birth, a dying and burial with Christ, in respect of sin,
and rising with him in a new life to God, and a confirmation of faith in the
death and resurection of Christ, and free remission of sins by the same, as
Romans 6. 3, 4. none of all which can be expected in an Infant.

Circumcision Romans 2. 29.
being, as the Apostle speaks of the heart, not of the letter, the praise
whereof is of God, not of men, did it not also call for regeneration, and
newness of life? were not the Infants of it spiritual above the reach of the
creature, especially children, yet it was then no lying sign, as I. S. in the
case of Baptism lyingly affirms?

Secondly, I say, our Lord was baptized, and this Ordinance was no lying sign,
as it was acted on him; yet those things were not in him, nor could be, which
I. S. says, the Ordinance holds forth or signifies, namely, Regeneration, a
spiritual new life, dying to sin, burying with Christ, rising with him in
newness of life, confirmation of faith, and free remission of sins by the same.

What will J. S. say now, will he say it was a living sign, or will he
confess his lying accusation, to be, as indeed it is, lying and false, for
none of those things which he is pleased to set down, as held forth in
Baptism, or else it is a lying sign, could be expected, much less be, in
Christ: And yet he fulfilled righteousness, in being D. Sclater
baptized, as is righteousness fulfilled in Infants Baptism, even as it was
in their Circumcision of old.

For we may know, that there are other ends in Baptism, as there was in
Circumcision of old, besides those specified by J. S. as namely, the subjecting
the creature, and dedicating of him to God outwardly in a way of service. The
marking of him for God by such a Character. The differencing of him from the
rest of the World, and instructing in inward sanctification by the outward
washing.

And here it may be observed, that at length J. S. quoteth a Scripture or two,
but to little purpose surely; it is about dipping, for that is new, and
pleases him; and so in his seventh Reason at length he comes out with it. So
he concludes, None of all which can be expected in an Infant: And why not, but
only because he says so; but his words are no Oracles: for those, or some of
those may be found in Infants, notwithstanding what he says. God that works
those in an elder, can work them in a Infant, he has done it as in the case of
Jeremy, John Baptist, he has promised to do it, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. And all Gods
promises are yea and Amen in Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Which when J. S. has
considered of, he may repent of his error and lying accusation, as indeed he
has great cause for to do.

I suppose the indifferent Reader will be able to see how false and unworthy an
accusation this is, which makes Christ himself an unlawful subject, and
Baptism a lying sign to him; if J. S. his accusation were true, in as much as
those things could not be expected, or be at all in Christ, which he specifies
as necessary, or else it is so.

Because the subject of Baptism is to be passive; but a Infant is no way
passive, as that Ordinance requires, I mean a passive subject in a threefold
way. First, a thing incapable, and so is a stone. Secondly, a thing forced, and
thus is a Infant that opposes it Baptism what it can, so far is it from being
passive in the same. Thirdly, a thing is passive by a subjecting power
producing the same in the subject, by bringing of it into a free and voluntary
subjection, and thus is the true subject of Baptism, none can be capable to
receive grace but by grace, because it consists of self-denial.

A. R. in his Treatise of Childish Baptism, makes Children to be incapable
Subjects, because they are mere passive, as he is pleased to say: whereas the
right subjects of Baptism (he says) ought to be more then passive: J. S. he
makes them incapable, because they are not passive at all; as contrary as
these men are one to another, even so contrary is their opinion to the truth.
Namely, their denying Baptism to Infants: as untrue also is that which he
further adds, that an Infant is no way passive, as that Ordinance requires.
What that Ordinance requires in a passive way, that is not, or cannot be in an
Infant in a passive way; sure J. S. cannot show. Infants were passive in
Circumcision of old, so were persons of years; and there was no real
difference in passivenesse, or being patients in that Ordinance of
Circumcision, as there is none now in Baptism, betwixt Infants and men of
years, though J. S. would by a foolish distinction of the diverse kinds of
passivenesse, seek to make it appear otherwise. He first speaks of a stones
being passive, but this he says is incapable; of what is it incapable? not of
total dipping, no not in a passive way. J. S. may please to remember, what is
written of such like subjects, namely, The baptizing of cups and pots, etc.
which sure he Mark. 7. 4.
forgot, else he would not have distinguished so; Secondly for an Infant, which
he says opposes its Baptism what it can; I say it opposes its Baptism no
more then it did in Circumcision of old. But how knows he they oppose their
Baptism, because happily they shrine and cry; a weighty reason sure: did not
Infants, nay, did not persons of years in Circumcision do the like: yea more,
do not persons of years shrink and show an unwillingnesse to be totally dipped
in J. S. his way.

Thirdly, For passivenesse by a subjecting power, bringing a thing to a free
and voluntary subjection; which is, as he says, the true subject: It may be
observed how he rubbeth upon the old sore, there is something in Infants
wanting, some Faith, some Repentance, some Freeness, some willingness of
submission, which he is pleased to make passive qualifications, with little
reason surely: for any man may see what the disease is, they bring nothing to
Christ, therefore they must have no acceptance of him, nor grace from him.
Indeed it is works and not grace that here lets: For certainly Infants are as
capable of grace, and grace as free to them, as to persons of years. As both
old and young are mere passive, in regard of inward grace, and God gives
freely; so both are also alike passive, in regard of outward grace, to wit,
that of the Genesis 17.
Covenant, and this in question in particular, namely Baptism, the Seal of
it: even as in Circumcision of old. But he has a kind of reason, although no
Scripture, to prove either his distinction, or that children are not passive;
and that is, That none can be capable to receive grace but hy grace, because it
consists of self-denial. Truly, this had need of some explaining, surely our
being sinners and miserable, makes us meet subjects for mercy: I reckon, that
there is nothing in us, (as of our own) of grace, that can make us capable. I
suppose he holds not with the Papists foreseen works or any preparatives that
makes persons capable of grace. If he mean thus, that none can be capable of
the grace of Baptism, in an orderly way, but by being within the grace of the
Covenant first, I should agree with him, and do think, that nothing can be more
clear, but that Infants, being within the Covenant, and interessed in the grace
of God that way, they are capable of further grace, namely, to be sealed with
the Seal thereof, Baptism. But what he means I I know not, because he says
It consists of self-denial; If he be able to apply it to the purpose now in
hand, I shall be willing to acknowledge my want of judgment, for to me it is,
as if he had spoke of a man in the Moon: and how far this eight reason is from
effecting any thing against the lawfulness of Infants Baptism, I leave it to
the Reader to judge.

This Doctrine of Infants Baptism opposes directly the express Word of God,
by teaching that Infants are in the Covenant of Grace; being borne of believing
parents, and so a holy seed, by virtue of which they have right to Baptism, as
a privilege of grace. Against which the holy Ghost affirms, that all are
conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity, and so by nature the children
of wrath, and under the curse, and except they be horn again, they cannoe see
the Kingdom of God, Psalm. 51. 5. etc. Here man says, that Infants are clear
and holy from the womb, and so are subjects of grace: But God says, all
Infants, as well one as other, are first in sin, and unholy, and subjects of
wrath, until the second birth makes the difference, John 3.

I. S. has attained to the full number of his Reasons, which are far more by
number then by weight, and surely this last is not in the least behind the
other for shallowness; for either he was very ignorant of what he set down, or
else perverseness of spirit carried him headlong to the multiplying of words
without council against the truth. For,

First, I would ask of I. S. whether Isaac and Jacob, and the Infants of
Israel, were not in the Covenant of Grace? whether he and they were not a holy
seed? by virtue of which they had right to Circumcision, and privilege of
Grace, Romans 2. 29. That the Covenant to Abraham was a Covenant of Grace, I
suppose he denies not; that Circumcision was a privilege of Grace, the Seal
of that Covenant the Apostle testifies in the case of Abraham, He received it
as the Seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 11.

Secondly, I would know whether Isaac, the particular Son of Promise, Heb. 11.
9.
with Jacob fellow-heire, were not borne in sin? and whether he or they in
Infancy were under wrath; so as he could not be in the Covenant of Grace.

Thirdly, I would ask him, whether children, being out of the Covenant of
Grace, and born in sin, and so under wrath. according to his sense, can
possibly be converted, so as to see heaven, if they John 3. Romans 10. 15.
die in Infancy, seeing by outward means they cannot come to believe, till they
be able to hear, and may not be judged within the Covenant nor baptized, till
they manifest faith: sure according to his opinion, to our notion they are all
debarred Heaven at a blow.

But truly, as the opinion is, so is the consequences that attend it, erroneous
and false: but in as much as this stone is much stumbled at by some of that
way, I shall endeavor to remove it, in showing, that the Doctrine of Infants
Baptism agrees fully with the Word of God. The Infants of the faithful being
within the Covenant of grace externally, Genesis 17. 7. That this Covenant is to a
thousand Generations, Psalm. 105. 8. That God is not the God of the Jews only,
but of the Gentiles, Romans 4. 29. That the Gentiles are fellow heirs of the
same body, and partakers of the promise in Christ, Ephesians. 3. 6. That there is no
Romans 10. 12.
difference, but that he that is Lord of all, is rich to all, Romans 10. 12. His
grace and mercy being not lessened, but enlarged, All his promises of grace
being to the Gentiles, yea and amen in Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 24. Act. 15. 18.


Touching inward Sanctity, and inward right in the Covenant, as it is Gods
work and interessing of whom it pleases him, so it is only known to him, To
whom all his works are known from the Mar. 22. 14.
foundation of the World; A thing not within our Sphere; we being to meddle
with things revealed, and to proceed according to that.

Secondly, this Covenant of grace externally, of which we treat; it is extended
more largely then according to J. S. his narrow Deu. 29. 29.
minding of it, that seems as if he would thrust himself into the room of
God, meddling with things secret, and proceeding in his measuring of things that
way, making the Covenant of grace externally to be with the invisible Elect,
and not with the called in Jesus Mat. 22. 14.
Christ, of whom many are called but few chosen; so as he is not able I am sure
as infallible to show one person of that Covenant) whereas it is and may be
known that the Covenant of grace is made with Christ's Kingdom, his Church, and
that consists of Virgins, five wise, and five foolish; and Israel though as the
sand of the Mat. 25. 2.
Sea, yet but a remnant shall be saved. If J. S. would but be pleased to Romans
9. 27.
take notice of the outwardnesse of the Covenant of grace as before, as well as
the inwardnesse of it; the outwardnesse of the matter to which the Covenant is
made, as well as the inwardnesse of the matter known only to God, he would
surely be of another mind, and would not say, it crosses the Word of God to
hold children within the Covenant of Grace, for truly if they be not neither
inwardly nor outwardly in the same, they are in a sad case, being wonderful
losers by the coming of Christ into the world with grace and Joh. 1. 17.
truth, by whom so many gain: But it is evident by what before is declared,
that they are in that Covenant, and so are to be sealed as others, with the
Seal of it, and that so doing is fully according to the Word of God.

But, says he, the Holy Ghost affirms, that all are conceived in sin,
children of wrath, and under the curse, so as they cannot see the Kingdom
Gross ignorance.
of God unless born again.

To which I say, Isaac and Jacob heirs of the promise were borne in sin,
and yet in the Covenant of grace, so soon and before they were born: J. S. is
yet beside the matter and much to seek.

A little to unfold this matter so hidden to J. S. and those of his way: There
is a different consideration to be had of this matter, even as there is of a
person of years, who may truly be said to be a Saint and also a sinner in a
different sense. So the infants of the faithful may be said to be born in sin
and brought forth in iniquity, and so in that consideration under wrath; and
yet in another minding, born the holy seed of promise, even as Isaac and the
Israelites of old, as witnesses the Apostle, ye are the Children of the
promise; and again, the promise is to you and your children; Act. 3. 25. Act.
2. 19.
let it but be considered in the case of Isaac in particular, who was in a
special manner the child of promise, yet he was born in sin, etc. Let J. S.
and those of his way use their wit and reason; in stead of faith, to find out
this matter some other way, and they shall but tire themselves in vain: It will
appear a truth fully held forth in the holy Scriptures, that though all men
since their fall in Adam (Christ the new or second Adam excepted) have been,
and are born in sin, and so under wrath that way; yet a number have obtained
such free grace, as that (though in another consideration) they are and have
been by generation the seed of promise, holy, and such as God has and does
own for his children, even as he did Isaac and the seed of Israel of old,
and the seed of the believing Gentiles, who are under mercy and grace by
promise, as they are under sin and wrath the other way: And were and are high
in the account of God, what ever mean account J. S. has of them; of all
which, and who, and what to believe, let the upright heart to God judge, as J.
S. in the end of his Reason sets down, thinking belike he had said something
that had concluded all.

But alas, how far these weak and inconsiderate reasons are from effecting
what the Author of them intends, any one that is not of a very childish
understanding may be able to discern: for sure men must be childish indeed,
that in a matter of such weight and concernment as is their outward
Christianity, and relation to Christ that way, shall by such reasons be so
swayed, as to renounce and reject the same.

CHAP. II. Containing a discovery of the vain pretense of J. S. of finding
Baptism now lost and fallen out of the world, as he holds, in the holy
Scriptures of God.
I. S. At the end of page 37. says, That the substance of his former discourse
had been about the subjects of Baptism, in which (if any please to believe his
own witness in his own cause) he has disproved the Baptism of two sorts of
persons; First, of believers infants; Secondly, the Baptism in the defection
of Antichrist, being Baptism in infancy also: So as like a workman indeed he
has overthrown the outward Christianity, and relation to Christ that way,
privileges of grace, and Saintship, and what not; all which are of much
concernment every manner of way, unto men; and that of all persons in the
world, only those few; so of late baptized by total dipping: Is not this
Goliath like, and can any marvel that we poor Israelites thus stripped and
left naked, are offended and complain, being such losers, and turned out of
all? Had he any great reason to complain as he does in his Epistle, and
elsewhere in his book again and again, as page 40. Some have so wide mouths
open against them that wished them ever well: Well indeed, to unchristian them,
and to strip them of all relation to Christ externally, quit them of all
interest in the Covenant of God, yea making them as without God in the world,
so casting them out, that Ephesians. 2. 12. 1 Samuel 26. 19.
they may go and serve other gods: And can he think much that they complain
of wrong: What have they more? He says he will leave them to God, to whom they
must be accomptable for all their hard words: But what are those hard words;
surely such as these, that they say their way and course is erroneous, a new
invention, having evil consequences attending of it; that they are light and
mutable in their courses, and very censorious; and is all this so great a
matter and hard to be born: Are not his words, or those of his way far more
easy, that condemns all the people and servants of Jesus Christ in the world
for unbaptized; the course and way of all Churches, reformed or separate, as
Idolatrous and not of God, only those of his way excepted; though the said
persons or Churches be endued with never so lively graces, and walk never so
sincerely and uprightly with good conscience in the way God has made known to
them: But, says he, I leave them to God, to whom they shall give account for
all their hard words: Surely he forgets, and does not think of the hard
censures and grievous condemnations, that he, and those of his way give and lay
upon all that follow not their erroneous way and course.

In way of further complaint, he says, Men do as the Tyrants did of old: And
old story indeed, and ill applied, but though he be not, he says certain of
the truth of it, he is certain that some are little better minded, that labor
to cover the godly with such filth as they vomit out of their self-sick
stomachs: To all which I say its more easy to see a moat in another eye, then
a beam in their own; how does J. S. and those of his way cover the godly, and
the Churches of Christ with the filth of their vomit which they cast forth, and
yet he wipeth his mouth as innocent, and wonderfully as we see complains of
others, that have more cause to complain of him, for he can lay heavy
burdens and grievous to be born, making men no Christiant, no Churches of
Christ, but Synagogues of Satan, of the world, Antichristians, Idolaters, and
what not; all which men must bear, though never so innocent: but now the least
of these he will not endure to touch with his finger, but he cries out
bitterly; but as their dealing is unequal in this, even so it is in other
things. But now to return and leave this digression.

In page 38. he tells us, That this falling out so: How is that? That that
the Baptism of all persons and Churches in the world (those few of his way
excepted) being void and null, an Idol, and none of Christ's. It follows,
says he, that we are now to seek for the Lords true Baptism. This is sure a
wonderful case indeed, that the Baptism of Christ should be thus lost, and
fallen out of the world. Now, says he, in a case so difficult as some would
make it, two things in special are to be inquired into: First, How, or where
to find it. Secondly, how it may be obtained, being found.

For the first: If any Ordinance be so deceased and lost, as we do not know
where it is afoot in Gods way in the world: (a rare case) Baptism is thus lost
and deceased in his opinion) so as those that find themselves unbaptized, may
be made partakers of it. What are they to do? They are to go to Christ and his
Apostles as the godly then did. But I say Christ and his Apostles have left the
world, and are in heaven: I but, says he, That is to the Scriptures, which are
the lively Oracles of God. Ans. And so they were when Christ and the Apostles
were on the earth. The spirit, says he, speaking in them to a believer. Answ.
They stand in the place of Christ for advice and counsel, and so they did
then, for both our Lord and the Apostles sent us to them, and spoke nothing but
according to them. But what of this? Truly nothing to the purpose, nor yet that
which is added: Namely, That they have ability to furnish a man of faith with
all truth, as the Scriptures quoted, compared together, will prove. To which, I
say, they do easily and fully prove the same, and there were never any that
held the perfection of the Scriptures, that did deny the same: yet is J. S.
never the nearer for all his pains in multiplying expressions to make the
matter seem something; when indeed it is nothing at all to purpose: For, To the
Law and the Testimony we are to go: And in Esaias 8. 20. 2 Pet. 1, 19.
difficult cases, To take heed to the Word, as to a Light that enlighteneth in
darkness.

Now first, I say, the Scripture gives no light at all concerning such a
cessation of the Church and Ordinances: Nay, it is against the light of the
Scriptures to believe any such thing, Jesus Christ having said, That hell gates
shall not prevail against his Church; and Matthew. 16. Matthew. 28. 20.
having also promised his presence for preservation and continuation for ever.

Secondly, I say, it is but directively, that the Scriptures do furnish men in
all cases; now their direction in this case, it is to the Church, 2 Timothy 3. 17,
18.
and to the ministry of man, for the enjoying, and being made partakers of the
holy Ordinances of God.

The holy Scriptures of old in a like manner stood in the stead of Moses and
the Prophets in a sense: And yet the heathen were to repair to Jerusalem for
the Ordinances as they did; and did not act Esaias 8. 20. 2 Pet. 1. 19. 2 Chro.
6. 32.
them themselves with the help of the Law: The Scriptures in a sense stood in
the stead of Christ and the Apostles; yet the people must go to John; yea, our
Lord himself, that he might fulfill righteousness, Matthew. 3. 15.
must go to him: Cornelius must send for Peter; Paul must Act. 10. 32. Act. 9.
10.
have Ananias; and so such as attain the knowledge of the truth, they are to go
to the Church and Ministry of man, appointed of God; and so that way to be
added to the Church, and made partakers of the holy Ordinances of God: for it
is most certain, the Act. 2. 47.
Scriptures act nothing, neither can they: they only direct in righteousness,
2 Timothy 3. 16.
their directions is always as aforesaid, and no otherwise.

Thirdly, I say, it is not true that the Scriptures are in the stead of the
holy Ministry, ordained by God: The Scriptures were not in the stead of the
Priests, in case of Saul's sacrificing, nor in Vzzia the King his burning
incense, to enable them to do as they did: 1 Samuel 13. 12.
The Scriptures were not in stead of circumcised Jews unto the Heathen to
enable them, or make them capable of building the Temple: 2 Chronicles. 26. 17, 18.
They were not in stead of John Baptist to our Lord: They were not in stead of
Peter to Cornelius and his friends. As it is not in stead of Ezra 4. 3. Matthew.
3. 15. Acts 10. 32.
Christ, the Apostles, or holy Ministry to an unbaptized person or persons to
enable them warrantably to Baptize, and so without Commission to raise this
Ordinance a new, so lost and deceased out of the world, according to his
opinion.

The Scriptures which he quoteth, I shall set down, and they are these, 2 Timothy
3. 15. 2 Pet. 1. 19. Romans 16. 25, etc. Now I appeal to the indifferent Reader
whether these Scriptures, all, or any of them, are any other then directive.

Again, whether their direction, it be not to a precedent Stative Church, and
ministry of man, appointed by God, as formerly under Moses and the Prophets;
so in this latter dispensation, under Christ and the Apostles, as is before
declared.

Lastly, whether these Scriptures, or any of these, or all of these, compared
together, do give direction to a person unbaptized himself to baptize either
himself or others: and whether they do not rather testify against such
usurpation of Gods holy things, and running before they be sent, in thus doing
a thing that never came into Jerem. 23. 21.
the mind of God, much less did he require it at their hands: Jerem. 32. 35.


J. S. proceeds, and says, By all which we see, that all things are
contained in the Scriptures.

Answ. Yea, in the way of direction, and therefore such practices as are
without the direction of the Scripture, are unwarrantable, such as is their
casting away as Null their present Baptism, because of some corruptions that
did attend it; and beginning it again with greater corruptions; namely, by an
unbaptized person, without Commission, acting of it.

Here he adds many good words in commendation of the Scriptures; As
containing all things concerning faith and obedience, as being the Prophetical
mouth of Christ, to which all must repair unto; and all Doctrines and practices
must be tried by; and an Angel from heaven is not to be believed, but as they
speak according to it. All which is directive, as I said before: And what then?
Truly nothing: Though he go over the same matter again, with some different
expressions: and some of them improper; carrying a show of favoring his
conceit, and what he would have: As where he says, The Scriptures is the only
place: How is this proper, or true, unless he mean in a directive way? Where
any Ordinance of God, in case aforesaid, that is, of cessation, and loss of
being again, when, or wheresoever any of these (meaning) Ordinances of God,
cannot be found: (What then?) We are, says he, to go to the Scriptures
directly, and recover the same again, as Cant. 1. 7. Esaias 8. 19, 20.

Answ. All this is but the same over again, we are to go to the Scripture for
direction, (if the case were so) the Scripture directing, and not acting, as
Esaias 8. 19, 20. the Church acting according to that direction, and therefore
persons are sent thither, according to that Cant. 1. 7. alleged, which is
according to the direction of Scripture, which always sends men to the
Church in such cases: so as in this copiousnesse, he does but puzzle his Reader
to make him believe what he is never able to prove.

He proceeds, saying: Thus having found out the place or subject, (very
improper expressions) Is not the Scripture the ground and foundation of all
Ordinances in a directive way? Did ever any Christian question it, much less
deny it? That he should with often going over the same, and with such improper
expressions, and far fetches seek to make it appear as a discovery of truth not
known, or at least not assented unto: sure he had some further drift in it then
ordinary.

In the next place he says; It is to be known how they that want it may come
orderly by it; For, says he, though God has joined his Word and Ordinances
together, yet he has enjoined an orderly way for his people to come to enjoy
them.

Answ. I would fain know to what end all the former matter serves, if so be
God require an orderly way: for, as I said before, there is none that deny the
Scriptures, in a directive way, to be the ground and foundation of all
Ordinances. J. S. might have spared his labor, for it was to as much purpose
as for a man to prove there is a Sun in the firmament; which all grant.

In this it had been far better for him to have made full discovery, how they
that (in such a case) want it, may come orderly by it; in as much as God
requires this. And surely, if God require an orderly way, J. S. and others of
his way, will yet remain in a great strait; and will find it a matter more
easy to cast away an Ordinance (as they have done their Baptism) for the
disorder and corruption that did attend it then in an orderly way to obtain the
same again: for certainly, the Scriptures, according to what before is set
forth, direct to a precedent Church, and Ministry of man, ordained of God, and
sent as John was: And if not a Christ, a Moses, or Elias, or Prophet from
heaven, the blind Jews could John 1. 25.
see it to be unlawful for any other.

How will he do now? He is but where he was, an orderly way according to God is
necessary; there being no gathered Church to be found remaining, no, not
baptized persons to be found, nor any Prophets sent from God, according as his
judgment is: What will he do, or what course will he prescribe? He conceives
this orderly way is only in and hy the Church (I had thought he would have
rather said in the Scriptures, for to me it seems he has unsaid all he said
before) wherein is the power of Christ, he says, to set on foot his
Ordinances: So, as it seems, now it is not in the Scriptures, (as before he
endeavored to make his Reader believe.) But in the Church of God, so as we are
not, as he said before, to go directly to the Scriptures, but we are to go to
the Church of God. But now this is the case with J. S. and those of his way,
there is no Church remaining in the world to be found, how then will he do? to
help now at a dead lift, they will make a Church, that they may make Ordinances
anew, and be the spouse of Christ whether he will or no, I suppose greater
arrogance cannot be showed in Babylon. But let us see how they will do it, thus
says he, When God is pleased to take a people to himself, and by the power of
his truth to unite them to his Son, and so in an orderly hody among themselves.

Answ. Now this supposed orderly gathered Church, pretended (after the manner
of the Church of Rome) to be Gods: consists of persons unbaptized. Now I
would hear mind J. S. of his first Argument against Infants Baptism; namely,
that which has neither precept nor example in Scripture is unlawful; let him
or any of his way show an example of a unbaptized Church, since Baptism was on
foot in the World, or any command from God for persons unbaptized to congregate
and assume, for so he after speaks, to become a Church, indeed it may be said
presume, for it is without all doubt, great presumption, and a doing that God
never spoke to any to do, but the contrary, namely, to repair to the Church
before gathered, and by him made partakers of his Ordinances in a right way,
there to be added and made partakers of the Ordinances with them.

J. S. says further, When it pleased God to take a people to himself, etc.

Answ. When God is pleased to take a people to himself in such a way, there
always was new discoveries of his will, new grants of favor, there were new
signs and miracles, there were Prophets and men sent immediately to declare
his good pleasure: as appears first in the case of Abraham, after in the
example of Moses, and that people: and last of all in the case of Christ and
the Gen: 15. 17, 18. Exodus 19. 16. Heb. 2. 4.
Apostles, when not the Jews only, but the Gentiles, were drawn to God, By
signs and miracles and diverse gifts, he gave confirmation to his pleasure, as
of old he had done.

But alas, here is no such thing attending this supposed gathering of such
people to God, for indeed the gathering is of another nature, and answerable to
Gods gathering of his people in some other cases more ordinary. As namely, his
gathering of them out of captivity of old, when they were in Babylon, or his
gathering them out of apostasy and defection, under Jeroboam or the like:
figures of this spiritual captivity and apostasy of Babylon now. But as then
there were no new beginnings of Ordinances, no new Circumcision; nor any signs
or miracles for confirmation of their return and gathering to the Lord: Even
so the case being a like, there is no new beginnings of Church and Baptism,
which would require as heretofore, such like confirmation. And certainly, if
the return and gathering of Gods people to himself, were any other then
according to those gatherings from captivity and apostasy of old, I say, surely
if there were such a new taking of people, and raising of them as is pretended,
God would have manifested his pleasure as of old, by signs and miracles, or at
least by persons sent from heaven for the business, as John was.

J. S. further says, Such a people so gathered and constituted, have right to
all the privileges ordained and appointed by God for their mutual comfort and
well-being.

Answ. Just as Cornelius and his friends had, or might have had, in the like
case, without Peter, whose Ministry they must make use of, he being authorized
of God to the work, and they directed of God to him, and not bidden to do it
themselves.

Now this he pretends to prove from certain Scriptures, as Romans 8. 17. 1 Cor.
21. 22, 23. Answ. For that in the Romans it is mavelous he should think that
to be a proof: I say first, that was spoken of the Church of the Romans, that
were gathered by Christ, and washed with his washing in an orderly way, by such
as were not only baptized, but had authority to baptize others, they were Gods
Church indeed, of whom glorious things are spoken. But what is this to persons
unbaptized, pretending to be a Church, and to be gathered by God, when they
cannot show the least warrant for it.

Again, it speaks of heirs, now may heirs, because heirs, and so every
heir of Christ, act Ordinances of so high a nature, because heirs; sure they,
as obedient children must serve God in an orderly way, and not in such a
confused course, as that upon the pretense of heirship, young as well as old,
yea, women also might do it, for They are all one in Christ. Nay, which is
more, though unbaptized, and so the Eunuch, or Cornelius and his friends,
needed Gal. 3. 28.
not Philip or Peter, but might have done it themselves. I suppose this
Scripture, any one that has but common reason in him, will see it is to no
purpose at all.

But that other happily may stand him in stead, and the scope of that is to
declare the interest of Christ's Church to all things, according to the
Scriptures direction, always provided. And what then? then people may make
themselves the Church of Christ, or pretend at least so to be: and then they
are so interessed forthwith in all things. The Romish Church can make as large
claim as they in this matter, and speak as much for themselves: surely, if
persons in earthly cases could do the like, there would not be a few found in
such claims and pretenses, but they would by wise men, be thought sitter for
Bedlam then any place else. In further answer, I say, that was spoken of the
Church of Corinth, and so is true of all other Churches, gathered and instated
by Christ in an orderly way, by such means and instruments as had authority
from him. But what is this to persons that want this jnstating, by such
instruments in such a way: Truly no more then it could for those that called
themselves Jews and were not, or then it would have availed Rev. 3. 9.
the Heathen of old, to have enjoyed the privileges with the Jews in Gods
holy things, in particular, of building the Temple, to whom it was told, it was
not for them to build, etc. It cannot be imagined, that such large privileges
should, according to due order, Esr. 4. 3.
appertain to such; the Scripture being wholly silent concerning their right:
It is but usurpation for such to challenge such a condition, of being called to
be Christ's Church, as it was in them that said, they were Apostles, and were
not, as these in like kind are Rev. 2. 2.
not the Churches of Christ, rightly gathered and constituted, whatever they
pretend to be; I suppose it will also appear to the Reader, that this Scripture
serves nothing at all to purpose in the matter in hand.

But J. S. supposing to have made some proof in the aforesaid matter, says,
that by virtue of this union they have with their head Christ, the body thus
jointly considered, has the power and authority of Christ within themselves,
to choose or make use of any one or more of her members, as occasioa offers, to
administer Baptism upon the whole body, and so upon themselves in the first
place as a part of the same: This is the great conclusion drawn from the former
premises; but it is only said; for alas, that before is no proof at all of
the matter; what precept or example is there in the Scripture for the warrant
of this, certainly none at all, for this is unwritten tradition; and I dare
say, as pure popery as any can be: for men thus to feign cases, and then to
give authority in such cases as the holy Scripture is altogether silent in.

But says he further, if any please to take his word for it, such may be as
truly said to be sent and authorized by Christ (thus as of old, by Christ in
his humane body; even so now in his divine and spiritual body: that is, this
unbaptized company pretending to be a Church: Now I marvel whether there be
any so simple as to believe such doctrine as this; that a company of unbaptized
persons are Christ's divine and spiritual body; and that so, as what they order
persons to do in the matter of ordinances in particular of Baptism, though it
do not concur with the Scriptures; is as true and real a mission and as
full authority as the holy Apostles had that were sent of Christ himself; and
beside, that such high terms of divine and spiritual should be proper to this
fained body; and only the term humane, should belong to Christ's person, when
he was manifest in the world; it is sure very much; and at least shows
plainly how wonderfully he is conceited of his own Idea.

This strange doctrine he will prove by a reason thus; Wheresoever a Church
does rise in her true constitution: I ask from whence is this rising, from the
bottomless pit: I never heard of Jerusalem, Revel. 19. 2.
but coming down from heaven: But Babylon, and this little Teret of it, may
rise happily from the earth. Again, in her true constitution, I say, it is
likely to be a very true constitution without Baptism. There he says, are her
ordinances; Yes, but in an orderly way they must be acted; it is not for Saul
to sacrifice: But says he, there is power also to administer the same: but
sure, not without right or lawful instruments, God is the God of Order. But
the 1 Cor. 14. 37.
reason that kills all dead before it, and concludes the matter fully, is
this, That where a thing is wanting, there must be of necessity a beginning to
reduce the thing again into being; this is the conclusion of all. And is not J.
S. come to a fair Haven after his sore travel and great hazard. Necessity
has no law. But where is that due order, and orderly way of seeking of God
which he before spoke of? Truly it is a sad case, that any by their erroneous
judgment and following their own way, should bring themselves into such a
snare or straight, and then plead necessity to do that which is not lawful
for them, and think necessity will bear them out. Disobedient Saul, by his
evil course, had brought himself into a great straight, whereupon he
adventured to do that which did 1 Samuel 13. 12.
not appertain to him to do; but for all he pleaded necessity it would not
serve his turn, for he was told by the Prophet from the Lord, That he had
done foolishly, and that to obey was better then sacrifice. v. 13.


Thus says he, I have showed my judgment, that if Baptism be wanting where
it is to be had, namely in the holy Scriptures. Secondly, how from thence to be
obtained, by Gods calling an unbaptized people into an holy fellowship with
Christ, from whom (though unbaptized) they have power to assume as a Church; so
the Ordinance of Baptism upon themselves.

Now courteous Reader, this is the sum of the matter, consider of it, and see
if it be not a fair judgment and well grounded, and whether thou can judge
this to be any other then Popish divinity, which the Romanist can say in the
like kind for their course; for cannot they say as much for making Christ's
real body in the Eucharist, by hoc est corpus meum, as these can say for
making his divine and spiritual body, as they call it; for they pretend the
Scriptures as these do, they assume to themselves such a state, to be Christ's
Church; and to have such power in what they do, even as these do; but truly,
as theirs is only pretended, and not real; Even so in like is this, merely
feigned and not otherwise.

But he says, he will clear up this matter; (Indeed it needs clearing, for it
is yet very dark and smoakie) this he will do, by showing the manner of the
aforesaid Constitution in the causes of it: How will he do it? in page 40. by
saying over again what he had said again and again before; namely, that the
Scriptures, remaining in the place of the Apostles for us to have recourse
unto, and serve as the mouth of Christ: Alas this is but a poor clearing, for
this is only in a directive way, as before I noted. And what then? The
Scriptures being so; truly nothing at all. Yes, says he, as the Apostles did
before the Scriptures were written; To which I say, there were Scriptures
before the Apostles, to which the Apostles had an eye and regard, and directed
others to do the like: The holy Apostles they acted Ordinances of Religion
preaching, breaking bread, and baptizing. The Scripture acts nothing, neither
can they: surely Act. 2. 42.
this is a poor clearing; we will mind the Scriptures he here quoteth,
Matthew. 28. 20. 2 Pet. 19. 20, 21. Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. In answer, I will not tire
my self and the Reader; certainly no man can imagine any thing more then
direction from that full and perfect rule of the Scriptures, as gatherable from
those places of Scripture, which as before I said none deny, let him but call
to mind what he said of an orderly way which God requires, and how that is as
he conceives by the Church; and then let him tell me if he can to what
purpose these Scriptures are, or that which follows; that as the Lords people
conferred with the Prophets and Apostles about their great affairs, so have
the Lords people now, Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles in their
writings, as Luke 16. 29. And what then, truly nothing (it is but for direction
as before) nor yet that which further follows in this clearing matter of the
constituting causes; which are, says he, with the spirit of life in them, as
effectual as their personal presence, if not more.

Answ. Stay a while, the matter is sure otherwise, for this effectuallnesse, if
it were granted, is but directive. But it is not wholly granted, for that the
Apostles were men inspired and sent of God to declare his will, they were a
saving means of good to men; and God in his good pleasure, as a double mercy,
gave his Word, and sent his Apostles and Prophets; sure I take it, it must
needs follow, that if the Scriptures were as effectual without the Apostles
(and rather more) then with them; then God gave the Apostles in vain, and the
Churches were great losers by their personal presence; but the truth is
otherwise, as is most manifest: The Scripture (with the Spirit of life in them)
act nothing, but only direct and furnish men how to act according to the will
of God, in an orderly way, according to what he holds.

For proof of what before he affirmed of the effectualnesse of the Scripture,
he quoteth, Joh. 6. 62. 2 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Revel. 11. 3, 5, 11.

Answ. That in John, speaks of Christ ascending where he was before, how this
should prove any thing is beyond my thoughts, I will say nothing, but leave the
Reader to judge of it. That place of Peter is of the sure direction of the Word
in dark, and our doing well to take heed to it. That in the Revelation is of
the two witnesses; a thing too mysterious to be a proof in this case.

I suppose J. S. will not hold himself to be one of those witnesses, nor he,
with others of his way, to be both those witnesses there spoken of. I will say
no more but leave the Reader to judge whether these Scriptures do prove that
the holy Scriptures with the Spirit of life in them (as he is pleased to say)
are in stead of the Apostles personally sent of God with power to act
ordinances; or whether they in the case of the Ordinances dispensing in an
orderly way, are as much or more effectual then the Apostles personally that
were sent of Christ for that end, who did not send the Scriptures, as in the
case of the Eunuch, but Philip; and in the case of Cornelius, Peter, as in
those and the like instances may be seen.

He proceeds, and in full concluding of this matter, says, and thus all
succession (what phrase have we here) from the beginning came to Christ. (Of
what speaks he now, of Ordinances?) I had thought all Ordinances had ever
proceeded from him, he being ever the Lord of the Church, and sure he means
the Ordinances; namely, those ordained of old under Abraham, and Moses, and the
Prophets; these lasted and continued to the coming of Christ into the world,
the substance indeed of those shadows; so his sense may be good. From Christ,
he says, to the Apostles; from the Apostles to the Scriptures: This is pure
nonsense, if I mistake not; and beside, I ask him where is that orderly way
he told us of, and how is the case now according to 1 Cor. 3. by him alleged
for the Authority of an unbaptized Church; Does he not by this descent seclude
them from all, rather then inright them to any such authorite; happily he will
say, Oh from the Scriptures to us; very good: But first, how from Christ to the
Apostles? Did Christ our Lord prefer the Apostles before his beloved Spouse
for whom he gave himself? I always took the Apostles as the servants of the
Church for Christ's sake. Secondly, did the Ordinances 2 Cor. 4. 5.
proceed from Christ to the persons of the Apostles; or to their office as
Apostles; So as when they in regard either of person or office left the world,
it descended to the Scripture; certainly, the right and interest of the
Scriptures was the same before the death and cessation of the Apostles as
after; and the Scriptures gained no legacy by such friends, unless a sealing
to the truth and full authority of their direction: so from the Scriptures to
us: a wonderful matter, a very fair Ring, from the Scriptures to the
Scriptures, and so to us, just nothing but a show of words without matter.

Further he says, That all succession is now spiritual: So it seems he
holds it was carnal before, when it was from Abraham to Moses, from Moses to
Christ and the Apostles, and so to the Scriptures; and now it is from the
Scriptures to us, it is spiritual; a rare conceit. He says, it is now
according to faith; whether he mean faith of miracles, or what else, is hard to
say; but it mattereth not much, for he is beside the Scriptures, and walking in
some other field. It follows not, says he, the personal succession of any,
but only the Word of God.

Answ. Sure J. S. speaks in a strange tongue, he is never able to make out
his sense, that succession follows the Word, the Word being immovable, and
that which abides for ever, and has no place for succession, though he thus
speaks he know not what. And the word of God, he says, gives being to all
Order and Ordinances: It does give being of direction and warrant, declaring
what is good and lawful, and what not: It acts nothing: God requires an
orderly way, and that is by the Church.

Now, courteous Reader, do but seriously consider how J. S. has cleared the
way of raising and beginning again Baptism lost and fallen out of the world,
as he believes: and how he has removed the difficulties in the way, which he
ealleth clouds that darken the sky: See if thou do not yet find it very dark
and cloudy as ever, and never the clearer for all the labor and pains he has
taken; and whether his labor and travel herein has been to any more purpose
then the washing of the Blackmoore.

For first of all: Whereas he refers thee to the Scriptures, as the
Successors of the Apostles in his opinion: First, Thou see the Scriptures
were before the Apostles, and the Apostles themselves were guided by them.

Secondly, That the Scriptures are only directive, and act nothing at all,
neither can they: and beside, they do not direct to any such course as the
constituting an unbaptized Church, or authorizing unbaptized persons to baptize.

Thirdly, Thou see what great cause of doubt and question there is, according
to his opinion, whether these Scriptures be the Scriptures of God, and whether
they have not lost their being, having been so long in Babylon, and in the
hands of Antichristians; especially if it be minded that they were by
Antichristians translated into our native Tongue: their translating must needs
make them Antichristian, and to be rejected as false, as well as their
Baptism. Where will J. S. be then (do thou but think) for the raising a new
his Church and Baptism, which I would wish him and those of his way to
consider of well.

But then in the second place; God being to be sought as he holds in an
orderly way, according to what he has declared as his judgment, and this
orderly way being by the Church rightly gathered and constituted, to whom
Christ has committed the power.

Consider, good Reader, in the first place, that if the Scriptures be not
Antichristian, (as his opinion inforceth) that they have in them no ground or
warrant by any example or precept for such an unbaptized Church, neither can
such a supposed Church be orderly constituted, or the proceed thereof orderly,
the Scripture being wholly silent concerning any such thing: This conceit of so
making Christ's Church, and so making Baptism; being a mere Popish Tenent, and
the proceed therein like unto theirs in such like cases: So as this Ordinance of
Christ's Baptism, being, according to his opinion, destroyed in Babylon, and
there being no orderly Church of Christ in earth to be found, as he holds:
nor no Christ, Moses, Eliah, or Prophet from heaven appearing: nor yet any that
by Signs and Miracles can prove the truth of their Mission; I conceive it
necessarily follows, and I willingly leave all men free to judge of it. That
J. S. is yet, for all his clearing, in a great straight, and under a dark
cloud; out of, and from under which, he will not be able to get, unless he do
as Saul did, make bold to do that which is unwarrantable; and so running before
he be sent, and doing that which God never spoke any word about; the which he
shall do well to take further knowledge of.

CHAP. III. Containing a defense of the judgment of such as hold that Baptism
has continued Gods Ordinance in the Apostacy of Antichrist, notwithstanding
the corruptions attending of it; in way of Answer to the Cavils and Exceptions
of J. S. against the same.
BEfore that J. S. could finish the matter in the former Chapter, and clear it
as he pretended to do, he found some Tenants in his way, as opposite to that
pretended truth (but indeed error) which he endeavored to maintain; the which
he sets down thus: First, such as stand for a personal succession: Again
thus; A word or two to such as hold succession in the defection of Antichrist:
Again, Such as hold Baptism by personal succession, as in page 39. may be
seen.

To which I answer: First, That sure J. S. mistaketh himself, being never able
to make it appear, that any person, or persons, do so hold. So I might let him
alone to contest with his own fancy.

But in as much as he may happily have met with some that hold the continuation
of Baptism, as Gods Ordinance in that defection; not in way of succession,
that being no way proper to an Ordinance; returning home unto himself his
phrase of succession, as darkening the truth: I shall apply my self to take
knowledge of his scope and purpose.

First, he says, Such have received a sufficient Answer that hold so, in what
he had writ before.

To which I answer: Indeed, if he might be his own Judge in his own cause, it
might be so: It were much better that others should have said so, and praised
him, then he thus his own work: But what was it that he had proved before in
his conceit? That all the world are unbaptized, only he, and those of his way:
Is he not a mighty Champion, thus to nullify and make void the Christianity of
all Christians in the world? It is more then Turks could ever do by all the
force and power they had.

He has yet a word or two more to say to such as hold contrary (to his
erroneous conclusion) that Baptism has continued, and does continue Gods
Ordinance, etc.

And first, he begins by way of Querie, thus: If they mean by defection, the
outward form of worship, and Government Ecclesiastical, as he thinks they do.

Answ. Is defection of so hard and doubtful sense with J. S. as he should
querie thus, and go by thinking: he may know that defection or defilement,
pollution or corruption, are of one nature, and that there is a real
difference betwixt corruption, and the thing corrupted; between defilement, and
the thing defiled; betwixt Religion, and Gods Ordinances; and men's additions
to, and detractions from the same: They mean that the Ordinances, and in
particular, Baptism has continued from the Apostles downward, through all the
apostacy and defilements that have attended Religion and it to this day; Just
as Circumeision of old did continue Gods Ordinance in the apostacy and
defilements of the ten Tribes under Jeroboam: and likewise in the time of
Manasses in Judah: This is their meaning, and what then? Then, says he, all
the power and authority that ever carried out any Administration or constituted
Ordinance depends on the same: (Just as Circumcision depended on the Calves in
Jeroboams apostacy) And if so, says he, then the Ordainer, and Ordinance
ordained, are both of one nature: (Yea, they are both of one nature; God is the
Author, he is spiritual; and Baptism, the thing ordained, so also.) If one
be, says he, Antichristian, the other is also Antichristian: Strong lines
without proof. What if neither be Antichristian, neither the Author nor
Ordidinance, where is J. S. then? For truly his collective reason is as much,
as if a person opposing Circumcision, as none of Gods Ordinance, because of the
Idolatry of the Jews, should have reasoned thus: If the Israelites be
Idolaters, and the Calves Idols, and no gods; and the Priests Priests to them
that are no gods, then is Circumcision 2 Chro. 13. 9.
of the same nature also as are the Calves, and Priests, and Jeroboams whole
way of Dan and Bethel. And for proof, should say as J. S. does, that it was the
power of Jeroboams way, or of his Calves that carried on the whole form of
worship, and proceed: and the power, and Ordainer, and the Ordinance ordained,
must needs be of one stamp; if one so, then so the other: Had not such a way of
arguing overthrown Circumcision then, as well as Baptism now: Let J. S. be
Judge himself, and let him tell me whether he would not have distinguished in
the case.

Again, I will propose another instance in the way of his Argument: Thus the
Author and thing ordained or made, must be of one and the same nature; if one
be Antichristian, the other also, for so he has proved, be says. But the
Authors, namely, those that translated the Scripture, were according to his
opinion, Antichristians, and there be additions and detractions, as in some
translations there are: Now the thing made or translated, must be of the same
nature with the Translators that were the Authors, and if it were added for
proof, it was the power of their Antichristian spirits that carried on the
whole work and proceed thereof; and so conclude as before, both are one and
the same. If J. S. now would in this stand to his own ground, where would he
be, he would be as far to seek for new Scriptures, as they are for Church; and
Ordinances, that hold there neither is nor yet can be any in the World; or as
he himself was not long since for Baptism.

But truly it is much to be pittyed, to see such ignorance in men professing
knowledge, that they cannot distinguish betwixt Gods Ezekiel. 4. 4.
posts and men's, when men's are set by Gods. That they cannot distinguish
between Gods Ordinances and men's inventions and aditions; that they cannot put
difference betwixt the Arc and Dagon, or his Temple, in which he being placed
fell before the Arc: I would 1. Sam. 5. 4.
feign know of J. S. when Baptism, that was Christ's, seized, and lost its
being, and Antichrists Baptism came in the room of it, sure he cannot tell.

But I must here tell J. S. that the power of Jesus Christ supports and carries
his Ordinances in the midst of the deepest defections that Satan ever has or
could bring upon the same, wherein his glorious power does appear; although J.
S. would spoil him of it, by faining that he is overcome, and his Church and
Ordinances destroyed Gods people of old remained his people; his Church, his
Church; his Ordinances, his Ordinances; as particularly Circumcision in the
midst of the greatest defilements that ever attended that dispensation. In like
manner it is so now, under all the defilements of Antichrist, in particular,
Baptism, of which is our question; as also the Church: our Lord Christ his
power being no way lessened for the upholding of it, nor his faithfulness
failed for the preservation thereof, according to his promise; who has said,
The gates Mat. 16.
of hell shall not prevail against it: It were good for J. S. to study well
that place 2 These. 2. 4. Where Antichrist is foretold, sitting in the Temple or
Church of God; and if he would please but to take notice, that there is
difference between Gods Temple, in which he sits, and him sitting there; as
there was betwixt the Arc in the Temple of Dagon, in which the Arc was, he
happily would change his thoughts, and be of another mind, and so come to have
more respective thoughts of the power and faithfulness of Jesus Christ, then
now he seems to have. Truly I suppose these foolish inferences of J. S. will
appear to be but mere fantasies, without any ground, tending only to deceive
the simple; for any indifferent Reader will be able to distinguish betwixt
Religion and corruption, betwixt Ordinances and the evils, (by way of addition
or detraction) that attends them; Circumcision was of God, and it was the hand
and power of God that carried it forth in those evil times. The Idols, Calves,
and Jeroboams Priests, and his whole way as they were of, and from another, so
another hand and power carried them along. Even as in like manner Baptism and
other like things being of God, are preserved and carried by a hand and power
of God; whereas that universal Church, general Ministry and government, with
those other forms of Churches Provincial, Diocesan, and proportional
Ministry and Government, Ceremonies, with additions and detractions
innumerable, as they are from another fountain, so they are carried in another
channel, and by another power abetted and set on: namely, by the power of the
man of sin, the author and inventer of them. So far shall suffice in this.

But says J. S. praising of himself, He has proved, that if one be
Antichristian, the other is Antichristian: By what Scripture he has proved it
none can tell. And, says he, To dream of any approved Church by the Word of
God, under the defection, and yet a part of the same, is for a man to look for
a man in the Moon; and to suppose a Church to consist in such matter as is
destructive to it self; and therein to hold a successisn of truth is against
the light of nature, and a keeping of the Pope upon the Throne of Christ
whether he will or no.

Answ. Is not this high Divinity which I. S. belcheth out of his self-sick
stomach against the people and truth of God: Is it not a sore and heavy charge?
but it is well, it is but said, and not proved. Now least any, as simple as he
that said it, should believe it because it is said, and that by a person
venerable in their way, I shall take the pains to examine the respective
charges as they are laid down. First, says he, To dream of an approved Church
by the Word of God.

A. Sure he dreamed himself in what he fathered thus upon his opposites, who do
not hold an approved Church in such a sense as J. S. seems to intend, that
is, a pure and spotless Church: But they hold according to the Scripture, a
Church to be really true, and Gods, though corrupt and greatly defiled. I
suppose he will not question but that Judah, (not to speak of Israel) was the
Church of God in Manasses time, and in other times when Idolatry greatly
prevailed, yet not approved as pure and spotless, but reproved for corruption
and defilement; yea, and visited with the rods of men Psalm. 89. 3 2.
because of the same, that she might be reformed, so as to be again approved of
her head and husband, that all this time of her backsliding did not renounce
her. In short, she was approved to be, but not approved as pure in that her
being. And surely so is the case of the Church where Antichrist sits as God, 2
These. 2. 4. The matter so considered, let J. S. when he awaketh make the most
he can of it.

The second part of the dream is this, that this is a part of the same, I
suppose he means corrupt, as the whole is. To which I answer, though it be
corrupt, yet it is no part of the corruption, there being difference, as
before, betwixt a thing and the corruption that attends it; the Israelites were
a part of the Schism of Jeroboam, The seven thousand were a part of the ten
Tribes which went astray. In a diverse 1 King. 19. 18.
sense persons may be of the Church of God, and members for their parts, and
yet in a way of Idolatry, and in that way none 1 Cor. 12. 27. compared with 1
Cor. 5. 1. 1 Cor. 25. 12.
of Gods, as may be further seen by the case of Manasses, as also of the Priest
that went astray, that went along with the Israelites in their Idolatry, sure
there is little in this part of the whole.

But in the third place in his deep charge, he says, this is to look for a man
in the Moon.

Answ. Just as J. S. did look for the Church and Baptism in the Scriptures:
Indeed Eliah thought, as his complaint shows, that he was left alone, but God
told him otherwise: for sure to Romans 11. 3, 4.
mind a Church, as retaining her being, though in a corrupt estate is no
looking for a man in a Moon; though he, for want of other matter and better
proof, is pleased out of his sick stomach to say so against the truth, and
such as stand for it.

Fourthly, says he, It is to suppose a Church to consist in such matter as is
destructive to it self. Sure J. S. cannot make out this in any rational way,
it is but a part of his dream; to hold a Church to consist of matter corrupt
and degenerate, as was the Idolatrous Israelites, and as was the lukewarm
Laodiceans, is not to hold amiss, is not to hold the matter destructive to the
form or being. The faithful City becoming sometime a harlot: Indeed such
matter is against Esa. 1. 21.
the well being of the Church, but that is not our question: the matter of the
Church ought to be holy and pure, but it is often otherwise.

Fifthly, he says, to hold a continuednesse of the Churches being, (though not
of her well being) his term is here succession of truth, but he means sure,
the Churches being: It is against the light of nature.

Answ. A mavelous high ascent and sore charge, but it is but rashly spoken,
as one in a dream, that loves no inferences: But however it is well it is not
against the light of the holy Scriptures, J. S. has left them, and is gone to
the light of nature: but how does the light of nature teach, that a Church and
Ordinances, of which is our question, cannot continue their being, if corrupt
or greatly corrupted. Truly no more then in the case of Job, that he should
not, or could not be a man, because corrupt, Job 2. 7. The folly and weakness
of this fifth part of the dream, I suppose any weak judgment will be able to
see, and I will say no more. In the sixth place to bring up the rear, he
adds a charge of a foul nature: That to hold a continuance of the Church and
Ordinances under the apostasy of Antichrist, Is a keeping of the Pope upon the
throne of Christ whether he will or no: But how does this appear, truly as all
the rest, because he says so. I would ask J. S. or any other, if the holding
the Israelites of the ten Tribes, to be Gods people, and their Circumcision to
be Gods Ordinances, did thus keep up that apostasy, and the Calves at Dan and
Bethel perforce, as in the place of God and his ways. Again, does J. S. and
those of his way, because they hold the continuation of the same Scriptures,
and which is more translated by Antichristians in their sense, and so
successively from Pope Jone: does he or they in thus doing, keep the Pope upon
the throne of Christ whether he will or no? It concerns him to see to it, and
to renounce and cast away those Antichristian Scriptures, as he has done his
Baptism, and so seek new Scriptures too; lest not being true to his own
principles, he should become guilty of keeping the Pope upon the Throne of
Christ whether he will or no.

Experience, the School-mistris of fools, has showed the contrary of this
charge in the Reformed Churches, who have almost unthroned the Pope; of whom J.
S. and those of his way, as if they had some compassion, have busied themselves
in making a little Terret and Throne for him to sit upon and inhabit in;
namely, their Babel practice. And certainly their erroneous practice and way
does more help to keep the Pope upon the Throne of Christ, then any other thing
that pretends opposition to it, as that course does, of which a little more
hereafter; and for the present I shall only here ask J. S. whether he do
think the Pope does sit upon the Throne of Christ yea or no; if he say yea,
then sure he sits in the Temple of God in the Church, for Christ's Throne is
there.

He proceeds after that great charge, thus: But to lay the chain of
succession of truth this way, namely through the Popedom of Rome, as all such
must do that hold a personal succession of a Church and Ordinances to consist
in the same from the Apostles until now; What will such do, and where will
their succession of truth lie when they come to the woman Pope, of whom the
Papists themselves are ashamed.

In answer I retort it thus, to lay the chain of succession of truth this way;
namely, through the Popedom, as all such must do that hold the writing or the
letter of the Scriptures to have continued from the Apostles until now in a
way of personal succession in that defection; what will such do when they
come to the woman Pope, of whom the Papists themselves are ashamed; truly J. S.
has cause to be ashamed of his foolish reason, which if it were true, he would
find himself to be at as great a fault as his oponent.

But further, I say, such as hold the continuation of the Church and Ordinances
through Popish defection, or under the state of the Popedom, will do well
enough with their tenent, notwithstanding Pope Jone, who could never reach the
Churches being, to cause it to cease; nor yet Baptism, of which in special is
our question; all the coined words of J. S. put upon the matter will not do
it; as his chain of succession of truth, in stead of continuation of Baptism;
again, hold a personal succession; again, where will their succession of truth
lie: All these being returned home to J. S. their master, he will see, or at
leastwise any indifferent person will be able to see, that Pope Jone will help
nothing in the case, to hinder the continuance of the Churches being, nor yet
of the being of Baptism, with which Pope Jone meddled not, nor was any way
concerned: this matter at the most is but a relic of the dram before.

I. S. further tells us, that when he speaks of personal succession of truth,
as in reference to Church and Church Ordinances, he looks upon this in the
power and authority tbat bears the same.

Answ. Now J. S. seems something to awaken out of his dream and to speak
sense, what ever sense he have in it (his personal succession of truth set
aside) when he speaks of the Church and Ordinances their continuance, he
looks upon this in the power and authority that bears the same. Now surely,
the power and authority that bears the Church and Church Ordinance up, is the
power of him that bears up all things by his mighty power, Jesus Christ our
Heb. 1. 3.
Lord, against the gates of hell, that preserves his Church, as he did his
Arc, when Dagon fell in his own Temple. Is it not a wonderful Matthew. 16.
thing, that he should conceit that Antichrist should by any power of his,
support Christ's Church and the Ordinances thereof, that with all his might and
force indeavoureth their destruction and ruin? but in vain, for Christ is
stronger, that with his mighty power supports them.

But J. S. looking awry, cannot see any other bearing up the Church and
Ordinances, then by Antichrist and the Pope, that are trampling it down what
they can, fitting there as God; for by no means will he be brought to
distinguish and put difference betwixt Gods Temple, and the Man of sin
sitting in it, but like Nicodemus he will say, How can it be, Joh. 3.

For says he, To hold a Church to be true (in regard of being, you must mind,
and not of purity) and the Ordinances their administered the true Ordinances of
God, and to leave this, and to set up a way of worship apart from it, and to
deny communion with it; is in his dark understanding a mere Schism and the
overthrow of all Order in Religion.

Answ. I am both glad and sorry: Glad, that J. S. is no Apostle, so as we are
not bound to believe his bare word, unless we will: Sorry I am, that he has
so dark a judgment and understanding, as in this he does discover: For first,
I say, a Church may be true, and the Ordinances true, that is Gods; and yet
both corrupt, so as they cannot be partaken with all without sin. In such a
case there is to be a withdrawing from them, in regard of particular
communion; in as much as we are to keep our selves pure, not doing evil for
good ends: Yea, a Church in regard of membership may be left, and that without
the said Churches consent, as plainly appears by the example of the Apostles
and others that left the Church of Israel of old, and that while it was a
Church: And God himself calls his people out of Babylon, Rev. 18. 4. though
the Church and Ordinances have a being there; in as much as there can be no
remaining there, but there will be a partaking in sin. So as leaving
particular communion, and personal relation of membership, I conceive is very
necessary, and according to God, after the manner of all the Reformed Churches
that have come out of Babylon, and renounced communion with her in the things
of God, because of the evils attending of them, lest they should be defiled.
As on the other side, they have drawn nigh to God in the purity of his ways
and worship; as those did that left Israel in the time of their Apostacy, and
came to the Lord and his pure worship in Judah. But thus to do, namely, to
leave a Church and Ordinances greatly polluted and defiled, and to worship God
together purely, apart from that corrupted estate, withholding fellowship, is
in his dark judgment a mere Schism; (alas poor dark judgment) such a Schism
as he has often made and those of his way are full of in their own sense. The
holy Apostles and believing Jews were Schismatics in his account; and all the
Reformed Churches and Christians that have forsaken Babylon and are come out of
her, are all Schismatics in his dark judgment: But no marvel he so
accounts of these latter, seeing by his reckoning they are not baptized
Christians. Truly he, and those of his way, by light and clear judgments will
be discerned to be even such themselves, for doing as they do.

Now to that latter part of this charge, That it is the overthrow of all order
in Religion: I ask him which way it appears so to be; sure he cannot tell;
for if it be well minded, it will be found to be a special means of the
preserving of religion decayed, and a repayring of it, and of reducing it to
the first purity, and an utter putting away all rust and defilement; and
therefore the Apostle gives in charge, having forewarned of the great
defection of Antichrist, not to begin a new; but to keep the (old) Ordinances,
according These. 2. 15.
to the purity they were delivered to us. J. S. his course, I suppose, is
guilty of the overthrow of all order in Religion, not only what is of God,
remaining, and afoot in the world; but even of that also which is held forth in
the Word: in erecting a new Church, and dispensing new Ordinances, without a
new Commission, which never any did before.

After this, he tells us of his learning Christ, which sure is very little, in
regard of order, as his way and course does show: So far, faith he, as I have
learned Christ, men are to stand in their places, and use all means to reclaim
and reform (corrupt Churches he means) by the word of truth. Very good; But
what if they will not reform, and all means which we can use avails not? This
being done, says he, so as of necessity I must leave off communion with them.
So as it seems communion may be left with a Church that is Gods, because of
evil, and obstinacy in the same. Then in such a case he thinks (for he
only gives us his thoughts without Scripture) he must disclaim them, and
separate from them. To which I say, it is but upon the condition of their
non-repentance, which challenges sometime of waiting: but that such a Church
he ought to disclaim, and separate from, he holds. First, I would know,
whether he may do this while it remains a Church of Christ? If he say yea;
then I ask him, What is become of that which in his dark judgment was a mere
Schism? But if he say nay, not till the Church ceases to be: Truly, that will
be a very hard matter for him to determine, especially to hit upon the very
hour of such a Churches death, from which time he is freed from her relation
without Schism. But yet further, he holds, as before; He must stand in his
place, and use all means to reform, and reclaim such a Church by the word of
God. Indeed, I say, that is a good medicine, and wholesome plaster to heal
such a disease and malady: I would fain know whether he be not to wait to see
the issue; and whether he be not to exercise long patience after the example of
Almighty God, that sent his Prophets to his Church, rising Jer. 25. 4.
early, and sending them; and notwithstanding their wickedness, and abuse of
his long patience, did not disclaim them, or his relation unto them, till such
time as they rejected the Son himself, and so were broken off through unbeleef.
But further, if this his good medicine of admonition, reproof, and use of all
good means in his Romans 11. 20.
place, shall not avail; but in stead of curing, the Church shall be killed;
that were a sad matter indeed. But however, the Physician shall not lose his
reward, though the patient die. But oh! to know whether she be dead in all the
parts of her, every member, is a hard matter to know: happily she may have life
in her inward parts; to bury her, before quite dead, were an ill business.
Sure out of so great a labyrinth as J. S. his thoughts necessarily led into
this way, he will no way know which way to get forth, unless he happily shall
ingeniously confess the darkness of his judgment to have deceived him, and
so acknowledge that a Church may be left in regard of communion, and
membership, by reason of great corruption and defilement, and that though it
retain the being of a Church of Christ, and that without any Schism.

J. S. goes over this matter again, on the negative, by a back blow of the
left hand, saying, And not to leave a true Church, and true Ordinances, (though
never so corrupt and defiled, and therein obstinate and impenitent) and go
apart to set up another Church, and Ordinance, (that is, serving God together,
in the freedom and purity of his Ordinances, as the reformed Churches do) apart
from it, and in opposition to it: This is as far from the Rule of the Gospel,
as for a man to baptize himself; neither of which he approves of.

Answ. J. S. Laying down the matter to his own advantage, may happily make it
seem something; but if it be well sifted, and scanned, it will be found just
nothing. The leaving a Church in defection, and gathering or going to a Church
gathered in freedom, and purity, is the matter in question: The refraining
Ordinances corrupt, so as they cannot be partaken withal without sin, we being
required to keep our selves pure, for the Saints to serve God together in the
freedom of his Ordinances purely: Sure he will not count this against the rule
of the Gospel; if he do, it is not for want of ignorance: Where is the pinch in
this case? It is surely in this, of erecting another Church. To which I say, it
is but another in number, by multiplication, not in nature; sure he does not
question that neither, they practice such, multiplying themselves in their way.
What then must it be? That it is in opposition to the other: To which, I say,
it is but in opposition to the corruptions, and defilements of the other; so as
here is a pure Church, and Ordinances in their Administrations, in opposition
to a Church and Ordinances administered corruptly. So far is this from an evil,
as sure it is a high virtue in Churches and particular persons; so, as to say
no more, having before treated of this matter. Betwixt thus doing in this case,
and a man's baptizing himself, J. S. may see a wide difference, if prejudice
does not let him.

J. S. has yet a word more: Because some hold it an error, without example or
warrant from the Word, for a man to baptize himself or others, being himself
unbaptized: whereby, says he, they think to shut up the Ordinance in such a
strait, as none can come by it, but through the authority of the Popedom.

Answ. A strait it is indeed, as great as Saul was in, when he presumed 1 Samuel
13. 11.
foolishly to sacrifice; and this he will find every day more and more, there
being not a few as rational as himself late of his way, that do see this; and
rather then acknowledge their error and return, proceed to a further and
greater error: namely, to hold no Church of God, nor Ordinance of Christ,
existing in the world, nor none to be had, nor enjoyed, till Christ personally
again appear, or send such to restore them, as by miracles can evince their
mission. Such an opinion he is not unacquainted with: I wish him to consider
further of it, and see if it be not rational from his ground, though very
irrational and unreasonable for Christian men to believe, without ground of
Scripture, against so many clear evidences of holy Writ, and faithful promises
of Jesus Christ, Dan. 7. 27. Mat. 16. 18. and 28. 20. Act. 5. 39. Heh. 12. 28,
29. Luke 1. 55. etc.

For the opening of this cloud, says he, that seems so to darken the sky, let
the Reader consider who baptized John (I say let them rather consider John's
particular and special commission) before he baptized others; and if no man
did, then, whether he did not baptize others, himself being unbaptized: and if
he was baptized, whether it was not by an unbaptized person?

Answ. This Instance refers it self to the beginning of Baptism at the
first, and so it is brought, in way of parallel, to prove the new beginning of
Baptism, that former being lost and ceased out of the world.

Now, if this matter be minded, John was (according to what was foretold) sent
of God to prepare the way of Christ, and had special John 1. 6.
warrant in particular wise to Baptize: as it is written: There was a man sent
of God, his name was John. So as if this prove any thing, it must be upon the
same ground; that is, having the same Warrant and Commission in particular, as
John had: for as John's example would not serve any, in those times, to go
without Commission, or Baptize without command, being unbaptized themselves;
Cornelius must have Peter; Paul, Ananias; and our Lord himself, for
righteousness sake, must go to John: Even so in like kind, it will not serve
any now to recover and raise (as they pretend) the Ordinance of Baptism lost
and fallen out of the world, without special warrant, as he had.

But because this of John the Baptist is still catched at for help, in this
helpless cause, I shall add a word or two: First, The orderly way of raising
Baptism, I. S. holds to be by the Churches power and appointment, and this
way they proceed. But John's Commission, it was not from the Church, but it was
immediately from God that sent him to prepare the way of his Son.

Secondly, concerning John, the Scripture testifies; That he was a Prophet,
and more then a Prophet: But how, or what, or whether or Matthew. 11. 9.
no concerning his particular Baptism, it is altogether silent. It is not for
men to be over wise, or meddle above what is written; but let the body of Moses
alone.

Last of all, I will put it upon this Issue; In the judgment of indifferent
men, whether they think it will follow, that because Abraham and John Baptist
were the first beginners and actors in Circumcision and Baptism, by virtue of
special Commission to them personally; that therefore it was lawful of old,
in case of Circumcision, for any of the heathen to have also circumcised
themselves and families: or in the case of Baptism, for others at that time,
by virtue of his example, to have baptized also as he did, without any
Commission at all; for if in those times it was not lawful for them so to do,
but of necessity they must go, as our Lord did, to the Baptist, then in as much
as length of time, can give no warrant, to a thing not warrantable at the
first; I conceive it will be given, and concluded, that Instance is invalide,
and of no force to warrant a person to baptize himself, or others, being
himself unbaptized.

Which he in the case of Baptism, says, was written for our learning, and
teaches us what to do upon the like occasion. To which I say, supposing the
occasion, he here speaks of, is not that of necessity that has no law; but
leaves men at liberty to do the best they can: which is the last refuge of I.
S. and those of his way: There is, I say, no such occasion as in the case of
John, there being no Scripture to be fulfilled by sending a messenger before to
prepare Christ's Matthew. 3. 3.
way. There is no such occasion, for that there is no new Commission, nor any
new Ordinances to be set on foot. Again, there is no such occasion, for that
there is baptized persons in the world to repair unto; that as Christ our Lord
went to John, so we might go to them.

Besides, what is not written, cannot be for our learning. Now it is not
written, when, or where, or by whom, or whether at all John was baptized, so as
none of any such things can be for our learning, unless we will go beyond our
Lesson: But this is written, that he was sent of God, and had special
Commission to do what he did; that we might learn, not to run before we be
sent, but to be obedient in going when we are bidden, and doing as we are
commanded, as he did.

Further I. S. says, for the continuance of the Church from Christ's words: The
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Here by the way, I take notice,
that he has laid aside his succession, and personal succession, and speaks
now plain English; namely, the continuation of the Church, Matthew. 16. 18.

Now what says he to this? He confesses the same: But in so doing, he
overthrows his new way and course; for if the Church continue, and has
continued, what need is there of new beginning, and baptizing by persons
unbaptized: surely none at all. And therefore he makes his acknowledgement
with a proviso; that is, by a distinction that indeed is either a nonsense, or
else a flat denial. The distinction is thus: That this Church is to be
considered, in her instituted State, as it lies in the Scriptures; in the
rules of the foundation. (See what expressions are here; Instituted State,
Rules of foundation, Lying in the Scripture; as much, and no more then this,
according to the pattern set forth in the Word) Or otherwise in the second
place, in her Constitation, or constituted form, in her visible Order. As much
as if he had said, in her outward being. Now of the pattern is not our
question; for as the pattern of the Temple was one thing, and the Temple built,
or to be built, was another thing; so it is here. But see what J. S. says,
having made such a distinction, as before, to darken the truth: Thus he says,
Against the first hell gates never prevailed. This pattern standing sure in the
Scriptures, as of old the pattern of the Temple might remain, when the Temple
was destroyed. But against the Church it self, which is the second part of his
distinction, it has prevailed. So the sum is as much, as if he had said,
hell gates never prevailed against the Scriptures; but against the Church,
built according to the Scriptures, it has. Now let any man excuse the
irrationalnesse of I. S. if he can; thus to grant in show, and deny in
substance and truth, with one breath, the continuation of the Church, according
to the Word and ptomise of Christ, made to the Church, and not to the
Scriptures. And I say unto thee, thou art Peter; and upon this rock Mat. 16.
18.
(to wit himseif) I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it to destroy it. For why, it was built on a sure foundation,
not to be moved for ever.

Now this Church, the continuation whereof he granted before, having deceived
himself and his Reader, by a groundless distinction; he denies the
continuation now, and says, Hell gates has prevailed often against it. But
whence is it that he is thus contrary, and I and no? Says he, For the Church
has been often in her outward order scattered through persecution and the
like. Sure this is a very weighty reason, thus to over power a man; what if the
Church has bin scattered through persecution, must it then follow, a
destroying by hell gates: though the Church has been greatly scattered through
persecution, yet she continued her being, and was so far from being by hell
gates prevailed against, as that they overcame by suffering Romans 8.
the gates of hell, and were more then conquerers. The blood of the Martyrs
being the seed of the Church, and the Church the more oppressed, the more
growing and increasing. J. S. says, in this sense of being scattered, she is
said to be overcome. To which I say, that this is not the sense of Mat. 16. 18.
nay, it is against the sense of the Scripture, that by afflictions the Church
should be overcome, when as in all afflictions the Church has been more then
conquerers through Christ that loved her. I. S. cites two or three places,
Dan. 7. Rev. 12. Act. 8. 1. For that in Daniel, it is utterly against his
sense, for speaing of the Kingdom of Christ his Church, it says, it shall not
be destroyed, verse. 14. 27. As for that, Rev. 12. it plainly declares the
prevailing of the Church, and not her being overcome or destroyed, and that
they overcame by the blood of the Lamb, and that the Dragon was cast out. It
indeed speaks of the woman's fleeing into the Rev. 12.
wilderness, but there she was preserved and not destroyed, the earth helping
the woman against the rage of the Dragon. Sure there can no sense hence be
gathered, of hell gates prevailing to destroy her. Lastly, Act. 8. 1. It
speaks of Saul's making havoc of the Church, and persecuting of it, but this
tended greatly to the increase of it, and not to the destroying of it.
Certainly I. S. will not think, much less say, hell gates at this time
prevailed against the Church, indeed it never did, for that was always true
which was said of the Church of old, Many a time have they afflicted me from my
youth, may Ps. 129. 1. 5.
Israel say, but they have not prevailed against me, the righteous Lord has
cut the cords of the wicked in sunder. I suppose I. S. has but small
judgment, and less aim, to bring such Scriptures as these to prove that hell
gates have prevailed against the Church in any Scripture sense. It were far
better for him to hold the continuation of the Church according to the sure
Word and faithful promise of Christ, and if he would not acknowledge her
continuance under the apostasy and defection aforesaid, then to endeavor to
find her continuance some where else. But in regard this would overthrow his
new unbaptized Church, and proceed that way, he rather chooses to asperse
Christ of unfaithfulness in his promise, then by acknowledgement to give him
the glory of it.

In regard of the former matter J. S. seems to have had an eye to a
collateral reason, which he sets down thus: Where was their Church before
it came out of the defection?

First, let it be observed how he shakes hands with the Romanists, that use to
say in like manner, Where were the reformed Churches before Luther?

But in further answer to this demand, I say, it was in regard of the matter of
it in Babylon, as the seven thousand were in the apostasy of Jeroboam; out of
which apostasy of Babylon, God called them forth, Rev. 18. 4. And so, by the
efficacy of that heavenly voice, they being drawn forth, they served God in the
purity of his Ordinances, (a part,) as the Israelites that left Jeroboam and
his Idol-worship 1 These. 1. 9.
at Dan and Bethel, and served God at Jerusalem. These turned from those Idol
ways in Babylon, To the pure service of God in Sion, and so kept according to
the injunction the Ordinances, as they were delivered to them, 2 These. 2. 15.

This question is of the nature of what we have treated on before, about
leaving a corrupt Church for obstinacy in evil; and therefore I shall not
further trouble my self nor the Reader about it, being assured, it cannot reach
so high, as make good any sense of the destroying of the Church by persecution,
to which it is added here.

I shall only here mind the Reader, that our question is not of one particular
Church, but of the state of the Church remaining in one place or other with few
or many, in freedom and purity, or in bondage and corruption, according eo
various conditions and changes that attends her in the world, wherein she is in
all of those conditions preserved by Almighty God. I. S. adds in his further
proceed, saying, That which once was in such a way of being, and ceases for a
time, and then comes to the same estate again, is and may truly be said ever
to continue, as Mat. 22. 31. with Luke 20. 38. In which sense the Church may be
said ever to continue, for though she be cast down at one time, yet god will
raise her again at another, so as she shall never be prevailed against, so as
to be utterly destryed.

Answ. This is plain nontsense to me, first granting, then denying, and so the
whole amounting to just nothing but a mere conceit.

Here is the Church in a way of being, here is the Church seasing to be for a
time; here is the Church coming to live and have being again; here is the
Church that ceased to be for a time affirmed; (untruly) to have ever a being,
(just as the Temple had when it was destroyed,) here is the Church cast down,
(that is, without being, for so he must mean, else he deceives,) here is the
Church said to be raised up by God again, and her being restored to her; here
is concluded the Church was never prevailed against, so as to be utterly
destroyed. Truly, truth is strong and prevails. I. S. speaks not as of
himself, but as overcome by the truth, which he fought to darken and turn
aside, but at last is forced to confess it, as they were that had hand in
crucifying Christ, that said, Truly this was the Son of God, when they had
before crucified him. So Mat. 27. 54.
he in like manner is in the end forced after all, to confess that the Church
was never prevailed against, so as to be utterly destroyed.

But I shall here observe how that what he before said might be made a
rational matter, if it were rightly applied, as thus; That which was once in
such a way of being, (that is to say, pure and undefiled, and for a time ceases
so to be,) (that is, becomes corrupt and defiled, like the faithful City that
became an harlot.) And Es. 1. 21.
then comes the same estate again, (that is, to her former purity and
holiness,) is, and may truly be said, ever to have a continuation. In this
sense I would join with J. S. touching the Churches continuation, for though
she be corrupted at one time, yet God will restore her to purity at another;
yea, If by affliction she be diminished Ps. 107. 39. Ps. 105. 24.
and made low at one time, yet at another time God increases her like a flock
of sheep. In either of which senses she has never been prevailed against, so
as to be destroyed: but this genuine sense J. S. may not admit of, for that it
will not stand with his way and practice, and therefore by multiplicity of
expressions he would produce some thing: namely, That the Church may some time
live, and have a being, and at another time die and lose her being, and yet she
shall never cease to be. That is, be prevailed against to be destroyed: and
this he thinks to prove by alluding to a place or two of holy Scripture,
before quoted, for confirmation of his conceit.

To which I answer, those Scriptures indeed do seem to illustrate his sense,
and what he intends; namely, that the Church may be said ever to continue,
though at some time she ceased to be. But how senseless a thing it is thus to
conceit, will appear if we mind the matter a little. It is the resurection of
the dead which is the case: now as men die, and are not, and yet shall live
again, and be; so the Church in like manner. But may such and such men be said
to have ever a continuance in the World, (which is our question,) and not to
have been destroyed by death, because they shall rise again? Nay, does not
this prove plainly, that death had dominion over them, and that they were
thereby destroyed? for otherwise, how should there be place for their rising
again. And indeed the restoring of the Church to her being does necessarily
imply the loss of her being; otherwise there would be no place for restoring.
If all men had been destroyed at the deluge of Noah, a new creation had been
necessary.

Happily he may think their is something in that, that God is not the God of
the dead, but of the living, in as much as all live to him. Indeed this may
prove the souls immortality and living with God. But what sense it has in
regard of the Church, is beyond my thoughts; for certainly, if it has
reference to the Church, it will enforce the being and continuace of the Church
of the Jews and the Patriarchall Churches which ceased long ago: To imagine
their continuance, what can be more vain?

But further, if because all live to God, therefore the Church always has a
being, where is place left for her death and cessation? Truly this is a matter
too far fetched, to prove any thing in this matter that may stand him in any
stead, for if any thing be gathered from it, it must be that; as Abraham, and
so other Prophets dyed and left the world; so the Church of Christ dyed also
and was destroyed out of the world. But if he shall say, Abraham and the rest
lived notwithstanding: The answer is, they lived indeed another way, not in
regard of their mortal bodies, but in regard of their immortal souls. Their
outward visible bodies were destroyed and in the dust; so the outward visible
Church is destroyed, and ceases to be; but the inwardnesse of it (the life and
soul, to wit, Jesus Christ) is in heaven with God, what this makes to the
matter in hand I leave the Reader to judge.

And this way, says J. S. I suppose Christ may have and enjoy as good a wife
ever as any can be preserved for him under the defection of Antichrist.

Answ. This way is a mere supposition, without reason and against sense: That
Christ should have sometime a wife, and sometime none, and then one again; and
yet he should have ever one preserved. It were good to lay aside such
senseless suppositions, and to believe the Scriptures, that tell us that the
man of sin sometime sits in the Temple of God; and that Gods Temple 2
These. 2. 4.
remains; and hell gates shall not prevail against it. Though the Church
(Christ's wife) may go astray and be corrupted, yet he Matthew. 16. 18
that is her husband will not forsake, but will reform her and refine her, and
put new garments on her; sure he has read what God said of old to his Spouse,
Thou have played the harlot with many Jer. 3. 10. 22.
lovers, yet return to me, says the Lord, I am thy husband and thy maker. But
happily if he had then lived, he would have supposed Esa. 54 5.
that Christ might have had, or have made to himself a new (as he in this case
endeavors to do for him) as good a wife as that that was, so corrupt and
defiled. The truth is, there is more rich grace and free mercy in Jesus Christ
then to take advantage and to refuse, and put away, for he is the Lord that
changes not, and therefore his Church is not destroyed, no, notwithstanding the
evils she Mal. 3. 6.
falls into, for he hates putting away.

It were more suitable for J. S. and those of his way, to profess Mal. 2. 16.
the doctrine of works, which is suitable to their other opinions, then the
doctrine of free grace, unless they would be more true to their principles, as
in this particular; more especially, wherein they hold corruption dissolveth
the marriage bond, and makes the relation to cease, and causes the
everlasting Lord to change, and his Covenant to fail for evermore, Psalm. 77. 8.

The following complaint and story, by which it is illustrated, I have spoken
unto it before; in which matter of guilt, if he and those of his way should
take water and wash their hands, they would notwithstanding be no less guilty
then Pilate was of Jesus blood.

But after this, he tells of his fears, and that is, that men put more in
Baptism then does of right belong to it, that do prefer it before the
Church and all other Ordinances besides.

Answ. Is not J. S. and those of his way sick of this disease, and that as
dangerously as those he is in such fear of? how otherwise should it be that
they should be so often baptized, over and over, and over again, and make a
Church, that they may make Baptism? I leave the Reader to judge.

2. How does this appear which he so fears in others, that they prefer it
before the Cburch and all Ordinances beside.

Answ. It is only to the qualification of the matter externally, that it might
be suitable to the rest of the building, Ephesians. 5. 26. But yet this charge is
not altogether true, for they do not prefer Baptism before the Word and the
publishing of it, by which faith comes: Nay they do not prefer it above, or
before the Church; the Church being the pillar and ground of truth; that is, of
the truth 1 Timothy 3. 15.
of Ordinances and divine worship, and so of Baptism in the proceed of it in a
right way, which Church the matter of it at the preparing of it by John was
first baptized, and after laid together in the building. So of this matter
thus, by John's preaching prepared, and by his washing in the second place
fitted, was in after time gathered and laid into a holy building to the Lord,
which Church way begun, and settled in the world, augmented and increased: those
washed washing others, according to Christ's appointment; never any unwashed
person being added or laid into the building since the Church begun, it being
necessary that the matter of the Temple be outwardly fitted, that it may suit
with the rest of the building being laid thereon. So as J. S. may be satisfied
that his fears in the first place are causeless, the Church being on foot
according to God, Baptism in administration follows: But in further
declaring the reason of his fears, he says:

For they can erect a Church, take in and cast out members, elect and ordain
officers, administer the Supper, and all anew without looking after succession
any further then the Scriptures. But as for Baptism they must have that
successively from the Apostles, though it come through the hands of Pope Jone:
what the reason of this is that men can do all from the Word but only
Baptism, and that must come by man, even by the man of sin.

Answ. To balance the thoughts of J. S. I will present a case to his
consideration, supposing he had lived in the Apostacy of the ten Tribes (yea
of Judahs Apostacy) and returning to the Lord and his pure service, as those
of the ten Tribes that went from Israel to Judah, had other Priests and
Ministers of the Law and service of God, and a pure way of serving of God,
only that of circumcision, they would continue that (though according to his
conceit in the case of Baptism) it came from the two Calves. What would he
have said or thought of it in this case I would feign know? If they did well,
it is good for us to imitate them in a like case.

2. I say, as before more fully, I have showed that this Church and Ordinances
are but new in regard of purity, the other being corrupt; so all this he
calls new, is not like their new raising of the Church and Ordinances, as if
those before had lost their being, and were not at all. In this their case
which he so excepteth against, there is express warrant, 2 These. 2. 15. keep
the Ordinances as they were delivered unto you; that is, purely.

3. Baptized persons, in the case of their return from idollwayes and
Apostacy, to the pure service of God, are to look after Baptism no otherwise
then circumcised Jews did in the like case when they returned unto the Lord,
Ezekiel. 44. 9. They were not to circumcise themselves, or be circumcised again;
yet the Heather coming along with them, they must be circumcised. In like
manner, Gods people coming out of Babylon, according to the call of God, Rev.
18. 4. are not required to be again baptized, though the Jews and other
Heathen that embrace the faith of Christ, are required to do it, which I would
wish I. S. and those of his way to consider of.

4. For the continuation of the Church and Baptism, the outward qualification
of the matter, the Scriptures fully give witness unto (as before is showed) so
as is no need of beginning them a new in any sense (unless of purity) but
other Ordinances are by negligence laid by and out of use, something in the
room of them: and so are by the Church to be restored to their places, when the
Church is purged and made pure.

Lastly, for this of Baptism, coming through the hands of Pope Jone, and from
the man of sin: It is a false and scandalous reproach; it comes no more
through the hands of Pope Jone, and the man of sin, then the holy Scriptures
did, or then Circumcision did, through the hands of the two Galves of old. J.
S. may be ashamed so to reproach Gods holy Ordinance, by his good pleasure
preserved to this day, I would wish him to call to mind his complaint and story
before.

And now in regard he is up with Pope Ione again, to disgrace the truth, and
those that stand for it; whereby to make persons afraid, and do they know not
what; which after, they undo again, and so Gal. 2. 18.
make themselves every way trespassers by destroying what they before built.

I will note some particulars, wherein those of his way shake hands with Pope
Ioane, and the man of sin, and leave the Reader to judge who may be most justly
taxed for affinity with Pope Jone, the reformed or separated Churches, or those
of the new way of Baptism.

First, those of that way of Baptism hold general or universal redemption
with the man of sin and Pope Jone. 2. Free Will. 3. Falling from grace. 4.
Conditional Election, that men may be saved if they will themselves. 5. They
hold an universal Church, and general ministry, with power universal. 6.
That Antichrist is not yet come, and shall be a particular man, and shall
continue but three years, etc. 7. They hold with Pope Jone, and accordingly
censure all the reformed and separated Churches for mere Schismatics. 8. They
hold with Pope Jone dipping in Baptism. I do not say that J. S. or all of that
way hold all these particulars; but this I am sure, that all these are held by
persons in that way; in practice they also shake hands; for as the man of sin
has made a Church, so they also have made a Church; only the man of sin and
Pope Jone have succeeded better in their work, for they have made a Church of a
large structure; whereas theirs is yet but a little Terret of the like nature.
2. As Pope Joane has sent out her messengers to preach and baptize; (namely,
the Friars and others) the Moors and Indians: so in like manner these send out
their messengers to preach and baptize also. 3. As Pope Jone and the man of sin
give authority to their instruments and ministers to act things without the
cognizance of the Scriptures, so in like kind do they; namely, authorizing an
unbaptized person to baptize others. In this and one thing more they exceed in
irrationalnesse Pope Ione; to wit, of giving mission to unbaptized persons to
baptize. 2. In Baptizing them that were before baptized. I will forbear to add
other particulars. Now let them show if they can any such doctrines held, or
courses taken by the separated, or rightly reformed Churches in way of affinity
with Pope Jone, and the man of sin. I say no more, but leave the Reader to
judge.

In the end of this Sexion he utters diverse high Notions, so undigested,
unsound, and contradictorie, as a man that should weigh them, could not but
wonder.

First, he says, that we are to know that the truth depends not upon Churches,
nor any mortal creature, but only upon the immortal God, who by his Word and
Spirit reveals the same, when, and to whom he pleases.

This is the first of his wonderful Notions, which we are to know, that the
truth of Ordinances, and right serving God (of which is our question) depends
not upon Churches.

Where then is J. S. his orderly way he proposed according to God, by the
Church and her assignement of one or two of her members, to begin Baptism,
being lost, etc.

Secondly, This that he would have us to know, is directly contrary to that
which God teaches us to know in his Word, 1 Timothy 3. 15. The Church of the
living God, God himself says, is the pillar and ground of truth: that is, of
Religion and divine Ordinances, as we said before.

Thirdly, If I. S. say, he do not mean truth of Ordinances, truly he is then
beside the matter in hand, deceiving and being deceived.

Fourthly, If he mean as in the former is specied, with whom then does he
contend? Do not all confess the truth, as Doctrinall, to have God for the
Author of it, and to depend on him? What high words does he here use to amaze
the Reader? as, The truth depends not upon any mortal man. Who ever held so?
But upon the Immortal God, Who ever held otherwise? But this immortal God
reveals the same by his Word and Spirit. What, does God reveal new Ordinances
of Religion by his Word and Spirit? Sure this is some dark nonsense: He
questionless means some other thing: What Revelation he herein intends, is
not hard to guess; however he is beside the matter, and clean out in this
first Notion.

Second Notion: And for succession of truth, (truth of Ordinances you must
understand) It comes now by the promise of God, and faith of his people, whom
he, as aforesaid, has taken out of the world to the fellowship of the Gospel.

Answ. Setting aside succession, and in stead thereof putting in continuation;
What can be more right then this, though not in J. S. his sense? The truth of
Ordinances continues by virtue of Gods promise made to his people, they
continuing to believe in him, and not forgetting his name, though many times
greatly failing against him, as of old; yet the truth of Ordinances continue;
namely, the Church and Baptism now, as the Church and Circumcision did of old;
and this by the promise of God. J. S. has no such sense as this, but some
inward familisticall sense of inward faith, and Gods promise to such secret
believers; which he is never able to make out any such thing, that the truth of
Ordinances depends upon them in regard of continuation, by vertee of the
promise of God to them in such a secret way.

Third Notion: To whom the Ordinances of Christ stand only by succession of
faith (What faith, outward or inward?) and not of persons (What faith severed
from persons?)

Answ. I would fain know what any rational man can make of this, either in it
self, or as it has relation to what is before declared.

Fourth Notion: For the same power the Apostles had in former time, for
direction in godliness, the Scriptures have in the hand of Christ, as the head
of the Church, which make up but one body, 1 Cor. 12. 12.

Answ. such power for direction in godliness, the Scriptures had of old, when
the Apostles lived. Some other things J. S. aims at, but the truth
prevails, and the words he here uses will nothing avail: namely of the
Scriptures in the hand of Christ joined with the Church. Its worth observing
how the Church is here couched, just after the manner of the Babylonians, that
pretend their Church is inspired with the Holy Ghost, and cannot err: for
Christ the head is in Heaven, and has left his Word for direction in
godliness for his Church to take heed unto. Now the holy Apostles had
authority to act Ordinances according to Christ's command; they were to preach,
pray, break bread, and baptize; the Scriptures were not sent, neither act they
any thing as before. So as in J. S. his sense, it is utterly untrue, that the
Scriptures in the hand of Christ, joined with the body, have the same power to
act Ordinances as the Apostles had.

Notion fifth and last, So as what the Apostles and Church together might do,
(in acting Ordinances you must understand) the same may the head and body,
together with the Scriptures, do now. Reader, observe how J. S. coucheth
subtly his unbaptized Church betwixt Christ and the Scriptures; so as Christ
being in heaven, and the Scriptures only directive; the whole matter for action
will fall into the hands of the Church. A contrivance, as fine as the Papist
found out when they were sore put to it by John Hus and the Bohemians, and not
able to defend themselves and their courses against the truth, they invented
and abetted this, That holy Church could not err.

Secondly, observe how I. S. quitteth two of these three; namely, the head and
body: and concludes laying all the stresse upon the Scriptures, and so in
effect says nothing at all, the Scriptures being only directive: for says he,
the Scriptures have the same, whereas he should have said, the head and body,
with the Scriptures, have it.

Thirdly, observe what a preposterous conjunction I. S. makes of three, in the
matter of fact; one of which, to wit Christ the head is in Heaven; who, though
he has fullness of power, acts not here below, but in a providenciall, and
ministerial way, and the like. The Church, the second, Christ's wife, is in all
things to be obedient to Christ her husband, his will and pleasure contained in
the Scripture: the Scriptures they act not, but only direct; where is I. S.
now? just where he was at the first, and no further.

Fourthly, this is utterly untrue, which he concludes, that what the Church
and the Apostles, the Ministers of the Churches, might do; that the Scriptures
(he quitteth the head and body as before) may do. Now, what might not the
Church and the Apostles do, in ordinances and administration, orderly,
according to God; what can the Scriptures act, truly nothing at all, their
authority is only directive. I suppose any one may see how far out I. S. is in
these conceits. In the close he is up again with revelation, which happily, if
he did study and cleave unto, would stand him in more stead then the Scriptures
that are so helpless to him in his cause.

CHAP. IV. Containing a defense of the opinion of them that hold no right or
orderly Ministerial Church, without, or before Baptism.
I. S. Having ended his former matter, against the Churches continuance, and
likewise the continuance of Baptism under the popish defection, proceeds,
saying,

And so we come to such as will have no Church before Baptism, and so make
Baptism the form of the Church.

Answ. Who these (such) are that he intends, I cannot tell; they are either
some of his own way, or some other: some of his own way do indeed so hold, that
Baptism constitutes, or is the form of the Church. Did I think he intended
them, I should leave them to try it out, and should not intermeddle with the
strife. I shall only, as the matter relates to them, show my thoughts briefly:
namely, that they will be too hard for J. S. in the tenent, he himself being of
their belief, but that he is not true to his own principle: otherwise how
should he, without Schism, and being a Schismatic, leave the reformed and
separated Churches, and set up another of his own, as he has done; only he
accounts them no Churches of Christ, and what is the reason he does so?
nothing but his Baptism is wanting, so as that must be the form that gives
being; for otherwise, They are companies of Saints professing faith in the
righteousness of Christ, and living accordingly; that is, in holiness of
life. This he describes to be the matter, and the form he declares to be
their being united and knit together in one fellowship or orderly body; and
that is the Covenant of grace by which God becomes (not visibly, as he unawars
says) but in an outward way of relation, a God unto them, and they become
visibly his people. Now what is there to hinder J. S. from being a Schismatic
by his own ground: for surely nothing hinders those Churches which he forsakes
and disclaimeth, as no Churches of Christ, by all or any thing, that in his
description of the matter or form of the Church, by him set down can be found:
and let him take in his five Reasons to help him if he please. So as it must be
the want of his new Baptism or nothing, and then I leave it to him to judge,
whether that be not the form of the Church necessarily, according to his ground
that gives the being thereunto.

Secondly, if by (such) he means those he was an opponent of in the former
matter of the Churches continuation, and likewise Baptism under Popish
defection: I shall add a little in the way of defense.

First, granting that such hold indeed no Church (to wit, rightly constituted,
as a right or lawful Ministerial Church) without or before the matter of this
Church is baptized.

Secondly, denying that in so holding, they make Baptism the form of the
Church, as he infers, (and so make Baptism the form,) there is more goes
to the proof of a matter then so.

His five Reasons might well have been spared, by which he would prove
Baptism, not to be the form of the Church, till he had made that to appear to
be of necessity the right consequence, which sure he is never able to do: for
there was no right Ministerial Church of old without Circumcision, yet
Circumcision was not the form of that Church: an uncircumcised person was not
to be admitted a member, much less an officer Circumcision was then an
external qualification of the matter; as in like manner is Baptism now.

In this matter we shall have recourse to the first beginning of the Church of
the new Testament, and of Baptism. John the Baptist the forerunner of Christ,
sent of God, to prepare the way of his Son, according to Commission, baptized
much people, as did also afterward the Disciples of Christ our Lord: to him
repaired our Lord to be baptized, that righteousness might be fulfilled. It
may be observed by the way, that this was in the Church of the Jews. Of these
thus baptized was the Church of the new Testament begun, whether the initiation
of it be referred to the time before the passion of our Lord, as to himself and
the twelve, with whom he brake bread, or whether it be referred to the time
after his resurrection, when he gathered the 120. together and blessed them,
(as is most Acts 1.
proper) let him take his choice, and refer to which he will, it was begun of
the aforesaid baptized matter, which is certainly to the life of the matter in
hand, in discovering that the matter of the Church was fitted by Baptism
before it was laid together. As was the Church at the first rise of it, so was
the proceed: those 120. baptized, those that joined with them (being not before
baptized) as it is written, they were baptized and added to the Church. This
first Church scattered by persecution, became the instrument of increase, and
the first matter of many Churches; which Churches by their instruments,
baptized such as received the faith, and joined into the Lord, and thus was the
Church and Kingdom of Christ spread throughout the World, as the holy history
does show. And let J. S. or any of his way, show that there was ever any
unbaptized Church or Congregation of the new Testament, or that ever any
unbaptized person was received into fellowship, or that ever any unbaptized
person, after Baptism was a foot in the World baptized, or was authorized for
to do it. And lastly, let him tell me, whether the order of the new Testament,
(as in another case he asked,) be not as strict in this case of Baptism, as it
was in Circumcision of old, when no uncircumcised might have part in the
Church, or fellowship in the Ordinances, much less act Ordinances Esek. 44.
in way of dispensing of them to others. And let him tell me, whether a precept
or example be not as necessary in all those cases, as in that of baptizing
Infants. And lastly, whether his practice of raising and beginning the Church
of unbaptized persons, do agree with the primitive practice of our Lord and his
Apostles, that began the Church of baptized matter, as before.

J. S. propounds a second Reason of his opponents thus, The Scripture
speaks of no Church before Baptism. To which he answers as he did to that
of the Gates of Hell not prevailing against the Church: He must distinguish, he
says. A mere shift to blind his Reader, and avoid the truth; there needs no
distinction at all in the case. He would not take it well, if any should
distinguish in case of Infants Baptism. But what is his distinction, it is
betwixt the truth of the doctrine of Baptism, and the administration of it
(just as he did in the forenamed case) as much as if he had said, He must
distinguish betwixt the Scripture that teaches Baptism, and Baptism or
washing according to the Scripture. In this first sense, Baptism or the
doctrine of Baptism (as much as if he had said, the holy word of God) is
before the Church: What this is to the purpose, is beyond my judgment; nor yet
that which follows: no Church according to the order of Christ's Testament
without it or before it. No Church without or before the Scripture; how this is
to the matter in hand, and what clearing (or rather darkning) there is in this
distinction, I leave the Reader to judge.

But now for the second part of the distinction: Namely, the outward
administration of Baptism that ever follows the Saints joining in
fellowship, by mutual faith and agreement in the Doctrine, wherein consists
the stating of the Church in her conjoyning in Covenant, which ever goes before
in the administration of Baptism, and gives power and authority for the same;
so, says he, in the first sense the Church is not before Baptism, but in the
last it is.

Answ. The sum and scope of this whole matter amplified and enlarged, is
utterly false, being referred to the purpose for which J. S. does bring it,
namely to prove an unbaptized Church, or the Scriptures speaking of such. Alas,
this is far from proving the matter; no not in a seeming way. In this case it
may be truly said, from the beginning it was not so: The matter of the Church
was fitted outwardly by Baptism, as is before declared: And the Scriptures
give no president of such Church, officer, or member, at any time such a
proceed being clean besides the Scriptures.

2. J. S. deceives (if not himself) yet others in what he sets down; in
referring that to the initiation of a Church, which is only true of the
proceed. The Church stated and on foot in the world, according to God, of
baptized persons, baptizeth others in way of proceed, in a orderly way of
administration; so it was at the beginning, and to begin otherwise is not
according to the pattern. So as not taking notice of the difference, between
right beginning and orderly proceed, he is clean out, and beside the truth, and
his distinction will appear to be vain and to no purpose unless to deceive;
for as he sets down, that Baptism ever follows in regard of the
administration of it, the Saints joining in fellowship, etc. this is only true
of the proceed of the Church as before; but this joining is to be of baptized
matter, as it was at the beginning, which necessarily calls either for a
person from heaven, as in the instance of John, or the continuance of baptized
persons in the world from John downward, as is the case now, though J. S. will
not acknowledge the same. The sum of the distinction he makes to be this in
the first sense, the Church is not before the Scriptures. In the last sense, it
is before Baptism; utterly untrue, as before.

J. S. tells us, his distinction being observed, we are not to deny a Church
to be a Church, though the Scriptures do not so call it. So the Scriptures of
which he spoke so great things in case of raising Baptism lost, are now become
deficient, and we may be wiser then they teach us; and call a people a Church,
though they do not so call them or teach us so to do and we are not so
engaged: to speak as the Word of God. His reason of this strange divinity is
the Church of the Old Testament, and many of the new were Churches before they
were so called. But I say they were not rightly gathered Churches before they
were baptized, neither does the Scriptures give that appellation to any in a
relative way to Christ, and we may not be wise above what is written. Cornelius
and his friends coming together, were no right orderly gathered Church before
Baptism, neither does the Scripture so call them. After all said that may be,
he demands, why it may not be so, that a Church may be a Church before
Baptism be administered: why may not children be baptized, I would ask him?
let him tell me that, I will tell him why.

Again he says, a Church is so a Church before Baptism, as that the end of
her union is for communion. J. S. at the last does in effect in a modest way
give up the cause; (A Church so a Church) That is, in another way then at the
beginning it was, when it was first instated. Again in another way, then
according to a right Constitution and orderly way of serving God. Again, is a
Church so as a betrothed Virgin is a wife before the day of her Espouslas, and
plays the Harlot in the mean time, and so defiles the marriage bed: So is an
unbaptized Church a Church of Christ.

After this he is up with the substance of his five Reasons before alleged, to
prove that Baptism was not the form of the Church, but the Covenant. And what
then? (for I will not meddle with his Reasons, be they right or wrong.) A
Church may be in Covenant and fellowship before Baptism be administered (so as
Cornelius and his friends were:) But I say such a Church can never administer
Baptism according to God, unless they had a man sent to them, as John was
sent, or as Peter was to Cornelius and his friends. He is pleased to call such
a Church, whom the Scripture calls not so. But what he here sets down he
does as formerly, but say it and not prove it, so as we need not much stand
upon it. A People are a Church by covenant, he says, to which Ordinances are
annexed: But the matter of this Church is to be first outwardly sitted by
Baptism. An orderly way is necessary, and that is by persons sent of God, as
was John; here he deceives again, affirming that of (his so a Church) which is
only true of a Church stated, and on foot, according to God in the world, as
was the Church of the new Testament baptized, and so the matter outwardly
sitted by John before the building was erected.

He quoteth, Genesis 17. 11. Ezekiel. 16. 8. Act. 2. 41. Ephesians. 4. 5. and concludes
thus: So here was a Church before Ordinances, or before ever Baptism was
administered, either by John the Baptist, or the Apostles.

To which I answer, in regard of those two places of the old Testament,
alleged in this matter in question: It is at least as far off as the proving
the baptizing of Infants from Circumcision, or their being baptized of old to
Moses in the cloud and sea, which he 1 Cor. 10.
accounts nothing to the purpose, as indeed this is little to the purpose.
They use to ask in the instance before, when produced: whether that Baptism of
the cloud, etc. was the Baptism of the new Testament. I in like manner ask him
whether those were the ministerial Churches of the new Testament. Alas, this
matter is too far fetched. I could tell him of a Church, and a great one too,
without faith, or the profession of it: namely, that gathered by Demetrius and
his fellow Crafts-men, Act. 19. 25. 46. he happily will count it to no purpose;
truly, so is his matter here.

As for those instances in the new Testament, sure he was much over-seen in
them, and very inconsiderate: Those Act. 2. 41. had broken bread, and prayed,
and were baptized, before they were a Church. As for the Church of Ephesus, no
question but that was also baptized in like manner; and he might from that
place as well prove a Church to be before faith, as before Baptism, by any
thing I can perceive. Certainly he had little aim, in bringing such places of
Scripture to prove a people to be a Church of the new Testament, before
Baptism was administered to them; at least that it should be so before John's
Baptism, that according to the Commission of God, administered Baptism to fit
the matter of the Church, before ever it was laid into form.

A further Objection he sets down thus: Some say from Act. 2. 41. they were
added to the Church after they were baptized. What is his Answer?

If it were so; they should neither put on Christ, nor yet be baptized into one
body, nor to the true profession of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, etc.
directly against these Scriptures, Gal. 3. 27. 1 Cor. 12. 13. Matthew. 28. 19.

Answ. I am very sorry to see such weakness in persons pretending to, and
promising much strength of knowledge. For,

First, all those that John Baptist baptized, could neither put on Christ, nor
be baptized into one body, nor into the true profession of the Father, etc. by
his account and reckoning; and so his practice of baptizing was contrary to
those Scriptures by his reckoning. Was not John Baptist to blame?

Secondly, how appears it, that if persons sent of God, as was John of old,
(as is necessary to raise Baptism, if it were lost out of the world, as they
hold) baptizing according to their Commission, that those they baptize cannot
put on Christ, nor be baptized into one body, nor into the true profession of
the Trinity, only because J. S. says so, without any show of ground. For,

Thirdly, those Scriptures cited, have no such thing in them certainly to the
judgment of any rational man; neither can it be imagined that there is any
let in regard of any of them, why a person sent of God should not baptize
before the Church be formed.

For that in Acts 2. 41. he says, It is only declarative of the great
increase of the Church through Gods goodness. To which I answer; That it
declares plainly, that they were of, and by that Church baptized, that they
were added unto, in as much as the Church receives no unwashen ones. If it
were questioned whether the Church receive them before she baptize them, or
baptize them before she receive them; I would give my thoughts, that in
strictness of concluding, neither are first; for these are so interwoven, that
they go together, and are unseparable: As thus, persons believing (being
unbaptized) the Church opens her arms to receive them, but before she can
fully embrace them, they must be washed, and so made like the rest of the body.
There is a different case to be taken knowledge of:

First, of the seed of the Church (by generation I mean) they are of the Church
first, and baptized for righteousness sake, because they are of the Church,
and for the end before specified.

Secondly, the case of converted Infidels; their access to the Church and
Ordinances is as before; as it was in like manner of old in Israel, the infants
were circumcised, because they were a part of Israel, that they might answer
the whole. But the Converts of the Nations they were circumcised, that they
might be of the Church, and have fellowship in the same. The case I conceive to
be even so now, which I note in way of digression, as a touch to be Exodus 12.
48.
considered of, though happily J. S. will think it to no purpose.

There is another Argument, which he sets down, and makes answer unto; all
the difference amounts but to that of the circumstance of time, and has
nothing in it substantial; I shall not make the difference greater, but shall
leave J. S. to his constituting causes of his unbaptized Church, and shall
forbear to trouble him, or my self, or the Reader any further, but leave all to
the judgment of the godly wise.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 11. l. 20. for Infants, r. Intents. p. 13. l. 16. for shrine, r. shrink.
p. 14. l. 36. for and privilege, r. a privilege. p. 45. l. 34. for
constitation, r. constitution.


