THE TRIAL OF A BLACK-PUDDING.

OR, The unlawfulness of Eating Blood proved by Scriptures, Before the LAW,
Under the LAW, and After the LAW.

BY A well wisher to Ancient Truth.

LONDON: Printed by F: N. and are to be sold by John Hancock in Popes
Head-Alley. 1652.

THE TRIAL OF THE BLACK PUDDING: OR, THE EATING OF BLOOD Questioned,
Convinced, Condemned.
SIR,
I Have at last got a Copy of the Treatise, you mentioned to me, but with much
ado, and for a short time. I made use of my spare hours to extract the sum
of it, which here I do impart, and commend to your more serious consideration.
I confess, I was always tender in that point, not knowing, what or how to
resolve; seeing on one side express and literal Scripture inhibitions; on the
other side, the Churches practice and approbation; and being loath to lay an
unnecessarie burden upon my conscience, and yet fearing to transgress so plain
and literal inhibitions, my judgment was distracted between fear to be
accounted singular, if I should abstain; and fear to transgress a Law, if I
should receive. Now this Treatise in my opinion does make the point clear
enough to any rationable man, that will submit rather to the word, and be ruled
by it, then to the conceits and practice of men. I do wonder, you do so
violently exclaim against it, as Judaical, and Mosaical, when we see the
Apostles Canon and Decree, touching this and other restraints, was published
and enjoined then, when all other parts of the Ceremonial Law were altogether
abolished, and this Law against Eating of Blood de novo re commanded, and
recommended to all Christians practice and observation, you will see mo e of it
in this Extract, which if you like, I will endeavor to get the whole Treatise,
and impart it to you, Herein only I differ from the Author, that he makes
this restraint from eating of Blood General and binding of all men, as men:
Whereas, I rather think, it does concern and oblige only Gods people, and
under the Gospel all Christians, and such as make profession of Jesus Christ.
For what have we to do with them, that are without? I pray, read it without
pre-conceit, consider it without partiality, and judge it without passion.
Farewell.

THE QUESTION IS, Whether it be lawful to Christians under the Gospel, to eat
Blood?
THe Author answers Negatively, and says No, it is not lawful: and does
prove it by one General, and three sorts of particular grounds and Arguments.

The main Argument is this:

That precept, or command, which God has given to man before the Law, renewed
to the Israelites under the Law, confirmed to Christians after the Law, without
any distinction of Times, Places, Persons, is Moral, and perpetual. But the
Law against eating of Blood was thus given, before, under, and after the Law,
and never repealed. Ergo that Law is Moral and perpetual.

The Major or Proposition of this syllogism is thus proved; because 1. the
whole time of the Churches subsisting on Earth is divided into these three
ages, before, under, and after the Law; so that what Command of God soever was
given in any one of these three ages, it did bind all and every one in the
Church, during that age of the Church. Now the same Command against Blood,
being re-confirmed in all three ages, it was made binding of all men in the
Church in all these three ages, and consequently for ever. 2. Because we can
hardly find any such command of that Nature, but was either natural or moral;
as the Law of keeping the Sabbath, and against murder, which being made in all
three Ages, does prove it moral and perpetual.

The Minor or Assumption is contained in the very words of Scripture. For this
precept was given before the Law, Genesis 9.4: renewed under the Law, Levit.
17.10. seq: confirmed after the Law, Act. 15.28. Ergo this precept is moral and
perpetual.

Object. Circumcision was commanded before, and under the Law, and practiced
after the Law, Ergo it does not follow, that whatsoever has a footing in these
three Ages, is moral, etc. R: 1. Though Circumcision was commanded before, and
under the Law, yet not after the Law, but rather expressly forbidden. Act.
15.10, 19.24. Gal. 5.2. Ergo the comparison fails. 2. Circumcision was
commanded before the Law, but only to one man, Abraham, and his posterity,
and consequently does and cannot bind all men, as the Law against Blood, which
was given to Noah, and his posterity, and consequently to all men.

The particular Arguments against Eating of Blood are taken from several places
of Scripture, in all the three Ages of the Church, which the Author does
prosecute largely, the sum whereof is, as follows.

I. From the command of God before the Law, Gen 9.4.
But Flesh with the life thereof, which is the Blood thereof, ye shall not eat.

In these words of Gods inhibition, the Author finds three grounds against
Blood.

1. From the Persons, to whom this Command was given, Noah, his sons, and
posterity, v. 1.9. from whence he does conclude:

Whatsoever Command was given to Man as Man, at the beginning of a 2d.
Creation, without any repealing of it in after ages, that Command is Moral and
Perpetual. But this Command was thus given. Ergo.

The Major is undoubted. The Minor appears in the text; where we see, that
the Law against eating of Blood was given to the same persons, to whom the
blessing of multiplication was given, v: 1. the dominion over the Creatures. v:
2. the permission to eat flesh, v. 3. the command against shedding of Blood.
Now all these particulars belong properly to Mankind, without distinction of
Persons. Ergo the Law against Blood also, which consequently is Moral and
perpetual.

2. From Gods own reason, why he would have us abstain from Blood; because
Blood is the life of the flesh, i: e: blood does contain, and maintain, and
convay the vital spirits to all the parts of the body, which receive their
ordinary nourishment from the Blood, so that blood being taken away, their
lives are taken away. Now God would not have Men eat the life and the soul of
Beasts, a thing barbarous and unnatural; so that if it was unlawful then, it
is unlawful still to eat Blood, because Blood is still the life of beasts,
from whence he concludes:

Wheresoever the same reason, and ground of a Command continues, there the
Command it self continues in force, till it be expressly abolished. Now the
reason, why God would have Men abstain from eating of Blood, continues;
because it is the life of Beasts. Ergo.

Obj. The fourth Command has a continuing reason annexed, because the Lord
rested the Seventh Day, and yet that day is altered. Ergo a perpetual reason
does not always prove the perpetuity of a command.

Answ: The change of the day of Sabbath is by an express order from God and
his Apostles; but we have no such change or alteration of the Law against
eating of Blood, which is expressed in the Major, as a limitation, Ergo it
continues still.

2. From Gods End in this precept, which was, according to the best Fathers and
Divines opinion, to teach us humanity, meekness, bowels of mercy: as if God had
said, I would have you abstain from eating the blood of Beasts, that so ye
might be the more careful to abstain from shedding the blood of Men. Now this
end of God continues still, who will have us still to labor for humanity,
kindness, tender-heartedness, etc. Ephesians: 4.32: Gal: 5.22. Col. 3.12. and
consequently the means to attain this end must continue. From whence he
gathers this conclusion:

Where the end intended by God in a Command does continue, there the means
appointed by God for that end ought to continue, unless they be expressly
forbidden. Now the end intended by God in this Command does still continue.
Ergo.

Obj: The end cannot prove the command lasting, unless it can be prooved by
the mind of the Lawgiver, that the Command is the only perpetual means to
continue for that end: which cannot be said of abstaining from Blood, to be the
only, perpetual means to teach us humanity etc. R: An absurd consequence: To
abstain from Blood is not the only means, to teach us humanity, Ergo we ought
not abstain from Blood. God prescribes many means to attain to one, and the
same end, for the good of body and soul; as for example, to eat, drink, rest,
exercise, and use Physic, etc. for outward health: and to hear, read, pray,
meditate, conferr, etc. for our spiritual health: All these particulars serve
for the same end, yet we cannot say any one of them to be the only means, and
yet we are bound, as occasion is offered, to make use of all, shall we not eat,
nor sleep etc because it is not the only means to preserve our health? shall
we not hear, or pray, etc. because neither of it is the only means to preserve
Grace in us? God forbid. If God appoints a thing to be a means to obtain an
end, whether it be the only, or perpetual means, or one of the means, we are
bound to use it, as long as it may be a means to obtain that end, unless it be
expressly prohibited of God. Now God having appointed the abstaining from
blood, as a means to teach us humanity, we must use it, till we are forbidden
it.

II. From the Command of God under the Law, Levit. 17. v: 10.14.
And whatsoever man there be, of the house of Israel, or of the strangers, that
so journeth amongst you that eats any manner of blood, etc.

From these and the following words, the Author draws three arguments more;
as,

1. From the repetition of the first natural reason, which God gave to Noah,
and his Sonns, because blood is the life of Beasts: to show, that the same
ground and reason continuing still, for which God at first had forbidden the
eating of Blood, the duty should continue likewise; and that the Israelites as
Men, and of Noah's Posterity were bound to observe this Law, as long as this
reason continues; from whence he concludes thus:

Whatsoever Law or precept was given to the Isralites, as Noah's posterity, that
Law is Moral and Perpetual. But this Law against eating Blood was thus given.
Ergo it is Moral and Perpetual.

Obj. The main reason added to the renewing of this Law was Ceremonall, and
Typical. v: 12. For I have given you the Blood upon the Altar, etc. Ergo this
Law bound no others but the Israelites; and no more, then other Ceremonial
Laws.

R: Though one reason alleged in this Chapter was ceremonial, and bound
only the Israelites, yet there were other reasons more general and moral,
which bound all men, as that natural reason, v: 11. Because the blood is the
life of Beasts, and a judicial reason, that else God would punish them, and
cut them off, v: 10.19. seq: And God gave here a threefold reason, natural,
mystical, and judicial reason, in the confirmation of this Law to the
Israelites, to tie the Israelites the faster to the obedience of this Law, as
Men, Israelites, and in Covenant with God. A threefold cord is not easily
broken, Eccles: 4.12.

2. From the Persons to whom this renewed command was given, viz: to all Men,
Whatsoever Man there be. And least they should apply it to all Men only that
were Israelites, and in the Covenant, it is added, whether he be of the house
of Israel, or of the strangers, that sojourn amongst you, v: 10. as if God
would say, All men, and every one of you, none excepted, of what Country,
Religion, profession soever, if he live or sojourn amongst you, shall be bound
to this Law. From whence the Author argues thus:

Whatsoever Law amongst the Israelites, did not only bind themselves, but their
strangers also that did but sojourn amongst them, that Law is Moral, and
Perpetual. But the Law against eating Blood, did bind all strangers. Ergo.

The Major is certain: because no stranger or alien durst sojourn amongst the
Israelites, but was bound to observe all Moral Laws, though he was freed from
all Ceremonial Laws. For the strangers needed not to be circumcised, or to eat
the Passover; but they were bound to keep the Sabbath, Exodus: 20.13. Nebem:
13.16.20. and durst not blaspheme or curse, Levit: 24.16. and the like.

The Minor is in the words of the Text. Ergo the conclusion is infallible.

Obj. There were two sorts of strangers amongst the Israelites; One by descent
and birth, but not by Religion, being proselites to the Jewish Religion, and
these were bound to observe all Ceremonies, and amongst the rest, to forbear
from Blood: The other sort of strangers was both by birth and Religion, aliens
from the Israelites, and not bound to Ceremonial Laws, neither to abstain from
blood, as it appears out of Deuteronomy: 14.21.

R. 1. The distinction is true, but not sufficient. For we find three sorts of
strangers amongst the Israelites, 1. proselites, which were called strangers
within the Covenant, 2. Sojourners, called strangers within the gates. 3.
Aliens, which were open Idolaters, living in neighbor Countries about them.
The first sort of them was bound to all Laws, Moral, Ceremonial, Political:
The second sort to Moral, and in some respect to Political, but to no
Ceremonial Law at all. For whosoever would live or sojourn amongst them, must
yield and submit himself to the seven great commandments, which were given,
according to the Hebrews relation, to the Sons of Noah, amongst which one was
to abstain from Blood. The third sort of strangers durst not live or sojourn
amongst them at all, as Ainsworth and other learned men report. Now the Law
against Blood was given not only to strangers proselites, but to strangers
sojourners, which though not of the Jewish Religion, yet sojourning amongst
them were bound to it, as appears by what is said. Ergo by this expression
are not only understood Proselites, but even Heathen, and Infidels, if within
the gates. 2. The place of Scripture alleged out of Deuteronomy: 14, 21. where God
gave leave to strangers, to eat that, which dies of it self; and to the Jews,
to sell it them to eat, though they themselves durst not eat it: this can prove
nothing against the Morality and perpetuity of the Law against eating Blood.
For 1. Suppose God had given the strangers leave to eat Blood in the carkase,
which yet is not: he might take it as a particular exception to the general
rule, for that time. Now Exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis. 2. Though
eating of Blood was a sin in it self, yet Gods extraordinary warrant and
permission intervening, does make it lawful to that Person, and for that time,
that it was allowed. To murder, or to robb is a great sin; yet Gods Command to
Abraham to sacrifice his Son, Gen: 22.2. or Gods permission (at least) if not
command to the Israelites to robb the Egyptians. Exodus: 3.22. and 12.35.36. did
not make murder or robbing lawful, or abolish the Law against them. 3. It
does not follow, the Aliens might eat that, which died of it self, Ergo they
might eat Blood. For either they did eat the carkase cleansed from Blood, as
Hugo Grotius upon the Acts 15. judges: or they did not eat that Blood, which
was forbidden by God, viz: such Blood, as might and should be powered out, in
which the soul or life of the Beast goes out. For this Blood was properly
forbidden by God, Levit: 17.12. There was a great difference between Blood and
Blood amongst the Jews. And some blood was absolutely forbidden, other Blood
lawful to be eaten, even amongst the most zealous and most superstitious. The
Hebrews say, that he only was guilty, which did eat the Blood of Beasts and
Fowls: but they might eat the Blood of Fishes and Locusts, if clean, as
Ainsworth reports upon Levit: 17.10. To apply this, the Blood that is left in
a carkase cannot properly be said to be the forbidden Blood, ergo the eating of
it does not abolish the Law against eating of Blood. In which respect the Latin
calls a carkase ex sangue cadaver. 4. The difference of punishment, which God
threatens to such as eat Blood, or a dead carkase, does clearly prove a great
difference in the act or sin it self. For God will cut him off, and set his
face against him, that eats Blood, Levit. 17.10. but he that eats of a
carkase, should only wash his clothes, bath himself in water, and be unclean
until the Even. v: 15. This should be a sufficient answer to the Objection.

3. Argument is drawn from the Threatening of Gods Judgment annexed to it: I
will even set my face against that soul which eats Blood, and will cut him
off from amongst his people. Now we can hardly find such an expression, where
the Lord threatens any punishment to Men for breaking Ceremonial Laws; It is
true God will many times have the transgressors of Ceremonial Laws to be cut
off by men, i: e. either by an Ecclesiastical censure of excommunication; or a
civil punishment by death to be afflicted, as we read Gen: 17.14. Exodus: 12.19.
Levit: 22.3. But we never, or hardly find, that God threatens such an immediate
kind of punishment by Himself, to Ceremonial transgressions, as he does here
in this place, Lev: 17. where God threatens to be not only the Judge, but the
Executioner also: as God does often in Moral transgressions; Levit: 20.3 6
Jerem: 44.11. Ezekiel: 14.8 and in other places, from whence the Author thus
concludes:

Wheresoever God annexeth a threatening of immediate judgment from Himself to a
Law, that Law is Moral and Perpetual: Now in this Law God does it. Ergo it is
Moral and Perpetual.

Obj There are many such expressions of Gods threatening punishment to
ceremonial transgressions, and amongst the rest, Levit: 23.29, 30. Ergo this
is no sufficient proof for the Morality of this Law.

R, 1. We do not see it yet, nay not in that place alleged, Lev: 23.29, 30.
for in that Law of keeping the day of atonement, two things are to be observed;
the moral part of it, which is to keep such a day, and to afflict our souls
etc. and the Ceremonial part of it, to keep that day of atonement yearly, upon
the tenth day of the seventh month, which was a Ceremonial Ordinance, binding
only the Israelites; for we may keep such days of atonement at any other
convenient time. Now God threatens a twofold judgment, the one to be inflicted
by men, he shall be cut off from amongst his people, for these outward or
ceremonial neglects or transgressions, which Man is able to discern and to
discover: But the other judgment God reserveth to himself, for the neglect of
those moral duties, which Man cannot discern, but only He that knows the
hearts of men, as, for not afflicting their souls, and sincerely humbling
themselves, but resting in outward duties, etc.

2. We answer, that if God does threaten such immediate judgments to
Ceremonial transgressions, then it is in such cases only, where a Moral
transgression is joined to Ceremonial, and cannot be severed one from another;
but we cannot find any such threatening denounced to merely Ceremonial
breaches, and offenses alone.

3. And this Calvin takes notice of in his Comment, upon Levit: 17.10. where he
says: God does not only command to put to death those, which should defile
themselves in eating Blood, but he does threaten to take vengeance. Himself,
though they should escape the band of the Judges. For the words do not only
exhort the Judges, to do their Office, but that he does reserve a punishment to
himself.

III. From the Command of God after the Law. Act. 15.28, 29
For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater
burden, then these necessary things: that ye abstain from meats offered to
Idols, from blood, from things strangled, and from fornication, etc.

From these words the Author draws one General, and 3. particular Arguments.
The General Argument runs thus:

Whatsoever Law or Command of God is renewed, reconfirmed, re-established under
the Gospel, after the abrogation of all Ceremonial observations, generally,
absolutely, without any restriction, or limitation of Time, Place, or Persons,
that Law must needs be perpetual, till it be expressly repealed and abrogated by
the same Law giver. Now this Law against eating of Blood was so renewed. Ergo.

Both Propositions are true; the former being grounded in Reason, the second in
Scripture; and consequently the Conclusion undeniable.

Obj. This Law was renewed by the Apostles with restitution, and limitation,
and was to last no longer, but till Blood might be eaten with a Conscience
satisfied in its Christian liberty, and without offense to weak brethren. And
therefore cannot be perpetual.

R. We answer 1. This limitation is but a humane gloss, and we do not find the
least ground or hint of it in the whole word of God. We did show, that God has
forbidden it in general terms, without any limitation: Let them show out of
the word, that it was forbidden only for a time. It is a great presumption in
man, to limit the time of keeping Gods Commandments, when God himself does not
limit it. In such things we must deal considerably, and not follow the mere
ungrounded conceits of Men, but the Rule, To the Law, and to the Testimony, if
they speak not according to this word, it is, because there is no light in
them, Isa. 8.20.

2. Suppose it were so, then let us know, when it was, that Christians came to
know their liberty in this particular, and that this Law was abolished. We do
find it observed, Rev. 2.14, 20. which was about forty years after this
Decree was made; And the purest Fathers in the primitive Church do report, that
it was observed many hundred years after Christ's Ascension; as we may see in
Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 1 Tertullian in his Apologet. cap. 8. where amongst other
things he says, Inter temptamenta Christianorum botulos cruore distentos
admonent, etc. they did try men, whether they were Christians, by offering
them puddings filled with blood, etc. Origines, li. 8. contra Celsum: Minutius
Felix in Octavio etc. Cyrillus Hierosolomit. in 17. catech. Chrysostom in Acts
15. Homil. 33. Baronius says, it was yet in force in St. Austins times. Nay
longer, in the times of Beda, and Rabanus Maurus, a. c. 855. as Trithemius
reports: And we find, that when the Pomeranians were convened to
Christianity, a. c. 1120. this Law was commanded to them amongst others, to
abstain from Blood, as Alph: Ciaconius in vitis pontif. witnesses. Petrus
Martyr in 1 Samuel 14.31. says, Vt verum fatear, nescimus, quo tempore haec Lex
desierit: To speak the truth, we know not, when this Law did end. But in the
Eastern Churches it continued longer. Leo Imperator made a severe Constitution
against eating of Blood, as impious, contrary to the Old and New Testament of
Grace, invented only for luxury and the palates sake; and therefore commanded
not only the delinquents to be severely punished, but even the Magistrates
themselves, in those places, where the crime was committed, by reason of their
carelessness, etc. And the Eastern Churches for the most part do observe this
Law and Decree still, as we may read of the Grecians in Breerewards inquiries,
ch: 15. of the Aethiopians in Damicanus a Goes history: of Moscovites in Baron
of Herverstines Voyage, etc. The very Turks abstain from Blood, though a bloody
Nation. All this is to show, that not all men or Christians know yet this part
of their pretended Christian liberties, and that consequently by their own
Judgment, the Law must still be in force. We find in Beemans Theolog. Exercit:
that there are yet many in Europe, in Germany, Bohemiah, etc. which abstain
from Blood, and that Sebastian Castellis, and Dan Augelocrater name some
eminent men of them. But enough of this point.

The particular Arguments follow; which are drawn,

1. From the Author of this Decree or Law the Holy Ghost, Apostles, and Elders;
from whence he argues thus:

Whatsoever Law is given by the Express Command and order of the Holy Ghost,
and the Apostles, is binding of all Christians, and perpetual, till it be
abrogated by the same Authority. But this Law was thus given. Ergo.

Obj: But this Law was to last only for a time, and was abrogated afterward,
as may be prooved by diverse places of Scripture, which shall be alleged by and
by. Ergo it is not perpetual.

R. 1. This, is crambe his eocta and a repetition of a former objection, and a
mere humane gloss, and therefore not to be regarded. 2. For the places of
Scripture concerning the abrogation of this Law, we shall consider them in
order, as they shall be proposed.

2. From the Necessity of this duty: to lay upon you no greater burden then
these Necessary things, from whence the Author thus argues.

Whatsoever duty the Holy Ghost, and Apostles account, and make necessary to be
observed under the Gospel, without any restriction or medification, that is
necessary still, till it be abrogated by the same Holy Ghost and Apostles. Now
this Law is such. Ergo.

The Question only is, what kind of Necessity is understood here in the Decree.
To argue hereupon we say, that there is a twofold Necessity, a natural and
absolute one, when a thing cannot be otherwise: and a moral conditional
Necessity, when a thing shall or ought not to be otherwise. This Law against
Blood is of a Moral Necessity, necessitate praecepti, by reason of the express
will, and pleasure of God, who has commanded us to abstain from Blood. Now it
is necessary still, as long as this Command is unrepealed.

Obj: It was necessary only pro Tempore, to avoid the scandal of weak Brethren.

R. This is the great question, whether fear of offense was ground and cause of
renewing this Law: we cannot conceive it so. For 1. There were more things more
offencive to the Jews, then eating of Blood, and yet not commanded to be
observed, as uncircumcision especially, and eating of Swines flesh, and the
like: therefore fear of offense cannot be the cause. 2. Because the holy Ghost
in his grounds does not mention this at all; but the Apostles give other
reasons, because all Ceremonial Laws were an intolerable yoke, v: 10. a
trouble, v: 19. a subverting of their souls, v: 24. but the abstaining from
Blood, a necessary thing, v: 18. as necessary to abstain from Blood, as from
fornication, v: 29. a thing which seemed good to the Holy Ghost to command,
etc. We may not lay false grounds for the abiding or destroying of the date of
a Precept. The great reason of a Precepts continuance is the pleasure of the
Great Lawgiver. Let men take heed, to father a false ground upon the Holy
Ghost, which is not mentioned; or to desire a true ground of the Holy Ghost,
which is mentioned, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, etc. Let them show the
contrary pleasure of the Holy Ghost as clearly, and expressly, and we will
yield. 3. Suppose fear of scandal was a ground, yet not the main, much less
the only ground, for the chief ground is Gods pleasure. 4. Neither do we deny,
but that it was a great offense to believing Jews, to see men eat Blood, and so
it is to us; as great an offense, as to see men continue fornication, or any
sin against a Moral Command, and in this respect we grant, fear of offense and
of believers, nay of God, to be a ground of this Decree.

3. From the equality of the particulars forbidden in the Decree; where the
Author thus concludes:

Whatsoever Command is made as Necessary, as the Law against Fornication, that
is moral and perpetual. But the Law against Blood is made as necessary. Ergo.

For though we should not say that eating of Blood were as great a sin, as
Fornication, in every respect, yet we may say, that by virtue of this Decree we
are as much bound to abstain from Blood, as from Fornication, as long as they
are thus connexed and joined together in one Law, till the equality be taken
away by a countermand. Thus, Gal. 5.19, 20. Ephesians. 5.4. different sins are
forbidden, adultery, fornication, theft, jesting, etc. Now though jesting be
not so great a sin as Adultery, yet we must abstain from one as well as the
other; because he that has said, Thou shall not commit Adultery, has also
said, Thou shall not jest.

Obj: The Law against Fornication has footing in the moral Law: not so the
other particulars.

R: Even all the rest have a footing in the Moral Law. Nay eating of Blood not
only forbidden by a moral Law, Genesis 9.4. but more severely threatened, then
simple fornication Compare Exodus 22.16. Deuteronomy. 22.18. with Levit. 17.10. Deuteronomy.
12.23.25. and observe the expressions. Howsoever, till we have a repeal of this
Decree, we account eating of Blood as unlawful as Fornication.

And thus much of the Arguments against eating of Blood.

Follows the consideration of such Arguments, as are held forth to prove the
lawfulness of eating Blood, of which there are diverse, but of no great moment.

1. Argument. If there be no meat unclean in it self, i. e. in his own Nature,
or by Gods forbidding it to be used, then neither is meat made of blood
unclean, but to him that esteems it so. But there is no meat unclean in it
self. Romans 14.14. Ergo.

R: 1. We must distinguish the Major, and consider what meat is, and whether
Blood can properly be said to be meat.

Three things must concur to make a thing to be meat. 1. Fitness of a thing for
nourishment. 2. Gods allowance, or approbation of it for food. 3. The use of it
by the custom of men. Now though Blood may perhaps be fit for food, (which
many Physicians question, and make it very unwholesome, as Galenus lib. 3. de
facult. alim. c. 18. and 23 and de victus attennant. rat. c. 8. Dioseorides
lib. 6. c. 25. Weekerus in syntax. utr. Medic. li. 1 p. 5. Sennertus Instit.
Medic. lib. 1. p. 3. and 2. c. 4.) yet it has no allowance from God, neither
before, nor under, nor after the Law, but rather an absolute inhibition and
restraint in all these 3 Ages: Nor has it been used by men lawfully, from
Adams days till the days of the Apostles, and afterward for the space of many
hundred years, as it was proved above. Ergo it cannot properly be called meat.
2. We do not abstain from Blood, as unclean, seeing God never calls it
unclean; and almost all things were purged and cleansed under the Law with
blood, Heb. 9.22. and God would have it offered in sacrifices to himself; and
it did represent the holy Blood of Christ; all which particulars show, that
Blood is not unclean, neither forborne for that regard: but only because it
pleased the holy Ghost to forbid it to us. Act. 15.28. as being created for
another end, to be the life of flesh. Genesis 9 4.

2. Arg: If there be no sin committed by any uncleanness, that goes into the
mouth, then there can be no such uncleanness in Blood, but sin is not so
committed, Mar: 7.15. Nothing from without a man, that enters into him, can
defile him. Ergo.

R. 1. We must consider the scope of Christ in these words, which was not to
take away the distinction of meats, but to reprove the Pharisees for their
hypocrisy, that they held those things, which otherwise lawful, yet did
defile a man, if they were eaten with unwashen hands; so that Christ speaks
here not of the matter, or thing eaten, but of the manner of eating; else
Christ had not answered to the point, nor refuted the Pharisees: And this
appears out of Christ's own conclusion, Mar: 7.20. 2. Suppose Christ did speak
of things eaten likewise, yet he did not understand absolutely al kinds of
food, that none did defile a man; but he spoke of such, as knew their ordinary,
lawful food, which then they were about to receive. For there were then
certain creatures unclean by the Law, of which the Lord could not say, that
they did not defile a man, because the Ceremonial Law, and the distinction of
clean and unclean, was then yet in full force, and not abrogated, till after
Christ's death. 3. Suppose Christ did speak of all kinds of meat, that may be
eaten, yet the sense is, that no meat can defile a man, in it self, in its own
nature, but may defile him per accidens, if it be expressly forbidden by God, as
we know blood was then, and is still. 4. And if Christ had spoken of al kind of
meat, yet it cannot be applied to blood, which was not forbidden by that
distinguishing Law, Lev. 11.4. but by a Moral Law, above 800. years, before that
distinguishing Law was given to Moses. 5. And is it probable, that Christ has
given leave here to eat all sorts of food, when he knew, that the Apostles
shortly after would prohibit blood? Or would the Apostles have crossed Christ's
dispensation, if he had here allowed Blood? Or had not Peter despised Christ's
license, nay his power to give liberty to eat of blood and all things, when he
confesses, Act. 10.14. that he had never eaten of any unclean thing? 6. We
answer again, that we do not forbear Blood, as unclean, but as appointed for
another use, and therefore forbidden to us in the Law and Gospel.

3. Argument. The Law it self allows some to eat blood. Deuteronomy. 14.21.
therefore there was no moral uncleanness in it. Should the stranger be more
privileged, then the believer?

R: 1. The Law never allowed any man to eat Blood. 2. We say still, that there
is no uncleanness in Blood. 3. The place, Deuteronomy. 14.21. shows, God gave leave
to aliens, to eat a carkase, not Blood, as was proved above in the 2d
particular Argument out of Levit. 17.10. 4. If it was a privilege to eat a
carkase, then our Dogs have more privilege then Men, Exodus 22.31.

4. Argument, If Christ has freed his people from Ordinances, Touch not, taste
not, handle not, then they ought not to make scruple in any such cases. But
thus has he done, Col. 1.20, 21. Ergo.

R. 1. We must distinguish the Major, and consider, what Ordinances are meant
by the Apostles. And truly the Expositors are of different opinions concerning
them. See Mayer upon the place: The soundest Fathers, and Divines take them,
not for Ceremonial or Mosaicall Ordinances, but for the traditions and
ordinances of those Heretics, and Philosophers, which taught the worshipping
of Angels, and the abstaining from certain Creatures at certain times, as
displeasing to Angels. Thus Beza, and Zanchie understand it, and to them do I
subscribe, says Mayer. See more in Bezas annotations upon the place: And in
this sense, the place will do them no good, Tertullian lib: 5. contra Marcion,
negat haec ad legem Mosis pertinere. And learned Hugo Grotius says, that by
(...), Commandments, are understood such things, as were commanded by humane
Laws, and by (...), Doctrines of Men are meant, quae a Philosophis
precipiebantur. But 2. supposed (not granted) that Ceremonial Laws be here
understood, then let them prove, that this Law against Blood belongs to Moses
Ceremonial Laws only. The very ground of this mistake is, that they will and
do not distinguish, between the Laws given to Noah, ad quae addidit quaedam
Christus, dempsit nihil, says Grotius; and the ceremonial Laws given to Moses,
which are abolished, and that they refer the Law against Blood merely to Moses
Laws, when it was given so many hundred years before.

5: Argument: If we may eat, whatsoever God has created to be eaten, and it be
a Doctrine of Devils, to teach otherwise, then we may eat Blood, which is
created to be eaten, and it is unsound Doctrine, to teach otherwise. But this
is so. 1 Timothy: 4.2, 3. Ergo.

R. 1. The scope of the Apostle is, to forewarn Christians of diverse heresies,
which should come in with Doctrines of Devils, forbidding to marry, and to eat
flesh, as proceeding a malo principio, as were the Encra^ites, Marcionites,
Manichees, etc. which is the common opinion of most Fathers, and Divines,
amongst them Austin, Calvin, Beza, Piscator, Grotius, etc. Thus the Text does
speak nothing of Blood, which was forbidden by God himself, not by those
Heretics.

2. We do deny, that Blood was created to be eaten, but to be a means to
contain and maintain life in Beasts, as we did show above, out of Gen: 9.7.
Lev: 17.11. nay for this cause, the Lord did expressly forbid the eating of it,
in these two places alleged.

3. The Apostle does describe the nature of those Creatures, which were created
to be eaten, that they must not only be good, and fit for food, but sanctified
by the word, and prayer, v: 5. to receive a Creature with thanksgiving, is not
enough to make it lawful to be eaten, unless it be sanctified, i: e: allowed
to be eaten, in the word, as Calvin expounds it. Now I pray, where is Blood
sanctified and allowed in the Word? I find a threefold inhibition of it, before
the Law, Gen: 9.4. under the Law, in many places, especially Levit: 17.10 seq:
after the Law, Act: 15.28, 29. but no allowance, no leave, no license to eat
it, in no place of Scripture. Ergo it is not sanctified by the word, and
consequently not created to be eaten.

3. It is not probable, the Apostle would so quickly repeal the Apostles
Decree, not above five years after the publishing of it. For so many years
after, this Epistle was written: especially, when about the same time, the
Apostle did write to the Romans to be very circumspect even in things lawful,
much more indifferent, and rather forbear the use of things lawful, to avoid
the offense of the weak, then to follow their own knowledge, with the offense of
others; Rom: 14.15.20.

4. The Apostles themselves being met together, in the presence of Paul, did
repeat, and reconfirm the Decree against Blood, the next year after this
Epistle to Timothy was written, and resolved again, that that Decree should
still be observed by the Gentiles, Act. 21.25. Is it likely, that the Apostle
should of his own head, contrary to the Apostles mind and determination, give
liberty to do here, which they had prohibited; and himself after this Epistle
was written, did prohibit and interdict again? We cannot conceive such
ficklenes in the Apostle.

6. Arg. If every Creature of God be good, and nothing to be refused, then
Blood is good, and not to be refused. But every creature of God is good, and
nothing to be refused, 1 Timothy 4.4. Ergo.

R. 1. This argument is but an old coat turned with a new facing, and a mere
repetition of the former argument in other words. 2. It is true, Every Creature
of God is good in it self, and by Creation. So God says himself, Gen: 1.31.
but not always good, i: e: fit and lawful to be eaten, and that in many
respects, either because it is unnatural, or unwholesome, or forbidden by God,
as Blood is. 3. Again it is true, Nothing to be refused, viz: whatsoever is
sanctified and allowed by the word, v: 5. but he may refuse, whatsoever is
contrary to Nature, to the express word of God, and to our health, or
inclination. Now we have proved fully, that the eating of Blood, if it be not
against Nature and humanity, and many times prejudicious to our health, that
yet it is directly contrary to the express word of God, in the Old and New
Testament, and therefore may and ought to be refused.

Obj. But this place speaks so generally, and largely of every Creature of
God, that it may be received, if good for food, and not to be refused.

R. 1. The Apostle speaks either of every kind of flesh, which those
abovenamed Heretics did deny to be lawfully eaten: or of such Creatures, as
were created to be received and sanctified, or allowed by the word for food, v:
5: which cannot be said of Blood, as was shown in the precedent argument: or of
such meat as was never, or should not be forbidden by the Apostles themselves,
as Blood was forbidden: for else the Apostles had been guilty of inconstancy,
to forbid, and to allow; to forbid again, and allow again, over and over, the
same things, to the same Persons, which had been contrary to the Apostles
profession, 2 Cor: 1.18. Howsoever, the Apostle does not speak of Blood, which
was never used from the beginning of the world, and never acknowledged for
ordinary food by Gods people, or fit to be eaten, but always forborne, always
abhorred, because always forbidden.

2. It is no good consequence to say, whatsoever is a good Creature of God, and
fit for food, may be eaten: The tree of knowledge of good and evil, was a good
creature of God, and good for food, pleasant to the eyes, etc. Gen: 3.6. and
yet was not created to be eaten, or appointed for food, because God forbad our
first Parents at their very first entering into the Paradise, to eat of it. So
blood though it may be good for food in it self, yet was forbidden to Man, at
the very beginning of a second Creation of the world, and as soon as Blood
might have been eaten, by virtue of Gods allowing him flesh to eat. Therefore
Blood is none of those Creatures, which the Apostle counts good for food, and
created to be eaten.

3. We may retort these arguments against them upon a better ground; That
Doctrine, which for the satisfying of carnal lusts, does give liberty to eat
those Creatures, which the Holy Ghost under the Gospel has expressly, and by
name forbidden, by a public, possitive Decree, without any repealing or
limitation does both wrong God and Man. But that Doctrine which do^ give
liberty to eat Blood, does give liberty to eat such Creatures, which the H:
Ghost has expressly forbidden in the word under the Gosel: Ergo that Doctrine
does wrong God and Man. For that Men eat Blood is for wantonness, and their
palates sake, especially as it is dressed in Italy, France, and here in great
Houses. Hence Leo Imper: in his 58. constitut: says, Alii Lucri, alii gulae
causa, summa cum impudentia mandatum (DEI) contemnunt, in escomq: qua vesci
vetitum est, sanguinem convertunt. And afterward speaking of Puddings filled
with Blood, he says, it was impium soli gulae, inhiantium hominum inventum,
etc. Thus it appears that Blood is not of those Creatures, which are good,
scil: for food, and not to be refused.

7. Argument: If one part of the Decree may be put to an end, then we may
without sin so conclude of the rest, that is not clearly moral. But one part
is put to an end, the forbidding of eating Idols meat, 1 Cor: 10.27, 29. Ergo.

R: 1. The Major is not universally true, seeing that in one and the same
Moral Commandment often one part may be altered, and yet the rest continue: as
in the Doctrine of Sabbath, the day is changed, the duty remains.

But 2. The Minor is false in the particular alleged, because the Decree
concerning Idols meat lasted as yet above five and thirty years after the
Epistle to Timothy was written, nay after the total destruction of Jerusalem
by Vespasian and Titus, when there was hardly a Jew seen, that might be
offended: even to the latter days of St. John, when the book of Revelation was
written, and the Gospel of Christ dispersed through the whole world For even
then the holy Ghost found sault with the Churches of Pergamus, and Thyatira,
for eating things sacrificed to Idols. Revel. 2.14.20. Therefore it cannot be
proved, that the Apostle should have abrogated that part of the Decree so many
years before, in this Epistle.

3. And to answer to the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 10.27. there were two sorts of
Idols meat; One sort was that part of the sacrifice which was not only offered
to their false gods, but eaten also at the Idols feasts, in the Idols Temples:
The other sort was a portion of those sacrifices, which was left, and did
belong to the Priest, and either sold in shambles, or eaten in private houses.
The first sort of Idols meat was absolutely forbidden to Christians, which
durst not so much, as be present at such feasts and sacrifices. The other sort
of Idols meat Christians might eat, if they were invited by Gentiles to their
private houses; or if they bought it in the shambles, and did eat it at home.
The Decree does most properly speak of the first sort; and the Apostle in 1
Cor. 10. of the second sort. The reason is, because that Idols meat, that was
bought in shambles, and brought home to their private houses, was not sold nor
eaten, as a sacrifice, but as ordinary meat, and so returned to his former
nature again, and became common food, as it was before the sacrifice; or as any
other meat, that was sold in shambles publicly: not unlike (if it be lawful
to compare holy things with unholy) to the bread and wine in the Lords Supper,
which is holy bread, and holy wine during the administration of the Sacrament,
but what is left after it, returns to his common Nature, and use, and may be
eaten, or drunk, of children, Heathen, Turks, Jews, and all men without sin.

4. We might as well draw an argument by such an argumentation, that the Decree
was abolished in regard of Fornication, as well as of Blood. For if we may
argue from the abolishing of one part of the Decree, to the abolishing of two
other parts of the same Decree; then we may with a better consequence argue
from the abolishing of the three first particulars of the Decree, Idols meat,
Blood, and strangled; to the abolishing of the fourth particular, which is
Fornication. But we do deny, that the Decree was abolished in regard of
Fornication, and so neither in the rest.

Obj: But Idols meat might also be eaten in the Idols Temple, 1 Cor: 8.9, 10.
where we find the Believer sitting in the Idols Temple, and yet eating with a
good conscience, if he do not abuse his liberty. Ergo the Decree was in regard
of both sorts of Idols meat abolished.

R: 1. The Apostle speaks of sitting in the Idols Temple, not by way of
approbation, or permission, but by way of reproof, as of a thing altogether
unlawful, so Beza says upon the place: Pr^ponit exemplum accubitus in
Idolorum templo: quod factum Corinthii male inter res medias numerabant, cum
simpliciter sit prohibitum, ob loci circumstantiam, etiam cessante offendiculo,
etc. The same he repeateth in diverse places, and amongst the rest, upon Rom:
14.6. The same, says Calvin, and shows in his Comment upon 1. Cor. 10. that it
is no less then Idolatry, to eat Idols meats in the Holy Temple: and that such
persons have communion with Devils, etc. And as I remember, if not all, surely
most of the Fathers, and Divines are of this opinion, that it is a sin in it
self, to sit and eat Idols meat in an Idols Temple. 2. And if the contrary were
true, and the thing lawful, then it would be much more lawful to go into
Popish Churches, and to hear a Mass, or to see their Idolatry, when the
Corinthians might not only be present and see, but partake of their sacrifices,
which Calvin says, could not be done without yielding to some rites and
ceremonies used in honor of Idols, and false Gods; a thing utterly unlawful
in it self, and forbidden. Exodus 23.24. Deuteronomy. 7.25, 26. and in many places
more. But our Divines do absolutely deny it to be lawful to go to hear a
Mass, etc. Ergo much more to partake of Idols meat. And thus much concerning
the Arguments that are brought in against, and for the eating of Blood. Our
duty is, to prove all things, and to keep that, which is good.

For a conclusion, seeing there are three sorts of opinions about this
question; The first accounting it absolutely unlawful; the second absolutely
lawful; the third doubting of it; Let us speak a word to every one of them; to
the First a word of confirmation, to the Second a word of conviction; to the
Third a word of caution; to show them all, that by Gods Law they ought to
abstain from Blood.

1. To such, as account the eating of Blood absolutely unlawful:

Where we have the express, literal word of God for a duty, before, under,
and after the Law, without any clear and evident repealing or abrogation of it,
there we may safely rest upon, submit unto, and frame our practice according to
it, rather then where we have no word of God, but only uncertain probabilities,
and conceits of men.

Now we have the express, literal word of God, before, under, and after the
Law, against eating of Blood, without any known repealing or abrogation of it;
when nothing can be satisfactorily alleged out of the express word of God,
for the lawfulness of it; nay not so much, as any probability, but only the
opinion and conceit of Men.

Ergo we may rest safely upon, submit unto, and frame our practice according to
this Truth, that is unlawful to eat Blood.

2. To those, that account eating of Blood absolutely lawful.

Where there is an evident scandal given to the Brethren, by the eating of any
thing lawful, indifferent, doubtful, there we are bound to abstain rather
from the use of it, then to receive it with offense. Rom: 4.21.

Now there is an evident offense given to many brethren, by eating of Blood.

Ergo they are bound in conscience to abstain from it, to avoid offense.

3. To such, as doubt of it, whether it be lawful or not:

Whasoever is not done in faith, is sin, Romans 14.23. that is, whatsoever a man
does, being not fully persuaded and convinced in his conscience, upon good
grounds, of the lawfulness of it, that is sin to him. Now whosoever eats
Blood doubting, whether he may eat it or not, does not eat it in faith. Ergo it
is sin in and to him.

It is no sin in us if we abstain from Blood: It may be a sin to us, if we eat
Blood. The safest way, the best way: He that makes no conscience in little
things, will hardly do it in greater. The Lord give us grace to practice the
Apostles rule, which he gives, 1 These: 5.22.

Abstain from all appearance of evil.

FINIS.

