A New MAP OF ENGLAND. OR, Forty six QUAERIES.

By I. B.

Contra publicos bostes, and majestatis reos omnis homo miles est, says
Tertullian. Jus and aequitas vincula civitatum. Cic. LONDON, Printed in the
Year, MDCLIX.

I. WHether when any sober person prayed for the late Junto, it was not upon
the same reason as the old Woman of S^racuse prayed for the long life of the
Tyrant Dionysius, lest the Devil should come next.

II. Whether Aristotle spoke right, Arist. pol. lib. 5. cap. 10.
that all Tyrants have been first Generals and Captains for the People, under
pretense of vindicating, or defending their Liberties.

III. Whether that was not the chiefest reason that the Rump had to keep the
Generalship in their own hands.

IV. Whether they are not justly retaliated to be so often stripped of their
usurped Authority, since they as often subverted the Government, under pretense
of the liberty of the people, and the Chimera of the (Good old Cause) that they
might invade that liberty themselves.

V. Whether if the Army should purge the Rump of all the ill humors, they
would not reduce it to a Nonentity, or at least to make good the words of the
Prophet Elishah.

VI. Whether the Junto were not mistaken in their Plot to impoverish the people
by Taxes, Excise, Decimations, etc. (that they might want power if they had a
will to shake off their Egyptian Bondage) since they paid part of those
Levies to the noble Army, who thereby had power as well as honesty to discharge
from the great trouble of getting Estates.

VII. Whether the Army has not dealt very hard with them to turn them to Grass
in so unseasonable a time.

VIII. Whether Nebuchadnezar's Judgment that has befalne our Hogen-Mogen State
were not for the same sins, if not greater.

IX. Whether Dr. Holmes ought not to be punished by the Marshal-law, for
wresting and torturing the Scripture to prove the Junto to be a lawful
Government; And that it was their Providence, and not the Valor of the Army
vanquished those that so valiantly ran away at Chester.

X. Whether Dr. Holmes married the Parliament (as he called it) and the Army by
the Common Prayer, since it is so soon become uneffectual.

XI. Whether they be divorsed a mensa and thoro, or, a vinculo matrimonii.

XII. Whether it be not most advantageous that they be divorced a vinculo
matrimonii causa frigiditatis (their Charity being grown so cold) least they
come once more to usurp by the Title of Dower; since all their other Titles
will not hold water.

XIII. Whether the Army ought not for the good of the Public to abate the
place called the House of Commons, lest those running Foxes steal once more
into their Den.

XIV. Whether those Members do intend to rise at the second Resurrection,
having risen twice already.

XV. Whether the poor Cavaliers may not justly call that House a Den of Thieves.

XVI. Whether the Presbyterians might not to call the Speakers Chair the Stool
of repentance.

XVII. Whether Mr. H. M. ought not to have the pre-eminence to name it the
Bawdy House (being generally in fashion among the best Saints.)

XVIII. Whether Sir H. V. ought to be countenanced to call it the House of
prayer (but rather the Preaching house.)

XIX. Whether the Army are not bound to sell the Members of the Rump at the
cheaper rate then in Fifty three, lest they can find no other Customer beside
the Devil.

XX. Whether it will not be convenient to except M. S. from Sale, and to give
him liberty to set up Shop, having no other Employment now, to sell the rest of
his fellow Members.

XXI. Whether it be not fit for his better encouragement to prohibit any other
beside himself to utter any of them.

XXII. Whether such a Grant be a Monopoly.

XXIII. Whether it be not Darcy and Allens Case in point, the Members of the
Junto being as much the bane of a Commonwealth, the Nurserie of Rogues, and
the destruction of great Estates, as the making and uttering of Cards can
possibly be.

XXIV. Whether the Judges of the Common Law will be competent Judges of the
Cause, since M. S. babled so much against the Law which he did not understand.

XXV. Whether M. S. ought not to be Indicted of wilful Murder, upon the
Statute of Stabbing, being credibly reported that he killed Mr. Attorney
Prideaux with his sharp words and threats of refunding.

XXVI. Whether those Sycophants that fauned so much on the Infant Commonwealth
(be not filii terrae) since the Army will not own them, nor give them leave
once more to turn their threadbare Coats.

XXVII. Whether the Cavaliers, or M. Jo. Can be now under the greater Curse.

XXVIII. Whether the Saints in Southwark did not perform their promise in their
Addresses to the Parliament, That they would live and die with them, when a
thousand of them so valiantly appeared in Arms, and dispersed themselves at the
sight of 20 Redcoats.

XXIX. Whether when they said, That they would live and die with the Junto,
that they did intend to live and die like them, viz. Knaves, Hypocrites and
Rebels; since they construe Scripture always figuratively to serve their own
turns.

XXX. Whether we may not justly cry out with the Roman Host when Narcissus came
into the Tribunal of Plautius, Io Saturnalia? since so many Servants in these
days have put on the Habits of their Masters.

XXXI Whether Dr. Owen's Infant Commonwealth was not an Anabaptist, since he
nor Mr. Harrington could give it a Name.

XXXII. Whether Dr. Owen ought not to unswadle the Infant Commonwealth, and
lick him clean, for it is feared by many wise men that it is all bes --.

XXXIII. Whether his Infant has not cracked his crown against the Cradle, since
he is become so addle headed.

XXXIV. Whether it be not fit that Dr. Owen be made the Infant Commonwealths
Tutor during its Minority.

XXXV. Whether Mr. Harrington is studying Monarchy, or an Aristocracy now,
since his Democratical Government took no effect.

XXXVI. Whether he did not take great pains to no purpose.

XXXVII. Whether the Members that so highly opposed the Engagement against a
Monarchy, because Christ was suddenly to Reign personally upon earth, did not
intend one of the Members of the Army.

XXXVIII. Whether Sir A. H. zeal for a Commonwealth be not quite set on fire
in this great day of trial.

XXXIX. Whether he would not willingly resign his Bishopric to be a King,
notwithstanding he is a zealous Hogen Mogen man.

XL. Whether Mr. Peter's was not really asleep when he made his Dream, or
whether it be his own or no, being it contains so much truth.

XLI. Whether then it ought not to be admitted for a Proverb, viz. That Knaves
and mad men do speak truth as well as Children and Fools.

XLII. Whether Mr. Baxter be within the equity of the second Proposal of the
Army to the last Junto, for charging Sir H.V. with Jesuitism (causlesly and
groundlesly) though Sir H. be no Member of the Army.

XLIII. Whether the Army would not purchase eternal honor, and the general
Love of the People, If they would (now while it lies in their power) remit
those Noblemen and Gentry that have offended against none besides those that
were both the Armies and the Nations Scourge.

XLIV. Whether those Gentlemen, and the rest of the Nation would not have
omitted such a Concurrence, in defense of the Laws, Privileges of Parliament,
and liberty of the people, if the Army had kept their Authority in their own
hands, and not deputed those that made a breach of all, under the sacred Name
of a free Parliament.

XLV. Whether it be not a Duty Incumbent on each individual Member of the Army
(which they owe both to God and Man) to settle such a Government (upon the
Basis of Religion and Law) that consists with the Genius of the greater and
most considerable number of the people, yea, and upon such a Person in whom
Right, Love of the People, and Law do Concenter, that we be no longer carried
away like an empty Cloud, with the Whirlwind of particular men's Ambitions and
Interests; more especially since a settled Religion, Law, Liberty of the People,
and Privileges of Parliament wholly depended on it.

XLVI. Whether if the Army seriously endeavor such a settlement, they will not
be more happy; more certain of their Pay, and due encouragement, and then may
justly claim the Title of a GLORIOUS ARMY.

FINIS.

