THE Perfect and Experienced FARRIER.

Being necessary for all Gentlemen-Troopers, Farmers, Farriers, Carriers,
Carmen, Coach-men, and Horse-coursers, etc. Showing a most Exact, easy and
Speedy way of Curing all Sorances and Diseases incident to Horses (and other
Cattle.) Wherein is showed the true Anatomy and Inside of a Horse, with his
Intrailes, Sinews and number of Bones, and Veins necessary for Blood-letting.

Never before Published.

Written by ROBERT BARRET of Esborne in Sussex, and Published for the good of
his Country.

medical examination of a horse

LONDON Printed by T. Fawcet, for Fr. Coals, dwelling at the Lamb in the
Old Bailey, 1660.

The true Anatomy and Inside of a Horse.


TO THE READER,
Gentle Reader,
MAny Books have been published concerning Horsmanship, and the Curing of such
Diseases, as commonly happen to that Beast, but I have found that many of their
works are mere Collections out of others, and not their own practice, so
that they scarcely know the right office of any member, but rash by prescribe
they know not what, as being not able to judge truly of the difference between
one Sorance and another. My Advertisement to you therefore is, that You would
truly observe every thing which I prescribe, and not run after each new
Invention, that is only applauded, because it is pollisht over with fine
Phrases, which I want to set forth my work withal; for all the Authors or
Eloquence that I have to persuade you is my own Practice and Experience: which
that You may understand, I have here placed the proportion of a Horse, with the
Letter B, upon every outward Vein where You ought to let Blood, explaining
each Sorance, and the Cure thereof, where I begin with a deformed member in the
Head, and so preceed to the rest in order, and from the outward Grievances
refer You to the inward hereafter following.



THE Perfect and Experienced FARRIER. SHOWING A most Exact, easy and speedy
way of Curing all Sorances and Diseases incident to Horses.
ALave-eard Horse is unseemly, yet the Member is according to the Breed of the
Horse, but notwithstanding many of them do prove very good for Service;
therefore I have thought fit to prescribe you a way how to set and make his
Ears stand and be as complete as any other Horses ears be. First, take a
pair of Sheares and pare his Ears so small as you desire, and then cut away
the skin between his ears, and with a drawing hot Iron sear the Sinew
between the Head and the Ear, until it begin to look yellow, which done,
you may annoint the Sore with Hog's Grease and Butter, and Honey boiled
together, and then put a flat string over his Ears to keep them as you desire
to have them stand, washing the Sore once in two days with white Wine vinegar,
and Salt warmed together; and laying it on the salve with a feather gently,
that you make not the Horse wild and fearful about the head; for I have
known many Horses spoiled by being too hasty with them: Wherefore I advise you
to deal gently and quietly at all times, and upon all occasions throughout
every Cure that you take in hand.

If the Horse eyes be lanke or thick, then look that his Ey-teeth be not
grieved, or that the Wolves teeth trouble him not: if they do, pull them out,
and let him blood under the eye and in the nose with a naule, and anoint his
eyes with the fat of a fresh Eele. Proved.

And if he have a Canker, take hog's grease, roch-allum, white copresse, bole
armoniacke, and temper them together, until they be so mixed that you cannot
discern the one from the other, and put some of the salve into the eye once in
two days, and this serves for any speck or pin or wefe: and if the Haw be
rank cut it out, and spirt in wine or beer, and it will do well again.
Proved.

For the Canker in the nose, take Whitewine vinegat, white copresse, roch
alum, sage leaves, woodbine leaves, and coltsfoot, then boil them together,
and streine the water, dressing the Canker once a day for two days, and
afterward but once in two days: this will also cure the Canker in the mouth,
or any other part, so that you put in some Touchwood leaves into the same with
a little honey. Proved.

The Lampers are to be cut or burned or salted, and the Flapes or Bags are the
like, but it is good to let blood in the third grise in the mouth, before you
salt him.

The Fives are hard round swellings between the jaw and the neeke under the
Ears. For the Cure of which, you shall first launch the skin a little against
the Kirnell, and then sear the Kirnoll with a small hot Iron, until it begins
to look yellow, and then annoint it with oil of Camomile once in two days
until it be whole, but always let him blood in the neck on both sides, and
after he is whole, you may make a charge of Pitch and Rosin, bolearmoniacke,
Masticke, and lay it on with Flocks, letting it lie until it fall away of it
self, and then annoynting it once a week with a little hogs grease, camomile,
and smalledge boiled together; which will serve for any swelling about the
head, if it be anointed once a day, and will either ripen the sore, or cause
the Swelling to vanish away.

The Gare lies in the throat, and may appear any where about the head or
breast, but if it appear in the breast, we call it Anticor; these Sorances come
suddenly, and are cured alike; First launch the skin, and then fley it so
far as the swelling goes, and with a warm Iron sear the swelling or gelly,
but not the skin, rubbing the place well with white wood ashes and bay salt:
and fear not the Cure if he live but twelve hours after: and then you must
provide some oil of Turpentine, and liquor the place where it is swelled: then
may you take this Drink, one pint of Treakle, and a pint of sack, a spoonful
of the powder of bay berries, and a spoonful of Turmericke, and boil these
together, and give it the Horse to drink, and it will drive the gellid humors
out, and the heat of the fire; the ashes and salt likewise will draw them ou
ward, and so cure him. Provel.

The Shoulder-sprained, is when he trailes his toe on the ground, and carries
it wide from his body, and if he prick his toe forward, then it is a sign
that he may be Shoulder-pitched, which is easily seen; for if he be much
lower and close in the top of one shoulder then the other, he is
Shoulder-pitched, and then you must tie his forelegs together, and so draw him
upon some beam* by which means his shoulder may come in his place again:
which done, you shall let him blood in the plate-veine, and put in a rowell and
blow his shoulder, annoynting it with oil of spike, nerveoyle, and hog's grease
beaten together, and if it be but sprained, then you need but let him blood in
the platevaine, and annoint him, and he will do well again in 12 days, if
not, then rowel him as before expressed.

The Parsie is a swelling in any part of the body, and breaks out with knobs,
which is thus cured, let him blood in those veins next the place infected, and
take black soap, tar, bay salt, and white copresse, and mix them together
as you use them, and annoint the places well once in two days, and it will
help him at three times dressing, but it is good to launch the knobs that be
soft, and let out the filth.

The Splint is apparent to every man, and is thus cured, Launch the skin
through so long as the Splint goes, and when you shall see the knob, take your
drawing Iron red hot, and sear the knob till it begin to look yellow, and
then lay a Charge of pitch and rosin, bole-armoniacke, masticke, and sanguis
draconis boiled together, and some Flocks of the same color, letting it lie
until it fall away of it self, and then annoint the place with oil of
turpentine once in two days, until it be whole, and the hair will come
again, and it will be plain, and no ey-sore, but a small race like a cut. But
if it chance to ketch any grit or dirt, then wash it with wine vinegar,
roch-allum, and butter, launch two holes, one above the Splint, and one beneath
and open the skin so far as the knob goes, and put in the root of
Bares-foot, and let it stay in five days, anointing it with butter once a day.

The Ring-bones are apparent, and the Cure is, if they be newly come, take up
the Shackle veins on both sides of the foot, and with a Fleame prick the
swelled places, so as they may bleed, then boiling hot, lay the Charge
rehearsed for the Splint: but if the swelling be big, you must open the foot,
and draw the swelling with a hot Iron, and annoint the place with Tar and
Turpentine boiled together, when the Charge falls away, and not before. And
if you think that the Horse is a little founderd, or hoof bound, then you may
let him blood in the toe veins, and stop his feet with Tar, Turpentine, and
Hog's Grease with some Hemlockes or Arse-mart in it, boiled together seething
hot, and renew it once in two days.

The Quiter-bone is an Ulcer in the foot, which runs at a little hole with
white matter, and in the bottom of the hole there lies a gristle like a bone,
therefore search it to the bottom, and fill the hole with Verdegrease, letting
it remain so three days, then take it out, and if you see that it is not come
clean away, stop the hole again with the same, and take away the hoof as
far as you see it hollow, and wrap the sore with brown paper dipped in
tar, turpentine, and hog's grease beaten together after the bone is come away
until it be whole.

The Spraine of the Back-Sinew is a very evil thing, yet take the oil of
Spike, Venice turpentine, Comfry and Tu^som leaves, boil them together, and
strain the ointment, then anoint the place with the fame once in two days
for nine days, and most commonly this will help, but if it do not, you must
let him blood, and lay a Charge upon it, as is showed in the Splint, but if his
leg swell, it will be good to take up the Shanke vein; a little above the
knee, and salt it, and that will assuage the swelling.

The Colts-evill is easily known, for that comes but in winter, by cold moist
humors, therefore ride him into the water once a day, and that will cure him,
but if he have his stones beaten by hard riding, or if they chance to swell by
some strain which also may happen by covering a Mare, I advise you to take
oil of Roses, Smallage, the herb called Rosa solis, which you shall find in
boggy grounds, boil them in white wine vinegar and bath the swelling with it,
and it will help the horse with letting blood on the spur-veines and the neck,
or you may launch the Horses sheath if need be for it may do good if it be
much swelled.

FOr Wounds or Pricks in general, take Cats grease, Venice turpentine,
Camomile, Tutsom leaves, Coltsfoot, Hogs grease, Roch-allum, boil them
together, and strain them, and keep this Salve always by you; for it is good
for any cut or prick; but you must remember always first to wash the sore
with white wine vinegar and butter warm. This is a proved salve.

For the Impostume in the head you must take the juice of Willowes, the juice
of Camomile, the juice of a Pomegran^t, and some Linseed oil, boil these
together, and milke-warme put it into the ears, and either stop them close, or
sow them together for the space of twelve days: this also helps the worm in
the head, or any Deafness, it opens the pores, and is a present remedy for
any Giddiness in the head.

A very good Oil to ripen any kind of Swelling or Knobs or Wennes. Take
Linseed, or Hempseed, Pelletory, Smallage, Camomile, the roots of Lillies,
Hemlocks, Speare-grasse, Garlic, Bears foot, Bores-grease or Hogs grease,
oil of Spike, and Pigeons dung; boil all these well together, so as they be
like a Plaster, then lay it on the wen or swelling once a day, for three days
space, and it will break; if not, launch it through the skin, for it will be
ripe; then wash out all the filth with white wine vinegar and roch-allum
together warm, annoynting it with oil of turpentine and hog's grease, until
it be whole. This O^le may be used only to such swellings as are old and hard;
for it will ripen any thing that it is laid unto, if it be not so hard as a
bone.

The Fistula every man knows, but few can cure it, yet by this Medicine, as is
well known, I have healed many; which is thus to be applied: Take a pint of
the best white wine vinegar, a penniworth of roch-allum, an half penniworth of
green copresse, a penniworth of honey, and a quarter of a pound of Dogsgrease,
boil them together, until the copresse be dissolved, and open the Fistula on
both sides the maine, and keep the crest whole if you can; then wash the sore
with this water once in two days, and if there be any bone corrupted it will
scale it, and heal the sore. pr.

This will also serve for the Pole-evill as well as any Medicine else, with a
little turpentine, hog's grease, colts-soot, and touchwood leaves boiled
together, and strained clear, that there be nothing in it; for I forbid all
powders and lime that I have seen used, but no reason for it, save only
through ignorance and use, no washing with chamber lie, nor any other water,
but dry the sore well with a soft linen rag, or a piece of sponge, and then
wash the sore with the water according as is directed, but use not your salve
till it have almost done running.

If your Horse be Wrenched on the loins or back, then take two pair of
Pastornes, and tie all his four legs together, then lay him upon good store of
straw, and clap a sheepe-skin new taken from the sheep and dipped in brine upon
his back, keeping it so for twelve days; then let him st^nd up, and if you
stay him with ropes that he fall not, he may do well: but cut off three
joints of his tail, and lay a Charge of Pitch, Rosin, and Bole armoniacke,
good and thick upon his back, and so let it lie till it fall away.

The Falling of the hair is either with Worms, or with the Mange; if it be
with Worms, let him blood in the tail vein, and wash his tail, or maine,
with stronglye and bay salt; but if it be the Mange, then must you take black
soap, tar, brimstone, bay salt, hog's grease, and a little Tobacco boiled well
together, and after that you have shaved off the scurfe, then anoint the Horse
with it good and warm once or twice at the most, and it will skale four days
after, then may you anoint him with hog's grease, and this will heal him with
letting blood.

The Horse that is Stisted cannot gather up his leg, but trailes his toe on the
ground: the Cure is thus, Put in the bone, and take up the skin with a pair of
pinsers, and burn a hole through it, anointing the place well with comfrey and
butter boiled together, then side-span the other legs for three days, and this
will cure him; but if he be bruised or strained, let him blood on the haunch
vein, and blow and rowell the Horse, and anoint him with hogs grease and oil
of Spike beaten together, and warm it in with some warm Iron.

The Spavin is a Bunch in the pan of the Hocke; if it be soft, we call it a
Blood-Spavin, if hard, a Bone-Spavin; the cure for the Blood-Spavin is, Take up
the vein, and draw the vein out, if the Spavin be big, at the nether place
that you open, and salt the vein well, then lay on a Charge of pitch, rosin,
bole-armoniacke, masticke, and sanguis draconis, boiled all together, with some
Flocks; but if be a Bone-Spavin, you must lay a corasure to it, made of
Euforbium, Cantharides, a little Mercury, white wine vinegar and oil of Spike
beaten together: but shave off half the skin so far as the bunch goes,
and then clap it on like a plaster, tying up his head for the space of three
hours, and when it comes off two days after anoint it with a little butter,
and draw it with a hot Iron, then lay on the Charge before spoken of, letting
it lie till it fall away of it self, which done, you must anoint it once in
two days till it be whole; this will cure without fail: but if you lay the
corasure on, you must not work the Horse, nor let him come in water for ten
days.

The Curb lies under the Hocke, therefore you must prick it with a Fleame,
and when it has bled well, then draw small lines with your hot Iron, like a
broad arrows head and lay the same Charge as you do for the Splint.

The Puffing lies like wind in the gambrell place above the Hocke, and if you
let him blood in the thigh vein, laying the same Charge unto it as is
prescribed for the Curb, and fire him as you do the same, it is a present
remedy.

Malanders and Selenders lie in the bout of the knee* and in the Ham behind:
this Sorance is always scabbed, and the more you rub it, the worse it is, if
you take not the right course; therefore I advise you to shave all the scurfe
off his legs, so far as it goes, with a hot Iron, but take heed that the
Iron be not too hot, but so as it may scald the scurfe off; and then take a
little black soap, and bay salt, and anoint the place with it once in two
days for a week, and then take soap, and butter, and bole armoniacke, mixed
well together, and anoint the place until it be whole.

The Tent in a Horses leg, is when the nutriment of the sinews falls under the
f^ter lock, which will make a Horse lame; it is big and soft, and must be thus
cured: Strike it with a Fleame in the middle of the soft place, and it will
spout out like the white of an egg, then put a little salt and anoint all the
feter-lock with a salve made of Comfrey, tursome leaves, and butter, giving him
twelve days rest, and then you may use him again.

Wind galls are above the Fetter-locke, and they are not to be opened any
where, but as the Tent is; foregarter the Horse with a string, and lap the leg
from the knee or hocke downward, for this Sorance belongs to all four legs,
and they are cured all alike: and you shall see the Wind-galls come into the
same place that the Tent does, and the same receipt serves; if not, then you
must draw with a hot Iron small races, croswaies, on both sides of the legs,
and lay the Charge rehearsed for the Splint and Spavin, and it will cure him.

The Pains is an evil humor in the body, therefore it is good to trot your
Horse till he begin to sweat, then let him blood on both sides of the neck,
and take up the haunch veins, and give the same drink that is prescribed for
the Liver and Spleen, washing his legs once in two days with this water
compounded of white Wine vinegar, white copresse, green copresse, brimstone,
butter, and bay salt boiled together, and afterward annoint it with cream.

A Horse may be Founderd diverse ways: either in the feet, or in the legs, or
in the body; if he be founderd in the body, his hair will stare, and if you
strike him on his ribs, they will sound like an empty barrel, and he will go
crowdling all four together, and when he is too sore heated, and cool too
suddenly, then he will be as though his back were broke, and cannot stand, and
then he is most commonly past cure: but if he can stand and go, then make a
Charge of oil of Spike, pigeons dung, and salt, boiled together, and rub it
into his back and loins, covering him with a new Sheep skin with the wool
upon it warm, and make a drink of Sack, or strong ale, Isop, mallows,
smallage, fennel, some of a Brionetree-root, treakle, honey, tar, goose
grease, or sine lard, boil all these together, and give it the Horse to drink
once a day for three days, and in the afternoones a Mesh of malt, and let him
blood in the neck, legs, haunch veins, and tail, each place a little: If he
be founderd in the feet, pare them thin, and let them bleed in the toes well,
then stop up his feet with hog's grease, and wheat bran, and anoint them with
tar, turpentine, hemlocks, and nettles boiled together, and this will cure
him.

A good way to stanch blood in any part. If the Horse bleed after letting blood
in any vein, you may take a stick and cleave it half way, so as it may clip
the skin together, and put a little bole-armoniacke between for a while, and
it will stay; or if the wound be big, you may take some of the Horses own dung
and salt mingled together, and bind it to the wound, letting it lie for the
space of twelve hours after, and then there is no danger; or you may take
nettles and salt beaten together, or the Soot or scraping of the out side of a
kettle, or hogs-dung, for any of all these things will stay bleeding.

A very good Medicine for the Biting of a Mad dog. First, get some Sweet-brier
tree bark, and betonie, beaten to powder, and runnning water and bay salt
boiled together, and give it the Horse, or Sheep, or Dog, or Hog to drink,
and wash the place well that is bit with the water good and hot; and this will
help, if you let blood in the Roof of the mouth. Proved.

If a Horse, or any other Beast be stung or bitten with an Adder, Snake, or any
kind of venomous creature, you may take new milk, and wash the place and then
take rotten eggs, soot, fresh butter, turpentine, bay salt, and
bole-armoniacke, beaten small and mingled well together, then launch the place,
and annoint it with the salve, giving your Horse, or other beast, wine and
treakle lukewarm to drink: and when the venom is out, annoint the place
with Salet oil and turpentine beaten together, once in two days, until it be
whole.

A Re-advertisement to the Reader.
Gentle Reader.
SOme have writ that a Horse has no Brain, nor Milt, which I deny; Others
have affirmed, that a Horse may have the Mourning of the Chine, which I deny
also; for the Chine and Brain join together: And if the Brain should wast,
the Horse cannot live. For this cause, and to prevent the like error, from the
outward Sorances and Diseases commonly incident to Horses (whereof I have
before treated, and explained their several Cures) I proceed to the Inward
Grievances, and their Remedies: For the more plain and easy understanding of
which, I have laid open every part, Bone, or Sinew, belonging to a Horse, so
that every man, though but of a mean capacity, may both find out the cause of
any Disease, and the way to Cure it, by those Medicines which I have here
prescribed, and by mine own Expeience often proved, being such things as with
ease are commonly to be had in most Gardens, or almost in every Grocers and
Apothecaries Shop. And now l advise you to be very careful in making a true
compound of every Drink or Medicine which you shall have occasion to use, both
for your own profit and my credit; for I have left the quantity to your own
discretion, that you may apply it according to the constitution of your Horses
body, since some are able to bear far more then others. As also, although
many be fearful to let Blood at some times, yet I wish you upon any great
occasion to defer no time at all, but to do it speedily, otherwise I hold it
fit to observe the Moon, the temper of the air, and time of the day; for a
temperate Air is very good to undertake any Cure in, either inward or outward.
And so for your instructions by the Anatomy here prefixed (for it is necessary
that every Farrier should know not only the office, but the number of all the
Bones and smallest gristles or Sinews in every part of the Horse) I have laid
open the Horse, and placed the letter A, over his Head, which shows* how the
Eyes hang to the Brains; as as when he is living (with other letters to
describe the Entrails, and other members as they lie in order in the Horse.)

So as A signifies the Eyes, B signifies the Brain, C C the Teeth, D the
Windpipe, E the Gullet, F F the Lights, G the Heart, H the Liver, I the Milt, K
the Maw, L the Guts, M the Kidneys, N the Spleen, O the Bladder, P the Dock, Q
the Gall, R R the Midriffe.

As also I have set figures upon every joint, according to the number of the
Bones therein contained;

As for Example.

The Figure of 5. next to the Brain, specifies five Bones in the Head and the
two figures of 20. upon each side of the Head, so many Teeth: and so of the
rest according to their places; for the number of Sinews likewise, I have
placed the figures on the outside of the Horse, with the letter S. to
distinguish them from the Bones. And thus wishing thee good success in all the
Cures that you take in hand, I rest

Your Friend, R. B.

The true Anatomy and Inside of a Horse.
diagram of the anatomy of a horse

FIrst, I find that in the Head there breed many Sicknesses, as the Falling
evil, the Staggers, the Sleeping evil, the Frenzy, the Pofie, and
Giddiness: besides most Farriers say, that the Moone-eyes are a sore Disease
in the Head.

The Falling evil is a stopping of the spirits, veins, arteries, and pores,
depriving the Horse of his sense, as it does a man, so that he lies as it were
dead for a time, yet he may be thus cured. Let him blood on both sides of the
neck, and in the mouth, and in the nose, then take oil of turpentine, ale
cost, fennel, camomile, and pionie roots boiled in oil, then strain it, and
put the oil in his ears, and either sow or tie them, that it come not out:
and boil the same herb in strong ale giving it the Horse to drink three
mornings, and it will help him: This is also good for Giddiness, or the
Palsy, or any Quivering or shaking. proved.

The Staggers is a Plurisie of blood thorow-out the whole body, and infumes the
senses of the Horse, so that he can neither stand nor go without staggering,
his feeling is taken away, his sight grows dim, and he will run against
walls and hedges, staying himself on his head; and if he be far gone, he
will sleep and start as though he were in a dream: the Cure whereof, as I
have found by experience, is thus. Let him blood in the neck, nose, eyes, and
mouth, and if you see that he looks yellow, then it is a sign that the
Yellowes are come upon him too, therefore to use the cure for both it is not
amiss: then if his ears be cold, take aquavitae and salt, and put it into
his ears, and tie them for twelve hours; but if you can get no aquavitae, take
water and salt, which will do well, then launch the skin in his forehead,
and open it two inches, and put in garlic, and annoint the outside with hogs
grease; which done, you must make a Drink for him of Tansie, turmerick, long
pepper, grains, aniseed, liquorish, and strong ale, boiled well together, and
milk warm give it the horse stirring him up and down a good space; and if he
live but six hours after his dressing there is likely no danger: and then you
must give him a Mesh of malt twice a day, for four or five days after. This
serves for the Staggers and Yellowes both, if you let him blood in the tail
three days after you have blooded him in the forepart. proved.

The Sleeping evil is an infection of the blood, and black choler taken by
eating mildew'd feeding, for the horse will scowre, and hang down his head,
sleeping in the manger, and his mouth will be hot as fire, therefore you shall
take blood from him in the nose, and under the eyes, and mouth, in the nose
once in two days for a week with a naule, and make a Drink of bayberries,
grains, mustard seed, marigold seed, anniseeds, liquorish, some treakle,
butter, and turmericke, boiled together in Beer or ale, and give it the horse
to drink milke-warme, and it will cure him. proved.

A Horse that is Taken, or as some call it Frenzy, sor they differ not much at
the first, and he stands still not greatly willing to move nor to eat nor
drink, but of a sudden he will gape and bite, and to the Farriers judgment
is no foul horse; the cure of this disease is thus: cord the horse about the
neck, and the veins under the ears will rise, then let them blood in the
nose, and two days after in the haunch veins, and tail, and make this Drink
with mallows, smallage, fennel, parsley, bay berries, grains, and treakle,
boil them in beer or ale, and give it him milkwarme, then put some of that
oil rehearsed in the Falling evil into his ears. This is a good way and
proved.

The Posie is a cold congealed humor in the head, and appears to me, as it
were a settling of choler in the pores, it is known by the horses eyes running
yellow goul, and underneath or within the ball of the eye you shall see at
certain times of the moon as it were yellow matter, and then some Farriers
say that he is Moone-ey'd; true it is; for till the grief be cured, the horse
will be so, and will not thrive because he sleeps in pain: for the cure
whereof, you shall take blood under his eyes, and in the nose, and palla^ of
the mouth, and neck, perfuming his head with frankincense, brimstone, and
tobacco, upon coals, and put into his ears oil of Rue, and oil of camomile,
beaten together, then give him the same drink as you do for the
Sleeping-evill, and this will cure him, being used every morning for five
mornings.

The Canker in the mouth is when the lips and tongue is full of blisters, and
raw: it comes by evil seed, as gritty hay, or raw provender, or eating among
worms castings, or licking earth: the cure is thus; make a Drink of Rue,
Isop, brimstone, saven, roch-allum, and bole-armoniacke, boiled well together,
in Beer, and give it the horse, then let him blood in the roof of the mouth,
and the next morning wash his mouth with white wine vinegar, roch alum, and
salt once, and this will cure him. Proved.

Of the Glanders, Strangullion, and mourning of the Chine. I find that the
Strangles at the first is a heat and a cold congealed in young horses, having
moist bodies, and then it grows to incarnat and break in matter, and the
kirnells under the horses tongue between the jaws will swell; and then if it
break and vanish away within a reasonable time by such meats and drinks as I
have prescribed in the outward Sorances, it may do well: but if not, then it
is the Glanders, or the Mourning of the Chine, as some call it, but I think it
may more fitly be called the Consumption of the Lights, for I for my part could
never find it otherwise: therefore according to my experience I will prescribe
the best remedy that ever I could find. Take oil of turpentine, oil of
turmericke, fine hogs lard, goose-grease, treakle, sugar candy, honey, onions,
camomile, smallage, the wild vine root, anniseeds, liquorish, and fennel
seeds, beat them well together, and boil them, then strain the oil, and give
it the horse every other morning in his nose, for nine days, and ride him
after it for two hours, then give him a mesh of malt always, during the said
nine days: which done, let him have comfrey, coltsfoot, venecricke,
bayberries, grains, and wheat bran all in powder amongst his provender during
the space of six weeks after, and if he be curable this will help him.

The Pursicke, or Shortness of breath, comes always after an extreme cold,
or upon the settling of some great sickness, causing the conduits or pipes of
the Lights to be straight, or else there may be some small conduit or pipe
broken, and so the horse coffeth dry, and often, and fetches his wind
thick; the best cure therefore is to take Sirrop of liquorish, and new milk
from the cow, with treakle, and sugar candy; Some will give balls made of
Venice turpentine, tar, lard, rosemary, elecampany, anniseeds, liquorish,
tansie, lungwort, and sporage, which is good, with a little oil put in his
nostrills after it, and so to ride him fair and gently, feeding him with moist
meat, and he may do well again.

The Garget in Horses, and the Garget in Oxen proceed both of one cause, yet
are not cured both alike, although there be no great difference: this disease
if not looked unto may grow to the Murren or Pestilence either in beast or
horse; and therefore I will show you the causes which first breed it. Where
they keep cattle low and poor in winter, and have rank feeding in summer,
and standing water which they stale in, having no spring in it to refresh the
same; and so the blood being not good at the first time of the year, the rank
feeding, and the unwholesome water, infecteth the whole substance of the beast,
that is, blood, choler, phlegm, black choler, nay breath and all, and then
comes the Murren and pestilence: at the first it may swell in the breast,
throat, lips, or under the ears or eyes, and they that dye of it are always
full of gelly at the heart and lights of all colors: the Cure for the Garget I
have already showed in the outward Sorances; but this is how to prevent the
murren or pestilence: take Rue, wormwood, garlic, pelletory, mug-wort,
marigolds, red dock-roots, Tansie, elderne bark or berries, turmericke,
bayberries, grains, cominseed, anniseed, liquorish, long pepper, venecricke,
treakle new tar, some bears foot, then beat them together, and boil them in
beer with some bay salt among them, then strain them through a cloth, and
every morning when your cattle are infected give a reasonable quantity to
each, and let them blood in the neck and mouth, or for your horse you may
boil a reasonable quantity in wine, and give it him. This is an approved
medicine, besides it purges the body for all diseases, as well as any medicine
that can be found, and you shall not need any persume, if you give it in the
morning.

For Vomiting and Worms. Because I have spoken of water and feeding not fit
for cattle, I will now show you how to stay the vomiting of any unwholesome
meat, drink, or any thing that your horse shall swallow, which will appear
quickly: take ale cost, saven, holy thistle, treakle and strong ale or beer,
boil them together, and put in some sallet oil, and give it him: this is also
good for the bots or small worms, if you prick him in the mouth.

The Diseases in the liver, gall, and spleen. I find that if the liver be
inflamed with any hot blood, or the gall be too full of choler, then the
spleen cannot discharge his office, which is easily perceived; for the horse
will be weary, dull, and heavy, hot and faint, and commonly full of choler in
the mouth and eyes, his veins will swell, and if it be not prevented, it will
grow to the Yellowes, of which I have spoken in the Staggers, and now will show
you a very good way: Take liverwort, elder pill, or barbery pill, turmericke,
cominseed, venecricke, fennell-seed, tansie, smallage, anniseeds, liquorish,
Ivy berries, pelletory, parsley seed, coleander seeds, treakle, sugar candy,
and boil these in wine, then strain them, and give it the horse to drink:
this is good to convert choler, it comforts the heart, it helps the colic
also, if you put in the roots of Filippendula; but let the horse blood in both
sides of the neck and mouth and nose, and it will cure him. proved.

The Dropsy or Tenpen, is a swelling in the belly, or may fall into his legs,
and break out in watery humors like the Pains, which by continuance it will
grow unto; therefore to prevent it, after you have rid him or run him till he
sweat, which will cause the watery humors to fly up into his body again, while
he is warm, let him blood on both sides of the neck, and in the mouth, then
open the skin between his forelegs, raising it two inches long, and as much
in the hinder part of the belly, and put some of the herb called Seter-wort or
beares-foot into the holes, and that will draw the evil water away, if you let
it stay in 4 or 5 days, giving the horse the same drink that is prescribed
for the Liver and Spleen, and when the holes are open, use hog's grease to
annoint them withal, trotting him up and down every day, and rubbing his body
and legs, and he may do well, if you bath his legs with vinegar and salt very
hot.

THe Golden water or Ointment for the eyes is thus compounded; take the Flowers
of marigolds and ey-bright, daisies of the biggest sort, the flowers of
rosemary and saladine, the inward bark of the palmetree, some saffron, the
flowers of water lillies, and the flowers of the bay tree, distill these all
together, and keep it by you in a bottle, that when your horses eyes begin
to look yellow or green like the rainbow, you may put some of this water
into his ears warm, and stop it in four or five days, washing his eyes with
some of the water likewise; and then to make his eyes comfortable, take fresh
goose-grease, and the marrow of cats bones, and roast a Lampre, or Eele,
reserving the fat that drippeth in a clean dish, then put some rurmericke unto
it, and boil them well together, then put it into a pot, and keep it till you
have need, but you must gather the flowers in May or June, and the water will
keep until the next year, if you put some sugar candy in it. The goodness
of this Receipt cannot be enough valued; but you must remember when your horse
is grieved to let him blood in the nose with a naule, that he may bleed well.

The Strangullion or Sqinsie, is an inflammation of the throat and tongue, so
that it is ready to stop the horses wind, and must be thus cured; Let him blood
in the plate-veine, and wash his mouth with hot vinegar and salt, then take
leekes, alexander, honey, and bedlam, boil them in wine, and give it the horse
at the nose and mouth, annoynting the swelling with dogs dung and honey, then
let him blood in the mouth, and give him no cold water, but let him have
pelletory to chew in his mouth, which will make the rheum void away, or if he
cannot chew, put some in his drink, and as soon as the swelling is assuaged,
anoint the horse with sallet oil, and he will do well again. proved.

The Bloody flux, or Pissing blood, some hold to proceed from the nature of the
ground where the Horse goes, or else by a strain, for the cure, therefore
take roch-allum, bole armoniacke, solder-wood, worme-wood, polepodium, and
salt, stamp the herbs, or dry them to powder, and give it him in new milk
two mornings: and this will cure him, if you let him blood in the mouth. proved.

The Mattering of the yard, and the Shedding of the Seed, which comes in
covering time most commonly, is cured by washing his yard with white wine
vinegar, roch-allum, and butter, and giving this drink, in red wine, comfrey,
bole-armoniacke, and sugar boiled together: Some will give balls made of venice
turpentine, wheat flower, and venecricke, every morning for four or five
mornings, and this will cure, as has been well proved.

Incording or Bursting may come by leaping, or by stopping the Horse too
suddenly: therefore according to my experience, I advise you, if his guts, or
the Kell be fallen down, tie all his four feet together, and with warm milk
bath the place, so that it may be gentle, then work the gu^ into his place
again, and tie the stones gently with a broad string, so as you may put your
singer between, bathing him with vinegar, bole-armoniacke, salt, and butter,
once a day, and give him a drink made of strong ale or claret wine, comfrey,
masticke, and stone pitch; and if it be where you can make a trusse for him,
when you have put in the gut, you may lay a Charge on, and bind it up with the
trusse: make the charge of rosin, pitch, masticke, bole-armoniacke, and some
turpentine; they may fall in some place, where you may cut the skin a
handful beside the place, and put in the guts, and then sow up the rim of the
belly with a needle full of silk, you must take good hold, but not too thick
stirches, nor draw it too hard, yet be sure to make it fast, and annoint the
place with venice turpentine, tutsome leaves, and dogs grease boiled and
strained, but be sure to keep the wind from it for six days, and afterward
put some hog's grease in your salve. This way I have cured diverse cattle, both
horses, oxen, and others. proved.

The Fashions may come by an inward cause as well as an outward; for if it
begin in the breast, or in the groine, or cod, it is a sign that it proceds
from some inward defect, and then the knobs will be big and hard like
carbunkles, therefore you shall make a drink of Rue, or as some call it, herb
grass, tansie, the root of the w^lde vine, Isop, walnut tree bark,
turmericke, cominseed, smallage, treakle, and bay salt boiled together in beer
or ale, and give it the horse to drink for three mornings together, then let
him blood in the neck, and in those veins next the place that is infected,
and launch the knobs, anointing them with black soap, tar, and bay salt,
once in two days: and this will help him without fail. proved.

The disease of the Womb of the Mare, called the Weather, is when the bag or
nature comes out, and she is in great pain, therefore take white wine vinegar
and roch-allum warm, and wash the nature bag that comes out, then put it in
again, then make a drink of peach-stone kirnells, comfrey, nutmegs, and
sinamon, all beaten to powder, and boiled in milk or ale, and give it the Mare
twice in a day, and it will help her proved.

The Hungry evil, and Consumption of the Flesh, is when the horse does eat his
meat fast and greedily, and yet prospers not with it but still grows leaner,
which I think does proceed from some evil habit in the body, although some
Farriers do not perceive the cause; therefore I advise you to give your horse
some Rosemary, marigold seed, or diapanta, sage, savin, earth-nuts, or
pig-nuts, oranges and lemons steeped in vinegar three days, and some eggs
steeped with them, and stopped close, till the egge-shells be as soft as the
orange, then take out the eggs and the oranges whole, and put into the vinegar
a quarterne of sugar-candie, treakle, diapanta, savin, sage, nuts, boil them
together, and milke-warme give it the horse in the morning, and let him have
the eggs, and oranges, after the drink, riding him for two hours after it,
then give him sod beans and pease for the space of six days, and a little of
this drink every morning, and it will cause his flesh to rise again, if you
let him blood in the mouth.

A very good medicine, to take either in wine or beer, against the Fever,
Palsy, or Convulsion of the Sinews, or to annoint the body or sinews withal
in time of numnesse or stiffness: Take Galbanum, castoreum, bedlam, pepper,
amoniacum, ladanum dissolved in sallet oil, bayberries, grains, Rue, Isop,
tansie, anniseeds, liquorish, oil of turpentine, Fox-grease, or
badgers-grease, tar, stone-pitch, hogs grease, take of these things an equal
quantity, and beat them to powder small, and boil them together, then give the
horse part in wine, and anoint his body and legs with part, warming it in with
hot coals in a pan, then keep him warm, and let him stand dry, and either
ride or walk him once or twice a day; giving him no cold water for nine days
space, but rubbing his body and legs well: and as soon as you see him begin
to use his legs, you may let him blood in all four a little, anointing him
all over with oil of Copresse, and by this means the horse may recover his
former strength and nimblenesse again, as has been proved.

Balls to give horses, when you misdoubt their grease to be over heated by too
hard riding: Take honey, fine hogs lard, the herb called Earsene tobacco,
savin, Rue, the tops of stocke-gilliflowers, some Isop, camomile, and smallage,
shread the herbs small, or beat them in a mortar, then temper the honey and
lard with them, or boil them in sack, and give it the horse to drink: this
will cause the horse to scowre out the grease, and cleanses his guts from all
kind of worms. proved.

To help your horse if you misdoubt he has eaten or drunk any poison: Take
Betonie, plantain, and harts-horne, scrape it small, and boil it in milk, and
when you have made it blood warm, put in some sallet oil, venice turpentine,
and fine hogs lard or hogs grease, beaten well together before you put it in
the milk, and this will qualify the poison, and the horse will do well
again. proved.

Balls to keep your horse in breath and health fit for hunting: first take
Rosemary and marigold-seed, anniseeds, and liquorish, comfrey roots,
coltsfoot, cardus, and fennel roots all dried to powder, with frankincense,
mirrhe, cominseed, turmericke, treakle, sugat-candy, and butter, temper all
these well together, and give them to the horse in the morning when you ride
him forth, before you water him, and then you may ride him two or three hours,
or till your occasion serves in reasonable time to come in: for the longer you
ride him after it, the better it is for him.

If at any time your Horse or Ox cannot Vent, give him this glister, take
tobacco and honey, beating it together in a mortar, and when it is well mixed
put some sallet oil unto it, and some hog's grease, then milke-warme put it in
his fundament with a straight horn, and let one that has a small hand stir
it gently up and down in his body, and it will help him presently. proved.

For a horse that cannot Stale, take a small twig made very smooth, and annoint
it with oil, then pull out his yard, and thrust the twig up in his bladder,
and that will give him vent; which done, you shall give a drink made of
fennel seed, or the root of Filippendula, camomile, smallage, anniseeds,
liquorish, and some ordinary horse-spice, which you usually buy at the Mercers
shops, boiled all well together in white wine or beer, and this will help the
horse, but you must stir him up and down a good space after.

A very good Plaster for Broken bones, if the skin be not broke. Take the
whites of eggs, bole-armoniacke, red lead, and salt, beat them together, and
role up the place for three days, then open it, and if the bone begins to
sodder together, and not swell, dress it as before, but if it swell, wash the
place well with wine vinegar and salt: and if the bones be broke through the
skin, you must mix black soap and bole armoniacke together, and lay on the
outside, and make a salve to dress the wound with of Cats-grease, hog's grease,
venice turpentine, tutsome leaves, comfrey leaves, and coltsfoot, boiled all
together and strained, and therewith annoint the sore places, putting some into
the wound with a feather, then make an open place between the Splints, that
the corruption may run away, and when it is whole, lay on a Charge of pitch,
rofin, masticke, bole-armoniacke and red lead; and swath up the place; and if
you let him run at grass but one March after, the bone will grow as strong
as ever it was. proved.

Some never failing Medicines, for certain mortal Diseases and other griefs
incident to Men, Women, Children, or other Creatures.
TAke three pintes of Malmesie, or for want thereof good Muskadine, boil
therein one handful of Sage, one handful of Rue, being shred small, till a
pint be wasted, then strain it, and set it over the fire again, putting
thereto one penny worth of Long Pepper, half an ounce of Ginger, a quarter of
an ounce of Nutmegs, all beaten together; then let it boil again a little.
This done, take it from the fire and put to it a quarter of a pint of strong
Angelica water, or good Aquavitae, a quarter of an ounce of Mythridate, a
quarter of a pint of Triacle, mingle all together, stir it till it be cold,
then put it into a glass close stopped, and shake the glass when you take it
out for your use.

Also it has been tried to be specially good for the cure of a quartan Ague.

Take of it for a Man or woman three spoonfuls, for a Child one blood-warme,
let them be well sweated for an hour or thereabouts; as their strength will
bear.

This medicine is good against the Plague either to prevent or to cure it, but
it is also good against those diseases that are kin to the Plague, and
particularly it has cured multitudes that have been sick of this malignant
Fever, which of late has been so common; it having a special quality to draw
all infection from the heart.

A Remedy for the Plurisie when it is past Blood-letting in which case it is
commonly mortal. TAke an Apple and cut off the top for a cover and pick out
the co^r, then fill the hollow place with white Frankincense, put it on a
shovell by the fire, and put the cover upon it, then roast it till it be soft
round, then put it into a sawcer and bruise it altogether till it be well
mixed, then put so much Sugar to it that will make it savory, let the party eat
it. This will drive away the putrefaction from the Lungs and preserve the party.

An assured Medicine for to cure the biting of a mad Dog. TAke a good handful
of Bittony, and a handful of wild Sage, and a handful of night Shade, and of
fair Running water a pint; stamp the Herbs and strain them therewith, put
thereto a penny worth of Triacle, or the weight of three pence of Mithridate,
give it to the patient to drink two or three mornings.

This Medicine is good for Cattle, and for Dogs bitten with a mad Dog, and has
been upon occasion tried to be effectual without Mithridate or Triacle,
putting a handful of Rue with the other herbs, and using ordinary Garden Sage
where the other is not to be had; the herbs boiled in milk and strained, and
six spoonful given at a time.

FINIS.
A Table of the several Diseases contained in this Book in each Page,
according to the Folio.
IN the Epistle to the Reader I begin with a deformed member in the Head, from
the outward and inward Grievances in a Horse.
A most exact and speedy way of Curing all Sorances and Diseases incident to
Horses, Folio, 1. For the Canker in the Nose, and how to cure it, ibid. For the
Lampers, ibid. For the Fives with the cure, ibid. The Gare and what it is,
Folio, 3. For the Farsie, and its cure, folio, 4. The Splint and how cured,
ibid. For the Ring-bones and the cure, Folio, 5. The Quiter-bone is an ulcer in
the foot, ibid. The Spraine of the back sinew, ibid. For Wounds or Pricks in
general, Folio, 6. For the Impostume in the Head, ibid. To ripen any kind of
Swelling or Knob, Folio, 7. The Fistula and the Cure, ibid. For the Pole-evill,
Folio, 8. If your Horse be Wrenched, ibid. The Falling of the Hair, ibid. For
a Horse that is Stifled, Folio, 9. The Spavin is of two kinds, the
Blood-Spavin and the bone-Spavin. ibid. The Puffing, Malenders and Selenders
lie in the bout of the Knee, and in the Him behind, Folio, 10. The Tent in a
Horses Leg, ibid. Windgalls are above the Fetter-locke, ibid. The Pains is an
evil humor in the body, Folio, 11. A Horse may be Poundered diverse ways,
ibid. A good way to Stanoh blood in any part, Folio, 12. A good medicine for
the Biting of a Mad Dog, ibid. If a Horse be Bitten or Stung, ibid.
A Re-advertisement to the Reader, with the Anatomy of the inside of the horse;
Folio 15.
For the Falling Evil what it is, ibid. For the Staggers what it is, Folio,
16. For the Sleeping-evill. Folio* 17. For a Horse that is Taken, called the
Frenzy, ibid. The Posie what it is, ibid. For the Glanders, Strangullion* and
mourning of the Chine, ibid. For the Shortness of Breath, Folio, 19. For the
Garget in Horses, Folio, 20. For Worms in Horses, Folio, 21. For the Dropsy
or Tenpen, Folio, 22. The Strangullion or Squinsie, Folio, 23. The Bloody flux
or Pissing of Blood, ibid. For the Mattering of the Yard, Folio, 24. For
Incording or Bursting, ibid. The Hungry Evil and Consumption of the flesh,
Folio, 25. Balls to give a horse when he is overheated. Folio, 27. Balls to
keep your horse in breath for Hunting. ibid. For a horse that cannot Stale,
Folio, 28. A very good Plaster for broken bones, ibid.
Some never failing Medicines for certain Mortal Diseases. incident to Men,
Women and Children, and other Creatures. Folio, 29.
A Remedy for the Plurisie, when it is past Blood-leting. Folio, 30. To cure
the biting of a Mad Dog. ibid.



