CENSVRA CLERI, OR A PLEA Against Scandalous MINISTERS, Not fit to be restored
to the Churches Livings in point of Prudence, Piety, and Fame.

By a true Lover of the Church of England in Doctrine, Ceremony and Discipline.

ROMANS 2.24. The Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you. S.
Bern in coen. Dom. Ser. fol. 1683. Non enim provenit dignitas in hoc nomine,
quod est Sacerdos, non (inquam) nomine sed unitate: conversatione, non officio:
merito non vocabulo, Sanctitate non ministerio. LONDON, Printed for Giles
Calvert at the Blackspread-Eagle at the West end of Paul's. 1660.

Censura Cleri, OR A Plea against Scandalous Ministers, not fit to be restored
to the Churches Livings.
FOR Sion sake I cannot hold my peace, who am a true lover of the Church of
England in its doctrine, ceremony and discipline; I believe the purest and
Apostolical of any Christian Church in the world; O my bowels, my bowels are
troubled within me! When I saw the violent endeavors of some, who should be
more tender of the Churches welfare, peace, and honor, that profess themselves
true sons of it, yet their actings do manifest the contrary, so incongruous to
the principles of reason, piety, and prudence, that in the just restoration of
orthodox, holy, and learned men into their spiritual livings and promotions,
they would restablish the wicked debauched Clergy, who are notoriously
scandalous, and have been the overthrow of our most glorious Church, the
reproach of Protestant Religion, and the just odium of the people in this
Nation; that I wonder as St. Austin could not be restrained from writing his
excellent Notions of the City of God, quippe zelo domus Dei exardescens,
because he was inflamed with the zeal of Gods house, that I see not many Pens
taken as it were from the wings of a Seraphim, and inflamed with a coal from
the Altar to declare their zeal for the Temple of God against drunkards,
swearers, prohane persons, who should be scourged out as they were deservedly
by Cromwell, that flagellum Dei, the rod of Gods correction upon the Nation,
and overthrown as the buyers, and sellers, and money changers; nay the gates
thereof as of Paradise should be shut up against them, that they never offer
sacrifice of polluted lips more, who have caused the offering of the Lord to be
abhorred in the Sanctuary like Elies sons. What though they were erected by an
extraneous power, which judged in the throne of Gods Church, as well as in the
Courts of civil judicature over his Majesty's subjects! yet the persons of such
Clergy known so infamously scandalous, that the Country ringed with the common
fame of their vices, witnesses many produced to attest the reality of their
crimes, that they were not forged calumniations, and still are in readiness to
assert the same upon oath, shall we in all haste restore them before the
matters of charge be cleared, whereof they still still stand accused? As I saw
then their deprivations from their livings was not much judged, their very
Friends being ashamed to solicit their cause before an Usurped power; so their
present restitution in the country to their places is so far from being
desired, that the very nameing of their return is so odious to the people, that
it cannot be heard with any patience. I speak of such Clergy as have been
deprived purely upon the account of scandal by the pretended Act of Cromwell,
as for common drinking, swearing and carding and dicing in an Alehouse, or in
other public houses; and not of those who were wickedly thrust out of their
livings for the constant tenure of a good Conscience, adhering to their
principle of Loyalty to the King, and obedience to the established orders of
the Church; so that if there shall be a promiscuous reduction of them all into
their Churches without any special note of discrimination upon them, who are
worthy; and who are not; who sufficient for the Ministry, and who are not; but
all rush in a crowd to the Churches Patrimony, and celebrate her sacred
offices, wicked and ungodly with their unsanctified lips, and hands to offer up
sacrifices for the people, as if the flood gates were let open to irreligion
and profaneness upon this change, for debauched livers to swim in the Sea of
their former lust and pleasure, and not the way open to piety, strictness and
order amongst all ranks of men, and Ministers especially; if this be the fruits
of Gods mercies and deliverances to us, which have been wonderful to the
acknowledgement of our enemies, we must not expect a blessing from heaven upon
the Nation, nor the long continuance of our Church in its excellent
constitution: but as Hooker observed, it had but the Age of a man in its best
estate, when it flourished with the outward riches of honor and glory, to the
envy and admiration of other Nation, we may fear it will live but the day of an
infant, that is unnaturally born, when it shall cherish and nourish such
monsters and Vipers in its breast as scandalous Ministers to feed upon her milk,
who will afterward with more cruelty then Nero, not only detest but eat out
the very bowels of this their tender Mother.

The reasons which should induce then all honest Sons of the Church of England
for the present stop, and admission of such injustice, especially they which
are in Authority, and have their daily emanation from the Head of our gracious
Sovereign to cherish and enliven their just actions and Counsels, for the happy
establishment of our Church and Kingdom: let them impartially weigh the merit
of the cause, in the balance of reason, justice, and conscience, and then it
will appear I hope to their full satisfaction, for piety sake, prudence, fame,
and our Churches honor, they should not be restored, but at present suspended,
until a reexamination of their case before a lawful Authority is made to have
the depositions of the same witnesses upon their oaths, who are ready to
appear; and who should seem against this Christian proposal which savours so
much of equity I know not; but all men are rather bound to have wickedness
brought to light, and that which is the work of the devil to shame and
confusion, considering the nature of offense in a Minister who is a public
person does draw a reproach upon religion and the heavenly calling he has
taken upon him: that his ejection from the Church, when he has ministered a
just scandal to the people instead of a good example, is but a punishment
commensurate with his crime, that deserves no less then deprivation, if not a
total exclusion ab officio and beneficio while he lives, of which we shall
speak more fully afterward.

1. Because such have violated and broken their sacred vow and promise at their
ordination, when they were made Deacons and Priests by the Bishop; and this
does so evidently appear by the solemn charge that the Bishop does impose upon
their calling into these degrees and offices in the Church, that any one who
reads the book of Ordination may see how justly they have merited their
ejection out of the Church by having less conscience then Infidels, among whom
the bonds of covenant and vows are sacred; yet these violate their oath, break
their faith, evacuate their promise, betraying that singular trust and charge
which the Bishop does repose in them when he consecrates their persons to so
high a calling, as Deacon and Priest, which is done with that admirable
solemnity, to enforce the deeper impression of reverence and obedience to
Ordination, that which must needs prefer it above all other Ecclesiastical
Ordinances. Now let us hear what the Bishop gives in to his Candidate when he
ordains a Deacon or a Priest: First he solemnly put them in mind of their duty,
the greatness of their office, the danger and fearful consequence that follows
the neglect. Book of Ord. p. 2.
Have always printed in your remembrance, says he, how great a treasure is
committed to your charge; [What treasure is this? that is, the souls of the
people, which are of more invaluable price, then the treasures of many worlds,]
for they be the sheep of Christ, which be bought with his death, and for whom
he shed his blood; the Church and congregation whom you must serve, is his
Spouse and body; if it chance the same Church, or member thereof, take any hurt
or hinderance by reason of your negligence, you know the greatness of the
fault, and also that horrible punishment does ensue. Can there any thing more
divinely be uttered for the demonstration of a Ministers duty, and the setting
forth his charge with terror, in case he should break the same, which no doubt
is a sin of that nature of provocation, as not only draws him before the
Ecclesiastical seat of Judicature, whereby he will be judged worthy of
deprivation, but also before the judgment seat of God, whereby he will be
arraigned unto condemnation! For if the breach of vows and promises is a sin
contrary to the light and practice of the Gentiles, who were faithful
performers of what they promised before their Gods and their Priests; much more
does a Christian, and a Minister offend the Almighty, before whom, and his
Bishops, and Presbyters he does make a solemn vow at Ordination, and then
breaks it. Let us hear further what he engages to. Will you give your faithful
diligence, says the Bishop, always so to minister the doctrine, and
Sacraments, and discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and as the
Realm has received the same according to the commandment of God? I will, says
he, by the help of God. What shall we say of him that went out of the Church to
spue before the consecration of the Sacrament, because he had overcharged his
stomach with drink; has not he broken his vow of ordination, and is worthy of
ejection? Will you be diligent to frame and fashon your own selves and your
families according to the doctrine of Christ, and to make both your selves and
your families as much as in you lies, wholesome examples and spectacles to the
flock of Christ Jesus? I will says the Priest apply my self, the Lord being my
help. Certainly thou profane man, shall be judged out of thy own mouth, who
have been an example of wickedness, a leader of the people to the gates of Hell
and destruction, who have the keys put into thy hands by ordination, to open
the doors of Heaven. If this be suffered, what conscience will the people have
of their vows and promises, when they see the Priest or Deacon go away
unpunished, whose integrity of life being a condition whereby he is received
into holy orders, the wilful breach thereof deserves no less upon proof then
the degrading him from the work of the Ministry, and forfeiting his living by
scandal; when he that breaks his trust in any civil office, that he holds in
the Kingdom, is adjudged worthy of being displaced; much more who bears rule
in the Church of God ought upon misbehaviour forthwith to be expelled.

2. These scandalous Ministers have corrupted our Gentry and most ingenuous
spirits in the Nation with speculative and practical Atheism, that religion is
esteemed a mockery, and a subtle artifice of deceit to possess the people with
Chimeraes, fancies, dotages of timorous men according to Lucretius, Primus in
orb deos fecit timor, that we are debarred from the sweet enjoyment of that
lawful liberty which otherwise we might use. Are not their thoats a common
sepulcher to issue out such unsavory speeches? what is their ordinary discourse
but Rablais language to confirm one another in liberty and Atheism? and when
Gentlemen see a Ministers vicious life so diametrically opposite to his
doctrine, though he preaches the judgment of hell, Gods wrath, and eternal
damnation, yet not scrupling to commit the same sins against which he thunders
forth judgment: what can they believe but that he is a religious Mountebanck,
and juggler, and speaks out of the Pulpit as from his stage to get money of the
people, and he only preaches ex officio to receive his tithes and profits, is
not this the common exprobration of Gentry against Ministers, and grown
proverbiall in the mouths of the people, that let them sharpen their doctrine
and reproof with never so keen an edge of their spiritual sword, yet they can
dull its encounter from any powerful execution with this ready answer, O
Doctor, intus respice labium tuum; fac quod dicis, operare quod praedicas; and
in the words of the Apostle, Romans 2.21. Thou which teach another, teach
thou not thy self? thou which preachest a man should not steal, do thou
steal? That say a man shall not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery?
that make thy boast of the law, do thou dishonor God, that his name is
blasphemed among the Gentiles through you? Let us mark our ingenious-spirits in
the country, how they are chiefly led aside and corrupted, where they have a
debauched Ministry in their parish, by whom they justify their mispending of
precious time, and palliate the crimes of drinking, idle talking and common
swearing, with the Apology of their example; and this prodigality of time, with
their estates, dribling away in cups to the destruction of their families and
dishonor of their persons, they christen in their drink, with the excellent
name of Society, good fellowship, and liberal fruition of each other; as if
there was not a more generous way of enjoyment, both for free communication,
and diversion of pleasure and delight, then in a paltry Alehouse, the common
receptacle of infamous and vile persons, who have no other Sanctuary for their
revelling, to form a discourse suitable to the liberty and extravagancy of the
place; is not the Theme commonly betwixt him and the Minister (who must conform
himself to his Patrons humor) either obscene, idle, and misbecoming both, or
else Atheistical, profane, Celsian and Julian like, scoffing at the austerity
and rigid behavior of Christians; that Religion is but a State trick of wise
invention, the device of Kings and Governors, a Political Engine to draw
people into blind obedience and subjection to their powers; and keep this wild
beast of many heads, the common people, awed with a persuasion of conscience,
they must not thrust forth the horns of rebellion against any civil power? what
shall we say of their pains taken betwixt the cup and the lip, to set forth the
variety of Religions as Varro did amongst the Heathens, to destroy the belief
of all; that the multiplicity of opinions, differing as wide as the poles, is
like the contention among the Philosophers, dogmatizing several ways,
according to the Number of their Sects; and none of them holding the truth, but
all their principles may be disproved? Nay when Religion is granted for a truth
in the confession of our more learned gentlemen, do not they add to it the
loose superstructures of Hobbs, Osborn, and others of the Atheistical tribe,
which they build upon the foundation on purpose to overthrow it, and with it
the precepts of faith, life, and good manners? are not these the Authors, and
such like, wherein they are versed through their diligent reading them above
all other books, as if they were their Catechism? Now for the Minister and
ghostly father to join issue with such profane and ungodly men, as it were in
the Dialogues of Bernardinus Ochinus, to make all religious impostures, to
question our received principles of Scripture, Fathers, Councils in former
ages, and manage a discourse of Libertinisme and Atheism pleasing to his
Patrons ears, to talk slieghtly and merrily of Religion, as the Priests and
Friars did of old, and that Cardinal did of Melanchton, Mel. Adam in vita Mel.
who thought he was a wiser man then to believe the resurrection of the body;
add to these (which I am sure have been the subject of some discourses) the
intolerable scandal they have given in their lives by roaring, swearing and
drinking: I think the purging them out of the Church, by whatsoever power
erected, as the putting away of Locusts and Caterpillars from the destroying
the fruit of the trees in a curious garden, should be accounted a good act done
by any hand: their detrusion out of the Church good men have not pitied, but
bewailed the rather, that the remisness of government in former time occasioned
that to be done by an invading hand, which should have been performed
regularly. Is not the saying of Horace true, Decipit exemplar vitiis imitabile.
Surely, Hor. ep. 10.
of all examples the Minister is most imitable, both in the Gentry and
Commonalty of the Nation, who bear so awful a reverence to their Learning and
Calling, that what they say or do, is taken for an Oracle and Rule, being
supposed to be wiser and more knowing then all other, as the Druides were among
the old Britains, Gild.
if they are not holier; that if the salt of these grave learned persons have
lost its savor of morality, piety, and mortification, what is it good for but
to be cast into the dunghill? If their communication which should minister
grace to the Hearers, tends either to Libertinism, Obsceness, Profaneness, or
Atheism, and the whole course of their life is ungodly and wicked through
scandalous sins, what reason or piety is there to be alleged they should
continue in so holy a calling, or that they should wear the habit of Sacred
orders, to the reproach of their own function, but forthwith be degraded, or at
least suspended from the exercise of their ministerial office; much less have
those Souls deposited again into their hands, who have led them the way to hell
by Authority of their example. When also they have sinned both against the Law
of God, the Civil Law, and the Canonical Laws of the Church, which enjoin, a
rigidity of strictness in their lives, above all other; Tit. 17. Na. 134.
Vna est eorum conversatio and orantium and quae naturae sunt opera facientium,
quatenus inculpabiles and inaccusabiles consistant. Their conversation should
be altogether such as those that are given to prayer, and doing works of that
nature, as that they may stand unblamable and unaccused; and by the ancient
Apostolical Canons we find them worthy to be deprived ipso facto for
neglecting the cure of souls upon misbehaviour; Episcopus, vel Presbyter, cleri
vel populi curam non gerens, deponatur: Can. Ap. 58.
The Bishop or Priest neglecting his care of the Clergy and people, shall
forthwith be deposed of their Office.

3. It is to be lamented how they have brought both the calling and the persons
of their fellow brethren in the Ministry into contempt and disgrace by the
Gentry and people, among whom they have been esteemed the filth and offscouring
of all things, into which they have poured forth their obloquy and dirty
speeches, in the scandal of those men; or else why should not an English
Clergyman be honored as much as a Scotch Presbyter, in the Country of
Scotland, or a reformed Minister in the Churches beyond the Sea, who have not
nigh such estates of preferment as the English Clergy, yet have all due respect
from the people? but those men's sins tolerated, draws an odium upon all the
rest; which are punished immediately without compassion in the Discipline of
their Countries: that Luther knowing how insufferable they were in the Church,
and might endanger the reputation and credit of the Ministry, is so far a
stranger to that foolish pity, which some testify in their favor, that he
would have them imprisoned, and deposed. Luth. colloq. p. 295.
Preachers, says he, that are scandalous ought to be imprisoned, and put from
their office; I have obtained of the prince Elector that a prison should be
built for their discipline and punishment: I am sure it is the Apostles rule,
that nothing should be done whereby the Ministry might be blamed; And has not
the impudence of Fanatiques taken their rise for want of this Discipline? Had
Ministers been so fanned thoroughly by a Reformation of their abuses, that the
Clergy were known to be the most holy peculiar tribe of the Nation, they would
never so pertinaciously have denied their outward call of Ordination, and from
thence conclude themselves to be more truly Priests by their inward call of the
Spirit, whose impulse they feel beating them on to the exercise of their
pretended gifts; whereas they find no fruits of the Spirit in a number of
Clergy men, not so much as a holy life of Christianity, not coming up to the
morality of Heathens; whose very Books of learning, if they read no other,
should teach them better. I know not what will wipe away this reproach; but
their confession of shame, with a pudet haec opprobria nobis, and a speedy
reformation by the Bishops and Prelates, who, having lain so long in a dead
sleep, being slain in the exercise of their power, should upon their
resurrection (having a spirit of life put into them by the vigorous breathings
of a gracious Prince) judge and condemn those notoriously scandalous or
insufficient, and set free the innocent and guiltless; a judging and
reexamining there should be of every man's case, or else the sin of not judging
such wicked offenders, will still be a provocation of God against the Nation,
and intolerable shame and ignominy fall upon the Church and precious Clergy.
The Church has never spared, but inflicted punishment on lesser crimes
whenever they are proved, not only for incontinency, swearing, drinking, but
less offenses have no countenance from the Church, but are absolutely
condemned. So exemplary a strictness would it impose upon the Clergy to be
patterns of imitation to all others; Deponatur clericus qui in caupona cibum
sumpserit, Carantza Can. Ap. 54.
Let a Clergy man be deposed for eating in a common victualling- house, viz. as
the Comment instances it, unless it be upon an extraordinary case of a journey.
Laodic. Conc. Can. 24.
The Laodicean Council, says, Nullus Ecclesiasticorum in tabernis comedere
debeat: No Clergy man should eat in Taverns; why so, but because they are
scandalous places for them to frequent, drawing the same Infamy as if they went
into Stews and Brothell houses, because they are places of bad report? does it
not indeed represent a shameful aspect of disgrace upon the whole cloth, to
behold a Minister cupping and piping with the vulgar people, or the gentry of a
dissolute life? what is it but to draw the same reproach upon Christianity,
Tertull. Apol. cap. 13.
as Tertullian writes of the Heathens, who carried the images of their gods
into Alehouses, that Religion may beg an alms there. Who does so lively
represent the image of God, in his calling, office, sanctity, and purity, as a
Minister, who speaks in persona Christi, 2 Cor. 5.20.
that men would be reconciled from their sin, to the fear of God? and shall
this be a drunken, swearing image, wanton and unclean, as if the god whom it
Symbolizeth with, were Bacchus, or Priapus, or Florus? Oh let us purge out all
scandalous gods. For amongst the idolatrous priests of Jeroboam, who were
scraped into the office of Priesthood, ex faece populi, from the dregs of the
most inferior people (so men more prone to gross vices) yet we find them not
Drunkards, Whoremasters, and common Swearers; for then few would have been
induced by their example to worship the Calves of Dan and Bethel; much less in
the number of Christ's Apostles do we find any other but one Son of Perdition,
Jerome. in Mat. 26.
who was, as S. Jerome speaks, Scandalum Christi, and omnium Apostolorum, the
scandal of Christ and all his Apostles; but it had been better for him never to
have been born, then to have brought that Scandal into the world. Such an exact
behavior there was among the primitive Christians in their times, unspotted
from vice, Tertuli. apol. cap. 44.
that Tertulliam appeals to the Registers of the Heathens for the
unreproachable testimony of their integrity; of all the malefactors brought
before you, is there any of them accused of murder, robbery, or sacrilege? or
can you tax them of smaller crimes, that their life is like other prisoners,
that is, in intemperance, rudeness, unchastity, gluttony? No surely we find not
the common sort of Christians blemishing their professions with odious sins,
much less their Bishops or Priests: which the Heathens would have taken notice
of so highly, that what was accounted a mote of offense in the least disordered
conversation of a Christian, was a beam of great magnitude in a Minister, and
by the Churches censure would undoubtedly be suspended, if not utterly deprived
of his office. And this was indeed the very opinion and practice of the
Gentiles from the very light of nature and reason, who thought their Priests no
longer worthy to celebrate mysteries and holy things, or to continue in the
office of priesthood, Rosin. Antiq.
then they approved themselves to be of unblamable life; that if the Vestall
Virgin suffers her chastity to be defloured, she is not only discharged of her
office from serving at the sacred fires, but for her Scandal put to a cruel
Death.

4. It must be acknowledged, that scandalous Ministers have turned the hearts
of the people from Episcopacy, and the established orders of the Church, who
otherwise would have entirely loved them, but through offense of their scandal
who were Episcopal, did prejudice their judgments with a dislike of whatsoever
they commended; that they would rather embrace any other form of Church
government, Presbyterian or Independent, then this, which is so ancient and
proper and deducible from the Apostolical times; because the people are more
led by the Authority of example then reason, both in Religious and Civil
matters, following the president of pious upright men, and those especially
that bear the outward show of holiness above others; as how were they bewitched
with the seeming sanctity of the Scribes and Pharisees, their painted
Sepulchers and washed Pots, their hypocritical zeal of prayer in the streets:
A Heretic of a severe life, shall Arius-like, from one spark set the whole
world on fire; That it concerns the Orthodox to shine in eminency of piety as
well as they, and to exceed them in luster and brightness, as the Sun does the
Stars, and the Stars the poor Glowworms. 1 King. 2.26.
Abiathar must be put out, and Zadock take his office, because iniquity was
found in him, and the other was righteous according to his Name, the Lord
signifying by Zadock what a righteous Ministry he will establish, and no other
in his Church; so were all the Apostles, and seventy disciples except Judas the
Traitor; and is not this righteousness suitable to their calling and employment
they attend, who are to offer up prayers and supplications for the Church? that
as it is well observed by S. Cyprian, he that is employed to prefer the
Petitions of many to a King, must be one specially chosen that is a Favorite
of the Prince, or else the Petitioners may go without audience and relief: So
for the offering the Congregations Petitions and solemn requests to the King of
heaven and earth, its necessary he should be chosen one who is in grace and
favor with God for his righteousness of life, and not a drunkard or debauched
person, to whom God may say, What have thou to do to take my Name into thy
mouth? And indeed as such Priests were formerly debarred of their service, who
had fallen into gross sins, and put into inferior offices, because they had
gone astray; there is the same reason of excepting against a scandalous man's
Ministry, that he shall not be permitted in the celebration of high mysteries,
as prayer and intercession, and the administration of the Sacraments, but put
into some inferior service, as the Church shall think fit, if it should bring
back the ancient orders of Lectores, acolouthi, etc. Rather then they should
attend these other grand administrations: for God says directly of those
Priests that had gone astray from their office, Ezekiel. 44.13. They shall not
come near unto me to do the office of a priest, nor come near to any of my holy
things in the most holy place; what then were they to do? The inferior parts of
the service, to keep the charge of the door, kill and flay the skin, and
prepare the beast for sacrifice, for which they should have a competency of
allowance, as the Sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.36. Such a piece of silver and a
morsel of Bread, that may supply their condition from extreme poverty. What
else but this can be gathered from the Apostles words? 1 Timothy 5.17.
the Elder that rules well is worthy of double honor, that is, an honorable
maintenance for his work, and a due reverence to his Person and calling: Are
all deserving this? No, only he that rules well, without blame, giving no
offense, and taking heed to the flock that is committed to him; if he rule ill,
let him have but the single honor of necessary maintenance, because he is
worthy of the greatest shame that vilifies the order of Evangelical Priesthood
with the disgrace of his example, that as St. Jerome speaks, virtus ubique
honoretur, vitium deturpetur; virtue must be honored everywhere, Jerome. in
Jac. c. 2.
but vice disgraced, especially in a Minister, who should be like St. John
Baptist, a burning and a shining light to others, yet is a pillar of cloud and
darkness to obscure the way to heaven, when he alienates the affections of
people from the love of the Church, its peace, unity, order from obedience to
its constitutions; when he is a Son of disobedience himself by his life, he is
neither worthy of honor nor continuance in his place, but in an inferior rank
and order.

5. In point of prudence and fame, as the present junctures of affairs stand,
they ought not to be readmitted who are so notoriously wicked, knowing how
many enemies of potent factions this poor Church and Kingdom has, who watch
for all advantages to excite the people into rebellion and disobedience against
his Majesty, and desire no better pretenses to shake the foundations of our
peace and safety, and to unsettle the frame of our civil and Ecclesiastical
government, then the old exclamations, that scandalous and corrupt practices
are tolerated in the Church, profaness is countenanced when not punished, good
men discouraged when bad men are preferred, formality only and show of religion
is set up, but the power of godliness is extinguished; Hor. Satyr. 3.
urgeris turba circum te stante; we cannot step aside but the clamor of common
people thus sounds in our ears, as if most conscientious and strict men would
be laid aside, and many regular and orthodox who are placed by Patrons, shall
now be displaced by deboist and ignorant persons; what comfort will redound to
the people, what honor to the Church, what glory to Almighty God in their
return, who have been the instruments of shame and confusion to the Churches
former happy estate, and no doubt but will bring a second desolation upon it,
if we are not careful how to establish things piously and prudentially? and
shall not the wing of fame, (upon whatsoever extreme we run into, as we are apt
through the liberty God has put into our hands) carry our errors aloft with
multiplied aggravations unto the Protestant Churches abroad, some of which
being haters of our well established government, would be glad of any evil
reports that fly abroad to the dishonor of our Island, the traducing of
Episcopacy, and confirming the opinion of the more moderate sort of
Presbyterians, that since there is no platform of government directly laid
down in the word of God, Presbyters they say, is the best established
government in the Church they are sure, if not for the remedy of schism, yet
for the punishment of sinners and scandalous offenders. Let no man through
favor or affection therefore extenuate a Clergy man's offenses when they are
gross and odious, or save them from the suffering the just reward of their sin,
who as they have merited no less at the hands of God, whose judgments are
right, so no less at the hands of Tyrants, which are Gods instruments to punish
sin, where the lawful power is debarred both in Church and State; And would to
God since our eyes are blessed in the sight of a hopeful flourishing Church
and Kingdom, that the ancient Ecclesiastical censures, pennances, injunctions,
suspensions, deprivations and excommunications were restored to their primitive
use, that offenders of all sises may be punished, but Clergy men especially
with rigor, that the name of God may not be blasphemed any longer through
them, since now we have an authority which no man can except against: I know it
will be said that many a man has been cast out for scandal, that was was
unblamable: So indeed was the unjust process of the Tryers; it cannot but be
confessed; whose cause ought to be heard over again, and in conscience he
should be restored, but shall even such notorious offenders over whom
Constantine said, Paludamento se obtecturum, he would cast over his cloak to
hide their shame, be pleaded for, when the voice of Town and Country shall
tell you that they are common drunkards, fornicators, swearers, and pitifully
insufficient for the work of the Ministry, if you will but bring them to a
trial; It is most true, they had not competent Judges; no more had any other
malefactors, and evil doers which were deservedly condemned for their crimes
proved by witnesses upon their oaths against them, or else what living had
there been for men under a tyrannical power? is not here the same case? There
wanted the outward form of a Judge, but the matter is evidently proved against
them, that it was intolerable such men should be continued; if competent Judges
must invalidate all proceedings for this twelve years, I wonder why all the
suites and trials of Law should be confirmed that have been? I know many also
are of this judgment, that these should be admonished before put out of their
livings, and if they be admonished now before the Bishop, for their scandal,
it is sufficient. I must needs answer, that some crimes of Ministers fall
rightly under admonition, reproof, and Ecclesiastical censure to punish the
offense; but others are of that Nature as deserve immediate expulsion from the
Church, for holding so sacred an Office, as in the Ministry, according to that
canon of the Apostles, Clericus in fornicatione deprehensus deponatur. Apost.
can. 25.
A Clergy man taken in fornication, let him be put aside his office: have not
some been proved guilty of this crime? and shall they be restored to the
Church? in light offenses we must admonish, but in great punish greatly; and
have we not for this the practice of the Church of England, when Williams
Bishop of Lincoln was deprived ab officio and beneficio, and fined a good sum
of money besides; was he admonished before he was put out of all? no; because
his crime was of that scandalous nature, that the Archbishop called him a Son
of Belial, he had no such act of favor as admonition. Eli thought that might
expiate his Sons wickedness when he reproved them for misbehaving themselves so
scandalously in the Priests office, but God accepted not of this purgation of
their sin, but brought a judgment upon the old man's house for ever, 1 Samuel
2.32. So the incestuous man by St. Paul's letter of excommunication, was put
away immediately, 1 Cor. 5.13. The rule is excellent in this case, Si quidem
mediocre est peccatum, monere, and suspendere, and paenitentia ei dare tempus,
ut in meliorem ordinem sacrum mox revertatur ad semetipsum, Justin. Tit. 17. N.
134.
if it be a mean offense, then to admonish and suspend him for it, and give him
time for repentance, until following a better course he returns to himself
again. What are mean offenses? shall we say common drinking, swearing, whoring,
or such like? God forbid; he that makes no conscience to defile his soul with
these sins, Peccata conscientiam vastantia, which lay waste the conscience, it
is not fit he should have the government of other men's souls and consciences
committed to him; and though he may show some outward signs of repentance and
reformation afterward (for which let him receive due encouragement by his
attendance on some inferior office, as the Priests did of old, and have some
competent maintenance for his labor,) yet it is not fit he should be entrusted
with the same charge he had before, no more then he who has falsely and
corruptly behaved himself in a place of the Commonwealth, should be continued
in it, nor upon his outward show of more honest carriage to minister in any
other then an inferior office.

Then let us consider seriously, who fear and tremble at the judgment of God,
who has afflicted us many years, for our sin, first beginning at his own
house, then going to the house of our King, and visiting all our families with
plagues, as he did Egypt; if we harden our hearts against the sense of his
former judgments, because we live under the fruition of present mercies; if we
know not how to improve these stupendous providence, that he has wrought
with his own arm, and by the hand also of our professed enemies, who have long
trodden upon our necks, but now they bow their sheaf to us; we must expect, if
we return to our old profaness, riots, wantonness and liberty in our carriage,
that sin will drive our Jordan back from us, in all its pleasant streams; if we
soar too high with waxen wings, we shall melt before the Sun; our only care is
to be examples of great strictness, watchfulness, and circumspection of our
lives, and labor that above all orders of men, the Clergy, which is the
peculiar tribe beloved of God, be in nothing blamed, but that such who are a
scandal to their calling be punished according to the discipline of former
times, and that we follow those rules of strictness which the holy Scripture,
the laws of our Church, and the Canons of Ancient times has enjoined; St. Paul
sets forth the qualities of being blameless, which might be a sufficient word
comprehending all; 1 Timothy 3.2.
(...) does not signify faultless; for there are no such in the world, but a
man that is not tainted with any common blemish of scandal; so he is not to be
(...), that is, given to wine, not only to be free from drunkenness, but from
frequent drinking; vino assidens ad perpotandum, Calv. in loc.
says Guhard, a Tavern Stake, sitting close to his cups; tippling is forbidden;
non ebrietatem sed quamvis intemperiem in vino ingurgitando, says Calvin, not
only drunkenness but intemperate guttling of wine; the Apostle knowing what
follows the disorder of immoderate drinking, commands in the next place, that
he should be no striker; cognata vitia sunt vinolentia and violentia, as one
says, these two are cosen germans, drinking and fighting: when wine fumes into
the head, the quarrel begins: above all other, these are most unbeseeming the
profession of a Minister; yet the Church of England takes notice of other
crimes that are adjudged scandalous by her; The book of reformation of
Ecclesiastical Laws, that was begun to be compiled in Henry the eighths reign,
and after carried on to a perfection in Edward 6. by whom it was confirmed with
the approbation of such Bishops as were godly Martyrs of the Church after, we
find written therein concerning our Clergy, Non sint compotore, non Aleatores,
non aucupes, non venatores, non Sycophantae, non otiosi, aut supini, sed
sacrarum literarum studiis, praedicationi and orationi incumbant: They must not
be good fellows, dicers, hawkers, hunters nor Sycophants, idle neligent
persons, but apply themselves to the study of holy Scrptures, and to meditation
and prayer; so we may see how strict our first reformers from Popery were; so
far from indulging gross scandals, as not to suffer the lawful recreations of
hunting and hawking among Clergy men, who should be examples to refrain from
such idle pleasures as others might enjoy. And to show how agreeable was the
constitution of our Church to the strictness of primitive times, unto which it
was excellently framed by the Prelates thereof, we find those times enforcing
great severity of behavior in the Clergy above all other, which was the
occasion I suppose of those strict laws of our Church, An. Dom. 364. Laodic:
council. can. 54.
Non licere clericis ludicris spectaculis interesse. It is not lawull for
Clergy men to be present at stages-playes; Non Christanorum comessalibus
interesse, nor present at common feasts of Christians. Can. 53.
In Christianorum non saltetur nuptiis, Can. 5.
he must not dance at weddings. Nic. council. can. 18.
Clericus usurarius deponatur, An usurer who is a Clergy man must be deposed
from his office. Quadragesimam non jejunans deponatur, Lib. Conc. can. 20.
this is to be understood in case he had his health, or otherwise he might
break Lent. Conc. Antioch. can. 1.
Being convicted of scandal, no appeal should be made to the Emperor by the
Council of Antioch.

Since that we are now rebuilding our spiritual temple after so long a
captivity of twenty years that it has been laid waste by Gods judgment on us,
and made an abomination of desolation for our profaness, liberty, scandal,
transgression both of humane and divine laws, which very sins were the occasion
of the destruction of the Jews Temple and City, as Josephus tells us, let us
with all our diligence, now the stones are to be gathered up, not build our new
City and Temple with any other materials then are precious stones, that is,
just, holy, righteous, and truly religious men of sanctified lives, that we may
have the same divine policy of Presbyterians, only differing in the better end
proposed, that what they do out of faction and gaining a greater party to
themselves, as Dr. Tailor says we may out of conscience show that Episcopal
men are of strict severe course of life, and as zealous to keep off scandal
from our Church and sacred Ordinances as they are; and never let us think that
God will bless our Church, to continue it in peace, unity and glory, unless we
vigorously put in execution its former laws of discipline, and the Clergy be
exemplary in piety above all others, that they live like the primitive
Christians, whose lives excelled the strictest laws of the Empire. So theirs
must excel the laws of their order, and in the mean time keep out scandalous
men from blemishing their society; if otherwise we build our Temple, the
building will be but in vain, when we think to re-edifie it by the ministry of
the same hands which have pulled it down.

FINIS.

