Die Mercurii 25. October. 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that Colonel Harvy do from
this House give thanks to Mr. Barker for the great pains he took in his
Sermon, preached this day at Margarets Westminster, before the House of Commons
(it being a day of public Humiliation.) And that he be desired to print his
Sermon; wherein he is to have the like privilege in printing of it, as others
in the like kind usually have had.

Henry Elsing, Cler. Dom. Com.

I appoint Rapha Harford to print this Sermon.

MATTHEW. BARKER.

A CHRISTIAN Standing and Moving Upon the true Foundation.

OR, A word in season.

Persuading to Stick close to God, Act eminently for God.
In his present design a-against all discouragements, oppositions, temptations.

EXPRESSED In a Sermon Preached before the Honorable House of Commons upon the
day of their monthly Fast, Octeb. 25. 1648.

By MATTHEW BARKER, M. A. late Preacher of the Gospel at James Garlick-hith,
London, and now at Morclacke in Surrey.

ISA. 30. 7. Their strength is to sit still. V. 15. In quietness and
confidence shall be your strength. CANT. 3. 6. Who is this that comes out of
the Wi^dernesse like pillars of smoke, etc. LONDON; Printed by M. S. for R.
Harford, at the guilt Bible in Queens-head Alley in Paternoster Row* 1648.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE of COMMONS now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
TO speak to a Kingdom at once, is both a weighty work, and an happy
opportunity; Whiles I considered the former, the vast disproportion of mine
own abilities did discourage me: but the latter brought me upon the adventure;
in which though I should come off with loss, yet if you and the great work in
your hand receive but any gain, I shall desire to rejoice. I know that God
usually is maximus in minimis, and does his highest works by lowest means,
and instruments; Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings he has perfected
praise, Mat. 21. 16. Therefore I hope my poor endeavors may not be without
fruit; which your desires do command, and your gracious acceptance does
encourage me to make thus public, and present them again to you.

In them I have set before you a true Christian as standing firmly upon the
true foundation, as ascending daily in the true sphere, to perfection and
rest; Both which is the Lord Jesus. Every standing that is not upon this
foundation is deceitful and false, every ascent that is not in this sphere is
enormous and crooked.

Every man is growing up according to that root in which he is planted, and
that principle in which he lives; By living in Christ we grow up into Christ,
and he that lives most in him, grows up most into him; What ever God the
father would have to abide, and grow up into a state of perfection and glory,
that he has laid upon Christ as the foundation; and what ever rests upon any
other, will either vanish into air, or be consumed with fire.

And this is the commission that Christ has received of his Father, and the
great work that he is upon at this day, to throw down all false foundations
that men have set up and built upon, that the true foundation of all things may
appear. All Religion, peace and principles within, all power peace and glory
without that rests not upon it, he is now coming to shake and dissolve.

The four great Monarchies of the world, though their firmness and strength
be like that of Gold, Silver, Brass, Jron, as they were represented to
Nebuchadnezzar in his dream Dan. 2. Yet because they were not erected upon a
true foundation, the Stone cut out of the Mountain breaks them to pieces, and
brings them to nothing;

And so Great Babylon the throne of the beast being erected without Christ, yea
against him, is falling down every*day before him.

Therefore (Worthy Senators) take heed how you build, see that your foundation
be solid; Let me be bold to tell you, that all your profession, religion, and
your hopes grounded upon them will fall into the dust if they stand not upon
this Rock, the Lord Jesus; I mean not an imaginary but a true Jesus, as
rightly discovered and apprehended: For millions of souls miscarry in these
Gospel Times, amidst Gospel Light by resting upon such a Jesus that has no
existence either in the word, or in heaven, or any where but in their own
fancy alone.

And when you find^ your standing good, let nothing shake you; rest here,
reign here, and from hence be you daily advancing into the bosom of the
father, which is the center, the home, the haven, the heaven of your souls.

As to the Kingdom, and your own trust in relation to it, I shall only say
thus much, look upon its ruins, and its dangers; and both these call upon you
for a double work, to be strenuous in building, and vigilant in watching.

First, strenuous in building, you are called to raise up the former
desolations, even the desolations of many generations, Here are the liberties
of the people to be built up, the peace of Church and State to be built up; the
walls of Jerusalem to be built up, and the ruins of poor Ireland; according
to your power and capacity address manfully to all these that you may win to
your selves the honorable name of b^ing the repairers of our breaches. I
remember a great Athenian Commander being asked why he did not riot and swagger
it with the rest of the Company; answered, I know not how to drink and
swagger; sed novi Rempublicam ex parva magnam facere; I know how to make a small
Commonwealth great: Oh Sirs, you will then approve your selves to be men of
skill and wisdom indeed if you know how aright to build up a poor decayed
Sat, and to unite divided Christians. That you may be successful in this
work;

First, build with unity, there can be no greater obstruction to the building
than divisions among the builders; Did you all act from the same principles, to
the same common ends the work would go on in your hands more prosperously and
speedily.

Secondly, with diligence; If builders grow slack, will not attend the work,
but are by every slight occasion called off, the building is likely to stick.

Thirdly, with wisdom, Prove. 9. 1. Wisdom has built her house. The
spiritual building goes on successefully, because it is carried on by an
infinite wisdom: And Prove. 24. 3. By wisdom is an house built, and by
understanding it is established.

You have many enemies that seek to disparage and undermine your building, and
therefore build wisely: and wise builders will build upon a good foundation,
and by a good rule.

Fourthly, with resolution; builders ought not to be affrighted from their
work with ashowre of rain, a puff of wind, or the barking of a dog; For
want of this men have left their work, and either by fears or flatteries have
been brought to a very unworthy and base compliance.

Next in order to the imminent dangers of the Kingdom, your work is to be
vigilant in watching. Vita hominum vigilia, said Pliny to Vespasian; I am sure
it is now one great work of your life to be watchful for this poor Kingdom,
and would you approve your selves true watchmen, then watch;

First, accurately; Watchmen must not be blinds as Isreal's was, Isa. 56. 10.
They must have a piercing sight, that they may be able to see into the bottom
and depth of things; that they may see snares that are laid in private, and may
not be deluded with fair pretexts and overtures to the betraying of their
trust, and the good of those for whom they watch. As also, that they may be
able to see afar off. Watchmen stand upon walls and high places to discover
dangers approaching at a distance: so are you this Kingdoms watcbmen to
discover evils that may come upon it, not only for the present, but many years
hence. You are to provide not only that we may for a few years, or in this
generation enjoy the Gospel, our peace and liberties, but to settle them upon
such a bottom, as that posterity may rejoice in them as well as our selves.

Lastly, Watch men must have accurate sight to spy out the fittest season for
every action; that may be done at one time with ease, which at another will not
with much difficulty. And surely Sirs, had there been this wisdom on all sides
to improve seasons, the work of this Kingdom might have been nearer finishing
then now it is. But this is our comfort, though men may miss their seasons,
God always does lay hold of his.

Secondly, watch faithfully; the unfaithfulness of a watchman brings all in
danger. If he be corrupted and comply with the Enemy, he may do more hurt
then the whole Army.

Thirdly, watch with selfe-denyall; A watchman must endanger himself for the
public safety, he must deny himself in his ease, in his estate, in his
private occasions and interests, that he may be serviceable to the public.
Let Adrian's motto be writ upon all your hearts; non mihi sed populo, for the
people, not my self.

That the dangers of the Kingdom are not yet over, we have too evident reason
to believe: and therefore let your eye be still open, and keep strict watch,
lest we should be surprised by them.

Thus I have done, only if any where you find my language more particular and
importunate then ordinary, I desire that the present exigence of the time and
your affairs may plead my excuse.

I did desire to be faithful in the work, and in the free discharge o^ mine
own conscience I shall endeavor to sit down and rejoice amidst all the
censures and reproaches of men. Who are the true friends and enemies of peace
God will in a short time discover.

Some things which I had prepared to speak, I was constrained to omit by
reason of the time, and I am here bold to present them to your eyes, together
with those which I have already presented to your ear. Which that they may be
as A SACRED ANCHOR to establish you, as HEAVENLY FIRE to inflame your hearts
into an higher pitch of true zeal and resolution for God and this Kingdom,
shall be the continual prayer

Of him Who desires to be found a faithful Steward in the Lords work, MATTHEW.
BARKER.

A Christian standing and moving upon the true foundation. Expressed in a
SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of COMMONS October 25. 1648.
1 Cor. 15. last. Wherefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, as knowing that your labor is
never in vain in the Lord.
THE Apostle Paul the Penman of this Epistle was a great Proficient both in the
lower school of humane learning, and in the upper school of divine knowledge;
and where have we a clearer discovery of it then in this Chapter.

His knowledge in things divine appears in the height and heavenlinesse of his
matter; he does in this Chapter unfold these four Mysteries;

1. The Mystery of Christ's resurrection; as being not alone that, whereby he
himself did overcome death, and triumphantly entered into a state of perfect
righteousness, life and glory, but also that whereby his whole body has
received an assuring pledge of, and mystical in^e^ into the same state. And
that we read from verse 12. to 24.

2. He unfolds the Mystery of Christ's Kingdom, and that in two particulars;

First, in the end, or final cause of it, and that either Mediate, as the
putting down all rule, all authority and power, and the utter abolishing of
all enemies, or ultimate; That God may be all in all. There are many enemies
that lift up themselves above God in the world, and do cast vailes upon his
glory, that they themselves may appear and shine forth, now the great end of
Christ's reign is to destroy these enemies, and remove these vailes, That God
may be all in all; And this you have set forth from verse 24. to 28.

2. In the period or expiration of it; this Kingdom according to the form of
its present administration is to cease, and to empty it self, and expire into
the Kingdom of the Father; and this you have partly in the 24th and partly in
the 28th verse. This is the second Mystery.

The Third is the Mystery of the Saints resurrection in their own persons;
which the light of nature cannot reach; and which some even of the wisest among
the Vid. Plin. not. Hist. lib. 7. Cap. 45.
heathens have not only denied, but exploded; this he first proves from verse
12. to 39. Then describes from ver. 39. to 45.

4. The fourth is the Mystery of the first and second Adam; which he sets in
opposition to each other several ways in this Chapter.

1. In respect of their principles, verse. 45. The first man Adam was made a
living soul, the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. The first man had a
principle of divine life within himself, but had not a stock or treasury The
Ap^stle-doth here alude to these two expressions in Genesis 2. 7. (...) an^ma
vivens (...) Spiritus vitarum.
of life, the first man was made a living soul only, but the second Adam
having the fullness of the Godhead in himself, is a storehouse of lives, and
from him life breaks forth upon his whole body, the second Adam was made a
quickening Spirit.

2. In respect of Order, verse. 46. Howbeit that was not first which is
spiritual, but that which is natural, and afterward that which is spiritual.
The first Adam, and the first state of things under him, was natural; God
took pleasure in them, and received glory from them, according to those
natural perfections wherein he did create them; but afterward the second Adam
comes and gathers up all things into a spiritual estate, even into himself,
that now all that delight which God puts forth upon his creature, and all that
glory he receives from it, is alone in this second Adam, the Lord Jesus.

3. In respect of their Original, verse. 47. The first man is of the earth
earthy, the second man is the Lord from Heaven. The first man was earthly in
his original, and all that we have received from him, brings us not up above
an earthly estate: but the second Adam was the Lord from Heaven, and so in him
we rise up into an heavenly estate.

Thus you have a brief account of his skill in divine learning.

His skill in humane learning appears, as in the excellency of his style, so
in the exactness of his method. He first begins with his Prooem, and there
prepares the minds of the people to entertain that heavenly discourse that he
was to insist upon: and this you have in 11. first verses. Next, we have the
narration, wherein he states the Question, and lays down the subject that he
was to speak to, and that you have in the 12. verse. Now if Christ be preached
that be rose from the dead, how say some among you that there is no
resurrection of the dead. As if he should say, The Doctrine that we Apostles
and Ministers of Christ preach is, that there shall be a resurrection of the
dead. Now there are some among you, whether of the Sect of the Epicures among
the Heathens, or of the Sadduces among the Jews, or of both, some there are
that deny it: And whether they or we have the truth with us, is the matter in
controversy.

And next, he proceeds to the confirmation, wherein he does prove his own
assertion, by many solid and undeniable arguments, from the 12. verse to the
33. which would be too long to give a particular account of at this time.

After this he comes to the Confutation, wherein he answers an objection, and
that we find in the 35. verse, But some man will say, How are the dead raised
up, and with what bodies do they come?

This he answers by a double Metaphor: The one is of Corn, which by dying is
quickened, as you read 36, 37, 38. verses. The other is from the several forms
and qualities wherewith God has clothed other creatures in nature, as you
read in 39, 40, 41. verses.

And then he further proceeds to the Illustration in the 42, 43, 44 verses,
wherein he unfolds and describes the nature and manner of the resurrection.

And lastly, we have the Epilogus, where he winds up all, and makes a
practical application of his whole discourse, Wherefore my beloved brethren,
be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, as
knowing that your labor is never in vain in the Lord.

That we may rightly understand the full Emphasis of the Text, we must look back
to the Context. The Apostle having largely discoursed of the resurrection,
wherein he sees both himself and all Saints raised up into a state of
victory, as he speaks in the 54. verse, Death is swallowed up in victory; like
a Conqueror he does perform these three things in the end of the chapter.

1. He makes his triumph, and sets his feet upon the necks of his enemies, O
Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? v. 55. 2. He offers
up his sacrifice of praise to the God of his victory, But thanks be to God who
gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus. v. 57. 3. He gives out his Orders
for the right improving of his victory, and that two ways, as we read in the
Text.
1. To a Christian steadfastness, and resolution, Be you steadfast, and
unmovable; as if he should say, God has made you Conquerours in Christ over
Death, Grave, the Law, Sin, and all your enemies, the victory is fallen on your
side, therefore now stand your ground-give not back, stoutly maintain what you
have won.

2. To a spiritual activity and sedulity, Always abounding in the work of the
Lord; as if he had said; Has the Lord Jesus done such great things for you, as
to bring you up into such a conquering estate; and is there such a glorious
estate abiding you in the resurrection; as before he had described, therefore
now esteem no labor or travel too much to undergo for him.

In the Text we have these two maine parts.

1. A Loving Compellation, my beloved brethren. 2. A double Exhortation; the
one is to a constant unmovablenesse, be ye steadfast, unmovable. The other is,
to a continual motion, always abounding in the work of the Lord. Both which
are backed and enforced with a double Motive.
The first employed in the first word, the Adverb ^^ wherefore; seeing it is
thus that there are such victories won, and such hopes laid up for you,
therefore be ye steadfast unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord.

The second is expressed in the last words, as knowing that your labor is not in
vain in the Lord. What ever labor you undergo, either in standing unmovably
upon your foundation, or in your spiritual motion in the work of Christ, it
is not lost labor, not an empty work, your labor is not in vain in the
Lord. Thus you have a brief account of the Text.

For the first part, the Compellation, we shall not insist upon it at all, it
being only to make room in their hearts for the entertainment of the duties,
he commends to them.

That which we shall therefore (God assisting) spend the time that yet
remains upon is, the two Exhortations; wherein he stirs them up to make a
right improvement of the victory they had gotten in Christ.

The Motives we shall not particularly insist upon, as intending to make use of
them in the Application.

First then, to the former Exhortation; to a Christian unmovablenesse, and
constancy: be you steadfast, (...) it is a Metaphor either taken from a Basis,
or Foundation, upon which the building will stand firm, and steadfast; So that
the Apostle exhorts them to stand fast upon that sure foundation, on which they
were placed in Christ. Or else from a Chair or Seat in which a man sits firm,
without tortering, or in danger of falling; and so he exhorts them to sit
quietly and steadfastly in that Seat of rest; that Chair of State, that Throne
of victory and glory which they were placed upon in the Lord Jesus

The other word in this former Exhortation is unmovable, (...) it signifies one
that will not be moved from his place, or standing; The Apostle knew that many
things would assault them, to draw them off from their foundation, and
spiritual stability: but says he yield not a jot, be unmovable, like the Pole
of the heavens, or like a Rock in the Sea, be unmoved in the midst of all.
Thus from the first Exhortation we shall gather this Doctrine.

To stand fast with an unshaken spirit upon the true foundation, is the wisdom
and work of Saints.

That as they are raised up into a full, free, firm and victorious state in
Christ, so here they are to live, abide, and reign amidst all encounters, all
changes from within, from without, or round about them; and our Apostle might
the better press this upon others, as having in so great measure attained it
in his own person, as we read in Romans 8. latter end, Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, distress, nakedness, famine, etc.
nay in all these things we are more than conquerers; and then adds, I am
persuaded that neither life nor death, principallities nor powers, things
present nor things to come, shall ever be able to separate us from the love of
God, etc. He like a wise Commander, espies out the utmost strength of his
enemies, and surveying them in their number, in their nature, in their several
kinds; and he is not one whit moved or shaken, but standing firm upon his
foundation, concludes against them all, that they shall never be able to
separate him from the love of God which is in Jesus Christ.

So in 1 Cor. 16. 3. Watch y^^, stand fast in the Faith, quit you like men. He
speaks in military language, for Christianity is a fight; lest your enemies
surprise you, watch; if they approach to an encounter, stand ^ast, retreat not
at all: if it comes to an engagement, quit your selves like men. So in Ephesians.
6. 13. Therefore put on the (...).
whole Armor of Go^, that ye may be able to stand in the evil day, and
having done all, to stand, or having abolished (...).
the strength of all enemies, to stand. First, as good Soldiers they are to
put on their armor; next, stoutly to make resistance, and not to cease the
fight, till they had quite scattered their enemies, and like conquerours
keeping the field, having done all to stand.

So often does our Savior encourage his Disciples to stand fast, Matthew. 24. 6.
When you hear of wars, and rumors (...).
of wars, see that you be not troubled. Some Critics observe, that the word
implies such a trouble, as when Soldiers receive some sudden alarm, what
strange disquietments, distraction, confusion, may then be seen, but says
Christ, be not you thus troubled, let not these things amaze you, or draw you
off from the foundation of your repose and rest.

One place more I shall add, John 16. last. These things I have spoken to you,
that in me you might have peace: In the world ye shall have tribulation, but be
of good cheer, I have overcome the world. It is true, you are to encounter
with the troubles of the world, but the world, and every thing in the world,
that fights against your life and peace, is overcome in me; therefore be not
you moved, be of good courage notwithstanding all.

1. For the clearing of the point we shall first show you, wherein a Christian
is to show forth his steadfastness of spirit.

2. Secondly, the way whereby God brings up the soul to it; Then we shall
acquaint you with the grounds and lastly apply all to our selves.

For the First, a Christian is to show forth this steadfastness, in oppsition
to those several things which are apt to shake him.

1. The First is, the guilt of sin; this has brought many a precious soul
under sad disquietments, conflicts and agonies, Job felt them, and expresses
them Job 6. 4. For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison
whereof drinks up my spirit; the terrors of God set themselves in array
against me

David felt them, and elegantly describes them by that dismal appearance of
things upon Mount Sinai, at the delivery of the Law, God came down upon it, in
his Majesty and glory, and then the Earth shook; the foundation of the hills
moved; there was seen also fire and smoke and burning coals, darkness, dark
waters; thunder, lightning and thick clouds of the sky; All this the Prophet
did find spiritually in his own soul, so dreadful and disquieting is the
presence of God to the guilty conscience.

But now a Christian is to stand steadfast here, to live above the fears of
hell and wrath; and amidst all that unworthiness, weakness, sinfulness, he
beholds in himself; yet to esteem himself in Christ perfectly righteous in the
sight of God, and so to be at peace. The Apostle exhorts to this Heb. 10. 22.
Let us draw nigh with full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from
an evil conscience, etc. Nothing more unfits the soul to draw nigh to God than
an evil conscience, a conscience under the workings of guilt, and fear of
wrath; not that we exclude mourning for sin, such mourning as flows from
faith, and calls not the soul off from the true foundation,

2. The Second thing which is apt to disquiet the soul, is the temptations of
Satan; he is an unquiet turbulent spirit, and is still seeking to draw the
soul off from the Center of her rest and peace, and though he cannot rob her
of her inheritance in God, yet he makes her to posesse it with as much trouble
as he can. Disorder and ataxy are the very basis of his Kingdom; when every
thing is brought back to its proper place then does his Kingdom fall.

Christ told his Disciples that Satan desired to winnow them as wheat, Luke 22.
31. wheat is not winnowed without much moving and shaking: Now a Christian is
to stand fast against Satan, to resist him, steadfast in the faith, to 1 Pet. 5.
9. 1 John 5. 18.
keep himself that the wicked one may not touch him. And thus he does when he
stands upon his foundation, when he lives above with God, and in God he has
Satan under his feet; though he cast his fiery darts at him, yet they are all
quenched and hurt him not: But when he comes from his foundation, and parlies
with him, and consents to his suggestions, then is he wounded by him. The
Devil could not touch Christ, because he abode steadfast in the Godhead, and
the will of the Father, he set the Lord always before him, and kept Satan
behind him, Psalm. 16. 8. Mat. 16. 23
and so conquered. Had our first parents done thus, they had not fallen, but
they turning their eyes from God and his will, and fixing it upon the
temptation, were bewitched and fell.

3. The third thing that is apt to disquiet the soul, is the Law. When it was
delivered the Earth shook, the people trembled, and Moses himself said, I
exceedingly fear and quake. This is the natural effect of the Law, to cause
earthquakes and shakings in the Soul. When a poor Christian looks upon the
purity and strictness of the Law pointed with wrath and curse against the
least transgression, as also the holiness, justice and majesty of the
lawgiver, and his own vileness and filthiness, he is then ready to quake and
tremble, and say with those men of Bethshemesh, Who is able to stand before
this holy Lord God? 1 Samuel 6. 20.
But yet looking up to that free estate, to which he is advanced in Christ,
having the Law with all its curses under his feet, he is to stand fast, not to
fear, but to be as fully at peace in Christ, as if there was no Law at all.
As Histories report of some Hills, that stand up above the middle Region, that
those that are at the top, may see it thunder and lighten, and the clouds send
forth storms and tempests upon the Region below them, and yet they behold the
Sun clear above them, and enjoy a calm and serene air round about them: So
though the Law like claps of thunder, and flashes of lightning, may amaze those
that yet live in the lower Regions of the flesh and the world, yet the Saints
are set up aloft in Christ, above the Law as a Covenant of Works, live in an
upper Region of light and peace, when those that are below them are in
darkness, terror, and trouble. Romans 3. 19. We know what things soever the Law
says, it says it to them that are under the Law.

4. The fourth thing that is apt to disquiet the Soul, is Death: this is the
King of terrors, and makes stoutest hearts tremble; yea, there is no creature
but flies from it, arms against it, and trembles before it.

But a Christian is to be steadfast here, not to be afraid of Death, though
presented in the most dreadful shape; he is not to decline his duty, to bawk
his station, or tread one step awry that he may avoid it.

Of this temper was the Apostle Paul, he saw Death daily before him in his way,
yet he goes on unmovably, as you read Acts 20. 24. None of these things move
me, neither do I count my life dear to my self, that I may finish my course
with joy. And Chap. 21. 13. What mean you to weep and break mine heart, for I
am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the Name of
the Lord Jesus.

When a man is brought to see that the loving kindness of God is better then
Life, and the fulfilling the Psalm. 63. 3.
will of God better then all outward contentments and enjoyments, then will he
stand fast against the approaches of Death.

The fifth thing that is ready to disquiet a Christian, is the world, and that
both in its Frowns and Flatteries.

First its Frowns, when it musters up its reproaches, losses, crosses,
afflictions, persecutions, and sets them as in battle array against a poor
Christian: when that malignant Spirit that is in the World, breaks forth, and
acts to the utmost of its activity, in opposition to the Saints, and the
present design of God; yet this ought no whit to move them, or discourage
them, but are to go on as freely and uprightly in the work of God, and to be
as confident of its prevailing, as if there was no opposition at all. Of this
brave temper was the Apostle Paul: The Holy Ghost did witness to him, that in
every Act. 20. 24
City bonds and afflictions did wait for him, yet says he, None of these
things move me. When God sent out the Prophets of old to prophecy against the
Princes, and the great men of the earth, he commands them to stand fast against
all opposition. As when he sent out the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 1. 8. says he, Be
not afraid of their faces, for I am with thee to deliver thee. And in the 17
verse, Thou therefore gird up thy loins and arise, and speak to them all that
I command thee.

For behold, I have made thee this day a defenced City, an Iron pillar, and
brazen walls against the whole Land, against the Kings of Judah, against the
Princes thereof, against the Priests thereof, etc. Though the powers of the
World acting in several Spheres, and running along in several Channels, do
come to unite in one Stream of violence, to overflow the Saints, yet they are
to stand fast, like Iron pillars, and brazen walls, without fear or flinching.

So he speaks to the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 2. 6. And thou son of Man, be
not afraid of them, nor be not afraid of their words, though briers and thorns
be with thee, and thou do dwell among Scorpions. Such armor of proof is the
spirit of a Christian to put on, that he may be able without fear or
prejudice, to walk through the very midst of Briers, Thorns, and Scorpions.

2. A Christian is also to stand fast aginst the flatteries of the world; and
these many times conquer where the other cannot Sampson could not be overcome
by the power of all the Philistims, yet was foild by the inticement of one
Dalilah. The Armies of Moab could not prevail against Israel, but the
daughters of Moab could Number. 25. 1. 2.
with their whorish alurements. For a man to have the glory of the world set
before him in its richest array, as it was before Christ, Moses and others, yet
to remain steadfast, not to move a step out of the way, so much as to salute
them, or parley with them in his spirit, this is a mighty work, and yet it is
the duty of Saints. So that as the Romans had this inscription upon their
Targets nec spe nec metu; neither by hope nor fear, would they ever prove
renegadoes, or become unfaithful; So though the world presents it self to us
in several forms, and complexsions, sometimes to affright, sometimes to
ensnare, yet a Christians work is to stand steadfast against both.

6. A Sixth thing that is apt to disquiet, and to remove the soul from her
foundation is the darkness of divine administrations; when God makes clouds
to be his chariots, rides along in the dark quite out of the creatures sight:
when there appears no harmony between Promises and Providence, the word and
works of God.

And this either in the more internal, or external works of the Almighty.

First internal, when God does alter his administrations to a poor soul;
when he shall frown as a Judge, who even now did smile as a Father; When he
shall cover his face with a dark cloud, that even now shone forth with much
sweetness and glory: when the soul shall still follow God, and yet God seems
to depart farther off; when the soul shall cry, and God seems not either to
hear, or regard: but all his administrations speak that he loves her not,
ownes her not, but intends to cast her off: Now for the soul to be un shaken,
not to faint or be discouraged, not to say, Surely I have cleansed my heart in
vain. I will go back to my former lovers: and as the Israelites, Arise, and
make us Gods to go before us, for as for this Moses that brought us out of
Egypt, we know not what is become of him. For the soul yet to bear up Exo.
32. 1.
stoutly in confidence of the love of God, and rather to rest upon, and wait
for a frowning, chiding, delaying God, than to embrace a smiling, courting,
flattering world, this is her work and duty.

And so in the more external works of God to his Church abroad, When instead
of rasing her, he shall suffer her to fall yet lower, and lower; in ste ad of
making up her breaches they seem still to grow wider, and wider, and she is
speaking as the Jews, Jer. 8. 15. We looked for peace, but no good came; and
for a time of health, but behold trouble. And the whole course of Providence
speaks as if God had quite cast her off. Now all this while to stand fast, to
rest confident of Sions prosperity and glory, and that all these strange
administrations shall be made serviceable thereunto; this is the work and duty
of Saints. David though a man raised up on high, yet professes that when he
viewed the strange methods of Providence, His feet were almost gone, his steps
had welnigh ^lipt, Psalm. 73. 2. It was a strange work that Abraham was called
unto, to offer up Isaac, which was not alone his only son, his beloved
son, the son of his old age, but the son of the promises, in whose seed
all the nations of the earth were to be blessed: so that Abraham by such an act
might seem to undo the world; yet he did it without staggering, being strong
in faith. And so God brought his people out of Egypt into Canaan by a strange
series of providence, so that they were all shaken and offended but Joshua and
Caleb, who followed after God, and stood steadfast.

The seventh and last thing that is apt to shake and remove the soul from her
foundation, is strange Doctrines, these are said

To toss to and fro, Ephesians. 4. 14. (...).

To carry about, Heb. 13. 9.
To shake as a ship upon the waves, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2.
To turn aside, 1 Timothy 1. 6.
Now here a Christian is to show his steadfastness, to stand firm upon the Rock
of truth, whilst strange doctrines, like so many impetuous waves, are beating
upon him, and breaking themselves to pieces against it, till at last they are
turned into mere froth and foame. A Christian indeed is always to be in
motion, and advancing higher in the Sphere of Christianity: but it must be
still upon the Rock, and in the straight line of Truth.

Thus have we finished the first particular.

The next is to show you the means whereby GOD brings up the Soul to this
Heroic and Princely frame; and he does it by a double act: of Illumination and
Mortification.

1. Of Illumination: He enlightens the soul to see himself as he appears in
Christ, to see the gracious designs of God upon her; and the glory of the
Godhead breaking forth into her through him, does thus establish her.

1. It establishes her against the guilt of sin, she beholds God himself
become her righteousness; and in that righteousness, justifying, accepting,
adopting, yea embracing and kissing her. And now the Chains of her bondage are
falling off, the dark night of her fears passing away, and the storms of
divine wrath, and of her own troubles, sweetly blown over: yea, she finds such
a calmnesse and tranquillity, such peace passing all understanding, possessing
and filling all her powers, as none can comprehend, but those that have felt
it. This is that white stone with the new name, which none know but those that
Rev. 2. 17. Gal. 4. 6.
receive it: This is the cry and witness of the Spirit: these are the
speakings of Christ's blood in the soul; and the sprinkling Heb. 12. 24
of the heart from an evil conscience, Heb. 10. 22:

2. This does establish her also against Satan and his temptations; for in this
appearance of God in Christ to her, she does not only in the letter, and in
the notion, but truly and really in the Spirit behold her self a conqueror
over Satan; yea trampling him under her feet. Yea she beholds herself so
embraced in the arms of mercy, so infolded in the bosom of Love and Grace, so
settled upon the Rock of eternity, that Principalities and Powers, the gates of
Hell shall never be able to pull her away, or to prevail against her. Paul
seeing this in that Romans 8. makes his Challenge against all enemies, who shall
ever separate us from the love of God which is in Jesus Christ? So that though
Satan casts his fiery darts, and follows her with his temptations, yet upon
this account she is fully established and at peace.

3. This appearance of God in Christ does establish her also against the Law:
For why? She now sees herself translated out of that old estate over which
the law had dominion. We know the law it was made with the first Adam, and
whiles we grow upon him as our root, while we continue in union and marriage
with the Old Man, and the flesh, we are under the law; but now in this
appearance, the soul sees her self married to a new Husband, the old Man
being crucified, and the old match dissolved upon the Cross of Christ, and now
she is no longer under the law of her former husband, as the Apostle does
c^early speak this, Romans 7. 1, 2, 3. He first does lay down the metaphor of the
woman being under the law of her husband while her husband lives, and her
freedom from that law when her husband is dead; and then applies it, v. 4.
Wherefore my brethren, ye also are become dead to the Law by the body of
Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from
the dead. Upon the Cross of Christ the old man, the first husband to us all,
was crucified, that we might be no longer under the law to him, but be free to
marry to, and come under the law of another husband, even him who is raised
from the dead.

Now in this divine appearance of God in Christ, the soul does indeed see this
mystery, and so is established against the law; so that now this law of Christ,
which is the law of love, and the Spirit prevailing, it swallows up all other
laws into it self, and the whole man is under the command of it.

In this appearance of God in Christ, the soul is also established against the
fear of death: for hereby she beholds the sting of death removed, and her
self made one with the Fountain of life, and by death to be brought into the
most intimate conjunction with it.

5. In this appearance is the soul established also against the world. And
first against the frowns of it: hereby she beholds God himself become her
buckler and shield, hiding her in his pavillion, taking her into the secret of
his tabernacle, and standing on her side, and therefore fears not the frowns
and threats of the world. This did so confirm David, that he says, His heart
should not fear, even though an host encamped against Psalm. 27.
him. Though they may touch his outward man, yet that which is most properly
himself, as a Saint, they cannot reach.

As Philo reports of Anaxarchus, that being brought (...). Philo p. 682.
under tortures to confess a secret, he spoke thus, You may beat the skin and
cask of Anaxarchus, but you cannot touch Anaxarchus himself. A Christian sees
his treasure, his portion, his life, his heaven, his all so secured in God, so
set out of the reach of the world, as that he is not shaken, when the world is
pouring out floods of wrath and violence against him.

Hereby is the soul established also against the smiles of the world, this
casts a dark veil upon all earthly glory, that we may say of it as the Apostle
of the administration of the Law, 2 Cor. 3. 10. That it had no glory, by reason
of the glory which excels. As by the shining of the greater light of the
Sun, all other light is contracted and retires into that body wherein it is
placed: so does the appearance of this higher glory in Christ, shrink up,
contract, and even annihilate all other beside it self; that now the great
things of the world appear as small things; the precious things of the world,
as mean and worthless, the high things of the world are now degraded and come
down from that height wherein they stood before, and are brought to lie under
the feet of a Saint: so that now the soul truly and strongly pursues after
God, his glory in Christ having caught her up into such a blessed captivity to
it self, as that the glistering beauties of the world do no whit divert or
retard her in her pursuit after it, and she remains unshaken; yea, even
invincible, by reason of her immixt and immutable love of this divine beauty,
and her full propension to that Dionys. Arcopag. de Coelest. hierarch. cap. 2
which is truly desirable, as Dionysius the Arcopagite divinely speaks. Yea,
she beholds all that finite, particular, deceived good in the creature, to be
but a low communion of the infinite, original, and universal good that is in
God, and therefore is not called of by the stream from the fountain, by the
particular from the universal, by the finite from the infinite. Moses was not
tempted by Heb. 11.
the glory of Pharaohs Court, seeing him that is invisible, and having respect
to the recompense of reward. And the Lord Jesus having his eye still fixed upon
the beauties and glory of the Godhead, did by this overcome the temptation of
Satan, and the allurements of the world.

And according to that degree that any Christian is brought up to this sight of
God in Christ, does he thus remain steadfast, both against the frowns and
flatteries of the world.

6. By this appearance of God in Christ is the soul established also against
the darkness of divine dispensations; by this she comes to see that this
infinite love in God to her is not, cannot be founded upon any thing in her
self, for she beholds nothing but vileness and emptiness in her self, but
upon the unchangable righteousness, the infinite and invalluable merit of the
Lord Jesus; and therefore how ever the dispensations of God to her are changed,
and she finds her self changed, yet by this she is established, kept from
sinking, because the foundation of love is still the same, and how ever the
face of God speaks wrath and displeasure, yet the mystery, the design of God
in Christ speaks unchangable love; yea she can by faith behold her self
enjoying a fullness of love, joy, and glory in Christ, while she can behold and
feel none of these in her self.

Upon this account also is she established under all the strange acts of
providence to the Church abroad, seeing his love to her settled upon such
imu^table grounds, that he cannot cast her off; and that this love still
follows her in every condition, and will certainly work her out of all her
wants, darkness, distresses, conflicts, into perfect fullness, perfect light,
salvation and victory.

7. Lastly, by this appearance is the soul established, against strange
doctrines; for by it she comes to see truths, especially fundamental, as it is
in Jesus, she comes to taste its sweetness, to see its beauty, and to be
convinced of its authenticknesse by the demonstration of divine light; and
therefore will hold it as invaluable treasure against the gates of hell. As
that Martyr spoke, I cannot dispute for my religion, but I can die for my
religion; Such a Christian is able to fetch Arguments not alone from the Letter
without, but from the Spirit within to confute Errors by; He is able
experimentally to assert such truths as these, That we are justified by grace
alone; That there is no power in man to good supernatural; That the grace of
God works irresistably; That the union between Christ and the soul is
inseparable; And that a full assurance of eternal life is attainable. These
and many such like can the soul put her seal to, and therefore holds them
fast; So that holiness and communion with God are better supportes of Truth in
the world, than any Coercive decrees, or wrangling disputes, and reasonings.

The Letter of truth may delight the fancy, but it is the Spirit that makes it
relish in the soul; the ointment does not smell til the box is opened, nor the
Jewel shine whiles it lies in the Cabinet; Truth must be unvailed in spiritual
light before the soul can prize it, or hold it fast.

Thus have we spoken to the first Act.

2. The Second is an act of mortification, the flesh in a Christian is the
fountain of all unstedfastnesse; the more this is cruicified the more is he
established and at peace; The Spirit would always lie and live in the bosom
of God, the only Center of true rest, did not the flesh call it off and so
disquiet it; now God is daily bringing the soul into this steadfast frame, by
crucifying it to the flesh, and gathering it up into his own unchangable life
and Spirit; And therefore Mystical Divines Di^imus itaque assiduis ad deu^
connitendo aspirationibus aque totalibus contrariorli mortificationibus et
abolutionibus homines Spirituales status hujus de^formis immutabilitate pot^ri.
Isagoge Corderit ad Mist. Theol. Cap. 5.
to bring up the soul to that Deiforme state which they speak of, which is the
perfect conjunction of the soul with God, and the enjoyment of an eternal
Sabbath in him, they first prescribe a daily mortification, for the soul
cannot enjoy this peaceful conjunction with God, till the unquiet principle of
the flesh is crucified in her.

And she especially is crucified to these three things which are causes of much
unstedfastnesse, A sensual life, Private ends, Proper will.

1. A sensual life, in this life is the soul hurried up and down, changing
according to the several changes and motions of times and things about her; as
they rise and fall, ebb or flow so does the soul; of what Complexion the world
is and outward administrations, of the same is the soul also: as the fish
Polypus that Pliny mentions that always is of the same color with the Rock by
which she lies.

Now God comes and crucifies her to this life, draws her out of this lower
region where she is always restless; into an upper region, to live upon
things invisible, unchangable, and eternal, even his own truth, power, wisdom,
goodness, yea himself; and now she is upon a firm * Basis, a rock that moves
not. Yea he brings her to live, not alone above humane sense, but even above
divine The Hebrew word (...) signifying Lord, comes from (...), that signifies
a Basis.
sense, not upon influences from God, but upon God himself, that she might be
more fully established.

2. Private ends, making himself to be her end, whiles a man is carrying on
self ends, his motion must needs be crooked, and irregular, and the spirit
must needs be distracted, moving as it were to several Centres, like a needle
betwixt two Loadstones, that is drawn by both, is quivering in the middle, and
moves to neither; Now God crucifies it to these self ends, making himself that
ultimate end to which it singly moves; subordinating all other ends to
himself, and so does establish and settle it.

3. Her own Will; this is a root of bitterness in the soul, that takes away
the sweetness of her rest in God. This is that Castle which every man by
nature keeps garrisoned against heaven, and by it maintains a deadly Cesset
propria voluntas and non erit infernum. Bern.
fight against God himself; and this clashing of man's will and Gods, makes
great tumults in the soul, till God comes and crucifies this proper will, and
melts it into his own will, and so makes peace. As in Christ the humane will
did subsist in the divine, and carried it along freely in all things without
reluctance: so when God brings the will of the creature to subsist in, and to
be acted by own will, that it is now no longer what I will, but what God wills
in me, and concerning me, this harmony and marriage of wills does fill the soul
with peace, and brings her to the very walls of Paradise Omne^ temporum
difficultatem sciet lege^ ei naturae, etc. Senec. de vita beata. Omnia tibi ex
sententia cedent, nihil adversum accidet, nihil contra opinionem ac voluntate^.
Ibid.
. As Seneca speaks very high language for an heathen, That a virtuous man not
only patiently, but Willingly bears all adversity, and upon this account,
because he esteems it to be the law of Nature, and to such a man nothing falls
out cross, or contrary to his will. What he calls the law of Nature, that we
call the will of God, which when we have brought our wills to comply with,
nothing falls out cross, or contrary to us, and so the soul is composed and
quiet in all the various dispensations of Providence to her.

Thus having explained these two particulars, we shall next give you an account
of the grounds upon which the point is built: they are these three.

The first is from our own advantage. The second is from the honor of Christ.
The third is from the end of the Gospel.
From our own advantage whiles the Soul stands fast

Safest Fullest Strongest Freest state.

1. Safest: Never does she catch hurt but by declining and moving from her
Center; while she abides here, the wicked one does not touch her, the world
does neither affright nor allure her: But departing hence, she is as a Biro
from her Nest, as a Coney from her Borough, as a Manslayer from the City of
Refuge; every sin masters her, every temptation ensnares and conquers her.

The Name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runs into it and is
safe: or, is set aloft, as the word carries (...) Pro. 18. 10.
it when the soul is Castled and Towered in this Name, then is she above the
reach of every enemy.

Antichrist is the child of Apostasy: he sprung out of the corruption of the
Church, and her restoring will be his ruin.

2. Fullest: The soul living upon her foundation, is daily fed with the
Strength, Vigor, and Virtue of the foundation, and is passing and transforming
into the nature of it, 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5. To whom coming as to a living stone,
you also as lively stones are built up, etc. The stones being laid upon this
foundation, are quickened by it into the same life.

This truth under another metaphor we read John 15. 5. He that abides in me,
and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit; for without me you can do
nothing. This abiding I conceive speaks out more then union with Christ by
habitual faith, viz. a continual act of faith, whereby the soul keeps close
to him, and lives upon him; and by this means receives such daily supplies of
spiritual sap, as makes her to abound with fruit. Living besides the foundation
is the reason that Christians for the most part live at so low a rate, they
live upon Creatures, upon their own duties, graces, enjoyments, and therefore
are no fuller of peace, strength, and joy.

3. The strongest state: now is the soul able to encounter her greatest
enemies, now does she stand stoutly against the fiercest assaults, they are
but like Arrows against a wall of Marble that make no impression, but are beat
back with violence. As Darkness can make no resistance to Light, but scatters
and flies before it, so 1 John 1. 7. Romans 13. 12.
whiles a Saint walks in the light, and is dressed up in his armor of light,
his enemies being all darkness, vanish before him, and are overcome by him,
Sampson while he kept his hair, the token of his Nazariteship, he was strong
and invincible, when he lost this, was conquered presently.

Every Christian is under the vow of spiritual Nazariteship, Nazarite comes
from (...) that signifies to separate.
that is, is one separate to God, as the word imports; whiles he keeps this
vow, lives as one separate to God, out of the flesh and the world, upon
himself the true foundation, he is a Giant in spiritual strength, and always
conquering: but when he separates from God, breaks his vow, lives not according
to the laws of his Nazariteship, out of his own flesh and the world, now is his
strength departed, and he is even as weak as another man. What a building is
removed from the foundation, what a tree is without its root, that is a
Christian when he is departed from God.

4. The freest state: every degree that we move from the foundation, we move
into captivity, and thraldom.

Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, and when 2 Cor. 3. 17.
we live in this Spirit, which is to abide upon our foundation, then are we
free men and women. (...), ^hilo in lib. quoth omnis probus liber.


The Heathens accounted only virtuous men free men, that had their lusts and
passions under command: surely if this be liberty, as indeed it is, he that
lives most directly upon his foundation, lives in greatest conquest over his
lusts, and so most at liberty.

The second place of reason is from the Honor of stain upon his glory when we
stand not fast.

1. We dishonor him in his Sufferings, yea in all his great transactions for
us in the flesh, when we stand not fast. He has sweat, bled, died, rose again,
that he might bring us into a state of Conquest over all our enemies; and
having conquered them for us, he calls us as Joshua did Josh. 10. 24.
the men of Israel in the type, to set our feet upon their necks, and triumph
over them: Now what dishonor is this to Christ, if we shall fly before these
enemies that he has thus conquered. You know of whom it was said, Hanniball.
that he knew how to conquer, but not how to use his conquests. We improve not
our victory aright, if we stand not fast, if we keep not those enemies still
under us, that have been conquered for us.

2. We dishonor him in his Spirit; that Spirit which was in Christ, and
brought him off with conquest in all his agonies, conflicts and sufferings, he
has given to dwell in the heart of every Christian that it might bring them up
into the same victory. When therefore we suffer our selves to be overcome, we
grieve, we dishonor, that victorious, that So that word may be read, 51. p.
12. (...)
princely Spirit which dwells within us; does not this speak that there is more
power in Satan to destroy, then in this Spirit to save, that he that is in us,
is lesser then he that is in the world.

3. We dishonor him in his truth, how does the Gospel suffer when those that
profess it stand not fast? how do the enemies of the Gospel triumph over the
truth, Religion, Gospel, all, when Christians fall? Lactantius professes that
he saw in Bithynia a chief Ruler boasting, tanquam barbarorum gentem aliquam
subegisset, as if he had overcome some great Nation, when he had made but one
poor Christian renounce his profession, which Lact. lib. 5. cap. 11.
he had for two years stoutly maintained against all his tormentours. And I
remember it is an argument that he much insists upon, to prove the truth of the
Christian religion by, viz. the constancy and unmovablenesse of Christians,
Eadem ubique patientia, idem contemptus mortis, etc.

4. We dishonor him in his alsufficency, as if he could not protect us against
all evil, and supply us with all good; as if we might find some good in the
creature which is not in himself, for if that we find all fullness here, why
then do we not steadfastly abide in him.

From the end of the Gospel, there are three things faith, hope, and joy; and
the Gospel is said to be written to work all these in us, First, joy, 1 John
1. 4. These things we write unto you that your joy may be full. Secondly,
faith, 1 John 5. 13. These things we write that you may believe on the name of
the Son of God. Thirdly, hope, Romans 15. 4. That we through patience and comfort
of the scriptures might have hope: But there are especially three things
revealed in the Gospel which will establish the soul. John 16. ult. 1 Cor. 15.
penult.


1. In the Gospel is revealed, our conquest in Christ over all our enemies; and
may not this be a strong bulwark to establish the soul against all their
assaults, that she has to do with conquered enemies. By this the Roman
General sought to put new courage into the ^cipi^.
hearts of his Soldiers, telling them, Cum iis est vobis hodie pugnandum quos
priori bello terra marique vicistis, you are to encounter with those to day
whom in a former battle you conquered both by Land and Sea.

2. In the Gospel is revealed that sweet fellowship we 1 John 1. 3.
have with the Father and the Son: And what will more tend to establish the
soul in all conditions than this, that she is made one with power, wisdom,
life, and happiness it self; and beholding the infinite God giving himself to
be her shield, reward, and portion. As God to quiet the heart of Abraham when
he had left country, kindred, lands, all to follow him, tells him Genesis 15. 1. I
am thy shield, thy exceeding great rewara. Emptiness is as fullness, loss as
gain, poverty as riches, death as life, nothing as all things to that soul
that has heard such language from heaven.

3. In the Gospel is revealed, the hope of our caling, that inheritance
imortall, incorruptible, undefiled, reserved for us in the heavens, 1 Pet. 1.
4. and this being seen will carry on the soul with steadfastness, and
invincible resolutions to the possession of it.

It was Canaan that the Israelites had in their eye that encouraged them to
walk through the midst of the Sea, through a land of drought, of deserts and
pits, and the shadow of death. The recompense of reward Moses had in his eye,
which made him neither to decline by the flatteries of the Court, nor the
afflictions of the Church; The incorruptible crown was in the eye of Paul,
which made him not to faint in his race, and to keep his body under, and in
subjection. 1 Cor. 9. latter end, yea to glory in the cross of Jesus. Gal. 1.
4. The joy set before Christ made him to endure the cross, and to despise the
shame, Heb. 12. 2.

Thus you have an account of the Reasons. The main part of the Sermon is yet
behind, which lies in the bringing of all these thruths home to our own
hearts, and that we now are addressing to in the strength of Christ.

From what has bin said may not every soul here present weep, mourn, and
bleed afresh before the Lord this day. Could I have insisted upon any Point
that speaks out so much to our shame and debasement, that may lay us lower in
the dust than this I am now upon; who is there that may not take up a sad
lamentation over the instability of his own heart? and its cursed declinings
from the true foundation every day. When men take an account of their stature
in Christianity by the performance of some external duties, and the avoiding
of gross and scandalous sins, by the goodlinesse of their profession, etc.
They are ready to say as the young man in the Gospel, Master what lack I yet;
But if they lay themselves in this Balance, measure themselves by this rule,
try themselves by this touchstone, Oh, how exceeding light, short, and corrupt
will they be found.

This is that which God so sadly complains of in his own people, Psalm. 78. 7,
8. They are a rebelious generation, a generation that set not their hearts
aright, and whose spirit was not steadfast with God. And ver. 37. Their heart
was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant; And ver.
41. They turned back and tempted God, etc. Unstedfastnesse is the retreat of
the soul from her true foundation, playing fast and loose with God.

And may not we all join in with God in these complaints over our own hearts;
and cry out with the Prophet Psalm 19. 12. Who can understand his errors? we
may as easily know the way of an Egle in the air; the various windings and
turnings of a Serpent upon a Rock; the motion of a Ship upon the wide Sea, as
to track and find out the way of this adulterous woman, THE FLESH, in all her
secret and whorish departings from God; It is a thing to wonderful for us.

Therefore the Prophet Jeremiah looking into the heart of man concludes, that
of all deceitful things it is most deceitful; and so deceitful as none can
know it but infinite wisdom, God himself, Jer. 17. 9. the words there in the
Hebrew run thus, The heart is a supplanter above all (...)
things, and sick; This is the great sickness and distemper, that it labors
under, that it is so full of unquietness, tumbling and tossing up and down;
running from creature to creature, and no where can find rest, because it
seeks it not in God. Oh that we had eyes to see this sickness, and hearts to
weep over this wound that is yet unhealed, and bleeding fresh in our souls
to this day, Oh how exceeding apt are we to be affrighted, or allured from God,
and our work and duty; What by carnal fears, what by carnallhopes, I fear
the best of us live but little upon the true foundation, although God has
given us in all the helps to establish us, has yielded himself to the
greatest advantage of our faith; has bound himself to us, and us to himself in
all the bonds and obligations as may be, yet these treacherous hearts of ours
do break all bands asunder, cast away all cords from them. Philo a learned
man among the Jews speaks thus, If thou will search into the bottom of thine
heart, and not superficially, thou shall find it an hard matter to believe,
and rest steadfastly on God, and he gives this reason, (...). Philo in lib. Quis
rerum divinarum haeres fit.
because of that affinity and kindred, and connaturalnesse that is betwixt us
and mortal things; which are apt to draw us to trust in them, and therefore
(...). Ibid.
to trust in God alone (he says) it is the work of a great and heavenly
spirit. The best of us have as well flesh as spirit, and so far as we are flesh
there is great suitablenes betwixt us and these earthly things; and therefore
they have such an atractive force in them to draw us from our standing, and
repose in God alone.

And yet, alas Sirs, do we know what we do when we thus backslide from God,
and embrace the creature? do not we go, from strength to weakness, from
light to darkness, from fullness to amptinesse, from truth to lies, from all
things to a mere nothing.? And can we look upon this with dry eyes, unbroken
hearts, and faces not covered with shame? Oh let it be your work this day to
see this and lament it, and I shall freely bear you company, (as I have cause)
in it.

And (Right Honorable) let me desire you also to deal uprightly with your
selves, and ingenuously-search into your own hearts, and see whether you may
not have cause to join in with us in the same work also.

I confess you have been put upon as great trials as ever any Parliament, or
such a Society of men was, sometimes God has raised you up into a very high
estate, and that estate was not without its tentations, and sometimes you have
bin thrown down again as low, and that estate has had its tentations also.
Sometimes the whole Kingdom has seemed to be with you, or under you: sometimes
as wholly against you; Now amidst all these tumblings of the Kingdom, these
different complexions of the times, have you bin steadfast, still the same; kept
your selves close to the true principles upon which you and the well-affected in
this Kingdom first engaged in this Cause? Though the people, mobile vulgus,
have in themselves bin inconstant, sometimes for you, sometimes against you,
yet have they still had a fixed station in you; that you have bin no whit
diverted, or discouraged in your endeavors to save them, whilst they have bin
seeking to destroy you and themselves also.

And give me leave (Sirs) in all humility, and yet with all freedom as a
Messenger from God to propound these few Quaeres to you, which I desire you to
make a faithful Answer of, to that God that knows you, and is within you.

All instability is either in the Eye, in the Heart, in the Tongue, or in the
Hand. And have you been unstable, unstedfast in none of these?

1. Have you been steadfast in your Eye, or Ends, that from the very first day
of your sitting, your eye has been still fixed upon the same common end, the
glory of God, and the public advantage: that as in the guiding of a Ship upon
the Sea, at the sametime we mey see manus ad clavum, oculos ad coelum, hands
guiding the Rudder, and eyes fixed upon the heavens; so while your hands have
been upon the Rudder, steering the torn Ship of this Commonwealth upon a
raging Sea, ^ have you had your eyes fixed upon an heavenly end? Or have they
not sometimes at least, been looking a-squint, and rolling aside to some
private end and interest of your own?

2. Have you been steadfast in your Hearts, or affection? Have they been firm,
and born up stoutly against all opposition, and discouragements that you have
met with in that great work which has been under your hands? Or have you not
been closing, at least some of you, with indirect means for your own security,
in case the Cause should miscarry?

3. Have you been steadfast in your Tongue, or Language? I mean in your debates
and votes, that still in all the changes of the times they have savoured of as
much zeal, justice, resolution, as ever? Or else have they not altered in the
nature of them, according to the present emergency of things abroad; or the
instigation of some private end, or party at home?

4. Have you been steadfast in your hand, or actions? have you not been drawn to
act something out of fear or favor, which has not born proportion to some
former proceedings?

Have not popular Arguments, as the pleasing or displeasing the people, been
used or enter tained by you, or some of you, to decline former Conclusions, and
those settled upon good Foundations of Religion and Justice? Not but that upon
the Emergencie of things, unseene, there may and ought to be a change in men's
actions and resolutions, when we change that we may still be in the ways of
righteousness; but to alter upon carnal grounds, is unworthy a man, much more
a Christian, much more such a society of Christians met upon affairs of so
great importance and influence.

If you, or any of you, can in these things acquit your selves, you have great
cause to bless God that has thus established you: if not, let it open a
Fountain of tears and sorrows in your hearts in this day.

The next use, which is the main, is to invite and encourage

And (Honored Patriots) give me leave first-to address my self to you as
CHRISTIANS, and so I shall speak to my self and the whole Congregation: and
then as you are the TRUSTEES of the Kingdom.

1. As Christians, so you are both Wayfaring and Warfaring men: O let nothing
be able to divert you in the race you are running, or to dismay you in the
battles you are fighting. What ever it is that seeks to draw you off from the
true foundation, say to it as Christ to Peter, Get thee hehinde me Satan, yea
fight against it as the enemy of your safety, liberty, strength and fullness.
Yea, say to it as Peter to his Savior, Whither should we go, have not thou
the keys of eternal life? Is there any creature can open me the door to
enter into li^^ and true peace? Is there any foundation that (...) the weight
of my immortal soul, but God alone? Is there any good but the enjoyment of
God, that can run parallel with the line of eternity? Or has my God been a
barren Heath, or dry Wilderness to me, that I should distrust him, or depart
from him?

It is left in Story concerning Catilines Army in a fight against the Romans,
though most of his men were slain, yet every man was found dead in the place
where the Captain set him: So beloved, let nothing affright us from S^lust.
our standing; but if we die, let us die upon our Rock, in the actual embraces
of Jesus. And if any of us have adulterously departed from God, let us now come
back, and say, I will return to my former husband, for then it was better with
me, then now, Hosea 2. 7.

The Scriptures do much press this every where Luke 9. 62. No man laying his
hand to the Plow and looking (...)
back, is fit for the kingdom of Heaven, is not a man well constituted for
such a kingdom. When once we are entered the possession of this kingdom, the
glory and pleasure of it are so to ingrosse the whole man, as that we must
never look back. And Lot and his wise in their departure from Sodom, were
commanded not to look back

Christianity is a daily departing out of spi^ituall Sodom, the Flesh, the seat
of all uncleanesse; being departed from it, let us never look back with
lingering desires, to come again into acquaintance and fellowship with it, but
fly and escape from it, as for our life; for who ever lives in it, will be
destroyed with it. (...). A millta^y word from Soldiers, whose revolt^ng or
flying (...) odious.


So the Apostle, Heb. 11. 38. If any man draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasur^ in him: it is a qualifyed expression, he means that such persons and
practices are abhorred and loathed by him.

Solomon gives this description of a righteous man, Prove. 28. 1. The righteous
are as bold as a Lion, as a young Lion, who turns not back for any. The
primitive (...) Et neseit remeare Leo. Claud.
Christians would not yield to Arrius in a Letter: We cannot be too peremptory
and rigid in such cases as these.

To these we might add innumerable examples of Martyrs, in primitive and
latter times, whose constancy and resolution against all tentations, is
incredible: Ecclesiastical Stories will abundantly furnish us with examples of
this kind. I shall mention only one passage out of Lactantius: Says he, That
I Nostri autem (ut de viris ta ceam) pueri and mulierculae tortores suos taciti
vincunt, and expromere illis gemitu^ nec ignis potest. Lact. lib. 5. cap. 13.
may not speak of men, our women and children being silent, do evercome their
tormentors, and the very fire cannot so much as extort a figh from them.

Yea the very Heathens constancy and firmness was admirable, though it was
but a gilded Vice, a wild Branch, not springing from a divine root. When
Alexander the great was in India, he met with a Sect of Philosophers whom he
desired to acquaint him with the greatest Rarity of their Country, of Vide
Philone^ in lib. Quoth omnu probus liber. and ubique passim.
which he might inform the Grecians. They bid him report this, That there were
there certain men who could never be forced to change their mind, or to do
those things which they were unwilling to. And whom no Prince upon earth should
ever make to act the least thing contrary to Bonus nec cogi potest, nec vetari.
their opinion.

If this was the constancy of Heathens to some slight Opinions and Principles
growing upon the root of Nature, how much more should Christians that are set
upon an everlasting Rock, be firm to those principles that they have received
by supernatural revelation and infusion.

And here (beloved) let me particularly entreat your constancy to that Cause in
which you are engaged. If it be not good, why did you at first engage; if it
be, why should you ever desert it. Did you own it in the midst of difficulties
and outward uncertainties, and will you now leave it when as God has crowned
it with such admirable success and victory. Be not like foolish children,
because you have not all you would have therefore to throw all away. And let
not some miscarriages in instruments redound to the disadvantage of the cause
it self.

But more particularly I desire to address to you (honorable and beloved) as
you are the Trustees of the kingdom. In you I see this day the whole kingdom
before me, and for your sakes I have pitched upon this Text and Theme; the sum
of all I have to say to you, is this, Remember your trust, and stand fast: you
have the liberties, wealth, safety, prosperity of this great people put into
your hands, hold them fast, they lie upon your shoulders, therefore stand firm.
The Poets feigned that Atlas did bear up the heavens with his shoulders, and
that when he stirred, it caused an earthquake: under God you are to bear up the
pillars of this kingdom, and can you move, and give back, and not the kingdom
shake, and in danger of a sad fall?

What the Sun is in the Firmament, what the heart is in the body, that are
you (Sirs) in this Nation: If the Sun should go back, would not all men
wonder? And if the heart keep not steadfast to that place and function assigned
it in nature, would not the pillars of the body bow and tremble?

Solomon had two pillars in the porch of the Temple; the name of the one was
Jachin, signifying he will establish; of the other Boaz, there is strength in
it. Ye are as these pillars to this Commonwealth; win to your selves the name
of Boaz for your strength and firmness, and of Jachin by establishing the
true liberties and interests of this Nation, that your memory may be renowned
and precious in future Generations, and both we and posterity after us may call
this the Parliament which the Lord has blessed.

And particularly let me be bold to commend to you these four particulars,
wherein it will especially concern you to show your selves steadfast: and
resolved by the assistance of that God who has hitherto been with you, not to
sit down till they be accomplished. And what I shall speak is not my own
thoughts alone, but the desire and expectation of all your truest friends in
this Nation.

1. In the full vindication of our liberty from oppression and tyranny; this
Kingdom as well as other Nations about us have a long time groaned for it: but
it has been curbed and stifled by Prerogative and Arbitrary power: It has
been coming to the birth in former Parliaments, but had not strength to come
forth. Oh be you the Mid-wives to show it the light, and bring it forth in its
full proportion.

And I entreat your care and wisdom in settling it upon some sure foundation.
Verbal assurances are not foundations strong enough for so precious and weighty
a fabric. I have read of Sylla the Dictator, having condemned to death all
the Inhabitants of Peronza, save his Host, his Host refused his pardon, saying,
* (...). Eurip.
that he would not hold his life of the murderer of his Country! Oh let us
never hold our liberties, estates, lives of those that would have destroyed us.
You cannot (Sirs) be too circumspect in this point, especially if you consider
what a precious jewel, what a comprehensive good the true Liberty of a people
is; as also when you have to deal with men whose principles are known to be
against it.

It was an usual saying of Lysander, Admiral of the Lacedaemonians, that if
the Lions skin would not do, the Foxes skin is to be sewed on; your enemies
have not been able to overcome you as Lions, take heed they do not deceive you
as Foxes.

I have read of Iphicrates an Athenian, in the making of a league with the
Lacedaemonians, interposed this. There is one thing (O Lacedemonia^s) that would
link us to you in the band of Amity, and be the occasion of peace and
security; which is, if that you can plainly demonstrate that you have put that
power into our hands, as that would you never so fain hurt us, you should not
be able. I know absolute and infallible security cannot be had of any outward
enjoyme^ts, yet God has given you opportunity of doing much for us this way if
you improve it and stand fast. This is the first.

2. Show your resolution in the freeing of our Consciences from yokes and
snares; you know in the times of the Prelates this did most pinch and lay
heaviest upon the spirits of Saints, and who would not then have given the
greatest part of his estate to purchase but The Jerusalemy Paraphrast
expounds the Fowls to be the Monarchies that affl^cted Israel. Vide
Ainsworth in Genesis 15. 11.
part of that freedom we now enjoy. And this great privilege (Right Honorable)
how ever some may undervalue it, God has enabled you to bestow upon this
nation, you have been as Abraham to drive away those * ravens and unclean
fowls that did prey upon the Saints in this kingdom, show your selves still
resolved to free us from these yoakes. It cannot be believed that ever you will
suffer that Prelatical power to creep up again under any form or name
whatsoever. Did you covenant against Name only, or was it the name that did
oppress and tyrannize? or will the mere chainging of our claim free us?

I remember a passage in a A Declaration of Lords and Comm^n^ concerning the
Papers of the Scots Commissi^ners. March 13. 1647. page 43.
late Declaration, where you speak thus. We through the mercy of God, have got
so far out of the darkness of Popish and Prelaticall principles, as not to
revive them under any image or shape whatsoever. And the Lord grant that that
darkness never return upon your spirits, or cloud the face of this Nation. And
I am confident, that the protection, freedom, and countenance which the people
of God have had under you, above all Parliaments before you, is one great
reason of that blessed success wherewith God has crowned your endeavors.

This is the main end of all government higher and subordinate, to advance the
kingdom of Jesus Christ, and protect and cherish his people. And how ever they
are a poor despised people in the world, yet God upholds States and
Monarchies, Common wealths and Kingdoms, yea the world it self for their sakes;
And when once government kicks at these, it will be broken to pieces, though
never so well compacted and founded. Therefore (worthy Senators) how ever times
may alter, and things turn about, if you would establish your selves and the
Kingdom, let these still be protected and cherished under your wings.

3. In the execution of Justice, fear not the power or greatness of any; A
virtuous man (as a wise Heathen said) ought not to consider anything in his
actions, but whether it be good or evil, just or unjust. If it be just and
good, God will carry you through it against all the world. The counsel that
Jehosaphat gives to the Judges I shall give to you, 2 Ch^on. 19. 6, 7. Take
he^d what ye do, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in
the judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed
and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of
persons, nor taking of gifts. And in the last words of the Chapter, Deal
courageously, and the Lord shall be with the (...)
good. Remember that to justify the wicked, and condemn Be strong, and do.
the just, both are an abomination unto the Lord. Does innocent blood cry, and
will you not hear it what it speaks, what it demands, whom it accuses? Blood
cannot be buried in a grave of Oblivion; for the Earth will Isa. 26. ult.
disclose its blood, and no longer cover its slain.

I remember what Jehoshaphat complains of, 2 Chronicles. 20. 11. They spared the
Ammonites in their march to Canaan, invaded not their Land, yet afterward they
came in battle against them; Now O Lord (says he) behold how they reward us,
to come to cast us out of thy possession which thou have given us to inherit. I
am sure you have cause to complain that you have been ill rewarded by some, for
the favor you have showed them; it has not won them over to you, but
emholdened them against you; and rendered your Authority more contemptible. And
therefore did you only move upon principles of just policy, you could not well
dispense with justice; But surely you are in this case to act upon higher
grounds; has not your cause been styled the Cause of God, and your wars the
wars of Christ against Antichrist? For what ever power it is that does press
the forms of godliness to the destruction of the power, that tramples upon the
Saints of the most high, that in the Temple of God sits above God, and will
make times and places holy, which God has left common; impose Laws to bind
the Conscience in matters of divine worship, which Christ has never
instituted, is certainly Antichristian; and has not that power against which
you engaged been of this nature? Now hear what the voice from heaven says
concerning* Babylon when she is falling, Revel. 18. 6. Reward her even as she
rewarded you, and double to her double according to her works. And the third
Angel having powered out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of waters, and
they becoming blood, Revel. 16. 4, 5, 6.
the Angel of the waters says, Thou art righteoas, O Lord, which art, and
wast, and shall be, because thou have judged thus. For they have shed the blood
of Saints, and Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink: for they are
worthy. You see what a foundation you have to build the execution of justice
upon to supersede all objections, and resolve all scruples in it.

4. Lastly, show your resolution in the propagation of the Gospel, and
promoting of Religion within your sphere; that it may have a free course in
the Kingdom: Let the faithful Dispensers of it be encouraged, and countenanced
by your Authority; though all see not by the same light, and cannot act by the
same rules: let men be owned and countenanced not by their opinions, but by
their piety and faithfulness in the work of God: owning them upon other grounds
will be apt to make parties, and raise jealousies among them.

And certainly nothing will tend so much to the establishing of the Kingdom, to
the advancing of Reformation, to the ^^ine of Antichrist, as the free progress
of the Gospel. Those seeds of Popery that are yet in the hearts of the greatest
part of the Kingdom, will never be rooted up but by this means. Antichrist has
a double sword in his hand, temporal and spiritual: his temporal Religio
suaderi potest non cogi. Lact.
Sword shall be beaten out of his hands by the temporal, and the spiritual by
the spiritual, even the Word and Spirit. And was his spiritual power removed,
his temporal would fall of it self. He first enslaves the Conscience, and then
he picks men's purses, and brings them under his power.

Whiles Episcopacy is received upon a Jus Divinum, no wonder though it stands
firm; And that to meddle with the Lands that bore it up in its pomp and pride
is the highest sacrilege, forsooth, and who ever touched them, it would be as
that Aurum Tholosanum, their ruin and undoing. Whiles men are thus persuaded,
and abused, a Bishops title is the surest in the world: but let the Gospel and
truth take place in the hearts of men, and both the fabric and the props will
fall down together. Antichrists kingdom is nothing but darkness, and light
destroys it. We read, Revel. 14. 6. of an Angel flying in the midst of heaven,
having the everlasting Gospel to preach to the Earth: and then in 8. verse,
another Angel comes, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen. And Revel. 18. 1, 2.
When the earth was lightened with the Angels glory Babylon fell. The spiritual
whore does dress up her self in a false glory with scarlet, purple, gold, and
precious stones, Revel. 17. 4. which is discovered and destroyed as the true
glory breaks forth in the world. Thus you see your work is to stand fast: to
move and encourage to it, let me propound these several considerations.

1. Consider how deeply God has engaged you to stick fast to him, how
wonderfully he has gone forth with you in your counsels and Forces, and has
done greater things by you, and for you, then any Parliament before you: your
bow has abode in strength, and Gen 49. 24.
your Arm has been made strong by the Arm of the mighty God of Jacob. He
has given your Enemies as the dust to the sword, and as the driven stubble to
your Isa. 41. 2.
bow. If ever any victories had the Arm of the most high God engraven upon
them then have yours: Can you, Sirs, look back and see what difficulties God
has brought you through, what mountains he has led you over, and not cry out
even with astonishment, as Balaam in his parable, What has God Numb. 23. 23.
wrought! Could a man ever have thought to see the Hierarchy f^ll, and the
Kingdom stand: to see that power that had so twisted it self in the power of
the State to be pulled away, and yet a visible power of the Kingdom remaining;
To see a poor despised handful of men, as the Saints were, to have their
heads lifted up, and to become a terror to their numerous Enemies, as the Jews
were in the days of Morde^ai; What had become of you, and all those that
faithfully adhered to you, if God had not wrought for you after an
extraordinary rate; had he suffered your enraged Enemies to prevail, could you
have expected to be followed with Propositions to restore you to Honor,
Safety, and freedom? Or could you have compounded for your lives at a lower
rate then slavery and beggary? Think upon this, and you may easily see your
engagements to cleave close to God; Magnus Animus magnam fortunam decet: Answer
that high estate to which God has brought you by high resolutions for him.

2 Consider how you have engaged your selves to God, by Protestations,
Covenant, and such Declarations as have revived the hearts of your friends, and
raised up their hopes of you to a great height, and made them ambitious who
should appear most eminently for you in this cause. Never did Parliament before
you pretend so much to God, and entitle him so immediately to the work before
them as you have done.

Now as Nehemiah said, Shall such a man as I flee? Nehem. 6. 11.
A man that have made the Lord my confidence, and am set apart for his
immediate service? So shall such a Parliament as you ever flee, or faint, that
have thus bound your selves to God; and professed your relyance upon himself in
the managing of the work in hand; And have more solemnly upon all emergent
difficulties set your selves to seek God, then any former Parliament; shall
such a Parliament as this ever give back, faint, or flee?

3. Consider the necessity of your standing fast; A whole Kingdom, that I say
not three Kingdoms, depend upon your integrity and ^^stabilitie in the
mannaging of those affairs before you. The heathen Emperor said, Si violandum
est jus Regni gratia violandum est. When a Kingdom lay at stake, he thought
necessity might supersede Justice. But do you speak and resolve quite
contra^y; if ever we show our selves upright and steadfast, let it be now when
the necessity of a Kingdom calls for it: What the Apostle speaks in another
case to the Thessalonians, 1 These. ^. 8. Now we live if ye stand fast: that I
may say to you, England is likely to live, if Englands Parliament now stand
fast. Shall a Nation be born at once? says the Isa. 66. 8.
Prophet Isaiah. And shall a Nation be destroyed at obce? In cases of
necessity, men are more then men; Pompey the great being ready to take sail
for Italy, to relieve them with provision in their famine, the Sea became very
tempestuous; whereupon they dissuaded him from adventuring: But he answered,
Come, hoyse up sail, for it is necessary that I go, not necessary that I
should live. The preservation of all Italy depended upon his voyage, and
therefore would not be dissuaded or discouraged. So (Honored Senators) what
ever storms may assault you while you are engaging for the happiness and
preservation of the Nation, remember the necessity of the work, the strength
of your call, and retreat not for them.

4. Consider the temper of the times upon which God has cast us, shaking and
trying times: And unless men be firm and resolved, they will scarce be able
to stand. Malac. 3. 2. But who may abide the day of his coming, and who may
stand when he appears? When Christ came in the flesh, he came like a refiners
fire, and the droffie hearts of men could not abide his presence, or stand
before him; yea those very men that praved and waited for his coming yet could
not stand before him, but persecuted and crucified that very Messiah whom they
sought after; So much less are men able to stand before Christ's coming in the
Spirit, when he shall come and drive asunder the Nations, and the everlasting
mountains are scattered, and the perpetual hills do bow before him: When he
walks through the Sea witb his horses, through the heap H^b. 3.
of great waters, as Habakuk describes it: When he comes in the whirlwinde, and
horrible tempest, and darkness is under his feet, that we cannot perceive his
goings, then happy is he that is not offended, that is not then ready to cruc
fie that Jesus, and fight against that kingdom whose coming he before sought
and prayed for. The Philistines rejoiced that they had got the Arc, but they
were quickly weary of it when they were smote with Emrods. And the men of
Ekron cried out when it came to them, They have brought the Ark of the God of
Israel to us to 1 Samuel 5. 10.
slay us. And so the men of Bethshemesh rejoiced to see the Ark, and offered
sacrifice to welcome it, but when the Lord smote of them fifty thousand for
looking into it, then they cried, Who can stand before this holy 1 Samuel 6. 20.
Lord God, and to whom shall he go up from us? So the Israelites sighed under
their bondage, cried for deliverance, but when they saw the way they must
receive it in, they must march through a dry Desert and howling Wilderness,
this offended them, and made them look back to Egypt: And has it not been thus
with this Generation, many have cried out for deliverance, have pretended much
joy at the approaching of the Ark, and erecting of Christ's Kingdom, but seeing
that they cannot enjoy it without shaking of the Nation, without some loss in
their estates, and Trades, without laying down some carnal interests, they
have grown weary of it; yea resisted it with all their might.

We have had Apostates of several editions, and I wish we have not yet more
behind; unless men be thoroughly principled, and divine assistance support
them, first or last they will be ready to fall. This is the manner of men, they
will chalk out Christ his way, and prescribe him the method and manner of his
coming: and if he comes in a way they thought not of, and which their reason
cannot comprehend, then are they offended, and fall away. And so Hagg. 2. 7.
God speaks thus, I will shake all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall
^ome, and I will fill this house with glory. Before Christ's coming in the
flesh, there were great shakings of the Nations from the time that Haggai wrote
this Prophecy to the coming of Christ, which is computed to be Vid Gualther in
Hag. 2. 22.
about 500. years, there were great wars and troubles in the world, whereby the
greatest Kingdoms were either shaken or overthrown; as we might give you a
particular account of, would we lead you along through the History of those
times. And so when he comes in his Spirit, to refine and purge his Church, to
bring her up into a clearer light, and higher life, he comes and shakes the
earth; those false foundations, false contentments that men have rested upon,
and delighted in; yea he shakes Heaven also: that corruption that has gotten
into men's religion, worship, profession, he strikes at it, and shakes them,
that it may be removed. And whether thus God has not been shaking heaven and
earth in our days, I leave it to your selves to judge.

Therefore the temper of the times being such, it calls upon you to stand fast.

5. If you stand not fast, you will loose the things you have wrought; And
things may gradually run back into their old channel; Oh, look back to those
^u^s of blood that have been shed, those millions of treasure that have been
exhausted, those sad breaches that have been made upon families, Towns, Cities,
Counties in this Kingdom, to bring us up to that degree of deliverance, at
which we are arrived this day; and then go back if you can.

It is reported of Judas Maccabeus, when he was assaulted by a mighty Army, and
having with him but an handful of men, he was advised to retire and fly into
the Temple; He answered, God forbid that the Sun should ever see me turning my
back, I had rather dye, then stain the glory I have won by such a shameful
flight. Oh let not the Sun ever behold such a shameful spectacle as the
declining of this Parliament; or the staining of your glory by the least
defection of your trust.

6. While you stand fast God is with you; The eyes of the Lord run to and fro
through the whole Earth to show himself mighty, or to strengthen himself, or
strongly to hold with all those (...)
whose hearts are perfect toward him. 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. While your hearts are
perfect, and depart not from him, you have an almighty God that holds strongly
with you.

God is pulling down the power of this world, that has lifted it self up
against him, his truth and servants; and will reckon with all the Princes and
Nations of the Earth that have dealt injuriously with them, as he dealt with
the several Enemies of his people of old: when he had performed his whole work
upon mount Sion and Jerusalem, then a cup Isa. 10. 12.
of wrath was put into the hand of their Enemies, and it went round from
Babylon to Assyria, to Egypt, to Moab, to Damascus, etc. And so when God has
performed his intended work upon the hearts of his people, then woe to their
Enemies though never so mighty; woe to them when God comes to plead the cause,
and avenge the quarrel of his Saints.

Now those that stick fast to God in this work shall have God with them, and
nothing shall stand before them; for he will work, and who shall let it, or
turn it back. And this is Isa. 43. 13
the only way to make you grow great and strong. As David, 1 Chronicles. 11. 9.
waxed greater and greater, for the Lord was with him: And the Armies that
follow the Lamb when he is going forth in righteousness to judge and make war
are clothed in white: as an emblem of their innocence, Rev. 19. 14
righteousness, and victory.

Thus follow the Lamb whither ever he leads you; and then you shall have
righteousness and victory on your side continually: yea to add to this, as
you shall have God with you, so you shall have if not the most yet the best of
the people with you, and I hope drawing into better union then of late. And it
is no small advantage to have a believing, praying people on your side; It is
by their prayers that you have prevailed, and your Enemies fallen. Isa. 43. 14.
God tells his people, For your sakes I have sent to Babylon, and brought down
their Princes. And though Jacob be a worm, Isa. 41. 15.
yet he shall thresh the mountains, beat them small, and make the hills like
chafe. Yea the great revolutions of States and Kingdoms are but Answers to the
prayers of Saints. And therefore to keep the hearts of these will be your
wisdom and security.

7. Consider the present juncture of time upon which Providence has cast us.
And I confess it was that which invited me to this text and subject: such a
critical juncture of time and aff^irs, as, all things considered, has not
fallen out since your first sitting to this day. I mean in respect of the
present Treaty; And the Lord knows what revolutions and changes we may see
before your next monthly Fast; now for the Lords sake, sirs, I beseech you show
your selves men resolved for the happiness and prosperity of England, take
heed you loose not that in Conciliis, which you have won in Campis. Sanballat,
and Tobiah, and the rest of Nehemiahs Enemies sent to him with a desire to
treat with him, Nehem. 6. 2. but Nehemiah perceived that it was for mischief,
and to weaken his hands from the work, that it be not done, as you read ver. 9.
Therefore says he, O Lord strengthen my hands. God forbid the issue of this
Treaty should be the weakening your hands, or obstructing your progress in the
great work that you are upon. Some say that you have made a step back to
embrace the Treaty; but take heed of making a step back in it. What you lost in
the field at one time you gained at another: but what you loose here, will not
easily or suddenly be recovered.

Obj. But is it not better to yield, to comply, then have our troubles
continued, and wars renewed?

Ans. Wars! me thinks the very name should startle us, having so lately tasted
the bitter fruits of them; And we are to seek peace and pursue it: But let me
be bold to tell you that which I fear will be found true, that the concluding
of an unsound Peace will be the beginning of a new war. And our troubles will
not cease, till all the true ends of this late engagement be fully accomplished.

Oh let us never have cause to complain of you, as God does of the Prophets and
Priests among the Jews, Ier. 6. 14. They have healed the breach of the daughter
of my people slightly: per rem leviculam, by some slight thing. Some slight
imperfect (...)
work will not amount to a full cure; and if the cure be not full, no wonder
though the sore grow angry, and break forth again.

Thus we have finished the first Point grounded upon the first Exhortation, Be
you steadfast and unmovable.

We shall now address to the second, though I shall not have time or strength
to make a large discourse upon it; I shall contract what I may.

It is this, Always abounding in the work of the Lord: or as the word is
better rendered by some, Excelling in the work of the Lord, as expressing not so
much the number as the (...).
nature, the quantity as the quality of our works. Beza renders it, Eminentes,
seeking to go beyond, and exceed each other. Here is the Saints activity.

Then he^e is the subject of this activity, and that is not the works of the
world, or our own private works, much less the works of sin; but the works of
the Lord, so called, either because it is work of Gods own institution, as the
Lords Supper, the Lords day, etc. or else because it is wrought in God: all
spiritual works are wrought in God, Joh. 3. 21. Or else, because it tends to
God, and his glory. And these works are either more internal and immanent, as
the works of faith, and love in the soul; or more external and transient, as
those that break forth in the outward man.

And then here is the Income of this divine activity, your labor is not in
vain in the Lord: your labor, (...), a labor even to sweat, and weariness,
answering to the Hebrew word (...), though it be such a labor, yet it will be
countervail'd in the recompense, It is not in vain: (...), not an empty work,
that brings nothing with it, that evaporates and comes to nothing; yea there is
a meiosis in the word, It is not in vain, he means that it will be labor
exceeding gainful, answered with an hyperbolicall reward. And he puts it in
the present tense, your labor is not in vain; the very work is wages: A man is
reaping while he is sowing.

Lastly, it is added, in the Lord, which either expresses Christ as the root
from whence the work springs; work in the Lord, which the soul brings forth
abiding in him, and in the power of that union she has with him: as Joh. 15.
2. Every branch that brings not forth fruit in me, as Calvin reads it, though
the fruit and work be outwardly good, yet if it be not work in the Lord, and
fruit in Christ, it is a vain work. Or else these words express Christ as the
crown wherewith the work is rewarded; though the work may be in vain as to men,
it finds no reward in the world, but it meets with abundant recompense in the
Lord.

Thus we have the words briefly opened: the Observations might be several:
Only one I shall speak to, and under which the substance of the rest may be
comprehended.

That Christians are to press after a spiritual excellency in the service of
God. To excel and be eminent in spiritual work. We have a parallel place, 1
These. 4. 1. Furthermore we beseech you, brethren, etc. as you have received of
us how to walk, so ye would abound more and more. (...), the word in the text,
which Beza translates, Vt magis excellatis, and notes upon it: It a conemiai
magis ac magis excellere, ac vos ipsos quotidie superare. And the French
translation renders the words very fully, Vous passier plus autre de plus en
plus: that you would pass on further from more to more.

Solomon compares the way of a righteous man to the shining Pro. 4. 18.
light which shines more and more till the perfect day. A Christian, like the
Sun, is daily to mount higher, and shi^e brighter in the sphere of his
spiritual activity.

For this we have Christ admiring his Spouse: Cant. 6. 10. who is she that
looks forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun? she is
shining forth still in a purer and brighter light and glory. She is walking in
the light, as John expresses it: that is she acts in light, and makes a
progress 1 Ioh 1.
in it also.

And Christ compares the kingdom of heaven to a seed that grows up into its
perfection by degrees: Mar. 4. 28. the earth brings forth first the blade, then
the ear, then the full corn in the ear. The first works and fruits of a
Christian are weak, and low, and exceeding imperfect, that he can scarce know
them whether they be of the flesh or of the spirit: as a blade of good corn is
scarce discerned from a tare, then it brings forth the ear. Now his actions are
more raised, springing from higher acts of faith and love; and clearly appear
to spring from a Divine seed and spiritual root. Lastly, the full corn in the
ear, now his fruit is come to some perfection and maturity.

In the heavenly Academy there are three degrees. First, Tyrones, novices,
babes in Christ, newly entered. Secondly, proficientes, those that have ascended
to an higher degree, and who are past the first principles, and are moving
toward perfection. Thirdly, perfecti, who are arrived at the top, strong men
and dextrous in spiritual works: now those of the first form are to aspire
toward the second, and the second to the third. The Psalmist, Psalm. 84. 7.
seems to allude to this: They go on from strength to strength, it is in the
(...)
margin, and so the original will bear it, from company to company: from one
form and company of Christians to another; The French de band eu band.
and every one of them in Sion appears before God.

It is said of Abraham, Genesis 12. 9. that he journeyed, going on still toward
the South. A learned Interpreter observes this upon it, he journeyed toward
the South, which Ainsworth in loc.
is toward the Sun, figuring his progress in faith and grace. The Apostle
presses to this often, as, Hebr. 6. 1. Therefore leaving the principles of the
doctrine of Christ, let us go on to perfection, not laying again the foundation
of repentance from dead works, and faith toward God. Not that faith and
repentance are to be laid utterly aside, but only in the primi^ive and first
acts of them, and afterward to put forth higher acts of both.

And this excellency in the work of God is to appear:

1. In the matter of the work, to be still undertaking higher and greater works
for God: As the work that Moses was upon to bring Israel out of Egypt, and
Joshua, to bring them into Canaan; and the Apostles to preach the Gospel among
the Gentiles: these were great works. So Christians are to be still engaging in
works of greater eminency, of a more public nature, more importance and
difficulty.

2. In the number of our works, a Saints life is to be a continual service;
God has not tied us under the Gospel to any number, because he delights in
free services: and where there is a Gospel principle, it constrains to act
abundantly; Love it is a short Tyranny* as one calls it, it sweetly Charron.
compels the soul to be industrious, and active in the service of her beloved.
The vestall fire never went out; so the fire of a Saints activity is to be
always flaming. The more active a Christian is, the more like Angels, who are
described Isa. 6. 2.
as always flying; yea the more like Christ, whose meat and drink was to do
his Fathers will: yea the more like God, who though always at rest in himself,
yet always in act, yea activity it self.

3. In the manner of our working, which is the main. 1. In doing our works with
more simplicity, to do them purely for Gods sake, when we look singly at God
in them, and (...). etc. Philo: in li. Quis rerum d^v^na^um haeres.
they appropriate not understanding, apprehension, quickness of sight, any
thing to themselves in their actions: But to offer up and dedicate all these
things to him who is the cause of all It is an easy matter to do works great
in outward appearance, but to do them with this simplicity of spirit, Hic
labor, hoc opus est; this is Christianity indeed.

The Pharisees did great works for the matter of them, gave great Alms, paid
Tithes of all, built the Sepulchers of their fathers; but because they wanted
this simplicity of spirit, did them to be seen of men, they stunk in the
nostrils of God.

But the rule of Christ to his disciples is, when thou give an Alms, let nor
thy left hand know what thy right hand does; hide what thou do even from thy
self, left the flesh assume glory.

2. In doing them with more delight, to rejoice as a giant to run a race; to
act with as great freedom in a work where God alone is concerned, as where our
own interests are the most deeply involued. When we can rejoice more in
opportunities of service, then in all outward contentments; counting it an
honor that God will make use of us in the meanest work.

3. In doing them with more self-denial; when we can be content to lay down
and wave our own interest, that we may do God service. The more self-denial
appears in any service, the more true excellency shines forth in it. To be
stiff and inexorable in matters concerning common good, and to be flexible and
yielding in his own private, is the temper of a gracious heart.

4. In doing them with greater bent and intention of spirit; when the heart is
carried out strongly in the work of God, that no difficulties and opposition do
discourage or stop. Hezekiahs heart was lifted up in the ways of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 17. 6. not lift up with pride, but resolution: an heart soaring above
dangers, sufferings, low, and earthly interests. Not slothful in business:
but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord: says the Apostle. Romans 12. 11. As the
Angels called Fervorem and acumen and ^ffer vescentiam inte^tae ac nunquam
intermissae nunquamque decl^nantis motionis nomen Seraphim luculenter designat.
Dionys. Areop. de coelest. hierarch. cap. 7.
Seraphims have their name from that burning heat of spirit wherewith they are
carried forth to God, and for God. There are two words in Scripture most
commonly used signifying a man, Ish, and Adam; the latter comes from a word
signifying earth, and expresses man in his dead, corrupt and earthly state:
the former from a word signifying (...)
fire, and expresses man in his raised quickened state in Christ. Christians
then act not up to their renewed state in Christ, when they are not carried
forth Ignis. Avenar.
with fervor of spirit in the work of God.

We shall only make one Use of this, and so conclude.

You see then (Christians) your duty before you: Oh

O that this might be all the strife and contention among Christians, not who
shall get victory over each other; and whose private opinion shall be most
applauded: but who shall most excel in the work of the Lord: who shall put
forth highest acts of faith and love, and outshine in a spiritual and
exemplary conversation.

And O that this was all the contention among Ministers, not who shall get the
greatest Livings, who shall be most in favor with men, or gain the greatest
party: but who shall be most laborious in the work of the Gospel, who shall
most deny themselves for God, and win most souls to the Lord Jesus.

And O that this was all the contention among Magistrates, not who shall most
enrich themselves by the ruins of the State, who shall carry on some private
design with greatest strength and success; but who shall show himself most
faithful to his trust; who shall be most sollicitous and sincere for the
advancing the honor of God, and the freedom and happiness of the Nation: such
strife would reconcile us, such contentions would make us all friends.

And you (Right Honorable) I shall addr^sse the residue of my discourse
particularly to. You have already done great things we do acknowledge; but if
you sit down he^e, England will be on this side that cure she needs, and that
happiness she expects from You. Therefore still strive to excel not alone
other Parliaments, for so You have done already; but your selves also daily.
Let your last works excel the first; that it may never be said of you, as the
mother of Claudiu^ Caesar said of him, That Nature had begun him, but not
finished him: That you begun a good work, and left it abortive and unfinisht*
Seneca speaks of some, that they were semper victori, always about to live;
let it not be said of you, that You were about to settle us, and establish our
Liberties, but never did it. And let there appear still more simplicity, love,
self denial, and intention of spirit in all your actions, that none may have
occasion to say, that you have any whit abared of your primitive integrity and
zeal.

And to move you to this, let me be bold to propound to You some serious
Considerations.

1. Consider how God has excelled toward You; he has appeared for you, and
gone along with you after an excellent and extraordinary rate: What Parl^ament
or people before you can speak higher things, and tell larger stories of the
power and goodness of God then you may. And has he not exceeded of late; do
not the mercies and victories of a later birth bear a livelier image and
clearer lileaments of God upon them then the former; has he thus excelled in
his workings for you, and will not you excel daily in your acting for him? How
often has the Parliament of England been at the very brinks of the grave, the
proud waves have beset you round; and you have been reacy several times to be
buried in a deluge of desolation and ruin, and yet God has given you a new
life from the dead, and you stand upon your feet this day as rich monuments of
the excelling mercy and providence of God, to the joy and comfort of your
friends, and the terror and astonishment of your Enemies. Now as it was with
the Captain of our salvation, after his resurrection he appeared in greater
glory: And as Herod said, when he heard the fame of Christ, John Baptist is
risen from the dead, and therefore mighty works show forth themselves in him.
So, Sirs, you having been al^eady as crucified, and buried, and now as risen
from the dead. Oh that we might now see more of God breaking forth from you,
and more mighty works showing forth themselves in you.

2. Consider how the eyes of all the Saints have been upon you, not only in
England, but even in all parts of the world, to see what will be the issue of
that work which is now in you hands. And never did God more raise up the hearts
of his people to pray for any society of men, as for you; and they are now
looking how prayers are answered in you. And oh that we might daily see you
rising up in your actions and resolutions answerable to the height of our hopes
and expectations from you.

3. Consider seriously what precious blood has been spilt for the advancing of
that work you are called unto: does not this be speak something from you
excellent and extraordinary, somewhat to countervail that dear price that is
laid down for it.

The blood of the Martyrs is called seed: much of this seed, seed of blood,
precious blood has been sown, and may not we wait for an harvest that may bear
proportion to this seed? The glory that Saints expect from God is great,
because it is the price of the blood of God: And I am confident, that the
mercies that are in the womb for us will bear proportion to, yea far exceed the
price laid down: and we hope that God will make You Instruments to give them
birth. We know you are but men, and poor instruments in the hand of God: and
if we looked upon you otherwise, we should wrong God, and you, and our selves
also: yet going sorth in the strength of God, you need not fear the greatest
undertakings.

4. Consider what great opportunities God has again put into your hand: It was
once feared that you had let slip your opportunity and critical season of
Englands deliverance, but God has redeemed it again for you by his almighty
arm, and now again has put you to a trial.

He has subdued your Enemies over and over, and enabled you not alone to
relieve your selves, but give help to others also. You were faint in your
extremities to run upon arrears with Scotland, but God has set you up, and
enabled you to pay them not only in Coin, but in kind: so that now again the
whole Kingdom is before you, and what is it that you may not do, if you
address to it with integrity and confidence. Of late you had violent storms
that beat upon you, and threatened sad things to you, and your friends from all
parts of the Kingdom; and then the season might plead your excuse: but has not
God now allayed these storms, said to the raging Sea, Be still, and here shall
thy proud waves be stopped. O then now hoyse up sail, and steer strengly and
swiftly to the haven of Englands prosperity; and I dare assure you, walking in
Gods way, you shall have wind and tide with you.

Lastly, consider the motive in the text, your labor is never in vain in the
Lord; though you find ill reward for it in the world, you shall find glorious
reward in God: Its Et si aliqua am^sist is vi^ae gaudia, negotiatio ^st al quid
amittere ut matora lucretis. Tertul. lib. ad Marty ras. Bo^um agonem subiturae
estu in quo corona aeterni^a^is brab^um, ang^licae substantiae po^itia in
coelis, gloria in s^cula seculorum. ibid.
merchandise is better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof
then fine gold. All our works in God, all our sufferings for God, are as
precious seed that tise up again an hundred fold into our bosom.

Thus the Prophet Azariah encouraged Asa and the people, 2 Chronicles. 15. 7. Be you
strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak, for your work shall be
rewarded. And thus the Prophet Isaiah encourages himself in his God, when his
work found little success or reward with men: Isa. 49. 4. I said; I have
lab^ured in vain, and spent my strength for naught, yet surely my judgment is
with the Lord, and my work (or reward) with my God. And ver. 5. Though Israel
be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord. The more
upright we are in the work of God, the more contemptible we are likely to be in
the eyes of men; but the more glorious in the eyes of God. And one smile of his
face will countervail the highest works, and deepest sufferings for him, in a
transcendent measure: The meanest service shall have its reward; how much more
works of an higher nature, of which rank are those (Sirs) that God has put
into your hands: and y^u have a great opportunity, as to honor God, so to
tre^sure up happiness and glory to your selves. And assure your selves, you
whose hearts have been upright with God, all your unwearied travel, and
attendance now for these eight years, all your expense of time, all your
losses, sufferings, reproaches, inconveniences that any of you have sustained
in the prosecution of this cause you have in hand (which will be carried on
against the gates of hell) yea all those wholesome Votes, Orders, Ordinances,
Declarations that have proceeded from you in the integrity of your hearts, do
stand upon record in heaven, and are fruit that will abound to your account in
that great day of recompense; when all things shall be heard over again, and
every action of men be brought under strict review before men and Angels. And
though we thus speak, yet we allow no merit in any work either ex congruo, or
condigno, but a reward we do, and that not of debt but of grace, as the Apostle
distinguishes, Romans 4. 4.

Neither can we allow the love of the reward as the Voluptas non est merces nec
causa virtutis, sed accessio, nec quia delectat placet, sed quia placet,
delectat. Sen. de vita beata.
highest principle from which, or the obtaining the reward as the utmost end to
which our actions move: this is too mercenary for Saints; but freely to act
from love to God, and to the work it self, as our highest principle, and to the
glory of God as our utmost end, though there was no reward at all, is most
Evangelicall, and Saint-like: yet that a subordinate respect may be had to the
reward, the pleasure and glory that are the train of spiritual works, the
text, especially that word (...), knowing, in the text does undeniably prove.

Therefore now to shut up all, (Right Honorable) let me bes^ech you by all the
glorious appearances of God for you, by those expectations that the Saints have
of you, by all those prayers that have been made, those tears that have been
shed, that blood that has been spilt, by those precious opportunities that are
in your hands, by that exceeding great reward wherewith free grace shall crown
your works in the Lord withal; that you would, as in opposition to all
tentations both on the right hand and the left, show your selves steadfast and
unmovable; so in Answer to your own engagements, the necessities and
expectations of the Kingdom, be always excelling in the work of the Lord.

And not only seek to excel your selves, but to give all just advantages that
you may, that others may excel also; that the Church of God in this Kingdom
may grow up under the fostring wings of your government into a more perfect
state.

You know, not long since, this excelling in spiritual things was looked upon
with an evil eye, and was condemned for faction, scoisme, preciseness,
singularity, etc. and therefore all Religion and worship must be confined
within certain forms and boundaries; and thus men sought to imprison light and
truth: But lay you, I beseech you, no such restraint upon the Church of God,
divine truth, or the Spirit: but as knowledge will increase, and light will be
breaking forth in the evening of the world; so let us not have the curtains
drawn, or the windows*shut, but be left in some capacity to entertain it.

FINIS:

