An Answer to the ESSEX Watchmens Watchword, being 63 of them in number. Or a
discovery of their Ignorance, in denying liberty to tender consciences in
religious worship, to be granted alike to all. Also, showing how persecution
for conscience came in.

Isa. 5. 20. 21. 23. Woe unto them that call evil good and good evil, that
put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter. Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in
their own sight, which justifies the wicked for reward, and take away the
righteousness of the righteous from them.

1 Samuel 2. 36, And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thine
house shall come and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel of
bread. etc.

Isa. 56. 10. 11. His watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant, they are all
dumb dogs which cannot bark, sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber; yea,
they are greedy dogs which can never have enough. And they are sheapheards
that cannot understand, they all look to their own way, every one for his gane
from his quarter.

Jer. 5. 30. 31. A wonderful and filthy thing is committed in the Land, The
Prophets Prophecy lies, and the Priests receive gifts in their hands, and my
people delight therein, What will ye then do in the end thereof?

Jer. 23. 1. 2. Woe he unto the Pastors that destroy, and scatter the sheep of
my Pastor says the Lord. Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel against
the Pastors that feed my people, ye have scattered my flock, and driven them
away, and have not visited them. Behold, I will visit upon you the evil of
your doing says the Lord.

Hosea 8. 12. I have written unto him the great things of my Law, but they were
counted as a strange thing.

Hos. 9. 7. 8. The days of visitation are come, the days of recompense are
come, Israel shall know it, the Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad;
for the multitude of thine iniquity, and the great hatred. The Watchmen of
Ephraim was with my God, but the Prophet is the snare of a Fowler in all his
ways and hatred in the House of God. Hab. 1. 3. 4. Why do thou show me
iniquity, and cause me to behold grievances? etc

Ezekiel. 34. 2. 3. 4. Son of man, prophecy against the Shepherds of Israel,
prophecy and say unto them, Thus says the Lord God unto the Shepherds, woe be
to the Shepherd of Israel that do feed themselves, should not the Shepherds
feed the flocks. Ye eat the fat and you cloth you with the wool, ye kill
them that are fed, but ye feed not the flock. The deseased have ye not
strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound
up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven
away, etc.

By Edw. Barber Freeman of Engl. Citizen and Marchant-Taylor of London.

FOr as much, as the Author holds forth all due obedience unto just
authority, who are Gods Ministers, to take vengeance one them that do evil, As
also, the distinct Office of the servants of Christ in the free faith, and full
dispensation of the Gospel, without forcing the conscience by humane
Compulsion; For Magistrates ought not to persecute, but to protect all those
who live under their authority, that they may lead a quiet and peaceable life,
in all godliness and honesty. And, for that the Author produces most pregnant
Scriptures, to prove and illustrate such Truths as are contained in this
Treatise; all which, tend to the confirmation and consolation of all those who
love the Truth in sincerity; therefore I do say.

April the 2, 1649. Imprimatur Theodore Jennings,

To those pretended Watchmen of ESSEX in general, and in particular to all
such, as love the publishing of that glorious Everlasting Gospel of KING JESUS
in sincerety.
Dear friends,
YOur condition being like the state of Demetrius and the Crafts-men, Acts 19.
24. to the 29. Your Estates, Tithes, Honor, yea your all-being not only in
great danger, I cannot blame you to cry out for help, your Diana and her
Magnificence and Temple, being likely, not only to be despised and destroyed;
but your craft also being in great danger to be set at naught. And also your
cunning craftines whereby you lie in wait to deceive, discovered.

Yet notwithstanding, I cannot but admire at your weakness in that you take upon
you the name, or title of the Ministers of the Gospel, having received
ordination from your reverend Fathers, the Lord Archbishops, and Lord Bishops,
etc. pretending to renounce that Ordination sent over by Austine the Monk,
from Pope Gregory the 7. Peter's pretended Successor, and Christ's Vicar General
upon earth; but this being discovered, and your craft failing herein Jure
divino, you obtain an Ordinance of Parliament Jure humano to ordain withal,
making good the proverb, a bad shift is better then none at all, by which
means you became Parliaments servants, and not Christ's Ministers, from whom
also you know you have your wages by their Ordinance with trebble damages, and
upon ref^^all commitment without Bail or mainprize, being in your esteem
better then Christ's words, freely you have received, freely give, Matt. 10. 8.
or the Apostles Acts 20. 33. 34. 35. compare with 1 Cor. 4. 11, 12. These. 1. 2.
9. and 2. 3. 8. or as Fox in his Acts and Monuments declares, The maintenance
of the Ministers is the pure alms of the Church. A condition to mean, and low
for these plush and silken Ministers of these times.

And truly, as you came in, and began to be set up by the Sword, and authority
of the civil Magistrate: even so you stand and continue; and not by any rule,
power, or Authority of Christ.

And for the wounding the Gospel through your sides which you speak of, if you
consider, and weigh your words in the Balance of the Sanctuary, you will find
it to be your selves that chiefly wound it, as your Predicessors the Scribes
and Pharisees, did the Doctrine of the Apostles, as Acts 4. 1. to the 21. and 6.
8. to the 14. and 22. 22. from whence Theodore Beza sweetly observes, That
false Teachers, because they will not be overcome, flee from disputations to
Magistrates, and open slandering, and false accusations; and that the first
bloody persecution of the Church of Christ began, and sprung from a Council of
Priests by the suggestions of the University Doctors. But your words hold true,
concerning the true Ministers of the Gospel, who can prove their call, and
Ordination by the word of God, as Acts 20. 27. 33. 34. 35. 36. and 2 Cor. 11.
23, to the 28.

And whereas you say, you are charged to the Authors of all the Kingdoms
troubles, fomenters of these unnatural divisions; and bloody wars, who are
they whose eyes the Lord in any measure has opened but see it? Who have been
the main Instruments but you? The one part of you stiring up the King and his
pary, the other part of you the Parliament and their party, to fight and kill
one another for the Gospel, though brethren and in the nearest relation in
Church fellowship.

How did you press that text curse ye Meroz, yea with a bitter curse, to cause
people to bring in their plate, money and jewels; and to send out their
husbands, servants and children, and if they died in the cause, their souls
would be in heaven, before their bodies would be in the graves? And how did you
dissemble, to stir up men to go out against the Kings Army, and yet not against
the King and to bring [all men] without respect of persons to condign
punishment, yet not the King? But when you saw your honor, riches, and indeed
[your all] was lapt up in him, then with Pilate you began to change your notes,
and to pretend to wash your hands in Innocence saying, I am clear from the
blood of this just man; But be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever
a man sows that shall he reap. And as you have sown in blood, so shall ye
have blood to drink for ye are worthy. Yea the whole Antichristian State, from
the Prelate to the Sexton, as well as from the Pope to the poorest Friar;
because in you, to wit, in that State is found the blood of Prophets and
Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth; all which, all those whose
eyes the Lord has in any measure enlightened, knows you have in your measure
fulfilled, and that for your own mere Interests, power, and gain of your
goodly fat benefices (which now are) as Demetrius with the Tradesmen of the
like occupation was, Acts 19. 24 to 30. In great danger and hazard of losing,
which some had rather have the ruin of the Nation, then the loss of their
Trade, gain, and benefice; for are you not such as Micha speaks of that preach
for hire, and divine for money, and yet will lean on the Lord, etc.

Thus you whose names are there subscribed are proved, although Ministers of
Essex, yet no Ministers of Christ, but State Ministers, and therefore cannot
act according to the example of the Apostles, or other the faithful Servants
of Jesus Christ, till such time as with the Jews. Acts 3. 19. ye repent and
be converted that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing
shall come from the presence of the Lord, and until such time as you change
your minds, and obey the Commands of Jesus, against whom, in his Members you
have engaged to uphold your own pride, covetousness, and persecution, with
contempt of your poor brethren whom you ignorantly pretend, to be misled with
ignorance and false zeal, but brethren I hope that through ignorance you do it.

To the next, you have not without great weakness discovered your ignorance,
that when God according to his promise is inlightning the earth with knowledge,
as the waters cover the Sea, in discovering the mystery of Iniquity, and
throwing down the Kingdom of Antichrist, whereby your Church indeed is in great
danger and hazard, [but not the Church of Christ] which by this means
flourishes abundantly, increasing daily, And therefore there must be great
alterations in Doctrine and Worship, for says Christ, Mat. 15. 13. Every plant
which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up. And for your
faithful conscientious Professors as you call them, to be persecuted to bonds,
flight, and imprisonment, Its well your eyes are opened in your own cause, to
see persecution for Conscience so great a sin which all this while you have
wincked at, [it seems the case is altered] had you formerly made Christ's rule
yours: whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, the same do you unto
them, this need not have been:

And truly Sirs, if Popery should not be connived at, what would become of all
your administrations. And for your grievous oppressions in the Liberties and
properties of the Subjects, which you say you fighed for [good Sirs pity your
selves, or be better informed for the greatest burden that ever came of late
to this Land, was that Ordinance for Tithes with treble damages, or commitment
without bail or main prize upon non payment.

For the Parliaments Declaration you speak of, upon the first and second time
of meeting apprehending the danger of the State and the Church, how it say upon
your hearts, it may easily be conceived, the day approaching their
Declarations, Petitions, Remonstrances, etc. The blame lying upon the evil
Counselors, but who were those evil Counselors, search and see, 1 Kings 22.
20. 21. who must persuade Ahab to go up and fall at Ramouth Giliad, but the
evil spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets: here you may clearly see the
chief Instruments and Insendiaries, compared with Revel. 16. 13. 14.

Here was the cause of fear, and the Kings leaving the Parliament, and raising
his Army, which kindled that fire which will hardly be quenched, but in the
destruction of you or the Kingdom, if not timely prevented. And for the League
and Covenant you so much speak of, we should desire but the performance
thereof, and in particular, for Religion to have it established according to
the word of God, and the best reformed Churches, which I hope you will grant to
be according to the primitive institutions; for know through the mercy of God,
we are not ignorant, that your National Presbyterial Churches are as truly
Antichristian, as the Papal or Prelatical, it being the third part of that
great City Babylon, Revel. 16. 19. which now comes in remembrance before God to
give unto her the cup of the fiersness of his wrath, compared with verse 13. 14.

And as the Kings of the earth have given their power and strength unto the
beast, as in the raising, so to the upholding of that Antichristian state, they
therein giving their power and strength unto the beast, making War, with the
Lamb in his Members, to wit, with his poor Saints and Servants: But the Lamb
shall overcome them, for he is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, Revel. 17.
13. 14. And they that are with him, are called, and chosen and faithful,
compared with Romans 1. 7. But the waters where the whore sits, are peoples
and multitudes, and nations and tongues, not redeemed and gathered out from
them, and so made Kings and Priests, being redeemed by his blood, out of every
kindred and tongue, and people and Nation. Revel. 5. 9.

Also observe, Revel. 17. 16. These ten horns there spoken of, which are ten
Kings, to wit, Christian Kings as you call them, who shall upon the
consideration of their being so woefully bewitched by those Froggs and Locusts
that come out of the smoke, that assendeth out of the bottomless pit, hate the
whore and make her desolate and naked, and eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire, for God has put into their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree, and
give their Kingdom to the beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled.
And truly we may now say as Christ once said, Luke 4. 21. This day is this
Scripture fulfilled in your ears. That therefore the Magistrate would consider
this, and take notice that for your part you are not the men that the Lord will
give deliverance to his people by, but according to the words of the Lord by
Jer. the 49, 20. Surely the least of the flock shall draw them out, surely a
company of poor despised Mechanic men must do it.

Again, Consider how much Innocent and Ignorant blood has been spilt by the
civil Magistrates, to set up and uphold, not theirs, but the Kingdom of
Antichrist, least it be one day made good according to the saying of Isaiah,
Isa. 60. 12. For that Kingdom and nation that will not serve thee shall perish,
yea those nations shall be utterly wasted, of which cup of Gods wrath, this
Kingdom with some others have already deeply tasted, according to Luke 20. 17,
18. compared with Acts 3. 23. And he beheld them and said what is this then
that is written, the stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the
head of the corner, whosoever shall fall on that stone shall be broken, but on
whomsoever it shall fall it will grind him to powder. You being such indeed as
Micha speaks of Micha 3. 5. Thus says the Lord concerning the Prophets, that
make my people err, that bite with their teeth and cry peace, and he that
puts not into their mouths, they even prepare war against them, etc.
compared with, Zach. 13. 2 3, 4.

Next you say, The Parliament seeing which way the Council of the King steered,
apprehended a necessity of raising arms for the defense of themselves and the
Kingdom, wherein they make you their Instruments, to stir up the people (as
fittest for that purpose) wherein they declare for the maintaining of the
Protestant Religion, which notwithstanding you have sat so long, and enjoyed
so many goodly fat benefices by their favor, yet have you never declared to
the people, what this Protestant Religion, so called, and which you so much
speak of is, much less proved your Presbyterian National Church and
Directorie to be it. And Sir I hope you think the preservation of the Freemen
of England, whose servants they are, and you ought to be, but are indeed grown
their Masters, according to Salomons words, being indeed that evil which he
saw under the Sun, Eccles. 10. 5, 6, 7. There is an evil which I have seen
under the sun, as an error which proceeds from the Ruler. Folly is set in
great dignity or height, and the rich sit in low place. I have seen servants
upon horses, and Princes walking as servants upon the earth. I say I hope you
will have them prefer the good and safety of the Nation before any particular
persons whatsoever. But had you been Ministers of the Gospel, you would have
done as they, did mentioned Acts 6. 1. to the 4. who refused to leave the word
of God to serve Tables.

And truly for engaging in the cause, being called unto it by lawful
Authority, in matters civil I grant they are a lawful Authority; But in
matters Ecclesiastical concerning the government of the Church of Christ,
there [neither they] nor you have any authority, the Government being wholly on
Christ's shouldiers, Isa. 9. 6. compare with Matt. 28. 18. James 4. 12. he
ruling by his own Laws, and not your acts nor commands.

And truly had it been, that you had been Ministers of the Gospel, you durst
not leave your flock to attend upon the Civil State and affairs of the
Kingdom, seeing the Apostles thought it not meet to leave the word to serve
Tables, that was to look to the necessity of the Saints; for which service they
chose out seven Deacons, fitly qualified for that purpose as before is showed.
I shall say no more to this, but what the Lord says Isa. 29. 7. to the 17. And
for pouring out your prayers in your days of humiliation, you have done as the
Lord complains Isa. 58. 2. to the 8. Yet they seek me daily, and delight to
know my ways, as a Nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinance
of their God: they ask of me the Ordinance of Justice: they take delight in
approaching to God. Wherefore have we fasted say they, and thou see not?
Wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou take no knowledge? Behold, in
the day of your fast you find pleasure, and exact all your labors. Behold, ye
fast for strife, and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness, ye shall
not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to be heard on high. Is it such
a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his soul? is it to bow
down his head like a Bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him?
will thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this the
fast that I have chosen to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy
burdens, and to let the oppressed go free; and that ye break every yoke? Is
it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are
cast out to thy house? when thou see the naked that thou cover him, and that
thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh, then shall thy light break forth
as the morning, and thy health shall spring forth speedily, and thy
righteousness shall go before thee. The glory of the Lord shall be thy
rearward, etc.

For your Appeal to God the searcher of all hearts, to whom you must give
account of all your ways, that these were your grounds of your first Engagement
and intentions in it, But pray take in with you the love of money the root of
all evil.

And for your amazement, consider what the Lord says, Isa. 29. 9. 10. Stay
your selves and wonder, they are blind and make you blind, they are drunken,
but not with wine, they stagger, but not with strong drink, for the Lord has
powered out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes, the
Prophets and your rulers, the seers has he covered etc.

Again you say, to see a war begun for the defense of Religion, likely to end
in the ruin thereof, herein you discover your great ignorance in the mystery of
the Gospel, for now is the Lord making good his promise, that the earth shall
be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. God
pouring out his spirit upon all flesh, as Isa. 11. 9. Acts 2. 4. Where they all
spoke as the spirit gave them utterance [not Books, and Arts, Learned at the
Universities.] And this is according to the desire of that faithful servant
and type of Christ Moses, when Joshuah the Son of Nun his servant, desired
Moses to forbid Eldad and Medad from prophesying, saying: Enviest thou for my
sake, would God that all the Lords people were prophets, and that the Lord
would put his spirit upon them, for know the Ministers of the Gospel are fitted
for their service by gifts from heaven, as Ephesians. 4. 8. 11. to the 15. And not
by Arts, learned at Oxford or Cambridge; although I desire not in the least to
take any thing from them, that is properly due to humane learning, as thereby
to fit men for the service of the State and Common Wealth.

Again you say, the War was begun for the defense of the King and Parliament,
to end in the death of the King, and violation of the Parliament. Herein you
show as little judgment in civil things as in spiritual, but your London
brethren at Zion College has been sufficiently answered to this,

Next you speak of the fears about Religion and Parliament, which you say is
turned into sorrows, I blame you not, for the mystery of Iniquity is
discovered, and your cunning craftiness whereby you lie in wait to deceive
also, who are those great merchants of the earth, with your weeping and
wailing, for no man buyeth your merchandise any more? The which is much
aggravated in you by the Agreement of the people, wherein your flattering with
the Parliament, concerning the tender thereof is much discovered.

And for the draught of poison you speak of, I wish this nation had been no
more poisoned with the golden cup of the Whore; And for the love and care you
speak of, to the people of your respective flocks, your Ordinance for Tyths
with treble damages without bail or mainprize, upon refusal will sufficiently
demonstrate it, wherein you have as your reverend Fathers endeavored, to rule
with violence, not by love.

And whereas your hearts tremble, to think of the subversion of the ancient
well grounded government of the Kingdom; the Protestant Religion, what do you
mean? what ayle you? Have not your selves done this, in cutting of your
Reverend Fathers the Prelates? Alas! they by their Agreement desire to take
away all slaverie and tyranny, brought in by Tyrants, and their flatterers, in
their Civil or Ecclesiastical Government, and instead thereof inright the
Freemen of England, and their posterity in their civil rights; and the liberty
of the Gospel of King Jesus in its due, to wit, to set up his government by his
laws and Statutes only.

Next you speak of an unlimited power of Parliament, and that in Religion,
surely the word of the Lord is fulfilled, Isay 44. 25. Saying that frustrateth
the tokens of Liars, that makes diviners mad, that turns wisemen backward,
and makes their knowledge foolishness, etc.

But truly Sirs, I cannot agree with you in neither of these, for first in
civil things, for which they are properly called together, they are not to act
for their own ends, and by respects, but for the good, safety, and well being of
the people, their Trusters or Impowrers, by whom they may, and ought to be
called to an account, if they should neglect to perform their duty: For if in
things civil, the Parliament have an unlimited power, why complain you of the
Executions done in Queen Mary's days by a Parliamentarie power, with the
consent of your Reverend Fathers the Prelates. As also in Queen Elizabeth's
days upon Barrow, Greenwood and Penrie, who were hanged for professing against
the Common Prayer book, which now you practice, the case being altered, neither
are we ignorant of the turnings, changings and unchangeings, of you Priests, as
in Henry the eights days Papists, in Edward the 6. Protestants, in Queen
Mary's Papists, in Queen Elizabeth's Protestants in K. James and K. Charles his
days, for the Bishops and Episcopal Government. Now for the Presbyterian, a
greater Benefice being a loadstone sufficient to carry the greater part of you
after it, like some Lawyers that looks more at the greatness of the Fee, then
the goodness of the cause, nay being Feed, leaves his Client, and turns on the
other side, I would there were none such fate in the House of Commons.

Secondly, For Religion, they receive no authority or charge from God, he
having given that power and prerogative only to his Son King Jesus, they
being Masters of the flesh only, but God the Father of Spirits, and therefore
^is worship being spiritual, he requires only voluntary, spiritual
worshippers to worship him, as John 4. 24. God is a spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth, etc.

For the many Oaths, Protestations, and Covenants you speak of, I fear, as
Jeremiah says, For these the Land mourns, for it had been good if they had
been fully debated concerning the lawfulness of them, before they had been
with such violence forced upon the Nation, although now you desire not to have
them kept: for if not lawful by the word of God, they are of no more force
then theirs that had bound themselves with an Oath, neither to eat nor drink,
till they had killed Paul, Acts 23. 12.

And whereas you object against the Ambiguity or darkness, in that it is said,
it is intended that Christian Religion should be held forth, as the public
profession of this Nation; yet does not declare what that Christian Religion
is. And can you object this? Have you forgot the Protestation, Covenant, Vows,
League and Covenant you engaged this Nation in, for the Protestant Religion,
yet never did declare what that Protestant Religion was you intended, and so
much spoke of.

And whereas you allege, that all Sects and Errors in the Church of Christ
(nay take the Church of Antichrist to it) since the Apostles days, do all lay
claim to Christian Religion, and may by this Agreement plead, at least stand
as Probationers for the privilege of public profession: I wonder else, how
could you all this while come in for a share, and are you not herein as those
of whom the Apostle says. Ye profess that ye know God, yet in works you deny
him, etc. Titus 1. 16.

And whereas you seem to take offense, that only the Popish and Prelaticall are
left out, I shall desire to include them also, otherwise I nor you, nor they
can obey Christ's commands, Mat. 7. 12. and Luke 6. 31. to wit, to do to all
men, as we would they should do unto us.

In the next place, I joy that you desire that God would increase that care in
you and others to have Religion reformed to the greatest purity in doctrine,
worship and Discipline, according to the word of God, and for instructing
people in a public way. And for the confutation of Heresy and Error, etc.
How can this be done, and not liberty of conscience granted? I hope then the
truth will not be confined as it hitherto has been by you, within the Lips
only of the Tribe of Levi, as you call them. But that others shall have liberty
to speak, either to add unto, or contradict if erroneous.

To the second branch, where sound doctrine, and a good conversation shall be
the only means to win upon the contrary minded, I shall plentifully prove
that to be according to the Gospel rule. As 2 Timothy 2. 24. 25, 26.

And the servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle toward all men,
apt to teach, patient, in meekness, instructing the contrary minded, etc.

And for your distinction of Paganism, I have elsewhere, proved your state
Antichristian, and to be far worse, and is compared to Sodom and Egypt, the
vety worst of Heathens, and therefore not to have given their hands and Seals
to Christ, nor taken upon them the profession of faith in him, unless it be
implicit, to believe as the Church believes, or by tradition of men.

And whereas you conceive there is so much zeal for God and for his truth in
the people of England, that did they but know the liberty intended and
endeavonred after, they would be so far from subscribing their hands to the
Agreement, that at the very hearing of it, they would Rent their clothes, and
cast dust upon their heads. Sirs I believe it, for as the children of Israel,
who had been a long time in bondage and slavery in Egypt, God sending his
servant Moses to deliver them in their journey, they murmered against him,
desiring rather to return and remain by their Fleshpots with Onions and
Leekes, then to be transported into the Land of Canaan, so these having drunk
so deep a draught of the golden cup of the Whore from your hands, that they are
now in the same condition that the Jews were to whom Paul preached the Gospel,
Acts 22. 22, 23. Who said, Away with such a fellow from the earth for it is not
fit that he should live, crying out casting of their clothes, and throning dust
into the air, etc.

Then you fall into the old strain of enveighing against Anabaptists,
Antinomians, Arminians, Arians, Socinians, Phocinians, etc. never showing what
they are, much less confuting their doctrine to be erroneous, neither can you
bring any part of the Gospel to prove, that these men, were they as erroneous
as you pretend, should be persecuted for their opinions, and not enjoy the
Liberty of their Conscience. But herein you show your selves brethren to James
and John, That would have had fire come down from heaven to consume the
Samaritanes. But as Christ said to them, so say I to you, Ye know not of what
spirit ye are of, for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives but to
save them.

And for your fear of overthrowing the Oath of Allegiance and Supremecie, your
Shibboleths, if they had never been; but according to James his words, yea
Christ himself not to have sworn at all, we had been far better, and the sin of
perjury and swearing would not have lain upon the Land, as I fear it now does.

The rest of the discourse is as much as in you lies to hinder a general
Liberty of Conscience in matters of worship, which is your Parenthisis, your
fly in the box of oyutment, disabling the power of the civil Magistrate, and
Societies in private Families.

And why are you so invictive against the Papists and Prelaticall, your late
reverend Fathers from whom you had your Ordination, being, and maintenance, [Oh
Ingratitude!] That children should so degenerate, as to seek the death and
overthrow of their Fathers, that so they may get into their possessions, which
you have done by Papists and Prelates. And whereas you say, Popery and
Prelacie may have liberty by the Agreement, because they make profession of
faith in God by Jesus Christ, do you Presbyters any more? Are ye not of those
the Apostle speaks of, Titus 1. 16. That profess they know God but in works
they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and to every good work
reprobate, or void of judgment. In which your practice, you show your woolvish
nature derived from your Fathers, that notwithstanding by the providence of God
your rage is stopped, and teeth struck out. Yet like a muzled Woolfe do you not
retain your nature of snapping and snarling, making good the word of the Lord,
Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, on the Leopard his spots, then
may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil. compared with verse 22.
and chapt. 5. 19.

For your conclusion, upon your being better informed and enlightened in your
minds, I wish your light prove not darkness, for then how great is that
darkness, and whereas you do all freely and solemnly underwrite the substance
of what is there published concerning the honor of God, I shall be of your
mind, when I see you with the Jews and the Go^lor cry out, What shall we do
to be saved, Acts 2. 37. and 16. 30.

Or with those that used curious Arts, and burnt their books, when you go and
do likewise, Acts 19. 1^.

Or according to Christ's command, and the Apostles rule and practice preach the
Gospel freely, getting that Ordinance for Tiths repealed, with your tr^ble
damages or imprisonment, without Bail or Mainprice.

When with the D^mzell, in whom was the spirit of divination, Acts 16. 16. You
confess those whom you revile and persecute, to be the servants of the living
God, that show forth the glorious Institutions of the Gospel of Christ the way
of salvation, renouncing all Antichristian practice and traditions of men, that
you have neither precept nor example for. Then and not until then, shall I
judge you to be no Malignants against Christ, nor Sectaries, nor Schismatics
from the only rule of Christ.

But herein Reader take notice of two things: the state of the National Church
of the Jews under the Law, from the world, distinguished by circumcision, and
the Church of Christ under his government in the time of the Gospel,
distinguished by baptism or dipping.

That being a Covenant of works made with Abraham, and his carnal or natural
seed after the flesh. The other being a new Covenant made with Christ,
believers, Isaac and his spiritual seed, being of the faith of Abraham. Gal.
3. 7. 26. 28, 29. compared with Romans 9. 7. 8. John 1. 12, 13. and 3, 4, 5.

2. We hinder not men from Instructing, Catechizing, and persuading their
families, either Magistrates, or private persons, yea and to power out
themselves with Jeremiah and Paul in prayer for them: But not to use any
violence or carnal weapons to force them to the worship that God requires,
under the Gospel by Christ, it being spiritual, according to that great
Charter, Mat. 28. 19, 20. His Churches being so gathered in the Primitive
times, and ought to be so gathered after the Apostacy of the man of sin, to
wit, by one and the same rule and ministry, etc. being taken from the Heathens
or Antichristians, although you seem to make a difference, for the word sets
forth the state of Antichrist, to be Sodom and Egypt, the worst of Heathens,
If you will make a difference.

I shall now desire to show you what was practiced under the Law, as also under
the Gospel, concerning Liberty of Conscience, with the grounds and reasons for
it. And lastly show you how persecution for conscience came in, and was
afterward agrivated to uphold, not the Church of Christ, but the state and
church of Antich^ist.

First then, were our Religion as false as you our Adversaries pretend, yet
were that no ground to take away our lives, estates, o^ banish us, pulling down
our houses to make Iakes thereof, and hang us on the timber, as some of eminency
have preached for before authority, I spare to name them. I say we proving
loyal to our Country, though holding errors in our judgments, yet were that
no ground for persecution, as is clear from Christ by the parable of the
Tares, Mat. 13. Whereby the Tares must needs be understood, men professing a
false Religion, which when some would have had them plucked up, Christ declared
his mind to the co^t^ary, and commanded they should be let alone, and grow with
the wheat, until the harvest in the world. Although not in the Church, least
men undertaking to pluck up the Tares, wanting wisdom to distinguish, pluck up
the wheat in stead thereof, as it has and does often come to pass, according
to the words of Christ, which shows that some shall be so blindly led, and
devoted as to kill the Saints, thinking thereby that they do God service, and
therefore Christ will have the tares let alone with the wheat, until the
harvest, then who without great sin can attempt to pluck them up before that
time.

And this does no way contradict Gods word which says, that Magistrates are
Gods Ministers to take vengeance on them that do evil, the tares being sinners
against God in false Religion; whom he has reserved to be punished with
flaming fire at the day of Christ, the other being trespassers against men, and
are justly to be punished by the civil Magistrate, and herein we give to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods.

3. The Lord commands, that those that are blindly led on in a false
Religion, and are offended with him for the teaching of the Gospel, should be
let alone, and refers their punishment to the falling into the ditch, Mat.
15. 14. And Phil. 3. 3. For we are the Circumcision which worship God in the
spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

Thirdly, the Lord Christ reproves those Disciples, that would have had fire
come down from heaven, and consume the Samaritans that would not receive him,
in these words, Ye know not of what Spirit ye are, for the Son of Man is not
come to destroy men's lives but to save them. Which shows plainly, that Christ
would have no man hurt for Religon, yea, though they were refusers of himself.
Luke 9. 54. 55. 56.

Fourthly, when the Lord Christ sent forth the twelve to preach the Gospel of
the Kingdom; this is the utmost that he directed them unto concerning those
that should refuse to hear their words, namely, Mat. 10. 14. 15. To shake off
the dust of their feet for a Testimony against them, leaving their further
punishment to the day of Judgment. This was clear under the Law, where none
was compelled to the worship of God by the Authority of the Civil Magistrate;
but as the Lord did persuade the heart by his Word. And as this was so under
the Law, much more in the time of the Gospel, the Body being of Christ: as
first, by the Commission of Christ given to the Apostles, where Christ shows,
though all power in Heaven and Earth was his, yet he only appoints Preaching
the Gospel, for gathering of his Churches throughout the world: according to
Paul's words, where he says, The weapons of our war-fare are not carnal, but
mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down
Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God. Genesis 9. 27. Exo. 35. 5. 21. 22. 23. Psa. 18. 43. 44. 110. 3. Col. 2.
17. Matt. 28. 19. 20. 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5.

Again the same Apostle commands, 2 Timothy 2. 24. That the servant of the Lord
strive not, but be gentle toward all men, suffering the evil instructing with
meeknes the contrary minded, proving, if God at any time will give them
repentance, that they may acknowledge the Truth* and come to amendment, out of
the snare of the Devil. Which plainly shows, that repentance must be
continually waited for, and not constrained by violence and persecution; and
that because repentance is the gift of God, and cannot be given by man: and
therefore Religion not to be forced or compelled. Ephesians. 2. 5. 8.

According to these commands the holy Prophets foretold, That when the Law of
Moses should cease, in matters of worship, and the Law of the Messiah should be
set up instead thereof, that then the carnal Weapons should cease They shall
break their Swords into Mattocks, and their Spears into Sythss, Nation shall
not rise against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more;

They shall sit every man under his vine and under his own fig tree, and none
shall make them afraid, for the mouth of the Lord ha^h spoken it; There shall
none hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain, for the Earth shall be filled
with the knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea, Which when Christ
came, he taught and practied and so did his Apostles and servants: Behold my
servant whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my Soul is well pleased; I will
put my sppirit upon him, and he shall show Judgment to the Gentiles; he shall
not strive nor cry, neither shull any man he are his voice in the streets; a
bruised Reed shall he not break, and smoking Flax shall he not quench, till he
send forth Judgment unto victory. Advising them to be so far from persecuting
those that should oppose, and not be of their Religion, that when they were
persecuted they should pray, when they were cursed they should bless, leaving
the Judgment to God. Isa. 2, 4. Micha 4. 3. 4. Isa. 11. 9. Isa. 42. 1, 2, 3.
Matt. 12. 18. 19, 20. 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25, 26. 2 Cor. 10. 4. Romans 12. 14, to the
20.

The reason of all is, They who are now blind, may see; They who now reject the
Truth, may receive it; They who are now Tares, may become Wheat; They who are
now in the snare of the Devil, through wicked works, and adversaries to the
Truth, may hereafter come to repentance; They that are now Blasphemers and
persecutors as Saint Paul was, may in time become most glorious and faithful
witnesses, as he did; They that are now Idolators as the Corinthians sometimes
were, may hereafter as they, become true worshippers of God; They who for the
present are no people of God in vissible appearance, nor under mercy, may
hereafter become the people of God, obtaining mercy as the Saints have done;
for some come not till the eleaventh hour, though some came at the First,
Third, and sixth hour, yet some not till the last; which should they be put to
death, because they come not with the first, they then would be prevented from
coming at all. Acts 8. 3. Acts 9. 5. 6. 1 Cor. 6. 9. 1 Pet. 2. 10. Matt. 20. 6.

It is affirmed by King James of famous memory, in his Speech at the Sessions
of Parliament, Anno 1609. That it is a sure rule in Devinity, That God never
loves to plant his Church with violence and Bloodshed.

Again, in his Apollogy for the oath of Allegiance, Page 4. speaking of those
Papists that took the said Oath, says, I gave a good proof for it; that I
never intended persecution for Conscience cause, but only desired to be secured
of them for Civil obedience. It was usually the condition of the Christians to
be persecuted, but not to persecute. And lamentable it is to see the folly of
late times, and we cannot but greive at the folly of men, who think by humane
Inventions, and carnal aid of Laws, and Statutes, to help God and with
worldly power and pomp, to defend the Churches of Christ; as if he by his own
power were not able to do it, and to perform his own will. Matt. 27. 52. 53. 54.

The Church has formerly bin known, by enduring Misery and imprisonment; but
it is the mark of the Church of Antichrist, to terrify others by
imprifonments, bannishments, and persecutions, boasting her self, that she is
highly esteemed in the world, whereas the true Church of Christ cannot but be
hated of the same. John 15. 18. 19. 20. Rev. 13. 3.

It was commanded by the Law, If a man met a betrothed Damsel in the ^ield,
and the man force her, he was to die: Then what shall those expect that shall
force the conscience the spouse of Christ? Deuteronomy. 22. 25. Hosea 2. 19. 20. 2
Cor. 11. 2.

The example of many Nations, both in Scripture, and at this day known, may
suffice to suffer the conscience free: Abraham lived in Egypt in Gerar, among
the Philistines, after with the Hittites: Lot in Sodom; Isaac in Gerar, Israel
in Egypt 430. years, after in Babylon 30 years; yet never constrained in their
Religion. Also in the days of our Savior, how many Religions were there in
that famous Empire of Casars, yet not by him persecuted, or constrained to his
Religion. Genesis 20. Genesis 23. Genesis 13. Genesis 26.

It was the Judgment of Luther, That the Laws of the Civil Magistrate
extended no farther then over the bodies and goods, and that which is
external; for over the soul, God will have none to rule but himself. And
therefore, wherever the civil Magistrate undertaketh to set laws, for the
souls and consciences of men, he usurpeth that Government and authority to
himself, which appertains only to God. Psa. 89. 27. Isa 33. 22. Phil. 2. 9. 2 Timothy 3. 16. James 4. 12. Rev. 22. 18. 19.

And therefore we conceive it, the highest degree of Antichrists impiety,
sitting in the temple of God as God, showing himself that he is God, 2 Thessalonians.
2. 4. in giving Laws to the Conscience, which is Gods Prerogative only. Deuteronomy.
27, 4.

In the building of the Temple, there was no sound of Iron heard, to show, that
Christ will have in his Church a free consent, not compelled mor constained by
Laws and Statutes, for the Kings of the Earth shall bring their glory unto it.
1. Kings 6. 7. Joshuah 8. 31. Isa. 60. 11. Rev. 21. 24.

Again, the Churches of Christ must look for suffering, with every particular
member thereof, as he himself did, who is their head, being thereby made
perfect, being the way and means that God has appointed to publish the Gospel:
which caused the Fathers to say, The blood of the Martyrs was the Seed of the
Church, Romans 8. 29. Phil. 3. 10. Heb 2. 10.

Therefore Christians are to be exhorted, not compelled: for he that will not
do that whereunto he is exhorted and persuaded, the Gospel injoyning, is no
true Christian as yet; and they that go not this Gospel way, to persuade men by
exhortation and Counsel, but seek to do it by constraint, show themselves not
Gospel Teachers but worldly Beadles rather, 2 Timothy 2. 24.

For consider, if an earthly King will take it so ill, as surely he may at his
subjects hands to have any equalize themselves with him or submit to a
foreign power, or to make Laws for his Subjects to be guided and ruled by;
how much more the King of Kings Christ Jesus, by whom alone Kings reign, will
he suffer himself to be displaced, and an earthly King placed in his throne.
Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Pro. 30. 6. Rev. 22. 18. 19.

Thus we conceive it is clear, That no man ought to be forced in matter of
Religion, the Gospel being spiritual, and requires only, spiritual
worshippers, like to it self: which cannot be made so, but by the Word and
Spirit of God, which breaths where and when it lists, and not where and
when men's Laws and Statutes pleases; which may make hypocrites, but not true
Christians. As we said unto you before so say I unto you again, If any man
preach any other Gospel unto you then that ye have received, let him be
accursed for do I now persuade men, or God? Or do I seek to please men? for if
I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ John 4. 24. John 3. 8.
2 Cor. 5. 10. Gal. 1. 9. 10.

And thus as you see, persecution was never taught by Christ, nor yet practiced
by his Apostles, nor by the Primitive ^hristians: so afterward it arose, and
was brought in by the bloody Heathen Tyrants, and continued by Antichrist and
his Ministers as appears in Tho. Beacons Relics of Rome, set forth with
Privilege Anno Dom. 1563.

Pope Seritius ordained that Heriticks should be banished, and that no
Christian should Communicate with, or keep them company Anno 588. fol. 214.

Pope Pelagius the first, not content with the former punishment made a Decree,
that all Heriticks and Schismatics, with all such as be contumiliter
disobedient to the holy Church Ordinances, should be put to death by the
secular power, provided always, that those bloody B. with their Woolf-like
Officers, and Antichristian adherents, do first of all prosecute imprison and
condemn them for Heriticks, and aftewards according to their wicked Decrees,
commit them to the secular power, and temporal Magistrates, as unto their
Butchers and Hangmen, to dispach them out of the way, either by fire, sword or
halter; for these holy Fathers cry out with their Forefathers, and Pope-like
Predicessors. John 18. 31. It is not lawful for us to put any man to death.
Anno Dom. 551. fol. 215.

Pope Innocent the 3. bearing rule in the year 1215. the Council of Lattern^
was called, or celebrated, where was present two Patriarks 70. Archbishops
Metrapolitans, 400 Bishops 12. Abbots 800. Convinciall Priests, the Legates of
the Greek and Roman Empire, with the Ambassadors of the Kings of Spain,
Jerusalem, France and England, and Ciprus; In this Council it was Decreed,
that all Heriticks, and so many as do in any point resist the Catholic faith
should be condemned.

In this Council was also Decreed, that the secular power of what degree
soever they be, should be compelled openly, to swear for the defense of the
Catholic Faith, And that to the utmost of their power, to root out and
destroy in their Kingdoms, all such persons as the Catholic Church h^th
condemned for Herit^cks. And if he do not reform within one whole year, then
the Pope is to denounce all his Subjects absolved, and utterly delivered from
showing, or owing any fidelity or obedience unto him, as in this Kingdom it was
done by King Iohr. Again, that the Pope may give that Land to be occupied, and
enjoyed by the Catholics, and they to possess it, all Heriticks being rooted
out peaceably, and without contradiction. fol. 217.

Since this answer to the Ministers Watchword was at the Printers, Mr. John
Fereby, Minster of Thoydon Garnon, one of the 63. April the 22, being Lords
day, took occasion much to enveigh against Sectaries, Anabaptist^, etc. as ^e
cal^s them.

But the Author desires if he does it out of conscience, to answer him by word
in a free dispute, or by writing, concerning the constitution of their Church
Ordination, of their Ministry, Worship, Government, Maintenance, Baptism, or
persecution for conscience, referring the sensure and judgment there of to all
judicious hearers.

E. B.

FINIS.

