TWO LETTERS From the HAGVE: OF Prince Charles His going into Scotland, and of
6000 Danes to be landed there, under the command of the Duke of Holst.

ALSO An Army of Swedes, in which are 7 Dukes 9 Marquesses, 17 Earls, and
above 20 Lords. The heads of the Princes Proclamation sent to the Earl of
Ormond, and a particular message sent by Colonel Buckworth.

AND Likewise of the Prince his intended Marriage with the Duke of Lorraines
only daughter and two hundred thousand pounds offered with her in ready money.

Imprimatur,

March.19. G. Mabbot.



London Printed by B. A. 1649.

A LETTER FROM THE HAGVE Concerning Prince Charles his going into Scotland, and
of six thousand Danes to be landed there.
SIR,
I Received yours this Morning. In your last you request all true news, which
now is very plentiful, The Prince is here yet, but his departure expected, and
by many longed for: I cannot certainly inform you, whether it be into
Scotland, or into Ireland, he is expected at both. Sir George Radcliffe is sent
after Gen: Riven, to hasten the Swedish Army into their quarters: there are
6000 men at Necopia, ready to put to Sea, and 1200 at Lo^usia, waiting only for
the m^lting of the Ise: and the Duke of Helsigna their General.

There is at Hamborough, waiting only for a wind, great store of Soldiers:
6000 Danes are by this time landed in Scotland, bound for England, and Duke of
Ho^^t General: 4000 more are daily expected. In the Swedish Army are seven
Dukes, nine Marquesses, seventeen Earls, and two or three and twenty Lords.
That of the Danes, two Dukes, seven Earls, three Marquesses, and fifteen or
sixteen Lords. These are great numbers, and it is to be feared, will do more
hurt to our already too poor Country, then they can do good. And yet we must
have very many more, as well of the barbarous Irish, as of the beggarly Scot,
and the both proud and foolish French.

We hear certainly, the peace is concluded on in France: and by an express
from P. Rupert, the Prince of Wales is assured of a strong Hold in Ireland; for
the two Princes Rupert and Maurice, are at Sea with seventy two Ships, and
Frigots, and their Randezvouz the twelfth of March, are to be within nine
Leagues of Dublin, at the Castle of Burkley.

The sixth of this instant, the Lord of Ormond, General, the Lord of
Clanrickard, Lieutenant General; the Lord Ta^^e, General of the Horse; the
Lord Muskerry, Commissary; and Inchiquin, and Preston, with five thousand men,
to meet Ormond and his fifteen thousand, at Pitmere, twenty miles from Dublin.

I Will assure you, this is the Princes intelligence: and if I could have got the
Copy of the Proclamation, sent to the Lord of Ormond, you should have had it;
But take the heads. First, he shows, that he has no desire to commence his
Reign in blood, and that he will freely pardon those now holding any Castle or
Garrison for the Parliament of England; That he fights only to settle himself
in the Throne of his late Father, and a deal to this purpose. This was sent to
the Lord of Ormond, by Collonell Buckworth, to be proclaimed as a Pardon to all
those that will falsify the trust reposed in them by the Parliament of England.

This I Will assure you, but with more allacrity assure you that I am,

Hague, March 16. 1648. Your assured friend G. B.

Another Letter from the Hague.
SIR,
THe Princes departure hence, is all the speech now at the Court, and it is
confidently reported (which I think is true) that be will be suddenly either in
Ireland or Scotland, where there are eight thousand Danes landed, which is
confirmed by an express from General Rivin, to the Prince, who was sent as an
Ambassador from him thither, and he not only assures him of their arrival,
but also of the assistance of a very considerable party of Swedes, which were
to be disbanded, on the conclusion of the late peace with the Emperor of
Germany: but God a vert the danger, that our poor Kingdom is threatened
withal.

Last night, I was with one of the Kings own Servants, who told me
certainly, that the Lord of Newcastle, and the Bishop of Derrie, lately made
one of the Kings Privy Counselors, are employed to Bruxels, to nenegotiate
for a marriage between the King, and the Duke of Lorraines only daughter, who
certainly offers two hundred thousand pounds in ready money, and to furnish
the King with five thousand Foot, and two thousand horse, which he undertakes
likewise, to pay for six months, if the marriage go on; which he may perform
with more easiness, if the peace between the King of France, and the Arch Duke
Leopall take effect; if the peace go not on, there will be foul doings in
Artways, the Archduke being resolved with fire and sword to enter the country,
and destroy all as he goes,

There is news here confidently reported among the Kings party, which I hope
will not prove true, it is concerning the straight siege laid to Dublin, by the
Lord of Ormond, and his great Army, I believe you have the Articles agreed upon
between him, and the Irish, or else I should have sent them to you by this
post, there is great expectations from Ireland, and a sudden storm threatens
to fall on England.

Sir I hope now I have satisfied you in all that you desire, for you desired
nothing but news, and you have the truth as near as can be.

My own going over will be very sudden, and I hepe to find you at more
quietness then reports make you to be, which are the hearty prayers of your
assured friend, and servant.

Hague March, 15. W. B.

FINIS.

