AN ANSWER TO THE Eight Quaeries propounded by the House of Commons, to the
Assembly called Divines, sitting at Westminster, April. 22. 1646. never to this
day by them Answered, nor they called to an account by the Parliament, for
their ignorance or negligence therein.

Psalm. 31.6. I have hated them that regard lying vanities, but I trust in the
Lord. Jonah 2.8. They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy.
Psalm. 82.6.7. I have said, ye are Gods; and all of you are Children of the most
high: But ye shall dye like men, and fa l like one of the Princes. Jer. 5.30. A
wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land, the Prophets prophecy
lies, and the Priests receive gifts in their hands: and my people delight
therein, what will ye then do in the end thereof. Cor. 1.14.36. What, came the
word of God out from you, or came it unto you only. Gal. 4.16. Am I therefore
become your enemy, because I tell you the truth. 2 Cor. 4.2. But have renounced
the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the
word of God deceitfully, but by manifestatio^ of the truth, commending our
selves to every man's Conscience in the sight of God. Col. 2.8. Beware least any
man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit etc. 1 Timothy 6.20. Oh Timothy,
keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain bablings.
By Edward Barber Freeman of England, Citizen and Marchant-Taylor of London.
1648.

To those Noble Senators, the chosen Stewards and Servants of the freemen of
England, the Commons assembled in Parliament, with that Right Noble General,
the Lord Fairfax, and Lieut. Genesis Crumwell.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
TAking into consideration the Quaeries so long since propounded by your
Honors, to the Assembly called Divines at Westminster, desiring their Answers
therein, as once Nebucadnizer did of his dream, from his Magicians,
Astrolog^rs, Sorcerers, and Caldeans, whom he had chosen, and to whom was
appointed a daily provision of the Kings meat, and of the wine which he drank.
Dan. 2. That so being nourished at his Table, at three years end, they might
stand before the King, But they being called forth to satissie the Kings
desire, in telling (...) etc. as Ier. 51 6.7. compared with Isaia 21.9. and
Micha 2.10.11. Arise ye and depart, for this is not your rest, because it is
polluted it shall destroy you, even with a sore destruction, if a man walking
in the spirit of falsehood do lie, saying, I will prophecy unto thee of wine
and strong drink, he shall even be the prophet of this people, compared with 2.
Cor. 6.14. to 18. and Revel. 18.4. come out of her my people that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

Now as the people of God were thus called forth of temporal and spiritual
Babylon, so the instruments by which the Lord will do this great work, shall be
by despised persons, that so the great wise men of the world may stay
themselves, and wonder who are blind and make you blind, instead of this they
render it, cry ye out and cry, Isai. 29.9. to 15. and also, that the whole
glory may be given to God only, and not to men, and as for such as have
received their Call and Ordination from the beast, or no calling at all as some
now pretends, if ever they should be converted and to submit unto the Order and
Government of King Jesus in the Gospel way, yet will these be the unsittest
for the carrying forth of that rich treasure of the Gospel, they having
formerly sworn themselves Servants unto Antichrist, and therefore will be but
as the Gibiouites, who although by their craft had saved their lives, yet were
by Josuah that glorious Tipe of Christ, appointed to be hewers of wood, and
drawers of water, Josuah 9. or Lovies Sons, Sam. 1.2.36. who at that time
when the Lord shall raise up his faithful Priest, shall come and crouch for a
piece of silver, or a morsel of bread, saying, put me I pray thee into one of
the Priests Offices, that I may eat a pecee of bread, or with those Merchants
of the earth, who when the Kings and Magistrates of the earth, who have
committed fornication with the whore, and lived deliciously; at her overthrow,
shall bewail her, and lament for her, Revel. 18.9. then also shall those
Merchants of the earth weep and mourn; for no man buyeth their Merchandise any
more, verse. 10. This will cause them as the Jews, Acts 22.22. to discover
their madness who east dust upon their heads, so these crying, weeping, and
wayling, saing, alas, alas, that great City wherein were made rich, all that
had Ships in the Sea, by reason of her costlinesse, for in one hour is she
made desolate, verse. 19. and verse. 20. the Church holy Messengers and Prophets
are called forth to rejoice over her for God has avenged them on her when all
profit and delight is taken away from her, verse 22.23. the Reason is laid down
verse. the last, because in her was found the blood of Prophets and of Saints,
and of all that were slain upon the earth; oh that therefore your honors would
give liberty for public disputes, that thereby the truth might be tried, and
that there might be some time allowed after the public Exercises is done;
wherein the hearers those whose mouths the Lord by his spirit shall open,
might have liberty to add to what is delivered, or contradict if irronious,
and that there might be some places that are vacant, as Paul's, or the like
appointed, for such exercises and trials of the truth, according to John
1.4.1. where he says, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether
they are of God, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world, and
These. 1.5.21. The Apostle exhorts the Saints to prove all things, and to hold
fast that which is good, which cannot be done in that way that is practiced by
them, they tying up the mouths of all but themselves, by their Antichristian
power and practice, that therefore the Kings of the earth, and you the
Majestrates would be wise, and consider your ways, and know as it was once
said to Saul, as he was going to Damascus, having received Authority from the
High Priests to persecute and hale to prison all that called upon the name of
the Lord Jesus, Saul Saul, why persecutest thou me, it is hard for thee to kick
against the pricks, so it will one day be said to all those that persecute
Christ in his Members, which through the subtelty of Antichrist is usually done
under the name of Heriticks and Sectaries, as in Queen Mary's days, etc. for
know as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 2.2. to 6. although the Kings of the
earth set themselves, and the Rulers take Council together against the Lord,
and against his Christ, saying, let us break his bonds asunder, and cast away
his cords from us; but he that sits in Heaven shall laugh, the Lord shall have
them in derision, then shall he speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his
sore displeasure, yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion, all which
their doing was but a vane thing in David's Account, verse. the first, and verse.
10.11.12. he exhorts them saying, be wise now therefore on ye Kings, be
instructed, ye Judges of the earth serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling, kiss the Son least he be angry, and ye perish from the way, if his
wrath be kindled, yea but a little, blessed are they that put their trust in
him, compared with Prove. 16.20. Isa. 30.18. Jer. 17.7. and 27 7. Romans 9.33. and
10.11. 1 Pet. 2.6. For says the Lord, Isa. 60.12. The Nation and Kingdom that
will not serve thee shall perish, yea those Nations shall be utterly wasted, on
that England would consider this in time! least one day it be said to it, as
was once said by Christ to Jerusalem, Luke 13.34 and 19 41. where coming nigh
to the City, he beheld it, and wept over it, saying, if thou had known even
thou at least in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace, but now
they are hid from thy eyes.

So the Lord for many years having called upon this Kingdom of England for
repentance, and turning unto him by amendment, sollowing us with mercies and
deliverances, fatherly chastizing us by pestilence, sword and famine; but what
amendment is there of any since, but that in justice, pride, cruelty, neglect
of the poor, Idolatry, covetousnes abounds, and as the proph. says, Is.
56.11. every one for ku gain from his quarter, that love of money the root of
all evil remaining as much as ever. 1 Timothy 6.10.

That therefore we would turn unto him according to promise, in keeping the
Protestation and Covenant, in standing for a reformation according to the word
of God and institutions of Christ, and not covetous men's desires and
inventions, who in all ages have been obstructers of the true worship of God,
and persecuters of his servants, as King. 1 22.22. to 28. Ier. 18.18. Come let
us smite him with the tongue, Ames 7.10.11 Mic. 1.1. etc. 3. Ier. 26.11. to 19.
Mat. 23.13. who shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, they neither go in
themselves, neither suffer them that are entering to go in; but as Theedoro Beza
observes from Act. 6.9. to 15. that falls teachers because they will not be
overcome, flee from disputations to Magistrates and open slandering, and false
accusations, and that the first bloody persecution of the Church of Christ
began, and sprung from a Council of Priests by the suggestion of the
University Doctors, that therefore we might beware of men, and according to the
command of God heat ken only to the voice of Christ, Mat. 17.5. that so we
obeying him the great Prophet and Anointed, the Lord may be gracious unto us in
causing the sword to be sheathed, and that he may delight to dwell among us, in
turning the hearts of the Fathers unto the children, and the hearts of the
children to the Fathers; which shall be the desire and prayer of him, that
desires the happiness here and glory hereafter of you, and all that love the
Lord Jesus Christ in fincerity.

Whereas it is Resolved by the House of Commons, that all persons guilty of
uotorious offenses shall be suspended the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; the
House of Commons desires to be satissied by the Assembly of Divines in these
particulars.
1. WHether the Parochial and Congregationall Elderships, appointed by
Ordinance of Parliament are Jure Divino, by the will and appointment of Jesus
Christ. 2, Whether all the Members of the said Elderships are Members thereof,
or which of them are Jure Divino by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ?
3, Whether the Supreme Assemblies or Elderships viz. the Classical,
Provincial and National, whether all or any of them, or which of them are
Jure Divino, and by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ. 4. Whether
appeals from Congregationall Elderships to the Classical, Provincial and
National Assemblies, or to any of them or which of them are Iure Divino, and
by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ? 5. Whether oecumenicall Assemblies
are Iure Divino, or whether there be appeals from any of the former
Assemblies, to the said oecumenicall Assemblies, Iure Devino by the will and
appointment of Jesus Christ? 6. Whether by the word of God the power of
judging, and declaring what are such notorious and scandalous offenses as
aforesaid, and conventing before them, trying and actual suspending from the
Sacrament such offenders accordingly, either in the Congregationall Elderships
or Presbytery, or in any other Eldership of Presbytery presented to the House
as the advice of the Assembly, and whether such powers are in them only, or any
of them, or in which of them Jure Divino, and by the will and appointment of
Jesus Christ? 7. Whether there be any certain and particular rules expressed
in the word of God, to direct the said Elderships, or Presbyteries, or any of
them in the exercise and execution of the powers aforesaid, and which are those
rules? 8. Is there any thing contained in the word of God, that the Supreme
Majestracy in a Christian state, may not judge and determine, what are the
aforesaid notorious and seandalous offencet, and the manner of suspention from
the same, And in what particulars concerning the premises is the said Supreme
Majestracy by the word of God excluded?
In Answer of these particulars the House of Commons desires of the Assembly of
Divines their proofs from Scripture, and to set down the several texts in the
express words of the same.

Ordered that every particular Minister of the Assembly of Divine that is or
shall be present at the debate of any of these questions, de upon every
resolution which shall be presented to this House concerning the same,
subscribe his respective name either with the Affirmative or Negative, as he
gives his Vote, and those that do decent from the major Part shall set down
their possitive opinions, with the express Text of Scripture upon which their
opinion is grounded.

For Answer to the first Quaerie, the Churches of Christ were constituted, and
gathered out of the world by the Ministry of the Gospel, according to that
great Charter thereof, Mat. 28.19.20. Mark. 16.15.16. Lu. 24.47. And not by any
Authority or Ministry of the civil Magistrate, and as they were thus gathered,
and planted in the premitive times, so are they in like manner by his Servants
to be gathered after the Apostacy whom by his power he shall in an
extraordinary manner raise up, and by the Servants of the Churches that shall
be by them sent forth to preach the everlasting Gospel for the inlightening the
earth, discovering the Mystery of iniquity, and the Ministry of Antichrist,
gathering his people out of spiritual Babylon, as out of Babylon of old, and
planting them into Church fellowship and order, having their Commission from
Christ and his Church, and not by Command and Authority from Pope, Council,
Synod, or civil Magistrate: the Church of Christ being his spiritual Kingdom,
consisting of a company of Saints, or holy people, Romans 1.7. Cor. 1.1.2. Pet.
1.1.16. called out of the world, John 15.19. Rev. 5.9. By the preaching of the
Gospel, Mat. 28.19.20. Mark. 16.15.16. by a free and voluntary consent, Ps.
18.43.44.110.3 Acts 2.41. and 13.48 and 17.11. entering into Covenant, Psalm.
50.5 Zep. 2.1. Acts 3.23. to 26. Heb. 8.8.9. to discharge duties to God, and
one to another, John 4.24. Phil. 3.3.1. Pet. 2.5. 1 Cor. 12, 12. to 28. putting
on Christ by Baptism or dipping. Gal. 3.26.27. for ye are all the Children of
God by faith in Christ Jesus; for as many of you as have been dipped into Christ,
have put on Christ, compared with Ephesians. 4.4.5. There is one body and one
spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling, one Lord, one faith,
one dipping, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and
in you all. This is Christ's spiritual house under the new Testament, whereof
he is Lord, as Hab. 2.20. Heb. 3 6. and head. Ephesians. 1.22.23. and King, Isa.
33.22. and Law giver, James 4 12. and prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.15. Mat. 17.5. Being
that Priest, Alter and Sacrifice, by which all that believe and obey, are for
ever sanctified and perfected, Heb. 10.14. and 5.8 9. for it is not the voice
of the Church, much less the voice of the Synod, or Parliament, that we are to
hearken unto in spiritnall worship, but Christ's voice in the Church, and that
in all things whatsoever he shall say unto us, Tim. 1.3.15. he speaking in his
Servants, as Luke 10.16. he that hears you, hears me, and he that hears
me, hears him that sent me.

These where ever gathered together under Heaven, in the name of Christ,
according to his order, consisting of Jews or Gentiles, Col. 1.18. have power
from him their head to receive in, deal with, or cast out of the Church, by
the only Laws and Statutes, of King Jesus, heir only King and Lawgiver, as
Isai. 9 6. and 33.22. Acts 2.41.42. Mat. 48.15. to 20. and 1 Cor. 5.4.5. and
2.2.4. to 9. They being under Christ their King, the freest Independent
Corporation or state under Heaven, John 8.36. If the Son therefore shall make
you free, ye shall be free indeed, Cor. 1.3.5, 6, 7. compared with Isai. 2.17.
The Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. Now the parochial Churches or
Elderships that are appointed by Statute Laws, or Ordinances of Parl. and
thereby forced thereunto, cannot be Jure Divino, Churches of Christ by his will
and appointment, but all the people of God are as truly called out of such
Assemblies, as out of Babylon of old, to the free voluntary worship of the
Gospel.

To the second quaerie I answer, The Parish Churches or Assemblies being not
gathered according to the Commission of Christ in that great Charter of the
Gospel, and by his Ministers and Servants, but by the Authority of the civil
Magistrate, through the importunity of Austin the Monck, sent over from Gregory
the 7. from which root and foundation the national Ministry now extant, still
retains their Ordination, having still kept their first state and
constitution, although reformed in diverse particular Doctrines, whereby they
cannot be Jure Divino, Churches of Christ by his will and appointment; but are
constitutions of men through the subtilty of the man of sin, or beast rising
out of the earth [to wit] by his earthly inventions, who by the slight of men,
and cunning craftiness they lie in wait to deceive, having 2. horns like a
Lamb, but speaks like a Dragon, exercising all the power of the first beast,
etc. Rev. 13.11. having a show of wisdom in will worship and humility, Col.
2.23. of whom the Apostle bids the Saints, beware of being spoiled through
their philosophy and vain deceit, after the traditions of men, after the
Rudiments of the world, and not after Christ, in whom dwells the fullness of
the Godhead bodily, and ye the Saints [to wit believers dipt] are complete in
him, etc. and Mat. 15.9. Christ says, in vain do they worship me, teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of men, from whence it appears [as the Churches,
so the Members also] are none of them Jure Divino, Members of any Church of
Christ, by his will and appointment.

To the 3. I answer, for any supreme Authority of Assemblies or Elderships,
viz. the Classical, provincial, or national, whether they are Jure Divino or
no. In all the Gospel I do not find any more jurisdiction of Churches over
Churches, then there is of brethren over brethren, but the contrary is clearly
proved, Mat. 23.8.9, 10. but be not ye called Rabby, for one is your Master, to
wit, Christ and all ye are brethren, and call no man your Father upon the
earth, for there is but one, your Father which is in Heaven; be not called
Doctors, for one is your Doctor, even Christ, and Cor. 1.5 4 5. That Church of
Corinth had power, as to cast out the Incestious person, so upon his Repentance
to receive him in again, without the authority of any other Church, or any
others contradiction, and James 2.1. he says, my brethren, have not the faith
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory with respect of persons, and Chap.
3.1. he says my brethren, be not many Masters, knowing that we shall receive
the greater condemnation; but this spirit of pride is no new thing, for it
began in the Disciples, Luke 9.46. when there arose a reasoning amongst them,
which of them should be the greatest, but Christ perceiving the thoughts of
their hearts, answers them by setting a little Child in the midst of them, to
teach them humility, there being too many now a days of their spirit v. 46.
47. 48 as he taught them, against persecution, verse. 54.55, 56. when they would
have had sire come down from Heaven to consume the Samaritans, saying, ye know
not of what spirit you are, for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's
lives but to save them, etc. Therefore these supreme Assemblies are not Jure
Divino, by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ, but are all by humane
Authority not known in Scripture, being against the freedom, which every Church
of Christ has given them, which they ought to enjoy, none being before or
after another in their privilege or prerogative, which liberty and freedom
every protestator and Covenanter is sworn to stand for and maintain.

To the 4. Concerning Appeals from Congregationall Elderships to the
Classical, Provincial, and National Assemblies. The parishionall not being
proved Iure Divino, but of humane Authority, appeals to them, and from one
unto another must needs be unlawful. Besides, how contrary is this to the
primitive practice, as Acts 15. when there arose a difference about
Circumcision in the Church of Antiochia, they sent up to the Church at
Jerusalem for their advice, (not that they had any authority over them), and
they as humbly and truly sent their advice, saying, it seemed good to the holy
spirit, and to us, to lay upon you no other burden then these necessary
things. Now if these could say thus, and would do as they did, their Council
ought evangelically to be received in like sort by believers; but these as they
were never called and gathered by Christ's Authority, so have they not the
promise of his presence by his spirit with them as his Churches have, Mat.
18.17. to 20. and 28.20. 1 Cor. 3.22.23. and 1.5.4.5. John 14.16.17. and
15.26.27.

To the 5. I find no ecumenical Assemblies in Scripture under the Gospel to be
of Gods appointing, but an invention of the man of sin, raised by those Locusts
that came out of the smoke that arose out of the bottomless pit, Rev. 9.2.3.
who had power as the Sorpions of the earth have power that so by force, As Eze.
34.4. flatteries as Dan. 11.21.22.34. And cunning crastinesse whereby they lie
in wait to deceive Ephesians. 4.14.15. Transforming themselves as the Ministers of
righteousness, Cor. 2.11.15. whose end shall be according to their works by
which means they cause all the world to wonder after the beast, who had his
wound and did live Rev. 13.3. to 7. for the first beast, being those heathen
bloody tyrants who worshipped the Draggon which gave him his power, to whom was
given a mouth, speaking great things and blasphemies against God, to blaspheme
his name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven etc.

This beast being thus wounded, there arises another beast out of the earth
(to wit) out of those earthly inventions of Popish assemblies counsels and
Synods, Re. 6 13.14. the Stars folling from Heaven to the earth, they leaving
those glorious institutions of Christ, the dipping of actual believers, upon
confessing sins and professing faith, as also the volentarie contribution of
the Saints, or as Fox in his acts and monuments renders it, the puer alms of
the Church, and bringing in baptizing or rather sprincklin of Natural Infants,
and paying (...) ^iths, hereby raising national Churches wichout the which they
could never have done it, neither could they now retain them, thereby
contradicting the Appostles rule Cor. 1.4.6. in presuming a bove that which is
written; but should these 2. pillars be taken away according to our
Protestation and Covenant, and a reformation set up according to the word of
God [as is pretended] the Kingdom of Antichrist like the Philistines house will
fall upon their heads, as that on the Philistines; upon Sampsons that glorious
^^pe of Christ's pulling away the 2. pillars whereupon the house stood, Judge:
16.29.30. That whereas by the authority of the Civil Magistrate, they having
insinuated into there affections, like Pharoahs froggs into his and his
servants Bedchambers Exodus 8.3 4. by being their Chaplains as they call
themselves, a service not known in the Gospel of Christ for his ministers;
whereby the Magistrates being by them deluded, give that power, which was given
the^ of God for the punishment of evil doers; but for the praise of them that
do well, to the upholding of this beast and his Image, and they having
received it put it forth to the uttermost causing all, both small and great,
rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, and in
their foreheads, and that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark
or the name of the beast, or the number of his name etc. This second beast
consisting of the whole state hirarchie or clergy, as they call themselves with
the Image even all that receive the ordination from that state there being not
so much as one of there names, much less their practice or maintenance heard
of in the Gospel of King Jesus: from the Pope or Prelate to the Sexton, and
yet they do as that vile person spoken of by Daniel, Dan. 11.21. That come in
peaceably and obtain the Kingdom by flatteries, pretending they are the
ministers of Christ yet are not content with his ordination, nor maintenance
and wages, and therefore obtain ordinances, as doctor Burgis etc. and Statute
Laws from the state though some of them had little need having enough before,
which have caused more breach of the protestation and Covenant, and tedious
suits in the Courts of Justice then any one thing in the Kingdom; and therefore
to say no more to this all appeals to them are human, and not Iure Divino,
neither in the particular or general.

To the 6. I answer, The Lord Jesus Christ having satisfied his Fathers
Justice, and thereby wrought everlasting rightcousnesse for all them that obey
him, it being testified from Heaven by the Father, that he is his beloved
Son, in whom he is well pleased, And having received all power both in Heaven
and in earth, by which Authority as then he sent forth his Servants, so has he
also given and settled this power only upon and in his Church, and that to the
body [not the Ministers] consisting of a company of dipped Disciples, not the
Servants distinct from the Church, as they new pretend and assume, but as they
derive it from the Church, they giving it to them; and therefore these
Presbyters not being Members of any Church of Christ, according to his
institution, and yet claiming such power as distinct from the Church, have
nothing therein but what they have from the man of sin, by tradition of men,
and not lure Divino, by the will and appointment of Jesus Christ.

To the 7. There are no rules at all given in the Gospel of King Jesus in
question, giving power to the said Presbyters or Elderships, or any of them,
for the putting in execution of any the power aforesaid, seeing their
constitution is not from God by Christ tha^ great prophet of the Church, but
from their reverend Fathers the Prelates, and so consequently from the Pope, or
civil state, who has no more power to Command or set Laws in the Kingdom of
Christ, then the King of Spain, or the French King has in the Kingdom of
England, which is entire and Independent of it self; But for a Church of
Christ truly stated there are rules, as to receive in, so to deal with and
cast out if need require, as Tim. 2.3.16.17. All Scripture is given by
inspirtaion of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

To the 8. We are to take notice, that under the Gospel the Lord Jesus is not
only a King, but the only King and Lawgiver to his Church, Isai. 33.22 James
12.4. Tim. 16.15. Rev. 17.14. and therefore the civil Magistrate under the
Gospel ought no more to entrench upon his prerogative in Church Government,
then he did upon theirs in civil things, as Luke 12.13, 14. where he would not
so much as divide the inheritance between the 2. brethren, and therefore Mat.
22 16. to 21. when the Pharices took Council how they might entangle Christ,
asking him whether it was lawful to pay tribute to Caeser or no* (...) ^aith
unto them, show me the tribute money, saying, whose Image or superscription is
this, they say unto him, Caesar's he says unto them, render therefore unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods, and
Romans 13.1. to 7. the Apostle injoynes obedience from the Church unto civil
Magistrates or higher powers, not only to Christians, but as they were
Magistrates though Heathens, which they then were, showing that they are of
God, ordained of God as Mrs. of our flesh, and that those that resist them,
resist the Ordinance of God, whether Christian or Heathen, and such as resist
shall receive to themselves damnation; for Rulers are not [to wit appointed of
God] a terror to good works, but to the evil, will thou the^ not be afraid of
the power, do that which is good; but if thou do that which is evil, be
afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain; for he is the Servant of God, a
Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil; wherefore ye must needs be
subject not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake.

Now what this evil is, the Apostle shows, to wit, not Heriticks, and
Schismatics, as some fondly dream, and would if they could maintain, though
with fire and sword, although indeed more to uphold their own honor, Kingdom,
power, places, greatness, and benifices, then the civil Magistrates as is
clearly discovered to most men already, whose eyes the Lord has in any measure
opened, and may easily be proved to all that are not wilfully blind; for in the
Conscience concerning worship, the Lord only reigns as King and Lawgiver;
wherefore the Apostle says, The Law is not made for a righteous man, but for
the Law less and disobedient, for the ungodly, and for sinners; for unholy and
profane, for murderers of Fathers and murderers of Mothers, for Man-slayers
for Whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for
men-stealers; for liars, for perjured persons [oh that the Ministers that pressed
the Protestation and Covenant so cagerly, would take notice of this!] and if
there be any other thing that is contrary to wholesome doctrine, according to the
glorious Gospel of the blessed Ged, which was committed to my trust etc. 1 Timothy
1.9. to the 11. Now the civil Magistrates are called fathers of our flesh, to
whom in all these civil things we ought to be obedient; But says the Apostle
shall we not much rather be in subjection to the father of spirits and live; to
wit, to his laws given forth by his son the great prophet of his Church,
speaking from heaven, Heb. 1 1. Deuteronomy. 18.15. Act. 3.22.23. Who has given a
rule for his people to walk by, as Mat. 28.20. which rule the Apostle exorts
the Galathians, and in them all beleivers to observe as Gal. 6.16. they thus
walking having the promise of peace and mercy upon them, And Phil. 3.16. he
exorts the Church, to walk by the same rule, and to mind the same things.

Thus I have made appear, that the Congregationall or Parishlonall Elderships
appointed by Ordinance of Parliament, the members thereof, or any of them, the
supreme Assemblies or Elderships, viz. the Classical, Provincial,
oecumenicall or National, are none of them Jure Devino, by the will and
appointment of Jesus Christ.

Wherein, I have also proved from the word of truth, that the Civil Magistrate
has nothing to do as a Magistrate, to judge of any cause in the Church of
Christ, it being there to be judged and tried by those servants, and in that
order and manner that is set down in his word, by the will and appointment of
Jesus Christ.

And what was required by the Parliament of the Synod or Assembly, I have in
some weak measure answered from the scripture, and set down the several texts
in the express words of the same, according as was desired, subscribing my
self your honors, and the Churches Servant in the Service of the Gospel of
King Jesus.

E. Barber.

Consider of it, take advice and speak your minds, Judges 19.30.
Certain Quaeries propounded (by the Author) to the Assembly called Devines.
1. Whether that Doctrine of obedience to Magistrates or higher powers, which
the Apostles taught, Romans 13.1 Pet. 1.2 13.14.15. etc were true or no. 2.
Whether it was not the Apostles duty, to practice that himself which he taught
and commanded others to do as Romans 2.21.22.23 3. Whether the Magistrates or
those higher powers, which from the disciples he required obedience unto, were
of their Religion or in the Gospel practice yea or no? 4. If not, Whether it
was lawful for those Magistrates or higher powers, to persecute Paul and the
rest of the Church for their Religion. 5. Whether Paul and the Disciples might
plot against or persecute the Magistrate, or any of his subjects by compelling
or forcing their Conscience or otherwise, though to the true worship God under
the Gospel. 6. Whether Magistrates as well as Subjects, be not to be subje^^ to
the Laws, Statutes, and censures of King Jesus only, who as under the Law, so
under the Gospel is no respecter of persons, Dent. 10.17. Romans 2.11. 1 Pet.
1.17. 7. Whether it may not be conceived, The Lord is now making inquisition
for the blood that has been shed in this Land, and other parts of the world,
of the Jews his ancient and peculiar people, (...) Isal. 51.21.22, 23. where
the Lord says, hear thou this, thou miserable and drunken, but not with wine.
Thus says the Lord God, even God that pleads the cause of his people, behold
I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, even the dreggs of the cup
of my weath, thou shall drink it no more, but I will put it into their hand that
afflicted thee, which have said to thy soul, bowdown that we may go over, and
thou have laid thy body as the ground, and as the^^ street to them that went
over, comp^ with Th. 1.2.12. to 17. Re. 18.24. 8. The punishing some as the
Catholics, etc. more then with death, to the unhumain quartering and hanging
up their quarters; also the Children luffering for their Parents sin, contrary
to the expres word of the Lord, Ezekiel. 18.4.20. that soul that sins, it shall
dye, the son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, neither shall the
Father bear the iniquity of the son, the righteousness of the righteous
shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him, also
executing men for theft, it being contrary to the Law of God. 9. Whether there
ought not to be a Fast kept for all the innocent bloed that has been shed in
this Land, not only of the Jews, but also in Herry the 8. days, Queen Mary's,
and in Queen Elizabeth's, as Barrovvs Greenwoods Penries, etc. who dyed for
opposing the Common Prayer, etc. 10. Whether there be any Gospel rule by
precept, or example for compulsion of Conscience in matters of Religion, taking
of Oaths, making of forced Covenants etc. that so we being truly informed, may
prevent the reproof Ier. 23.10 once g ven to the Jews, the Land is full of
Adulterers, because of swearing the Land mourns, the pleasant places of the
wilderness are dried up. and their course is evil, and their force is not
right, Ho. 4.2. by swearing lying killing stealing and committing adultery;
they break out, and blood touches blood. Chapt. 10.4. They have spoken words,
swearing falsely in making a Covenant. Thus Judgment grows as vvormvvood in
the furrovves of the field 11. By what rule from the Gospel of Christ may
Christians being Members of one Church; as they profess under Christ their
head kill one another. or that they would distinguish what makes the one more
then the other, by Gospel rule, or whether they ought not to excommunicate the
unruly and disorderly walkers, before they kill them, and not let them stand
Members of their Church, though worthy of death, and so kill them, which the
Church of Corinth might not, though for a l^s^e sin, in which there doings
they come short of the Church of Room.
FINIS.

