A REPLY TO THE Frivolous and impertinent ANSWER of R. B. to the discourse of
P. B.

IN Which discourse is showed, that the Baptism in the defection of
Antichrist, is the Ordinance of God, notwithstanding the Corruptions that
attend the same, and that the Baptism of Infants is lawful, born which are
vindicated from the exceptions of R. B. and further cleared by the same AUTHOR.

There is also a REPLY, in way of Answer to some Exceptions of E. B. against
the same.

1 JOHN 4. 1. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be
of GOD.

1 THESSALONIANS. 5. 21. Try all things and keep that which is good.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1643.

TO THE READER.
IT comes to pass often times, that words well spoken are by some ill taken,
and matters clearly and plainly declared, are exceedingly wrested and
perverted, and the good intent of person wholly subverted. It fared so of old
with Moses, with David, with Jeremiah, yea with our Lord himself, and with all
his holy Apostles in special: it so fared with holy Paul, the great Teacher of
the Gentiles, there were some that perverted his sayings to their own
destruction; the holy Martyrs Pet. 2. 3. 16.
and Confessors of the Truth, have had also experience of it in all Ages: all
which considered I may not think it strange, or count it a new thing, that it
so fares with me, being one of the meanest of the servants of Jesus Christ,
and the rather for that I did look for it, knowing I had to do with persons
of froward and perverse spirits, I endeavored to make things plain, so as I
am checked for Tautologie by my opposite, I did endeavor with all Ingenuity to
set forth the true meaning, and right grounds of my opposites judgment and
practices, and then did make opposall by inferences and other positive
arguments; I prayed them to measure such measure to me in way of their answer;
but contrarily they have fained Imaginary things, and fathered them on me with
more lying falsehoods: and also so perverted the sense and plain intent of my
discourse, as were it not for the taking off the falsehoods they have fathered
on me, and clearing of my discourse, and the matter therein set forth, I
should count it needless to spend time and pains in making reply to such a
lame and mean answer, I should have l^ft it to the judgment of the studious
Reader, whether he has taken of the charge, and vindicated their judgment and
practice from the errors and absurdities by me obj^cted. Now courteous Reader,
thou may take notice, that since the publishing of that short discourse
touching Baptism: some in their Pamphlets have taken occasion to carpe and
snarle at some particulars therein. But now on R. R. pretending great strength
in himself, and weakness in the discourse, would seem to make a full answer,
and overthrow all, and which is more, foil the Author with his own Weapons,
and with one word of his mouth to blast the whole discourse. But sure if he be
well minded, he will be found a vain boaster, and one that either not
understood what he undertook to answer: like to him that Solomon Prove. 18. 13.
speaks of, that answers a matter before he hear it, or otherwise he has
dealt maliciously, and unlike the servant of Jesus Christ, perverting the
words, the scope and plain meaning of his opposite, rather then confuting of
him; toward the end of his Epistle he tells his Reader, that not regarding to
follow his opposite to and fro, a fine shift to put off, or pass by that he
could with no show or Color answer) he says he will reduce the whole
discourse to three heads, the second whereof he says is the Baptism of the
Church of Rome, sure it is a wonderful thing, that he should reduce a pare of
my discourse to such a head (he dreamed certainly, for there is not one word,
nor syllable of it in all my discourse, let him look again, and take
spectacle to help his eyes, and he shall not find it, I treated in my discourse
of the Baptism of Christ, under the defection of Antichrist continuing Gods
Ordinance, as Circumcision continued Gods Ordinance under the defection of the
ten Tribes; he has a matter in his Imagination, and that he puts in the
stead thereof; and it must be admitted to be the same, or else R. B. will
think he has great wrong done him, though it be never so contrary; if one
had reasoned to maintain the Circumcision of the Apostate Tribes to have been
the Ordinance of God, and some in opposition should have entreated of the
Circumcision of the two Claves at Dan, and Bethell, and should be confident it
is the same: Salomons saying would have bin made good, in such a one as it is
also in R. B. bray a fool in a mortar, and his foolishness will not leave
him. I told him Prove. 17. 22.
and made it plain, so as he nor any other is able to gaynesay it, that
corruption makes not a nullity, which sure he would have gaynesayed if he
could, yet because of the corruption, Baptism there must needs be an Idol,
and his calling of it the Baptism of the Church of Rome will make it so, and
none shall help it for to tell him, otherwise he will say as Nicodemus did, how
can it be as if he or those of his opinion had infallible knowledge, and were
able to comprehend all truth whatsoever, and what they do not embrace must
needs be an error, and those high sinners that speak or hold contrary, if R.
B. did but mind his often changes he would not be so high minded and
confident, but would rather fear, he was as confident of his first Baptism,
certainly of his second he was so, nothing might be spoken against them, but it
was a great sin, and they high sinners against the truth; yet he was mistaken
in his Judgment in both, and they were Idols in his account, and he rejected
them, and now this his third it is the only truth, which none may speak
against, but he is a high sinner, It were good for all men to beware of such
men according to Salomons Counsel: My Son fear God etc. and meddle not with
those that are Prove. 24. 21.
given to change; a man that had a mind to come to R. B. in his third
Baptism, before a year or two spent in the serious waighing of the matter,
would find happily that R. B. had left his third Baptism, and taken up
afhurth, for by that time he could epsy such faults in his former Baptism,
and also in my discourse, as to overthrow it by it self will, it is likely
find something in his third Baptism, to make him reject that also. If he be
true to his own principle, he will find some error or corruption in it as in
the former, that will enforce him so to do, I may tell him, and he and all
other shall find it so, that upon his ground nor tender conscience shall ever
be able to satisfy it self in a stayed condition, and if by a lie R. B. shall
go about to satisfy any (as he pretends that was the cause that moved him
to answer my discourse,) it will never do it, such are not much beholding to
him, for neither they nor the truth needs any man's lie, but I will forbear
to trouble thee further Courteous Reader.

Thine in the service of Love, R. B.

A SHORT ANSWER, TO A Passage in R. B. his Epistle to the READER.
IN his Epistle he tells the Reader, that there needs nothing to be said to
overthrow the matter of the discourse, then what is contained in it, and this
he says is in a matter wherein the whole building consists, but what now if
R. B. miss in this, and be found to be deceived, as he was in his former
Baptismes, then the whole building may, nay must be granted to stand. It is in
the perp^tuity of the Church Estate under the New Testament, and so of
Baptism, by which I difference the matter thereof; The further says, I make
Baptism to depend on the Church; but what then? then he inserreth that,
unless I be able to show the continuednesse of the Church of Christ till these
days, I cannot be assured that the Baptism there is the Ordinance of God: But
what if I can show this, where is R. B. then? but he says page 2, 3. I
confess I know none, nor do I believe that any can show any such continuance,

But is worth the observing the evil dealing of the man, his willingness to
deceive, he knows and the Reader may observe, I produced Scriptures to prove
the perpetutie of the Church in the World, such as he nor any other are able to
avoyde, or show another sense of them than that for which they were produced, I
made an Inference from that in the 13. Heb. whereat he and others were much
offended; Then I distinguished thus, that this Estate of Christs-Church
continued under Antichrists exaltation, or else it continued somewhere else, as
a part from under that deffection, for somewhere it must continue, that it
continued any where else as in a pure way, I said I did believe none could make
it appear, and therefore it must need continue under Antichrists exaltation;
and that it did not continue other where than under the deffection of
Antichrist, I alleged those Scriptures of the Universalitie of the defection,
and the Waldenses being the first fruits to God, which could not be if the
Church had continued any where pure, which it did not, but in defection it
continued without being made null: what ever R. B. thinks to the contrary,
now what could be more plain than this as in my discourse may be seen: With
what face then does R. B. feed his Reader with such a fable, and so abuse his
opposite, and triumph in his own folly, and cry victory; truly he in this
deals with his opposite as the Devil dealt with our Lord, keeps back a main
part, and so showing a mind to smother the truth and keep it in
unrighteousness, I will appeal to any indifferent Judgment, if it be not
fully declared what is before said, and that I hold the continuednesse of the
Church Estate, under the defection but not in a pure way, and if R. B. or any
other think this a new opinion, it will but show their Ignorance, for as
learned and godly men are my Leaders herein, as those he catches at for
advantage touching Baptism of Children, being a humane Ordinance, namely Mr.
Junius Duplices Lord of Morney, the harmony of the Churches confession and
others.

The holy Scriptures I showed did hold forth the continuation, and perpetuity
of the visible Church, a plant of Gods own planting, not to be rooted out for
ever, as it had continued from Abraham to Moses, from Moses to Christ, so it
should continue for ever, for proof whereof I set forth sundry scriptures, as
in my discourse may be seen.

To which R. B. in stead of granting or denying, enters upon a discourse to
prove a matter neither in question, nor yet ever by any denied, and in the end
without showing any right sense or meaneing of those Scriptures, the better to
inform his Reader, he flatly denies the sense of his opposite, and calls
him false Prophet, and on that has spoken presumptuously in the name of the
Lord; a heavy charge: he only instanceth in those two Scriptures that are
prophetical, Esaias 9. 7. 59. 27. happily he might fear there might be
something in the other, so he passed them by; But thus he proceeds to reason,
that if the visible Church of Chrrist has not had a perpetual, interrupted
succession in the World, ever since the first planting of it till these days;
though the Prophecy be true, yet the sense of his opposite is false; here by
the way I note how R. B. corrupts his opponents conclusion with words of his
own coining, which words indeed are contradictorie, and plain nonsense in
regard of the thing in hand, the matter in hand is the perpetuity or
continuednesse of Christ's Church in the world; he comes with perpetual
interrupted succession; this succession he has often in his answer, wherein
he just speaks like a Parret; perpetuity and succession cannot stand
together, for where there is perpetuity of a thing there is no place for
succeeding; succeeding or succession may be in regard of an Office, one gives
place another succeeds, and takes place, but cannot be so with the Church,
as in my discourse may be seen: it may increase and decrease, but it always
abides for ever, so as his succession is an Ignoramus if not a Bull: But he
comes to answer, he will Psalm. 121. 1.
make my own matter confute me, I said the defection was universal, I so say
still; as said the Waldenses in regard of purity were the first fruits unto
God: he says so too: But it is much he will acknowledge them so to be (he may
wrong his cause ere he is aware, they were not Disciples by total dipping, the
French Churches proceeded of them R. B. might have been baptized by them, they
were the first fruits as he confesses, so as he and his toall dippers cannot
be it or them: but where did I speak of, and prove the universality of the
defection, not to prove the utter cessation of the Church State. R. B. cannot
be so blind, but to manifest that it continued not in a pure way as a part from
the defection, but under the defection I said it must needs there continue: and
the error and absurdity of such an opinion I desired any to show if they
could, so as had not R. B. been a vain Caviler, he would not have left the
plain matter and drift, as he has done, and by leaving out the distinction
with the drift, made a part, as if it were some other thing; But now further as
he grants the largeness of the defection, and the Waldenses to be the first
fruits to God, so he confidently denies the continuednesse of the
Church State in the World, especially under the defection, but let his reasons
be weighed, first is because it was given to him, namely the man of sin that
sits in the Temple of God) to make War with the Saints, and These. 2. Rev
13. 7.
to overcome them, a weighty reason thus: must needs die or cease to be,
because overcome, a person is overcome when he yields submits himself, so
a Kingdom and a City* yet they cease not to be, Beside it was about
particular Saints that were overcome; what is this to the ceasing of the whole
Church? this reason is so lame, it had need of another to support it, which he
adds to as little purpose, if to overcome then they could not continue;
wonderful: so before: yet further he says, if the Church continued he did not
overcome them and kill them with the sword, Rev. 13. 15.

Answer, Some of the Members might be killed Rev. 3.
as Antipas was, that faithful Martyr: the Church Estate or all the Churches
of Christ killed with the sword, and so overcome, is reason without sense, such
as R. B. himself will not believe, when he has better considered of it, if
some of the Members of R. B. Church were killed with the sword, yet he would
think his Church might continue, yea if all of them were so killed, yet he
cannot but think the Church might continue some where else, but belike feareing
his reasons to be weak he has a further reason to prove the Church did not so
continue, Those that worshipped the Beast were such whose names were not
written in the Lambs book of life, therefore the Church Rev. 13.
it could not continue, what the strength and force of this reason is, is
beyond my capacity till it be explained: reprobate men worshipped the Beast, so
they worshipped the Calves of old, and Idols of Gold and Silver, and their
Gods ^^se. 13 2. Psalm 106. 36. 38. ^er. 2. 28.
were as their Cities, what is that to the ceasing of the Church? R. B. had
need go to School to learn stronger reasons, it is no marvel he should be
so confident: he fulfilleth the Proverb, none so bold as b^ind Bayard: but he
goes on further in this his perverseness, and speaks of the Greeks, and
would make his Reader believe I hold no Church Estate remaining among them,
because I said there is little difference in their defection, and the Romanist,
and they will stand and fall together; being measured by a like measure.

Answer, they will so stand together as that the Church Estate will remain in
the one and other, whatsoever R. B. is able to say to the contrary, after this
he takes notice of what else where, he consealeth of the Chuches continuance
else where, might have added in a pure way: I said I supposed none was able to
make appear, such a continuednesse to have been in the World, if any could I
said and say still, I should be glad; and were it not a matter to be glad of
it, would not R: B. be glad also; happily he would be sorry, because his new
way would be disparaged, yea indeed overthrown, and he foreced to be baptized
a fourth time: But having thus gone on, he says who can believe his exposition
of Esaias 9. seeing he to wit his opposite, testifies that none is able to make
the truth thereof (of what of the Church in purity her continuance? but in
defection under the Greeks and Romanist it may be made appear, where will R. B.
be then among those false Prophets he speaks of: but further? here he says
it must follow (right or wrong) that I have given a false Interpretation of
Esaias 9. and also of all the Scriptures, to prove the perpetuity of the Church,
and none shall be able to clear me. But where is that true Interpretation of
R. B: that might inform his Reader? he has not studied it yet, unless it be
that the Church is ceased, let the Scripture say what it will, because
otherwise his opinion cannot stand, so he proceeds that thus having confuted
my self, he thinks it needless to spend time in the confutation of it; It
was time spent indeed vainly for him to meddle; unless he had better
understood what he took in hand, after he falls a complaining of wrong done,
for being blamed for not believing the Churches continuance in the World, then
it seems they do not believe the continuance, but the cessation they do,
they had need of better ground to believe against so many clear Scriptures,
then yet R. B. has found out; but how ever I did not mistake their judgment,
in that I said there was no ground for their practice, till they did believe
such a cessation, which they do, and so their practice is grounded on a gross
error, and a flat denial of the Scripture: clear it if they can, but having
so marvellously quited himself, as he thinks, he complayneth further, for
being accused for making Christ a Widower;

Answ. If the visible Church was Christ's wife, and it died as you believe and,
hold and remained without being: for a long season was not Christ a widdower
then and all that time? if he would but be pleased to mind the 5th. of the
Ephesians. he would confess it, Christ sometime had a Church but he lost it, is he
then to day as he was yesterday? observe what tautologie he here uses, or
nonsense, perpetuity and succession, which I would not mention, for I think
he is no great Artist as well as my self, save only he ubraided me with it in
his Epistle, he asks me whether ^ would have them to believe that I cannot
believe my self.

Ans. I can believe and do, the Churches continuance in the World, under the
defection of Antichrist, if they did believe so too it would please me well,
and sure there would be no place for their unwarranted proceed:

But this of being charged with making Christ a Widower sticks near his
stomach, he cannot digest it, therefore he has a lame consequence about it
ere he let it pass: If Christ be a Widdower, if he have not always a visible
Church in the World, then he infers that there is no salvation out of the
visible Church, Indeed ordinarily the learned have held there is not, but
extraordinarily there may: but what then? thinking belike there was little in
this, he adds none can be saved which are not first united and made one with
Christ, whether he mean union of Faith or Order is hard to be said, suppose
union of Faith what is that to the question in hand? and I would ask R. B.
what shall become of Infants, but because he propounds it as an
inconvenience, attending the holding the perpetuity of the Church, and so
asks me the question which he might have spared, till he could resolve what
should become of Children dying in Inf^ncy, I shall answer, that John Hus, and
Jerome of Frague, and other holy Confessors of Jesus Christ, they had union
with Christ by Faith, which is first and maine, yea they had relation to the
Church, though in deep defection, so as he publishes his hope in vain, he
says further if they were united to Christ, then Christ may have a spouse,
although no visible Church in the World; but he does but say it, we may choose
whether we will believe him. It is as much non sense, as if we should say
Christ may have a Spouse, though he have none, sure R. B. grew dull and much
forgot himself.

The next Section contains for the most part tautology, the man delighting to
sport himself like a fool with his own babble, only he had a mind to ask
me a question which I shall answer in convenient place.

R. B. Proceeds further, and has another bout concerning the perpetuity of
the Church, carrying along with him his devised fable which he still fathers on
me, without which he can say nothing, he tells his Reader that I say, seeing
none can make it appear elsewhere, he might have added in purity: he says I
say it is likely it continued under Antichrist, so it seems he knew my drift,
and did of purpose wrest and pervert my words.

But he here demands how it can be probable, why, because a little before I
spoke of the universality of the deection, I did so to show no Churches
remained a part in a pure way, therefore I said there that which he also
mentions here, that in that regard the Waldenses, were the first fruits to
God they coming first out of defection into purity, but the 2 Thessalonians. 2.
troubles the man much, and that I allege it to prove the Churches
continuance under the defection of Antichrist. This is a riddle to R. B. and he
is as a in a maze, but he answers plainly here, that Temple here spoken of
where the man of sin sits, and is worshipped cannot be taken for the
Church of God; but what is his reason, because it is said verse the 3. the man
of sin is not revealed, till first there be a departing: then v. 9, 10. he
speaks of his deceiveablenesse in the way of his coming, he asks himself
a question, and makes himself answer such as it is, in whom says he not in
the Church but in them that perish; as if many of the Church might not perish,
sure he forgets the Parable of the ten Virgins, that five were wise and five
foolish; Mat. 25.
but does R. B. indeed think that the mystery of iniquity rose, not in but out
of the Church, that is a rare opinion and singular judgment, which I never
heard of before, and most contrary to the truth, for the Churches might have
continued till now in purity but for the working of that mystery, and beside I
would feign learn how it should be a mystery if simply in the World, not at
all in the Church, I had like to have passed by his reason, the falling away is
first, the revealing is after, what of this? when the man of sin which began
to work in the Church in the Apostles time had got some strength, then he
showed himself more fully; but he says it must needs follow, that seeing the
persons the matter of the Church are departed from the Faith: therefore it must
needs follow they are not in any wise to be esteemed the Church of God he does
but say this also we need not believe him Psalm. 106 28. E^^ch. 16
unles we will, but sure this departing was not total like their dipping,
Judah was departed from God and followed Idols, yet with Judah was Gods
Church, so it may be and Eze. 16.
is under the defection for all his saying, in no wise it cannot be, he would
further enforce it from my judgment about the Beast, and because they that
wonder after the Beast, and follow him, are such as are not written in the
Lambs book of life: It may be I am dull, sure I understand not where the force
of this reason lies in regard of the matter in hand, what if I do hold the
Church may consist of such? many of whom may perish, I think the Scripture
will maintain me in it.

But he has a wonderful conclusion, I do not say it is presumptuous, but
sure it is blasphemous: his exposition of 2 Thessalonians. 2. He says the Temple there
is no more the Temple of God than Antichrist that sits there is God, nor no
otherwise to be esteemed, nor has any on more reason to affirm the one than
the other, see if he do not tax the Spirit ir self, for the Spirit with more
reason affirms it, then R. B. has reason so arrogantly to speak as he does.
It were good for all sober minded men to beware of such desperate contradictors
of the word of God, weigh but the matter seriously; is there no more reason to
affirm the one than the other, why does the Spirit say he does sit in the
Temple of God, what Temple has God in the World but his Church? and that is
called his Temple every where.

The mystery of inquity it rose up in the Church, how 2 These. 2. ^.
long it was before the Church was destroyed by it, R. B. cannot tell at the
first, it was of the same nature being weak; as after when it was strong, and
was exalted to that height, all which weighed it will appear, that R. B. had
little reason to speak presumptuously as he has done: he takes what he has
said for a full confutation, and that it cannot be any such continuednesse of
the Church, and most impudently fathering a lie upon me he concludes this
matter: It must be as R. B. page 2. says, that under the defection of
Antichrist it could not continue, but where are any such words in page 2. or in
any part of my discourse, no marvel he that durst be so bold with the
Scripture, should deal so by me, sure his Church if it continue till they know
it, will deal with him for it, for without and not within is place for all
liers, Thus I have Rev. 22. 15.
followed him to and fro in this particular of the Churches perpetuity, and
continuednesse in the World, particularly under the defection of Antichrist, I
doubt not but it will appear to be a truth for all R. B. has said, or is able
further to say to the contrary, that he believes it not I suppose it does
plainly appear, that they in their way have no ground to go on till this
believed, namely the cessation of the Church, that their practice is grounded
upon the denial of a truth, fully held forth in the Scriptures of the Churches
perpetuity, let them shift it if they can, and in their next let them inform
the Reader, the true sense and right meaning of those Scriptures by me
alleged, and I only advise they take heed of falling into some familisticall
strain, I have done.

Now he proceeds to Baptism and says, suppose the Church has continued,
then Baptism by which the matter is difference't continues also, so it is
probable his Baptism is the Baptism of Christ derived from thence, R. B. has
forgot his question, he asked me before, and merrily said it was a bull: but
what thinks he, is not the derivation good and rational? he would have it
taken notice of, that the best ground his opposite has is but probability. But
it were well if he would once leave his fabling: I said it was more than
probable, and I think that is certain if I mistake not.

But further he says, seeing I hold Baptism depends on the Church: he adds
true; and so makes a hinge for his door to go up on, I would feign know
where he learned in the Scripture this true and false with reference to the
Church, and Baptism, it will trouble him much to find it: the Church is
either the Church of God, or it is not, and so Baptism is either Christ's
Baptism or it is not, but of this by the way; in the next he will happily
show it, then he proceeds and takes notice that I hold not the Church of
Rome, the Church of God, but that State I hold to be the mother of
fornicaetion, Sodom and Egypt: he thinks it must needs follow that the
Church of Rome has not the Baptism of Christ; he is so frequent in the change
of Terms, as I might make a book of it, I write of the Church and Baptism,
the Ordinances of God continuing under that Roman State in that defection; he
is always up with the Church of Rome, and the Baptism thereof, he cannot
reach higher in his understanding but it must be the same, and from that, that
I hold the Church of Rome, not the Church of God, he will make it follow,
whether it will or no, that the Church of Rome has not the Baptism of Christ:
will he make it apappeare that Baptism does not remain the Ordinance of
Christ under that State? who has said the Church of Rome? This he will make to
appear by a lame Argument, thus, if the Church of Rome has not continued
(what means the man, it never was the Church of God, although God had a
Church in the City of Rome) therefore Baptism by which the matter of the
Church is differenced, has not continued in the Church of Rome, sure this is a
bull, the Church I indeed hold continued in the defection, and under the Roman
State, though R. B. fathered a lie upon me and said, I held it could not there
continue, and as the Church, so Baptism by which the matter of the Church is
differenced, not pure matter from corrupt, but matter from that which is none
at all; as for true and false they are words of his own coining as before, not
found in the word of God.

So as here he takes occasion to answer a passage in in my discourse, wherein
I desired any to show ^he error or absurdity, hu^t or damage t^a^ comes o^,
holdi^g the Church and ordinances to have continued under the defection, etc.
as in my discourse may be seen. R B here says, I may easily see it from wha^
I have written my self: well, what is it? This it is that Baptism differenceth
the true matter from the false, notorious fabler and falsiner! again in his
inference, if the Bap^isme of Rome: instead of in the defection: and thus he
goes over and over in his terms, be the Baptism of Christ, which
differenceth the true matter from the false, yet more of this coin: It should
be, which differenceth the matter of the Church from that which is no matter,
and the matter bejng so laid down. Where then is R. B. his great absurdity,
that I may so easily see, sure he may more easily see his folly and base
dealing, without true and false, and such words of his own foysting in his
inference, and pretended absurdity vanishes in the air: but what Tautologie
he here uses of this true and false, it is much to see men love the bratts of
their own brain. The sum of that great absurdity that R. B. can show of
holding as before is set forth, is only, this Baptism under the defection
differenceth the matter thereof, the Church from that which is no matter at
all, such as are the Jews, Mahometans, and other Heathen, and does it not? and
this is his great absurdity: It were well for R. B. if no greater did follow
of his holding the visible Church of Christ to be ceased out of the World, his
close this Section a is seeming contradiction he supposes in my tenent,
wherein he still abuses me and my Reader; he says I affirm Rome is the
Mother of Fornication, I do so: and also that Rome is the true Spouse of
Christ; where have I said so in all my discourse, he cannot end one Section
without fathering some false matter on me.

But with the leave of R. B. for more full satisfaction to the Read^r, I shall
show that there is a different consideration to be had of the Church in
defection, and that it may be minded diversely either in a good sense, or in an
evil, though he happily cannot see it, so as in on considerasion according to
the co^rupt defiled condition, it may be called Sodom, and Egypt, the Mother
of Fornication, and yet in some other sense, and minding the Church of God, R.
B. will ho^d himself both a Saint and also a sinner, but this in a diverse
consideration and respect, Judah was the Church of God, and yet she is called
Sodom and Gomorrah, and an Harlot, and Laodicea the Church of Christ, Esaias 11.
E^e. 16. R^v. 3.
yet in an other weighing; such matter as was fit to be spued out, the great
absurdity before lies in R. B. his lame understanding. And now he comes
after his great travel to conclude this matter thus, that seeing true Baptism
differenceth the true matter from the false, observe that without true and
false he is aground and cannot stir, but he still impudently will father this
on P. B. and yet further says I say so in my Epistle, where there is no
syllable to any such purpose; he proceeds in his conclusion, the Baptism of
the Church of Rome is not the Baptism o^ Christ that differenceth the true
matter from the false; a very worthy conclusion, a bratt of his own brain
pleases him well, and so I leave him to hug his true and false; I shall now
desire the indifferent Reader to mind whether R. B. has said any thing to
purpose against the perpetuity of the Church yea or no, or against the sense of
the Scriptures by me alleged to prove the said perpetnity.

And also neither I did not say right, that there is no ground for their
practice, till they hold this that the Church is ceased and not to be found in
the World, which it seems to be very plain by R. B. that they do hold, and
so lay for the foundation of their practice, and proceed, a foul error; no
marvel they be no more stable, and settled, but still in their changes, how
forcible are right words? but what does wrong reasoning profit? it will never
satisfy any tender conscience certainly.

R. B. Proceeds to Baptism, and takes notice of Job. 6. 25.
what I said, that if the Church be ceased then Baptism is ceased: here now he
is something more calm, he wants his true and false to help him out, to that
he answers, that although Baptism were ceased, so as there were no baptized
person in the World: yet as long as Baptism is found in the word with a
Commission to do it, he does but beg the thing in question never answering to
what I objected in this case, here the 28th. Matthew must be alleged but to
what purpose, I suppose none can tell: Baptism he says may be obtained
without any such special Commission as had John, if an unbaptised person shall
do it. R. B. will excuse him of running before he is sent, though God never
speak one word to any such so to do: But he says it will follow no more to
be unlawful so to do: then it will follow that because Abraham might Ier. 23.
21. 7. 22.
not circumcise himself, and Males before circumcision was instituted, and he
commanded so to do, therefore the Israelites: see the weakness of the man in
his Argument, he should say therefore the Philistimes or other Heathen might
not circumcise themselves after. Indeed so he had overthrown himself: for
they might not, though Circumcision was instituted and commanded: yet they must
go to Israel as I urged the going to Sion, and there lighting their candle, as
the Heathen of old did to Israel which he passes by with silence, here is R.
B. his Argument, Circumcision is instituted and commanded: therefore the
Philist^mes, Aethiopians, and other Heathen might circumcise themselves and
their Males, I suppose he holds not so; if he does he holds contrary to
the truth, and this is the very case, which R. B. pleases himself withal;
but he proceeds further, and argues upon the point of necessity, It was
necessary for John to have Commission, as it was necessary to have a pattern
for the first building of the Temple; but here he evadeth from the Commission
to the Pattern, and so deceives the Reader: I would feign know of R. B.
whether they had not a special Commission to build the second time.

It is sure they were not only stirred up, but bid go up Hag. 1. 7. 8.
and build the house, and God would be ^ercifull to them: But now R. B. tell me
because there was a Temple described in the word, and that was ruined and
overthrown, might they build it again before God bid them? might they build it
in any place? and which is more and indeed to the life of the matter, might any
but those of Israel build it? I am sure it was said to others it was not for
them so to do, though the pattern was in the word, as in like manner it
belongs not to unbaptised persons to baptize, Esra. 4. 3.
though the pattern be in the word, it is only for such as are baptized.

To that objected that the Commission 28th. Mat. It was only to baptized
persons, and intends none other; R. B. answers it requires all persons as
are made Disciples, or shall be to be baptized, if he had inferred that it is
most likely there shall be a continuance of baptized persons in the World,
that so his pleasure might be observed he had said something: but he says
Christ's voice must be obeyed, therefore he concludes a necessity, to do as
they do: run before they are sent, baptized they must be, why have they not a
little patience? baptized persons there are none in the World, yet another lie
must be fathered on P. B. to make good the matter, he believes none in a pure
way, but under the defection there might be some always found, R. B. might
know I reasoned from their ground and practice, and not from my own judgment,
if he were not blind or a vain Caviller as I told him before.

But it appears to be true, that R. B. indeed holds so, that at some time
lately there were no baptized persons in the World: And yet Baptism might be
raised again well enough; there being none, how then? why says he in the.
Time: 2. ^6. The Scripture is profitable and serves for instruction in all
righteousness to perfect the man of God unto all good works, as is there
declared, if to all says he then to this of Baptism: R. B. upbraided me for
misapplying the Scripture, but it were well if he had first seen the beam in
his own eye, and cast it out* truly this is a wonderful thing that so rare a
practice should have no better ground: the Scripture did not furnish the
Heathen to circumcise themselves to erect a Church among themselves to offer
Sacrifice, yet these were good works: It was a good work to build the Temple,
yet the Heathen were not furnished to do it as before, God is the God of order
which when it is neglected, for breach of due order he is offended, he is
displeased as in the case of Vzzah: it was not for Saul to offer sacrifice
though it were a good 2. Sam. 6. 6. 1. Sam. 13. 12.
work as it is not for an unbaptised person to baptize: though R. B. do
foolishly enforce it by vain confidence, the Iron was dull that he needed to
put to his strength: But let us see what it is he thus confidently affirms,
that as at the first John Baptist at the command of God baptized others, though
unbaptised himself, even so according to his example written for our learning
we are taught what to do in like case of necessity, he at length is arrived
at a fair haven, necessity has no law, being in a great strait indeed,
brought upon themselves by their erroneous ground, of holding no baptized
persons in the world, after the example of disobedient Saul, being in great
strait, they are bold to baptize others, being unbaptised themselves, our Lord
did not so, though he were the King of the Church, as I told them before, which
he took no notice of: but yet further he says according to Romans 15. 4. A
disciple at the command of Jesus Christ, where is that command in the 28. of
Matthew, this serves at every turn, as true and false did before: it is four
times alleged in this short section be like to fill up, that he might seem
to say some thing, but it may not be counted Tautologie: but does the 28. of
Matthew command unbaptised disciples to baptize others, sure R. B. is mistaken
and never able to make any such thing appear.

If any say John's example is extraordinary, and so not exemplarie: he
answers, theirs is an extraordinary case, truly so it is: without the rule
of the Scriptures: but it may be David's eating of the Shewbread will stand
them in stead. Indeed, in the case of extreme hunger to preserve life it
might: in exstravagant courses, such as cannot be warranted by the Scriptures,
some have done as here R. B. does, catch at David's example, upon some case of
necessity, to do that which is not lawful; this is their case he says, and
hereby he says, they justify their practice, but how well, let all men judge.
But sure R. B. forgot himself in this, or otherwise he dissenteth from others
of his judgment. There were baptized persons in Holland of a hundred years
descent and more, to have repaired thither were more easy, then for the Eunuch
to Acts 8.
have gone to Jerusalem; as easy it was, for them to have gone thither, as for
our Lord to have gone over Jordan to Matthew. 3. 13.
John. If R. B. question their baptism, it is much: happily he may, because
they practice not total dipping; then sure it is likely, the restoration is
but of two or three years standing, a very rare business, and how rare are
baptized persons, he concludes there needs no new commission to raise it
again, we may believe him if we will: All the rest of what I wrote concerning
this matter R. B. passes over, not finding as is likely what to answer, in
special, that which I declared concerning corruption, not making a nullitie,
he concludes this matter with saying, their practice is not like that of Nadab
and Abihu, and setting children against persons of years, he would make as if
his opponent, were against the baptising of believers, or persons of years,
because he holds the baptising of Infants: a fallacy and fond conceit, as if
such of old as should hold the circumcision of males at eight days, must needs
be against the circumcision of men of years. But I must tell R. B. that it was
unlawful to rircumcise those of the ten tribes, when they were of years, that
had been circumcised, though in Apostacy in their infancy. And this is
indeed the true case between R. B. and his opponent, if he could or would see
it.

New things are very pleasing, and many are much taken with them, as is R. B.
with dipping, about which he takes great pains, produces many Scriptures,
and would seem to be so strong, as nothing is able to withstand him: First, he
says, I am greatly offended, he does but surmise, for he cannot gather it out
of my discourse; he shows what dipping he means, total dipping of the whole
man over head and ears; he pretends this is the commandment of God, wherein
the 28. of Matthew, this now must serve the turn, as true and false did
before: but sure it is a rare thing to gather it thence, for if dipping were
there enjoined, yet sure total dipping cannot be: It is not said go dip all
nations totally, or over head and ears, certainly, this total dipping is
some voluntary religion, Cor. 12. Romans 6. Matthew. 28. 10. Mar. 1. 9. Mat. 3. 16.
Ioh. 3. 23. Act. 8. 38.
having a show of wisdom; as men's own ways have; he quoteth many places, and
sundry examples, but sure the man is as one that looks through a
greene-glasse, he sees all of the same color, all and every of these
Scriptures, and examples are for total dipping, the whole man in matter and
burying of him under water; and I appeal to the judgment of the indifferent
Reader, whether there be any the least syllable to any such purpose: no marvel
he should check me for not believing of it; and so confidently to father his
fancy, and erroneous conceit, on the holy Scriptures, and which is more to
hold all the Churches, and Christians in the World to be unbaptised, but those
two or three that have been thus totally dipped: he is in a high strain if he
can keep it, I hold not dipping so necessary, but that a person baptized by
sprinkling, must needs therefore be esteemed unbaptised, I indeed acknowledge I
hold washing the maine, as before I declared in my discourse, and washing by
the way of dipping, or by the way of sprinkling, to have in them the substance
of the Ordinance being ways of washing; he is pleased to take notice of the
Reasons, I alleged, which is first that springling can be but a defect in the
quantity of the Element; I said it is a wonderful thing a nullity should
follow thereof: and is it not? to this he says that he wondereth any should
esteem that an Ordinance of Christ, which Christ never ordained; but this is
only to beg the matter, unproved: but the 28. Ma. 19. serves still; Christ he
says never ordained sprinkling, but dipping; therefore sprinkling in Baptism
is none of Christ's Ordinance, and so by consequence a nullitie; Thus easily in
his conceit, and fully in his opinion he has made the Baptism of not a few
persons in the world; If I should make the like against his total dipping he
would not receive it, though it be his own, Christ never ordained total
dipping by an unbaptised person: Ergo it is none of Christ's, but a nullity, and
by consequence R. B. is yet unbaptised.

He takes notice of a second reason I set forth, and that is of placing the
substance of an Ordinance in the Criticknesse of a word, to this he answers,
that he places the substance of every Ordinance in its conformity to the word;
so as defect and corruption make a nullity, I suppose he holds; but he
propounds a case for discovery, sprinkling is no more to be esteemed Gods
Ordinance, then to prick the finger was to be esteemed Circumcision, and he
that would not take that for Circumcision might as well be accounted a Critic
as he that will not take sprinkling for Baptism; sure R. B. has but little
aim in his parallel, sprinkling at the most is but a defect in the quantity
of the Element for all this, I will make a case and leave the Reader to judge
of it, if any unskilful Circumciser should have left some little part of the
foreskin through oversight, should it have been a nullity and no circumcision?
I suppose nay: so if any shall miss in washing by shortness in the quantity
of the Element, yet it may be Christ's Ordinance notwithstanding, for that such
a defect or corruption does not make a nullity thereof, And if any dipper in R.
B. his way should through some neglect or other accident, not dip the Crown of
the head as well as all the rest of the body under water, I suppose R. B. had
but little reason, if he should not account it true Baptism in his way,
notwithstanding he proceeds: and here I note how fairly I dealt with them,
and how foully he has dealt with me, I set down their opinion so right, as
that he does not go about to mend it, he for the most part fathereth this,
and the other falsity upon me, and by change of phrases alters often the
whole matter for dipping in Baptising, and against springling or washing they
produce that Romans 6. Collo. 2. 12. of Burial with Christ, which sprinkling
they judge cannot import or hold forth: To which I in my discourse answered,
that sprinkling or powreing water on the face does hold our Burial and
resurrection also, and indeed I judge it does, and so understanding men will
account whatsoever R. B. thinks to the contrary, to this purpose I alleged
that in the 10. Corinth. of being baptized in the cloud and Sea: and the
Scripture tells us they went over on dry ground, to this R. B. answers
not, for indeed he could not, they were dipped, they were buried as says the
word: But here he infers that by this reason they should not be sprinkled;
Why? because, they had not water on them: But R. B. may mind, how they had the
Sea on either side, and the Cloud over them; and were in the Water: That the
Spirit accounts Baptism, as it does Sprinkling, and washing, as well as
dipping; so, as Water is necessary for baptising, but the use of it may be
diverse, some more near, and some more remote from the written manner, and full
scope of the ordinance, and yet have the substance of the Ordinance in it. And
if R. B. could make the sea divi^e as Moses did and should carry one of his
disciples into it they might be so Baptized as they were, I shall bear his
derision and proceed, The Baptism in the Cloud and Sea, urged, pleases him
not, he therefore seeks by a question to entrap. first he would know whether
I hold it the Baptism of Christ instituted Mat. 28. I let R. B. know I hold it
the Baptism of Christ, as the spiritual meat and drink were that are there
also spoken of, and that it held forth and had an eye to that Baptism after
ordained by Christ Matthew. 28. as the spiritual bread and drink there did etc.
And held forth the food in the Lords supper the substance of all which was and
is Christ, so as it is a very pertinent instance and example what ever R B.
thinks, But he has a farther demand wherein he abuses himself, and me and
the reader, with one of his accustomed Fables; fathering a thing which was
never my judgment nor practice about sprinkling. I let R B. know I hold water
necessary in Baptism, I^ he can divide the sea let him so Baptize, I shall not
find fault with him, his inference is vain about voluntary Religion, and will
not help his Baptism garments at all.

To that by me objected that the forceing Baptism thus to hold forth burial,
we lose that which it holds forth equally with burial: Namely, the
sprinkling of the Consci^nce in the blood of Christ. Esaias 52. 15. Heb. 10. 2^.
Ezekiel. 36. 25. Heb. 12. 24. And the Laver of Regeneration and washing in the
blood of Christ that blessed fountain Acts 22. 16. Heb. 10. 21. 1. Corin. 6.
11. Re. 1. 5. R. B. answers, denying that sprinkling in the blood of Christ
is required to be held forth in Baptism, to which I say it is an easy thing
to deny a matter never so plain. I shall refer the matter to the judgment of
the Godly wise, whether the outward washing in Baptism does not hold out every
way of cleansing of the soul in the blood of the Covenant. Baptism is the
outward way of washing away sin. It was said to Saul Acts 22. 16. Be baptized
and wash away thy sin etc.

Now sprinkling with which R. B. is so much offended, is a way of inward
washing away of sin as before, and if R. B. please to consider the Scriptures
again in special that in the 36. Ezekiel. He may if he be not overswayed by
prejudice, happily change his mind so as to see that sprinkling both outwardly
and inwardly has in it the nature of washing to cleanse, And though he like
an unwise man has again censured my judgment and practice about this matter;
he has condemned me being innocent, for I tell him once again I hold washing
more fully according to the nature of the ordinance, but sprinkling being a way
of washing to cleanse cannot be altogether rejected; he has something further
here, which because I do not understand his aim and drift, being unwilling to
father any thing on him but what he holds I pass it by, and the rather
because it is but the repeating of the scriptures before set forth, he being
mightily taken with his sense of them; pleasing himself with his own conceit
that sprinkling for washing or cleansing is borrowed from the shadows under
the Law, and so no whit to the purpose, and so he would put by ^he manner as no
way significant but only the matter, blood: sure the spirit knew how to teach
if we knew how to learn: I will sprinkle clean water upon them and they shall
be clean: again the blood of sprinkling, and our Conscience sprinkled, Is
there nothing in these and the like but only so as to be borrowed from the
Law, and that is all I suppose R. B. is deceived at the least.

But now to that other particular of washing in the blood of Christ, which I
said was also lost by thus enforcing dipping; He answers that I am much
mistaken: Why how appears it? in the judgment of the spirit he says dipping
is washing; so I say in like manner is sprinkling also as before Ezekiel 36. But
if dipping be washing, then washing may be dipping: in a spiritual sense sure
it is; where is R. B. then: But though dipping be a way of washing, yet all
dipping is not washing, nor so intended, a thing may be dipped in water for
other ends: as for instance, a Smith dippeth his hot iron in water, and
intends no washing, he says to washing by the way of dipping much water is
required: Indeed total dipping must have some quantity, but less then
Jordan, or Enon rivers may suffice to dip a person over head and ears: he
says here it does follow, that as dipping the whole man, etc. it does lively
represent our burial etc. so doing it in much water, must import a full
resemblance of our washing in the blood of Christ, Zach. 13. 1. To which I say,
sure our Lord did not think so of the quantity of either water, or washing,
as R. B. does. Peter was indeed some way of his mind, it appears; our Lord
took a Basen: and he told Peter that would needs be washed all over as they
will be by dipping, that he that is washed, needs not but to be washed in one
part etc. R. B. here sure forgot John. 13.
himself, the manner in the case of sprinkling though much enforced, he would
have to import nothing, only the matter; but in the case of dipping, he will
have the manner as essential as the matter. And the quantity of the element he
will have as significant as the matter, to wit, water it self: But though he
be partial, it being his own cause it must be borne: so he concludes this
particular saying, they do not lose by dipping, the holding forth their
washing in the blood of Christ, and again, he must father a falsehood on me
about sprinkling, ere he leave it: R. B. proceeds, and takes further notice
of what I write, and setting down a part only, that does not hold forth my
meaning: but the contrary he answers thereunto as pleases him; I said all
do, or may know, that a thing dipped is not therefore washed, neither is
washing always intended in the dipping of a thing in water, there is a washing
by dipping I said: R. B. answers, that much less is that which is sprinkled,
therefore washed; I argued to enforce washing as the maine thing, and dipping
but an accident in the way of washing, as is sprinkling in like manner, for as
there may be dipping without washing, so there may be sprinkling also; but he
minds further what I said, that a thing dipped is not therefore washed and
made clean. I said washing is not always intended, as before in the dipping
of a thing, this I said to enforce washing, as most fully significant, and
according to the nature of the ordinance. To this he answers, that much less
is that which is sprinkled, washed, and made clean, I say, a thing may be
sprinkled as well as dipped, and not washed, or made clean, yet there is a way
of washing and cleansing also by sprinkling, Ezekiel. 36. 25. he says, he has
proved that is washing, so I have showed that sprinkling is also; he says, he
that is dipped is washed, so is he that is sprinkled also; he says by
consequence he is made clean, so far as the ordinance does require, I say so
also of sprinkling, according to that which is the life and substance of the
ordinance, the cleansing of the soul in the blood of Christ, Ezekiel. 36. Surely
R. B. will acknowledge that washing is the principal thing in baptism, and
that there are diverse ways or manners of washing. And that at the most dipping
is but a way of washing; I say no more, but that to me it is an admirable
thing, that any should lay such weight on that way of washing, as that all
other ways should be nullities in their account; especially, that washing the
maine and principal thing in the ordinance, should not be baptism, or the
ordinance of Christ, when that so fully holds forth our washing in the blood
of Christ, that blessed fountain, and cleansing thereby.

I declared what I thought the ordinary way of their washing to be by dipping
the thing in water and rubbing or the like in those countries where baptism
was first instituted: I said it is yet the way, or manner of washing in some
cases, as may be seen in the Diers washing their matterialls in the river
Thames: R. B. applies this to baptism, as if I spoke of that: sure he was
dull of understanding: he says they do practice so, namely dipping, and when
I can prove he says they dipped often; they will dip often too; like enough so I
say, for they are for all new things, right, or wrong: But R. B. tell me, did
they not dip often to cleanse in the ordinary way of their washing? look but
on your own example produced, to prove dipping, washing; was he not to wash
seven times? do not those I mentioned dip, or plunge their materials often in
water? R. B. carrying the matter in his assumed sense, as^eth me why I am
offended with them for dipping but once? I told him that total dipping was the
thing I excepted against, for dipping by way of washing, not total but of a
part, I told him it was a laudable way, especially in hot countries; R. B.
says further, that if they dipped by way of washing, at the first, then is
dipping the good old way, Iere. 6. 16. a very poor conclusion. I reason in
like case thus, if they eat the Supper in an upper Chamber, or at night, or
leaning, the conclusion would be alike to no purpose; he asks why I reproach
their practice? I answer, because they urge that which they can never prove by
one syllable of the scriptures, namely ^otall dipping; and also lay such load
upon one way of washing by dipping, when washing it self is rejected; but R.
B. says, he sees I love to wrangle: I say, he sure loves to pervert council
by words: he would not make his reader I^b 38. 2.
believe I spoke of baptism, else when I spoke of common washing: That I love
to wrangle, he says, appears because in stead of dipping often and rubbing
to cleanse, I now say a little water serves to set forth our washing in the
blood of Christ as well as a great deal, and the washing of one part as the
face as the usual manner is, as well as the washing of the whole man: I do
acknowledge I do so hold and am willing to be judged by the godly wise whether
it be not so: For I reason thus, if a great deal of water be necessary in
Baptism, then a great deal of bread and wine in the Supper by like reason
which indeed would carnallize the ordinance, and again if a great deal be
necessary and the quantity have such force in it, then the greater quantity
the greater force and more full holding forth the fullness of the blood of
Christ; And so not some little brook like old Foord, but rather the great sea,
for this argument wolud carry men ad infinitum, But truly I think one dro^ of
Christ's blood to be of that force and efficacy, that i^ ^e be but sprinkled
with it, it will purge our conscience from dead works: I would pray R. B. and
all other to observe the place by me alleged: not to prove Baptism or the
manner of it as he would seem to take it, but to illustrate the thing in
difference, touching total dipping and washing but of a part, and a little
water and much, For sure I think R. B. his answer will be counted weak and
unsound in that he says a little water serves not to set forth our washing in
the blood of Christ as does a great deal; as for that place produced Zacha.
13. 1. The Lord aims at the pureness of the blood of Christ and
unexhaustiblenesse of it: rather then at the muchnesse of it, for then a sea
the greatest of all waters, rather then a fountain would have been expressed,
the which I leave to the judgment of the reader: R. B. his judgment
concerning a part not answerable to the whole, is as weak as the former, he
says the washing of a part does not set forth the cleansing of the whole; whom
shall we believe, our Lord or him? our Lord told Peter in all ^^^n 13.
cases of washing (I do not say it was Baptizing as he would make the reader
believe) that he that is washed, needed not but to be washed in one part, and
is clean all: in the 36. Ezekiel. sprinkling it cleanses from all sin and
filthiness: sure that place 2. Cor. 7. 1. R. B. misapplyeth in this case, here
he yet again fathereth a false matter on me but I must bear it; he in the end
after some further impertinent matter, says he supposes I know Christ would
teach his disciples humility by that act: But what then does he teach nothing
else? does he not teach that he that is washed needs not but to be washed in
one part according to his Masters will? and further also that he that is so
washed is clean all? and if so in this washing then sure in that mysterious
washing much more; But in his conceit to wash a part is contrary to his own
Institution Ma. 28. The man is sick of total dipping, but it may be he may
recover.

He says further, my great objection is that total dipping cannot be
performed with modesty and shamefastness; I say I judge it cannot, and I
think such as are godly wise will think so also, But he says I urged against
them in the hot countries their dipping often and rubbing to cleanse; Now he
says I cannot determine how it may be done once; If I had not met with such a
perverse opposite I should have spared my self and the reader much pains: did
I say they dipped and rubbed in Baptism? fie R. B. Did not Naaman dip or wash
seven times? do not those I instanced in dipping often their materials, by
which the way of washing is set forth; If R. B. have no more to say to save his
course from Immodestie he is in a poor case: Going in his own way he says
surely I will conclude they put on a linen garment: I will rather conclude
such are wise and modest above what is written, that shall hold total dipping
and yet use a Covering, I suppose R. B. will hold so too, If he do not, some of
his opinion do I am sure? It will follow they baptize the garments into the
death etc. of Christ, They do so I judge according to their opinion, here yet
still he fathereth a lie on me about sprinkling; But he says not their
garments but the persons in the garments, I answer if total dipping be Christ's
Command and Institution; so far as covered, so far undipped: whether those
garments made for such use and so used are not as holy as Popish Vestments I
leave the reader to judge. He says it must follow that they that sprinkle
baptize garments also, I say it is only accidental if they do, they have no
devised garment for the use, they have only common Clothes; some conscientious
men in R. B. were true to their principles that have been baptized in such
vestments, will see that the defect has made void their Baptism and that they
are not to rest in it but to be Baptized again.

What should be the cause R. B. has labored so much in this matter of dipping
and taken notice of every particular, I leave every man free to judge, for my
part I take it to be as I said before, It is new and the man is mightily taken
with it.

For I am sure the rest of the discourse is as much against him, and in
special that which follows, to which he says nothing at all; There is one
thing in the end of this matter of dipping which he does not declare himself
about, Namely whether he learned this new way of dipping of the Romanist and
Ignorant Welsh, and whether he count their Baptism the Baptism of Christ, In
his next I suppose he will do it.

Now he has done with the Negative part of my discourse and so he comes to
the affirmative part, how he quitteth himself there may be seen by that which
follows; before he comes to it, he says I have spoken my mind against the
ordinance of Christ: Certainly he is greatly mistaken, I have spoken for the
ordinance of Christ which he has peremptorily condemned, and yet does, denying
the Baptism of all the reformed Churches and separed Churches, and also of all
other Christians either Reformed, or yet in defection, only those two or three
excepted that have within these two or three years, or some such short time,
bin totally dipped for Baptism, by persons at the beginning unbaptized
themselves, An opinion so rare and singular, so high and presumptuous as I
suppose all persons godly wise will abhor the very thinking of it:

Had not R. B so traveled through this matter of dipping I should not have
challenged him for slipping, as now I shall in the rest of the matter
remaining; Certainly dipping was none of the three particulars he would reduce
my discourse unto, as he told his reader in the end of his Epistle, I must
crave pardon if I declare my thoughts touching R. B. that he sure thought
himself guilty of what I so marvelled at, Namely that persons should think
that every Corruption meeting with Gods ordinance destroys it forthwith, as
if Satan were stronger then God; And that also his thoughts tell him he is one
of them that would pull up the tares with Ma. 13. 29. Eze. 43. 8.
the wheat, and destroy Gods posts with man's, as in my discourse I observed it
to be the vein of not a few, of which things he takes no notice; But makes
mention of my first positive ground, and uses his skill of reducing it to a
very narow compass, and so shifteth it off without either answering the scope,
the reasons or Scriptures, by me produced, so as I might take that ground
unanswerable, and say no more. But in as much as I tender the discovery of
light and some clearing to the truth I will a little travel here further; The
first ground in my discourse was the Covenant of Almighty God to Abraham and
his seed after him in their generations Gene. 17. I showed it was an
everlasting Covenant both in the nature and in the extent made to a thousand
Generations Psalm. 105. Continuing to the time of Grace, being of force after
the suffering of our Lord, that it did extend to the Gentiles, they being a
part of the seed to whom this Ephesians. 3. 6
Covenant was made as in the discourse may be further seen, none of all which
R. B. denies, for indeed he could not, but something I further propounded, he
catches and that is about the difference, I conceived to be betwixt a Covenant
and Testament. That there is two Testaments of Almighty God and one Covenant,
distinct in diverse considerations, and in special in the manner of Confirming,
which things R. B. refuteth not, though I desired that any one should show the
error that attends it; he after some confused and dark setting forth of the
ground, Answers he marvelleth I should urge Infants being in a Covenant not
confirmed by the blood of Christ, to prove their Interest in Baptism, and so
consequently in the blood of Christ.

This matter he supposes to be against me, To which I answer, the Covenant of
Almighty God to Abraham Gene. 17.
and his seed was confirmed in Christ, and by him, rather in his birth and
coming into the world, then by his death and leaving the world. Gala. 3. 17.
But not to wade in new things I further say that that Covenant Genesis 17. was
made with Abraham and his seed the Church, The Testament by Moses was made with
the same people, old and young. The new Testament confirmed in particular wise
with the blood of Christ it was made with the same people also, the house of
Israel and Judah: so as the matter standing so, that the Covenants and
Testaments whether so distinct or not (as before) being to young as well as old,
what cause had R. B. to marvel unless at his own shallowness? for indeed
to any that has but half an eye it is so far from excluding Childdren as it
does wholly include them, and interest and inright them in the Covenant and
Testaments both old and new, and so in the seal now as of old, especially the
Covenant being everlasting and by neither Testaments made void. But further he
says, If Infants be not in the Covenant confirmed by the blood of Christ who
says they are not: Then can they he says have no right to Baptism. which
serves to set forth our blood of washing in the blood of Christ, But I answer
if they have interest both in that Covenant and Testament also, then they may
have right to Baptism, But this is most certain as before is briefly declared,
so as if R. B. can show no other eror to atte^d that distinction, it will also
as the rest of the matter, pass for good, for any thing R. B. to purpose can
say against it: But he says this excludes Children not only from Baptism,
but also from salvation by Christ; how it does so I suppose he cannot tell. If
he think thus because they are said to be in a Covenant, not confirmed
particularly by the blood of Christ, Though Typically and Relatively it be so
confirmed.

Then from such a conceit it will follow certainly, that those Israelites of
old Parents and Children, were excluded from salvation by Christ, they being in
a Covenant not so confirmed: Indeed his opinion seems to be sick of this
disease, for how Children which he holds neither within the Church, nor
within the Covenant, nor do believe, how they should have salvation by Christ,
sure he cannot tell: This R. B. according to his judgment thinks a
sufficient answer, The scriptures which I produced to prove the extent of the
Covenant of God to Abraham and his seed in their generations; and that the
Gentiles they were a part of the seed to whom the Covenant was made, Ephe. 3.
6. That children are included, and not excluded, so being in the Covenant and
of the Church, have a writ now also to the Seal to be buried with Christ by
Baptism, all which I suppose R. B. grants as true, and that he could not
gainsay the same: And is therefore by just consequence guilty ^^ offering
wrong and violence to the Covenant of Almighty God, and to Abraham the Father
of the faithful; in excluding such as God has not only included, but
expressed in that his Heb. 8.
Covenant and also in both his Testaments, for these whether so distinguished,
or otherwise: were made with one and the same people, the house of Israel and
Judah, so as to Gal. 1.
exclude Children always included must needs be a changing the Everlasting
Covenant and a bringing in a new Gospel never learned of Jesus Christ, and let
R. B. or any other clear themselves of it if they can.

The second positive ground I set forth it was the stablenesse and perpetuity
of the Church, some change being in form and Administration, but not in matter
and relation, as in my discourse is before fully proved; R. B. thinks he has
disproved the same and so here passes it by: And he only minds what I did
infer from this ground. Infants I said were lawful members of the Church from
Abraham to Moses, from Moses to Christ, what should let them from being a part
of the Church and lawful members yet still? seeing the Church or Kingdom is
the same. Mat. 21. 43. I also there proved that the Gentiles they are
fellow-heirs and of the same body. Ephe. 3. 6. To all which and that that
further follows in my discourse. R. B. answers that though Infants were of
the Church of old, yet the Lord has manifestly declared they shall not be so
now; It would amaze one to see the presumptuousnesse of the man; has God so
manifestly declared their putting out of his Covenant and cutting off from the
Church, where is that manifest declaration? the scripture rather declares
their continuance Ephe. 3. 6. But let us see where is that manifest
declaration, It is Gala. 4. There is mention in the scripture but of one
Allegory and that is all the proof R. R. has for the excluding of Children
from the Church and cutting off their entayle from the Covenant, sure he is
very near driven that has no other proof but this Allegory to prove a
matter of such great consequence as the altering of the unchangable Covenant of
God and cutting of a part of the Church, And this Allegory must be expounded,
according to his own sense and fancy or else all is lost with him in the
cause, But let us see how he makes the Allegory speak to his purpose, for the
putting of Infants out of the Church: Gala. 4. It is written Abraham had two
sons one by a bond-maid an other by a free woman; he that was borne of the
bondwoman (to wit Ishmael) was borne after the flesh, but he that was born of
the free woman was born by promise, The sum of all this is that Ishmael not
being the child of promise, was put out of Abraham's family: Alas what is all
this to the manifest declaration? O yes says he it is an Allegory but sure R.
B. had small judgment and less reason to say an Allegory is a manifest
declaration: But happily he may make something of it; I shall mind his sense,
The bondwoman he says shadowed out the old Covenant: and her son Ishmael
which she bare to Abraham after the flesh by carnal generation: see what words
R. B. here uses in setting out the generation of Ishmael sure there was some
Allegory in his thoughts about them; Romans 4. 19.
For I asked him, was not Isaac borne after a fleshly wise, and by carnal
generation also? sure he was begotten and brought forth even as Ishmael was, R.
B. is yet beside the white; he further says that Ishmael shadowed out the
carnal Israelites which should proceed from Abraham in after generations, to
what time he refers Exo. 9. 6, Act 3. 25.
this, it does not appear: As under Moses the Jews are said to be a holy
people, and Gods peculiar treasure, so after Christ the Apostle tells us
expressly they were the Children of the promise, If Ishmael being cast out of
Abraham's house Gods Church for mocking; did Type out the unbeleeving Jews that
rejected the Son of God, as indeed it did, if R. B. held so, I agree with him
but sure he means some other matter, and therefore he goes on further and
says, The free woman Sarah pointing out the new Covenant and Jerusalem: But
can R. B. put no difference between the new Covenant, and the Church in his
judgment: that is from above and her Son Christ: Some of the Covenant or
Church means he; sure Christ came of the Church of the Jews as it is
written, Romans 9. 5. R. B. will not account that Jerusalem from above, he will
confound himself, and lose all if he take not heed before he get out of the
Allegory, or bring his manifest declaration to light; he adds Christ the
promised seed. Gala. 3. 16. R. B. does not take Christ here personally, for
then it must be exclusively, (I suppose Heb. 2. 13.
to all others) but he takes it, I judge, mystically and so inclusively for
him and all his, the Children which God has given him whether Jews or
Gentiles, males or females young or old.

For his saying in this place not to seeds as of many, but to seed, as of one
that is Christ, Is as I conceive not of Jews apart as on seed and Gentiles
apart as another and so seeds, but both together in one to wit in Christ as it
is written Romans 4. 16. and I parallel this place with that in the 1. Cor. 12.
12. where the Apostle speaks after a like manner and I leave the reader to
judge of it; But to go on he says as Christ verse. 2^.
the seed, so believers born from above or by promise; sure he means actual
believers, so as to be capable of total dipping, certainly Isaac was not so
borne from above, when he came first into the world, and yet then he was the
son of promise, and Abraham's spiritual seed. v. 29. 28. He further urges
that we as Isaac was, are children of the promise, we Gentiles, we Galathians
are as Isaac children of the promise: how was he by descending from Abraham of
Sara Lineally? can any thing be brought more plain for the manifest right of
Children to be of the Church and within the Covenant, then that which R. B.
would bring to exclude them? Isaac the son of of Abraham by Sara, before he
came into the world, when he was an Infant of aday old was the child of
promise, aed so were all the seed of the Jewish Church of old, witness the
Apostle Peter Acts 3. 25. In like manner we Gentiles are as Isaac so children
of the promise and have Abraham for our father and the father of all our seed,
the blessings of Abraham being common, the Gentiles through Romans 3. 36.
faith (as the Jews lost it through unbeleife,) God to be the God of the
Gentiles by special relation and Covenant and the God of all their seed, as of
old he was to Isaac of Abraham and to all the generation that followed.

But R. B. supposing the matter not to be yet clear enough travelleth further
in the business and says, that to close up the full intent of the spirit the
Apostle ver. 29. 30. says that the carnal and fleshly seed Ishmaell for
persecuting was with his mother cast out; out of Abraham's house the Church:
Well now R. B. draws nigh to his manifest declaration, which is that by their
casting out was foreshewen, that when Christ the true Isaac should be born
(here he seems to understand that place Gala. 3. 16. personally and so
exclusively.) And the barren Esaias 54 1
woman, the new Covenant or Gospel, A rare understanding: The barren woman I
had thought had been the Gentiles, and sure so it is, and not the Gospel or
new Covenant; for did not the Gospel always in the sense R. B. is now in
opening his Allegory always, bare Children to God? sure it did witness the
Catalogue of the faithful Heb. 11. Further he says then shall the bondwoman,
which he calls the old and carnal Covenant, with all the Carnal ordinances
thereof: This is a very rare sense also the covenant of Almighty God by Moses
he calls Carnal; certainly it is a Carnal expression and unsavorie so to
call that gracious Covenant of Almighty God which he of love and free Grace
gave or made unto his people Deu. 33. 6. and to call those spiritual
ordinances of Gods own Instituting, how ever some way Ceremonial, to call them
Carnal after the manner of Carnal or Common Generation: But further he says
that all her sons the Carnal and fleshly seed Ishmael and all because
begotten and borne of the flesh, shall be cast out of the house: It does not
say cast out Children out o^ the Church for the matter so far traveled in, is
where it was if not worse and further off.

Cast out Agar and Ishmaell, Abraham, out of thy house, for they shall not
inherit with Isaac and Sara as indeed they did not, And therefore as the sum of
all R. B. says that though Children of old were of the Church and within the
Covenant before Christ yet they are not now if we please to believe him,
Children it seems are great losers by Christ coming: But Alas is this the
manifest declaration, that R. B. fathered so confidently on Almighty God, in
rejecting Children from being of the Church. Truly I suppose he and such of
his way, had more need to be pitied for their ignorance joined with
presumption, then to be envied for any rareness in their opinions; he further
says my exposition of this scripture page 22. in my discourse, is also to be
rejected and cast out, and his rare exposition is to be received and taken in:
For he says in my discourse I make such only to be the sons of the
Bondwoman as actually refused and rejected Grace as Joh. 7. 35. 36. He means
Joh. 1. 11. and so became bound, I said there as the reader may see that these
two sons which Abraham had by two women, were two Types, And the Apostle says
it is an Allegory and they did Type out two states of people, and had reference
Mat. 21. 4* 3.
to the time of Grace when Christ came unto his own and they received him not
Joh. 1. 11. but to such as, did he gave power to be the sons of God; But such
as did not as the greatest number of the Jews did not they became bond and
were cast out; the kingdom being taken from them and given to others, namely
the Gentiles etc. as further John 8. 36. Gala. 4. 28.
may be seen, which rejecting and casting out the holy Apostle so greatly
bewayleth Romans 10. 11. The Jews for unbelief were cast out as was Ishmael and
Agar for mocking, But such of the Jews and Gentiles also that did believe were
made free by the son that makes men free indeed: I said thus this Allegory
is fulfilled and we Gentiles are as Isaac and as the Israelites children of the
promise. This understanding must he says be cast out also, and he supposes he
has a special reason for it; for Ioh. 8
says he this implies as if they had been free by nature: Sure the man
dreamed, they were free as Isaac was by promise, being a part of the seed to
whom the promise was made, the Israelites they were so free by promise as they
could tell our Lord: but they were not so free, but that they must become bond,
unless they were further Romans 11.
made free by the Son that makes men free indeed: Rejecting of him they of
free became bond, and are unto this day and cut off, but shall be loosed again
when their hearts shall be turned to the Lord, and they grafted into their
Olive tree again: But this R. B. says is a manifest contradiction of the
Apostle, let that be made appear; thus he does it; The Apostle he says by
the bondwoman understands all them that were borne as Ishmael by fleshly
generation, he then as I said must mean Isaac also, for he as before is
showed was so borne by fleshly generation, though Abraham was old and Sara
stricken in years, the intent and meaning of the Apostle is far otherwise as
before is showed, though he see it not: and so rudely to father his erroneous
conceit upon the holy Apostle: So he concludes that all that are not as Isaac
by promise etc. the Galathians bein Gentiles were as Isaac by promise as
before, the Gentiles being grafted into the stock of Abraham the Church their
seed, though lineally descended is owned of God as of old, and after the manner
of Isaac Children of the promise.

I suppose the indifferent reader will be able to see how far R. B. is from
making good, what he so boldly affirmed, And that the Children of the
faithful and such as are of the Church, are yet still true and lawful
Members, and such as are not to be denied to come unto Christ of such being
his Kingdom; The rest of what I set forth in my discourse touching this second
positive ground in as much as R. B. happily was in his deep reducing, to some
of the three heads before mentioned, I shall hold him excused for passing it
by: If any reader studious of this controversy desire to see further thereof,
he may please to peruse the discourse. And so I proceed as does R. B. saying my
next ground is the Apostles exhorting Parents to bring up their Children, in
the nurture of the Lord, therefore by consequence they were of the Church and
so baptized, I said indeed the Apostle writing to the whole Church distributeth
the same into parts, and makes one part Children which he wills to be
obedient, and these were young and to be brought up in the fear of God: Now
the Apostle writing to the Church would not meddle with them if without, I
alludeing to that place 1. Cor. 5. whether the allusion were so proper yea or
no I leave the reader to judge, But about this R. B. takes pains and
travelleth about it, and infers this and that as absurdities, to little
purpose, following thereof, in the mean time never clearing that which
follows of the Jews Children, being left out when they shall be called and
grafted into their stock again, as no more capable to be of the Church, which
were greatly to lessen their comforts and to diminish of the grace of God to
them, But minding his promise of reducting he passes over and comes in his
further proceed, to take notice that I said it was an uncomfortable doctrine,
the excluding the Lineall seed of the faithful from the Church estate and
Covenant as of old, for from thence I said it will follow that Parents do
beget, bear and bring forth children to the devil etc. To this he answers
that by nature we are all the children of wrath, Ephe. 2. ^. To which I say,
that indeed the Ephe. were the the Children of wrath before their calling and
ingrafting into the Church; And further it is true of the seed of the
faithful, and of the faithful themselves, that nature considered according to
their fallen condition and unregenerate part, they may be so minded, yea Isaac
the particular son of promise was so also: But by Covenant and promise, neither
Isaac nor yet the Israelites were the Children of wrath, as were the Gentiles
and their seed, But were the people and children of God, Eze. 16. He says
further that our being of the Church, depends on our regeneration; which I
say is a Familistcall strain: But he further says, if all that are not borne
members of the Church shall be damned. I ask who says so? Does R. B. know no
difference betwixt these two, that in his judgment, the one must needs follow
the other, being out of the Church, and so Relatively without God in the world;
then they must be damned and there is no other way, If it were so, children
would be in a poor case, according to his judgment that excludes them all the
church: But his drift is to enforce some absurdity on me. I shall take notice
of it: he says there is in my judgment no true visible Church in the world.
This fable we had enough of before: so he Argues on thus, no church, no
Children borne in the Church: no Salvation: He asks me if this doctrine of
mine be not very comfortable: he may take it to himself for sure he is the
Master of it: And by this feigned retortion, he thinks to heal and comfort
the sad thoughts of Parents, against that doleful consequence, that their
children are not now as of old, the children of God; but are borne the children
of the Devil: and so he skippeth over what I inferred by way of question,
which it seems he had no list to answer.

R. B. takes notice of another Argument, which he says must needs be
answered: for he takes it, I place great confidence in it, and indeed so I
do, he sets it down thus, Children of Believers are holy, therefore they
may be baptized. 1. Cor. 7. 14. To this scripture opened and applied, as in my
discourse may be seen, R. B. answers, that the Apostle does not say the
children of believers are holy: sure he has little modesty, he might as well
deny the light at Noone day; does not the Aposay now are they holy, v. 14. But
what then does the Apostle say, that the unbeleeving wife is sanctified to the
believing husband? that is to his use, so as his ox or sheep and other goods
are, I suppose he so means.

Could the Corinthians question that a poor Exposition, It is likely rather
they questioned their lawful continuance with them: because of old the
Israelites were to put away their strange wives, and the children which were
Esra 10.
begotten of them: which children God did not own for his, so they might have
conscience of doing so also; The partition wall being now broken down, the
case it was otherwise, and this R. B. in part confesses as their scruple, but
he seeks to turn another way by multip^yi^g words, and in the end makes
this the sum of all, that their children so begotten (are Legitimate) that is,
true borne not bastards, a wonderful case and rare exposition! if one be a
believer then the children are true borne, but if neither be, then the children
are bastards; what a number of Bastards are there in the world, in R. B. his
sense? he adds as a reason of his exposition, that the holiness of the
child is not concluded from the believing of the parents, but from their
lawful use each of other: which is utterly untrue and contrary to the sense of
the scripture, that terms the seed of those of the Church holy for their
relation sake, but the seed of other not having relation, unclean, though
borne in never so true wedlock. But R. B. again saying the same without any
show of proof, that it proves no more holiness in the seed of the faithful,
then in the seed of the heathen borne in wedlock: But he does but say it, we
are not bound to believe him unless we will; He intends brevitie he says,
and so refers me further for answer of R. B. where the the matter is handled
at large.

These he says are the reasons I can show for baptizing of children, which
because they satisfy not some, but they require as well he says they may, a
precept or example for warrant. He says I promise to do that, but first
requires a precept or example to be showed of an unbaptized persons; baptizing
either himself or others, and also the like for rejecting children their
member-ship in the Church, and right in the Covenant as of old. These two he
has sufficiently done: Indeed if he might be his own judge he has, but
truly he must to work about it again, or otherwise, men of judgment will
count his cause lost, for R. B. to prove that an unbaptized person may baptize
himself, or others, before he be baptized himself; brings David's eating of
the shewbread, and the Alsufficiencie of the scripture to instruct the man of
God in every good work, And for cutting of the Intayle of children from the
Covenant, and putting them out of the Church: that one only Allegory
mentioned in the scripture, Gala. 4. and this expounded aright, and not
according to his erroneous sense, is so far from being for him; as it is clear
against him. It is no marvel he should say it is sufficiently done; It is well
he is judge in his own cause, for sure others, no not those of his own way
will say any such thing for him.

Now he will take notice of the performance of my promise and so to the first
thing by me set down, he having cavelled at it before he passes it by,
Namely, children their being baptized into Moses in the Cloud and Sea: a very
clear example.

He minds my next as the first, and that is of the baptizing whole households,
as the Jaylers Lydiah, and the household of Stephanus by Paul himself. R. B.
replieth to this and says, he requires an example of Baptizing Children, and
not of households. It is worth the noting, what unequal dealing may be found in
men, and how far men are from measuring to others, what they require of others
to be measured to them, to prove that an unbaptized person may baptize. David's
eating the shewbread is a very clear example and full proof with R. B. And
he may take himself wronged if any shall refuse it. If I had said to him I
require an example, not of eating shewbread, but of an unbaptized person,
baptizing of himself, what would he have said, he it is likely would have
minded me of the substance of the thing, and the nature and agreement of the
matter so parralled as he intended: I mind him so to mind this Instance and
proceed.

I reasoned thus from these examples, If Children with their Parents entered not
the Covenant Church, estate now, as of old they did: The Apostles would have
spoken more particularly and not so generally, for sure he minded the reproof
of our Lord to mark 10. 14.
those Disciples, that hindered children from coming to him, for this reason
amongst other, because the Church consists of such: It is an example for
baptizing whole households however, wherein usually are young children, It is as
pertinent however, as David's eating the shewbread before: A family may be
tendered, a whole family may be baptized, It lies on the part of R. B. if I
mistake not to declare by what right, they being a part should be put by: If he
can show no further discharge but that Allegory, they will do well enough. I
told him if a household were tendered to Baptism, and I will now put the case
if he was to be the Baptizer, and there should be an infant, two or three in
it, and Paul's example should be alleged to him; by what warrant would he put
them by; or who should be his pattern? It seems he would rather choose to
follow the disciples which Christ blamed for hindering Mark 10. 14.
Children in their coming to him, rather then the mind of our Lord or example
of Paul: But what I inferred about this he passed by with silence, And thinks
to pay me home saying, this proves no more the baptizing of children, then it
proves the baptizing of notorious drunkards, thieves and swearers, or whole
households have bin baptized in some households, there are such, ergo, If I should
tell R. B. that John Baptist did baptize such, and so the cause is by him
unaware granted, he would Matthew. 3. 7. Luke. 4. 7. Luke 4. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.
tell me they confessed their sins first, but the scripture tells him and us
all, that they were a generation of vipers, whose good fruits were not then
brought forth: pleasing himself in the parallel he says to me, who sees not
your folly: I may I suppose with more ground Retort it on R. B. again for
making such a parallel and Illusion, for would he have drunkards etc. to be
baptized whether they would or no? And if these being in a family confess
their sins, though they forsake them not, sure R. B. (or otherwise he
differs from those of his own way,) especially if they own but total
dipping, will think it meet to baptize them, upon that their confession and
profession, though they were, and do after appear to remain such drunkards,
thieves and whores as he speaks of: who may not see R. B. his shallowness
thus to please himself with just nothing.

He comes to the next, I said the whole Church of Collosse was baptized as
the whole church of old were circumcised; now a part of the Church which was
thus buried with Christ in baptism were children. To this he answers our
question is of Infants and not of children in the general, some of which may
be old. R. B. told me I loved to wrangle, but sure he is sore sick of the
disease himself. Infants and Children not come to understandding, I count one
and the same and I suppose properly, and of such is our question, such were
members of the Church of old and circumcised; such are members of the church
yet still for ought any thing R. B. can say to the contrary, the Apostle Ephe.
6. speaking in like manner, speaks of infants 10. 16.
or children not grown in knowledge: such as our Lord took in his Arms and
said of such were his kingdom. Ephe. 6. 4. Mark
To little purpose unless to deceive the simple, does R. B. set forth that old
persons, relatively may be called Children. I could also show that an infant of
a day old has the like expression. Ezekiel. 16. But he seems to have a lame
argument, upon which he much relieth, the Apostle did not write to infants: I
say he wrote to the whole and to Children Inclusively; as a part of the whole,
yea to such as for present could make little use of what he wrote* holy men of
old they wrote as they were guided by the spirit, in like manner the Apostle
wrote. Now of old the Law and the prophets, the precepts and promise therein
were to children inclusively: and secondarily ^ene. 17. 7. Exodus 19. Romans 9. 4.
Deu. 29. 1
in their order, the Covenant to Abraham, and that by Moses from God it was to
young and old: to whole Israel pertained the adoption and the giving the Law,
the service of God and promises; yea expressly Infants that could not express
themselves verbally, enter Covenant with God, all which minded it will appear,
to be false which R. B. says that the apostle did not write to Infants. But R.
B. must have his vein, to take all things in the case of children exclusively,
which concerns their right in the favors of God, with their Godly Parents.
And inclusively he will take Infants with unbeleevers and the wicked of the
world, and so liable to the same wrath, let what will be said to the contrary,
though he have not the least show for it out of Gods word: so as to end this,
If Infants or children not come to knowledge were of the Church, and the whole
Church was buried with Christ by Baptism, then were children Baptized. That
they are let what before be minded. He concludes with saying, these exampies
will yield little satisfaction: To which I say and end they will yield more
then his examples brought for the warrant of an unbaptized person Baptizing of
others or himself; or for what he alleged for childrens discharge from the
Church.

I said there was a command for the baptising children: Matthew. 28. 19. Go etc
Baptize all Nations; not one only, as the Nation of the Jews. I illustrated
the sense by parallel reference to other places of Scripture, God having of old
declared that Abraham should be a Father of many Nations, all which Nations
according to Christ's command must be baptized, a part whereo^ are Infants, or
Children not come to understanding: as Infants were apart of that one Nation of
the Jews: It is likely R. B. cannot but must needs be angry, that I take this
place of Scripture to prove that, which he is so much against when it was the
only Scripture, that ^he made to serve him at all turns, and in every case
about Baptism, as before may be observed.

To this he answers thus, Abraham indeed was to be a Father of many Nations,
some whereof he says were his natural and carnal seed, borne after the
flesh, as Ishmael and the Jews, but by the way can R. B. put no difference
betwixt Ishmael and the Ishmaelites, and the Jews; If he cannot he sure has
very small judgment; These he says further for unbelief were rejected and
cast off, but he does not tell us, the Order of it, neither is it altogether
true, which he speaks of the cause, Ishmael was cast out first, and in him
all the Ismaelites, and the cause was not unbelief, but making, and this which
was first, was the type of that which followed, the casting of and rejecting of
the Jews for unbelief, at that time when Christ came unto them being his
own, and they received him not, this rejecting of the Jews for unbelief R.
B. denied, and would not grant, and he thought he had good reason for it,
because he thought then in his deep judgment it would imply, as if they had
been the people of God by nature, and free that way: but now of himself he is
pleased to acknowledge some: further he says as those were cast off, so the
old and carnal Covenant as before he says, he showed, I then and now again
tell him, that was a carnal expression, so to call that gracious covenant of
Almighty God: Abraham he says had other Nations, which were so reputed in
regard of their Faith, and walking in his steps; I say surely these are the
Gentiles Nations, Romans 4. which place he alleges, in observing to whom
Abraham was a Father to: and Math. 19 Ephesians. 16.
says mark, and so I say mark them Nations that believe and walk in the
steps of Abraham, and who says otherwise. But to young and old complete
Nations, as was the Nation of the Jews. He goes on and says Gala. 3. 29.
such as are Christ's, are Abraham's young Children, are Christ even as Isaac, of
such he says himself, are his Kingdom, the Gentiles are fellow heirs etc.
These latter, Nations he means, or else he deludeth in the case: are Abraham's
spiritual seed, and are by express command to be baptized, Math. 28. Mark.
16. has not the man traveled far to little purpose: unless to confute
himself: The Nations of the Gentiles that believe, they are Abraham's
spiritual seed, and are by Christ's express command to be baptized, as R. B.
acknowledges, and Infants are a part of these Nations, and so also to be
baptized. But what says he? is all this to the baptising of Children that
believe not? I ask how he knows they do not believe, if they believe not
they cannot be saved: he again says, and therefore not believing are none of
Abraham's spiritual seed, Isaac when a Infant could not believe after that way
R. B. intends, yet he was Abraham's spiritual seed, so were the Infants of
Israel of old, and now we Gentiles are as Isaac, so as I suppose it is much to
the purpose, though he see it not: and therefore says that children not
believing, are therefore none of ABRAHAM'S spiritual seed, who only are to be
baptized, fie what poor matter is this; he says that which follows is
likewise nothing to the purpose, namely that the Nations that are made ABRAHAM'S
seed, the NATIONS that are saved, the Kingdoms that shall become the Kingdoms
of the Lord, must needs receive Christ's badg, and be baptized, this he says is
granted but proves nothing; that is a wonderful thing if Children be apart
as before of those Nations, that he should grant the baptising of the whole,
and yet deny one part; what is his reason that before, over again, none are
Abraham's seed, but such as are Christ's, first Isaac and the Infants of Israel
were first Christ's, and the Gentiles are partakers of the same promise: But he
urges further (like an unwise man) they walk in his steps, what did Jsaack so
walk when he was an Infant? do his works? to apply these Scriptures to
Infants shows great weakness and folly: yet he goes on farther, and says
that no Kingdom does become the Kingdom of the Lord, but those that fear and
serve him kiss the Son, Psalm. 101. Hear his voice Acts 3. 22. and have him
to reign over them, all which he applies against Children, grossly abusing
the Scriptures as any man that has but half an eye may see: I ^x. 19. 6
ask him did the Nation of the Jews that was Gods Nation as well as Abraham's,
and a peculiar people, their Infants and all do so? did those Infants so hear
Gods voice, sear and serve God kiss the Son; R. B. is in a Labyrinth sure.
But yet further he urges that the Scriptures do, not declare the salvation of
any; but such as do believe, so no children in his account, but his reckoning
is utterly untrue: he goes on, saying those that believe on the Son have
life, but such as believe not (as Children he says do not) the wrath of God
abides on them, a fearful Mat. 2 1^
doom for Children, Herod was a great Enemy to the Children of Bethlehem, for
he destroyed them all in one day, R. B. exceeds he designeth all the children
in the children in the world at once to utter destruction and the wrath of God;
he concludes thus, therefore in refusing Infants which believe no^, but have
as before the wrath of God abiding on them. A fearful doctrine, R. B. says
for himself and the rest with him, if any please to believe him that they do
not curtaile the Nations which Abraham was to be a father of. If any will take
his word for it they may; but believe him who list, I shall not, for as Herod
did curtaile, that is cut off a part of Bethlehem when he destroyed the
children of two years, for which there was so great mourning in Ramah, and as
Pharaoh did curtaile Israel when he destroyed or did endeavor to destroy Exodus
1.
their children: So in like manner to reject children from a nation or people
in a relative way as R. B. does, is to curtaile a nation or people what ever R.
B. say to the contrary. When God changed his purpose of destroying Nineve, he
speaks of the greatness of the people, Iona. 4. 11.
and that there were sixscore thousand that could not discern betwixt the
right han^ and the left, that is children, a part of the whole, that must be
either be saved or perish together in the judgment: The infants of Israel were
a part of the nation of Israel and such as shared both in mercies and
judgments, which happily when R. B. has better considered of he may change
also his thoughts about children and have more charity toward them. I shall
set down the Argument again, and leave the reader to judge of it, now he has
heard what is said of both sides. There is a command for baptizing of nations;
Children or infants are a part of these nations, Ergo there is the command of
Christ for Baptizing infants. But R. B. i^ angry about this 28. Matthew. being
alleged against him, and says, nothing can be said more contrary possibly,
for what it is alleged, so sensuring me for vain jangler and one that
understood not what I spoke nor whereof, I did affirm* he concludes his
answer, never saying any thing to that of the Jewish Nation being borne again
in one day, whether then their infants shall be left cut is no more capable of
the Grace of God, nor yet to what I further said about their being first taught
and then baptized which I said was an adition of their own coin, not found in
the scripture, and being presumption in any to add it to the 28. Matthew. 19. I
said in the end of my discourse also that distinction is to be put betwixt
persons of years and infants, that persons of years are first to be taught,
but not children, as of old the Proselites were, but not their infants. That it
were unreasonable to require it of them now in Baptism, it not being required
of them in Circumcision, that no Conditional if, can be put in the case of
infants. To all which R. B. says nothing, for sure he grants it all, and so
takes himself guilty of that frowardness I observed in some, in setting
children against their parents in the case of believing and interest in the
Covenant of Almighty God: a thing they have taken up by tradition, and never
learned it of the holy scripture: And yet in it lies the great force and
strength of these men's reasoning, opposing young children to their godly
Parents, making the one a believer and the other an Infidel, making the Infant
of a believer an unbeleever, to whom pertains the wrath of God, and so
applying and opening all scriptures for the one against the other, when as it
is very clear by the scripture, as in part may be seen by what is before
declared. That children are always taken and minded as included, and so
sharing and having right with their Parents and not otherwise. I shall bear
his censure patiently which he lays on me, and conclude this Answer, saying
as R. B. does, and I think the reader will judge I say the truth; that R. B.
his whole Answer is not only weak and Impertinent, but that it does declare
the Author thereof to be very erroneous, that it is full of feigned fables
fathered unjustly on his opposite, and has many things in it contradictorie to
his own principles, so as he that shall read the Answer discovered and laid
open, will sure judge what ever R. B. intended he has rendered his cause and
practice which he endeavored to defend, evil and naught, and an error to be
deserted and shunned of all the people of God, which God give them wisdom to
see aright.

A short reply, to the frivolous exceptions of E. B.
He being desirous to vent and put off his notions, though very raw and
undigested as may easily be seen, and meeting with my discourse, he thought
good to have a ^^^ing at it though to little purpose God knows, as is the
rest of the matter of his book, to which he does add this short and hasty
Answer. I shall rather choose that he shall please himself with the great
strength of his matter, and the utter inabillitie that is in any to Answer:
rather then trouble my self in endeavoring to show the deceitfulness of his
wares, and so hurt his market: he having so great a desire to put them off: I
suppose any indifferent Chapman can see into it. I shall only make a short
reply to what is excepted against in my discourse. First he excepteth against
this that Christ should be said to be a widower if his visible Church died, and
ceased to be any more in the world; to this I have answered before and refer
the reader to it: Christ the husband of his Church must be a Widower if his
Church died; To this he says we differ not in the matter or substance: No
that is strange, what is his reason? He says the Church is either in heaven or
earth, so I say is a man's wife when she is dead, either in the world or out of
it: But he says Christ has a Church though no visible one, but our question
is of the visible, that is Christ's wife Ephe. 5. If that die or died, Christ
must be a widower sure. But he says his Church became Invisible; then it
changed the nature of it. But he thinks it is clear, that some time it was
so invisible Reve. 6. 13. 14. but sure he wants a clear judgment as in
other things so in this Scripture, heaven departed away as a scrole when it is
rolled together, A scrole is a visible substance when it is rolled up, though
not so visible as when unrolled, heaven the estate of Christ Church departed
away no otherwise then as a scrole, which is the same and continues it being
rolled as unrolled, indeed he is visible rolled, more visible unrolled, R. B.
his inference, namely that the Church is not always visible is unsound: Till the
eight seal was powered forth Heaven or the Church was as a scrole unrolled, so
as the things therein written might be seen: so was the Church while it
remained now pure: But after that time it departed as a scrole rolled up, so
was the case, and in some sort is still of the Church under deep defection;
The restoring of the Church to purity is the unrolling of the scrole, begun
and yet a doing: he adds but to what purpose I suppose he knows not Reve.
11. 7. 12.

Further he says the Church was hid in the wilderness for a time, and times
and half a time: But from whom is it that she was thus hid? from the Serpen I
but if she be hid she is preserved and has her being, and having a being she
is visible: nothing can be more plain She is hid from the rage of the serpent
from the cruelty of the enemy, but visible to her friends, and to the members
and those that in good will do seek her. If E. B. in some danger of the
enemy, as in the time of the Bishops should have retired to some place of
secrecy and there have hid himself, was he therefore to his wife and other
friends a man invisible, because so hid. Truly any man of reason may see to
what purpose these Scriptures serve his turn, and that they are fully against
him and his opinion which he brings them for, and do prove the continuednesse
of the Church and visibillitie of it which he opposes: In the wilderness the
Church continued, if by wilderness he will not understand the state of
defection, he must then understand by wilderness private places, for other
sense I suppose he cannot find I he choose the latter as I suppose he will: If
he had taken or would take pains to traverse the world, If he could not find
the Church remaining in Europe, in Asia, Africa, or America he might find
her, for in the wilderness she is to be preserved as before: and there finding
of her he might have lighted his candle, and been baptized and added to the
Church. And he should not have been put upon such a necessity as to begin
Baptism by an unbaptized person acting of it without any Commission or warrant
from Christ: But he and others of his mind had rather spare his pains and
labor of seeking and searching the wilderness for her, and without Scripture
or word of God, believe and hold she is seized out of the world and gone to
heaven, and must be so raised and restored in the earth again, by this way of
their own devising, which never came into the mind of Almighty God.

His second exception is to what I propounded, that if Rev. 7. 31.
Baptism was lost and fallen out of the world none but a Christ, a Moses, an
Elias or at least a prophet from heaven might restore, the blind Jews could
see this that it was unlawful for any other: To this he says that he
grants that an ordinance lost and fallen out of the world none but a Christ a
Moses Elias or a prophet from heaven can raise it: Baptism: was thus lost he
acknowledges, when did Christ, Moses, Elias, or any Prophet from Heaven, come
to raise it again? where are they, or who be they that we may do them
reverence? Sure he can show none such; But this he rhinketh may serve,
believers having Christ the Word and Spirit, so he says may do it. Indeed
they that have Christ, Moses, Elias, or prophets from heaven may do great
things: but alas these being in heaven, are not at their beck. It is likely he
means they have their word, there was never any held any error so great but
did assume to have that and the Spirit also: But supposing to have Christ the
Word and Spirit: how then does he prove such may raise a lost ordinance without
special Commission: he quoteth four Scriptures Matthew. 18. 19. 20. 11. 11.
Luke 17. 28. Romans 10. 6. We will view the Scriptures. Matthew. 18. 19. 20. If two
of you agree, and again, where two or three are gathered in my Name etc. To
which I say that it is not meant two or three unbaptized persons such have no
warrant Commission or promise in this kind; Cornelius and his family and
friends were two three such: yet they must send for Peter; Two or three is Acts
10. 2. 5. Ast. 2. 41.
or usually and I judge truly, taken for the Church; two or three unbaptised
persons, I deny to be a Church; let E. B. that would have an example of
baptising Infants, show an example, or any ground from Scripture of a
unbaptised Church, There is clear examples of Believers being Baptized and
added to the Church, where there was a Ministry of Christ: however where there
were Baptized persons to Baptize them, but alas for believers so called to
become a Church, being unbaptized is without all warrant of scripture I
conceive I shall ^ot need to wade further in answer, for doubtless this
Scripture will be judged by the reader to be impertinent to his purpose. The
11. Matthew. 11. Luke 7. 28. both which contain one matter are the next: They
speak of John and that the least in the Kingdom of God is greater then he:
though he were great indeed. The force is suposed to lie here, greater, and so
may baptize as he did, without Warrant or Commission, though he had one. By
this reason women may baptize, they being of the kingdom of Heaven and
believers, but sure unbaptized persons cannot be the Kingdom of Heaven in this
sense: Cornelius might have baptized his family and friends, and needed not to
have sent for Peter. Certainly our Lord was greater then John, and the Lord of
all believers, yet he did not baptize himself or others, but went to John,
that he might fulfill righteousness, and so would these, were they like
minded to him, they would go to them that Matthew. 3. 15.
were baptized, and had Commission to baptize others: These Scriptures the
strength whereof lies in a Compara^ive way, without all question E. B. does
not yet understand the scope of them, and that it makes nothing for him, every
ordinary judgment will see, and I will say no more.

The 10. Romans 6. 7. 8. is the last place by which he will prove that unbaptized
persons believing may baptize others, and so raise the ordinance lost and
fallen out of the world, this place of the Apostle is that of Moses Deu. 30.
11. 12. 13. 14. 1 S^m. 13. 9. 11. 2. ^hron. 26. 18. 1 Cor. 1^ 33. 40
It would better have fitted Saul to have excused his disobedience he being in
a great strait, and foolishly adventuring to sacrifice, Vzziah the king might
better and to more purpose have alleged the same for burning incense, for
which the priest withstood him he being for it smitten with leprosy. Can E.
B. account God to be the God of order, or think well of him for making a
breach in Vzza for neglect of order? and hold th^^ every believer may without
any more ado, act any ordinance of never so high a nature or peculiar
concernment? and saying, say not who shall a scend into Heaven, and the word is
near them, will serve their turn and bear them out, Alas it would not serve
Saul nor Vzza nor Vzziah though a King, neither will it in the least serve an
unbaptized person; the which I leave also to the judgment of the Reader. After
this he speaks that the Scripture is silent of John his baptizing of
himself; I say though it be, yet it is not silent concerning his Commission,
they show these it were to purpose. Then abruptly he falls could on the
Apostacy of Israel and AntiChrist and says the Apostasy of Antichrist,
greater then i^ that of Israel, indeed so it had need, with reference to their
course, and so he says though they did not again circumcise themselves, yet
now they may again be baptized, though the Scripture be as silent concerning
it as it is of John's Baptizing himself etc. It is well he will ingenuously
acknowledge the silence of the Scripture in the matter: but what is their
course now not having the Scripture for the rule of it, a voluntary course of
their Esa^. 8.
own devising to be shunned of all Gods people, who are to cleave to the Law
and Testimony: But we will a little mind his reason, why the Apostacy of
Antichrist is greater then that of Israel; it is this, they were called
Sodomites and Egyptians, these were the worst of Pagans and so of the Gentiles
Reve. 11. 2. 8. It is but Spiritually they are so called: And Israel in their
Apostacy from God is called by the like terms Esaias 1. 10. 57. Esaias. 3.
Neither does it appear that Sodomites and Egyptians were the worst of Heathen,
unless any please to believe his bare saying so* truly this is a poor way of
confuting a matter.

B^^ ^^ further says Isreal's Apostacy did not raze the foundation of the
constitution of their Church: It is well he so holds, others of his way have
not held so; Israel forsook God and his pure worship and followed Hos. 4 17.
8. 4.
Idols, They worshipped the Calves at Dan and Bethel, if their ground were
true, that corruption it makes a nullitie, it is mavelous they should
remain a true Church.

But it is plain he says that Antichrist has changed all ordinances, both in
Church and Ministry, Worship and Government: Esai 24. 5. and so has destroyed
baptism. To which I answer, it is not so plain as it is plain: E. B. is
foolishly confident of his own opinions and conceits, though he have no ground
for them: does the 24. Esaias 5. prove it so plainly? E. B. has a vein to make
any thing prove his matter; he thinks he has to deal with children, with
whom he is so out of charity: he goes on adding one thing to another without
any relation, and so says the matter of the Church under the Gospel must know
the Lord and be all taught of him. If all of E. B. his Church do so know God,
and be so taught of him it is well; if it be so, they have the more wrong done
them: further he brings all the difference betwixt him and the Church of
Rome, and England to a very narrow point, and that is they do not baptize
believers only confessing faith and sins etc. If they did, they would not leave
her; they do baptize persons of years in Nova Spania and other parts of the
Indies; yea in Rome and so also in England they baptize Jews, Turks and Moors,
who confess their faith and their sins: they baptize infants also that is a
less error then the worshipping of the Calves which when E. B. has well
considered, happily he may leave off his separation and be reconciled again.

Further he seems to say something to what I minded in my discourse that some
are so filled with prejudice, that they have no patience to think of the church
estate: remaining under Antichrist exaltation: to this he says they shall ever
be ready to speak or write; I say like enough so, but not to hear it
seems. It is a virtue to be swift to hear and slow to speak: I did in my
discourse James 1. 19.
desire any to set forth the hurt that comes of holding the Ordinance of the
Church and Baptism, to have bin in captivity in Babylon, and there preserved
by the power of God, for a time etc. And now by the same power brought forth to
freedom and purity, God returning to build his Tabernacle broke down and
ruined: But Act. 15.
not destroyed, as sometime of old the Church and vessels of the Lord were in
Babylon and thence returned: to the vessels he answers, but to the Church it
seems he knew not what to answer, and so passes it by with silence,
notwithstanding he hold as before, as in the end of his third reply, the
constitution of that Church was founded in the land of Canaan, and being
removed thence by his ground must become void. To the vessels he most
ignorantly replieth and says, the vessels of the Lords house had no relation
to the sprinkling of infants; his reason is, they were the Lords ordinances,
and is not the Church and Baptism so also? he says they needed no new casting
so long as they remained the same, so the Church and Baptism need no new
raising, they remainning the same: But he conclude^h the sprinkling of infants
was never Gods Ordinance; indeed if he were a Christ, a Moses, Eltas or
prophet from heaven, his bare affirmation might pass and be taken for good,
but it is well we need not believe him unless we will: So he says the
Argument is to no purpose: he might well say so of his simple answer he
pleases himself withal. He propounds a case I shall not trouble my self, to
take away the content he has in it, being assured any one that has reason in
him will see it is but a fancy. Another exception is to a passage in my
discourse, wherein I said it was mavelous they had not patience about raising
Baptism lost, seeing some of them expect Christ personally to appear, in the
world again. I said happily he might be angry at their sudden attempt that
they did not stay his coming, or at least till he had given them Commission
as he did John to prepare his way before him; this he sets down corruptly,
and says I say some hold Christ is to come and reign at Jerusalem. He says
I say I would have had them stay til then for the ordinance: I said only I
marvelled they had not patience to stay: I shall bear his charges and take
notice of his answer; If the want of the visibilitie of the Church makes
Christ a widower* The Church P. B. is a Member of, was unheard of till within
these two hundred years, this he learned of the Papist, where was your Church
before Luther? well two hundred years is some Antiquity, more then two or
three years, such as is the descent of the total dippers in this Kingdom:
he foolishly concludes so Christ a widower till then. But he might know, that
though the Reformed Churches came then out of Bondage and Corruption, to
freedom and purity, yet there might be other Churches in Asia or in Africa,
though there remained none, but so corrupt in Europe, so as Christ should not
need to be a widower for want of such a visible Church as P. B. is of, being
but of two hundred years standing: But the aforsaid inference he makes with a
promise, and that is unless I hold the Church of Rome a true Church; I hold
not the Church of Rome a true Church nor never did: but this I hold, that the
Church estate remained in or under the Roman deffection, the man of sin
sitting in the Temple of God: so as Christ was not widower, though his Church
was polluted and defiled kept under and suppressed, as it fared in like case
with the spouse of Christ the Church, when she went a whoring from him and
polluted Ezekiel. 23. 17. 30 14. 11. 26. Esaias. 13.
her self, and had other Lords to reign over her: At length he turns his
confutation into a quaere, and asks how I dare separate from her; how durst
he separate from the Church he was left a Member of, for which he was dealt
withal by them; he may resolve the case himself: But for satisfaction to
others in this matter, I shall give some account: Christianity and the estate
of the Church I hold remained under the great defection of the man of sin; God
in time called out his people Reve. 18. 4. The Waldenses first the Reformed
Churches in France, Germany, Belgia, then came forth into freedom and purity
in obedience to that call, and served God apart, as sometimes the Christians
did leave the Church of the Jews.

In Babylon is Gods people, yea his people in Covenant, these words Reve. 4.
18. being the words of the Covenant Iere. 31. So as the matter of the Church
remaining, is clearly gathered from thence, none being the people of God in
Covenant so, but only those of his Church, the Church estate and ordinances in
some consideration there remaining, they coming out of her: to wit Babylon,
they must come out of, and separate from the Church so either remaining so
far as concerns Member-ship: So as I might answer we separa^e from her,
because we are so bidden by Almighty God, though in some sense the Church be
there remaining: And if E. B. or any other would please but to mind M. Iunius,
and Duplesis Lord of Mornay, as they do M. Rogers they might learn this, at
least they might see that such an opinion is neither singular nor new: to
further his daring question touching separation, I say separation is total.
For it is in part: E. B. professes total separation from Rome and England
which he accounts on: but he is nothing true to his principle, for all he
casts away the Baptism he received there; for why by like reason does he
not separate from the same Savior and Redeemer Jesus professed by them? why
does he not renounce the Scriptures by them maintained? especially the
Translation of them, this being an outward thing as is Baptism? why holds he
with them the doctrine of the Trinity the two natures of Christ in one person?
why observes he with them the Lords day and retains their Marriages, and
submits to Magistracy and government there? sure the man is partial; he
practices but separation in part, though he profess total, he comes much
short of his own principle; and it is well he does, for surely he ought but to
separate in part from the evil of a person or thing, and so from the evils
there: for so it is said, that ye partake not of her si^s, but of the virtues
or good there; or in any what ever we may and ought, and it is as great an
evil to separate from good that being of God, as it is not to separate from
evil and sin.

But he has another daring quaere, how dare they set up a state before Christ
come? They (the reformed Churches he means) that are, he says, but of two
hundred years standing. To which I say it is likely they expect no such
personal coming of Christ.

And further I say if he please to look into the harmony of their Confessions
they will inform him, and tell him the ground of their practice, not only in
forsaking Babylon and coming out of the Church in deep defection: But also of
their Congregating together and worshipping of God purely according to his
word; And this not by way of new beginning either in regard of matter or form,
but by way o^ reforming themselves, being Christians, or baptized believers and
so matter; and also there Congregated in regard of form, though in deep
defection, and in a very corrupt condition: so as in regard of matter or
form, there was no need of our Lord Christ Moses, or Elias, or a prophet from
heaven personally to appear about the matter, for at the most they being
baptized Christians: It is but a multiplying of congregations, which is sure
lawful and ever was, and E. B. will not be against it. The whole answer to
this daring quaere is but according to the injunction of the Apostle after the
defection. These. 22. 15. Stand fast and keep the instructions yea have been
taught by word or Epistle: the rest o^ his exceptions I have replied unto in
answer to R. B and so shall not trouble my self nor the Reader about them,
but shall refer the whole matter to the censure of the Godly-wise.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 1. L. 11. for the. r. he p. 4. l. 9. for is said. r. I said. l 16. for
where r. wherefore. l. 25. put out apart. p. 5. l. 7. for so before. r. see
before. p. 6. l. 5. add to where might. he might, p. ^ l. 33. for deection r.
defection. p. 11. l. 1. for R. B. r. P. B. p. 12. l. 19. put out. r. no p. 1^.
l. 33. for my. r. the p. 14. l. 33. for neither r. whither. p. 15. l. 4. add
on ^. p. 20. l. 7. for matter. r. water. l. 33. to made add void. p. 21. l.
30. make a stop at the end of notwithstanding. p. 22. l. 6. for our r. out. l.
21. for written. r. write. p. 26. l. 9. for that is. r. that dipping is. p. 28.
l. 28. the end. 29. the beginning for all cases. r. a case. p. 29. l. 22. for
dipping r. dip. p. 30. l. 8. for R. B. were. r. R. B. way. p. 31. l. 9. for
slipping. r. skipping. p. 32. l. 5. for but something. r. but at something. p.
33. l. 6. put out. our blood. l. 11. for some r. son. p. 37. l. 14. for
common. r. come upon. p. 41. l. 19. for nature considered, r. by nature
considered p. ^^, l. 27. for or r. for p. 48. l. 19. for making r. mocking. l.
^8. for (...) r. the same. p. 50 l. 31. leave out children in the p 51. l. 3.
r. for it. l. 29 for and in. r. and o^.

Courteous Reader pass by the escapes in correcting, and amend them with thy
pen if thou please, Take notice that there is some mistakes in stops, and the
quotations in the Margent are not placed even.


