CERTAIN QUERIES, PROPOVNDED To the Churches of Christ; and all that fear God,
and love the appearing of King JESUS.
QVERIE. 1.
WHether there be not sufficient in the Bible, as it is translated into
English, for Believers under the Gospel to prove their Faith, and Order or
Church Fellowship by, without any tradition of men, as Matthew. 20.28. teaching
them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I am with you always,
even to the end of the world; according to Tim. 2, 3.14, 15, 16, 17. But
continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have been assured of;
knowing of whom thou have learned them, And (...) form a child thou have known
the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, through
faith which is in Christ Jesus: All Scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works; Compared with Rev. 22.18, 19.

Q 2. Whether Christ Jesus has not given as plain and perspicuous a rule under
the Gospel, to Believers in all their Administrations to the end of the world,
as Moses did to the Jews under the Law Deuteronomy. 4.2. Isa 8.20. Jer. 6.16. Joh.
5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal life, and
them are they that testify of me: compared with Ephesians. 4 8.11. to the 14.

Quer. 3. Whether any thing may be brought into the worship of God, for matter
or form, that is not expressed in the Gospel, or the Epistle of the Apostles,
seeing the Jews were required so strict obedience under the Law; as it was
given of God by Moses, Deuteronomy 12.32. What thing soever I command you to observe
do it, thou shall not add thereto nor diminish from it: compared with Pro.
30.6. But believers much more under the Gospel, as given by Christ: Heb. 1.1,
to the 4. and 2.1, to the 5. and 3.1, to the 4. and 10.28, 29. He that despised
Moses Law died without mercy, under two or three witnesses: Of how much sorer
punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God, and has counted the blood of the covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an
un-holy thing, and has done despite unto the spirit of Grace?

Quer. 4. Whether actual Believers, confessing sins, and professing faith,
with desire of the Ordnance, be not the true subject of Baptism or Dipping:
And the right form, Dipping or Burying in water, not Sprinkling with water, it
being not according to the rule and institution of Christ and the primitive
Churches practice, Mat. 28 19, 20. Acts 2.37, 38. and 8.12, 13. But when they
believed Philip, preaching to them the Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus
Christ, they were all dipped both men and women, compared with verses 36, and 37.
Romans 6.4. Coll. 2.10. And this is performed in show by Godfathers and
Godmothers, commanding the Priest to dip the child, as is clear in the
Rubric: And whether the Administrator be not to go down into the water, as
Philip with the Eunuch, Acts 3.38. and John with Jesus, Matthew. 3.16.

Quer. 5. Whether repentance and faith, with desire of dipping, be not of
necessity to be required, according to the former Scriptures; and declared in
the Catechism set forth by authority, of every one that is baptized. And
whether there be not the same ground for Common Prayer, Surplice, and the rest,
as for sprinkling of Infants?

Quer. 6. Whether Christ commanded, or the Disciples and Apostles ever
practiced the dipping (much less the sprinkling) of Infants of eight days
old, or the like; or when or by whom it was first invented; which we find to
be one Fidus a Priest, and confirmed by Pope Innocentius about 300 years after
Christ: And whether such as seek to uphold it by Scripture, be not those false
accusers Paul speaks of, 2 Timothy 3.3. In that they pretend Scripture for it,
when both the Church of Rome, Councels and Fathers (as they call them) confess
it to be but a Tradition: And whether the Inventers and upholders declare not
themselves worse then Balam, Numb. 22.18, who being sent for by Balack to curse
the people of God, and so to be raised to great promotion, answered; If Balack
would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the Word of
the Lord my God, to do less or more.

Quer. 7. Whether every one that looks for life, and salvation by Christ, and
profess faith in him, be not bound to partake of that one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.4,
5, and not content themselves with any inventions of men: For as Eliah said 1
Kings 18.21, how long halt ye between two opinions, if God be God follow him,
if Baal be God follow him: So say I, if Dipping actual Believers be Gods
Ordinance, obey and embrace it; If Sprinkling Infants be according to Christ's
institution, prove it by the Scripture, and continue it: For as the Apostle
says, if he, or an Angel, bring any other doctrine then what they have
received, or above what is written, let him be accursed, Gal 189. 1 Cor. 46.

Quer. 8. Whether every particular Church of Christ or Assembly of Saints, in
the order of the Gospel, have not power from him their Head, to receive in,
deal with, or cast out their own Members, by the only Laws, Keys, or
Statutes of him their King and Lawgiver, according to Is. 33.22. The Church of
Jerusalem, Corinth, or the Churches of Galatia, for James 4.12. there is one
Lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy, Acts 2.41 46, 1 Cor. 5 4, 5.

Quer 9. Whether Religion be to be forced or compelled by any paenall Laws and
Statutes? Or if these Scriptures prove not the contrary: Psalm. 18.43. and
110.3. Math. 10.1, to the 16, and 20.1, to the 10, and 28.19. Mark 16.15, 16. 2
Cor. 10.3, 4, 5. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. And whether the Civil Magistrate in forcing
the conscience, fulfils not these Scriptures, in giving their power and
Kingdom to the Beast, Revel. 17, 12 to the 18. And whether as was said by
Christ, Matthew. 23.32, to the 36, Fill ye up the measure of the Fathers, ye
serpents, ye generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell;
wherefore, behold I send unto you Prophets, and wise men, and Scribes, and some
of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them shall ye scourge in the
Synagogues, and persecute them from City to City, that upon you may come all
the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel, unto
the blood of Zacharias son of Barakias, whom ye slew between the Temple and the
Altar: So whether the blood, imprisonments, banishments, deaths, and
persecutions, of what kind soever, that has been spilt of any of the Saints,
that has witnessed for the truth since Christ's death, our Abel, shall not be
required of the Kingdoms and States where they have suffered. According to
Isa. 43.4. and Jer. 25.13, to the 18. and Rev. 18.21, 22, 23, 24, The Angel
took up a stone like a great millstone and cast it into the Sea saying, thus
with violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found
no more at all: And the voice of Harpers and Musicians and Pipers and
Trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee: And no Craftsman of
whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in thee, and the sound of a
millstone shall be heard no more at all in thee, and the light of a candle shall
shine no more at all in thee, and the voice of the Bridegroom and of the Bride
shall be heard no more at all in thee, for thy Merchants were the great men of
the earth, for by thy sorceries were all nations deceived; and in her was found
the blood of Prophets and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth:
compared with Jude 15.

10 Whether Religion is to be fought for with carnal weapons by Believers, in
the first publishing the Gospel, for the planting or after preserving the
Churches of Christ? Or, if these Scriptures prove not clearly the contrary,
Mat. 10.16, Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of Wolves; be ye
therefore wise as Serpents, harmless as Doves, Mat. 16.24, 25, Then said Jesus
unto his Disciples, if any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his cross and follow me; for whosoever will save his life shall lose
it, and whosoever will lose his life for my sake, shall find it: 2 Cor. 10.3,
4, 5, For though we walk in the flesh we do not war after the flesh, for the
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling
down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God; and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ: compared with Ephesians. 6.11, to the 19.
Col 1 24 Revel. 6.10, and 11.12. And they overcame him by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto
the death: Their weapons as I conceive being only Faith, Preaching, Prayers,
Sufferings, and Tears, Mark 16.16. 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors
for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's steed
be ye reconciled unto God; Ier. 9.1, and 13.17. 2 Cor. 12.15. And I will very
gladly spend and be spent for you, though the more abundantly I love you, the
less I am beloved. According to Eccles. 9.17, The Words of Wise men are heard
in quiet, more then the cry of him that rules among Fools.

Quer. 11. Whether National or Parishionall Assemblies, be by divine
Institution Churches of Christ, now under the Gospel, or a humane invention,
and contrary to the Primitive churches practice, as 1 Cor. 1.2. Unto the church
of God which is in Corinth, to them which are sanctified in Christ Jesus,
called to be Saints. Ioh. 15.19. If ye were of the world, the world would love
his own, but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world, therefore the world hates you. 1 Pet. 2, 5, 9, Ye also as lively
stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Verse. 9. But ye are a
chosen generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, that
you show forth the praises of him, who has called you out of darkness into
his marvailous light: And that some would show, how and by whom the National
or Parochial Assemblies, were first begun, contrived, or constituted?

Quer. 12. Whether God makes any covenant under the Gospel concerning life and
salvation, with any Parishionall church and their natural seed, much less
with any National; which is clear he does with all the Saints, and churches of
Christ. Mark. 16.16, He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved Romans
2.6.7 Who will render to every man according to his deeds, to them who by
patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, honor, immortality, and
eternal life; The contrary proved Mat. 3 7, 8 9. Romans 9.7, 8. Gal. 3.6, 7, 8,
9.27, 28, 29. And therefore whether practicing contrary to the Scripture,
pretending Scripture for their doings when there is none, be not as Isaiah
says, seeking deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, whose works are in
the dark, turning things upside down saying; who sees us, or who knows us,
saying of him that made them he had no understanding. Isaiah 29.15, 16.

Quer. 13. Whether the Parishionall Assemblies, and the Ministry of England,
have not their Constitution and calling from the Church of Rome, by Austin the
Monk? As we humbly conceive is to be seen in the Book of Ordination, dedicated
to Archbishop Abbot. And whether such as have their call from them, be not as
truly Antichristian as theirs? Seeing Job the 14.4. he says, Who can bring a
clean thing out of an unclean? not one. Therefore Christ says, Math. 7.15, 16
Beware of false Prephets which come to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening Wolves, ye shall know them by their fruits: Do men gather
Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles: Even so every good Tree brings
forth good fruit; But a corrupt Tree brings forth evil fruit: A good Tree
cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good
fruit. Verses the seventeen and eighteen.

Quer. 14. Whether any that pretend to renounce their call from the Prelates,
may preach (as some do) by virtue of their gifts (as they pretend) without
first conversion to the Faith, and obedience to the Gospel; And so joining to
a church of Christ in order, and by them sent forth, with whom they are
Members: Seeing the Apostle says, Romans 10.15. How shall they preach except
they be sent? And Acts 13.3. When they chose Paul and Barnabas (it is said)
when they had fasted and prayed, they laid their hands on them and sent them
away.

Quer. 15. Whether after the Apostasy JOHN speaks of (Revel 6.14, 15.) Heaven
being rolled up as a Scrole, and the witnesses being slain (Chapter eleven
verse the seventh to the twelfth) the churches of Christ are not to be so
gathered as they were first instituted by Christ, and planted by the Apostles,
as in the first of the Corinthians the third and the 9, to the 15, and Revelat
the eleventh and the first: And there was given me a Reed like unto a Rod, and
the Angel stood saying; arise and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar,
and them that worship therein.

Quer. 16. Whether the Ministry of the Gospel be not those gifts, and those
only of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, which CHRIST
gave at his Ascension (Ephesians. 4.8.11.) Wherefore he says when he ascended up
on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men; And he gave some
Apostles, and some Prophet, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers. And whether as the false church is rejected and the true erected, the
false Ministry be not to be forsaken and the true received, and consequently
false Baptism renounced, and the true assumed? According to Ier. 51.6. to the
10. The Lord has brought forth our righteousness, come and let us declare in
Zion the Work of the Lord our God. And 2 Cor. 6.17. Wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate says the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, and
I will receive you: compared with Revelat. 18.4. Come out of her my people,
partake not of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

Quere 17. Whether Abraham had not a carnal or temporal covenant made to his
carnal seed, the Promise being of carnal or temporal things sealed to them
with a carnal seal? Genesis 17.13. Also a second or new covenant, made with him
and his Spiritual seed concerning spiritual things, even the kingdom of
grace and glory: (Hebrews 8.7. to the 12) whereof the Holy spirit of Promise is
the seal. And thus (as I conceive) things are proportionable; Two covenants
(Gal. 4.24) Two seeds (verse 23) Ishmael of Abraham and Hagar, which typed the
carnal seed; And Isaac of Abraham and Sarah, which typed the Spiritual seed.
These had likewise two Seals; Circumcision (Genesis 17.11) and the Holy spirit of
promise: (2 Corinthians. 1.22. Ephesians 1.13. 1 John 4.13) But now under the
Gospel, the carnal Commandment together with the subject, is done away by
the cross of Christ (2 Coloss. 14.) Blotting out the handwriting of
Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of
the way nayling it to his cross: And infteed thereof we have a spiritual
covenant typed by the carnal: Also the Spiritual seal the Holy spirit of
Promise, signified by the carnal seal likewise; a Spiritual Infant, a new
born Babe in Christ, in whom Christ typed by the male is newly formed,
signified by the carnal Infant: These had also two states and conditions
promised; the natural seed the Land of Canaan (Genesis 17.8) but the
Spiritual seed, the Kingdom of Heaven: Genesis 17.19. Romans 9.7, 8.
Galatians 3.7, 8, 9. Romans 2.7. Mark 10.30.

And whether the Admission of Children to Baptism, and so into
Church Fellowship by another faith, either Parents, or Godfathers and
Godmothers (as they call them) be not contrary to the Scriptures? Which clearly
shows that men are saved by their own faith, and not by the faith of others:
Habakuk 2.4. Romans 1.17. Hebrews 10.38. John 1.12, 13. and 3.3.5. 2 Cor. 5.16,
17.

Quere 18. Whether it may not be said of Infants sprinkling, as at the marriage
of England and Scotland? Where every one is charged to examine themselves, as
they will answer at the day of judgment; If they know any cause why they may
not lawfully be joined together then to speak; Because such as are joined
together otherwise then Gods Word does allow, are not joined together by God,
neither is their Matrimony lawful: So of Infants Baptism or Sprinkling, it
may be said, That those that are baptized (or rather sprinkled) otherwise then
Gods Word does command (Matthew 28.19, 20) were never baptized into CHRIST;
(Galathians chapter the third, verse twenty seven) Neither is their Baptism
lawful (Ephesians chapter four, verses four and five) There is one Body and
one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your Calling, one LORD, one
Faith, one Baptism.

Quer. 19. Whether under the Gospel the Church and Civil state be not two
distinct things as bodies or corporations Independent of themselves, by Gods
divine ordination, as is largely shown by Master Hancoke, in the three Kingly
Estates, Or Light for the Ignorant; That is, the civil state, the true
Ecclesiastacall State, and the false Eclesiastical state, and whether the 3
part or civil state which was noted in speech between Mr Seldom and Master
Grimstone, to be but Iure Humane, having power from God only over our Estates
Liberties and lives, and that which is external, as is noted by Luther, and
therefore are called Fathers of our flesh, Heb. 12.9. have any authothority
from God to settle Religion, which is Iure Divino, And settled already by the
Parliament of Heaven, with a curse denounced against all that add or diminish,
and therefore not to be altered, but by the same authority and Parliament of
Heaven, by which it was enacted, Mat 28.18, 19, 20. Revel. 22.18.19.

Qu. 20. Whether it be not a Humane Invention, and not Gods Ordinance, for one
to go up into a pulpit, and there speak an hour or more, and deliver what he
please, without questioning by any of the Assembly, though never so erroneous,
or judging by them whose due it is, or adding, if truth, or whether these
Scriptures prove not the contrary, Act. 13.16. and 17.11, 1 Cor 14.31, 32. For
ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted:
and the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets, for God is not
author of confusion but of peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints, And
Pet. 14.10. As every man has received the gift even so minister the same one
to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. And as every member
that has any gift, is to administer the same for Gods Glory, and the peoples
good, so the power of determinig is only in the particular Church where it is
done, they being the freeest Independent body under heaven, whose power rests
in the body, not in the Officers, Mat. 18.20. and 28.20. Act. 1.21. to the 26.

Quer. 21. Whether the servants of Christ are not to preach by virtue of a gift
given, Ephesians. 4.8.11 being called thereunto by the Church of which they are
members, as Acts 13.3. And not by arts learned at the Universitie, or Authority
gotten from Bishops or any others; And whether those priests that hinder
believers from exercising those gifts, or those books from printing, which are
plainly proved by Scriptures, be not a part of the Four angels: Revel 7.1. that
hold the four winds that they should not blow upon the earth, which causes
separation, when men may not deliver truth, nor contradict errors, the Word of
God, being as David says, Psalm. 39.3. Like a fire within the breast of his
Disciples, they beinig as the Lawvers that take away the key of knowledge, and
enter not in themselves, but hinder those that are entering. Luke 1152.

Quere. 22. Whether it can be properly said that the Ministers of Englang do
convert any to the faith of Christ and obedience of thegospel by their
preaching, seeing they take it for granted before they sprinkle the Infant,
that it is regenerate and borne Anew, whereas before it was the Child of
wrath, but the godfathers having professed repentance and faith and desired
baptism, or having one of the parents a believer, as they now say, the
Minister says, he receivs the child into the congregation of Christ flock;
Now we never read that the members of Christ's church has conversion preached
unto them, after thy are added to the church, but before, to bring them
thither, As Acts. 2.38, 40.41. and 3.19, and 26.17, 18. Col. 1.12, 18. Ehpe.
2.19. Now therefore ye are no more strangers, and forreiners, but fellow
Citizens, with the Saints and of the household of God, but afterward they are
to be fed, as Paul exhorts the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20.28. they being before
begotten to the faith as he says, 1 Cor. 4.15. For though you have ten
thousand Instructers in Christ, yet have ye not many Fathers, for in Christ
Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel.

Quer. 23. Whether the two Witnesses spoken of in the Revel. 11.3. may not be
understood to be the Scriptures and those gifts or ministry of the Gospel,
Mat. 28. 19, 20. Ephesians. 4.8, 11. And whether their being clothed in Sackcloth,
signify not, their poor mean despised and persecuted condition, according to
Mat. 10.16. Behold I send you forth as Sheep in the midst of Wolves, 1 Cor.
4.9. to the 13. and 2. Tim. 3.12. and John 15 18, 19. which as the Lord
complains of the false Prophets, Ezekiel 34.3. Who eat the flesh, and cloth
themselves with the wool, which now will not serve, but Silk Plush, or
Velvet, they being indeed the great Merchants of the earth according to Revel.
18.11. to the 19.

Quer. 24. Whether the true Ministers of the Gospel, may not or ought not to
work with their hands in some particular calling, to eat their own bread, as
Paul did, Acts 18.3. and gave command to all others, Mat. 10.8. freely ye have
received freely given, 1 Cor. 4.12. and 9.18. Acts. 20.33, 34, 35. I have
coveted no man's Silver or Gold, or apparel, yea you your selves know, that
these hands have ministered to my necessity, and to them that were with me.

I have showed you all things, how that so laboring ye ought to support the
weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said it is more
blessed to give then to receive, and 2. These. 3.8. Neither did we eat any man's
bread for naught, but wrought with labor and travel night and day, that we
might not be chargeable to any of you, not because we have not power, but to
make our selves an ensample unto you, to follow us, for even when we were with
you this we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat,
for we hear that there are some which walk Amongst you disorderly, working
not at all, but are busy bodies, now them that are such, we command and exhort
by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own
bread, but the Lord of old, by the Prophet, reproves those that preach for
hire, and Divine for money, and yet would lean upon the Lord, and say, is not
the Lord among us, Micha. 35. to the 11.

Quere 25. Whether under the Gospel there be any privilege or prerogative by
descent or generation, seeing the Scripture says, Eze. 18.4. That soul that
sins shall die: And Hab. 2.4. The Just shall live by his faith, And Gal.
5.6. and 6.15. Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new
creature, and faith which works by love, and Christ tells the Jews who were
Abraham's seed after the flesh, they were of their father the Devil, John 8.44.
And Paul says, 2 Cor. 15.16. Henceforth know we no man after the flesh, yea
though we have known Jesus Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we him
no more: and Gal. 3.7, 8, 9, 26, 29. If you are of the faith of Abraham, then
are ye blessed with Abraham, for ye are all the Children of God by faith in
Christ Jesus, and If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed and heirs
according to the Promise, according to John. 1.12, 13, and 3.3, 5.

Quere 26. Whether those gifts of the Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, which
Christ gave at his Assension, Ephesians. 4.8, 11. For the begetting to the faith,
and planting in Church fellowship, do not continue after the apostacy, though
commonly said to be ceased, as well as Pastors and Teachers, according to Mat.
28.20. Epes. 4.13. 1 Cor. 3.5. to the 10. or by what gifts they must be
gathered converted or begotten, seeing it is the pastors duty to feed and
instruct those that are begotten as Philemon 10. I beseech thee for my son
Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds, Now it belongs to the Ministry of
Apostles to beget, and not to Pastors and Teachers; as Acts 20.28. where they
are to feed those that are begotten according to Isa. 2.3. and 1 cor 12.20.
Revel. 14 2, 6, 7, 8, 13 15 17 18, 19.

Quere 27. What may be meant of the Great city Babylon, being divided into
three parts, Revel. 16.19. And whether Presbiteriall National Government,
which some would have set up, be not the third part or division thereof, and as
truly Antichristian as the Papal or pontifical: And whether their Government
would not exceed the other in cruelty, had they but the like power as the other
had, over the consciences of men, as far as Jeroboam did his father Solomon's,
1 Kings 12.10, 11, 14. or that some would declare, what Presbyterian Government
is, what power they have wherein their strength Lies, from whom they receive
it, whether from the civil state, or the Eclesiasticall state, Christ or the
civil Magistrate, or composed of both: And whether the the Papal State at
first arose not out of a Presbyteriall.

Que. 28. Whether the people of God are not in an Especial manner to hold and
bear forth the Truth when it is most opposed, or decrees made against it, as
Dan. 6.9, 10. Wherefore King Darius signed the writing: And the Decree, now
when Daniel knew that the writing was Signed he went into his house, and his
windows being open in his chamber, toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his
knees three time a days, and prayed, and Acts 4.18, 19. the Apostles being
commanded silence answered and said, unto them whether it be right in the sight
of God, to hearken unto you more then unto God, judge ye for we cannot but
speak the things which we have seen and heard.

Quere 29. Whether the faithful preaching and patient sufferings of the Saints
and Servants of Christ under the Gospel, who have ever gone under reproaches,
and trials, as Act. 2.41. 1 Cor. 1.24. Col. 1.24 1 Kings 18.17. Where Elias was
counted the troubler of Israel, Paul and Silas was said to turn the world
upside down, Acts 17.6. Paul counted a pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition
among the Jews, and a ringleader of the Nazarites, yet whether they and others
since, walking in Gods own way faithfully, does not more publish the truth to
the glory of God, the Inlightening of the earth, and the overthrough of the
Kingdom of Antichrist, then all the Inventions of men, though never so
seemingly holy: According to Christ's whords to the Pharisees, Luk 16.15. Ye are
they which Justify your selves before men, but God knows your hearts, for
that which is highly esteemed before men, is abomination in the sight of God:
And this made the Fathers; as they call them, say, the blood of the Martyrs was
the seed of the Church.

Quere 30. Whether in all Ages since Christ there has not been a people,
though few in number, and despised, who walked nearer in practice to the order
of the gospel, and institutions of Christ then was the general profession of
the Nation, as 1 Kings 18, 19. and 19.10, 14. and Mat. 7 13, 14. Revel. 7 and
13.3. and 14.1. to the 6.

Quere 31. Whether those Priests or Ministers that are so forward for pulling
down of stone and wooden crosses, pictures, surplices, common prayer book,
and to stand for the liberty of the Subject, yet hold the Ordination received
by the anthority from Rome, with church state, tithes and baptism, or rather
Infants sprinkling, also prohibiting the liberty of conscience, and the very
institutions of Christ, are not guilty of that who, which christ pronouneth to
the Scribes Pharisees, and hipocrites, for that they pay tithe of Mint, Annis,
and Commin, but omitted the wheightier Matter: as the Law Judgment, Mercy and
Faith, these, says he, ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other
undone ye blind Guides which strain at a Gnat and swallow a Cammell: Mat.
23.23, 24. Luke 11.42.

Quere 32. Whether under the Gospel there ought to be requiring or paying
Tithes any more then Altar-Sacrifice Priests and a High Priest, as the Lord
commanded, Exodus 20.24. and chapter 28. or Whether the Aronicall Priesthood
with those Administrations ended not in christ, as is clear in the seventh of
the Hebrews or whether under the Law, the Priest took any more then the tenth
of the increase, and that as Stewards, out of which they relieved the poor,
the fatherless, the strangers and the Widows, as in, Deuteronomy. 14.29. And how far
they that would have tithes now, comes short of them in deeds of mercy and
performing duty.

Quere 33. Whether marriage be not a civil Ordinance belonging to all men,
Heb. 13.4. And ought to be performed by the civil Majestrate, and therefore by
all the Disciples of Christ, to be brought from that Antichristian practice,
where they have made it part of their Merchandise to uphold their Kingdom, to
its proper place of the civil Majestrate, it being Gods Ordinance among all,
as Genesis 2.18. to the 24. Ruth. 41. to the 13.

Qu. 34. Whether it be not as truly Antichristian, and destructive to the rule
of the Gospel, and the Institutions of Christ, to have two Baptismes, the one
dipping of actual believers, the other Sprinkling of Infants, As it would be
destructive to the Law of the Land, And to the common wealth, to have two
Parliaments, or two powers governing at once; And whether the power of Christ
rests not in the body, not in the officers, as the power of the civil State,
according to Mat. 18.18, 19, 20. Acts 1.21. to the 26. 1 Cor. 5.4.5.

Quere 35. Whether the Ministers of Christ after the Apostasy are not to
Preach by the same power and Authority and in the same manner, as being sent
out by the Church, of which they are members, as Paul and Baruabas, Act.
13.2.3. And whether every believer, be not to stand for the Prerogative of
Christ, and the Liberty of the Church, as well as members of a Common Wealth,
are to stand for the Prerogative of the King, Privileges of Parliament, and
Liberty of the Subject, according to Gal. 5.1. stand fast therefore in the
Liberty wherein Christ has made us free, And be not entangled again with the
yoke of bondage.

Quere 36. Whether the Advice Lately given by the 21 Ministers, to persuade
people from entering into Church Fellowship, and communion for the present, were
not contrary to the Scripture, and the practice of the Saints, as Psalm. 18.43,
44. As Soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people
shall be willing in the day of thy power, and Cant. 14. Draw me, we will run
after thee.

Quere 37. Whether the Civil Magistrate, under the Gospel, has any charge
from God over the Souls of the Subjects, or whether their authority be not
only in things civil; and therefore are called fathers of their flesh, Heb.
12.9. Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. Furthermore we have had Fathers of our flesh
which corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall we not much rather be in
subjection unto the Father of Spirits and live. Their souls being only under
Subjection, to God in Christ, as Mat. 28.18, Where Christ says, all power in
heaven and earth is given unto me; now where it is alleged, that under the
Law, the Kings did reform and set up the worship of God? To this I Answer,
what they did do, they did as Types of Christ, or commanded by the Prophets,
But under the Gospel it is said of Zion, the church of Christ, that the Kings
of the earth, do bring their glory and honor unto it: Revel. 21. verse 24. And
therefore as is acknowleded by Luther and others, that the Authority of the
Magestrate is only over the body, estate, and life, and that which is
external, but over the Soul, God will have none to bear rule but himself,
the duty of the Majestrate being to support them, as their Subjects in well
doing.

Quere 38. Whether in a Reformation of Religion, things are not to be reduced
to the Primitive Institutions: and not to other Churches Reformations, as in
Ezra 5.11. Nehemiah 8.1. to the eighth verse, And Galatians 1.8, 9. and
Revelation 11.1. Where the Angel commands to measure the Temple of God, and the
Altar, and them that Worship therein; And the first of the Corinthians, chap.
11. verse 23. the Apostle delivers that to the Church, which he had recived of
the Lord.

Quere 39. Whether it has not been the practice of the false Prophets under
the Law, and in the time of the Gospel, for their own ends to side with the
times, and to be more in number then the true Prophets or Ministers of the
Gospel: As in Eliahs time, 1 Kings 18.22. Where Eliah a Prophet of God alone,
in appeareance, but Baals Prophets four hundred and fifty, likewise in King
Henry the eights daves, Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, what
turning, siding and timeserving: As also when the Bishops was in their power,
what cringing and stooping, hiding and running their countries, whereas the
true ministers of the Gospel were ever the same, though never so few in number,
yet not variable, nor changing with times or State Government, although they
went through never so great persecutions, which was a part of their portion, as
Mark 10.3. Phil. 1.29. Where the Apostle exhorts the Philippians in no thing to
be terrified by their adversaries: which is to them an evident token of
perdition, but to you of Salvation: and that of God: For unto you it is given
in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for
his sake: And James 4.4. The friendship of the World is enmity with God,
whosoever therefore will be a friend of the World, is the Enemy of God, and
John 14.19. If ye were of the World, the would world love his own, but because
ye are not of the world, I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the
World hateh you.

Quere 40. Whether it be not a sure mark to know the Ministers of Antichrist
by their Pride, Idleness, contempt of the poor Brethren, persecution, and
covetousness, contracting for hire, changing of places for greater wages, As
what will you give me, and i will be your Minister, Judas like, Matthew 26. What
will you give me and i will be your Minister to deliver CHRIST into their hands:
And they covenanted for thirty pieces of silver; whereas the servants of CHRIST
is to strive to make the Gospel free, Matthew 10.8. Freely ye have received;
freely give: and 1 Cor. 4 12. and 9.18. and 2.12, 14, 15. Where the Apostle
says: He will not be burdensome unto them: For says he I seek not yours, but
you, for the children ought not to lay up for the parents; but the parents for
the Children: And it is to be noted, that he which came to CHRIST, telling him
that he would follow whithersoever he went (was a Scribe) but he tells him:
The Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of
man has not whereon to rest his head, Mat. 8.19, 20. Luke 9 57,58.

Quere 41. Whether the Ministers, or rather the Servants: as 2 Cor 4.5. of the
churches of CHRIST under the Gospel, be not to be at the disposing of the
church whose servants they are, as is clear: Acts 6.3. and 13.2. and 14.27.
Colo. 4.17. And therefore not to be changing at their own pleasure, for a
better Benefice richer flock, or greater hire: As too many do, they disposing
of the church, not the church of them, who therein as Paul did: serve not the
Lord CHRIST, but their own belly: And by fair words seek to deceive the
hearts of the simple: Rom 16.18. professing they know God, but in works they
deny him, being abominable and disobedient; and to every good work reprobate,
or void of judgment, but as Paul says; 1 Timothy 6.9.10. They that will be rich
fall into Temptation, and snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts,
which drown them in destruction and perdition, for the love of money is the
root of all Eyill, which while some coveted after they have erred from the
faith. And pierced themselves, through with many sorrewes, this was Judas his
condition: Mark chapter 14. verse 10.11. Also Demas, 2 Timothy chap. 4. verse 10.
Like them that received the seed among thorns Mat. 13.22. Who hearing the
word, the care of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches choke the Word,
and he becomes unfruitful.

Q. 42. Whether one of the chiefest duties the Lord requires of that honorable
high court of parliament be not, or had not been to relieve those that have
been oppressed by the unjust courts and Judges. And whereas their Honors may
be employed in greater affairs, there might not be some godly men appointed
for that business to relieve those plundered Subjects, as well as a Committee
for plundered Ministers, whilst there is releif to be had from their
oppressors; And that because the Lord commands that as Justice is to be
Executed impartially: Leviticus chapter 10. verse 15. Deuteronomie chap. 1.
verse. 17. and chapter 16. verse 19.2. Chronicles chapter 19. verse 7. Upon
which doing, they might expect Gods special presence, as Isaiah. chap. 58.
verse 4. to the 9th. So also it is to be done speedily, as 1 Kings chapter 20.
verse 42. and chapter 22. verse 28. Where the Prophet said to Ahab: Thus says
the Lord, because thou have let go out of thy hands, A man which I had
appointed to utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life, and
thy people for his people: and Ecclesiastes chapter 8. verse 11 Because
sentence against an Evil work is not executed Speedily, therefore the hearts
of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil; And Jeremiah chapter 48.
verse 10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently, And
cursed be he that keeps back his sword from blood, therefore Iethroes advice
to Moses was Ex. 18.21. to provide out of all the people Able men such as fear
God, men of truth hating covetonsnesse: And place them to be Rulers over the
people, and whether the greatest offenses are not to be punished only by
death. So far as concerns the Civil Majestrate.

Q. 43. Whether the best Employment for the Sinod to have bin employed in, were
not truly to translate the Bible into English by reason that some of it as it
is Translated into English, is quite put out, as Acts chapter 1. verse 26. And
they gave forth their lots, and the lot fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered
by a common consent with the Eleven Apostles, where common consent is left out,
and Acts. 14.23. Where the word Election is quite left out; untranslated, Mat
28.19. where if with Paul we desired to speak in a known tongue we, might
have Baptizing, Dipping.

Quere 44. Whether notwithstanding the prohibition, which men through Ignorance
or malice obtain, as has ever been the practice of fale prophets and
Ministry of Antichrist, to shelter themselves, And their practices under the
Civil Magistrate, the people of God are not to witness to whatever truth the
Lord betrusts them withal, as Amos chapter 7. verse 10. to the 17. Daniel
chapter 6. verses 10.11. Acts chapter 4. verses 18.19.20. So CHRIST himself
says: John. 18.37. To this end was I borne and for this cause came I into the
world, that I should bear witness unto the truth: every one that is of the
truth, hears my voice. and 1 Corinthinthians chapter 9. verses 16. and 17.
Where necessity was laid upon Paul, saying, Woe unto me If I preach not the
Gospel, else he might have been reproved as the evil Stewart, Matthew chapter
25. verse 24. to the 30. verse. So likewise shall every one that improves not
the Talent which God betrusts them withal, especially at this time, we having
taken a Protestation against Popery, and Popish innovasion, to the extent of
our Estates, Liberty and Lives, and to stand for a Reformation, accordng to
the Word of God, rooting up Episcopacie, Root, and branch, and therefore we
must perform our vows made to God, that the Land mourn not because of
oaths, nor commit that sin of devouring holy things, and after vows to make
Inquiry, Pro. 20.25.

Q. 45. Whether persecution by Imprisoning, Silencing, Fining, Banishing, or
taking away by death, for conscience cause, were not first invented by the
heathen or the Man of Sin, as to set up, so to uphold his bloody Kingdom; Frst
condemning the servants of CHRIST, for heretics; And then leaving them to the
Civil Majestrate to be tormented and executed, making them their executioners;
and as the Papists in former times, so the Prelates Lately, And now the
Presbyters, would be, which I conceive to be contrary to these Scriptures, as
Matthew the 7. chapter and the 12. verse: Where CHRIST says; Whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law
and the Prophets, and Romans the 13. chapter, and the third and fourth verses,
Rulers are not a terror to good works but to the evil, will thou then not be
afraid of the power, do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the
same; for he is the Minister of God for thy good, but if thou do that which is
evil be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain, for he is the Minister
of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil, as is largely
laid down in the 1. of Timmothie the 1. chapter and the 8. verse, to the 12th.
verse, and the second of Timothy chapter the second verse 24. and 25.

Quere 46. Whether those Ministers which have recived, their Ordination and
call from Antichrist, shall have any hand at all, or not the least in the
publishing that Glorious and Everlasting Gospel, Revelation chapter 14. verse
6. For the overthrowing the Kingdom of Antichrist, and the setting up the
Kingdom of CHRIST, according to Jeremiah chapter 49. verse 20. and chapter 50.
verse 45. and chapter 51. verse 24.25, and 26. compared with Matthew chapter 5.
verse 19. Whosoever shall break one of these Commandments, and teach men so,
he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of God, and Acts chapter 6. verse
7. When the Word of God increased, and the number of the Disciples multiplied
in Jerusalem greatly, then a great company of Priests were obedient to the
faith, and Acts chapter 8. verse 12.13. When Samaria had received the faith,
and were Baptized, both men and women, then Simon himself that had used
Sorcerie, and bewitched the people formerly, then he believed and was Baptized,
but as in CHRIST'S time, the Pharisees cried out, John the 7th. chapter and the
48. and 49 verses; have any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him,
but this people, which know not the Law, are cursed; so now they usually cry
out, do any of the Learned walk in this way of the separation, To which I
Answer, for my own part, I am so far frow wondering at it, that no more of
them embrace it, that considering the Apostles words the 1. of the Corinthians
chapter 1. verse 26. to the 30. that I admire to see so many: Yea any at all,
cosidering the great measure of self denial, that must be wrought in them
beyond others, when they like the Converts, Acts chapter 19. verse 19. that
used curious Arts shall burn their books, And with Apollo, be instructed by
Aquila or Priscilla, Acts 18. verse 24, 25, 26. Two poor Disciples, being by
trade Tentmakers with whom Paul, wrought, he being of the same craft, verse
1.2, 3, And with Paul (Philippians chapter 3. verse the 7, and the 8) count all
things but loss and dung, that he might gain the knowledge of Christ; being
willing to receive Instruction, and Baptism, though from Ananias a poor
Disciple. (Acts 9.17, 18.) And so as he advises (1 Corinthians. 3.18.) become a
fool, that he may be made wise.

Quere 47. Whether the shutting up of houses for infection, or the Plague, as
they call it, be not a great heedlesse burden and oppression to this Kingdom,
and a mere invention, to the great grief of the particular persons, and abuse
of diverse scriptures; contrary to the rule of Equity, and Christ's command, who
says: Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do you unto them.
And at the last day, when Christ shall say, depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels! One chief reason was,
I was sick and in prison, and ye visited me not: Will it be a good plea for
them think you to say, thou wast sick of the plague or sickness? Surely no.
Christ excepts no disease, but says, the hairs of their head are numbered: And
a Sparrow falls not to the ground without the providence of God, Matthew. 10.29,
30, 31. Again, whereas many ignorantly would draw it from the shutting up of
the Leprosy, you may easily perceive how grossly they abuse the Scriptures:
First, they were never shut up, as I humbly conceive, for fear of infection,
but to keep the Congregation clear; which rather typed the keeping out those
that were scandalous of life, and Excommunication to be past upon great
offenders: As (in the first of the Corinthians, the fifth chapter, the 4, and
5, verses) the Incestuous person was to be cast out, but from the Leprous the
Priest was not to keep, but Aron or his sons was to have recourse to them,
and to look upon it upon all occasions; As is clear in the 13 Chapter of
Leviticus throughout. But the Priests of these times, though they retain their
Tithes, yet run from the Plague, as some of them have done from the Cavatiers,
or after a rich Benefice, letting who will take the flock: According as John
says (chapter 10. verses 10.12, 13) He that is an hireling and not the
Shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, sees the Wolf coming, and leaves
the sheep and flees, and the Wolf catches them, and scatters the sheep,
the hireling flees because he is an hireling, and cares not for the sheep;
but the good shepherd gives his life for the Sheep. And as Christ the head,
and true Shepherd, (Isaiah 40.11. Ezekiel. 34.23. to the end of the chapter.) So
his faithful Ministers and servants, as Paul expresses (Acts 21.13.) what mean
ye to weep and break my heart, for I am ready not to be bound only, but also
to die at Jerusalem, for the Name of the Lord JESUS.

A definition of a Church of Christ in the Order of the Gospel; consisting of
a company of Saints, or holy people, called out of the world by the preaching
of the Gospel, by a free and voluntary consent; entering into covenant to
discharge duties to God, and one to another, putting on Christ by Baptism or
Dipping.
The perticulars thereof proved.
A Company of Saints or holy people (1 Corinthians. 1.2. 1 Peter 2.5.9) called out
of the world (John 15.19) by the preaching of the Gospel, (Matthew. 28.19, 20.
Mark 16.15, 16. Acts 2.41. Revel. 14 6.) by a free and voluntary consent (Psalm.
18.43, 44. and 110.3. Acts 13.48.) entering into covenant, (Psalm 50.5.
Zephaniah 2. 1. Acts 3.25. Mal. 2.1. Heb. 8.9.) to discharge duties to God, and
one to another, (John 4.24. Phill. 3.3. 1 Peter 2.5. 1 Corinthians. 12.12. to the
28) putting on Christ by Baptism or Dipping: (Mark 16.16) Acts 2.38 41. Gal.
3.27) For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ,
and (Ephesians. 4.4, 5) this I conceive to be Christ's spiritual house under the
New Testament, whereof he is Lord, (Hab. 3.6) and head, (Ephesians. 1.22, 23) and
King, (Isaiah 33.22, and Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20) and Prophet: (Deuteron. 18.15
Matthew. 17.8. Acts 3.22 23) He being the Priest and Sacrifice, by which all that
believe are for ever perfected. Heb. 10.14. For it is not the voice of the
Church, as some fondly dream, but Christ's voice in the Church that we are to
hear: He that hears you hears me, and he that hears me, hears him that
sent me. Luke 10.16.

These wherever gathered together under heaven, Jews or Gentiles, have power
from Christ their head, (Coloss. 1.18) given to receive in, deal with, or cast
out of the Church, by the Laws and Statutes of King JESUS, their King and
Lawgiver. Isaiah 9.6, and 33.22. James 4.12. Acts 2.41. Compared with Matthew.
18.15, to the 20. 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5, and 2.2, 3, to the 9.

If any knowledge and light appear, give all the glory to God, through Jesus
Christ.

As the Apostle says in another case, I am in a strait between both; having
many reasons not to set my name: As my own unmorthinesse and dis-respect, and
being liable to sufferings. Yet if I do not, I make my self a Libeller by the
Law; therefore to discharge my duty to God and man --

By EDWARD BARBER, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of London;
Who (as I have formerly, and ever shall stand for King and Parliament, to the
extent of Estate, Liberty, and Life) does now prostrate the same for King
JESUS, the privilege of the Gospel, and Liberty of his Churches. And as I
have formerly lain in the University of Newgate eleven months, in Kings Bench
and Newprison and sued in the High Commission Court, five years; and in the
Echequer, and Common Pleas, and Kings Bench, being stung by the Locusts that
came out of the smoke, that arose out of the bottomless Pit: Revel. 9.2, 3. So
I desire to go on not fainting, knowing that in due time we shall reap.



FINIS.
TO All them that love the publishing of the Everlasting Gospel of King JESUS;
I having given in many of these queries, to diverse of the Synod, yet could
never have any Answer from them; And having taken the Protestation, in which we
are to stand for a through Reformation, according to the Word of God:
AS ALSO,

THe cause of propounding these Queries is, that notwithstanding, being ready
to submit to His Majesty, and State, as Masters of our flesh, so far as
concerns our Estates, Liberty and lives; And walking conscionable in the way
and worship of God; according to Christ's institution and the primitive
practice, To whose Word, as our only Law giver, we ought to have recourse; he
being faithful in all his house, and therefore worthy of more Glory then
Moses: Heb. 3.2, 3. yet have we been, and still are, both in Print and Pulpits,
reproached with the name of Anabaptists, and said to deny civil government; as
by Dr. Featley, Bakewel the Baker, M. Edwards, etc. which how false it is, let
all that know any of us judge: yea the Prelates and High Commission before whom
we witnessed the truth, when some that now do rail against us hid their heads,
and fled their Countries: But yet, so long as we practice according to the
Great Charter of King Jesus, though we walk in the way called Heresy, as Paul
did, Acts 24.14, yet so worship we the God of our Fathers; being ready as the
Apostle Peter advises, 1 Pet. 3.15. Always to give an Answer to every man
that asks, with meekness and fear. As also, to receive any information
produced from the Word of God: And to that end, if we might enjoy that
privilege that was under the Law among the Iewss, Acts 13.19, and ought to be
in all the Churches of Christ, 1 Cor. 14.29.31. and 1 Pet. 4.10, which order
ought to be continued for ever, Matthew. 28.20. 1 Timothy 5.20. which is to come
openly to declare the truth, or convince error, we should be glad: And so that
aspersion of running into holes and Chambers, and preaching in Tubs, as they
say, would be taken away: Which privacie we have been forced unto, as the
Disciples of Christ did for fear of the Jews. John 20.19. But as Paul says,
we are not to seek our own, but every one, another good: 1 Cor. 10.24. and
2.12.14. And as Christ requires, deny our selves: And not like that evil
servant, hide our Talent in a Napkin. Matthew. 25.24, 25, 26. Neither should the
contempt of our persons discourage us, seeing there was a poor wise man,
Eccles. 9.14, 15. delivered the City by his wisdom, it being besieged by a
great King, and great Bulworkes built against it, yet no man considered that
same poor man. Also Jer. 49.19, 20. and 50.45. God will work that great
deliverance by weak means. Also, Jer. 29.14. For thus says the Lord, hear ye
the counsel of the Lord, that he has taken against Babylon, and his purposes
that he has purposed against the Land of the Caldeans; surely the least of the
flock shall draw them out, surely he will make their habitation desolate with
them, therefore the means or instrument by which God works, is not to be
condemned, but the wisdom and power of God magnified: As Judges the 7. So 1
Cor. 1.18. to the 29. Where the Apostle declares the preaching of the Cross,
is to them that perish foolishness, but unto us which are saved, it is the
power of God; For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and
will bring to nothing the under standing of the Prudent: Where is the wise?
where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this world? Has not God made
foolish the wisdom of this world? for after that in the wisdom of God, the
world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching, to save them that believe. And 2 Cor. 8.12. it is accepted according
to that a man has, and not according to that he has not; for it is very
probable, that this unnatural War will never cease, nor Prerogative of the
King, privilege of the Parliament, and Liberty of the Subject be obtained,
till sighting for the Gospel with carnal weapons be laid down; and the
conscience left free for Christ, the King, Lord, and Lawgiver, to rule by his
own Laws and Statutes, prescribed in his Word. Isa. 33.22. James 4.12. There
is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy. Wherefore although we are
to submit to the Magistrates as the Fathers of our flesh, yet unto God as the
Father of our spirits ( Heb. 12.9. and Christ bids ( Matthew. 13.50. Let both
grow together unto the Harvest; though not in the Church, yet in the world
Showing a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree
bring forth good fruit, for by their fruit ye shall know them. And consider who
must go up and persuade Ahab, that he might go up and fall at Ramoth Gilead, 1
Kings 22.20, 21, 22. but a Spirit that would go forth, and be a lying spirit in
the mouth of all his Prophets; and the Lord said, thou shall persuade him, and
prevail also, go forth and do it. Also Rev. 16.13, 14 and I saw three unclean
spirits like frogs, came out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth
of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, which are the spirits
of Devils, working miracles, and go forth unto the Kings of the Earth, and of
the whole world, to gather them to the Battle of that great day of God Almighty.

By EDWARD BARBER, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor, of London.


