A DECLARATION AND Vindication of the carriage of Edward Barber, at the parish
meeting house of Bene^finck London Friday the 14. of July 1648. after the
morning exercise of Mr Callamy was ended, wherein the pride of the Ministers,
and Babylonish or confused carriage of the hearers is laid down. As also the
false aspersions cast upon him, he doing nothing but what was according to the
primitive institution, and is and ought to be in the best reformed Churches
according to the Protestation and Covenant.

Hosea. 8. 12. I have written unto them, the great things of my law, but they
were counted as a strange thing.

Hosea 9. 7. The days of visitation are come, the days of recompense are
come, Israel shall know it; the Prophet is a fool, the spiritaall man is mad.

Isa. 9. 13. For the people turns not unto him that smites them, neither do
they seek the Lord of Hoasts. etc.

Jonah 2. 8. They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercies.

Isa. 44 25. I am the Lord that frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes
diviners mad, that turns wise men backward, and makes their knowledge
foolishness:

Zech. 13. 4. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Prophets shall
be ashamed every one of his vision, when he has prophesied: neither shall they
wear a rough garment to deceive, etc.

Mich. 3. 5. with 11. Thus says the Lord concerning the prophets that make my
people err, that bite with their teeth and cry peace: and he that puteth not
into their mouths, they even prepare war against them.

Ioh. 3. 19. 20. 21. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men loved darkness rather then light: because their deeds were
evil. For every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the
light least his deeds should be discovered; But he that does truth, comes to
the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God.
Ioh. 16. 2. 3. They shall put you out of their Sinagogues: yea, the time
comes, that whosoever kills you will think he does God service. And these
things will they d^ unto you because they have not known the Father, nor me.

By E. B. freeman of England, and Citizen and Marchant-Taylor of London.

BEing earnestly desired by diverse of the Inhabitants of the parish to come to
hear Mr. Callamy at the Morning lecture, they promising that I should have
^i^erty to add to what he should deliver, or contradict if erroni^us, he being
to be there upon the 14 of July. At which time, according to their desire and
my duty I came, and having heard him all his Sermon without interruption,
wherein ^is chief discourse was concerning Moses rodd, which being done, I
desired him and the r^st of the audience, to permit me to add some few words to
what he had delivered, conceiving he had not so much as touched upon the very
quintecence of the text, which did most nearly concern the people, to wit, The
Lord Jesus the great Ensign of the Gentiles; Isa. 11. 10. upon which he desired
me to forbear till he had concluded, and I might speak, upon which I did
forbear till he had done and pronounced his blessing: and then desired that as
he had prayed that the Gospel might be sent forth in the right order, that I
mieht have liberty to speak according to St. Paul's exortation, 1 Cor. 14. 29.
30. Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge. If any thing
be revealed to another that siteth by, let the first hold gi^ peace. For ye may
all prophecy one by one, that all may learn and all may be comforted. etc.
Which freedom was practiced in the Sinagogues as Acts 13. 15. where After the
reading the Law and the Prophets, the R^lers of the Si^agogues were so far from
denying this privilege that they sent unto Paul and Barnabas saying, ye men
and brethren if ye have any word of exortation for the people say on. not
coun^ing their speaking, to be making a disturbance as Mr. Callamy did, who
contrary to his promise, when according to his desire I had forborne till he had
done, instead the^ of giving me leave said he wond^ed that any that pr^fect the
Gospel would come to make a disturbance in the Church of God, dealing with me
as formerly he had done with Mr. K^ffin, Mr. Knoles and Mr. Cox concerning the
public dispute that should have been at Aldmanbury meeting house, or at least
discovering his malice or ignorance of the Gospel practice, as Acts 15. 13.
where it is written, after that Paul and Barnabas had spoken and held their
peace James answered saying, etc. compared with P^t. 1. 4. 10. Upon which his
denial of this Gospel privilege, I told him and the rest of the audience,
that as I had bin a long dweller in the parish, where I had bin a diligent
observer of the traditions of their fathers, those popish practices of paying
tiths, and infants sprinkling etc, bu^ being now better enlightened, and also
by authority of Parl. enjoined in that place with the rest of the parish to
take the protestation a thing enjoined up on the whole Kingdom, wherein I was
enjoined to protest against all popery, and popish innovation: and this tying
of the spirit of God only is the mouths of the Black co^^es, b^ing one of the
grearest innovations that ever was invented, as to raise, so to uphold the
Kingdom of Antichrist: and so long as it is upheld, it shall never be raced,
nor the libe^ty of the Gospel obtained, which we are all enjoined to en^e^v^^^
the overthrow thereof; and therefore desired the audience to consider these
Scriptures as I should nominate, as Acts 2 4. And they were all filled with the
Holyghoast and began to speak with other tongues as the Spirit gave them
utteranes. comp. Numb. 11. 26. with 29. Joel 2. 28. Upon which the Assembly was
filled with confusion, like the whole City of Ephesus, Acts 19. 29. and 22. 22.
Where Pau^ declaring the liberty of the Gospel, which was by him to be preached
to the Gentl^s, The Jews giving him audience unto that word, and they lift up
their voices and said, away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not
fit that he should live, crying out, casting off their clothes, and throwing
dust in the Air. etc.

So these being in this confusion, some crying one thing some another, some
crying lay hold on him, some throw him down, others kill him, others pull him
limb from limb, some kiking him, others pulling off his coat, another his
hat, some saying he is mad, others he is drunk, women scraching me by the
face, where I might have been both robbed and murdered, had there not been a
Constab^e there, who Centurian like rescued me, there being Mr, Calamy Mr.
Clanford, Mr. Clarke and some eight more of them, and not one endeavoring in
the least to stop the rou^; but 3 or 4^0 following me in this tumultuous manner
to my own house much abusing me, thronging about the door as they of Sodom did
to Lots, Genesis 19. 9. Mr. Callamy and the rest never showing so much aid or
humanity as Gamaliel Acts 5. 34. 35. or the Captain of the band that rescued
Paul from the rude multitude, Acts 21. 30 31 etc. they showing more wisdom and
morality then any of these did though at lest ^o in number; but I confess your
condition being like Demetrius and the rest that made silver shrines for Diana,
at this time ingreat danger, I cannon blame ye to look about you; for if the
liberty of the Gospel be obtained, your Kingdom will fall like Dagon before
the Arc to the ground.

Whereupon, you not giving the least liberty of the Gospel of Christ, I could
not but protest against that Antichristian practice, and told them that as they
and their tribe had bin the stirers up of the people of the Kingdom to these
unnatural and bloody wars, yet pretend, they are the Ministers of Christ, and
all the members of their Church Christians, though they thus kill one another,
their practice being like Ahabs Prophets, 1 King. 22. 22. And those unclean
Spirits like Fr^ggs. as Revelation. 16. 13, being confident, that these wars
will never be ended, nor a well grounded Peace settled, till they, as well as
their Fathers be discovered, and the Kingdom of Antichrist, Root and Branch
destroyed: As Mat. 15. 13. they being Plants nev^r planted by Christ's (...)

Now I beseech all rational men to consider, whether Paul made the ^proar,
Act. 19 or Demetrius and his silver shrine-makers, and the rude multitude, Act.
20. 1. and 21. 38. and so for the Assembly. And inasmuch as Mr. Calamy, Mr.
Cranford, Mr. Cawton, Mr. Case, Dr. Burges Mr. Love* etc. have often since the
Parliament, before them, and others, much envied and Railed against Sectaries,
Schismatics, Anabaptists, and never by the wordshewing who they are, much
less confuting them, but in gross as their Fathers against the Calnenists,
Lutherens, Zwinliant, Protestants, and Presbyterians, etc. Although they I
believe practiced according to their light in those dark times; and we
according to the institutions of Christ* and premitive practice, but they pass
all over in gross, never opening the terms, much less confuting of it by
the word, looking upon it as a great sin, that any should question what they
deliver, though never so false, but take all they deliver as an oracle, by
which their doings, they sow the very seed of division, hatred, persecution,
and blood shed, as much as in them lies contrary to the Doctrine and practice
of all the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ.

But how* God has answered their plottings and underminings, with Judgments I
would the State and all men would take notice of, as when you have gotten
Ordinances Saul like, Acts 9. 1. for the punishing by imprisoning of people for
Conscience, thereby intrenching upon the prerogative royal of King Jesus, then
immediately God has sent some eminent trouble to the State and Kingdom, as
has been noted by diverse, etc.

And where as some old men and women in the Assembly, out of their ignorant
zeal, would have had me gone home in private to Mr. Calamy to be satisfied, let
them know that I am satisfied already, that they are all of them the Ministers
of Antichrist, and seek as to uphold his Kingdom, so to keep the people still
in ignorance, and as it was said of Israel, so it may be said of them, Isai. 9.
14 15, 16. Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel, head and tail, branch
and rush in one day. The ancient and honorable, he is the head: and the
prophet that teaches li^^, he ^^ the tail, For the leaders of this people
cause them to ^rr^, and they that are led of them are destroyed. And therefore
as the Apostle exhorts, Tim. 1. 5. 20. that those that sin are to be rebuked
before all, that others also may fear.

Now if this be not a sin to cause men to swear with their hands lift up to
the most high God, protesting and covenanting against all Popery, and Popish
Innovasions, and without respect of persons to endeavor the extirpation of
Popery and Prelacy, that is Church Government, by Archbishops, Bishops, their
Chancellers and Commissaries, Deanes and Chapters, Arch decons, and all other
Ecclesiastical Officers depending upon that hirarchy, etc. now if not to
perform this by such as have sworn, it be not perjury I know not what is, and
Eceles. 5. 4 5. Solomon says, when thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to
pay it, for he has no pleasure in foo^es, pay that which thou have vowed:
Better is it that thou should not vow, then that thou should vow and not
pay.

Now whether Mr. Calamy, with the rest of them that received their Ordination
from the Bishops, who ha^ [their] Ordination from Rome, and formerly prayed for
them as their right, reverend, and reverend Fathers, wearing their Surplus,
having Altars at their Comm^nds, and cringing to them, etc. be not depending on
that hitarchy* I leave to every understanding experienced protestor and
Covenanter to judge, seeing it is said, Iobe 14. 4 who can bring a clean thing
out of an unclean, not one, and Dr. Burges before the Committee confessed that
the Bishops were as truly Antichristian, as Gods word was Gods word. Although
400l. per Annum of the same meaner, and the Dean of Paul's his house in his
account be not, but could swallow greater things then these.

I shall now declare what I would have then said, had they given me liberty,
which he so much spoke of from Exodus 17. 5. 11. And 1. we are to consider what
Moses that Messenger of the Lord, that ruler and deliverer of the Isralites,
that tipe of Christ was, to wit, a poor mechanic Sheapheard, yet learned in
all the wisdom of the Egiptions, and refusing to be called the Son of
Pharoahs Daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God,
then to enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season, etc. Paul-like Phil. 3. 7. 8.
counting those things that were gain to him loss for Christ.

2. He being a Sheapheard, endeavored to get his own bread, laboring with his
own hands, and not only with the brain* as some now pretends, getting into rich
men and women's houses, that so their feet being under their Tables, thereby to
uphold themselves in their Idleness, contrary to the Apostles Doctrine and
practice, Acts 20. 34. These. 2. 3. 6. 7. 8. 3. This Rod of Moses tipisied, or
held forth that B^nner or Ensign of Gods love, Jesus the Anointed, as Isa. 32.
1. Behold a King shall reign in righteousness, with Acts 2. 36. Therefore let
all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus whom
ye have crucified both Lord and Christ, and not only King, but Priest and
Prophet, and where Christ is not thus received in his offices but divided, he
becomes no Christ to the devider. Now examine and see which of the ministers of
these times can say with Paul, Acts 20. 26. 27. I take you to record this day
that I am clear from the [blood] of all men; for I have not shuned to declare
unto you all the council of God.

4 This Ensign as it was to be lifted up as was noted, to signify Gods power,
promises and experiences, so I shall add that Christ is to be lifted up as an
Ensign to the Gentles* in the administrations of the Gospel, as Isa 5. 26. and
11. 10. And in that day there shall be a root of Iesse, which shall stand for
an Ensign of the people, to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be
glorious compare with Isa. 49 6. and Matt. 12. 21. Acts 13 47. 48. and Romans 10.
15. This is clearly laid forth unto us, Mark. 16. 15 16. the partition wall
being broken down that stood between Jews and Gentles. Go ye into all the
world and preach the Gospel to every creature, he that believes and is dipped
shall be^ saved, but he that believes not shall be damned, compare with Mat.
28. 19. 20. and Luke 24. 47.

W^i^h Commission of Christ, is unviolably to be kept by beleivers, under the
penalty of a curse without alteration unto the end of the world, as Heb. 10.
28. 29, He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy under two or three
witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God etc.

5. This Ensign Christ is to be lifted up in his natures as he was God, and as
he was man: Also in his Offices as he was the Priest, Prophet, and King of his
Church; the Priest by whos^ offeting he has perfected for ever all them that
are sanct^fied. Heb. 1^. 14. compare wi^h verse 10. the prophet whose voice
only we ar^ to hear, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. Acts 3. 22. 23. For Moses truly said unto
the fathers, a prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your,
brethren like unto me; him shall you hear in all things whansoever he shall say
unto you. And it shall come to p^sse that ^very soul that will not hear that
Pro^het shall be destroyed from among the people. 3. The only King and
Lawgiver to his Church* as, Isae 33. 22. For the Lord is our judge, the Lord
is our Law giver, the Lord is our King, he will save us, compared with Psa. 89.
27. 1 Timothy 6. 15. Rev. 17. 14. and 19. 16. John 12 32. 33. And I if I be lifted
up from the earth will draw all men unto me.

6. Christ is to be lifted up in the administracion of the Gospel, according to
the beginnings of the foundation of the doctrines of Christ, in the
constitutions and maintenance thereof; the Churches of Christ being to be so
gathered after the apostasy, as planted in the primitive times, to wit, by
repentance from dead works, faith toward God, the doctrine of dippings, and
imposition of hands, as H^b. 6. 1. 2. it being according to the great Charter
of the Gospel of Christ and primitive practice, as Acts 2. 38. to 43. and 8.
12. 36. 37, 38. and 10. 46. 48. which practice would soon discover the falsnes
or Na^ionall holiness, fetherall holiness, Church privilege to natural
infants, Parish Priests and Assemblies, taking Tithes and Alters, etc. From
whence you may observe the danger of all such as shall add to the word of God,
or diminishes there from, as Mat. 5 19. comp. with R^. 22. 18. 19 7. Christ
being thus lifted up it will discover those that pretend themselves ministers
of Christ, and are not; Re. 2. 2. Nor yet content with his wages, that he has
left them, and in his own way, and not to trouble the Civil Majestrates nor
the people, by the violent taking away there goods from them, and troubling
them with unjust suites, contrary to the rule and their Protestation and
Covenant, whereby if you will not be perjured, you can neither take tithes nor
they pay them. etc Consider L^vi^. sons those sons of Belial Sam. 1. 2. 13.
That came with their fl^sh*hooke with three teeth which they struck into the
pan or kettle, and all that which the hook took up, the Priest took for
himself by force; but ver. the 36 their condition is declared when they shall
come and crouch for a piece of silver and a morsel of bread, saying put me I
pray t^e^ into the Priests Office that I may eat a piece of bread. 8. This
discovers the folly of those as having drunk of the wine of Babels golden cup,
whereby they still seek to uphold their popish traditions, though to the
overthrowing of the glorious institutions of Christ and the drawing down the
wrath of God upon the nations, yet pretend themselves ministers of Christ, yet
seeking by violence and compulsion to set up the Gospel, a thing contrary to
the very nature thereof, and Christ and his disciples practice. But let them
know they are not the men that God will give his people deliverance by, neither
is that the way which they take, they having received as their power and
authority so their practice from the beast, Re. 13. 16. and therefore must be
rooted up, as Mat. 15. 13. and Ier. 51. 25. 26. Behold I am against the O
destroying mountain, etc. 9. Let this inform the people of God not to stay in
Babel in that state, it being not their resting place as Mich. 2. 10. 11. Arise
ye and depart, for this ie not your rect, because it is polluted, etc, Mar. 8.
37. 38. and 2 Cor. 6, 14. to 18. where the Apostle showing the disagreement
betwixt light and darkness, beleivers with unbeleivers, righteousness with
unrighteousnes, he that beleiveth with an Infidel, the Temple of God with
Idols beleivers being the Temple of God in whom he will dwell and walk, being
their God and they being his people; Wherefore he says, Come out from among
them says the Lord and be ye separate etc. And in this reformation to have a
word for their warrant, and not to make reformed Churches their pattern, as
Germany Scotland etc. But rather the Primitive Institutions, as Ezra and
Nehemiah did in their Reformation, and as the Apostle exorts, Col. 2. 8, Beware
lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit, etc. for as Christ
says, Mar. 8. 36. 37. For what shall it profit a man if h^ shall gain the
whole world and loose his own soul, etc. and John 1. 3. 2. the Apostle says,
Beloved now are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall
be, but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is. 2 Timothy 2. 11. 12. It is a faithful saying, for if we be dead
with him, we shall also live with him, if we suffer, we shall also rain with
him if we deny him, ^e also will deny us. 1 Cor. 2. 9. But as it is written,
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. Rev. 7. 14. 17.
These are they which come out of great tribulation, and have washed their
Rebes, and made them white with the blood of the Lamb^: therefore they are
before the Thrown of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple, and he
that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them, they shall hunger no more,
nor thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light upon them, nor any heat for
the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall feed them, and shall lead
them unto living Fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes.

Reasons 1. We may take notice that God will be found in his own way, and by
his own means his ways and thoughts being h^gher then men's, Isa 55. 8. 9.
compared with Luke 16 31. where Abraham tells Dives that ^^ his brethren would
not hear Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose
from the dead. 2. It matters not how weak the ^nst^ument is, that God works
by the work being his, as Judges 7. 16. 17. 18. Also Amos a head man, Joshua
Moses his servant, Nehemia a Courtier the Kings Butler, David a Sheapheard,
Peter Andrew James and John Fishermen. Paul 2 Tentmaker, Acts 18. 3. yea
Christ himself a Carpenter, Mark 6. 3* 3 This should teach all the Servants of
Christ not to undervalevv the gift of God in any, nor ^ye up the Tongues of
those whose mouth^s the Lord shall open by his spirit, but to give liberty and
freedom to them, as Acts 2. 4. where they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost, and spoke as the spirit gave them utterance, and Acts 15. 7. 13.
compared with 1 Cor. 14. 29. to 33. 1 Pet. 4. 10. when Christ assended upon
high, he led Captivity Captive, and gave gifts unto men for the gathering
ed^fying and perfecting of the Saints, (not Arts and Sciences) le^^ned at the
Universities. 5. God is now about his great marvelous work, and a wond^^ in
overthrowing the State of Antichrist, root and branch, Isa. 2^. 9. to 15.
saying, stay your selves and wonder, cryye out, and cry they are drunck, but
not with wine, they stagger, but not with strong drink, for the Lord has
powered out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes, the
Prophets, and Rulers, the Seers has he covered, and the vision of all is
become unto you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one
that is learned, saying, read this I pray thee, and he says, I cannot for i^
is s^^led, and the book is delivered to one that is no^ learned, saying, read
this I pray thee, and he says, I am not learn^d, wherefore the Lord s^id;
forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their l^ps do
h^nor me, but have removed their hearts far from me, and their fear toward me
is taught by the precepts of men, therefore behold I will proceed to do a
marvelous work amongst this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder for the
wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent men
shall be hid, woe unto them that seek deep to hide their Council from the
Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say who sees us and who
knows us, surely your turning things upside down shall be esteemed as the
Potters clay, Cor. 1. 1. 18. But it may be said, of these at this time as it is
said, Ezekiel. 33. 31. 32. 33. they come unto thee as the people comes, and they
sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words but they will not do
them, for with their mouths they show much love, but the^r heart goes aft^^
their covetuousnesse, And lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of on^
that has* pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument, for they hear
thy words, but they will not do them: but when this comes to pass, lo it
will come, then shall they know that a Prophet has been amongst them

Thus what I would have then spoken, I have written and committed to public
view and sensure of all being thereunto constrained, necessity being laid upon
me, desiring the Reader to receive ^t as favorably as it was truly intended for
the glory of God, and the exaltation of the Gospel of King Jesus.

FINIS.

