THE MEASURER's GUIDE: OR, THE Whole ART OF Measuring MADE Short, Plain and
Easy.

SHOWING,

1. How to Measure any Plain Superficies. 2. How to Measure all sorts of
Regular Solids. 3. The Art of Gaugeing. 4. How to Measure Artificers Work, viz.
Carpenters, Joyners, Plasterers, Painters, Paviers, Glaziers, Bricklayers,
Tylors, etc. of Singular use to all Gentlmen, Artificers and others.
By JOHN BARKER.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Salusbury, at the King's Arms, next Cliffords
Inn-Lane, by St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street.

TO EDW. HVBBALD Gent.
THIS Small Treatise of Measuring, is Humbly presented, and Dedicated; By,

SIR, Your Kinsman, and Humble Servant, J. BARKER,

To the READER.
THE Art of Measureing is of such Singular Use to all Sorts of Persons, that to
say any thing of it, would be to as little Purpose, as to tell any Person it is
day, when the Sun is in the Meridian. As to this Small Treatise, the Method I
have used therein is both Short, Plain, and Easy; So that the Meanest Capacity
may Attain to Measure, without the help of a Master; There being more Variety
in this than in any other Book that is yet Extant, which Treats upon this
Subject. In the first two Chapter, I have Showed bow to Measure any sort of
Superficies, and Solids of what Form soever. Wherein I have set forth the great
Errors committed by the Common Measurers, in Measuring of Round Timber. In the
Third Chapter, I have Taught how to Gauge any sort of Vessel. And in the Fourth
Chapter I have given Instructions how to Measure all Artificers Work, where I
also show how to find the Superficial Content of any Regular Solid; All which
is Performed without the help of Tables: For many Times he that uses himself to
Measure by the help of Tables, can Perform nothing without 'em; farther, if he
leaves his Tables behind him, or that they come by any Mischance, he is
Infinitely at a Loss, insomuch as he can do nothing; and such a Person had as
good leave his Brains behind him. Whereas any Person may easily carry all the
Rules here Delivered in his Head, and thereby Measure any thing with as much
ease and expedition as by most Tables. All that I shall Add is this, that as I
have been persuaded, after many Importunities, to Publish these few Sheets for
Public Good, So if the Reader Reap any Benifit thereby I have my Ends, in
proveing Servicable to the General Advantage of my Country.

THE CONTENTS.
HOW to Measure any Plain Superfices, page 1. How to find the Superficial
Content, of a Geometrical Square page 1 How to find the Superficial Content of
a Paralleogram, or Long Square page 2 How to find how much in Length of any
Long Square Superfices, goes to make a Superficial Foot page 9 How to find the
Superficial Content of a Right lined Triangle page 7 How to find the
Superficial Content of a Poligon, or any Equal sided Superfices page 9 How to
find the Superficial Content of a Trapezium, or Table page 11 How to Reduce
Irregular Figures into Trapeziums and Triangles, and to find the Content
thereof page 14 By the Diamitre of a Circle, to find the Circumference page 15
How by the Circumference of the Circle, given to find the Diamitre page 16 How
to find the Content of a Circle, having the Diamitre and Circumference given
page 17 How to find the Superficial Content of a Circle, having only the
Diamitre given page 18 How to find the Superficial Conetnt of a Circle, having
the Circumferance only given page 20 How by the Content of a Circle given, to
find the side of a Square, the Superficial Content of which Square shall be
equal to the Superficial Content of the Circle page 21 How by the Circumference
of a Circle given to find the side of an Inscribed Square page 22 By the
Diamitre of a Circle given, to find the side of an Inscribed Square page 23 How
to find the Superficial Content of an Oval page 23 How to Measure all sorts of
Regular Solids page 25 How to find the Solid Content of a Cube page 25 How to
find the Solid Content of a Cube page 25 How to find the Solid Content of
Parallelepidon or Long Square page 27 How to find the Solid Content of Cilinder
page 28 How to know how much in Length of any Solid Body, having equal Bases,
goes to make a Solid Foot thereof page 34 How to find the Solid Content of a
Cone page 35 How to find the Solid Content of a Piramid page 37 How to find the
Solid Content of the Segment of a Cone or Piramid page 39 How to find the Sold
Content of a Globe, or Sphere, the Diamitre being given page 42 How to find the
sold Content of a Globe or Sphere, the Circumference being given page 43 How to
find the Solid Content of any Solid Body of what form soever, such as Geometry
can give no Rule for the Measuring thereof page 44 Of GAVGING page 46 How to
Gauge a Cubical Vessel page 46 For Ale, Beer, or Wine page 49 How to find the
Content of a Square Vessel in Gallons of Ale or Wine page 49 How to Perform the
same by the Line of Numbers page 52 How to find the Content of a Cylinder
Vessel in Gallons of Ale, Beer or Wine page 53 How to perform the same by the
Line of Numbers page 56 How to find the Content of any Pipe, Butt, Barrel,
Hogshead or Cask, page 37 How to Perform the same by the Line of Numbers page
61 How to Measure Brewers Tuns or March Fatts page 62 How to Perform the same
by the Line of Numbers page 67 How to Measure an Oval Tun page 68 How to
Perform the same by the Line of Numbers page 70 How to turn Barrels into
Gallons, Beer Measure page 71 How to Perform the same by the Line of Numbers
page 72 How to turn Gallons of Beer or Ale into Wine page 72 How to Perform the
same by the Line of Numbers page 73 How to turn Gallons of Ale into Barrels
page 75 How to Perform the same by the Line of Numbers page 76 How to Gauge a
Ship, and thereby to find how many Tuns her Burden is page 76 Of Measuring
Artificers Work viz. Carpenters, Joyners, Plasterers, Painters, Paviors,
Glasiers, Bricklaiers etc. page 77 How to Measure Carpenters Work page 82 How
to Measure the Roof of any Building page 87 How to Measure the sides of any
Timber Building page 88 How to Measure Paving, Painting, Wainscoting and
Plastring, etc. page 91 How to find the Superficial Conten^ of a Cylinder page
91 How to find the Superficial Content of a Paralleleppidon or Square Pillar
page 98 How to find the Superficial Content of a Cone. page 98 How to find the
Superficial Content of a Piramid page 99 How to find the Superficial Content of
a Globe or Sphere page 99 How to Measure Glaziers Work page 99 How to Measure
Bricklaiers Work page 104 How to Measure Chimnies page 125 How to Measure
Tyling page 128


ERRATA.
Page 1. in the Title, Instead of Superfices, Read Superficies. P. 54. L. 5.
for 44. 64 Inches, Read 4464. P. 25. L 5. for Superfices Read Superficies.

THE MEASURER's GUIDE: OR, THE Whole ART OF Measuring MADE Short, Plain and
Easy.
CHAP. I. How to measure any Plain Superfices.
PROP. I.
HOW to find the Superficial Content of a Geometrical Square.

Example.
Admit there is a Square represented by the Figure A B C D, whose sides are
each Nine Feet, whose Area, or Superficial Content is required.

square ABCD

To find which, multiply its side 9 by its self, and the product will be 81
Feet, which is the Content of that Square.

PROP. II. How to find the Superficial Content of a Parallelogram, or long
Square.
Multiply the length by the breadth, and the Product will be the Content
thereof.

Example.
Admit there is a long Square represented by the Figure B C D E, whose length B
C is Twenty Two Inches, and breadth B D Twelve Inches, whose Content is
required.

long square (rectangle) BCDE

To find which, multiply the length 22, by the breadth 12, and the Product will
be 264 Inches, which is the Content of the long Square required, which you may
reduce into Feet, by dividing the same by 144, the Number of Inches contained
in a superficial Foot, and the Quotient will be 1 Foot, and 120 will remain
with 120/144 of a Foot, which is 10 Inches.

But this way of Working being very tedious and troublesome, by reason of the
Reduction; for your Multiplier, and Multiplicand, must be reduced both into the
Lowest Denomination, and afterward reduced into Feet. I would advise the young
Artist to work by Decimals; and for that end, to provide himself of a Two-Foot
Rule, on which each Foot shall be divided into Ten equal parts, and each of
those parts into Ten other equal parts: So is the Foot divided into 100 equal
parts, and thereby is fit to take the Dimensions in Feet, and parts of a Foot;
by which Rule, if the Dimensions of the Square in the last Example, was taken,
the length B C would be 1. 83 Feet, and the breadth, B D, 1 Foot. Then if you
multiply the length by the breadth, as before, the Product will give 1. 83, or
1 Foot 10 Inches very near. So is the Content found without any more trouble;
which Method I have made use of in some of the Examples in the following
Discourse of Measuring of Superfices and Solids; but in such sort, as any
person that understands not Decimal Arithmetic, may easily apply them to
Vulgar Arithmetic. But generally I have given the Examples in Integers or Feet.

If it happens, that any long Square Superfices, be broader at one end than at
the other, whose Content is required, first add the two ends together, and take
half their Sum for the true breadth, and multiply it into the length, and the
Productwill be the Content thereof.

Example.
Admit there is a piece of Glass, or any other Superfices, that is One Foot
broad at one end, and Two Feet broad at the other, and Six Feet long, whose
Content is required.

To perform which, add the two ends together, viz. One Foot and Two Feet, and
their Sum will be Three Feet, the half of which is 1. 5 Foot, or One Foot Six
Inches; which multiply into the length Six Feet, and the Product will give Nine
Feet for the Content required.

PROP. III. How to find how much in Length of any Long Square Superfices goes
to make a Superficial Foot.
Divide 1 by the given breadth, and the Quotient will give how much of the
length of any Superfices goes to make a Superficial Foot thereof.

Example.
Admit there is a long square piece of Board, or any other Superfices, whose
breadth is 1. 32 feet, and it be required, to know how far one ought to measure
along the same to make a superficial foot thereof.

To perform which, divide 1 by the breadth, 132, and the Quotient will give
757, which is Nine Inches and something more; and so much of the Length goes to
make a superficial foot, as in the following Work.

PROP. IV. How to find the superficial Content of a Right lined Triangle.
Although Right lined Triangles are of several Kinds and Forms; as, first, in
respect of their Angles, they are either Right Angled or Oblique Angled, Acute
Angled or Obtuse Angled. Second, in respect of their sides; They are either an
Equilateral, Isosceles, or Scalenium Triangle. But seeing they are all measured
by one and the same Rule, I shall add but One Example for all; and take this
for a general Rule.

Multiply half the Perpendicular into the Base, and the Product will be the
Content of the Triangle; or Multiply half the Base into the whole
Perpendicular, and the Product will give the same thing: Or if you Multiply the
whole Base into the whole Perpendicular, half the Product is the Content of the
Triangle.

Example.
Admit there is a Triangle A B C, whose Base A C is 72 feet, and the
Perpendicular B Q is 36 feet, whose Content is required.

triangle ABC

To find which, multiply half the Perpendicular, which is 18 feet, into the
Base 72 feet, and the Product will be 1296 feet, which is the Content of the
said Triangle.

Or thus,

Multiply half the Base, which is 36 feet, into the Perpendicular 36 feet, and
the Product will give 1296 feet, as before, for the Content of the said
Triangle.

PROP. V. How to find the Superficial Content of a Polygon, or many equal sided
Superfices.
Multiply the Length of the Perpendicular let fall from the Center to the
middle of one of the sides, into half the Sum of the sides, or half the
Perpendicular into the Sum of the Sides, and the Product shall be the Content
of Polygon.

Example.
Admit the Polygon given be a Hexagon, represented by the Figure A B C D E F
(or a Six equal sided Figure), whose side is 19, and the Perpendicular, or G,
is 16 feet.

hexagon ABCDEF

Multiply half the Sum of the sides, which is 57, by the length of the
Perpendicular 16, and the Product will be 912 feet, which is the Content of the
Polygon required.

Or,

Multiply the Sum of all the sides, which is 114, by half the Perpendicular 8,
and the Product will give 912, as before, for the Content of the said Polygon.

The reason of this manner of Working is very plain, if from the Center you
draw the Lines E and D, thereby making the Triangle E D, whose Content (by the
third Proposition) is found by Multiplying the Perpendicular G 16 into half the
side E D, which is 9.5, and there being in the Hexagon 6 such Triangles,
therefore the Perpendicular G being Multiplied into 6 times half, the side D E
produces 912 for the Content as before.

PROP. VI. How to find the Superficial Content of a Trapezium or Table.
A Trapezium is a Figure consisting of four unequal sides, and as may unequal
Angles, as is the Figure following, A B C D.

irregular quadrilateral or trapezium ABCD

To Measure which Trapeziums you must first reduce it into two Triangles, by
drawing the Diagonal Line A D, and so is your Figure reduced into two
Triangles, viz. the Triangle A B D and A C D, then if you let fall
Perpendiculars from the two Points B and C, if you find the Content the two
Triangles, and add their Content together, the Sum will be the Area or Content
of the whole Trapezium.

Example.
Having drawn the line A D, and so Reduced the Figure into two Triangles, and
let fall the Perpendiculars from B and C (the Base A D is common to both
Triangles) admit the Base A D to be 24, and the Perpendicular at C to be 8, and
the Perpendicular at B to be 10, then, if according to Proposition the 3d, you
Multiply 24, the Base by 4, half the Perpendicular, the Product will give 96
for the Content of the Triangle A C D.

Likewise, if you Multiply 24, the Base by 5, half the other Perpendicular, the
Product will give 120 for the Content of the Triangle A B D.

Then if you add the Content of these two Triangles together, viz. 96 and 120,
their Sum is 216, which is the Content of the whole Trapezium A B C D.

Or thus,

Add the two Perpendiculars, viz. 10 and 8 together, and Multiply half the Sum,
which is 9, into the common Base A D 24, and the Product will give 216, for the
Content of the Trapezium A B C D, as before.

Or thus,

Multiply half the common Base A D, which is 12, into the Sum of the two
Perpendiculars, which is 18, and the Product will give the same as before, viz.
216, for the Content of the Trapezium.

PROP. VII. How to Reduce Irregular Figures into Trapeziums and Triangles, and
to find the Content thereof.
Example.
Let the Figure given to be Measured be A B C D E F G H.

irregular polygon ABCDEFGH

To perform which, Divide the Figure into Trapeziums and Triangles, according
to your Fancy, and as the nature of the Plain will bear, then find the Content
of the Trapeziums and Triangle, as is taught in the third and fifth
Propositions, and add the several Contents together, so will the Sum be the
Content of the Irregular Figure desired. As in this Example, draw the lines B G
and D F, so is the whole Figure divided into two Trapeziums and one Triangle,
viz. the Trapeziums A B G H, and C D F G, and the Triangle D E F, the Content
of which being severally found by the third and fifth Propositions, and added
together, their Sum will be the Content of the whole Figure.

PROP. VIII. By the Diamiter of a Circle to find the Circumference.
To find which, the Analogy, or Proportion, is as follows.

As 7 is to 22,

Example.
Admit there is a Circle represented by the Figure A B C D, whose Diamiter A C
is 28, whose Circumference is required.

circle ABCD with diameter AC

To find which, work by the foregoing Proportion, so will you find the
Circumference to be 88, as in the following work.

PROP. IX. How by the Circumference of a Circle given to find the Diamiter.
To find which, the Analogy, or Proportion, is as follows.

As 22 is to 7

Example.
Admit the Circumference, the foregoing Circle A B C D be given, which was
found to be 88, whose Diametre is required.

Work by the foregoing Proportion, and so will you find the Diametre of the
said Circle to be 28, as in the following Work.

PROP. X. How to find the Content of a Circle having the Diamiter and
Circumference given.
To find which, Multiply half the Circumference by half the Diamiter, and the
Product is the Superfitial Content of the Circle.

Example.
Admit there is a Circle represented by the foregoing Figure, whose
Circumference A B C D is 88, and the Diamiter A C 28, whose Superficial Content
is required.

To find which, Multiply half the Circumference, which is 44, by half the
Diamiter, which is 14, and the Product will give 616 which is the Content of
the said Circle required.

PROP. XI. How to find the Superficial Content of a Circle, having only the
Diamiter given.
To perform which, first square the Semy-Diamiter, and then work by the
following Proportion.

As 7 is to 22,

Example.
Admit there is a circle whose Diamiter is 28, and it be required to find the
content of the said circle.

To perform which, first halve the Diamiter, the half of which is 14, which 14
Multiply into its self, and the Product will give 196, which is the Square of
the Semy-Diamiter, then work by the foregoing Proportion, and so will you find
the superfitial content of the said circle to be 616, as in the following work.

PROP. XII. How to find the Superficial Content of a Circle, having the
Circumference only given.
To find which, first Square the Circumference, then work by the following
Proportion.

As four times 22, which is 88, is to 7,

Example.
Admit there is a circle whose circumference is 88, and it be required to find
the content of the said circle.

To find which, first square the circumference 88, whose square you will find
to be 7744, then work by the foregoing proportion, so will you find 616 to be
the content of the said circle, as in the following work.

^

PROP. XIII. How by the Content of a Circle given to find the side of a Square,
the superficial Content of which Square shall be equal to the superficial
Content of the Circle.
To perform which, extract the square Root of the Content of the Circle, which
Root is the side of the Square desired.

Example.
Admit the Content of the given Circle be 144, and it be required to find the
side of a Square, the superficial content of which Square shall be equal to the
superficial content of the Circle.

To find which, extract the square Root of the content of the Circle, 144,
whose Root you will find to be 12, which is the side of the Square desired.

PROP. XIV. How by the Circumference of Circle given, to find the side of an
Inscribed Square.
To find which, work by the following Proportion:

As 1.000 is to 0.225,

PROP. XV. By the Diamiter of a Circle given, to find the side of an inscribed
Square.
To find out which, work by the following proportion.

PROP. XVI. How to find the Superficial Content of an Oval.
Multiply the length by the breadth, and that Product Multiply by Eleven, and
that Product Divide by Fourteen and the Quotient shall give the Content of the
Oval required.

Example.
Admit there is an Oval represented by the following Figure, whose length A C
is 50, and breadth B D 40, whose superficial content is required.

oval ABCD

To find which, Multiply the length 50 by the breadth 40, and the Product will
be 2000, which Multiply by 11, and the Product will be 22000, which Divide by
14, and the Quotient will be 1571, which is the content of the Oval required.

CHAP. II. How to Measure all sorts of Regular Solids.
HAving in the last Chapter showed you how to Measure any Plain Superfices,
which if well understood, the content of all Solid Bodies, whose ends are of
the same Dimensions, will be found by the following Rule.

First find the superficial content at the end by some of the Propositions
foregoing, and Multiply the same by the length, and the Product will give the
solid content.

PROP. I. How to find the solid Content of a Cube.
Multiply its side into its self, and that Product Multiply by the side again,
and that Product will be the solid content of the cube desired.

Example.
Admit there is a Cube whose side is 6 Feet, represented by the Figure A B C D
E F G, whose solid content is required.

cube ABCDEFG

To find which, Multiply the side 6 by its self, and the Product will be 36,
which again Multiply by 6 and the Product will be 216 Feet which is the solid
content of the said Cube.

PROP. II. How to find the Solid Content of a Parallelepipedon, or long Square.
First find the superficial content at the end by Propositions, the first or
second of the last Chapter, which Multiply into the length, and the Product
will be the solid content.

Example.
Admit there is a Parallelepipedon, represented by the Figure H I K L M N O,
whose Square at the end is 3 feet long, and 2 feet broad, and its length, K M,
is 39 feet, whose solid content is required.

parallelepiped HIKLMNO

To find which, Multiply the length at the top H I 3, by the breadth H K 2, and
the Product will give 6, which is the superficial content at the top, which
Multiply into the length K M 39 feet, and the Product will be 234 feet, which
is the solid content of the said Parallelepipedon.

PROP. III. How to find the solid Content of a Cylinder.
First find the superficial content of the circle at the top or base (by
Proposition the 10, 11 or 12 of the last Chapter) then Multiply it by the
length, and the Product will be the solid content thereof.

Example.
Admit there is a Cylinder represented by the Figure G, whose circumference of
the circle at the end or base is 44 Inches, and the length of the Cylinder 16
Inches, whose solid content is required.

cylinder, Figure G

To find which, first find the superficial Content of the Circle at the Top or
Base, by Proposition the 11th of the last Chapter, which you will find to be
154 Inches; which multiply by the length 16 Inches, and the Product will be
2464 Inches, which is the Content of the Cylinder required; which you may
reduce into feet, by dividing the same by 1728, the number of Inches contained
in a solid Foot, and the Quotient will give 1 Foot, and there will remain 636,
which is 736/1728 of a Foot. But, as I said before, the best way is to work by
Decimals; but I have added this Example for their sakes that understand not
Decimals: But this, as well as any other Question, may be better resolved by
Cross Multiplication than by this Common Method; to perform which, if the
Learner understands it not already, I refer him to the last Chapter of this
Book; and you will find the Answer to be 1 Foot 4 Inches, and 10 Seconds, as in
the following Work:

^

But here I presume it may not be improper to show the great Error that common
Measurers are guilty of in the measuring of Round Timber, whose Method is thus:
they girt the Tree, or piece of Timber about, and take the one fourth part of
the Circumference for the true Square, which is very erroneous, as may appear
by the last Example, where the Circumference, or Girt of the Cylinder was 44,
and the Content of the Circle 154. Whereas, if you had taken the one fourth of
the Circumference 44, which is 11, for the Square Root of the Circle, which
multiplied into its self, the Product is but 121; whereas the Content of the
Circle is found to be 154, from which substract 121, and the Remainder will be
33. So much does the common-way want of the true Content of the Circle; from
whence it is evident, that according to the common way of measuring, there is
lost something above the ^/5 part of any Round Timber so measured.

But all that can be said in Defense of this Custom, is, That all Trees growing
round, must be hewed square, before it can be fit for any use; so this
Advantage in measuring may be very well allowed for what goes to waste in
chips, they being good for nothing but the fire; and although Measurers think
not of this Excuse, but take their Rule for an absolute Truth, I presume was
the first Occasion of the Rule, though it is a very Unreasonable Allowance, as
may thus appear; the inscribed Square of the circle of the Cylinder, in the
last Example, will be 10 Inches, as you may prove by the following Proportion.

As 1.000 is to 0.225, so is the circumference 44 to the inscribed Square
9.900, which wants but very little of 10 inches; and this is the greatest
Square such a Round piece of Timber can be hew'n into, and this multiplied into
its self, gives 98 inches and.010 parts for its content. Now if you add the
content of the inscribed Square 98, and the true content of the circle 154,
together, their Sum will be 252, and the Middle, or Mean thereof (which is half
their Sum) is 126, and the content, after the common way, was but 121. So that
you may see this Rule gives an indifferent Allowance both to the Buyer and
Seller. But I presume, notwithstanding all that has been said, that the true
content ought to be given, and the Measure exactly known. And as to the Waste
thereof, Goodness or Badness of the Timber, there ought to be an allowance made
in the Price.

PROP. IV. How to know how much in length of any Solid Body, having equal
Bases, goes to make a Solid Foot thereof.
First find the superficial content at the End or Base, by which divide 1 (to
wit, 1 solid foot), and the Quotient will be the Length that goes to make a
foot solid thereof.

Example.
Admit there is a piece of Timber, or any other solid body, that is terminated
at each end by two equal Geometrical Squares, whose side is 1. 55, and it be
required to know how much of the Length thereof goes to make a foot solid.

To perform which, first find the superficial content at the End or Base, by
Proposition the 1st, of the last Chapter, which you will find to be 2. 4025, by
which divide 1, and the Quotient will give.416 foot, or 5 inches, as in the
following Work.

^

PROP. V. How to find the solid Content of a Cone.
First find the superficial content of the circle at the Base by (Proposition
the 10th, 11th or 12th of the last Chapter, which multiply by of the height,
and the Product will be the solid content of the Cone.

Example.
Admit there is a Cone represented by the Figure B, whose Diametre at the Base
is 5 feet, and its Height, or Altitude, is 18 feet, whose solid Content is
required.

cone, Figure B

To find which, first find the superficial content of the Base (by Proposition
the 11th of the last Chapter), which you will find to be 19. 64, which multiply
by of the height, which is 6, and the Product will give 117. 84 feet, which is
the solid content of the Cube required.

PROP. VI. How to find the Solid Content of a Pyramid.
A Pyramid is a Silid comprehended under plain Surfaces, and forms a
Triangular, Quadrangular, or any Mutangular Base, diminishing equally less and
less, till it diminishes in a Point at the Top as a Cone.

To find the solid content of any such Figure, first find the superficial
content of the Base, by some of the Propositions of the last Chapter; which
multiply into of its Altitude, or Height, and the Product will be the solid
content thereof.

Example.
Admit there is a Pyramid represented by the Figure M, whose Base is a Hexagon,
the side of which is 25 feet, and its Perpendicular height is 60 feet, whose
solid content is required.

pyramid, Figure M

To perform which, first find the superficial content of the Base, by
Proposition 5. of the last Chapter; viz. by multiplying half the Sum of the
sides, which is 75 feet, by the Perpendicular (let fall from the Center to the
midst of one of the sides), which will be 13 feet, and the Product will give
975 feet for the superficial content of the Base; which multiply by of the
height 20, and the Product 19500 feet for the solid content of the Pyramid
required.

PROP. VII. How to find the Solid Content of the Segment of a Cone or Pyramid.
Here note, that all tapering Timber, or Stone, etc. whose Bases are Regular
Figures, are Segments of either a Cone or Pyramid.

To find the solid content of any such Segment, first find the superficial
content of both the Bases, by some of the Propositions of the last Chapter,
then multiply the superficial content of the greater Base by the superficial
content of the lesser, and extract the square Root of that Product; then add
that square Root, and the superficial content of the Two Bases together, and
their Sum multiply by part of the Length, and that Product will give the solid
content of the Segment required.

Example.
Admit there is a Segment of a Pyramid, whose Bases are Squares, represented by
the Figure P G, and the side of the great Square at G is 1.5 foot, or 1 foot 6
Inches, and the side of the lesser at P is.5 foot, or 6 Inches, and the Length
of the said Segment is 30 feet, whose solid content is required.

segment of a pyramid, Figure PG

To find which, first find the superficial content of both the Ends by
Proposition the first of the last Chapter, the greater of which you will find
to be 2.25 feet, and the lesser 0.25 foot, then multiply the superficial
content at the greater end at G 2.25, by the superficial content of the lesser
at P.25, and the Product will be.5625 feet; then extract the square Root of
that Product, which you will find to be.75 feet, to which add the superficial
content of the Two Ends, and their Sum will be 3.25, which multiply by part of
the Length, which is 10 feet, and the Product will* be 32.50 feet, which is the
solid content of the said Segment required, as in the following work,

If you work the same by Vulgar Arithmetic, you will find the content to be 32
feet 6 Inches.

PROP. VIII. How to find the Solid Content of a Globe, or Sphere, the Diametre
being given.
To find which work by the following Proportion,

As 6 times 7, which is 42, Cube of the Diametre of any Globe

Example.
Admit there is a Globe or Sphere represented by the Figure following, whose
Diametre is 24 Inches, and be required to find the solid content thereof.

globe or sphere with diameter 24 inches

To perform which, first cube the Diametre, 24 Inches, whose Cube you will find
to be 1.3824 Inches; then work by the before-going Proportion, and say, As 42
is to 22, so is 13824 to the solid content of the said Globe, which you will
find to be 7241 6/42 Inches.

PROP. IX. How to find the Solid Content of a Globe, or Sphere, the
Circumference being given.
To find which, work by the following Proportion,

As 1.0000 So is the Cube of the Circumference of any Globe

PROP. X. How to measure any Body that is hollow.
Admit it were required to find the solid content of a hollow Tree, or of any
other hollow Body whatsoever; To perform which, first you must find the solid
content thereof, as though it were not hollow; then find the solid content of
the Concavity, as though it were Massy, and subtract it from the whole content,
and the Remainder will be the solid content of the hollow body.

PROP. XI. How to find the Solid Content of any Solid Body, of what Form
soever, such as Geometry can give no Rule for the measuring thereof.
To perform which, take some convenient Vessel, and fill the same to a
convenient height with clean water, and make a Mark just how high the water
reaches; then put the Body (whose solid content is required) into the water,
which will cause the water to rise above the Mark; then take so much of the
water out of the Vessel, as is raised above the Mark, and put the same into an
hollow Cube, which have in readiness for that purpose; then find the solid
content of the said Cube, so high as the water reaches, which shall be the
solid content of the said body required.

CHAP. III. Of GAVGING.
GAuging of Vessels is no other than finding the solid content of the
concavities in Inches, as taught in the last Chapter, and Dividing the same by
the number of cubick Inches, contained in a Gallon of the Liquor contained in
the same, which according to the Establishment of the Excise for Ale, is 282,
and for Wine, 231 Inches.

PROP. I. How to Gauge a Cubical Vessel.
Admit there is a cube-Vessel represented by the Figure D, whose side is 16
Inches, and it be desired to know how many Gallons of Wine or Ale the same will
hold.

cube, Figure D

To find which, first find the solid content of the said cube in Inches, as
taught in Proposition the first of the last Chapter, which you will find to be
4096 Inches, which reduce into Gallons, by dividing the same by 282 for Ale or
Beer, and the Quotient will be 14.5 which are the number of Gallons of Ale or
Beer the said Cube will hold, and for Wine, Divide the solid content of the
said cube by 231, and the Quotient will give 17.73 for the number of Gallons of
Wine the said cube will hold, as in the following Work.

^

To perform the same by the Line of Numbers.

I. For Ale or Beer.
Extend your Compasses always from the Gauging Point, which for Ale is 16, into
the side of the cube, which in this Example is 16, and the same extent will
reach from the said 16.8, being turned twice over unto 14.5 Gallons of Ale or
Beer.

II. For Wine.
Extend your Compasses from the Gauging Point for Wine, which is always 15
2/10, into the side of the ^ube 16, and the same extent being ^urned twice
over, will reach from ^he said 16, unto 17.73 Gallons of Wine.

PROP. II. How to find the Contents of a Square Vessel in Gallons of Ale or
Wine.
Admit there is a Square Vessel ^epresented by the figure A B C D E, whose
Length A B, is 86 Inches, and Breadth A C, 41 Inches, and 'its Depth C D, 9
Inches; and it be Required to know how many Gallons of Ale, Beer or Wine, the
said Vessel will hold.

square vessel ABCDE: length AB, breadth AC, depth CD

To find which first find the Solid Content of the said Vessel, as before
Taught in the Measuring of Solids; which you will find to be 31734 Inches,
which Reduce into Gallons, by Dividing the same by 282 for Beer or Ale, and 231
for Wine, as in the last Proposition, so will you find the said Vessel will
hold 112.53 Gallons of Beer or Ale, or 137.37 Gallons of Wine. As in the
following Work.

^

How to perform the same by the Line of Numbers.
To perform which you must first find a mean Number, between the Length A B, 86
Inches, and the Breadth A C, 41 Inches, by Multiplying the Length 86, by the
Breadth A C 41; and the Product will be 3526, and then Extracting the Square
Root of the said Product, which Root is the Number required, which you will
find to be 59.38 Inches

Or Thus, by the Line of Numbers.

Take the Middle way between 86, and 41, and you will find it the same as
before, viz. 59.38 inches.

Then for Ale.
Extend your Compasses from the Gauging point 16.8, to the mean Number 59.38
Inches, and the same Extent will reach from the Depth 9 Inches, turned twice
over unto 112.53 Gallons, of Ale or Beer, as before.

For Wine,
Extend your Compasses from the Gauging point for Wine 51.2, to the mean Number
before found 59.38 Inches and the same Extent will reach from the Depth 9
Inches, turned twice over, to 137.37 Gallons of Wine, as before.

PROP. III. How to find the Contents of a Cylinder Vessel in Gallons of Ale,
Beer or Wine.
Admit there is a Cylinder Vessel represented by the figure A B C G, whose
Diamitre A B is 14 Inches, and the Length thereof G C 16 Inches, and it be
required to know how many Gallons of Ale, Beer of Wine this said Vessel will
hold.

cylindrical vessel ABCG: diameter AB, height GC

To find which first find the Solid Contents of the said Cylinder as taught in
Proposition the Third of the last Chapter, which you will find to be 24.64
Inches, which Reduce into Gallons, by Dividing the same by 282, for Beer and
Ale, and 231 for Wine; and you will find the said Vessel to hold 8.73 Gallons,
of Beer or Ale, and 10.66 Gallons of Wine, as in the following Work.

^

Or thus,

Square the Diametre A B, 14 whose Square is 196, which Multiply by the Length
G C 16, and the Product will be 2136 which Divide by 359, for Beer or Ale, and
by 294 for Wine, so will you find as before; the said Vessel will hold 8.73
Gallons of Beer or Ale, or 10 66 Gallons of Wine.

How to perform the same by the Line of Numbers.
I. For Ale or Beer.
Extend your Compasses from the Gauging point for Ale or Beer 18.95, unto the
Diametre 14, and the same Extent will reach from the Length 16, being twice
turned over to 8.73 Gallons of Beer or Ale.

II. For Wine.
Extend your Compsses from the Gauging point for Wine 17.15 unto the Diametre
14, and the same Extent will reach, being twice turned over from the Length 16,
to 10.66 Gallons of Wine.

PROP. IV. How to find the Content of any Pipe, Butt, Barrel, Hogshhead or Cask.
Example.
Admit there is a Cask Represented by the Figure A B C D, whose Diametre at the
Head A B is 18, and the Diametre at the Bung 32, and the Length is 40 Inches;
and it be required to know how many Gallons of Ale or Wine the same will hold.

ale or wine cask, Figure ABCD

To find which there are several ways, but I shall only mention two, the first
is Mr. Oghtreds's Method, which is thus, first by Proposition the 11th. of the
3 d. Chapter of Measuring, find the Contents of the Circles at the Bung and
Head, which you will find to be 254.57 Inches for the Contents of the Circle at
the Head, and 804.57 for the Aria, or Contents of the Circle at the Bung, then
take two Thirds of the Contents of the Circle at the Bung, which is 536.38, and
one Third of the Contents of the Circle at the Head, which is 84.85, which add
together, whose Sum will be 621.23, which Multiply by the Length of the Vessel
40, and the Product will be 24849.20 Inches, which is the Solid Content of the
said Vessel, which Reduce into Gallons by Dividing the same by 282 for beer or
Ale, and by 231 for Wine, so will you find the said Vessel to hold 88.1 Gallons
of Ale, or 107.57 Gallons of Wine, as in the following Work.

^

^

Or thus,

Square the Diametre at the Bung, 32, whose Square is 1024, which double, and
it makes 2048, then you must Square the Diametre at the Head 18, whose Square
is 324 which you must add to the double of the Square of the Diametre at the
Bung 2048, and their Sum will be 2372, which Multiply by the Length of the
Vessel 40, the Product will be 94880, which you must Divide by 1077 for Ale,
880 for Wine, so will you find as before, the said Vessel to hold 88 104/1077
Gallons of Ale or 107 720/880 Gallons of Wine.

How to perform the same by the Line of Numbers.
To perform which you must find a mean Diametre, between the Diametre at the
Head and Bung, thus take the difference between the Diametre at the Bung 32,
and the Diametre at the Head 18, which is 14, which you must always Multiply
by* 7, and Divide that Product by 10, and the Quotient you must Add to the
Lesser Diametre and so will you have 27.8 for a mean Diametre then.

I. For Ale.
Extend your Compasses from the Gauging point 18.95 unto the mean Diametre 27.8
and the same distance will reach from the Length 40, being Twice turned over to
88.11 Gallons of Ale.

II. For Wine.
Extend your Compasses from the Gauging point 17.15 to the mean Diametre and
the same Extent will reach from the length 40 being twice turned over to 107.57
Gallons of Wine.

PROP. V. How to Measure Brewers Tuns or Marsh-Fatts
Admit there is a Tun or Marsh-Fat, Represented by the Figure A B C D, whose
Diametre at the bottom C D, is 88 and the Diametre at the top A B 80, Inches,
and its Depth L I 96 Inches, and it be required how many Barrels of Ale the
same will hold.

brewer's tun or marsh-fat (marsh-vat?), Figure ABCD

To find which, first find the Solid Content of the same, as taught in
Proposition the 6th. of the last Chapter which you will find to be 532625.92
Inches and 6/10, which Divide by 282 the Number of Cubick Inches contained in a
Gallon, and the Quotient will be 1888.74, the Number of Gallons of Ale the same
will hold, which Divide by 36, the Number of Gallons in a Barrel, and the
Quotient will be 52.46, the Number of Barrels of Ale the same will hold, as in
the following Work.

^

^

^

Or thus,

Square the Diametres of the Top and Bottom, then Multiply one Diametre by the
other, and Add that Product and the Square of the Two Diametres together, and
Multiply their Sum by the Depth of the said Vessel, and that Product Divided by
1077, and the Quotient will give 1888, which is the Number of the Gallons of
Ale the said Vessel will hold; which Reduce into Barrells as before.

How to perform the same by the Line of Numbers.
First find a mean Diametre, thus Add the Two Diametres 80 and 88 together, and
their Sum will be 168, then take half thereof, which is 84, for the mean
Diametre: Then Extend your Compasses from the Gauging Point for Barrels (of Ale
or Beer), which is 113 7/10 unto the mean Diametre 84, and the same distance
will reach from the Height 96, to turned twice over unto 52.44 Barrels.

PROP. VI. How to Measure an Oval Tun.
Admit there is an Oval Tun Represented by the Figure A B C D, whose Length at
the Bottom C D is 120, and the Breadth K W 90, and the Length at the Top A B
112 and the breadth I L 84 and the Depth of the Vessel L K 40 Inches; and it be
required to know how many Barrels of Ale the same will hold.

oval tun, Figure ABCD

To find which you must first find a mean Number between the Length and Breadth
of the Oval at the Bottom, viz. 120 and 90, by Multiplying the Length 120 by
the Breadth 90, and the Product will be 10800, and then Extract the Square Root
of that Product, and it will give 103 92 for the mean Number required, then
likewise by the very same Method you must find a mean Number, between the
Length at the Top 112, and the Breath 84, which you will find to be 97, which
Two mean Numbers you must Add together, and their Sum will be 200.90, then take
half thereof, which is 100.46, which Multiply by the Depth of the Tun 40, and
the Product will be 4018 40, which Divide by 359, and the Quotient will be the
Number of Gallons of Ale the same will hold, which you will find to be
1119.331, which Reduce into Barrels by Dividing the same by 36, the Number of
Gallons, in a Barrel and the Quotient will give 31.09 Barrels.

How to perform the same by the Line of Numbers.
To perform which first find the mean Numbers between the Length and the
breadth of the Two Ovals. Thus Extend your Compasses from the Breadth of each
Oval to its Length; then your Compasses being opened to half that distance,
will reach from the Breadth to the mean Number desired, by which Method you
will find the mean Numbers as before, to be 103.92 and 97, whose Sum is as
before 200.92, the half of which is 100.46 which is the mean Diametre; then
Extend your Compasses from the Gauging Point for Barrels, which is 113.7 to the
mean Diametre 100.46, and the same will reach from the the Depth 40, turned
twice over unto 31.09 the Number of Barrels of Ale the said Vessel will hold.

PROP. VI. How to turn Barrels into Gallons, Beer-measure.
To perform which, work by the following Proportion.

As 1 is to 36, the Number of Gallons contained in a Barrel, so is the Number
of Barrels given, to the Number of Gall^ns contained therein.

Example.
Admit it be required to know, how many Gallons of Beer are contained in 6
Barrels.

To perform which by Arithmetic, work by the Rule of Three, as follows:

To perform the same by the Line of Numbers.
First, set one Foot of your Compasses in 1, and extend the other to 36; then,
with your Compasses at that distance, set one Foot in 6, and the other will
reach to 216, the Number of Gallons contained in the said 6 Barrels.

PROP. VIII. How to turn Gallons of Beer or Ale into Wine.
To perform which, say, by the Rule of Three,

As 9 is to 11,

Example.
Admit there is a Vessel that contains 66 Gallons of Beer, and it be required
to know, how many Gallons of Wine the same will hold.

To perform which, by Arithmetic, work by the Rule of Three, as follows:

To Perform which by the Line of Numbers.
Set one Point of your Compass in 9, and extend the other to 11; then with your
Compasses at that distance set one Point in 66, and the other will reach to
80.6.

Here Note that the Proportion between 9 and 11 was found by Multiplying 282,
the Number of Cubick Inches in an Ale Gallon by 9, and Dividing that Product by
231, the Cubick Inches in a Wine Gallon, by which Method you will find 11
something too much, tho it is near enough for ordinary use.

PROP. IX. How to turn Gallons of Wine into Gallons of Ale.
Example.
Admit there is a Vessel that will hold 44 Gallons of Wine, and it be required
to know how many Gallons of Ale the same will hold.

To perform which by Arithmetic, work by the Rule of Three, as follows.

To Perform the same by the Line of Numbers.
Set one Foot of your Compasses in 11, and Extend the other to 9, then with
your Compasses at that distance, set one Foot in 44, and the other will reach
to 36, the Gallons of Ale the said Vessel will hold.

PROP. X. How to turn Gallons of Ale into Barrels.
Example.
Admit there is a Vessel that holds 216 Gallons, and it be required to know how
many Barrels are contained therein.

To perform which by Arithmetiek, say by the Rule of Three, If 36, the number
of the Gallons contained in one Barrel will have one Barrel, what will 216
Gallons have, and you will find the said Vessel to contain just 36 Barrels.

To Perform the same be the Line of Numbers.
To find which, set one foot of your Compasses in 36, and Extend the other to
1, then with your Compasses at that distance set one Foot in 216, and turning
the other toward 1, it will cut the Line in 36, the number of Barrels
contained in the said Vessel.

PROP. XI. How to Gauge a Ship, and thereby to find how many Tuns her Burden
is.
To perform which, Measure the Length of the Keel, the Breadth of the
Midship-Beam, and the Depth of the Hold; which three Numbers Multiply one into
the other, and Divide the Product 95, and the Quotient will give the true
Burden of any Merchant's Ship; but for M^^ of War, divide the Product by 100,
because in Men of War there is allowance made for Ordnance, Masts, Sails, etc.

CHAP. IV. Of Measuring Artificers Work, viz. Carpenters, Joyners, Plasterers,
Painters, Paviers, Glasiers, Bricklayers, etc.
BEcause the method I have used in Multiplying, may be new to many, although it
varies but very little from the method used by the common Measurers; for I Work
by Cross Multiplication, as they do; all the difference is, I have supposed the
^nch to be Divided into 12 equal parts, which I call Seconds, and each of those
Parts to be Divided into 12. other equal Parts, which I call Thirds, etc. So is
the Foot Divided Duodecimally, so that 12 Thirds makes 1 Second, 12 Seconds 1
Inch or Prime, 12 Inches 1 Foot.

Before I proceed I shall show you how to Multiply after the Method I have used
in this Chapter; to perform which, observe the following general Rules.

General Rules.
1. If you Multiply Feet into Feet, the Product will be Feet. 2. If you
Multiply Inches into Feet, the Product will be Inches. 3. If you Multiply
Inches into Inches, the Product will be Seconds. 4. If you Multiply Seconds
into Feet, the Product will be Seconds. 5. If you Multiply Seconds into Inches,
the Product will be Thirds. 6. It you Multiply Seconds into Seconds, the
Product will be Fourths.
Example.
Admit there is given 17 Feet, 11 Inches, 10 Seconds, to be Multiplied by 6
Feet, 9 Inches, 4 Seconds.

To perform which, first set down the Multiplicand and Multiplier, as in the
following Work; then Multiply the Feet in the Multiplicand 17 by the Feet, in
the Multiplier 6, and the Product will be 102 Feet; then Multiply the Feet in
the the Multiplicand 17, by the Inches in the Multiplier 9, and the Product
will be 153 Inches, which is 12 Feet 9 Inches, which set down as in the
following work, viz. the Feet under the Feet, and Inches under the Inches;
likewise Multiply the Feet in the Multiplier 6, into the Inches in the
Multiplicand 11, and the Product will be 66 Inches, which is 5 Feet 6 Inches,
which likweise set down as you see in the work; then Multiply the Inches in the
Multiplicand 11, into the Inches in the Multiplier 9, and the Product will be
99 Seconds, which is 8 Inches, 3 Seconds; set down the Inches under the Inches,
and Seconds under the Seconds, as you see done; Then Multiply the Seconds in
the Multiplicand 10, into the Feet in the Multiplier 6, and the Product will be
60 Seconds, which is just five Inches, which set down under the Inches;
likewise Multiply the Seconds in the Multiplyer 4, into the Feet in the
Multiplycand 17, and the Product will be 68 Seconds, which is 5 Inches, 8
Seconds, which set down as you see in the Work; then Multiply the Second in the
Multiplier 4, into the Inches in the Multiplicand 11, and the Product will be
44 Thirds, which is 3 Seconds 8 Thirds; likewise Multiply the Seconds in the
Multiplicand 10, into the Inches in the Multiplier 9, and the Product will be
90 Thirds, which is 7 Seconds and 6 Thirds, which likewise set down as in the
Work; then Multiply the Seconds in the Multiplicand 10, into the Second in the
Multiplier 4, and the Product will be 40 Fourths, which is 3 Thirds and 4
Fourths, which set down as in the Work, then add these several Products all up
together, and the Sum will be 121 Feet, 10 Inches, 10 Seconds, 5 Thirds and 4
Fourths, which is the Product desired.

^

Example 2.
Admit it be required to Multiply 165 feet, 6 inches, 4 seconds by 79 feet, 2
inches, 3 seconds.

To perform which, work in every respect as in the last Example, and you will
find the Product to be 13107 feet 8 inches 9 seconds and 3 thirds, as in the
following work.

^

How to Measure Carpenters Work.
Carpenters Work, which is Flooring, Roofing, Partitioning, Joysting, etc. is
Measured by the Square that is 10 feet every way, so that a square contains
100 superficial feet, in Measuring of which, the thickness is not considered,
but an allowance (...), according to the strength or slightness of the work; so
that the Measuring thereof is no other than the Measuring of a Plain
Superficies, as before taught; nor indeed is any other work belonging to
Building, Except Bricklayers work.

Example.
Admit there is a Floor or Partitioning which is 156 Feet 6 Inches in the
Length, and 55 Feet 4 Inches in Breadth, whose Content is Required.

To perform which Multiply the Length by the Breadth, and the Product will be
the Content in Feet and Inches, and then Divide the Feet by 100, and the
quotient will give the Content in Squares, and the Remainder will be parts of a
Square.

To do which, by Cross Multiplication, first set down the Length and the
breadth, as you see in the following Work. Then Multiply the Feet in the Length
165, by the Feet in the Breadth 55, and the Product will be 9075 Feet, then
Multiply the Feet in the Length 165 by the Inches in the Breadth 4, and the
Product will be 660 Inches, which is 55 Feet, which Set down under the Feet as
you see done; then Multiply the Feet in the Breadth 55, by the Inches in the
Length 6, and the Product will be 330 Inches, which is 27 Feet 6 Inches, which
Set down as in the Work, viz. the Foot under the Feet, and the Inches under the
Inches, then Multiply the Inches in the Length 6, by the Inches in the Breadth
4, and the Product will be 24, which are seconds, 12 of which make an Inch, so
that it is Just two Inches, which Set down as you see, then Draw a Line and Add
these several Products together, and the Sum will be 6157 Feet 8 Inches; then
Divide the Feet by 100, the Number of Feet contained in the Square, which is
done by only cuting off the two first Figures toward your right hand, viz. 75,
which is 57/100 of a Square and the rest Squares, which 57 Multiply by ^0, and
divide that Product by 100, and the Quotient will give 5 Feet, and there will
remain 70 which is 70/100 of a Foot, which 70 likewise Multiply by 12, Divide
by 100, and the Quotient will give 7 Inches and 40/100 of an Inch, so have you
found the Content of the said floor to be 91 Squares 5 Feet 7 Inches and 40/100
of an Inch, as in the following Work.

Example. 2.
Admit there is a Floor of Joysting that is 65 Feet 8 Inches Long, and 15 Feet
4 Inches Broad, whose Content is Required.

To find which work in every Respect as Taught in the former Example, and you
will find the Content of the same to be 10 Squarse, 7 Inches, as you see in the
Following Work.

How to Measure the Roof of any Building.
Example.
Admit there is a Building that is 93 Feet Long, from the outside of the Wall
at one end, to the outside of the Wall at the other end, and the Breadth from
the outside of one Wall, to the outside of the other Wall 36 Feet; and it be
required to know how many Squares of Roofing there is in that Building.

To perform which, if the Building be true Roof'd, you need not Measure the
Length of the Rafters or the side-pieces, but take this for a General Rule,
viz. that the Length of each Rafter is three Fourths of the Breadth of any
Building; so in this Example, the Breadth of the Building being 36 Feet,
thereof is 27 Feet, which is the Length of each Rafter, or Breadth of one side
of the Roof, which being doubled, for so it must be, for both the sides is 54
Feet, which you must Multiply by the Length of the Building 93, and the Product
will be 5022 feet for the Content of the said Roof, which reduce into Squares
by dividing the same by 100, so will you find 50 Squares, and 2 feet, and
20/100 of a foot, to be the Content of the Roof required, as in the following
work.

How to Measure the sides of a Timber Building.
Example.
Admit there is a Timber Building that is 36 feet broad at each end, and 93
feet long, and the height to the Rafters, or side of the Roof, is 69 feet,
whose Content is required.

To perform which, because the two sides are equal, and likewise the two ends
are equal, you need not stand to find the Content of each side severally, but
add all the four sides together, whose sum will be 258 feet, which Multiply by
the height of the Building 69, and the product will be 17802, which reduce into
squares, so will you find the Content of all the four sides of the said wod
-Building to be 178 squares, and 2/100 of a square, as in the following Work.

How to Measure the Gable-end of a Timber Building.
Example.
Admit it be required to find the Content of the Gable-end of a Building whose
breadth is 72 feet from the outside of one Wall, to the outside of the other,
the Gable-end of which Building is represented by the following Triangle ABC,
whose Base A C, is 72 feet, equal to the Breadth of the Building, and the
Perpendicular B Q is 36 feet.

triangle ABC

To find the Content of which, Multiply 72, the Base by 18, halve the
Perpendicular, and the Product will give 1296 feet, which reduce into squares,
so will you find the Content of the said Gable-end to be 12 squares, and 9
feet, and 6 Inches.

How to Measure Paving, Painting, Wainscoting and Plastering, etc.
These are all Measured by the Yard Square, containing 9 feet, so that in
Measuring of this sort of Work, all that it differs from the former, is only
instead of Reducing the Content into Squares by dividing the same by 100, you
must Reduce it into Square Yards by dividing the feet by 9, the number of feet
in a square Yard.

Example 1.
Admit there is a Court that is Paved, containing 76 feet 6 Inches in Length,
and 17 feet and four Inches in Breadth, whose Content is required.

To find which, Multiply the length of the said Court 76 feet and 6 inches by
the breadth 17 feet and 4 Inches, as before Taught, and the Product will be 136
feet, which feet Divide by 9, the number of feet in a Square Yard, and the
Quotient will be 147, and 3 will Remain, which is of a ^ Yard so is the Content
of the said Court found to be 147 Square Yards and 3/9 of a Yard or one foot,
as in the following Work.

Example 2.
Admit there is a piece of Wainscot that is 6 foot long, and 3 feet 6 inches
Broad, whose Content is required.

To perform which, work in every respect as in the foregoing Example, and the
Answer will be 2 square Yards, and ^ of a Yard, or 1 foot, as in the following
Work.

Example 3.
Admit there is a Room that is 9 feet 6 inches long, and 8 feet Broad, and 7
feet high, which is Painted, whose Content is required.

To perform which, first Multiply the breadth by the height, and the Product
will be the Content of one end of the Room, which because the two ends are
alike, double the same, and it will give the Content of both the ends; then
also Multiply the length of the Room by the height, and the Product will be the
Content of one of the sides, which being doubled, because the sides are both
alike, gives the Content of both sides, which being added to the Content of
both the ends before found, the sum is the Content of the 4 sides of the Room
required, which reduce into square yards, as before taught, by Dividing the
same by 9, and the Answer will be 27 square yards, and 2/9 of a yard. *

* Note that the Demensions of a Room that is Painted, is best taken by a
String, because of the Mouldings, which you bend as you please, and so Measure
the Mouldings with the rest, which must be done as being part of the Painting.

Example.
Admit there is a Room that is Plaistered, that is 16 Feet 8 Inches Long, and
10 Feet 6 Inches Broad, and 7 Feet, 11 Inches High whose Content is Required.

To perform which, find the Contents of the 4 sides of the Rooms, as directed
in the last Example, which you will find to be 430 Feet, 1 Inch and 8 Seconds,
then find the Content of the Top of the Room, which is done by Multiplying the
Length of the Room by the Breadth, viz. 16 Feet and 8 Inches, by 10 Feet and 6
Inches, and the Product will be 175 Feet, which Add to the Content of the
sides, and their Sum is the Content of the said Room which you will find to be
605 Feet 1 Inch and 8 Seconds, which Reduce into Yards, as before taught and so
will the Answer be 67 Square Yards and 2/9 of a Yard. As in the following Work.

Note that in Measuring of Plaisterers Work, there is no allowance made for the
Windows, Doors or Chimnies.

But here I judge it may not be improper to add, how to find the Superficial
Content of Solid Bodies, because Painters do very frequently Paint such Bodies.

How to find the Superficial Content of any Solid Body.
First, How to find the Superficial Content of a Cylinder.
Multiply the Length by the Circumference, and the Product will be the
Superficial Content desired.

Example.
Admit there is a Round Pillar that is Painted, whose Circumference is 5 Feet,
10 Inches, and the Length thereof is 12 Feet, 8 Inches, and it be required to
know how many Yards Square of Painting there is in the same.

To perform which, Multiply the Length 12 Feet, 8 Inches, by the Circumference,
5 Feet, 10 Inches, and the Product will give, 73 Feet, 10 Inches, 8 Seconds,
for the Superficial Content of the said Pillar, which Reduce into Yards,
Dividing the Feet by 9, and the Quotient, will give 8 1/9 Yards, for the
Content of the said Painting.

Secondly, How to find the Superficial Content of a Parallelepipedon or Square
Pillar.
Add the four Breadths together, and Multiply their Sum by the Length, and the
Product will be the Superficial Content of the Square Pillar desired.

Thirdly, How to find the Superficial Content of a Cone.
Multiply half the Circumference at the Base by the Height of the Cone, or
Multiply half the Height of the Cone by the Circumference at the Base, and the
Product shall be the Superficial Content desired.

Fourthly, How to find the Superficial Content of a Pyramid.
Add all the Dimensions of the Sides at the Base together, and Multiply half
their Sum by the Height of the Pyramid, or Multiply half the Height of the
Pyramid, by the Sum of all the sides at the Base, and the Product, will give
the Superficial Content thereof.

Fifthly, How to find the Superficial Content of a Globe or Sphere.
Multiply the Diametre, by the Circumference and the Product, will be the
Superficial Content thereof.

How to Measure Glaziers Work.
Glaziers Work is Measured by the Foot, and therefore Multiply the Length, by
the Breadth, as before, and the Product is the Content required. But because
the Dimensions of Glaziers Work is taken more exact than any other sort of
Work, viz. in Feet, Inches, and part of an Inch; which makes the resolution of
questions of that kind, for the most part, something more difficult, than any
of the foregoing; therefore I will show you how to perform the same here, although
I showed the same thing in the beginning of this Chapter.

Example.
Admit there is a Pane of Glass that is 6 Feet 8 Inches (or Primes) 6 Seconds
in Length, and 5 Feet 9 Inches (or Primes) and 3 Seconds in Breadth, whose
Content is required.

To perform which, first set down the Dimensions, as you see in the following
Work, then Multiply the Feet in the Length 6, into the Feet in the Breadth 5,
and the Product will be 30, which set down under the Feet, as in the Work; then
Multiply the Inches in the Breadth 9, into the Feet in the Length 6, and the
Product will be 54, which are Inches, which is 4 Feet 6 Inche which likewise
set down, as in the Work, then Multiply the Inches in the length 8, into the
Feet in the Breadth 5, and the Product will be 40, which likewise are Inches,
which is 3 Feet 4 Inches, which likewise set down as you see in the Work, then
Multiply the Inches in the Breadth 9, into the Inches in the Length 8, and the
Product will be 72, which are parts of Inches or Seconds which is Just 6
Inches, then Multiply the Seconds in the Breadth 3, into the Feet in the Length
6, and the Product is 18, which are Seconds, which is 1 Inch 6 Seconds; then
Multiply the Seconds in the Length 6, into the Feet in the Breadth 5, and the
Product is 30, which are likewise Seconds, which is 2 Inches 6 Seconds, all
which set down as in the following Work. Then Multiply the Seconds in the
Breadth 3, into the Inches in the Length 8, and the Product is 24, which are
parts of Seconds or Thirds, which is 2 Seconds, then Multiply the Seconds in
the Length 6, into the Inches, in the Inches, in in the Breadth 9, and the
Product is 54, which likewise is Thirds, which likewise is 4 Seconds 6 Thirds,
both which set down, as you see in the following Work Lastly, Multiply the
Seconds in the Breadth 3, into the Seconds in the Length 6, and the Product is
18, which are Parts of Thirds or Fourths, which is 1 Third, and 6 Fourths;
which set down as in the Work, then Add all these Products together, and their
Sum is the Product of 6 Feet, 8 Inches, 6 Seconds, Multiplied by 5 Feet, 9
Inches, and 3 Seconds; which is 38 Feet, 8 Inches, 6 Seconds, 7 Thirds, and 6
Fourths, which is the Content of the Pane of Glass required, as in the
following Work.

^

Example.
Admit there is a Pane of Glass that is 13 Feet, 6 Inches, and 5 Seconds Long,
and 6 Feet, 3 Inches, and 9 Seconds Broad, whose Content is required.

To perform which Work in every respect as in the last Example, and its Content
will be found to be 85 Feet, 5 Inches, 3 Seconds, 9 Thirds, as in the following
Work.

^

How to Measure Bricklayers Work.
The Measuring of which is more difficult, than any sort of Work that belongs
to Building.

In Measuring of which, Observe these General Rules following.
First, Find the Superficial Content of each Wall, then find the Superficial
Content of all the Windows and Doors in each Wall, and Subtract them from the
Superficial Content of the Wall in which they are, and the Remainder will be
the Content of the Brick-work of each Wall, in its given thickness.

Secondly, That all Walls of what thickness soever, must be Reduced into a
Brick and a half thick, by Multiplying the Content by the number of half
Bricks, contained in the thickness of the Wall, and the Product will be the
Content of the said Wall in half a Brick thick, which Divide by 3, the number
of the half Bricks, in a Brick and a half, and the Quotient will be the Content
of the Wall, in a Brick and a half.

Thirdly, That whereas Carpenters Work is Measured by the Square, that is 10
Feet, every way, so that the Square contains 100 Feet; so Brick-work is
Measured by the Square Rod, that is, 16 ^/2 Feet every way, so that the Rod
contains 272 Feet.

Fourthly, Having found the Content of all the Walls of any Building, in a
Brick and half thick, Add them all into one Sum, and Reduce the same into Rods,
by Dividing it by 272 the number of the Feet in a Rod, and the Quotient will be
the number of Rods, of Brick-work contained in the said Building.

Example.
Admit there is a Building, in which the Walls to the first Floor are as
follows, viz. the Wall on the Front, and the Backside, are each 16 Feet, 9
Inches Long, the Wall on the Front being 3 Bricks thick, and the Wall at the
Back 3 Bricks and a thick, having in each a Door of the same Dimensions viz. 2
Feet 6 Inches Wide, and 6 Feet 4 inches High, and in the Front Wall are 2
Windows a-like, each 3 Feet 6 Inches Wide, and 6 Feet 4 Inches High; and the
Wall on the Back, has 2 Windows, one of which is 2 Feet 4 Inches Wide, and 5
Feet 6 Inches High, and the other 3 Feet 2 Inches Wide, and 5 Feet 11 Inches
High; and the side Walls are each 24 Feet 9 Inches Long, and 2 Bricks thick,
and the Floor is 9 Feet 6 Inches High; and it be required to know how many Rods
of Brick-work there is in all the Walls to the first Floor.

To perform which, first find the Superficial Content of the Front Wall, which
is done by Multiplying it is Length 16 Feet 9 Inches, into the Height of the
Wall, or Height of the Floor, which is the same, viz. 9 Feet 6 Inches, and the
Product will be 159 Feet, 1 Inch, 6 Seconds, which is the Superficial Content
of the Front Wall, and because the Front and Back Wall are of the same Length,
and the Walls of one Height, it is likewise the Superficial Content of the Back
Wall, as in the following Work.

^

Then find the Superficial Content of the Door and Windows in the Front Wall.

I. To find the Content of the Door.
Multiply it is Breadth 2 Feet 10 Inches, and the Product will be 26 Feet 11
Inches, for the Content of the Door, as in the following Work.

^

Now because the Door in the Front Wall, and the Door in the Back Wall, are
alike having found the Content of the one, the Content of the other is likewise
found.

II. To find the Content of the Windows.
Which are 2, both a like, viz: each 3 Feet, 6 Inches Wide, and 6 Feet, 4
Inches High; so that Multiply the Breadth, 3 Feet, 6 Inches, into the Height, 6
Feet, 4 Inches, and the Product will be 22 Feet, 2 Inches, for the Content of
one of the Windows, which because the Wall in which they are placed, is all of
one thickness, therefore double the same, and you will have 44 Feet, 4 Inches,
for the Content of both Windows in the Front Wall, as in the following Work.

Thus having found the Content of the Front Wall, to be 159 Feet, 1 Inch, 6
Seconds, and the Content of the Door therein to be 26 Feet, 11 Inches, and
likewise the Content of the Windows in the said Wall to be 44 Feet, 4 Inches.

Then set down the Content of the Door and Windows, one under the other, and
Add them together as in the following Work, and their Sum will be 71 Feet, and
3 Inches, which Substract from the Content of the Wall, before found to be 159
Feet, 1 Inch, 6 Seconds, and the Remainder will be 87 Feet, 10 Inches, 6
Seconds, which is the Content of the Brick work in the Front Wall, in the given
thickness, viz. 3 Bricks thick, as in the following Work.

Then by the same method, find the Contents of the Brick-work in the Back-Wall,
whose Superficial Content is already found to be 159 Feet, 1 Inch, 6 Seconds,
and likewise the Door in the said Wall, is likewise found to be 26 Feet, 11
Inches, being both the same with those in the Front, so that there Remains only
the Windows in this Wall to be found.

To perform which, Multiply their Width into their Height, as before, so will
you find the Content of the one to be 12 Feet, 10 Inches, and the Content of
the other, to be 18 Feet, 8 Inches, 10 Seconds, as in the following Work.

Then Add the Content of the Door and Windows together, and Substract their Sum
from the Content of the Wall, as before, and the Remainder will be 100 Feet, 7
Inches, 8 Seconds, which is the Content of the Brick-Work, in the Back Wall, in
the given thickness of 3 Bricks thick.

Then find the Content of the side Walls, which are each 24 Feet, 6 Inches,
Long.
To perform which Multiply the Length 24 Feet, 9 Inches, into the Height 6
Feet, 6 Inches, and the Product will be 235 Feet, 1 Inch, 6 Seconds, for the
Content of one of the side Walls, which are a like in Length, Height, and
Thickness, therefore double the same and you will have 470 Feet, 3 Inches, for
the Brick-Work of both the side Walls, in the given thickness, viz. 2 Bricks
thick, as in the following Work.

^

Thus having found the Content of all the Walls, to the first Floor, to be as
follows, viz. the Wall on the Front 87 Feet, 10 Inches, 6 Seconds, in 3
Bricks thick, and the Wall on the Back 100 Feet, 7 Inches, 8 Seconds, in 3
Bricks thick and the 2 side Walls 470 Feet, 3 Inches, in 2 Bricks thick.

After the same manner find the Content of all the Walls, to the Second Floor,
and so on till you have found the Content of all the Brick Walls in the
Building you are to Measure.

Having so done there Remains nothing more to be done, only that you Reduce the
Content of each Wall, into a Brick and a half thick, and Add them all into 1
Sum, and Reduce, your Sum into Rods, by the former Rules. But because in all
Building you find several Walls of one thickness, therefore the best way to
perform the same, is as follows, Set down the Content of all the Walls of one
thickness by themselves, and all the Walls of another thickness by themselves,
in Columns Ruled for that purpose, as in this Example.

2 Bricks. 3 Bricks 3 Bricks F. I. S. F. I. S. F. I. S. 209 3 0 100 7 8 87 10 0

The Content of the Front Wall was found as before, to be 87 Feet, 10 Inches,
in 3 Bricks thick, which set down a Column marked at the Top with it is
thickness, as you see is done here, and under the same, in the Column, place
the Content of all the rest of the Walls of the same thickness, and the like is
to be understood of all the rest, of the Wall of any Building whatsoever, then
Add each Column up, and Reduce the Sum of each, Column into a Brick and thick,
and when so done, Add them all together, and Divide their Feet in their Sum by
272, the Number of Feet in a Rod, and the Quotient will be the Content of the
said Building, in Rods. but in this Example, the trouble of Adding each Column
is Spared, because there is but one Row of Figures in each Column, which, that
the foregoing Rules may be the better understood, we will call the Sum of each
Column; to Reduce which Columns into 2 Brick.

1. Take the Sum of the first Column toward your Right Hand, which is 207
Feet, 3 Inches, which is the Content of all the Walls in this Example, which
are 2 Bricks thick, and Multiply the same by 4, the Number of half Bricks
Contained in the thickness, and the Product will be 829 Feet, which is the
Content of the said Walls, in a Brick thick, which Divide by 3, the Number of
Bricks, contained in 1 Brick, and the Quotient will be 276 Feet, 4 Inches,
which is the Content of all the Walls of 2 Bricks thick, in 1 Brick thick, as
in the following Work.

Then take the Sum of the Second Column, 100 Feet, 7 Inches, 8 Seconds, which
Multiply by 7, the number of the Bricks contained in the thickness, and the
Product will be 704 Feet, 5 Inches, 8 Seconds, which Divide by 3, the Number of
Bricks contained in 1 Brick and, and the Quotient will be 234 Feet, 9 Inches,
10 Seconds, the Content of all the VValls of 3 Bricks thick, in 1 Brick thick,
as in the following Work.

Then likewise Reduce the Sum of the Third Column 87 Feet, 10 Inches, after the
same Method, into 1 Brick and thick, which you will find to be 175 Feet, 8
Inches, as in the following Work.

Thus having Reduced the Sum, of each Column in this Example, into 1 Brick and
thick, Add them all together, and their Sum will be 686 Feet, 9 Inches, 10
Seconds, which is the Content of all the Brick-VVork Required, in 1 Brick and
thick, which Reduce into Rods, by Dividing it by 272, the Number of Feet
contained in a Rod, so will you have 2 Rods, and 142/272 of a Rod, which is
something above a Rod, for the Content of the Brick-Work, to the first floor
required, as in the following Work.

What has been said, I suppose is sufficient to Explain the beforegoing Rules,
so that to give you any more Examples of that kind will be needles.

But because there is some Walls that have Watet-tables, that is Built some 3,
some 5 Feet High, which Water-table is many times a Brick thick, and some times
more, I shall show you how to Measure any such Wall.

To Measure which, first find the Content of the Wall, as before taught, and
Reduce the same into Brick and half Thick, then find the Content of the
Water-Table, after the same manner, and likewise Reduce it into 1 Brick Thick,
then Add the Content of the Water-Table, to the Content of the Wall, and the
Sum is the Content of the said Wall with the Water-Table, which Reduce into
Rods, as before Taught.

Example.
Admit rhere is a Wall that is 2 Bricks Thick being 91 Feet, 6 Inches Long, and
17 Feet, 3 Inches high, which has a Water-Table a Brick Thick, and 3 Feet
High, whose Content is required.

To find which, first find the Content of the Wall by Multiplying the Height
into the Length, and the Product will be 1578 Feet, 4 Inches, 6 Seconds, which
Reduce into 1 Brick Thick, by Multiplying it by 4, the Number of half Bricks,
contained in the given Thickneses, and Dividing the Product by 3 the Number of
half Bricks contained in 1 Brick, and so will you find the Content of the Wall
in Brick and Thick to be 2104 Feet, 6 Inches, as in the following Work.

^

^

Then find the Content of the Water-Table, by Multiplying it is Height 3 Feet,
into the Length of the Wall 91 Feet, 6 Inches, and the Product will be 274
Feet, 6 Inches, which Reduce into 1 Brick Thick, which because the Thickness of
the said Water-Table is a Brick Thick is done by the Dividing by 3, and the
Quotient will be 91 Feet, 6 Inches, for the Content of the said Water-Table in
Brick and, as in the Following Work.

^

Then Add the Content of the Wall in a Brick and half Thick, before found to be
2104 Feet, 6 Inches, to the Content of the Water-Table in 1 Brick thick and
their Sum will be 2196 Feet, for the Content of the Wall Required, which you
must Reduce into Rods, as before taught, so will you find 8 Rods, and 20 Feet,
of Brick-Work, to be in the said Wall, as in the following Work.

^

How to Measure Chimnies.
The Common way allowed by all Measurers, is thus, girt the Chimney Round,
below the Mantle-Tree; if it be in a Wood Building where the Wall of the House,
does go to make the Back of the Chimney, and take the girt of the Chimny for
the length, and the height of the Room, for the Breadth, and then Multiply the
one into the other, and the Product take for the Content, in the same thickness
as the Jaumes are on, which must be Reduced into 1 Brick.

But if the Chimney stands against a Brick Wall, then the Wall at the Back
being the same with the Wall of the House, and therefore being Measured, as
Part of the Wall, they only girt it Round to the Wall, and Multiply that into
the height of the Room, and take the Product for the Content of the Chimney in
the same thickness as the Jaums are on, which you must Reduce as before into 1
Brick thick.

Example.
Admit there is a Chimney whose girt round below the Mantle Tree, is 10 Feet, 6
Inches, and the height of the Room where the same stands, 9 Feet, the Jaums of
which Chimny, is 2 Bricks thick, whose Content is required.

To perform which, Multiply the girt 10 Feet, 6 Inches, into the height of the
Room 9 Feet, and the Product will give 94 Feet, 6 Inches, for the Content of
the said Chimny, in the same thickness as the Jaumes is off, which ^s 2 Bricks
thick, which you mu^t Reduce into 1 Brick thick, as before directed, so will
you find the Content thereof in Brick and one half to be 129 Feet, as in the
following Work.

Having by some of the before going methods, found the Content of all the
Chimnies, you are next to find the Content of Shafts, to perform which, you
must girt them about in the narrowest place and take that for the breadth, and
their height, for the Length, and multiply one into the other, and the Product
will be the Content, the Shaft or Shafts in the same thickness as their breadth
is of, for you must understand that they are Measured as if they were a Solid
Piece of Brick-Work which you must Reduce into 1 Brick thick.

How to Measure Tyling.
Tyling is Measured by the Square, Containing 100 Feet, and is in every respect
the same with that of Roofing, taught in Measuring Carpenters Work.

Example.
Admit there is a Roof of a Building that is Tyled the length of which
Building, from the outside of the Wall at one End, to the out side of the Wall
at the other End is 15 Feet, and the Breadth from the outside of the one Wall,
to the outside of the other, 9 Feet, 6 Inches, and it be required to find the
Content of the said Tyling which you will find to be 2 Squares, 1 Foot, 3
Inches, and 81/100 of an Inch.

^

^

Thus much of Measuring of Artificers Work relating to Building, I presume what
has been said, is sufficient for the meanest Capacity to understand, how to
Measure any sort of Building Timber, Stone, or any sort of Body whatsoever.

FINIS.
Advertisement of Choice new Books lately Printed for, and Published by Tho.
Salusbury at the King's Arms next St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet.
THE Gazetteer's, or Newsman's Interpreter: Being a Geographical Index of all
the Considerable Cities, Patriarchships, Bishoprics, Universities, Dukedoms,
Earldoms, and such like; Imperial and Hance Towns, Ports, Forts, Castles, etc.
in Europe. Showing in what Kingdoms, Provinces, and Counties they are in; to
what Prince they are now Subject; upon, or nigh what Rivers, Bays, Seas,
Mountains, etc. they stand; their Distances (in English Miles) from several
other Places of Note, with their Longitude and Latitude, according to the best
and approved Maps. Of special, use for the true Understanding of all Modern
Histories of Vrope, as well as the Present Affares; and for the Convenience of
Cheapness and Pocket-Carriage, Explained by Abbreviations and Figures. By Law.
Eachard A. B. of Christ's College in Cambridge.

2. The History of the Late Great Revolution in England and Scotland. With the
Causes and Means by which it was Accomplished. Together with a Particular
Account of the Extraordinary Occurrencies which happned thereupon. As likewise
the Settlement of both the Kingdoms under Their Most Serene Majesty's King
William and Queen Mary. Price 5 Shillings.

3. Zingis, or Love preferred before Duty; a Novel, Translated out of French.
Price Bound 1 Shilling.

4. Arithmetical Rules digested and Contracted, made plain and easy for the
help and benefit of the Memory. Very necessary for all Gentlemen and Tradesmen,
as for Youth and Apprentices in Merchantile Affairs. By Arthur Leadbetter,
Schoolmaster in Bury St. Edmonds in Suffolk. Twelves, Price 1. s.

5. Chimichus Rationalis, or the Fundamental Grounds of the Chimical Art,
rationally stated and demonstrated by various Examples in Destillation,
Rectification, and Exaltation of Wines, Spirits, Tinctures, Oils, Salts,
Powders, and Oleosums, in such a Method as to retain the Specific Virtues of
Concerts in the greatest power and Force. By W. Yworth, Spagyrick Physician and
Philosopher by Fire. Price bound 1 s.

6. A new Art of Brewing Beer, Ale, and other sorts of Liquors, so as to render
them more healthful to the Body, and agreeable to Nature, and to keep the
longer from sowring, with less Trouble and Charge than generally practiced. To
which is added the Art of making Malt. The third Edition. By Tho. Tryon,
Student in Physic. Twelves, Price bound 1 s.

7. A new Art of making above 20 sorts of Wines, Brandy, and other Spirits,
more pleasant and agreeable to the English Constitution, than those of France;
compliant to the late Act of Parliament, and Illustrated by the Doctrine of
Fermentation and Distillation, by the various Examples on the Growth and
Products of this Island. By W. Y. Medicinal Professor. 12 s. Price bound 1 s. 6
d.

8. Wisdoms Dictares, or Rules Physical and Moral, for preserving the Health of
the Body, and the Peace of the Mind. Fit to be regarded and practiced by all
that would enjoy the Blessing of this World. To which is added a Bill of Fare
of 75 noble Dishes of Excellent Food, without either Fish or Flesh. (...) The
Tryon, Student in (...)


