TO THE MOST HONORABLE And high Court of Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Gentlemen, and other of the Inhabitants of the
County of Cornwall.
HAving seen and heard the many (though scarce diverse) Petitions to this
Honorable Assembly by the Inhabitants of diverse, Counties and Cities of this
Land, as also Corporations, Companies, and Trades, some against Bishops, some
against the Common Prayer, and all against such judicial, and things
super-elementary to the Region of their capacity of judging, and matters only
belonging to the judicature of this grave Synod, which seems either to
distrust, or direct, or both, your great wisdoms; We therefore the Gentlemen
and other the Inhabitants of Cornwall, with as many hearts, though not hands,
with as many good wills, though not persons, not in imitation, but rather by
provocation and necessity, in these times, to show our good minded affections,
do humbly prostrate the utmost of our service to your feet. In which (or
rather after which) we take leave humbly to beg,

That you will be pleased to bend your auxiliary and good affections to the
redress of the distress of the miserable Protestants in Ireland. To gain
whose good, prosperity, peace, and tranquillity, to preserve the Sovereignty of
that Land to our Royal King, and to maintain his and this Kingdoms honor,
We shall willingly lay down our lives and fortunes.

That you will be pleased to continue your great respect, dutiful love, and
true obedience, to our Royal Sovereign, by maintaining his just, and no way
antilegall Prerogative.

That you will be pleased to put the Laws in due execution against all
Jesuits, Seminaries, Papists and Recusants.

That you will be pleased to look upon the other side, and duly weighing the
actions (or rather factions) of some, (whom most men call Citizens) to scourge
their irregular and disorderly schism and heretical Sects, into right paths
of serving God, to frequent his House, and to pray as well as hear, to allow
order, and obey conformity, to reverence Learning, and bow to Authority, to be
under a discipline, and live in order.

That you will be pleased to maintain and establish the ancient fundamental
and most venerable Laws, Order and Discipline, both of our Church and
Commonwealth, to continue the reverenced Office, and punish the offending
persons of Bishops, to have in high account, and eternize (as far as in you
lies) the Divine and excellent form of Common Prayer, to correct brain-forg'd
doctrine, by your exemplary precepts strike a reverence of Gods House into
every man's breast.

That you will be pleased to intimate to the people your honorable and wise
intentions concerning Divine Service, lest while you hold your peace, some
rejecting it in part, others altogether, they vainly conceive you countenance
them.

Lastly, (not to trouble your great affairs any longer) That you will be
pleased to take into your sage consideration, those scandalous and ill-affected
Pamphlets, which fly abroad in such swarms, as are able to cloud the pure
air of truth, and present a dark ignorance to those who have not the two
wings of Justice and knowledge to fly above them.

Now to polish this our work with a smooth demonstration of our modest
intents, that the tinctures which in introduction fell on the fore mentioned
presents may slide without a stain from this; We do in all humility declare,
that neither distrust of your intentions, nor opinion of any of our counsels
worthy your ears ever tainted our thoughts, but that we have still been, and
are confident, that this most wise Synod has ever thought fit, resolved, and
will confirm into action, what we now humbly request, therefore this our
present, not so much a Petition, as a prayer of willing and thankful hearts
for the hoped sequel, is only to show our true intentions and good will
toward his gracious Majesty, and this high Court, as Instruments of the peace
of our souls and bodies, for which we are unanimously, and immutably resolved
to spend our dearest blood.

Published by I.B. Gent.

