A LETTER from an honorable Gentleman in the Court, certifying the Examination
of Mr. John Cheisly Esquire, Secretary to the Commissioners of Scotland, Who
was taken and stayed at Newcastle, with his Answer to the many Interrogatories
put unto him by the Governor and Major thereof, concerning Major General
Massies going into Scotland, to raise an Army: And the Scots preparations to
invade this Kingdom. With some other advertisements concerning Peace. Together
with the certainty of the safe landing of Sir William Waller, Mr. Anthony
Nicols, and other impeached Members, at the Brill in Holland.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

Sir:
I Have received your Letter advertising the health and present condition of
his Majesty, and the report of Major General Massies going into Scotland; as
also the confinement of Mr. John Cheisty Esquire, at New castle, who being
examined, as you write, by the Major and Governor of that Town, I must
confess I do much affect your expressions, That he behaved himself
resolutely like a Gentleman, and expressed himself discreetly like a
Secretary: and I do verily believe, that the Answer which he made to the
Interrogatories to be very real and according to his conscience.

1. That he knew not where Major General Massy was, and had nothing to
satisfy them whether he was in Scotland, or no.

2. That as for his own particular, his Dispatch from London into Scotland,
was in no relation to any design of Major General Masey, or to raise any new
war, but to labor to the utmost of his abilities for the establishment of a
true peace, and the preservation of a right understanding between the two
Kingdoms.

3. That as he had given already sufficient demonstrations to both Kingdoms
of his integrity for five years together, so he could not but lament his
present unhappiness to have his fidelity now suspected, and his indevours so
churlishly examined, which did promise to themselves a more fair construction.

Sir, these indeed were honest expressions, in the which I do still observe and
commend your candor, that you are careful to render to every one their due,
and to continue your wonted course, which is wisely to steer betwixt the two
great factions in this Kingdom, the Whirlepoole, and the Rock, without fear
or danger of splitting against the one, or ingulphing within the other.

But since you are pleased to put your command upon me, to give you my opinion,
and what I conceive will be the event of these fid times, and whether the Scots
will take up Arms, and what it is probable that Major General Massy, (if
there) may perform in the Kingdom of Scotland, or if the mercy of God shall
so dispose it, that there shall no sword be drawn betwixt the two Kingdoms,
what may be the best means to reconcile the two different parties of this
Kingdom, I will use my endeavor to satisfy you, beseeching you hereafter that
you will put me upon more easy duties, and impute no more unto me, then I am
well able to discharge.

For the Scots invading this Kingdom with a new Army, (let their Pulpits
press it never so much) I believe it is a thing at this present not to be
feared. For unto the making of a war (it is a maxine in state) that there are
required these two great sinews, Money, and Provisions; without which, men will
fail, and war will fall of it self. For the first, you cannot be ignorant,
that the Kingdom of Scotland is extremely necessitated: How many Letters of
Invitation were sent unto them before they entered our Kingdom last, when the
North was unplundred, and the Kingdom in a more plentiful condition to
satisfy the appetite of the greedy soldiers then now it is: and yet the common
soldiers would not then stir without three pound English, paid for advance to
every man. Where is this money to be had there now? what a sum would this rise
to amongst twenty thousand men, although no man was to have above the allowance
of a common soldier? But suppose (which is impossible to be granted) that this
money was to be had, and the soldier on his march, what encouragement would he
send for the future, where would he look for recruits? their demeanor when
they were here last, being so full of rapine and oppression, that the weaker
sort of our Nation in the North (believe it Sir,) do tremble to hear of their
coming again into this Kingdom, and the more manly and resolute party will
stand on their guards, and lose their lives every man in his own defense,
before they will be persuaded to re-admit them.

Besides, they know very well, that there is a party in this Kingdom, that
does so strongly hate them, that if their Covenant should hang a little lower
in our Churches, their very Dogs would go near to lift up their legs against
it. And as they are destitute of money and encouragement, so they are in great
distress for provision, and (God bless them) they do stand in as great a
need of health as that: for besides want of health, the Pestilence raging in
many of their chiefest Cities and Towns, it may appear in what distress they
are for want of provision both for man and horse to sustain an Army; by the
advance of Lieutenant General Lesley into the Highlanders, in the beginning of
the last Spring, he being not able to march up against the Enemy, having
relief neither for horse nor men. And where should they expect this relief if
they should march into England? The people who already know their tempers and
have suffered almost beyond expression, will on the first rumor of their
advance, take all that they have with them, and drive all that they have before
them, before they will be made a prey unto such guests again.

You we^e pleased to hint in your Letter, that there were some of quality in
Newcastle, who would be ready to entertain them: Sir, the disposure of such a
Town as Newcastle, does not lie at the pleasure of two or three Merchants,
besides it is garrisoned by such soldiers, as (I believe) will not on easy
conditions surrender it to the Scots. You may add to this that Colonel
Lambert is not idle in the North, but is watchful to discover all their
designs, and to observe all their motions, and were they resolved to re-invade
this Kingdom, there is no doubt, but that with a powerful Army, he would
meet them half way to give them entertainment.

But Sir, there is one thing more then all this, which is, the pleasure of the
King which you write me word would certainly countermand them in the march, or
if they should advance into this Kingdom, they are like to pass under the
notion of Traitors. Is it likely, Sir, that a Nation so provident as the Scots,
who pretend nothing more then Allegiance to their King, would adventure
themselves in a war, for which, they shall be sure to be proclaimed Traitors?
Is it probable that a Nation so poor as the Scots, should adventure to lose
that little which they have, to purchase a certain and perpetual poverty, and
to inherit nothing but the wind, and their own melancholy? Is it possible
that a Nation so hungry as the Scots, should forsake their meals, and their
oaten cakes at home, to endure a wilful famine abroad? Besides the valor and
resolution of the English is well known unto the Scots, and is it likely that
they will adventure their fortunes, their food, their limbs, their lives, to
embrace a grave, or (which is worse then that) the infamy of a shameful
flight? Religion is made a pretense for all wars, but I could never yet find
that it did ever thrive by any; Schisms and Heresies are never more fruitful
then when the sword is drawn.

But you will object, that the Scots do expect many abettors, and have much
assistance promised them from the Presbyterian party in the Kingdom; it is not
doubted, but where will those recruits appear? Has not Sir Tho. Fairefax
taken the possession of the Tower of London, and all the Magazines of the City,
so that if a Musket should be unfixed, or a Pike broken, I cannot direct them
for the present where to relieve themselves; nay, are not all the most
considerable places in the Kingdom garrisoned by his Army? They must be surely
more then desperate that will adventure themselves in this Kingdom without
money, without provision, without encouragements, without reserves or recruits,
or a place of security to retire unto.

As concerning Major General Massey, I do conceive that you have not stated
the question aright, for I believe, it is not to be propounded whether Major
General Massy would be in the Head of the Scotch Army, or no, for the
defense of the Covenant, or the Presbyterian party; but whether Major General
Massy would adventure in the service to bring an Army from Scotland into
England, if his Majesty should cause him to be proclaimed Traitor that should
undertake it; Certainly not: There is no question but the obligation of his
Allegiance would put him into a tamer posture. And for my part, if he be in
that Kingdom, (as truly Sir, I do much doubt it, and can give many reasons
for it) I do believe that he would rather endure the melancholy of a man that
endured a willing banishm^^^ for a while, then incur the sentence and the
infamy of a Traitor for ever.

Concerning your desire to be satisfied, what is the best expedient to
reconcile the two different parties in the Kingdom: Truly Sir, I would I were
as well able to give counsel for the performing of it, as I should receive a
most hearty and undissembling joy to see it performed; I would do very well
(as you write) that some good course might be found for the taking away the
unagreeable names of Presbyterian and Independent, and that no more they might
be heard amongst us; but that we might be all of one affection as well as of
one Nation; but as long as the practice holds, I believe that the names will
continue. Sir what do you think (as it has been observed in this City of
London) that as one King is sometimes free of one Company of the City, and
sometimes one King of another, as one King may be free of the Company of the
Merchant Tailors and another of the Mercers, not that one of them is a Woollen
Draper, or the other a Mercer, but to keep the Companies even and entire, and
to suppress all envy, f^ction, and pride of spirit, which otherwise might grow
upon them? so what if his Majesty should seem inclined to the Independent
party, and the Prince to the Presbyterian, not that his Majesty is an
Independent, or the Prince a Presbyterian? but so to temper by policy, and to
poyse both parties that a mutual confidence and reconcilement may be had, and
by degrees so to qualify and suppress them, that at length which may be the
work of less then seven years) as well their names as practice may be lost,
and the Protestant Religion flourish in its native beauty: How happy would it
be that free Parliaments should enjoy their known Privileges, and the
Kingdom smile again in peace, safety, and happiness the end of all their
travells?

Sir I have something more to annex, but I am abruptly called away, which I
must beseech you to excuse, and with all my rudeness, that I have already so
unmannerly tormented you with the length of this Letter, which I hope will be
the easier pardoned because it was in a desire to content you, which shall be the
constant endeavor of him, who is,

SIR, Your thrice humble and thrice affectionate servant, I. ^.
Sir, As I had made an end of writing this, there came to my hands a certain
advertisement confirmed by several Letters from beyond the Seas, that the
impeached Members are safely landed at the Bril in Holland; neither is Sir
William Waller or any of them taken prisoners, as it was reported.



FINIS.

