A DISCOURSE TENDING TO PROVE THE BAPTISM IN, OR UNDER The Defection of
ANTICHRIST to be the Ordinance of Jesus Christ.

AS ALSO That the Baptism of Infants or Children is warrantable, and agreeable
to the word of GOD.

Where the perpetuity of the estate of Christ's Church in the world, and the
everlastingnesse of the Covenant of Almighty GOD to Abraham are set forth as
maine Grounds, and sundry other particular things are controverted and
discussed.

By P. B.

Stand in the way, ask for the old way which is the good way, walk therein,
and you shall find rest to your Souls. Jer. 6. 16. If it be of God, ye
cannot destroy it, lest you become fighters against God. Acts 5. 38. Stand fast
Brethren, and keep the Ordinances or Traditions you have bin taught by word or
by Epistle. 2 These. 2. 15. LONDON, Printed by R Oulton and G. Dexter, and are
to be sold by Benjamine Allen over against the sign of the Angel in
Pope's Head Ally, 1642.

The Epistle to the READER,
Courteous READER,
IT seems to be the work of this present age, to be upon the measuring of
the Temple, the Altar, and them that worship Rev. 11. 1.
therein; about the measuring of which things, though the truth and true measure
be but one, yet the persons measuring, are very various, and much differing,
not only concerning the right understanding of the measure, but also concerning
the things measured: hence it is that diversity of opinions and practices are
found amongst persons concerning matt^^s of Religion and Godliness, amongst
which, the matter of this Discourse is not the least, but rather ou^ of the
greatest differences in outward Religion, so as it, both on the one side and on
the other, is as a Foundation to be built upon, in regard of many things, which
must needs follow, according as persons shall hold and believe one way or
other; and so great a difference and distance does it lead men into, that it
admits of no healing, for till men be agreed about the matter of a thing
(that being first essential) how should they ^ossibly agree about the thing it
self. The things held forth and maintained, to wit, the Baptism under the
defection to be the Ordinance of Christ, and the Baptism of the seed of
Believers to be Gods will and appointment, as also the things opposed, namely
rebaptizing, or the new way of Baptism taken up by some, and the refusing, or
denying the Baptism of Infants, are in this Discourse argued and discussed,
not by way of School learning, but by plain inferences, and such necessary
consequences as are not to be denied. The opposite part, in regard of this
Discourse, are commonly called, by a Nic-name put upon them, An^baptists, some
of which, are my loving friends and acquaintance, whom I would not displease,
but rather please, whom I envy not, but love, but the truth is to be loved
above all, being most dear and precious. Indeed these seem to have the zeal
of GOD, if it were according to right knowledge: they seek after truth, and
think they have found it, when they embrace an error, which the further they
go on in, the further out of the way, which appears in that sum, they
miss it only in the point of Baptism, etc. whereas others, (as by an
Honorable Person was lately observed) err in points of an higher Nature, as
namely in holding Free Will, fall^ng from Grace, conditional Election, and
denying Original sin, opinions accounted as destructive to the truth by the
Godly. Indeed I have had great reasoning within me, whether I should conceal
this Discourse, and keep it for private use, or make it public, but minding
what great distraction of mind, and unsetlednesse do attend not a few about
this matter, and minding that some of the learned do give in no further
concerning Baptism of Infants or Children, then as a Tradition of long and
ancient use, whereby many take occasion to strengthen themselves, and to
confirm others against the Baptizing of Children: I have adventured for the
truths sake, to make this common, hoping it may tend to some satisfaction and
stay of men's minds in this matter, and the truth and true ground of things may
be the better wayed, and the truth some way furthered, and some persons kept
from such wonderful changes and rechanges as are found with them. Unity or
oneness of mind among the Godly is an excellent thing, and greatly to be
desired, so it be in the truth, but GOD that of his Infinite wisdom causes
good to come out of evil, causes much profit to attend the variations of his
Servants, the truth is the more sought into and discovered, and comes to shine
forth more fully afterward, The Children of the truth come to be approved, 1
Co. 11. 19.
so as the matter being so unavoydable, in as much as the Scripture must needs
be true, and every part thereof fulfilled. It were much to be desired, that
persons would not be so much offended about the differences and variation that
are in the matters of Religion and the service of GOD, if they would consider,
that great darkness had for a long time attended the world, by the prevailing
of the man of sin, so as men coming out into the light, see men like trees as
the Proverb is: And again would mind, how great oneness and agreement there
is in those that d^ffer, agreeing in the maine points of Belief of one GOD,
one Lord Jesus Christ, touching his Natures and Offices; as also in the
Doctrine of Justification, Redemption, Sanctification, in the Doctrine of
Free Grace, and perseverance therein and many more, too large to be rehearsed
here: And then on the otherside would consider, how that the differences among
the Godly, are of inferior kind, being only for the most part about outward
worship, and the right way of serving GOD, wherein if any do err, he falls
to his own Master, and his error cannot reach an other To 14 4.
in way of prejudice or hurt, every one being to give an account unto GOD for
himself: I say if persons did but mind such like things, it would greatly
abate of the prejudice that many have in their minds, touching this matter,
and it would take-off the offense of others, which without ca^se they have
taken against such as seek after the truth by reason ^^ this; for indeed it
must needs be a great weakness of mind and want of judgment ^o be so highly
displeased, as some are, with variety of judgments among men, in matters of
Religion: And however it is most certain, that it is better there should be
differences among men, then that gross ignorance should take place, or Papa^l
Tyranny bear sway and rule as it has done, and yet does too much in the
world, and the same persons that are so offended about differences of opinions,
take little or not offense at the same. In reading of this following Discourse
I shall desire of thee Courteous Reader, who ever thou be, that thou would
not gather any such conclusion, as if I held the Church of Rome a true Church,
for indeed I am far from any such thoughts, holding that State to be the
Mother of Fornications, the great where Sodom and Egypt spiritually, according
to the account of the Scripture. Now for this Discourse sent forth, if it shall
come into the hands of the Learned, I desire they would take no exception at
any Tottologie or want of Art they shall find in it, for the Author professes
it not, and did apply himself to weaker capacities, and so went over things
the ofter that they might the less mistake or mis-construe his meaning. If it
shall come into the hands of those that mind the things as truths, which this
Discourse opposes, I pray them to consider the whole, and one thing with
another, before they give judgment; and if it shall please any to make
Answer, (whereat I shall be nothing offended) I desire they would please to
measure such measure as I have measured to them, whom I trust I have not in the
least wronged; And if in Answer they can discover any error, I shall be
content to lose, so the truth may gain. If any shall meet with this that are
like to Gallio, I only counsel them not to increase their bonds by mocking;
Act. 18. 17.
and if they will not be warned, let them mock on. If any moderate and
indifferent affected shall read this Discourse, and gain any knowledge by it,
let them give the praise to God. And so forbearing to trouble thee Courteous
Reader, with any thing further, I leave thee to the perusing of it, (and the
blessing of God to cause thee to profit) and rest,

Thine in the service of Love, P. B.

A DISCOURSE TENDING TO PROVE the Baptism, in the defection of Antichrist, to
be the Ordinance of JESUS CHRIST.
THE holy Scriptures do very fully and clearly hold forth the perpetuity and
continuation of the estate of the visible or external Church of Christ in the
world, a plant of his own planting not to be rooted out for ever. This having
continued from Abraham to Moses, from Moses to our Lord Christ, and from Him to
continue till he shall come and deliver it up to his Father, that God may be
all in all. The perpetuity and abidingnesse of 1 Cor. 15.
this last period of the Church under the New Testament, it was foretold by
Prophecy, Esaias 9. 7. 59. 21. Dan. 7. witnessed very fully, Luke 1. 33. Acts 5.
29. Heb. 12. 29. and it is confirmed by Promise, in the 16. Math. 18. 28. 20.
these promises (as all other) are yea and Amen, stable and true for ever, and
so to be accounted by all the Saints.

To all which places that give in witness to this we might add that in the
13. Hebr. 8. Jesus Christ yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, as in
other considerations; so the Head, and Husband of his Church his Spouse, his
Body.

Certainly Jesus Christ was never a Widower or Head, without a body, be that
far from any to think, which should be if (at any time) his Church seized to
be, or died out of the world.

This estate of Christ's visible Church being thus to abide, and abiding and
continuing in the world, It has abode and continued under the defection of
Antichrists usurpation; or otherwise it has abode and continued somwhere else
in the world, as from under that defection, for some where remaining, it must
be of necessity.

The defection and falling away under Antichrist was very general and
marvelous universal, as appears by what is written, Rev. 13. 8. 16. And
unless the defection had bin so, how should those be the first fruits unto
God, that first appeared in the dawne of the day (commonly accounted, and that
not untruly, as I judge the Waldenses) if there had bin any that had remained
pure and undefiled, as in a Church way. Indeed the Greeks did not always
subject to the Roman power, yet were very little short in defection. I suppose
according to the measure whereby the Romanist in defection are measured, they
will stand or fall together. Truly it will be a piece of special service to
the godly, and very thankfully accepted, if any could make it appear, such a
continuance of the Church estate elsewhere in the world, then (as aforesaid) it
would tend to the settling of things very much: and for my part, I should
bless God for their discovery. If none be foundable to make it appear, as to
have continued elsewhere (as I believe they cannot) then it will be more then
probable, that it has continued under the defection of Antichrist, according
to that of the 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. for some way, and some where it must continue.
And as the Church that great Instituted Ordinance is to continue, and has
continued, so likewise the Ordinance of Baptism, by which the matter of the
Church is differenced.

Now if what is before said concerning the perpetuity of the visible Church,
shall be found a truth, and so esteemed, then that must needs be found an
error, and so accounted, that supposes or takes that for a ground, which is
the direct contrary, and flat denial of this truth, to wit, That the Church
has leased at some time, and bin utterly extingu^sht, and Christ a Widdower
for a good season, till by themselves, or some others it was revived, and so
came to live again: Such as take this for a ground of their practice, they
must needs err, and build upon the sands.

But the way of new Baptizing, la^ely began to be practiced by some, supposing
themselves, and so others, not to have bin Baptized with the Baptism of
Christ* has no ground for i^s practice, but the sesa^ion of the Church, and
Baptism with it, as not remaining in the world. That they are utterly seized
where Antichrist prevail^d to exalt himself, their practice does ^ully
declare: and that it is so, they take for granted and indeed; so had they need,
for to prove it they cannot; let that be minded, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. Math. 16. 18.
If it were so, that under the defection, the Ordinance of the Church, and
Baptism ceased; yet that it no where remains in the world, may not be
thought for the reverence of Gods Word before declared. But till this also be
believed that the estate of Christ's Church and Baptism, by which the matter is
differenced, is no where else to be found, remaining in the world: there is no
ground for this practice of raising Baptism, by persons Baptizing themselves:
But rather there would be a seeking out the Church, where she were to be found,
and there receiving the holy Ordinance of Christ's Baptism, as in a right line,
and so be added to the Church, and from thence conveying the truth into these
parts again, where Acts 2. 47. Psalm 133.
it had ceased. In Sion of old God appointed the blessing, and life for ever,
and thither, from the utmost parts of the earth the godly repaired, as they
very well know. But they do not believe such a continuation, it is plain, and
how shall they then seek there to light their Candle? they must seek, as they
do, to do it some other way. To help their belief, or make it greater
unbelief, I pray them to study that place, Heb. 13. 8. and see how they can
resolve the case, that Christ should not have bin a Widower, and a Head without
a Body: if his visible Church had dyed, and left the world, till they, or
other, a little sooner, came and made him one again, without his appointing,
or leave, or consent asked; a very mean opinion, unworthy our Lord, or any of
his followers. And whether he will accept of this Spouse they make him, or
reject her as a Harlot, may well be questioned; and the rather, seeing they
have questioned it themselves once and the second time.

But I well know some are so filled with prejudice, that they have no patience
to hear, or so much as to think of this matter of the Church estate remaining
under Antichrists exaltation: I do pray them setting aside prejudice, they
would be pleased to assign and set forth the error or absurdity, the hurt or
damage that comes of such an opinion, that the Ordinance of the Church, and
Baptism, have bin in Captivity in Babylon, and there preserved by the power of
God for a time, etc. and now by the same power brought out and restored to
freedom and purity, God returning to build again his Acts 15.
Tabernacle, bro^e down and ruined, but not destroyed, as sometime of old the
Church and Vessels of the Lord were in Babylon, and from thence returned. When
it shall please any to set down the Esa. 1* 7. 8. 9. -11.
error, or hurt, or damage, I do promise with Gods leave, to consider of it,
and happily it may after my belief in this point.

But now further Baptism being lost and fallen out of the world and an Idol,
and likeness come in the room of it, the Church being ceased, to whom Christ
gave his power; persons not having the Baptism of Jesus Christ, but being
unbaptized, all which the opinion and practice of New beginning Baptism
supposes to be most true and certain, and thereupon do ground their
proceedings.

I infer hereupon, that it is, and ever shall be found unlawful^, and without
warr^nt for any person, or persons whatsoever, to attempt, or go about the
raising, erecting, or setting up of it again, unless Man. 3. 3. 17. 11. 13.
Man. 9. 12.
the said persons have a special and particular warrant from heaven, and a
Commission, as John the Baptist had. The Jews (though blind could see this,
that none but a Christ, a Moses, or Elias, or a Prophet from heaven might do
this; so as there being ^^. 1 15
no such to be found to restore, and newly to erect this Ordinance fallen out
of the world, for any other to go about the raising of it (as some please to
term it) they shall but raise it from beneath (if not out of the bottomless
pit) Commission being wanting in the actors of it, it shall be but only earthly
and from beneath. And it being asked of the^e, as the Jo. 3 31.
Jews asked of John his Baptism, whether it were from heaven, or of men? It
must needs be answered of Men, for no Commission can any show to raise Baptism
thus fallen out of the world; nor to Baptize themselves, Mark. 21. 25
or others, being themselves unbaptized, no more then Nadab and Abihu could
show ^or taking other Fire, Levi. 10. or Saul for sacrificing in Samuel's 1 Samuel 13. 8
absence. If these should be asked as were those that would cast our Devil^ in
Jesus name, without, Commission, Jesus we acknowledge, and ^aul we know but who
are ye? whence came you? who gave you Acts 19. 15.
Commission? they must need remain silent. Waiting is unavoidable in this
case, till our Lord come, or send some one from heaven to restore, and newly to
begin this lost Ordi^ance: for, to do otherwise, 2 Chronicles. 26. 18, 19.
were ^o d^^ as King V^zia did, or as did Saul in offe^^ng sacr^fice in
Sa^^el's absence, he conceiving himself to be in a great straight, as indeed
they are, and may well take themselves to be, that are of such opinion that
Baptism is lost, and fallen out of the world, and must be by them, as of
necessity, be gone again and restored.

This their attempt it is mavelous that they have not patience and do not
wait, seeing they, or at least some of them, believe and expect our Lord
Christ personally to appear again in the world; happily he may be angry at
their sudden attempt, that they did not wait and t^rr^ his coming, or at
least, till he had sent the^ wit^ special Commission as he did John the
Baptist, to prepare his way before him.

Now if any either have, or shall adventure to be I^r 23. 21.
so hardy and venturous, as to run no being sent, as of old some Prophets did,
and shall set about the doing of this, without Commission and special warrant,
they shall but produce and bring forth an Idol or their own begetting which
shall be no Ordinance of Jesus Christ at all; error according to their own
ground, having destroyed and made void their former Baptism, a little error
shall make void this also: and they shall still remain without the true
Baptism of Jesus Christ, as default in the subject made void their former
Baptism, and made them reject it as an Idol; default in power, and want of a
right Instrument that has Authority, shall make this to be ^o^d also, and an
Idol likewise, worthy to be rejected: for i^ a man can receive nothing, Ioh.
3. 27. Iam 1.
unless it be given him from above, and if every good gift be from above, from
the Father of lights; This not having Divine Authority in the Instrument, and
so is not from above, from Heaven, as John's Baptism was, but from beneath of
men earthly of no value at all; If default in the subject make a nullitie; an
Infant of a Believer, instead of a person of years, professing Faith and
Repentance, so is their opinion; then in like manner it must needs be, that
default in power, and want of a Commission, does make void also: That is, when
an unbaptised person instead of a Baptized, does act it. The Commission in the
28 Matt. 19. it is most plain, it is to none but to such as were Baptized,
receiving it from John that had Commission to do it, and so as in a right line.

An Unbaptised person, what has he to do with it, or the acting of it? he may
be sure God never required it at his hands: what warrant has any Unbaptised
Esa. 1. 12.
person to Baptize himself? he may be sure God never spoke one word to him
about it; as for Jer. 7. 22.
example, there is none in this kind to be found, not one in all the
Scriptures; and truly, for a man to Baptize himself, and so to begin Baptism,
(which he must necessarily think is not remaining in the world as before) is
so singular a course, and so differing from the way and practice of the Saints,
that it discovers it self to be erroneous and not of God: The people went to
John that had Commission, Paul to Ananias, Cornelius to Peter, the Eunuch to
Philip, Disciples to such as were Disciples before Mar. 1. 9.
them; yea, our Lord himself, the King of the Church, he went to John: If any
might take liberty to himself, sure he might, but he minded the fulfilling
Mar. 3. 19.
of righteousness, which how these regard it, I leave it to be judged by their
practice, who will thus adventure to do as never any did before, namely,
Baptize themselves, and then others, when as Baptized persons are in the world,
which they will not repair unto as our Lord did to John: If they had
questioned, as I have heard some, going over the Sea, they may please to mind
the example of our Lord, that went over Jordan to John, but it is likely, they
question their Baptism that went before them, whether it were true or no, it
not being lineally descended, and indeed so have they cause; In like manner
others do, and well may question theirs, as feari^g it is but some Idol of
their own, as before is said.

But all that can be said avails not to satisfy some, for by no means can
they see how Baptism should be Gods Ordinance, under the defection of
Antichrist. I answer, it may well be so that they cannot see this, nor yet
that to be the Temple of God where Antichrist sits. These. 2. 2. this is a
great difficulty to many, but what then? may it not be a truth, and so indeed
in the one and in the other, because many cannot see it: yes certainly, unless
such as cannot see it, had or might be thought to have infallible knowledge and
understanding: Nicodemus could not see into the truth of the Doctrine John 3.
of Regeneration, or the new birth: our Lord told him of, yet it was a truth;
and so is this of Baptism being Gods Ordinance, in or under the defection of
Antichrist, though some do not, and others cannot see it so to be: let such
mind that this is a mystery, yea mysteries standing together, the mystery of
the Church, and the mystery of Iniquity; these being found standing together,
no marvel if they be not so easily perceived particularly, especially when
persons look so fiercely upon the one, that they altogether loose the sight of
the other, and cannot see it, and so say as Nicodemus, how can it be? To be
able to distinguish aright of things, standing th^^ together, namely Gods posts
from men's, and men's from Gods, is a point of great wisdom, which the Lord give
men understanding to do aright.

Oh but the Baptism of Infants or Children is such a matter as spoyleth all,
and makes void Baptism forthwith, where it is practiced, so as ever since
this came into use or practice in the world. Baptism has there and then
ceased so, as to be non of Christ. Indeed, if it do make it void now, it did
so at the first, and so it began to cease, and there was a nullity of the
Baptism of many before Christ died, or at least before the Apostles left the
world, for ought any are able to manifest to the contrary, I may safely affirm.

But touching the Baptism of Children or Infants, if it were an error as some
suppose, and would have it; does it then follow that it is a nullitie, and so
void, because an error is in it? if it were so, then is their Baptism, their
Church, and all their actions, nullities and void, having error attending them,
as they will confess and must do, unless they will plead perfection in
their courses, which I trust they will not do: so as now the question will not
be concerning error, but concerning the nature and degree of error which
conduces to make void a matter, and so this of Baptism, and with reference to
the quality and degree of error; it is evident, that as great error attends
their new Baptism, as the Baptism of Infants, or theirs in infancy: let the
matter of the estate of defection be added to it; So as here is no ground to
go upon, but that which leads into an endless Labyrinth: and indeed, this
some of them have come to see and to confess, and so have rejected their
second Baptism also, and taken up a third, which in time no doubt, when their
heat is over, and they have more seriously considered of it, they will see it
to be as faulty as their first or second, and that it is to be rejected also.

But if an error do not make a nullitie, as it is most sure it does not, no
though the error should be great, then may the Baptism in and under the
defection, be and remain Gods Ordinance, notwithstanding all the error or
errors that attend it, or are in it: And indeed so it does, so as there is no
need of this new way never heard of in the word of God, namely of a persons
Baptising of himself, and so others afterward, or others before he himself
being Unbaptised, when as they said, persons were before partakers of the true
Baptism of Jesus Christ, notwithstanding there were some errors attending the
administering of it to them; for all that the premises will bear, or can be
gathered in this matter concerning the subject, is but at the most, that
persons should keep back their Infants or Children from the Ordinance, least
they happily should profane the same by overtimely using and partaking of it,
and so tarrying till nature had given some ripeness in speech and utterance,
and art by Industry in way of Education had done its part also, before seven
years they might become capable subjects, according to these men's ground,
confessing Faith, and professing Repentance, when they have never a whit more
grace then the^ had the first day they came into the world, and in this way as
I am informed, some in the Nether-lands are fully pleased and contented; a very
empty business.

But now very lately some are mightily taken, as having found out a new defect
in the Baptism, under the defection, which makes such a nullitie of Baptism,
in their conceit, that it is none at all, and it is concerning the manner of
Baptizing, wherein they have espied such default, as it makes an absolute
nullity of all persons Baptism, but such as have bin so Baptized, according to
their new discovery; and so partly as before, in regard of the subject, and
partly in regard of so great default in the manner: They not only conclude, as
is before said, a nullity of their present Baptism, And so, but address
themselves to be Baptized a third time, after the true way and manner they have
found out, which they account a precious truth. The particular of their opinion
and practice is to Dip, and that persons are to be Dipped, all and every part
to be under the Water; for if all the whole person be not under the Water, then
they hold they are not Baptized with the Baptism of Christ. As for Sprinkling,
or pouring Water on the Face, it is nothing at all as they account, and so
measuring themselves by these new thoughts, as unbaptized, they address
themselves to take it up after the manner of Dipping: but truly they want a
Dipper that has Authority from heaven, as had John, whom they please to call a
Dipper, of whom it is said, that it might be manifested his Baptism was from
heaven. A man can receive nothing, that is, lawful authority or power to
Baptize, unless it be given from heaven, which I desire they John 3. 17.
would be pleased to mind, and they will easily see their third Baptism is
from the Earth, and not from heaven, as John's was. And if this case be further
considered, it will appear at the most to be but a defect in the manner, and a
coming short in the quantity of the Element. It is a wonderful thing that a
nullity should thereof follow forthwith; of which more may be seen in the same
case before. Again, that the substance of an Ordinance of so high a nature and
great concernment, should be founded in the Criticknesse of a word, and in the
quantity of an Element, is no less marveilous to say no more. Oh but Baptism
is a Burial, as it is written, Colo 2. 12.
We are Buried with him in Baptism, etc. and we are raised up also to newness
of life. This Burial and resurrection, only Dipping can import and hold forth.
Whereunto I say it is very true, that Baptism is a Burial, and holds forth
our Burial and rising with Christ. And so it is in regard of the person that
is Baptized by Sprinckling, or pouring Water on the Face, as they are pleased
to say, they are under the water, and Buried. I desire they would show how else
they were Baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, when not so much as
an hair of their 1 Cor. 10.
heads was wet. But while they force Baptism to hold forth Burial, etc. they
lose that which it holds forth equally with Burial and Resurrection, namely
the sprinckling of the Conscience of persons ^sa^ 52 15. Heb. 10. 2^. Ezekiel 36
25 Heb. 12. 24. Act. 23. 16. Heb. 10. 22. 1 Cor 6. 11. Rev 1. 5.
in the blood of Christ; and the laver of Regeneration, or washing in the blood
of Christ that blessed Fountain, imparted and held forth by Baptism, as well
as Burial and Resurrection, which is wholly lost in this way of enforcing,
only Dipping to hold forth Burial, etc. For all do, or may know, that a thing
Dipped in Water, is not therefore washed or made clean; neither is washing
always intended in the Dipping of a thing in Water. Indeed washing, to make
clean, is by the way of Dipping many times, that by putting the thing into
Water, and rubbing of it, or the like, it might be cleansed, which I conceive
it was the way of their washing in those times, and Countries, where Baptism
was first begun; as it is the manner now in many cases, especially where there
is much Water, and much filth in the thing washed.

And that it is or may be a laudable way especially in the hot Countries, to
dip a part rather then the whole, I will not gainsay, but that washing
(intimating washing in the blood of CHRIST) is the maine thing held forth in
Baptism, I suppose it cannot be denied, and that a little water suffices to
hold forth as well as a great deal, and that to one part (as the face, as the
usual manner now is) as to the whole: So as he that is washed ^eeds not but to
be washed in one part, and is clean all, according as our Lord told Peter
(who it seems was of the Joh. 13 9.
mind these are of) who would have his hands and his head, even as these will
have the whole, over head and ears, as men use to say, dipped, but not
therefore washed as before.

And furthermore to resolve and determine how this total dipping can stand
with modesty and shamfastnesse, is a hard matter to be made apparent. If out of
modesty persons shall use a linen garment or the like, it will be very
considerable, whether this is not to be modest above what is written: If that
shall be resolved, sure those vestments must needs be very holy vestments that
shall be Baptized into the death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ: I suppose
they may equallize the Surplice, if not excel it: being the fruit of voluntary
Religion, both of them.

The Romanists some of them, and some of the poor ignorant Welsh do use
dipping, I think these will not say they learned this new truth of them,
neither do I think they will hold their Baptism ever the truer for their
dipping: I hope when they have further considered this matter, they may abate
of the fiercenes of their opinion: so as to think that Baptism under or in
the defection may be Gods Ordinance, so as there shall be no need of this new
dipping.

But in as much as this is a very new way, and the full growth of it, and
settling is not yet known, if it be to themselves, yet not to me and others: I
will forbear to say further to it.

And here let me declare how wonderful strange the thoughts of men seem to me
in the minding of the things of Gods Ordaining, that if it happen that men's
devises are added to them, or set by them, they conceive them to cease and lose
their being: when as the things of God are more strong and durable, then so
easily to fade and vanish: It is most certain that every plant not planted by
God, shall be plucked up, Ma. 15. Act. 5 1 Samuel 5. 4.
but what is of God cannot so easily be destroyed: Dagon may fall before the
Arc, and be broken to pieces, but the Arc be unshaken, though among the
Philistines, and from thence brought forth again without any alteration of the
nature of it, and the Vessels in like manner brought out of Babell, without
change of their relation, which thing, if persons E^^. 1. 8.
would mind, they would expect the ruins of Babell, and all men's Inventions,
rather then to admit of any such conceit of the ruin of Gods ways, ^^ the
devices of Satan, as if he were stronger then God.

But woting well, that many have a vain this way, to pull up the Wheat with
the Tares, and to Ma 13. 29. Ezekiel. 43. 8.
destroy Gods posts together with men's, because men's posts are set near unto
them, and unless they do thus they think they do nothing at all, never
minding any severing or distinguishing: I will leave the further prosecuting of
this last trade at the present, and say something of the fore part, where there
is two things considerable as general grounds, in the minding whereof, sundry
particulars will fall in. The first is the Covenant of Almighty God to Abraham
and to his seed after him, in their generations. Genesis 17. 7. It is an
everlasting Covenant, as in the nature of it, so in the extent, being made to a
thousand generations, continuing Psalm. 105. 8
to the time of Grace, being in force after the sufferings of our Lord, as
apeareth by that of the Apostle; Ye are the Children of the Prophets, and of
the Covenant, and again, the Covenant is made to you and to Acts 3. 25. 2. 39.
your Children, yea it did extend to the Gentiles, they were a part of the seed
unto whom this everlasting Covenant was made, as we shall further show
hereafter. This Covenant of Almighty God as it is everlasting, and has the
same extent for ever, as ever it had; so it is a distinct thing from either of
the Testaments, old or new; for let it be minded, there is but two Testaments,
an old one by Moses, a new Heb. 8. 6, 7, 8.
one by our Lord Jesus Christ, so the Scripture is clear, Hebrews 8. one
confirmed by the blood of Goats, etc. and the other in or by the blood of the
Son of God: Now the Covenant to Abraham and his seed is neither of these two;
the old it is not, nor any part of it, it was made 430 years before, and noe
whit disanulled, swallowed up or made void by the Testament of Moses, as
expressly the Apostle does witness, 3 Gala. 17. the new it cannot be, in
as much as it is, as before is showed, 430. years older then the old, and to
make it a part of the new as some do, is to subvert the order of God himself,
for so the new Testament by CHRIST the Son, should be indeed the old, and the
old by Moses, 430 years after, should be the new: alike mistake it is, to make
it a part of the old, or the old it self, as some do, and so to count it
legal and carnal and the like, when as indeed it is most gracious and has
nothing but free grace in it, and in all the parts of it, and indeed but for
digression from the matter in hand, I would say something further about this
matter, because I know some will count this a new thing, but let them mind,
that though a Covenant and Testament have a common and general acceptance in
the Scripture phrase, yet in strictness of speaking they are distinct and
diverse, and not the same.

A Testament can be confirmed noe otherwise but by death or blood, so the
Apostle, and so were He. 9. 6.
both the Testaments old and new; but a Covenant is otherwise ratified, and a
person may make diverse Covenants, but he can make but one Testament, in as much
as he can die but once. Almighty GOD made one free gracious and everlasting
Covenant with Abraham and his seed, and two Testaments as we said before, one
by Moses which waxed old, and one new by his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: and
though this may seem new, let any in soberness show the error that attends it.

Now to return to our matter, This Covenant with Abraham and his seed being a
distinct thing from either of the testaments, and being everlasting, and not
made void by either of the Testaments, the seed of the faithful must needs be
interessed in it so long as it does last and continue, but as before it is
everlasting, and so in the extent of it, so as the believing Gentiles and their
seed are interessed in it and made Abraham's seed, they according as the Apostle
declares in the 3 Ephe. 6. are made fellow heirs and of the same body, and
partakers of his promise or Covenant in Christ through the Gospel: The promise
or Covenant in the 17 Genesis 7. The Gentiles they be a part of the seed to whom
the promise was made. Romans 4. 16. which was made sure and good when the
partition wall was broken down, and there was neither Jew nor Greek, etc. but
all one in Christ. Abraham being made according to the Gal. 3. 28.
promise of God, a Father not of one only, but of many Nations; that so in him
and in his seed, all the Nations of the Earth might be blessed, he being made a
Father Romans 4.
to them all (not only to the Circumcision, but to the uncircumcision)
according to the extent of the promise, and everlasting Covenant of Almighty
God unto him, in the fulfilling whereof the promise was made sure and good to
all the seed. Romans 4. 16. 17.

Indeed the Jews as branches of the Stock of Abraham, were broken off (yet not
all) and the Gentiles grafted thereon, Romans 11. 17. which was according to that
foretold by Christ, the Kingdom should be taken from them, and given to a
people that would bring forth the fruit thereof, namely the Gentiles Matt. 21.
43. And so those other sheep brought in, that were not of that Fold. John 10.
that there might b^ one Shepherd and one Sheepe-fold, and not two: the promise
it being to seed and not to seeds; that is, to Jews and Gentiles united
together in one in Christ. Gala. 3. 16. from all which, and much more that
might be said, I take it to be most evident, That the Covenant to Abraham was
everlasting, and to continue for ever: that it did extend it self to the
Gentiles as it did to the Jews: to the Nations of the Gentiles that believe,
as to the Nation of the Jews: to the seed of these and their posterity now,
as to them and their posterity of old. That they; to wit, Children of the
faithful, are of the Church of God, and within the Covenant to Abraham, and so
by just consequence have a right to such Ordinances as are the seal of that
Covenant, as of old, namely to be Circumcised with Circumcision made without
hands, and to be buried with Christ by Baptism: so Colo. 2. 11.
as it must needs be a great wrong and violence to the Covenant of Almighty
God, and injury to Abraham the Father of the Faithful, to exclude such as God
has not only necessarily included, but expressed in that his everlasting
Covenant, namely the Lineall seed of the Faithful: to forbid such to come to
Christ, as sometime some Disciples did, finding fault Ma. 19. 13, 14.
with them that bring them, as did those, whom Christ blamed, must needs be a
changing the everlasting Covenant, and a bringing in a new Gospel never
learned of Jesus Christ.

Minding that former to be very clear, that the Covenant is everlasting, the
same, of the same extent, the lineall seed of the faithful within it: I now
proceed to the consideration of the second thing, which is, That the estate of
Christ's Church, has bin, and is stable and firm, abiding to perpetuity: some
change in form and administration, but not in matter and relation. Proof of
this I shall spare, having done it before, to which I refer the Reader. Now
all do confess, that Infants or Children before they came to years of
understanding, were formerly a part of the Church, and true and lawful
Members, from Abraham to Moses, from Moses to Christ, what should let them to
be a part of the Church yet still, and true and lawful Members, seeing the
Church or Kingdom is the same, according to that of our Lord before declared,
Math. 21. 43. And seeing the Gentiles they are fellow heirs, (and but fellow
heirs) and of the very same Body or Church Ephesians. 3. 6. how can it be imagined
on the part of any soberly minding the truth, that Children or Infants of the
Faithful, should be now excluded, touching which GOD has never spoken one
word, but the contrary. Sure there is something in the distribution which the
Apostle makes of the Church, Husbands and Wives, Masters and Servants, Parents
and Children, yea Children to be educated and brought up in the fear of God.
What Ephe. 6. 1 Cor. 11.
had he to do with them, if without, as these account? And beside, can any
imagine that when the Jews shall be grafted in again into their own Olive tree,
Romans 11. that then their seed shall be excluded, and left out, as not any more
capable of that grace and favor; sure this were greatly to lessen their
comfort, and much to diminish of the grace of Almighty God.

Oh but (say some) what of all this? if it were so, there is no example in the
new Testament for it?

Answer, no more there is no example for a persons Baptizing of himself, or to
Baptize others, being himself unbaptized: let any show the latter; I shall
undertake when he has done, to do the former. But there is precept, or
warrant for the latter may some say, namely, that in Romans 10. 6. 7. Say not who
shall ascend into heaven, etc. Surely they are near driven, that have no other
proof but such for their practice: Nadab and Abihu, and Saul might have made
use of that proof to their purpose, and so might those many Proselytes, who
from far Countries came to Jerusalem, and were added to the Church, they
might, if they had bin as wise as these, have stayed at home, and Circumcised
themselves, and so served God: for in like manner they were not to say, Who
shall ascend into heaven, the Word it being nigh unto them. But they knew
otherwise, and so may these, that are to repair to the Church, where she is to
be found; yea though they should go as far as the Eunuch went, to
Jerusalem, or as the Queen of Sheba, that came from the utmost parts of the
earth; Mat. 12. 43.
yea, our Lord might have spared the la^our of fullfilling of righteousness,
in going over Jordan to John; he might have stayed at home, and Baptized
himself, the Word being nigh unto him. But it may be they have some other
proof that I do not know of: indeed so have they need, or else they are in a
poor case.

But a great matter it is with some, that Abraham had two Sons, one borne
after the flesh of Agar the Bondwoman, and one borne after the Promise, by
Sarah a Freewoman. This the Apostle says is an Allegory, Gal. 4. In way of
al^usion to these two, the Apostle says that Jerusalem, that now is, is in
Bondage, as was Hagar and her Son, but Jerusalem that is above is free, the
Mother of us all: hence high Notions attend the minds of some, and upon this
Allegory not well understood, I suppose they build very strongly, for the
rejecting of Children from the Covenant, and putting of them from Baptism, the
seal or sign of it; unto which matter I answer, and say indeed Abraham had
two Sons of two Women, Hagar and Sarah, and these were Types of two states of
people, and did point unto the time of grace, when the truth and substance of
this was fulfilled, when Christ came unto his own, and they received him not,
but to such as did, he gave power to become Jo. 1. 11.
the Sons of God, so many as did believe in his name; those that did not, as
the greatest number did not, they became bound, as Hagar and her Son, and so
was the present state of Jerusalem, but the Gentiles believing (Children of
the promise) with a remnant of the Jews, were made free by the Son through
believing, and were the Jerusalem that was from above, the Mother of us all:
The Hebrews or Jews were cast out for unbelief, as the Bondwoman and her
Son were for mocking, and so were in the same state, and yet still are, that
Ismael and all his posterity were: But such as did embrace the Son, and
believe, whether Jews or Gentiles, were made free by the Son that makes men
free indeed. Jo. 8. 36.
And thus that Al^egory is made good, and that Type fulfilled, and we Gentiles
are as Isaac, Children of Gal. 4. 31.
the promise.

Oh no say some, Children of the promise are true (they mean lively)
believers, and Children of the flesh are Infants: this is a mavelous
understanding indeed, Isaac lineally descending from Abraham, being an Infant,
was the Son of promise, and so were his Lineall seed to a thousand
generations, that did proceed from him Lineally; of which Lineall seed, some
were in time, lively believers, and some carnal and void of the Spirit; yet
all the holy seed of promise.

I (may some say) it is true, under that Covenant it was so. I answer, the
Covenant is still the same, though the Testaments differ, which no way alters
the case. I but (say some) it is said, If we be Christ's, then are we Abraham's
seed etc. I answer, it is so Gala. 3. 29.
said of the Gentiles in opposition to the Jews: the Gentiles believing are
Christ's as before, and heirs according to promise, and the promise is to the
Parents and their seed, as to Isaac and his seed. Then Ismael might challenge
right, might some say, Ismaell I say was noe child of promise, and though he
were Abraham's Lineall seed, he was cast out, and so were the Jews that
rejected Jesus Christ, and so shall it fare with the Gentiles when they will
noe longer own Jesus Christ, they then shall be rejected also, and the Jews
when they shall come to believe Romans 11.
shall be grafted in again into their own stock and Olive tree. Romans 11. A
very high mystery which the Apostle would not have men ignorant (to wit us
Gentiles) of it, that we might fear and not be high-minded: but alas, some
will be ignorant of it, whether the Apostle will or not, and be high-minded
also, and boast against the branches as carnal: and for lively believers, such
as these men mean; indeed truly, and I conceive not unproperly, they may be
called the seed of God, and his Sons being Jo. 2. 2. chap. 5. 1. Romans 4.
borne of him: and if Abraham be honored by Almighty God to be called their
Father, also he being a Father to all that believe; he of old, yea always had
such among his seed, but known only to God, that only knows the heart and
knows his own. As for these what ever they talk, they cannot as of certain
infallibility, show us one of Abraham's Children according to this their sense,
but they must veil the matter to charity, and if they would please to extend
their charity but a little further, they without any error or absurdity, may
take in Children also.

There are sundry other Scriptures controverted about this matter and reasons,
pro and con, which for brevity sake I will forbear, and shall only here
intimate, how uncomfortable a Doctrine this is, of denying the lineall seed of
the faithful to be of the Church, and within the Covenant of Almighty God, as
of old, for from thence it must needs follow, that Parents do beget, bear,
and bring forth Children to the Devil: sure he is much beholding to them for
increasing his Kingdom, but what sad thoughts may hereupon attend them, I
leave it to them to consider that are of such belief, and propound to them,
whether they could not think it were as good to burn, as to marry, or at
least to be baren, as to be fruitful and bear Children, and do such service
to the Devil in the Augmenting his number. But it may be, they will think
themselves, that their children have no original sin, and so resolve the
case just as some do.

Indeed it seems, that such like sad and perplexed th^ughts or reasonings
some of the Church of Corinth happily had, whereof they desired to have
resolution from the Apostle, who tells them, that if one person, either
Husband or Wife be a Believer, then were their Children holy 1 Cor. 1. ^
or separate, otherwise they were unclean or common: This is a very
considerable matter; some known thing sure the Apostle alludeth unto, that he
speaks thus: we may take knowledge, that of old the Nation and Church of the
Jews was holy and separate, and all Nations and people else, were common and
unclean: The substance of which matter standing good, causes the Apostle to
infer by way of a reason here, else were your Children common or unclean,
but now are they holy or separate. This reason has little force, or can give
small satisfaction to the Corinthia^s, unless some known thing were minded, or
understood of them. This now is like to be something which the Scripture had
held forth, which must be this, that persons not of the Church, nor within the
Covenant, were common and unclean. To omit the many places that might be
produced out of the Law, wherein there is much strength, which apeareth by the
Apostles alleging the Law in a like case; 1 Cor. 9. 13.
That in the 10th. of the Acts will inform us concerning this very fully,
where by a vision Peter was taught, not to call any common or unclean, namely
the Gentiles that did believe in him: we may see what was counted common or
unclean: in a vision the creatures of all kinds are showed Acts. 10.
him, and he is bidden to eat, he replieth, he never eat things common or
unclean: that which Peter was taught by this, follows, not to count the
Gentiles believing, as common and unclean, and this appears by his
understanding of it. ver. 28. So the other believers accounted in like manner,
thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and had fellowship with them, which
they accounted common chap. 11. 3
and unclean, so was the common sense, as is evident, the Jews meddle not
with the Samaritans; Ye know (says he) it is an unlawful thing for a Jew to
keep company, etc. but God has showed, that I should not account John. 4. 9.
any common or unclean, that is, for his kindred or Nation, he means, so
he fear God and believe, otherwise the Scripture teaches, that the believer
has no part with the Infidel, but must come out and touch no unclean thing
and be separate: Thus is the Apostles sense and 1 Cor 6. 15 17.
meaning found out, a common and known thing: noe person whatsoever fearing
God, and believing, are to be counted common or unclean; and as not they, so
not their seed or children; yea if but one of them be such, which is a further
extending of the grace and favor to them, for incouragment, with comfort to
continue together, their Children being not unclean or common, but the
children of God, holy and separate, which is the second thing we are to mind,
who according to the Scripture account and the reckoning of them, to whom the
Scripture did bebelong, were esteemed holy and separate of old in the Law, Deu.
7. 6. 14. 2. 21. 29. 9. we may plainly see, and touching children in the 9 Esra
2. it is said, the holy seed, so in Dan. 8. 24 12. 7. the Apostle Peter
alleges an exhortation of the Law to this purpose, and applies it: Be ye
holy, for I the Lord your God am holy, 1 Pet. 1. 16. according to the substance
of the truth known and held forth as before, we are to mind the Apostle here,
now are your Children holy or separate, and so there is great satisfaction to
the believing party, that however their children are the children of God and
^oly, whereas but only for them, they were but common and unclean: yet now in
regard of them, and their being in the Covenant, and of the Church, their
Children are accounted as Children both unto God as of old, and holy: as it was
said of Israel, the Sons which thou have borne unto me. Thus is this latter
sense found out and discovered, and the meaning of the Apostle manifested, in
way of Eze. 16. 20.
the right of Children to the Covenant, Church estate and Ordinances (which
they are capable of) holy things belonging to holy persons, such are Children,
according to the account of the Apostle.

But the opponents of the right of Children to the Covenant, Church, Estate,
and Ordinances, tell us, and would have us to believe them, that by common or
unclean, is meant, Bastardy, or illegitimacie, and so they would have the
sense thus, else were your Children Bastards or illegitimate, but no^ they are
holy, that is, true borne or legitimate. Truly this is a wonderful
understanding, and that which holds forth no light at all, according to the
Scriptures, to satisfy the Corinthians, with the Apostles reason, if one be a
believer, then your Children are true borne, and not Bastards: I say noe more
to it, but that sure it is a Bastardly sense and understanding of the Apostles
reason, and that which will make a many Bastards in the world, and they will
hardly exempt themselves from the number according to their own ground. But
they tell us further, that the sanctity of the unbeleever to the believer, is
to his lawful use, which is the same (say they) with the holiness of the
Children: To which I answer, it is an easy thing to say so, but a great deal
harder to prove it: The Scripture teaches, that to the pure all things, namely
lawful Tit. 1, 15:
things are pure, and so the wife to the Husband, and the Husband to the wife
in Gods Ordinance; but the holiness of the Children is an other thing,
according to the reason of the Apostle before set forth, which I desire may be
minded, and I shall need say nothing further: and truly this point of outward
or visible holiness or unholynesse of commonnesse, and being unclean, is a
point of great concernment, which for want of right and due consideration great
mistakes do attend persons, but I may not enlarge to speak of it here.

But yet still the matter remains to be declared, that persons so much stick
at, and that is an example or precept for this practice of Baptizing Children,
which before I speak unto: I shall desire first that they would mind what
has bin said before seriously and without prejudice. Secondly I desire they
would give such measure as they require to receive, namely, an example or
precept for an Unbaptized person to Baptize himself or others. Thirdly, I
would pray them to consider, whether they do not think the Apostle would have
spoken more particularly concerning the rejecting of Children, and keeping them
off from the Church, the custom being so ancient, that Parents with their
Children came in together; an example of refusing them lies rather on their
part to show. Lasty, I will endeavor to show them some precepts and examples:
And first for examples: It is evident, Children were Baptized as well as men of
years, unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea. 1 Cor. 10. 2. this is a clear
example, and there is more in it then some are ware of.

Secondly, there is clear examples of Baptizing households, the Jaylors and
Lydia, and the household of Stephanus by Paul himself, 1 Cor. 1. 16. and as
these, so questionless other households, as well as those three. It is a rare
thing to think there should be no Children. If Children with their Parents were
not, as of old, to enter the Covenant, Church State, and Ordinance of
Initiation, Baptism now as Circumcision of old, surely the Apostle would not
have spoken so generally, and especially considering the Proselytes always of
old brought in their Children with them, as a part of the whole: Yea I affirm
it is a full example in force for a president to after times, that Families
may, and ought to be Baptized; yea whole Families, for Paul Baptized the
household of Stephanus; and there is no example of putting by Children at all.
And I further add, that if a household, or households should be tendered to
Baptism, wherein there were Children or Infants, if Paul's example, and the
other should be alleged for pattern: I suppose they had need have an example
at the least, if not a Precept to refuse the doing of it, unless they would
wil^fully show they are not the followers of him, as he was of Christ, 1 Co.
1^. 1. M^. 1^. ^0.
that would have Children to come unto him, and not to be forbidden, there
being no coming to him here, but in his Church, especially when he has said
that of such are his Kingdom.

Thirdly, the Children of the Church of Coloss were Baptized as is plain, the
whole Church were buried with Christ in Baptism, as the whole Church of old
were Circumcised; and as of old, they were Baptized unto Moses, as before. Now
a part of the Church were Children, Colos. 3. 20, 21.

But further, there is the plain order and command of Jesus Christ for the
Baptizing of Children, which I make appear thus, Abraham was to be made
according to Gods Covenant unto him, a Father of many Nations, and so were his
seed to be: the Jews for a time, were the only people: but the time came, the
Kingdom was to be taken from them, and given to a Nation, the Gentiles, that
should bring forth the fruit of it. Many Nations are to be Abraham's, and to
have him for their Father. Now all these Nations, according to the express
command of Christ, in the 28. Math. ^9. are to be Baptized, and who dare
gainsay him? Now however, it is possible, though nothing likely, there R^. 4 18.
should be three Families, and no Children in them; yet that there should be
Nations and no Children, is altogether impossible. But the Nation, and all
Nations that embrace Christ, are to be Baptized, according to Christ's command,
and so Children as a party, even as of old, they were a part of the Nation of
the Jews, and Circumcised, yea and Baptized unto Moses as before. The Nations
that are made Abraham's seed; the Nations that are saved; the Kingdoms which
shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord, must needs receive Christ's badge, and
be Baptized according to Rev. 21. 24.
his will and pleasure, one part of those being Children, not come to
understanding. And upon what ground I know not, that any should curtaile the
Nations, which according to Gods promise, Abraham was to be a Father of, by
cutting off one part, to wit Children, when it is so manifest a thing. Children
were one part of the Jewish Nation, and equally interessed in the Covenant, and
in Abraham for a Father also, as well as persons of years. And that Nation when
it shall be born again in one day; shall be complete, and shall not be a part by
leaving their Children behind them. This learning the Scripture does fully and
very plentifully teach; yet some will conclude, as an inconveniencie following
thereon, that if it were so, then there must needs be National Churches, which
follows no more necessarily from it, then tithes follows from the Law,
alleged about the maintenance of the Ministry, ^ Cor. 9. 14. The Institution
of Christ in the one and other carries the force, and is to be regarded.

But it may be said, and is by some, that in the 28 Mat. 19. our Lord
requires, that they be first taught, and then Baptized, which Children cannot
be; hereunto I say that this (first) is their own qu^ in, and an addition not
to be suffered: Nations are to be made Christ's Disciples by Baptism, teaching
is necessary before and after, concerning the knowledge of God in Jesus Christ,
if persons of years are first to be taught the knowledge of CHRIST, and then
Baptized, it does not follow at all, concerning Children in the least, which
are always included in their Parents; as the proselytes of old were to be
taught the knowledge of the God of Israel, before they were received to
Circumcision the Ordinance of Initiation, but not so their Children: indeed it
were most unreasonable to require it of them, or to refuse them because of it,
when nature by time has not done its part, yet if any will enforce this so as
b^ wringing the nose to cause blood, let them teach children of 10 days old if
they please, for to refuse them Baptism, they may not, for no conditional If,
may be put in their case, as there was none in Circumcision of old. If any
shall say, thus we learn Christ of Moses, I answer and say, it is very
lawful for us so to do, for he wrought of him: and surely it is a very froward
and obscure way of reasoning, to set the Children, in way of oposition to the
Parents in the case of believing, and of interest in the Covenant of Almighty
God, which the holy Scripture never does, nor teaches us to do, no not by one
instance or example: in the Scripture, Nation is opposed and set in opposition
to Nation; Jews against Greeks, and other Gentiles, Families, against
Families; and Believers against Infidells; but not Parents against Children,
according as these men do.

Thus both example and precept is showed in the case of Baptism of Children,
which if neither could have bin showed, a just consequence is a real
demonstration of the will and pleasure of God, as in other cases, so in this of
Baptism, and that may be gathered (and is fully) in the former part of this
Discourse, both negatively and affirmatively deduced: I leave the further
consideration of it, and the whole matter to be considered of by those that
love the truth; whom the God of truth lead into all truth for his Sons sake,
Amen.

FINIS.

