The First and Second Parts OF Invisible JOHN made Visible: OR A Grand Pimp of
Tyranny portrayed, IN BARKSTEADS ARRAIGNMENT AT THE BAR, Where he stands
impeached of High Treason, and other gross misdemeanors, as the late Tyrant's
Bum-Bailiff, in his most Arbitrary, Oppressive and Tyrannical Invasions of the
Rights and Liberties of English men, within the late can^onized County of
Middlesex, the City of London, Tower, etc.

Whereunto is added, His Barbarous Cruelty to that Eminent and Reverend Divine
Dr. JOHN HEWYT AND OTHERS. Together with FIVE QUERIES TO THE Parliament,
Council of State, and Army, Occasioned By the preceding Plea for Justice; but
not unworthy of their perusal.

Printed at London, in the Year MDCLIX. June 4

Invisible JOHN made Visible: OR A grand Pimp of Tyranny portrayed, etc.
THe old Roman Laelius, mentioned in Lucan's Pharsalio, was not more
mercenariously devoted to serve the will and lust of Caesar, than late
experience has proved the plyablenesse of some English Parasites, to gratify
the greatest of Tyrants in the basest and beggerlyest Drudgeries. No Dog can be
more ready to run on a Bull or Bear at a stake, than these Ministers of
mischief, and Instruments of cruelty, have been fierce to fall on the most
innocent, upon the least beek or nod of the Tyrant: They have been so far (as
would have become English men and Christians) from refusing obedience to such
Commands as carried not with them the Authority of Law and Justice, as that
they have been ready (even to the ruining of men's persons and estates) to
execute such Orders as have been diametrically opposite to both: yea, BY VIRTVE
ONLY of their very power and stations, have they so highly invaded the
proprieties of those whom their, or their Masters malice has been prosecuting,
as if they had been within no bounds of Law, Reason or Religion, or that there
was no account to be given either in this ot another world.

But to proceed to that person against whom the Barteries of Justice by this
piece of Paper are more particularly (yet publicly and not personally)
levelled: I shall desire those who are now handing the Helm of public
Transactions, and promise so to steer the course of this Commonwealth, that we
may arrive at some such hopeful Harbor, wherein w^ may in futu^o, be sheltered
from those blustering Storms which had almost shattered us in p^eces, to
consider how far the present Jailer of the Tower, Colonel John Barkstead, alias
Baxter, (whom the deceased Tyrant had so trayn'd up in Tyranny, that he was
become sufficiently tractable to Ape him, and act his part in any Treason and
Oppression) has insolently run himself into guilt beyond all others who either
may deserve, or upon some pardonable grounds desire Indemnity, and
consequently rendered himself incapable of being continued in so considerable a
trust as the Tower, which he has made so obnoxious to igminy and contempt,
that persons of honor and credit will be very shy of succeeding him in such a
scornful scar. Now n t knowing how confident he may yet continue under an
invisible Those who are acquainted with the Story of the Stone lent him by an
Italian to make him invisible, will understand my meaning
conceit, I judged it incumbent upon me to cheque him at the stairs head,
before he run down with the Tower, as once he did with a dish of meat, when he
was by a merry company cajowled in such a frollick, as then rendered him as
great a fool as since he has made himself a knave: And therefore more soberly
than possibly some passages may signify me, I have sent forth this ensuing
Charge against him: the truth of which, and much more, will be seconded by
many, if opportunity be but offered thereunto.

First, He the said Barkstead, Lieutenant of the Tower, contrary to the Laws of
this Nation, and the trust reposed in him, for abetting the boundless ambition
of a Tyrant, and the oppressing and persecuting of all who would not subject
themselves to slavery, Major General Overtons Case, with diverse others.
has been a constant and punctual Observer of all commands, Orders and
Directions public and private, which came from the late Tyrant, or his grand
Pimp Thu^loc; and in imprisoning of men's Persons, banishing them beyond the
Seas, torturing them by strict restraints in the Tower, keeping them up close
from the comfort of Wives, Relations or Friends, As in Armigers Case, whose
mouth they say he has stopped by Composition.
denying them the benefit of Law by Habeas Corpus, when it stood not with the
Tyrants liking, breaking open of Houses, illegal searchings, Exactions and
Impositions; has been the most indefatigable Drudge in this Nation to the late
Tyrant: and for the more effectual managing of these his Masters affairs, be
constantly employed some Soldiers and Officers, as Emissaries and Trappanners
abroad, who under the notion of discovering Delinquents, and dissatisfied
persons, have committed most notorious Villainies, in forcing several peaceable
persons not within his Cognizance, to come and give the said Barkstead bond,
merely for the Fee sake, and in taking money from others not to discover their
delinquency: diverse of whom, though they could have put in sufficient Pleas for
themselves, submitted to any thing, rather than to come within the Tower, which
this Barkstead had made such a Bugbear, that it frighted many from it: yea,
his very Clerk forsooth had his Agents also, to make such discoveries as might
augment his gain.

2. He the said Barkstead, contrary to Law, and the Trust reprosed in him,
has, during the time of his Government in the Tower, made such private Laws
and Orders as have carried in them no other weight, A Lady was forced to pay 20
s. for her self and Servants; and yet it is said, She staid not above the time
allowed by his order.
and been of no other use and tendency than to ensnare and trapan those who
came to visit persecuted and oppressed Prisoners into forfeitures of moneys; I
have heard, and believe it is true, that 15 s. was forced from two Kinswomen
and a Son of Major General Overtons, sor but accidentally meeting of him as he
was walking within the Tower, they having been to see the Armory.
which has been from time to time exacted from them by very coarse and
inhumane usage: and upon refusal, many, both men and women, have been cast into
Guards for diverse hours; yea, some women who have had sucking children, could
not obtain their Liberty, diverse having been continued nights and days during
his pleasure: with which moneys so extorted, the Officers of the Guards have
often made themselves drunk, and the said Barkstead has seen it, known it, and
past it by.

3. The said Lieutenant of the Tower, without any public direction, or legal
Authority, as Lieutenant of the Tower, has several times, by his own Arbitrary
power, upon occasion of discontent with some Prisoners, imposed a close
restraint upon all, till many have been ready to perish for want of air and
exercise; and being ambitious of homage, has pragmatically continued this
close confinement upon them, till they have petitioned him for liberty to walk:
and those who could not in Conscience thus humor him with Cringes and
Cour^ship, Major General Overton, as himself and others have asserted, was kept
close in his Chamber six Months together; that restraint upon him and the rest
being occasioned by diverse P^isoners dining together, and yet Major General
Overton was not out of his Chamber that day: yea, when the said Lieutenant was
informed that this worthy Gentleman was almost destroyed for want of air and
exercise, yet for six months together he positively refused him liberty to walk.
he would not allow them the benefit of the air.

4. The said Lieutenant of the Tower has raised himself a vast Estate by
exacting unconscionable Fees from Prisoners; yea, from some who had not bread
to put in their mouths. These Fees he constantly demanded at their coming in,
and would allow them no liberty nor accommodation till they either paid him, or
gave security for it; having very uncivilly treated and threatened some for not
coming up to his Demands. Now for these Fees there is no other color of Law or
Custom, than that formerly there was a voluntary gratuity given by Prisoners
to the Lieutenant of the Tower for his pains in receiving and paying to them
the public allowance, which in Barksteads time Prisoners have not enjoyed; yet
notwithstanding, I believe it may be made appear that one Gentleman after an
Order came for his release, was continued diverse months, either because he
could not, or would not, pay a Fee.

5. That the said Lieutenant of the Tower has engrossed to himself (not
appertaining to him by virtue of his place several advantages in and about the
Tower, by which he raised a vast sum of money yearly, as upon examination will
appear.

6. That the said Lieutenant of the Tower, for his own, and Relations Advantage
and Accommodation, has expended (under the notion of necessary repairs) much of
the public money in fitting and making up Lodgings for Prisoners, from whom
there has been extorted most unreasonable rates for the said Lodgings: As for
instance: The said Lieutenant has himself received to his own private use from
Mr. Ashburnham 40 s. a week; I have heard that Major General Overton, lodging
at one Mr. Cuttingmans the Lieutenant of the Towers brother, and refusing any
longer to pay as he had done 30 s. a week for his lodging; the said Lieutenant
of the Tower threatened in the hearing of a Gentleman of worth, to put the Major
General in the Dungeon.
from Sir Henry Littleton, 40 s. a week, and from Sir Tho. P yton, forty
shillings a week, or thereabouts; which they in prudence complied withal, to
the end they might enjoy that Freedom and Liberty which others could not have,
and they paid dear for; besides great weekly sums which his Kindred received
for those Lodgings which ought to be free for Prisoners: Insomuch that the
Tower, formerly a noble and unexpensive Prison, is by him the said Barkstead's
base practices and connivances rendered a rooking Pinfold; many being raised in
that place by the ruins of poor Prisoners.

7. The Case of Mr. John Partman brought before the late Assembly, who voted
his Imprisonment illegal and unjust, deserves Consideration, and is of it self
singly sufficient to turn such a Traitor as this base Truck^er out of the
Tower; who in this case first played the Knave, at last the Fool.

8. That the said Lieutenant of the Tower has demeaned himself so insolently
toward Prisoners, and their Friends who came to visit them, Especially to that
worthy Person Major General Overton, his Wife, Children and Friends, as I have
heard, and I believe is publicly known.
and rendered himself so ridiculous in both public and more private gross
practices, (which I shall here decline insetting) that he has caused much
reproach to fall upon Religion, and by that means is become so scandalous all
the Nation over, that he stinks in the Nostrils of both Good and Bad.

9. And lastly, That it may appear how mere a Time-serving Truckler he the said
Barkstead is, as plainly and undeniably he was; and how he now closes in with a
Commonwealth from no other principles than the preservation of his interest,
and to shelter himself under the Armies shield from the Lashes of Law, which
otherwise might light heavily upon him; It may be made manifest that he was
improving all the interest he had to secure the Tower for the late Protector,
alias Mr. Richard Cromwell, in opposition to the Army, till he was frighted
forth of that assay by a Colonel who told him he was undone if he complied not
with the Army, as that Colonel has confessed in the audience of forty Persons.

Now if this Charge bear such a proportion with truth, as that the said
Lieutenant of the Tower is guilty of the Substance of what is in this Paper
alleged against him: Then

1. Does it stand with the honor and reputation of the Parliament and Army,
and the safety and security of the Tower, to continue him in that command? Or
(according to what the Parliament has lately voted, and the Army have
publicly declared to pull the wicked out of their places) to receive him into
any other Office or Place of Trust and Power within the Commonwealth? Or can it
be rationally understood that the Army (under an owning of their late Apostasy
and real repentance for the same) do or can propose Indemnity for all, with out
any Distinction either in relation to persons or things?

2. If he, and such as he be continued, and those who for Conscience sake
either saperated from the late Apostasy, or were laid aside by the grand
Apostate, are left out; what then does the late great Noise and Change
naturally and intentionally signify, farther than a translation of the
Apostatical Cause and Design (under the Cloak of the Good Old Cause) out of
Oliver Cromwels Family into some other? Or out of a single Person into several
Persons, where Tyranny still remains the same, as stinking water that may be
poured out of one into several vessels, but remains the same water, though the
vessels were never so sweet?

3 Should the Army return no nearer the Good Old Cause in their repentance for
their declension from it, than to such an Oligarchy wherein they may shroud and
shelter a private interest in opposition to the public; will they not plainly
unveyl the grossest Hypocrisy in the world, in professing themselves sensible
of an Apostasy, and expressing repentance for it, when at that time they
resolved to remain in it? Will they not thereby plainly prove themselves
Apostates indeed, not such as were led aside by weaknesses, but such as
wilfully and wickedly turned out of the way? Oh how will they then stink as
corrupt Carrion in the Nostrils of all Nations?

4. If the Parliament and Council of State walk by the Armies Rule in this
respect, and they go hand in hand together, and perpetuate themselves (as I
hope neither Parliament nor Army intend) will they not thereby in practice
justify that wickedness in the Apostasy, which most of them condemned in
words? And will they not also according to the Tenor of this Text, Thou art
made whole: go thy way, sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee be
judicially engaged into that which will rather perpetuate their infamy, than
their power; so that the old reproaches cast upon them, will revive with a new
remembrance, and they will really justify those who seem to condemn themselves
for interrupting them, and as really condemn themselves in that wherein they
now seem justified? Will they not by this means instead of healing our
Breaches, and restoring of paths to dwell in, create further and greater
dis-unions, and so give the common Enemy that opportunity, which will
undoubtedly and undeniably establish his Throne in the midst of us?

5. But if the Parliament and Council of State have more real thoughts for
Reformation, (as I hope they have) how comes it then to pass that they receive
those into places and preferment under them, who were actually engaged in the
Apostasy, and reJect, at least neglect those who have suffered for Conscience
sake, they being equally able with those they entertain, and far honester? Does
not this argue great ingratitude to those who have denied themselves, to
vindicate their power? And is it not very unbecoming the professions they make,
rather to countenance those who court them for places, than such as in
conscience cannot seek themselves? If Favor or Friendship must carry it from
desert, then does that spirit sway the Scepter which Rules in Righteousness?

I shall not in this place, nor at this present, make mention of the Death of
Mr. Syndercom, and what he suffered in the Tower by him; the Story is too well
known, and will not suddenly be forgotten. I shall only urge that, to add to
his former cruelties, the said Lieutenant of the Tower did deal most
barbarously and unmercifully with that famous, and Reverend Divine Doctor John
Hewyt, who being committed to the Tower upon the suggestions, and the
Jealousies of the late deceased Tyrant, he used all the ways that possibly he
could contrive to add unto his Grievances, and would not grant admittance to
many Godly and Reverend Divines who took the pains to come and visit him in
the Day of his Distress; nay he would not suffer the Honorable Lady his most
dear Wife to have access unto him, but only when he pleased: which amongst many
other almost inexpressible sufferings; was the occasion of a great and
dangerous sickness, which did afflict him to the jeopardy of his life:
whereupon petitioning to the Protector then living, she could not procure him
the liberty of a clear air, without putting in great security, and a guard upon
his person, who meant neither to fight nor fly away. It were too long in this
place to insert the Injuries with which he was tormented a little before his
Execution, when he was preparing himself for a better world, which were so
intolerable, that a Turk would not offer the like so the most despicable of
Christians. For your further satisfaction in this and the particulars thereof,
I shall refer you to the Petition of his Honorable Consort which she
presented to the late dissolved Parliament, at the first beginning of their
Sessions

FINIS.

