GODS Prerogative Power Made known diverse ways in the Old and New Testament.
ALSO The Prerogative Power of the Lord Christ. And what he will do in the days
of his Kingly Office, In Destroying his Enemies, And Exalting his Saints. Very
useful for these Times. By him that loves both Truth and Peace, NOAH BANKS.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. and are to be sold at the West end of Paul's, 1650.

To the truly Honorable in Christ, Major General HARRISON.
Honored Sir,
KNowing that you are one that wait for the appearing of the Lord Christ in his
Kingly glory, and are willing to hear news of the good Land, though it be by a
weak and poor instrument; for out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, God
will declare his praise. I have made bold to communicate a few lines to your
godly and grave consideration, what I do believe God is doing in this last Age
of the World; Surely, God is answering all the prayers, that have been powered
out by the Saints at the Throne of Grace against Antichrist, for this many
hundred years; and he is now going in an eminent manner, to require the blood
of the Saints that has been spilt by that man of sin, and his adherents; now
the Lord is revenging the blood of the Saints that cry under the Altar, now
those that have made war with the Lamb, the Lamb shall overcome them: for he,
and he only is Lord of Lords and King of Kings; and they that are with him are
called chosen and faithful. Antichrist has bin drunken with the blood of the
Saints, now he must have blood to drink, for he is worthy; now have we great
cause to bless God, who has taken to himself great power and does reign, and
has destroyed them that has destroyed the earth; now is the Lord humbling
great men, the loftiness of man shall be bowed down and the haughtiness of man
shall be made low, and the Lord alone exalted in that day; now has the Lord
Christ appeared in the Majesty of his strength; in his Armies he has scattered
the proud in the imaginations of their hearts, he has pulled down the mighty
from their seats, and exalted them of low degree; For behold, the day comes
that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, yea all that do wickedly shall
be as stubble, and the day comes that shall burn them up says the Lord of
Hosts, and it shall leave neither root nor branch; and he shall tread them
down, and they shall be as ashes under the soles of your feet; Now many Nations
are gathered against thee, that say, let her be defiled, and let our eyes look
upon Sion; but they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they
his Counsel; he shall gather them as Sheaves into the floores; Arise and thrash
O daughter of Sion for I will make thy horn iron, and thy hoofs brass, and thou
shall beat in pieces many people; God does and will do great things by weak
instruments, thy feet shall tread them down, even the feet of the poor and the
steps of the needy, Zech. 12. 8. and God has made good his word of late, in
that day shall the Lord defend the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, he that is feeble
amongst them, shall be as David and the house of David shall be as God, as the
Angel of the Lord before them; God is now stayning the glory of all flesh, now
is the little Stone that was cut out of the Mountain without hands smiting the
Image on the feet, that was of iron and clay and breaks them in pieces; then
was the iron, and the clay and the brass, and the silver, and the gold, and all
the Empires of the earth broken in pieces together, and became like the chaff
of the Summer flower, and the wind carried them away, and the place was no more
found: And the Stone that smot the Image became a great Mountain, and filled
the whole earth; the Lord Christ will break them with a Rod of Iron, and dash
them in pieces like Potters vessels; yea, the Kings of the earth that will not
submit to him, He will strike through Kings in the day of his wrath, he will
shake all Nations: yea, not only earth, but also Heaven; and these promises and
Prophecies and many more, is the Lord Christ now making good by his Prerogative
Power; and has not God begun this work in this Commonwealth? has not God
delivered us out of Egypt by a mighty hand? and God has broken the rod of
oppressors, as in the day of Midean; and I do believe, the work that God has
begun in England shall go on till he has made all his enemies his footstool:
and that great block that lies in the way, and hinders the peace of many good
men, that the Witnesses are not slain: I do believe for my part, that the
Witnesses are slain in this Island. I take the Witnesses to be those that have
suffered under Antichrist for forty and two months, Rev 11. 2. as Antichrist
came in gradually, so shall his tyrannical power be taken away gradually.

First, because when Christ begins he will make an end, Babylons ruin is like
a mighty millstone thrown in the Sea, it shall never be found again, he will go
Rev. 18. 21.
on till Rome be destroyed.

Secondly, because in the time of Antichrists reign the Witnesses must be
clothed in sackcloth, but now Rev. 11. 3.
God has taken a way the sackcloth, and many of the Saints do see cause to
put on the garment of rejoicing, and are waiting for the Bridegrooms coming.

Thirdly, the Witnesses having lain three days and a half dead, which is in
conformity to Christ's death, they must stand on their feet again; as blessed
be God they now do in this Island.

Fourthly, when the Witnesses stand on their feet great fear shall fall on
them that see them; and are not the enemies of Christ and his people in great
fear in these days who can but see it?

Fifthly, and are not many of the Saints of Christ raised up by the Spirit of
God into a glorious admiration of God, and into a safe condition out of the
reach of the malice and power of their enemies, and their enemies be hold them,
but they cannot hurt Rev. 13 6. Chap 12. 19.
them; Gods raising up his people is called heaven.

Sixthly, the great Earthquake God has made of late both in England Ireland,
and now of late in Scotland, which I do believe has made the territories of
Babylon to shake, this is called a great Earthquake. Rev. 11. 13.


Seventhly, I do believe this Commonwealth was the tenth part of mystical
Babylon which now is falen and the powers both in Church and Commonwelth that
did oppress the saints is taking away blessed be the Lord; and is not the
seventh Angel now going to sound? and are there not great voices in heaven, in
the Churches of Christ which is called heaven, saying the Kingdoms of the
world are become the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ, and he shall reign
for ever and ever, therefore let us fall down on our faces saying, we give thee
thanks O Lord God almighty Rev. 11. 16. 17.
because thou have taken to thee thy great power and have reigned.

But now give me leave to give you a few Reasons to show you why I do believe
God is about such a glorious work in this Island.

First, because I do not know nor have read of any Island in the Christian
world, that has opposed the Lord Christ, but this, that has a people that the
Lord will save, at this time that the Lord is destroying Antichrist, you may
see in that forenamed Isa. 12. 14.
place.

Secondly, in this Island there has bin many famous Martyrs that have suffered
for Christ.

Thirdly, God has had as many Jacobs that have wrestled with God by prayer
against Antichrist as any Nation in the world ever had; and I can speak it for
above this twenty years they have sown in tears, and were like unto Israel
groaning under our burdens and bondage, therefore I do believe he is now
bringing us out of bondage.

Fourthly, I do believe God is going on with this his glorious work here in
this Island, because God has raised up choice Instruments in pulling down
Antichrist powers that have opposed Christ.

Fifthly, God has given many of his choice servants a great measure of faith,
to believe that the work is begun in this Island, and that it shall not end till
Antichrist be destroyed.

Sixthly, I am sure of it God has as many precious and choice servants, such as
do love the Lord Jesus in sincerity after the inward man, as any Nation in the
world.

Seventhly and lastly, because I do find by the promises of Christ, that his
work in destroying Antichrist shall begin in the Islands, as the Scripture says
The Isles shall wayt for his Glory: So if you read the 97. Psalm, the whole Psalm
is a glorious Prophecy of these Times: it begins, The Lord reigns, let the
Earth rejoice, let the multitude of the Isles be glad thereof. I do believe God
has made good this whole Prophecy by his acts of Providence in this Island, and
also that glorious prophecy in the 42 of Isa. from verse 12. to the 21. which I
do believe is now fulfiling in these Islands, and therefore we have no reason to
murmur against the Instruments of our good, nor to complain, but to say with
the Prophet in the 12. ver. let them give glory to the Lord and declare his
praises in the Islands: has not the Lord Christ gone out like a mighty man?
has not he cried and roared against his enemies? has not he made wast
mountains and hills? has not he brought the blind by away that they knew not,
and led them in paths that they have not known? and made dark things light
before them, and crooked things straight: these things has he done unto them,
and not forsaken them; and may it not be said at such a time as this, who is
blind but my servant? or deaf but my messinger as I have sent, who is blind as
he that is perfect and blind as the Lords servant? seeing many things but
observing it not: this prophecy I believe is fulfilled in our days.

Sir this little Treatise was written some two years since, then being dark
times, and therefore what you find of weakness in it, let it be attributed to
the author, but what you find to be according to the mind of God, let him only
have the glory: this Treatise was put forth by the desire of many godly frinds,
and believing you are one that is precious in the sight of the Lord, therefore
you will have a favorable construction of what is written, I leave you in the
Lord,

Your servant in the Lord Christ, NOAH BANKS.

To the Christian Reader.
IN these last Ages of the world, there has been much ado about the
Prerogative Power of Kings, and great men in all Nations: so of late years more
then formerly in this Island, as may appear by all those ways that great men
took in oppressing the poor, in imposing taxes on almost all wares, and in coat
and conduct money, and Ship Money; which made the poor people to groan under
their burdens, and to cry unto the Lord for vengeance against the oppressors.

So also our Bishops they lorded it over men's consciences in bringing in
Superstitions and Idolatry, and seting up their Prerogative Power, that godly
men must do what their Wills will have, instead of Gods Word; so racking the
consciences of godly men till many times they cracked again, making some fly to
New England, others were imprisoned, branding some, and cuting off their ears;
Oh how sad was our condition then! some would by their Prerogative Power rule
over the Estates of men, and others over the consciences, it was worse then
Egyptian bondage; for they only oppressed the bodies, but these did seek to
destroy both souls and bodies of men; and no visible help could be found,
because they that had the Prerogative Power, called Parliaments, and broke them
up again when they would not serve their wills: also over ruling Justices and
Judges, they must bow the strait Laws, to serve their corrupt lusts, and like
Issacar, we begun to stoop under the burden; but when men will abuse their
power, God will make them know, that he has a power over them be they never so
great; the want of the knowledge of that Almighty power that there is in God,
and how he has made known his Prerogative Power in all ages, is the cause men
are so troubled in these times; but if men would search the word of God, they
would see how Gods ways are in the deeps, and his footsteps are in the mighty
waters. Isa. 43. 16. Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out, he is
excellent in power, he can throw down the walls of Jericho by the blowing of
Rams horns, and open the eyes of one born blind with clay and spettle; he can
make little David strong enough to cut off the head of Goliath; and the Lord
Christ chose out poor Fishermen to be his Disciples, and left the learned
Scribes and Pharisees.

Gods Prerogative Power made known diverse ways in the Old Testament.
IN these knowing times most men will acknowledge that all Prerogative Power is
in God; but when God is making known his Power in some great acts of Providence
in the world; oh how are most men offended at it, and will not believe farther
then they can see by their dark light of natural Reason: thus we read that
good men failed much, as Jeremiah, Job, and David, till they went and searched
into the word of God.

So it will be our wisdoms in these troublesome times and dark and various
acts of Providence to search the Scriptures how God has formerly made known
his Prerogative Power by most unlikely ways and Instruments.

First when God brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt, he commanded Moses
to go to Pharaoh and tell him that the God of the Hebrews has sent to him to
let his people go, but his answer was, I know not the Lord, neither will I let
Israel go.

Oh how unlikly a person was Moses! a shepherd to go to so great a King in so
strange a buisness, how hardly would Moses be persuaded, but when God said he
would make his Power known by plagueing Pharaoh and the Egyptians, and God said
he would go with him; if God will go with any Instruments they shall do the
work.

God was not tied to raise a great Army, no he can make use of a Shepherd to
do the work, and he can arm Lice and Flies and Frogs to pull down the pride
of Pharaoh. But oh how hard a matter was it for Israel to believe, because
Pharaoh did lay heavier burdens on them then before; but after God had brought
them out by a mighty hand, oh what an untroden path did God lead them in! they
must go through the Red Sea, or else Pharaoh would make them bond slaves or
destroy them, now does God make his Prerogative Power appear above what Israel
could believe by making a way for his people to go through the Red Sea, when
the Egyptians following them were all drowned; so all along throw the
wilderness forty years did God preserve them, in a miraculous way they had
bread and meat from Heaven, and water out of a Rock, and yet for all this how
few of them did believe that God would bring them into Canaan and give them the
Land of promise, none but Joshua and Caleb; one great reason was because the
walls of Jericho were so great and so high, but you may see how God did blow
them down with Rams horns: How did Israel at the first hearing of their
deliverance Rejoice and bow down their heads, and worship God, but after God
had Exodus ^. 13.
made his Power known and brought them out of Egypt, oh how did they murmur
against Moses and Aaron, and said they two took too much upon them; but did not
God destroy them, and their carcasses fell in the Wilderness for murmuring
against Moses and Aaron. So at the beginning of our Troubles, oh how did our
Ministers and People rejoice and bless God for raising Instruments to bring
them out of Bondage; but now God having made his Power known by doing Wonders
for us by them, oh how do now the same men murmur against the same
Instruments, and say they take too much upon them, and fain would we go back
again into Egypt but let these men take heed lest God swear in his wrath they
shall never see the new Jerusalem; but their children shall see the good Land
which many godly men now see a far off.

Secondly how dark a way was that when Christ came at the first a Virgin should
conceive a son! oh the mighty power of God, and love of this Lord and King of
Heaven and Earth! He must come in the form of a Carpenters son, none would
own him but poor Shepherds, and Heathens; and afterward he took poor
Fishermen to be his Disciples; and a few women administered to him! how did
this blind the great Learned men of the Jews! but here you see how God
delights to make his Prerogative Power known, when he will do his greatest
works by the most unlikely Instruments: but oh how sad a thing was it for them
not to know in that their day the things that concerned their peace, and not to
have rejected their Savior: Oh let it not be said of England nor London, that
they do slight or refuse the great Salvation that God has done for us,
because the Instruments are not so great or so learned, lest we be found
fighters against God.

Now seeing God has made his Prerogative formerly known by doing his greatest
works by the least and unlikeliest Instruments, that all the glory may be given
to him.

So also does the word of God declare his Prerogative Power; if you read the 32
of Deuteronomy from the 39 verse to the 44 there God says, I kill, I make
alive, I wound, and I heal, and none can deliver out of my hands. So in the
first of Samuel the second chap: in the 7 and 8 verses, the Lord makes poor,
and makes rich, he brings low, and lifts up; he rayseth the poor out of
the dunghill, to set them among Princes, and makes them to inherit the Thrones
of Glory: for the pillars of the Earth are the Lords, and he has set the world
on them. And in the 40 of Job the 12 and 13 verses. He looks on every one
that is proud, and brings him low; and treads down the wicked in their
places, and hides them in the dust together, and binds their faces in secret.

Diverse ways did God make his Prerogatvie Power appear in the Old Testament.
First over Angels and Men, in pulling down their pride: The great Design God
had in creating all things, was his own Glory, and amongst all his creatures he
made Angels and Men to be the most glorious; and endued them with many
privileges above all other creatures: but still he reserved the Prerogative
Power to himself. If the Angels (whom God had placed in an excellent
condition, who had Heaven for their habitation, standing in the presence of God
beholding his glory) if they will not keep their first estate, but will lift up
themselves, God will then make known his Power in destroying them and all their
glory, and throwing them down out of heaven into hell, reserving them in
everlasting chains in utter darkness unto the judgment of the great Day. Iud.
ver. 6.


And also Adam whom God created after his own image, and placed him in
Paradise, and made him Lord over all his creatures here below, when he would
exalt himself, how soon did God destroy him and all his glory, and his
posterity, and drove him out of Paradise; and he and all creatures became
accursed: if Cain will lord it over his brother Abel, and shed his brothers
blood, God will make his Power known, he shall be accursed, and a vagabond on
the earth. Genesis 4. 11.


So if Pharaoh will deal proudly and say, who is the Lord? and by his power
oppress Gods people with cruel bondage, and will Exodus 5. 10.
not let Israel go at Gods command, God will make his Power appear in raising
an Army of Lice, and Flies, and Frogs, to plague Pharaoh; and if this will not
humble him, he has a Red Sea wherein to drown him and all the malignant
Egyptians that followed after Gods people. Exodus, 14. 24.


Also Nebuchadnezzar that proud King if he lift up himself, and say in the
pride of his heart, Is not this great Babylon that I have built by the might of
my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? Here you see the pride of this vain
man; but while the words were in the Kings mouth, God told him that the Kingdom
was departed from him, and he was driven out from men; and he did eat grass
with the oxen; Oh let all proud Kings know Dan. 4. 30. 31.
that the great God has a Prerogative Power over them, he rules in the
Kingdoms of men; he gives them to whom so ever he will. Dan. 4. 17.


So if Herod to whom God had given wisdom, will harken to the applause of men,
God will suddenly abase him, for the Text says an Angel of God smot him,
because he did not give the glory to God; he was eaten up with Worms and he
died. Acts 12. 23.


By these Examples and many more we may see the great Prerogative Power of
God, and how fearful a thing it is to go about to rob God of his Prerogative
Power; this sin has always some Judgment suddenly at the heels of it, God
does many times abase such proud men in this life, for pride goes before
destruction, Pro. 6. 18.
and a high mind before the fall.

Secondly, Then God makes his Prerogative Power appear, when God stops the
natural course of his creatures, as when God at the prayer of Joshua made the
Sun and the Moon to stand Joshua 10. 13.
still, and the Sun to go back ten Degrees, and the fiery Oven not to burn the
three Children, and the Lions not to destroy Dan. 4. 27. Exodus 14. 16.
Daniel, and the Red Sea to stand like walls on both sides, till Israel past
over; God has the Prerogative Power over all his creatures, if the Lord Christ
command the Winds and the Seas they must obey him.

Thirdly, God makes his Power known, when he makes use of the weakest and
basest of his creatures, for to pull down the pride of man: as he did to proud
Pharaoh, he did send Frogs, Caterpillars, and Lice, and Flies, to plague
Pharaoh Exodus 9.
and all Egypt; and also if proud Herod will take the glory to himself, which
was due to God, God will send his Angel to smite him, and he shall be eaten up
with Worms.

Fourthly, Then God makes his Prerogative Power to appear, when God makes use
of the most unlikely instruments, to do the greatest and most miraculous works
by: as when God threw down the walls of Jericho with the blowing of Rams horns,
and the Lord Christ opened the eyes of one that was born blind with clay and
spettle, and Jonah must be delivered by being swallowed up of a great fish,
which was a very unlikely way; but there is nothing too hard for God to do, he
has a Prerogative Power to do what he will, and by what means he will. See the
6.

Fifthly, God makes his mighty Power known, when he leads people in
untrodden paths: as he did the people of Israel, when he brought them out of
Egypt, they must go through the Red Sea, and forty years in the Wilderness,
and through the waters of Jordane; in all these ways did God make his great
Power appear so much the more: so also many of the people of God in cases of
necessities, have gone in ways that has been contrary to the rule and
revealed word; as David did when he did eat the Show bread, which was lawful
for none but the Priest; yet Christ said he was blameless: so Phineas slew
Zimry and Cosby, he being the high Priest it was not his place to execute
justice; yet this act of his was well pleasing to God, and turned away the
wrath of God from the children of Israel, and how did God reward him and all
the rest that came after him. Numb. 25. 12.

Sixthly, The power of God appears, when God does many times his greatest
works by a few, and they the most contemptible instruments. Gideons Army was
too many. God would mould them, till they came but to three hundred, to
overthrow the Host of the Midianites; which were as Grasihoppers, Judges 7. 12.
and as the sand of the Sea for number: So God those out David to be King, the
most unlikely of all the sons of Jesse, and he must fight with great Goliath,
that made all the Army of Israel to tremble, whose spear was like a Weavers
beam; yet this David whom his brethren despised he going in the name of the
Lord kills Goliath; here was the power of God the more seen! as when Jonathan
and his Armor-bearer discomforted the whole Host of the Philistims: so the
Lord Christ chose poor Fishermen to be his Disciples, and leaving the learned
Scribes and Pharisees; thus God makes his power the more appear, when he does
do great works by weak instruments; and has not God done wonderful things of
late by a poor small contemptible new-moddelled Army! how has God by them
routed great Armies, taken many strong Garrisons! and these last years it may
be said, what has the Lord done by these despised instruments! oh what a black
cloud was risen in this poor land, in Wales, in Kent, in Surry, and that great
Army of the Scots never to be forgotten! and how did God by his poor
instruments making them valiant, bring down the pride and power of these bloody
men! and surely if men were not blind, they would see how God does own this
Army! and if God own them, let men take heed how they speak or act against
them, lest they be found fighters against God; and God has made his
Prerogative power to appear by this Army, that I am persuaded that many
Generations to come shall have cause to bless God for them; and they having
begun to throw down in this land the out-workes of Rome, who knows if God
will not so highly honor some of them, that they may set up their Trophies on
the walls of Rome!

Seventhly, God has made his Prerogative power appear, in altering of the
government of his Church five times already. First, God let down a Government
to Adam: Cain and Abel offered Sacrifice. Secondly, God let down a Pattern of
Government to Moses, as you may read in Leviticus. Thirdly, God did let down a
farther way to David and Solomon, when the Temple was to be built. Fourthly,
God let down to Ezra the second Temple, the manner how it should be built, and
all things therein. Fifthly, The Lord Christ he comes and sets up the Gospel
Government, which has continued this sixteen hundred years. Now there is one
more Government spoken of in the 21. Revel. 2. that is, the New Jerusalem that
must come down from Heaven, which will be a glorious time; this we wait for,
which I believe will be the last Government on earth.

Eighthly, So also the Lord has made his Power appear, by changing the
Government in the Commonwealth: as first the Government was by Abraham the
head of the Families, secondly Moses a Prophet, next Joshua who was a Warrier,
so Judges continued, sometimes they were men, sometimes they were women, and
thus it continued till Samuel's time: and this was the most immediate
Government of God. But when Israel would have a King. God told them they had
not only rejected Samuel, but God, that he should not rule over them; but then
God changed the Government upon the request of the people, and God bid Samuel
go and anoint them a King; but God bid Samuel tell them the manner of the Kings
that should Reign over them: how they would make slaves of them, and take away
their estates from them; and has not many Kings done so: did not Ahab take
Naboths vineyard, and much of this has been done in our days; then God gave
them a King which was Saul, but did Saul and his 1 Samuel 14. 14, 15, 23.
sons govern Israel long? No, God showed his Prerogative when Saul would not
obey the command of God, but would fulfill his own will, God rejected him and
his posterity for being King, and set up David his servant in his place; and
many times did God throw down Kings, as he did Ahab, and set up others in their
stead; but when Israel and their Kings begun to sin with a high hand against
God, and would not repent, then God gave them and their King into the hand of
the Heathen, whom they would be like in having a King, as you may read, Sam. 8.
5. then was Israel brought under the Babylonish Monarchy: Four Monarchies have
been already, first the Babylonish Monarchy secondly the Persian, thirdly the
Grecian, fourthly the Roman; all which Monarchies were shown to Daniel in the
dream. Now the last which is the fifth, which is said to be a Little stone cut
out of the Mountain without hands, as you may read, Dan. 2. 34, 36. Now begun
the Prerogative Power of the Lord Christ; for it is said, He smote the Image on
the feet, that were made of Iron and Clay, and brought to nothing all the other
Monarchies, as you may read, ver. 35. and it became a great mountain, and
filled the whole earth; this is a stone cut out without hands, a Kingdom set up
by the God of Heaven, some divine work: and all the Kingdoms and States that
were first and last, shall be swallowed up under this Kingdom of Christ, as
appears, Dan. 7. 14. There was given to him Dominion and Glory, and a Kingdom,
that all Nations and Languages shall serve him: his Dominion is an everlasting
Dominion, that shall not pass away; and his Kingdom shall not be destroyed.

Gods Prerogative Power made known in the New Testament, and in these last ages
of the World.
THus having spoken something of the Prerogative power of God in the former
ages, now much might be said of the Power of the Lord Christ in these last ages
of the world.

In the first ages, Christ did wonderfully and gloriously make known his
Prophetical Office, visibly and externally in the world by all the Prophets, as
Isaiah, David, Daniel, and all the rest of the Prophets: so also he was held
forth typically in the Cloud, in the Pillar of fire in the Rock, in the brazen
Serpent, in the Arc and Tabernacle, and in the Temple, and all the Sacrifices,
and the High Priests, the Escape Goat; all these did hold forth the Prophetical
Office of Christ, in those days of his Prophecy very gloriously, to all those
that understood the Prophecies. Abraham rejoiced to see the days of Christ,
and Daniel longed to understand the vision: and oh that men would more study to
understand the Old Testament; wherein they might see what God would do in all
ages.

In the second age of the world was the Priestly Office of Christ made known
visibly, externally, and gloriously in the world, to the amazement both of men
and Angels and Devils; God testifies of him, Math. 3. 17. this is my beloved
son whom I promised should come in the fullness of time to brake the Serpents
head: also the Angels spoke glorious things of a Savior that was born, Luke 2.
10. so the wise men they, came from far to see this great High Priest; and the
Apostles were witnesses of all Christ did in the administration of his Priestly
Office, the Devils confessed him, and Soldiers, and Christ himself was crucified
openly on the Cross; all these do declare, that in the second age of the
world, the Lord Christ did openly in the sight of men and Devils, fulfill all
Promises concerning his Priestly Office; and all the Saints must ever since
fill up the measure of the sufferings of Christ openly, for conformity to
Christ this sixteen hundred years.

The Lord Christ having finished his two Offices, a Prophet and a Priest; now
he shall come as King, and we have great ground to believe it, as you may read
hereafter, that the Lord Christ is coming to set up his Prerogative power; for
now God the Father has given to his Son all power both in Heaven and earth,
Matthew. 28. 18. now of his enemies that would not have him rule over them, he
says, bring them and slay them before me; now God will give his Son the
Heathen for his inheritance, and the utmost part of the earth for his
possession, Psa. 2. 8. the Lord Christ has hitherto been but a suffering and a
persecuted King, a scoft and a despised King by the Kings of the world; but now
he will be Lord and King of the whole earth. Zach. 14. 9.

Now the Lord Christ a sumes to himself a new form, different from the form of
a servant; he is now coming to set up his Prerogative Kingly power, to show to
his Saints and to his enemies, the great design he is doing in the world; this
coming of Christ will be very sweet and comfortable to his Saints, but terrible
to his enemies, with an iron rod in his hand, and he shall dash them in pieces
like Pottets vessels, and he shall have his Garments dipped in blood, Rev. 19.
13. his face is like lightening, but lovely to his Saints, it shines as the
Sun; Rev. 1. 16. this great power of the Lord Christ is known by his names and
titles given him, he is called, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19. 16.
King of Nations, Ier. 10. 7. King of Saints, a great King, Mal. 1. 14. all
creatures are at his command, the host of Heaven attend him, mighty to save,
the Phil. 1. 9.
Lord shall go forth like a Giant, he shall stir up courage like a man of war,
Isa. 42. 13. a Wonderful Counselor, Isa. 9. 6. his name is above all names,
every knee shall bow to him, his Right hand shall do terrible things, make
waste Mountains and Hills: he is that Little Stone cut out of the Mountayn
withour hands, that shall break in pieces the Gold, Silver, Brass, and Iron,
and Clay, Dan. 2. all former Monarchical Goverments, and he shall take to
himself great Power and Rule, he shall be King of the whole Earth, and there
shall be given to him Dominion and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all Peeple,
Nations, and Languages, shall serve him. Dan. 7. 14

When will the Lord Christ take to him this great Power and reign as King?
First, when the enemies of his Church and Saints are at the highest and say, I
sit as Queen, Rev. 18. 7. when they say, I will ascend above the Clouds, I will
be like the most High, Isa. 14. 14. when the enemies of God are lifted up with
pride and power, then shall the Lord Christ make known his power; then shall
her plagues come suddenly, for Reve. 18. 7.
the Lord that judges her is a strong God, then shall she come down and sit in
the dust. O how high were the enemies of Isa. 47. 1.
God and of his Saints in this Land of late, how did they oppress the Saints,
how did they begin to rule over men's estates and consciences too, and said,
bow-down that we may go over.

Now will God make his enemies his footstool, now will God visit the
wickedness of the world, as it is in Esaias 13. 11. I will cause the arrogance
of the proud to cease, and I will cast down the pride of Tyrants: And is not
this the work God is about in our days? and has not God done much in these
days? oh that men had eyes to see it, that God might have the glory.

Secondly when the Saints are at the lowest then will the Lord repent him self
for his servants, when he sees that their power is gone and they have no help
left: how sad was our D^t. 32. 3^.
condition in England of late years, in the time of our Prelates, how did they
oppress good men, making some fly to New England, branding some, and cutting
off their Ears, imprisoning others; how sad was our condition this last year,
when so black a cloud did arise both in Kent, Surrey, Wales, and Skotland, and
on the Seas; and how did wicked men thraten to cut the throats of godly men and
plunder them, then did Gods people like Israel groan and cry unto the Lord; and
praised be our good God who has scattered the proud, and has taken our
parts, and has raised faithful Instruments who have jeparded their lives in
the High Places in the Field; oh let not such valiant Commanders and Soldiers
go without their due Honor, next to the honor of God: and though the Saints
were low yet God was on high, and he has taken our part, when there was none
to help, then Gods Arm brought Salvation for us.

Thirdly, When wicked men rage against the Lord and against his Saints, as in
the second Psalm, Wherefore do the Hethen rage, and the people imagine a vain
thing, the Kings of the Earth set themselves and the Rulers take Counsel
together against the Lord and against his anointed, Then will God set his King
upon his holy Hill of Sion: verse 6. when wicked men rage the Lord Christ shall
dash them in pieces like Potters vessels; and never did wicked men rage more
then of late, therefore sure their ruin is near: did Saul prosper when he
raged against David? did not God rend the Kingdom from him? and is not this the
day when wicked men shall fret themselves and curse their God and their King,
and look upward? Isa. 8. 21. but blessed be God that the rage of man shall turn
to his praise, and the remainder of wrath will he restrayn.

When the Lord Christ comes to throw down Antichrist and his adherents, he will
shake all Nations in that day, in the day of his fierce anger, and by a mighty
Earthquake turning Esaias. 13. 13.
Kingdoms and Nations, upside down, every one must endure a shaking in this
Earthquake, and is not God now a shaking this Nation, and throwing down what
Antichrist has built Revel. 16. 18. 19
for many years: o! what a smoke does this great ruinous house make! it
blinds the eyes of most men yea many godly men; surely in this ruinous heap
Jesus Christ the wise Builder will find many precious stones, and many pieces
of timber that are found at the heart and fit them to build the New Jerusalem;
though many great posts will be found rotten at the heart when they are tried,
and they will be fit for nothing but for the fire; for behold the day comes
that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, yea all that do wickedly shall
be as stubble; and the day comes that shall burn them up says the Lord of
Hosts, and it shall leave neither root nor branch; Mal. 4. 1. wicked men shall
be as rubbidge, and he shall tread down the wicked, for they shall be as ashes
under the soles of his feet. Mal 4. 3.

Those Nations and Kingdoms that have lived in pomp, and contempt of God and
his Saints shall suffer dreadful shakings, that no person, nor Nation, nor
Government, shall be able to stand, that shall oppose the Kingly Government of
the Lord Christ, for he has said, once more he will not only shake the earth;
but the heavens also, Heb. 12.

Fifthly, When the Saints are in the dark as well as wicked men, much fearing
and thinking of a dark Night that is coming with dreadful troubles; and so it
will be to all those that are not acquainted what God is doing; when the Lord
reigns clouds and darkness are round about him, yet Righteousness and
judgment are the habitation of his Throne; and a fire shall go before him to
burn up all his enemies, Psalm 97. 2, 3. At the coming of Christ will be a
dark time for at midnight the Bridegroom came. All those that would be
acquainted what the Lord Christ is doing, let them read Esaias 42. 16. He will
lead the blind by a way that they known not, and will lead them in paths that
they have not known I will make darkness light before them, and crooked things
straight, and not forsake them. Many say in our days, things go on as in
untrodden paths and unknown ways and dark ways; if you look into this
Scripture you may see the Lord Christ will lead his peeple in such a way as
they have not known, and many good men are in the dark at this time, and godly
Ministers: if you read Esaias 42. 18. 19. 20. there he says, who is so blind as
my servant? who is so blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lords
Servant: but at last God will let them see, for at evening time it shall be
light. Zak. 14. 7.

Sixthly, when the Lord Christ fits and chooses out some choice instruments for
his work, such as Moses, Joshua, Sampson, David, Solomon, Cyrus, Zorobabel, or
moddel out some Army, a Gideon and his three hundred men; when you see God
raise up men of another spirit, choice men for wisdom and courage, to do some
notable work, as God has done by this Army of late years; it is a sign that
God is doing some excellent work for his Church, and for the downfall of
Antichrist.

Seaventhly, When the Lord Christ makes his Power known in abasing proud men
and women, as you may read in the second and third of Isa. at large; there you
may see, what God is doing now in these last days. Oh how has God in this Land
of late pulled down the pride of many tall Cedars! both in the Church as Lord
Bishops, and many great men are brought low; for the haughtiness of man shall
be abased, and the loftiness of man shall be brought low, and the Lord alone
exalted; in that day he shall tread them down, even by the Isa. 2. 9. Isa. 26.
5, 6. Mat. 4. 3.
feet of the poor and the steps of the needy; and ye shall tread down the
wicked, for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet.

Eighthly, When the Lord Christ gives his Saints a heart to cry mightily to God
for the downfall of Antichrist, and will give him no rest till he makes
Jerusalem the praise of the whole earth; when the Angel having the golden
Censor, which was the prayers of the Saints powered out, then woe to Antichrist;
there was a voice of thunder, and lightening, and an earthquake; how has God
made his power known by prayer? Moses prayed, and the Red Sea stood on heaps,
at Ioshuahs prayer the Sun stood still: prayer will shut Heaven and open
Heaven, as Eliah did; and has not God raised up some men to a mighty spirit of
prayer? how do they cry to God with abundance of confidence, believing now God
is pulling down Antichrist? oh says a poor gracious soul, let me pull too with
my prayers, for it will never be well with Sion till Antichrist be destroyed!

Ninthly, When the Lord Christ begins to take the vayl off, that is spread over
all Nations, Isa. 25. 7. A fire shall go before him which shall give light to
his people, but burn up all his enemies round about: the earth saw it and
trembled. Psa. 97. 3, 4. When the Sun of righteousness shall arise, oh what a
difference there will be between Goshen and Egypt; and surely God has of late
more then formerly, opened the eyes of many godly men, and made known his truth
concerning Christ's Kingly Government in these last days; but when the rest of
the Gentles and Jews do come to the knowledge of Christ, oh how glorious will
those times be!

But unto whom will the Lord Christ reveal this great work in destroying
Antichrist, and calling of the Jews and Gentles that are not yet called? They
must be his friends as Abraham was, they must be such as fear him, such as
dearly love him, and Psa. 25.
love not their lives to the death; precious choice men, Daniel like men of
excellent spirits; men beloved of Christ as John Reve. 12. 11.
was, lying in Christ's bosom, Eagle-ey'd men, such as the Pro. 17. 27.
Shepherds were which watched by night, and spent their meditations on the
high things of God; men like Joshua and Dan. 6. 3.
Caleb, who followed the Lord fully, and will speak well of the good Land; men
that have much sound knowledge of the Numb. 14 22:
mystery of Christ's Kingdom, searching out the deep things of 1 Cor. 2. 10.
God; they must be such as have laid the Church troubles to their hearts,
Jacobs that have wrastled with God by prayer, Ier. 9. 1.
and will have no denial; they are the first born sons of Sion, Dan. 10. 2, 3.
such as have spent themselves in fasting and fervent crying to Jehovah; those
that have sown in tears, they shall reap with joy, Genesis 32. 24.
those shall have the first fruits, and hear from Christ the first news of
Sions glory; these and these alone, shall see the Land a far of.

What will the Lord Christ do in these last days by his Kingly Prerogative
Power?

First, He will destroy his enemies. Secondly, He will exalt his Saints.
The Lord Christ has begun this work already, he has trod the winepress of
the wrath of the Almighty; this he did in the Garden, and on the Cross, then he
conquered all our spiritual enemies, then he suffered for us, but now he must
reign till he has made all his enemies his footstool; these days will bring
forth sad news for Antichrist and all his adherents, their judgments slumbreth
not; A long time says Christ I have held my peace, I have been still, I have
refrained my self, now will I cry like a traveling woman, I will destroy and
devour at once; the Lord goes forth like a mighty man of war, he shall cry,
yea roar, he shall prevail against his enemies. When the Lion Isa 32 23. 24.
of the Tribe of Judah shall rore, woe to the beasts, woe to Antichrist the
great enemy of Christ's Kingdom, and woe to all the Kings of the earth that have
taken part with the Beast: woe to Rome and her consederates, Howl ye, for the
day of the Lord is at hand: it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty.
Isa 13. 6. your lofty looks shall be laid low, Isa. 2. 11. for the day of
vengeance is in my heart, and the year of the redeemed is come; it will be a
terrible bloody day to the Lord Christ's enemies, as you may read, Isa. 34. for
his camp is very great, his day is very terrible, Joel 2. 10, 11. he will make
wast as mountains and hills the greatest of his enemies; Isa. 42. 15. the ruin
of spiritual Babylon and Rome, must be by a mighty earthquake; Isa. 13. 13. Rev
16. 16. at the taking of Babel the whole earth is moved, Ier. 50. 46. when the
Lord Christ comes to make his power known in destroying his enemies, there will
be great bloody wars, and changes in in Governments, and great troubles in all
Nations. This appears plain by many places of Scripture, it will be bloody
times at the fall of Antichrist, the Lord has a consumption to bring upon the
whole earth; See Isa. 66. 15. and Chap. 17. 12, 13, 14. Chap. 18. 3, to the
end, Chap. 28. 2. Chap. 34. 8. where you may read how bloody a time it will be,
for it is the day of vengeance, and the year of recompense for the controversy
of Sion; it is comfortable for the Saints, though he that is coming to judge the
great whore, that has made the earth drunk with her fornications, and to
avenge the blood of his servants; Rev. 18. 20. the Lord Christ will make known
his Prerogative power in the throwing down of the man of sin, he will stir up
jealousy like a man of war, Isa. 42. 13. he will strike through Kings in the
day of his wrath, Psa. 110. 5, 6. he shall be crowned King of Kings, Rev. 19.
he shall reign till Antichrist be utterly thrown down, 2 These. 2. 8. it shall
be as the overthrowing of Sodom, never to be inhabited from generation to
generation, root and branch shall be wholly destroyed; as you may read, Ier.
50. 39, 40. Rev. 18. 2. Isa. 34. Mal. 4. 1. for the Stone cut out of the
Mountain without hands, shall break in pieces the gold and the silver, the
brass, iron and the clay, and they shall become as chaff, and the wind shall
carry them away, and this Stone shall become a great mountain, and fill the
whole earth. Dan. 2. 35.

Be encouraged O ye valiant Commanders, and Soldiers, and subjects of Christ:
you that have sought the Lords Battles, glory and boast in your great General
the Lord Christ, he is a man of war mighty to save, a Giant refreshed with
wine, a Lion of the Tribe of Judah, he has a rod of Iron in his hands, he will
strike through Kings in the day of his wrath, he shall judge among the Nations,
he shall fill the places with dead bodies; the Sword of the Lord is filled with
blood, for it is the day of the Lords vengeance, he will have his garments dipped
in blood, Isa. 34. and the souls of the Heavens shall eat the flesh of Kings
and of mighty men. Rev. 19. 18. Woe to all the Kings of the earth, that oppose
the Lord Christ when he comes to reign; for the pride of man shall be abased
and the Lord alone exalted in that day; Isa. 2. 10. 11. he will pull down the
Cedars, the mighty men, the greatest of his enemies; and may we not think that
God is going to throw down Antichrist now in England? is not this one of the
outworks of Rome? you know when Soldiers are against a City, they first storm
the Outworks: now I say, brave valiant Commanders, and Soldiers of the Lord
Christ, you that have begun to pull down the Outworks of Rome, go on and fight
stoutly for your General the Lord Christ, you shall see him do more wonders for
you; and who knows but you may be counted worthy to be chosen, and saithful,
to set up your Trophies of triumph on the Walls of Rome; which will ere long be
done.

Also, the Lord Christ will make his power known, in treading Satan under his
feet, principalities and powers must be subject unto him; when Christ reigns
Satan must be bound up. And I saw an Angel come down from Heaven, having the
Key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand; and he laid hold on
the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the Devil, and he was bound up a
thousand years. Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3, 10. When we see that devilish malice in men
against God and his Saints is taken away; then shall the Lion and the Lamb ly
down together, they shall not hurt in my holy Mountain; then shall we beat our
swords into pruning hooks. Isaiah 2. 4.

We have spoken of Christ's Prerogative power in the destroying of his enemies,
and making them his footstool; but after this dark night of trouble, will the
Son of righteousness arise with healing in his wings, when he has trodden the
wicked, and they shall beas ashes under the soals of his feet; Mal. 4. 2, 3. Oh
the happy times that then will be! thine eyes shall see the King in his glory,
Isa. 33. 17. he shall be King of the whole earth, Zach. 14. 9. Mal. 1. 14. Isa.
59. 19. his Kingdom shall last for ever, Isa. 59. 19. Dan. 7. 14. that is, to
the end of the world; and then shall he resign up the Kingdom to his Father,
Luke 1. 3. and God shall be all in all. 1 Cor. 15.

First, Under this glorious Kingly Government, of the Lord Christ, his great
Power shall appear, in teaching his Saints, abundance of knowledge shall be in
the earth; for the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the Sea, and it must needs Isa. 11. 9.
be so: for thy Children shall be all taught of the Lord; Isa. 54. 13.
In the last days of the Kingly Government of Christ, God will power out his
spirit upon all flesh, and their sons and their daughters shall Prophecy; many
shall run too and fro, and knowledge shall increase; That City had no Joel 2.
28. Dan. 12. 4.
need of the Sun nor of the Moon to shine in it, for the glory of the Lord did
light it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. Oh how little has been known of
the Gospel, and of the Kingly Government of Christ in former times! and how
abundantly does it now spread; but oh how glorious will the times be when
Antichrist shall be destroyed! and the Jews called; then will all the fullness
of these promises be accomplished.

Secondly, Under this Kingly Government of the Lord Christ there shall be
greater degrees of holiness among the Saints, yea, the beauty of holiness; in
Psa. 110. 4.
the new Jerusalem, upon all the Vessels, and upon the horse Bridles shall be
holiness to the Lord, and an high Zech. 14. 20.
way shall be there, and it shall be called the way of holiness; Esaias 35. 8.
Revel. 21.
And I John saw the holy City, the new Jerusalem come down from God out of
Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband, and all the stones of that
City are precious stones; which does set forth that glorious Church, under the
Kingly Government of the Lord Christ.

Thirdly, There shall abundance of peace and plenty be under the Government of
the Lord Christ; he will first be like David, a man of war; but after that be
done, then he will be like Solomon, peace and plenty will be in those days;
when once Joshua appears in his glory, he will bring down the noise of
strangers, and the branch of the terrible ones shall be brought low Isa. 25. 5.
the sons of them that afflicted thee shall come bonding unto thee, and all they
that despised thee, shall bow themselves at the soles of thy feet; and they
shall call thee the City of the Lord, the Sion of the holy One of Israel; Isa.
60. 14. and for plenty for brass I will bring gold and for iron I will bring
silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron: I will also make thy Officers
be at peace, and thine exactors righteousness; verse 17. the Wolf shall dwell
with the Lamb and the Leopard shall ly down with the Kid, at the glorious times
of peace, in the days of Christ's Kingly Government; for he is the King of
peace, and the Prince of peace, Isa. 9. 6. he will create peace, Isa. 57. 19.
truth and peace shall kiss one another under this Kings reign.

Fourthly, under this peaceable reign of the Lord Christ, there shall be a very
fruitful time, the New Jerusalem shall so increase, that it shall overspread
many Countries, and all Nations shall flow into it, Isa 2. 2 then shall they
come flocking as Doves to Windows; Isa 60. 8. his peeple shall be a willing
peeple in the day of his power, then shall the Kingdom of Heaven suffer
violence; Matthew. 11. 12. Bashan was a fruitful Hill, but Mount Sion far excells
it, the valeys shall be full of springs, and crowded with Corn, Esaias 41. 18.
they shall shoot for joy and sing; the Church shall be as the garden of Eden,
as the garden of the Lord, Esaias 51. 3. this is a fruitful time above all others
as you may read, Ezekiel. 34. 25. 26. Esaias 49. Zech. 8. 5. from small beginnings,
it shall grow up into a Mountain, and shall fill the whole earth, Dan. 2. 34,
35. then shall the Kingdoms, and Dominions, and greatness of the Kingdoms under
the whole Heavens be given to the Saints of the most High. Dan. 7. 27.


Fifthly, The last great act of the Lord Christ; Power is, in the duration of
this glorious Church: it shall last for ever, as long as the world shall last,
as you may read, Dan. 7. 27. his Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and of his
Kingdom there shall be no end, Dan. 2. 44. Luke 1. 33. Esaias 54 8. Chap. 61. 7.
and his Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away and of
his Kingdom shall not be destroyed, Dan. 7. 14. and the Saints of the most High
shall take the Kingdom, and possess the Kingdom for ever, even for ever and
ever. Dan. 12. 3. Revel. 22. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 4. 16. 17.

Oh the happy and blessed times that will be under the Kingly Government of the
Lord Christ! when Antichrist shall be utterly destroyed, and the Jews and
fullness of the Gentles come in; When Knowledge shall cover the earth, as waters
cover the Sea, and holiness abound in men, and a liberty of all Ordinances, and
peace and plenty, that which the creatures now groan for; Romans 6. 22. the Lion
and the Lamb shall ly down together, then we shall beat our swords into Plow
shares, and our spears into pruning hooks; Isa. 2. 4. and I will make the place
of my feet glorious, the sons of them that afflicted thee, shall come bending
unto thee, and all those that despised thee, shall bow themselves at the soles
of thy feet; Isa. 60. 14. and the Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of
the Kingdoms under the whole Heavens, shall be given to the Saints of the most
High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve
and obey him. Dan. 7. 27.

Oh that the Lord would open our eyes to see the excellency and beauty of
Christ's Kingdom! and pardon our too much neglect of searching the Scriptures,
concerning the glorious things of Sions beauty; which will be ere long the joy
of the whole earth, the glory and praise of the whole world, (Isa. 62. 7. Psa.
48. 2.) in spite of men and Devils, and all the Powers in the world, and of
Hell it self.

Thy Kingdom come Amen, Amen.

