A SPEECH TO THE Lord General Monck AT SKINNER SHALL April the fourth, 1660.
A Countryman-Cornish strives to come in, and is Obstructed by one of the
Company. Cornish-man. CHe tell thee, Che will come in, and zee the gay volk;
ch'ave zome loquent Pistle to speak.


Fiddler. Thou a Speech!


Cornish-man. A zimple Trifle, better then your Zongs and Zonnets, Chill zay
that, and a vart vort. Iche beseech your Lordships Pardon; this zame Vellow is
zawcy, Iche a tolden zo zundry times.


And vor Iche know by sperience.
Vine volk will a vine things and zense,
Chill zee what Iche can do*
Chintend to let your Honor know,
Bum Vaith, Iche will no vurther go,
Chill now speak English too.
MY Lord, I have received Command from those
I this day do attend upon, to close
Your Stomach with a Welcome. Ed. 3. R. 1. H. 4. H 5. H. 6. Ed. 4 etc. made
free of the Company.
'Thas been long
Since that this Hall was graced with such a throng
Kings, heretofore, have not disdained to be
Made Free of this Ancient Fraternity:
'Tell that this most Unhappy Nation did
Break forth into a Flame, from Fire long hid,
Kindled by the Sulpherous breath of furious John's,
And Subjects became desperate Phaetons:
Whose dire Prodigious Rage, like Pelops brood,
Thirsted and hunted after Royal blood.
The Peoples Faith abused, who only lent
Their Aid to j^yn the King and Parliament:
In stead of which, the Miscreants subtilty
Laid violent hands on Sacred Majesty, I^ea^y at the Isle of Wight

Even when it came to the* Concluding point,
They did our Hope and Happiness disjoynt.
"We find our Fundamentals then begin
"To stagger, when King-killing's thought no Sin,
Nor was their Monstrous Malice satisfied
When as the Peoples Martyr, Great Charles, died;
From whence (unto their horror) this Truth springs,
" The worst of Subjects killed the best of Kings.
Thus were we drawn near to destruction
By that White Devil, feigned Devotion;
That Loyalty was held Malignity,
And pure Religion counted Heresy;
And Parliaments, we did so highly prize,
Made but the subject for their Mockeries.
So that this forlorn hapless Continent,
Has been the Sepulcher of Government:
Since Charles he suffered, no man durst complain,
But held it mercy that he might be slain.
It was a riddance from that Slavery
Attended on a Tyrants Cruelty;
Whose Usurpations left us with the Wind,
Though (like the Snail) h'as left a slime behind.
Kings were held Nursing Fathers: Great Sir, then
Grant us to see those Blessings once again.
Next unto God, the Power is in your hand,
To make this Fertile, or a Barren Land.
The old Arcadians, that did mourn all Night
At the Suns-setting, and dispair'd of Light,
Were next day comforted, when in his Sphere
He on his splendid Chariot did appear:
So Our great Loss admits of a Repair,
In the succeeding hopes of Charles his Heir;
That all men cry, and all Cries meet in one,
For th'Pious Father's God-like Patient Son.
Spoken by Mr. W. Bard.
London, Printed for John Towers 1660.


