A Small Treatise of BAPTISM, OR, DIPPING.

WHEREIN Is Clearly showed that the Lord CHRIST Ordained Dipping for those
only that profess Repentance and FAITH.

1. Proved by Scriptures. 2. By Arguments. 3. A Parallel betwixt Circumcision
and Dipping. 4. An Answer to some Objections by P. B. Psalm. 119. 130.
By EDWARD BARBER.

Printed in the Year. 1641.

The Preface.
To all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, and his Appearing. Ephe.
6. 24. 1 Gal. 8. 9. Matthew. 24. 30. 1 Revel, 7. 1 Cor. 9. 18. and 2. 11. 4.

BEloved Reader, it may seem strange, that in these times, when such abundance
of Knowledge of the Gospel is professed in the World, there should
notwithstanding be generally such ignorance, especially in and amongst those
that profess themselves Ministers thereof, of that glorious principle, True
Baptism or Dipping, Ephe. 4. 5. Instituted by the Lord Jesus Christ, which a^
that look for life and Salvation by him ought to be partakers of, it being that
only which was received by the Apostles and Primitive Churches, and for a long
time unviolably kept and practiced by the ministry of the Gospel in the
planting of the first Churches, and that the Lord should amongst some others,
raise up me, a poor Tradesman, to devlge this glorious Truth, to the worlds
censuring, but first, inasmuch as the Lord, notwithstanding, my own
unworthiness, has in his Son accepted, and counted worthy to suffer for his
Name; It being also by the Providence of God, so much in question at this time,
we are therefore imboldened thereunto.

2. The Lords usual dealing, it being to bring mighty things to pass by weak
means, as in Josh. 6. 3. 4* 5, 20. and 1. 1. where the walls of Jerecho fell
down by the blasts of Rams horns: 1 Samuel 16. 11. Amos 7. 14. And Judge. 7. The
Lord gave that great deliverance to Gideon, and 300. which he would not do to
him with 32000. verse 2. 7. And 1 Cor. 1. 27. 28. Choosing the foolish things of
the world, to confound the wise, and weak things to confound the mighty, Jer
49. 20. and 50. 44. And base things, and things despised has God chosen, yea,
and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are. Zach. 4. 10.
therefor looking only at the glory of God, and love to the Truth, for which
being imprisoned 11. Months, by means whereof, I being taken off my Calling,
had the more opportunity to search the Scriptures daily, to see whether those
things were so, not as they delivered by Paul, but practiced by the Priests
and Prelates so our times, for Paul delivered no such things, as by them is
practiced in many particulars, as is clearly shown in the following discourse.

3. The reports of some, who notwithstanding, they never saw our faces, and so
by discourse, try the Spirits, as John advises, 1 John 4. 1. yet behind our
backs, have reproached us, and so as Saint Jude says, Speak evil of things
they know not, and as Jere. says, speak a vision of their heart, and not from
the mouth of the Lord, Jer. 23. 16. 30, 31. 32. I am against the Prophesies,
says the Lord, that steal my words every one from his neighbor, I am against
the Prophets, says, the Lord, that use their tongues, and say he says, Behold
I am against them that prophecy false dreams, says the Lord, and do tell
them, and cause my people to err by their lies, and by their lightness, yet I
sent them not, nor commanded them, therefore they shall not profit this people
at all, says the Lord.

4. Others affirming, there was no plain text of the Dipping of any Woman, by
the which they discover much ignorance of, or malice against the Truth,
striving to uphold the Traditions of men, in stead of the glorions Institutions
of Jesus Christ for the word says, Acts 8. 12. that when they believed Philip
preaching the things concerning the things concerning the Kingdom of God, and
the Name of Jesus Christ, they were dipped, both men and Women: and Acts 16. 14.
15. Lidia a seller of purple, with her household, being judged faithful, was
Dipped. And Gal. 3. 28. Male and female one in Christ.

5. Considering the great burden this State and Kingdom lately lay under,
chiefly by those that pretended to be the heads of the Church, as has been
manifestly proved by diverse that were none of their Clergy, to their eternal
fame in that most honorable high Court of Parliament.

6. Others that pretend to come nearer in witnessing against the Prelates, yet
durst not Moses-like stand to it, Exodus 23. 32. who desired his own ruin,
rather then the destruction of the people. But these seeing the Wolf coming,
hid themselves, or fled beyond the Seas, not standing up in the gap to make up
the hedge for the house of Israel, so as they might justly be compared to the
Foxes of the Deserts, Ezekiel. 13. 4, 5. so that if the Lord should have sought
for one to make up the hedge, and stand in the gap for the Land that it should
not be distroyed, they were gone beyond the Seas, or ^id themselves when. If
ever the Kingdom stood in need; but herein they discovered themselves to be
hirelings, and not true Shepherds, John 10. 12, 13. or as much as in them is,
giving Christ the lie, who says his Desciples shall be brought before Kings
and Governors for his sake, whereas the fearful and unbeleeving are set in
the forefront of wicked ones, Revel. 21. 8. But the true Shepherd lays down
his life for his Flock, and Nehimia, the 6. 11. being in danger, and persuaded
by Sanballet to go into the Temdl^, says, should such a manas I fly; and who
is he that being as I am, would go into the Temple to save his life, I will
not go in; then he perceived that God had not sent him, and Acts 4. 18, 19.
20. The Apostles being command silence by Authority, durst not obey, but
answers, whether it be right in the fight of God, to hearken to you more
then unto God, judge ye, for we cannot but speak the things we have seen
and heard. And Matthew. 16. 25, 26. Christ says whosoever will save his life,
shall lose it; and he that shall lose his life for my sake, shall find it.
This we see fulfilled in these days, for some forsaking the cause of Christ,
have lost estates and lives, whereas others who have stood boldly to it, have
saved both. And if Meroz with the Inhabitants thereof, was cursed with a bitter
Curse, Judges 5. 23. Because they came not forth to the help of the Lord; And
Paul thought not good to take Mark with him, because he went not with them to
the work, what may we think of those that run from it. And if by the Law a
Souldeir that leaves his Colors, is to dye the death. What may be thought of
those that leaves their Countries, leaving the cause of Christ, thinking
thereby to shun the cross: When if ever the Kingdom stood in need of help.
But at this time, which is to be noted, the Lord raised up diverse Gentlemen,
Laymen, as they call them, to stand most boldly to the truth in respect of
Church and Commonwealth. And as John says, Revella. 12. 11. loved not their
lives unto the death. And Paul-like, Acts 21. 13. was not only ready to be
bound, but to suffer for the Name of Christ.

Again, others who pretend to come nearest in that way in separating, yet hold
the baptism they there received, though on no ground; for i^ they were truly
baptized into that Church I conceive with submission to better judgments, they
ought to continue, and to separate for corruptions, as is clearly proved by B.
Hall, in his Apology against the Brownists, showing that either they must go
forward to baptism, or come back again to the Bishops and Church.

7. Considering the great wrong done in putting out some Scripture, as in the
14. Acts 23. where Election is left out, by which means people are kept from
knowing, muchlesse enjoying their privilege put chased by the blood of Christ:
the causers thereof for so doing lying under the reproof, which the Lord
speaks of in the 13. Chapter of Ezekiel. Secondly, some words left
untranslated, as in the 28. of Mat. 19. where the word may as well be Dipping,
as in Luke the 16. 29. And this is acknowledged by the Clergy in the book of
Common Prayer, where the Minister is commanded to dip the child.

8. There being now a year of Jubi^e, such an Assembly as that most Honorable
high Court of Parliament, whose ears God has opened to hear what ever by any
shall be spoken for Gods glory, and the good of this State, Gamaliel-like, Acts
5. 34. 35. weighing, and considering things, least otherwise they should be
found fighters against God, therefore with Ester, 4. 16. desire to venture, if
I perish, I perish: conceiving if some should not now speak, the stones of the
street might cry; we having lately taken the Oath of Protestat^on, against
Popery, and Popish innovation, enjoined upon all the Kingdom ingenerall. And
sprinkling of children being an invention of men, brought in near three
hundred years after Christ; therefore in obedience to God, and love to our
native Country, we desire to publish what truth the Lord betrusts us withal,
hoping that God will effect his pleasure by this weak means, or make it a
motive to stir up some of more ability, who will, as in Nehemia's time, search
the Regester, and those that found not their Genealogy, were as polluted, put
from the Priesthood, and as Christ commands, search the Scriptures, John 5. 39.
and so return to his institutions.

9. The great cause we have to admire the goodness and love of God to this
Nation, in King Edward the sixts days, for the great light that then broke
forth; and they employing that talent, they received for Gods glory, yet now
the light springing forth forth in such abundance, according to the Word of
the Lord, Isai. 11. 9. we having received more talents, or a greater measure of
knowledge, it cannot be but the Lord requires an answerable obedience,
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 8.
12. for he that had one talent was not blamed, because he did not employ two,
but because he employed not that he had: so likewise, had he that received
five been guilty of the same reproof, had he employed but one, Matthew. 25. 15.
to the 30. looking at the Camelion-like dispotion of the Ministers of late
times, in King Henry the Eights days Papists, in King Edward the Six days
Protestants, in Queen Mary's days Papists, in Queen Elizabeth's Protestants,
when the Bishops were in power and authority, submit, fly their Countries, or
hide their heads, now that by the Providence of God, they are in disgrace and
in part down, oppose them with all their might, whereas the true Ministers of
Christ were ever the same, not variable or changing, Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. 13. 14.
which times and estate Government, looking only to God for direction from that
great Prophet, the Lord Jesus Christ. Deuteronomy. 18. 15. Acts 3. 21. 22. 23. Heb. 1.
1 2 3. Revel. 5. 5.

Lastly, It Is not unknown, that the faithful servants of God, who have
indeavored most faithfulness, have often gone under reproaches and slanders,
as Eliah was counted the troubler of Israel, 1 King, 18. 17. and Acts 17. 6.
Paul and Silas was said to turn the world upside down. And Acts 24. 5. Paul
was counted a pestilent fellow, a mover of Sedition amongst the Jews, and a
Ringleader of the Nazarites, insomuch that they were commanded not to preach
in the Name of Christ, Acts 4. 18. but verse the 19, 20, they answered, Whether
it be right in the sight of God, to speak to you more then unto God, judge
ye, For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard, from
whence we may observe the ministers of Christ could never have their mouths
stopped by men, no not the majestrate, much less the Prelates.

In like manner lately, those that profess and practice the dipping of Jesus
Christ, instituted in the Gospel, are called and reproached with the name of
Anabaptists, although our practice be no other then what was instituted by
Christ himself, withal desiring, if there be any that from the Word of God,
can show that we walk in a false way, or error in denying the dipping of
infants, that they would do it, for we profess our selves such as desire the
glory of God, and eternal life after death, being confident that our desire or
endeavors cannot bring us thither, but only Christ, Heb. 10. 14. Coll. 1. 14.
in whom we have Redemption through his blood, and verse 19. and 23. withal
walking ^n that only way which leads thereunto, by him prescribed in his
Word, Joh. 14. 6. and 10. 1. Acts 5. 32. Heb. 5. 9. And being made perfect, he
became the Author of of eternal salvation to all that obey him, and Thesal. 2.
1. 7. 8. when the Lord Jesus Christ shall be revealed from heaven, with his
mighty Angels, in flam^ng fire, rendering vengeance on them that know not God,
and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, desiring therefore that
these Scriptures may be well weighed, and considered of all those that fear
God, to the end we may be reformed, if we err in our judgments by
misunderstanding the Scr^ptures, and so be brought to acknowledge the Truth,
which we shall willingly embrace, if not, though we walk in the way called
heresy, as Paul did. Acts 24. 14. yet so worship we the God of our Fathers,
and at the great day, Every man must give account for himself. Romans 14. 10. and
Matthew. 15. 15. Christ says, Every plant which my heavenly Father has not
planted, shall be rooted up, mean time all is to grow together, though not in
the Church, yet in the world, which is the field, expounded by Christ himself.
Matthew. 13. 38.

Again, knowing that God is the same, Mala. 3. 6. Secondly Christ is the same,
Heb. 13. 8. having given laws, to which none are to add or diminish. Thirdly
his Ministry the same, 1 Cor. 12. 67. 28. Ephe. 4. 11, 12, 13. Therefore as
we desire to give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, so to God the things
that are his, Mat. 22. 21. He being the Father of Spirits, and so the only
Author of spiritual worship, Jo. 4. 24. He. 12 9. Fourthly the Promises to
Believers the same Jer. 31. 3. Mat. 28. 20. Romans 8. 29. 30. 1 Pet. 1. 2.
Therefore the Administration the same, so long as there remains any of the
members of Christ to be gathered on the earth, Rev. 22 18. And if the Q. of
Sheba hearing of the fame of Solomon, which when she saw, there was no more
spirit left in her, 1 King. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. how much more are we to admire
and rest satisfied to see the fullness of Christ, and the order left in the
Gospel. Mat. 12. 42. Luke 11. 31. Col. 1. 19.

By Edward Barber, Citizen, and Merchant-Taylor of London; late Prisoner, for
denying the sprinkling of Infants, and requiring tithes now under the Gospel to
be Gods Ordinance.

A small Treatise of DIPPING;
Wherein is clearly showed, that the Lord Christ ordained Dipping for those
only that professed Faith and Repentance;
I. Proved by Scriptures, from the Commission of Christ, and practice of the
Apostles, and Primitive Churches. II. By arguments, with Answers to some
obiectons, Psalm. 119. 130. The entrance of thy word gives light, It gives
understanding unto the simple. III. Also a parralell betwixt Circumcision and
Dipping, Matthew. 15. 8, 9. IV. An Answer to some Objections by D. B.
This people draws nigh me with their mouth, and honoreth me with their lips,
but their heart is far from me; But in vain they do worship me, teaching
for Doctrines the Commandments of men.

THE Lord Jesus Christ in that great Charter of the Holy Gospel, Matthew. 28. 18.
19. 20. having received all power in Heaven and Earth, says, Go, and make
Disciples, all Nations, dipping them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you. And lo I am with you always even to the end of the world.

And Mark 16. 15. he says; Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature, he that shall believe and be dipped, shall be saved: but he
that will not believe shall be damned.

Likewise Luke the 24. 47. he says: And thus it behooves Christ to suffer, and
to rise again the third day, and that repentance and remission of sins
should be preached in his Name, among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, now
ye are witnesses of these things.

Thus it is clear, that the Lord Christ commanded his Apostles, and servants
of the Gospel, first of all to teach, and thereby to gather Disciples: And
afterward to dip those that were taught and instructed in the mysteries of the
Gospel, upon the manifestation of their faith: which practice ought to
continue to the end of the world, Matthew. 28. 20. Ephesians. 4. 5. Heb. 13. 8.

Secondly, that the Apostles, according to this Commission of Christ did
always practice, Acts 2 36, 37, 38. Peter lift up his voice, and said to the
Jews, Let all the house of Israel know for a certainty, that God has made
this Jesus, whom you have Cruci^^ed, both Lord, and Christ; now when they heard
this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and the rest of
the Apostles, men and brethren, what shall we do; Then Peter said unto them,
Repent and be dipped, every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Spirit, for the
promise is to you, and to your Children, and to all that are afar off, even
so many as the Lord our God shall call; And with many other words, did he
testify and exhort them, saying, save your selves from this untoward
generation, Then they that gladly received his Word, were dipped; And the same
day were added unto them about three thousand souls, and they con^inued in the
Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and Prayers.

Again, Acts 8. 5. 6. 12. 37. 38. Then Philip went down to the City of
Samaria, and preached Christ there; and the people with one accord gave heed
unto those things which Phillip spoke, hearing and seeing the miracles that he
did.

And when they believed, Phillip preaching the the things concern^ng the
kingdom of God, and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were dipped both men and
women; again Phillip said to the Eunuch, If thou beleevest with all thine
heart, thou may; And he answered, and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God, and he commanded the Chariot to stand still, and they went
down both into the water, both Phillip and the Eunuch, and he dipped him.

Again it is evident, Acts 10. 44. to the 48. that those only, that received
the holy Spirit by Preaching the Word, were dipped, in these words, while Peter
yet spoke these words the holy Spirit fell on all them that heard the Word, and
they of the Circumcision, which believed, were astonished as many as came with
Peter, because that on the Gentiles also was powered out the gift of the holy
Spirit, for they heard them speak with tongues, and magnified God, Then
answered Peter, can any man forbid water, that these should not be dipped, which
have received the holy Spirit as well as me, And he commanded them to be dipped
in the Name of the Lord.

Again, Acts 16. 14. A certain woman named Lidia, a seller of Purple, of the
City of Thyatira, which worshipped God, heard us, whose heart the Lord opened,
that she attended to the things that were spoken by Paul, And when she was
dipped, and her household, she besought us saying, If you have judged me to be
faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there, and she constrained
us; and verse 30. 31. 32. The Jailer said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved
and they said, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and
thine household; and they spoke unto him the word of the Lord, and to all that
were in his house, And he took them the same hour of the night, and washed
their stripes, and was dipped, he and all his straightway, and when he had
brought them into his house, he set meat before them, and rejoiced, believing
in God, with all his household; and Acts 18. 8. the chief Ruler of the
Synagogue, Crispus believed on the Lord, with all his house, and many of the
Corinthians hearing, believed and were dipped.

Thus it is clear, that the Institutions of Christ, as also the practice of
the Apostles, concerning Dipping, was only to administer it upon such, and such
only as did manifest faith and Repentance, desiring it, and this is clear in
the Apostles words, Heb. 6. 1. 2. where the right order of the principles is
laid down; saying, leaving the Principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us
go on to perfection, not laying again the foundation of Repentance from dead
works, and of Faith toward God, of the Doctrine of Dippings, and of laying on
of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal Judgments, etc.
verse. 4. 5, 6.
Thus you see it proved by Scripture; Now it follows to be proved by arguments
grounded on Scripture, that the Lord Jesus Christ, who is Lord of all
administrations, being the Priest, Prophet and King of his Church, in that
great Commission of his, Matthew. 28. 19. has not appointed one Dipping for
Jews, another for Gentiles one for men, another for women; one for old,
another for young; one for the primitive times, another for present and future;
one upon manifestation of repentance and faith professed, another upon doing it
by Godfathers and Godmothers, much less having right thereunto by the faith
of their parents, for Habak. 2. 4. The just shall Ioh. 3. 36. Romans 1. 17. 1
Ioh. 5. 10. Heb. 10. 33.
live by his faith: therefore not the faith of others; For as there is one
Body, one Spirit, and believers called in one hope of calling, one Lord, one
Faith: so also one dipping, which was to be administered only on those that
were made Disciples by teaching, and not on those who had it professed by
others, which Christ commanded not, Matthew. 28. 19. Therefore Infants by
express prohibition are excluded, as is clear in the 1 Samuel 15. 19. 22 23.
following discourse: wherefore from that which has been spoken, we argue
thus:

1. They only are to be dipped that are made Disciples by teaching, Matthew. 28.
19.

Infants cannot be made Disciples by teaching, thefore Infants are not to be
dipped.

2. Again, Every precept affirmative, contains under it a negative. To make
Disciples and dip them, is the affirmative contained under it, dip not those
that are not made Disciple, by teaching.

3. Again, if the command of Christ our Savior for making disciples by
teaching before they are dipped, be Evangelicall and perpetual, as all the
Precepts of the Gospel are, then it ought to be performed and observed in the
Church of Christ for ever.

The Major Position is true, Isai. 9. 7. of the increase of his government and
peace there shall be no end upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom,
to order and establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even
for ever. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this. And Mat. 28. 18.
19. 20. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth; Go ye therefore and
teach all Nations, dipping them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you. And lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the world.

Therefore persons upon the manifestation of Repentance and faith, only are to
be dipped.

4. None but those that do express that inward Baptism. Matthew. 3. 11. Acts
10. 47. 48. are to be dipped.

Infants cannot express that inward Baptism, therefore infants ought not to
be dipped.

5. Whatsoever was written before time was written for our learning, Romans 15. 4.
For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.

Infants dipping was never written aforetime: Therefore infants dipping is not
for our learning.

6. We are commanded to stand in the way, and ask for the old paths, which is
the good way, and walk therein, and we shall find rest unto our souls, Jer.
6. 16.

The old and good way under the Gospel, is the Institutions of Jesus Christ.
This is that Moses that said unto the Deuteronomy. 18. 15. Asts 3. 2^, 23. and 7. 37.
Children of Israel, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of
your brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear: And it shall come to pass,
that every soul which will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from
among the people.

But the dipping believers is that good old way of Christ, and infants is not:
Ergo.

Again, the Lord complained, Judge. 5. 6. his people walked in bypath, that
are of their own invention, and not of his appo^ntment. From whence we reason
thus:

They which walk in a way, or set up an invention which God has not
commanded, walk in a by-path.

But the dipping of infants God has not commanded:

Therefore the dipping of infants is a by-path.

Again, if there be conditions required of all those that are dipped, and none
are to be dipped before the performance of these conditions; then are not
infants to be dipped.

The first is true, Acts 2. 38. Then Peter said unto them, Repent and be dipped
every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and
ye shall receive the gift of the holy Spirit. And verse the 44. And all that
believed were together, and had all things common. And Acts 8. 37. Philip said
to the Eunuch, If thou beleevest with all thine heart, thou may. And Luke 3.
7. 8. John faith to the multitude that came forth to be dipped of him: O
generation of Vipers! Who has forewarned you to fly from the wrath to come;
bring forth therefore fruit meet for repentance: and begin not to say within
your selves, We have Abraham to our Father: For I say, that God is able of
these stones to raise up children to Abraham.

Thus that repentance and faith is required before dipping, is clear not only
by Scripture, but also acknowledged in the Catechism of the Primer set forth
by authority; where it is As Godfathers and Godmothers
manifested, though by others; contrary to these Scriptures, Hab. 2. 4. Romans 1.
17. Heb. 10. 38.

The second cannot be denied, seeing infants have not the use of these
faculties for the performance of repentance and faith: therefore infants are
not to be dipped.

This is proved thus: They only are to be dipped in whom repentance and faith
is manifested by hearing the Word preached.

But in persons of years only is repentance and faith wrought by hearing the
Word preached (the reason is) persons of years have ears to hear, and faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10. 17. and Acts 11.
14. who shall tell thee words whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved. And
James 2. 17. faith without works is dead yea no faith at all.

Therefore persons of years are only to be dipped.

Again thus: If the new Testament be as plain and perspicuous as the old; and
Christ the Mediator of the new Testament, as faithful as Moses the Mediator of
the old Testament. Then the persons to be dipped, and the conditions of
dipping, and the time when, are as clea^e and faithfully described in the
institutions of dipping, as the persons condition and time of circumcision.

But for infants dipping there is no express description of of the persons,
condition, time; whereas true dipping, which is that one dipping, Ephesians. 4. 5.
which is the dipping of repentance for remission of sins, Mark. 1. 4. it is
most evidently and faithfully set down for persons, condition and time, viz.
Persons confessing their sins, Mat. 3. 6. whereas persons unrepentant are put
by, Luke 7. 29. 30. And all the people that heard him justified God, being
d^pped with the dipp^ng of John; but the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the
counsel of God against themselves being not dipped of him.

Persons believing, Acts 8. 12. 13. 36. 38. Persons penitent. Acts 2. 38.
Persons that received him, and are made Disciples by teaching, Matthew. 28. 19.
John 4. 41. 42. Persons borne again, not of corruptible seed nor by the will
of man, but of God, John 1. 12. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 23. begotten by the word of
truth, James 1. 18.

Thus for true dipping there is a certain time appointed, as was for
Circumcision, Acts 8. 37. yea commanded, Acts 10. 48. And he commanded them to
be dipped in the Name of the Lord. And 22. 16. And now why tarriest thou so long?
arise and be dipped, and wash away thy sins, calling on the Name of the Lord:
therefore such persons only are to be dipped, who are thus particular
described, wherein the new Testament is as clear as the Old; and Christ the
Mediator of the new Testament, as faithful as Moses the Mediator of the Old.
So it appears what subjects are to be dipped, whereas if otherwise, then is
not the New as clear as the Old, nor Christ as faithful as Moses; which to
say, is bla^phemy.

3. Again, if the Lord does make his Covenant of the new Testament with those
only which know him by faith, which at the hearing of faith preached, do
apprehend and apply the promises contained in the Covenant, and not to any by
virtue of fleshly generation, though the natural children of Abraham.

Then not any by virtue of fleshly generation, are under the Covenant, though
the natural children of Abraham.

The first is proved, Heb 8. 10. 11. For this is the covenant I will make with
the house of Israel: After those days says the Lord I will put my Laws into
their mind, and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and
they shall be to me a people, and they shall not teach every man his neighbor,
And every man his brother saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know me from the
least to the greatest, Isai. 59. 21. John 1. 11. 12. Ephesians. 1. 13. Romans 3. 16.
21. 22. Gal. 3. 26.

2. The second is proved, Romans 2. 28. Matthew 3. 9. Joh. 8. 39. Romans 9. 8. For he
is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision, that is
outward, etc. Therefore none by virtue of fleshly gener^tion, though the
natural children of Abraham, are under the covenant.

4. Again, if the covenant which the Lord made with Abraham and his seed under
the Gospel, concerning life and salvation through Christ, is meant his
spiritual seed, and not his natural, then Abraham's spiritual seed under the
Gospel, are under the covenant of life and salvation and not his natural.

1. The first is true, Romans 4. 11. 12. 13. 16. Gal. 3. 7. 9. 22. 23. 29. Know
ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are of the children of
Abraham?

2. And the second is proved, Matthew 3. 9. Romans 9. 7. 8. Gal. 3. 22. And think
not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our father; for I say unto
you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.

Therefore the covenant which God made with Abraham and his seed under the
Gospel, concerning life and salvation, was with his spiritual seed, not his
natural.

From hence we reason thus: They only are to be dipped, and received into the
Church of God, to whom the covenant does appertain.

But the covenant does appertain to the spiritual children of Abraham, not
the natural.

Therefore the spiritual children of Abraham are to be dipped, and his
natural are not, till they become spiritual.

From whence we reason thus again:

If the natural children of Abraham are not to be received into the covenant
of the new Testament, by virtue of the covenant made unto Abraham the father of
the faithful, and no believing Gentile has the like promise, title, or
privilege to his natural children, as Abraham had to his, then no believing
Gentile by virtue of the covenant made to Abraham, has that privilege of the
admittance of his natural children into the covenant of the new Testament by
dipping.

But the first is true, Luke 3. 8. Romans 9. 6. 8. And 4. 13. 16. Now seeing the
promise is of the faith, that is, upon the condition of faith, John 1. 12. Acts
8. 37. Romans 10. 9. 10. Luke 7. 29. 30. Which faith, is a living and working
faith, not dead 2. James 17. 18. 21. 22. 23. Without which Condition, none are
to be admitted into the Covenant of the Gospel, though the natural children of
Abraham, Matthew. 3. 7. 8, 9, 10. Asts 2. 37. 38. 41. And no believing Gentile,
though never so holy, have not that honor, or dignity, as Abraham had, to be
the father of the Faithful, yea of all that believe, Genesis 12. Gal. 3. 3. 8.
Whether Jews or Gentiles; But has this honor, or dignity only to be
Christ's, to be the Children of Abraham by faith Gal. 3. 7. 26. So that this
Covenant stands between GOD and man, man^fested by holy Writ is; That as
there is but one Lord; one Faith; and one Dipping: Ephesians. 4. 5. which is the
Dipping of Repentance for the Remission of sins, Mark 1. 4. so there is but
one way or entrance into the Covenant under the Gospel, so as the Father, to
wit an Infidel, after Convertion is admitted and received a Member into the
Church of Christ upon the manifestation of his faith and repentance by Dipping;
even so his natural children, those begotten after the Parents Convertion and
admittance into the Church must come in the same way as the Parent did, or else
he cannot see the Kingdom of God, John 3. 3. Mark 1. 4. Except he die in
Infancy, or a larger mercy be shown of God, then is revealed to us in his
Word, Therefore we conclude thus with Deu. 29. 29. secret things belong to the
Lord our God, But revealed to us, and to our children for ever, And say with
Paul, Romans 11. 33. Oh the depth of Riches, both of the wisdom and Knowledge of
God, how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out.

But for his revealed will, Christ says John 15. 15. That he declared all
things which he heard of his Father, but he never declared Dipping of Infants,
but forbid it as is proved from the negative part of the Commission, Therefore
he never heard it of his Father. And the Apostle Paul, Acts 20. 27. says, That
he had declared the whole counsel of God; But he never revealed the Dipping
of Infants; Therefore the dipping of Infants is none of the counsel of God,
And therefore as the Jews were brought by Ceremonies, to know Christ, so let
Christians learn to know first, as the Lord says, Isai. 53. 11. By his
knowledge shall my Righteous servant justify many, And Jere. 31. 34. all shall
know me, from the least to the greatest, and Phillip. 3. 3. we are the
circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
have no confidence in the flesh.

Quest. 5. But what is the true ordinance, of the dipping of Christ, and
wherein does it differ from childrens Dipping, which is the best way to show
the truth; and what benefit does Believers receive by it.

Answ. That Dipping whereof we speak, is Dipping, burying, or plunging a
Believer in Water, he desiring of this Ordinance of an Apostle, Prophet or
Evangelist, To whom Christ by his Church, has committed the Administration, In
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Spirit, Matthew. 28.
19. 20. in which definition, you may observe these two parts.

1. The matter, and that is a true subject of a Believer, confessing sins,
and faith, desiring the ordinance. 2. Water the Element, and so you have the
matter, for the true form, which is:
First, Christ's power, putting life into the Ordinance, in his own
Institution, delivered in these words, to the Apostles, go ye;

Thirdly, the right verbal form of words, in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Spirit.

Fourthly, consider the ends, the Lord aims at, in giving this ordinance of
dipping to the Apostles, and so to the Church.

First, he will have them all conformable to himself, Romans 8. 29. Matt. 10.
13. Mark. 1. 9. Luke 3. 21. for before that he went about the work of God,
he went to John, to be dipped of him, so before we take on us, to make public
profession of Christ, or any part of the Gospel, much more to preach, we must
be Dipped; and so put on the right profession of the Gospel, Gall. (...) as
many of you, as have been dipped into Christ, have (...) Christ.

Secondly, God does by this holy ordinance* assure, and manifest, that he has
washed us from all our sins, by the blood of Jesus Christ, Acts 22. 16. And
does truly and visably receive us into the Covenant of grace, whereby we are
partaker of all the Promises, therein contained, that do concern the planting
us in Christ, or forgiveness of sins, and Gal. 3. 26. Hos. 14. 3. Gal. 4. 4.
5. 5. 6.
receptation of persons, both that we being fatherless, by nature, God will
be a Father to us; for ye are all the Children of God, by faith in Jesus
Christ.

Again, we are lost in Adam, therefore we are washed in the Name of the Son,
for he has redeemed us, that we might receive the Adoption of sons, and
because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying Abba Father, who of God is made into us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and Redemption. 1 Cor. 1. 30.

Thirdly, we are unable, to will, or to do any thing that is good, And
therefore we have the holy Spirit to begin all in and perfect all for us, and
to work all our works, in us, Isai. 26. 12. Lord thou will ordain peace for
us, for thou also have wrought all our works, in us; And Romans 8. 26. Likewise
the Spirit also helps our Infirmities, And Col. 1. 29. whereunto I labor,
striving according to his working, which works in me mightily, And Phil. 2.
13. It is God which works in you, both to will and to do all his good
pleasure.

Fourthly, Hereby the Believer, that was by nature afar off, a Farrenner, and
Stranger, is by the blood of Christ made nigh. Ephesians. 2. 12. 13. 14. And is by
this Ordinance of Dipping, in union with the whole body of God upon earth. 1
Cor. 12. 13. And may challenge a right in the privileges of the Gospel, in any
place wheresoever, he comes into the Communion of the Saints, Acts. 9. 26,
27, 28.

Fifthly, this is Christ's Livery, by which Christians are known from all other,
and the Church from the world. Gal- 3. 27.

Sixly, if at any time any should ask us, who req^ireth us to walk in such a
holy fellowship, and communion, we are enabled to it by Christ, and so assured
of Countenance in it, by the Lords Supper, for he that says he is in Christ,
and has fellowship with him, ought himself so to walk, even as he has
walked. John 1. 2. 6.

Seventhly, That the person thus dipped, is first visibly sealed, to the day of
Redemption, Secondly, he has truly a right to Communion, as being dipped into
that one body, whereof Christ is head, 1 Cor. 12. 13. Thirdly, that he is
mortified, Romans 6. 4. crucified, dead and buried, and risen again with Christ,
Gal. 3. 2. 3, 4, 5.

Eighthly, that the Believer, may in that day role away all the reproach of
Egypt, or Antichristianisme, renouncing the mark of the beast in our right
hands, by holding, or fighting for him, or in our forehead, Revel. 13. 16. by
dipping of Infants, that false Constitution of Rome to beget grace, thus it is
clear; who is the true subjects of Dipping, And who are not.

Now the Lord Jesus came not till the fullness of time, Gal. 4. 5. and when he
was come, never undertook any Administration, though he were heir of all
things, Heb. 1. 3. but in an orderly way, as has been showed, nor will he
contract marriage with any, though the husband of all his Church and members,
Hosea 2. 19. I will betroath them unto me in Righteousness, And in Judgment,
and in loving kindnes^e, And in mercy, yet not with any that are so young, and
under age, Gal. 4. 1. 2. 3. that they are not sencible of the want of Christ,
or any benefit they receive by him, or what contract they make with him; In
short, all those holy ends that God aimed at in true dipping, are wholly made
void, and of no effect in the dipping of Infants, which the Lord Christ
commanded not, Jere. 7. 31. Revel. 22. 18. Matthew. 28. 19, 20. nor came into his
heart; And cursed is he, that shall add to the Word of the Lord, Deuteronomy, 4. 2.
and 12. 31. Prove. 30. 6. If any man shall add to these things, God shall add
to him the Plagves that are written in this book, and therefore that ^very one
would be incovraged to bring out their Talent, and not to hide it in a napkin,
to the overthrowing of all the inventions of the man of sin, Psalm. 137. 8, 9.

Objection 1.

NOW follow certain answers to diverse objections; As First Matthew. 19. 13. 14.
In which it is clear, children were brought to Christ, therefore he d^pt them,
or it was their right, say they.

Answ. 1. It does not follow, that because Christ received, and blessed them,
that therefore he dipped them, for he dipped none at all, John. 4. 2. but his
Disciples.

Secondly, this place is put in, to be read at the sprinkling of children; for
the whore has sweet words, as soft as oil, and with these fair speeches, she
makes the nations yield to her. Pro. 7. 21. but the simple only believes her,
Pro, 9. 16. 17. For this place, as all may see; makes nothing at all for
sprinkling of children.

Thirdly, if they were infants of Eight days old (as Circumcision was
Administered) And that their parrents were Jews, they might not be dipped, before
nor after the Eighth day, and then their Mother would lie in, and be very unfit
to go abroad, much less to carry out their children, If they were not of the
Jews, but Gentiles, then had they no right, they knowing not God, And their
Children not borne of believing parents. Acts 2. 30. Genesis 17. 9. 10. 11.

Fourthly, we must not think so meanly of the servants of Christ, or think
his Disciples so untaught, that if Christ had instituted the dipping of
infants; and so had practiced the same, that they would forbid, or keep any
away from Christ's Ordinance, But rather, of all others, observe all things, as
Christ commanded them, to the end of the World, Matthew. 28. 20.

5. In both these places, there is not one word spoken of Concerning Dipping in
many Chapters before and after, and therefore they came not for Dipping unto
Christ he never did it to any, having greater works to do; to writ, the more
Noble work of preaching; an^ working miracles, as he thought good for to
confirm his doctrine for the general good, in all places, where he came.

The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has Anointed Isay 61. 2. 3.
Luke 4. 18. 19.
me to preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent me to heal the
brokenhearted; To preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering sight to
the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the Acceptab^e
year of the Lord, Acts. 10. 37. 38.

6. If the dipping of infants, be Gods Ordinance, Christ was not so faithful,
over his House a son as Moses a servant was; For Moses made, and set out all
things, according to the pattern, Heb. 8. 5. but if Christ received any
pattern for dipping infants, he has left no rule for it, by precept, or
example.

And for those that do it from Circumcision, they set the Lord Jesus, and the
Apostles to school to Moses, to learn of him in the Law, to teach the Gospel,
but we have not so learned Christ, as to think his care, and faithfulness
less then Moses; and therefore he had no such command of God, as to institute
Dipping of infants, for if he had, he might have said to those that brought
them; have they been dipped, and all the rest of your children, at home, look to
it; and for time to come, see that you pass not the Eight day, for you know,
Circumcision was not to be omitted; Remember how angry God was with that good
servant of his, Moses, Exodus 4. 25. but here is not a word for any such end;
And therefore, no ordinance of God; for the truth is, there is nothing in these
places for dipping believers; which is Gods Ordinance, much less for the
dipping of infants, which he commanded not; neither came into his heart, Iere.
7. 31.

Answer.

But for Answer to this, Christ would show his mercy to all, both jew, and
Gentile, Acts. 13. 48. for there is no difference, Col. 3. 11. But the fame of
Christ, being spread abroad, as he was famous in all places; Insomuch, they
thought them happy that could but see him, Luke 1. 9. 6. and those that could
but touch the hem of his garment, were healed of whatsoever disease they had,
Matt. 4. 23. Luke 6. 17 18, 19 hence it came to pass, they came thronging in
upon Christ, And brought their Children, for it is natural for Parents to
desire the good of their Children, as well as their own, Matthew. 15. 25, 26.
where the Woman of Canaan came to Christ, in the behalf of her daughter;
crying, Lord help me.

Secondly, Christ by embracing, and blessing them, does show himself to be
Savior of Jew, and Gentile, young, and old; for there is no other Savior, and
so that he receives none upon decent; but though he be poor, and have no
money, yea, nor money worth, yet he will give them milk, and wine, without
money, and without price. Isai. 55. 1. 2.

Thirdly, to teach his Disciples, humility, and self-denial, for he that is
not a little child, in lowliness, love, humility, and self-denial, he
shall not inherit the kingdom of God, Matthew. 18. 3. Mark. 10. 13. 14. 15.

Objection. But the promise is made to the faithful, and their seed, for Acts,
2. 38, 39. Peter says, the Promise is made to you and to your children, and to
all that are afar off, even so many as the Lord our God shall call.

Answ. In these words, is not so much as any show of truth, for Dipping of
infants, for the words are part of an Exhortation, of encouraging these
Converts, pricked at the heart, verse. 37. for they cried out, what they should
do to be saved, the Apostle answers.

First, Repent and be dipped, every one of you, for the remission of sins.

Then comes with this encouragement, for the promise is made to you, and to
your children, And to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call, that is not to you Jews only, but to the Gentiles also, to so
many as the Lord our God shall call of them* and so it answers to a case of
conscience, that they might bring, being sencible of their own unworthiness,
in crucifying* CHRIST.

Secondly this answers; that the promise is made to them; And not only to
them present; But to their posterity, yea, and to all that are called, though
never so far off, the Lord calling them, as he has done you, they may come
in by faith, for a part in Chrst, as well as Abraham your Father, or you his
children, or the children after you, But what is this to the dipping of
Infants: for children, in this place, and many other the like, is not meant,
infants of seven, or eight days old, that is p^eaded to be dipped, But the
linially descended sons of Abraham, Acts. 13. 26. Romans 9. 27. loins, men and
women, of age, full grown, for the Converts did not scruple the dipping of
their Infants, they knew not that they should be dipped themselves, until Peter
tells them of it; And exhorts them to it; thus you see plainly, this makes
nothing for dipping of Infants.

Objection 4.

But children are holy, and therefore may be Dipped. 1 Cor. 7. 14.

Answer.

The scope of the former part of the Chapter, is to answer cases of
Conscience, put, or sent by some of the members of the Church to the Apostle,
being absent from them at Philippi.

1. Whether it was lawful for them to marry, verse, 1. 3.

2. About the lawful use of liberty, in their marriage estate, verse. 3. 4. 5.

3. If they being married, the one being a Heathen, whether they might
continue, to dwell together or no, And not as in Esrahs time* put away their
wives. Esiah. 10. 3, 4, 5, 6. Where they were to put away their strange wives,
that were not of the seed of Israel, and herein is the case of the children
being holy, where the Apostle answer^s;

1. Negatively, they may not part, though one be an unbeleever, and that for
these reasons.

First he, or she that believes not, is sanctified, as a clean vessel, by
the blessing of God, for the lawful use one of another, in that honorable
Estate of Marriage. Heb. 13. 4. else were were your children unclean, that is
Bastards, but now are they holy, that is, borne in lawful marriage, Deuteronomy. 23.
2. That holy Ordinance of God, instituted by him in Paradise for our first
parents, in the estate of innocence before the fall, and graced by our Lord
Christ, himself, to show that he was by a woman in that estate, Matthew. 22. 23.
Acts 4. 27. as also by his holy presence, and first miracles that he wrought,
John 2. 1. to the 7. but before thou pass, 1 Cor. 7. 14. consider that if the
words be truly translated, the unbeleeving parent and the child has all one
holiness, or sanctification, and so rendered in the Latin, and would be so in
the English, were it not to blind the Reader.

Thirdly, Christ is pleased to set out the mystical sweet, and heavenly union
and communion betwixt him and his Church by this holy Communion; for this cause
should a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined to his wife, and
they two shall be one flesh; this is a great misery, but I speak concerning
Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5. 31, 32.

Fourthly, true holiness flows from faith in Christ, and not by generation
of holy parents, but by regeneration wrought by the Spirit of God, John, 1. 12.
13. and 3. 3. 5.

Fifthly, God does not make promise to any faithful man and woman, and their
seed now under the Gospel, Psalm. 89. 27. 28 but to the Lord Jesus Christ and
his feed, that everlasting father of the faithful; Esaias 9 6, 7. and 59. 21.
Gal. 3. 29.

6. If you say the promise was made to Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17. 9, 10.
viz. to his natural seed, then it was to give them the Land of Canaan; but if
to the spiritual seed, as it was to Christ, Gal. 3. 16. then the Land of
Canaan, was the type, and eternal by Christ, and faith in the new Covenant, is
the truth, but you must prove this promise made to a woman; also if it help
any thing by this conclusion, so that if but one be a believer of the parents,
and that be the woman, it must hold that the children be holy by the promise
made to her, and by her faith.

Oject. 5. Children are of the Kingdom of God, and therefore have right to all
the Ordinances of God, and so to Dipping, Mark 10. 14. Mat. 19. 14.

Answer. Whereas it is objectected, children be of the Kingdom of God, and
have right to all the Ordinances, and so to Dipping. This consequence
necessarily follows, that they have right also to the Lords Supper as well as
Dipping, seeing, right to all.

The Argument is grounded, because they are of the Kingdom of God, and that
Christ says it; which being true, as they would bear us in hand, that Christ
would have them to receive Dipping. We desire that to be shown, where, or when
Christ dipped any, or commanded it to be done by any other; at else that they
would appoint Godfathers and Godmothers, as they call them, to eat the Supper,
as well as to profess repentance, and faith, and desire Dipping for them, to
the Law, and to the testimony; if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them, and Jerem. 23. 30. to the 40. The Lord will
bring an everlasting reproach upon the Prophets, which cry, the burden of the
Lord, when the Lord has not sent them, but Prophecy false dreams, and cause
his people to err by their lies, and by their lightness, yet he sent them not.

Object. 6. But the maine Objection, children were circumcised under the Law,
therefore under the Gospel they ought to be Dipped.

Answer. Is it a sufficient reason, because Abraham, at the, command of God,
under the Law, circumcised his males, Genesis 17. 11. and you shall circumcise the
flesh of your foreskin and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and
you.

Therefore we must dip infants under the Gospel, which Christ commanded not,
as is before proved, neither came into his heart to imagine, Jerem. 7. 31.

Secondly, why might not Jeroboam better build an Altar at Betheel, 1 Kings 12.
28. 32. 33. seeing God commanded Jacob, Genesis 35. 1, to do it; but Jacob built
the Altar, according to the command of God, verse 7. and was approved of God
for it; and Jeroboam offered upon the Altar, which he had made in Betheel the
fifteenth day of the eight month, even in the month which he had devised of
his own heart, and had this memorial, that he made Israel to sin.

Again, it is alleged that Abraham's children were circumcised, because they
were under the covenant so that the word because seems to be the reason that
the children were circumcised, because, they were under the covenant, or
because they were Abraham's seed which I deny, my reason is;

First, if they were circumcised, because they were under the covenant; then
only Isaac was to be circumcised, because he only was under the covenant, as
is clear, Genesis 17. 19. my covenant will I establish with him for an
everlasting covenant. Now Ishmael and the sons of Keturah, were the sons of
Abraham, yet were they not under the covenant.

Secondly, whereas some seems to give the reason, because they were Abraham's
seed, then the pupills, or servants which were borne in the house, or bought
for money were not to be circumcised. But the pupills and servants that were
borne in the house, or bought with money, were circumcised as well as Abraham's
children, borne of his body. Therefore they were not circumcised because they
were Abraham's seed.

Thirdly, if they were circumcised, because they were under the covenant, then
all these children and servants were under the covenant, and so should have had
right to the inheritance of the Land of Canaan, as well as Isaac, and so should
have kept Circumsion in their posterities for ever; which thing was not done by
any but Isaacks posterity.

But now to give a Reason why Circumcision was administered; was because God
commanded it, his command giving a being to all his Ordinances: from whence it
is clear; that as Abraham, the father of them that should believe, at the
command of God, circumcised himself, and all his males in his house, because
it was Gods Commandment.

Even so the faithful, the children of Abraham ought to dip those, and those
only that profess repentance, and faith at the command of Jesus Christ; and
that because Christ has commanded it, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. But the first is
true, therefore the second.

And to speak the truth, infants are not dipped, because the males of Abraham
were circumcised, Genesis 17. or because children were brought to Christ, Mat. 19.
nor because the promise is made to Believers and their children, 2 Acts. Nor
because Children are holy, 1 Corin. 7. 14. Nor because they were all Dipped,
unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, 1 Cor. 10. 2. Or because God, or his
Son Christ, who is faithful, as a Son, ever commanded it; or that the
Scriptures approved it, or will admit of any such thing, or because they are of
the Kingdom of God, Mark. 10. 14.

But because it has been invented by men, and confirmed by the Pope, thereby
to bring in all Nations under him; And the better to color the matter, knowing
that Repentance and faith, with desire of the Ordinance, is required, has
appointed Godfathers and Godmothers, as they call them, upon the profession
of whose Faith and Repentance, with desire of Dipping, the Infant is sprinkled;
Thus have they made the word of God, of none effect, by their traditions,
Matthew. 15. 6. 9. but in vain, says God, do they worship me, teaching for
Doctrines, the Commandments of men.

And if Naboth would not sell, nor change his Vineyard with Ahab, because it
was the inheritance of his Fathers, 1 King. 21. 2. 3. how much more ought every
believer stand for, and not part with the Institutions of Jesus Christ, the
inheritance of our Everlasting Father, the Pr^nce of Peace, Isai. 9. 6.

Now follows to show the Parallel between Circumcision and Dipping, and
wherein the privileges of the faithful are as large as the Jews, insomuch as
theirs were Circumcised, and these are not Dipped, also wherein they agree, and
differ.

1. It does not follow, that because Abraham's seed by the Command of God, were
to be circumcised, Genes. 17. 10. that therefore the faithfulls natural seed
should be dipped at the Comm^nd of Antichrist, for circumcision of the Males,
was one of Gods Sacred institutions, given to Abraham, by Gods special
commandment, for that Church for ever, so long as they dwell in the Land of
Canaan, And so to continue a National Church, and so is of the Lords own
tight hands planting. Acts. 7, 8. Genesis 17. 1.

But dipping of Infants was never heard of, in all the institutions of Christ,
or preachings of the Apostles, nor in the principles of the planting of those
Thirteen Churches, in any of those 14. Epist^es, and so you see the first part
of your Objection groundless.

Secondly, The p^iviledges of the Gospel, are more large to Believers, under
the Gospel, then to them under the Law.

First, that in Christ, all the Promises are absolute, yea, and in him Amen, 2
Cor. 1. 20.

Secondly, that Abraham did not circumc^se the Females; But under the Gospel,
both are to be dipped, for there is no difference. Col. 3. 11.

Thirdly, they had the Gospel but in dark shadows; Heb. 10. 1. but we have
the substance, or the body of Christ, Coll. 2. 17.

4* Circumcision was a hard and painful Ordinance, and did both hinder work
and travel, and by the foreness of it endanger death, Genesis 34. 25. Josh. 5. 8,
9. and therefore is called a yoke that neither we nor our Fathers could bear,
Acts 15. 10. but under the Gospel we have a fair, easy and comfortable
Ord^nance in comparison of that; and therefore happy are we that may wash and
be clean, 1 Kings 5. 13.

5. Their Circumcision did injoyne them to ke^p the whole Law in the
perfection, or else they must be d^mned, Gal. 5. 3. but in Dipp^ng we are but
to be^eeve the Gospel, and ^o Christ is the end of the Law, for righteousness
to every one that believes, Romans 10. 14. And if this be not a greater
privilege, or benefit, then any of the Jews, had by their Circumcision, let
all believers judge, Cor. 1. 14. 32, and the spirit of the Prophets are subject
to the Prophe^s.

Sixthly, our privileges, is more, and larger, for that it is now given to all
Nations, that was then confined, to the Jews. Matt. 28. 19. 20. Acts 10. 24.
And many of their Prophets, Kings and Righteous men; desired to see those
things that we see, but have not seen them, Matthew 13. 17. For John was the
g^eatest that was bo^ne, be fore him; yet he that is least in the Kingdom of
Christ, is greater then he, and so our privileges, more, Matthew. 11. 9. 10.
11. 12.

Objection. 1.

But dipping is come in the room of Circumcision, which did tipe out dipping
to us.

Answer.

That cannot be, for then one tipe should tipe out another; But Circumcision
did tipe out the truth, which is the Circumcision of the heart, and the dipping
of the Spirit, Romans 2. 26. 27. 28. 29. both made without hands, Coll. 2. 11.
12. but so never was Circumcision nor Dipping.

Objection. 2.

But can you show wherein Dipping and Circumcision does agree and differ; for
that dipping of Infants, is gathered out of Circumcision, for because Infants
were to be circumcised the eighth day, therefore many do think by the same
proportion from the Law to the Gespel, children are to be dipped the eighth
day, or before.

Answer.

It does not follow, that because Jews were to obey God, in his Commandment,
Genesis 17. 10. that therefore we are to obey the man of sin, Acts. 4. 18. 19.
in his traditions, Mark. 7. 13. And therefore till you prove dipping of
infants an institution of the New Covenant, as is proved, Circumcision was of
the old; you do but beg that by tradition, that you should prove by the Word
of God, but can never.

Now follows, wherein Circumcision, and Dipping agree, and differ.

They agree in these particulars.

First Circumcision of infants, was Gods sacred Ordinance, under the old
Covenant, Genesis 17. 10.

So dipping of Believers, Heb. 8. 8. 9. 10. is Gods Ordinance, under the New
Covenant, Matt. 28. 19. 20. Jere. 31. 33.

2 They were both given to the Church for Gods glory, and our good, but to show
his right, to command; James, 4. 12. and our duty as well as theirs to obey,
Acts 5. 31. 32. Hebr. 5. 9.

3. Cicumcision was to put a visible d^fferen^e betwixt the Church and the
World, or all Na^ions, Exodus 12. 48. so likewise dipping is to put a difference
betwixt the Church and the World, Mark 16. 16. Acts 2. 39, 40, 41. John 15.
18. 19.

4. That as many of any Nation as would b^e circumcised, was made a proselite,
and so might eat the Passover, Exodus 13. 48. So every one of any Nation being
taught by the Word, believes, and is dipped, is made a Disciple, Acts 16. 32.
John 4. 1, 2. and may lawfully eat of the Lords Supper, Acts 20. 7. for the
Jews did never part the^e two Ordinances, Exodus 12. 48. And therefore if you
will dip your children, you may as well give them the Lords Supper; but if they
be incapable of that, because they cannot examine themselves, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
nor descerne the Lords Body, 1 Cor. 11. 23. no more are they capable of
dipping, because they cannot confess faith and sins, Mat. 3. 4. 6. nor desire
dipping, Acts 8. 36. 37, 38. Acts 2. ^9, 40.

5. As all that were circumcised had visible right to the Land of Canaan, and
all the benefits thereof, Josh. 5. 9. so he that is dipped,0 being a fit
subject, has a visible right to all the privileges of the Gospel, Acts 2.
41, 42, 46, 47.

6. As he that was circumcised, might perish, if he had not the circumcision of
the heart and spirit, Romans 2. 28, 29. so he that is truly dipped with water,
if he have not the dipp^ng of the spirit, Matthew. 3. 11. may perish, as Simon
Magus, and many others, Acts 5. 21, 22. 1 Cor. 7. 19. Gal. 5. 6. and 6. 15.

7. As circumcision did not seal any thing to any of the Jews, but to
Abraham, Romans 4 11. and that faith which he had, being uncircumcised. So
dipping is not a seal to any, but a sign to all what God has wrought in us,
and for us; but the true and only seal is the Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 13. Cor. 2.
1. 21. both to us, and from us, to God and men, John 3. 33 James 2. 18.

8. As those that were Circumcised, nothing could hinder them from the Land of
Canaan, but Rebellion and unbele^fe, nor cast them out of the good Land, when
they were in it, Deuteronomy 28. 15. Numb. 14. 24. Heb. 2. 3. So nothing can hinder
any from Dipping or cast them out of the Vis^ble Church of Christ, but
disobedience, and unbelief, Hebr. 4. 2. and 12. 25. 26.

9. As those that were circumcised in the flesh, God of his free mercy g^ving
them that which was thereby signified, they did enjoy Canaan, and all those
outward privileges; but as the first f^uits, they had respect to far better
things to be enjoyed hereafter, Hebr. 11. 25. and Abraham sought a City whose
maker and builder was God: So they that are d^pped have those things, whereof
their outward washing is but a sign, and by continuing ^n well doing, Romans 2.
7, 8. and beleev^ng they seek more then we can here fully enjoy, Phil. 1. 23.

10. Finally, if any that were of the seed of Abraham, or a Proselite, did
neglect circumcision, he did grievously sin against God, and as much as in
him lies to provoke God to displeasure, Exodus 4. 24, 25, 26. so any that be now
of the faith of Abraham, but newborn babes in Christ, it is their great sin
to omit dipping if they ^now it, and my have it, Acts 22. 16. for without it
they cannot rightly put on the profession of Jesus Christ, Gal. 3. 27. nor
meddle with any other the holy things of God in the Church fel^owship, Acts 2.
39.

Now follows wherein they differ, which I conceive the best way the more
plainly to show the nature of them both.

First, circumcision was an Ordinance of God, instituted for the old Covenant
of Works before and under the Law, G^n. 17. 9. 10. Exodus 12. 48. But Dipping
is only for the Gospel, and both be^ong to the new Covenant of grace, Mat.
28. 19. Hebr. 8. 11.

2. They that were Circumcised, were bound to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5. 3.
and so a heavy bondage, Acts 15 10. but they that are dipped are only to
believe, and see all done in Christ, they by faith apprehending it, Luke 8. 50.
Romans 3. 28. Gal. 3. 26. 1 Col. 17. 18. 19.

3. Circumcision was an Ordinance belonging only to that one Nation of the
Jews, and that within the compass of the Holy Land only, but no further; and
therefore neither in Egypt, nor in the Wilderness did they Circumcise, Josh.
5. 8, 9, 10.

But Dipping does belong to all Nations, whosoever are believers, Matthew, 28.
19. 20. Mark. 16. 15, 16. Acts 8, 36, 37, 38.

4. In Circumcision, the Male only might enjoy it, Genesis 17. 9, 10. But Dipping
both Male and Female, for they are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 28. Collos.
3. 11. Acts 16. 15, 16.

5. Circumcision did belong to all of Abraham's carnal seed, under the Law,
Genesis 17. 13, 14. But Dipping to his Spiritual seed, only under the Gospel,
Gallat. 3. 16. 29.

6. As a Male-child of Abraham's seed of eight days old, might be Circumcised,
Genesis 17. 11, 12. 13. But now either Male or Female, Coll. 3. 11. of the
everlasting Fathers seed, Isai. 9. 7. a newborn babe in Christ must be
dipped, Act. 8. 37. Acts 16. 15. If they can come to any place, or person, to
whom God has committed this Ordinance.

7. Under the old Covenant, they were first to be circumcised, And then to
Believe, But under the Gospel, we are first to believe, and then to be dipped,
Acts. 2. 38. Heb. 6. 2. they being under the New Covenant.

8. Circumcision did Inrite those persons, that received it, into the visible
land of Canaan, Genes. 17. 8, 9, 10. But Dipping does not give us any outward
Inheritance in any Land or Country, But does manifest to all men, that the
Lord has not only given to those that obey, Hebr. 5. 9. That right in the
Kingdom of grace, but also the Kingdom of glory.

9. Those that were circumcised under the old Covenant, did worship for grace,
and so all that they did, was to make an Atonement: But we under the New
Testament, worship from a principle of grace, which do show forth the glory of
God; And this is the true difference betwixt literal and spiritual worship,
Psalm. 92. 14. Cor. 2. 3. 14. to the 18. And so between circumcision and dipping.

10. Circumcision did always go before preaching the word; bu^ dipping does
follow, Matthew. 28. 19. 20. Acts. 8. 34. to the 37. Acts 2. 37, 38.

11. Circumcision was a seal to Abraham, of his faith he had, Romans 4 11. but
to none of his posterity, But Dipping is not a seal to any of the faithful,
now but the Spirit of God, is the seal of life. Ephesians. 1. 13. 2. cor. 1. 21. 1 John 3. 24.

12. Circumcision does differ from Dipping, both in the matter, form, end, and
time, of continuance.

1. For the matter, an infant, a Male of Abraham's seed by nature, a prosselite,
or bought with money, but the subject matter of Dipping, is a Believer of ripe
years, but an infant in grace.

2. For the form, a round cutting of the foreskine of the instrument of
generation, very sore, and grievous, Josh. 5. 6. 7. But the form of Dipping,
is water or plunging* under water, Matthew. 3. 13. 14 15, 16. John. 16. 1^. 33.
Mark. 19. 10. John, 3. 23. which is much easier.

3. In respect of the end of it, Circumcission did but manifest an outward
right to temporal inheritance in the land of Canaan; but Dipping does witness
to Be^eevers, that they have a visible right into the Kingdom of heaven, Luke.
12. 32, not only in grace here, but in glory hereafter.

Again, in respect of the time, for circumcision was to continue so long as
the Jews, continued to be a National Church, and then to end at Christ's
death, but Dipping is to continue so long as Christ has any Church upon earth,
Mat. 28. 20. till the Kingdom be delivered up; and God shall be all in all. 1
cor. 15. 28.

Lastly, circumcision was a Tipe of inward dipping, the truth of Regeneration
or the circumcision of the heart, and Spirit. Romans 2. 26. to the 29. coll. 2.
11. 12. And not a Type of outward Dipping. Prove. 30. 6. Add thou not to his
words, least he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar. And Revellat. 22. 22.
for I testify unto every man that hears the words of the Prophecy of this
book If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the
Plagues that are written in this book, and Heb. 12. 9. Further more, we have
had fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence; shall
we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of Spirits, and live?

BEloved, since part of this Treatise was in Press, there came to my hand a
book, set forth by P. ^. which could I have gotten sooner, I should have
answered more fully. But to touch some particulars; and first of Christ's not
being a Widdower, nor his Church without a head, though I find not this
expression, we differ not in the matter or substance, though it be not always
visib^e on the earth, as is clear, Rev. 6. 12. 13. 14. whereupon the opening
the eight Seal, heaven departed as a scroule when it is rolled together, and
the 11. 7. 12. the witnesses lying dead three days and a half; therefore the
Church is not always visible nor the M^nistry, but for a time is hid in the
Wilderness, where she is nourished for a time, and times and half a time,
from the face of the Serpent, Chap. 13. 3. 17. And therefore Christ is no
Widdower, nor his Church without a head, so long as his Spouse has a being in
heaven or earth.

2. We grant the Ordinance, being lost, none but a Christ, a Moses, Elias or a
Prophet from heaven, can raise it; but believers having Christ, the Word and
Spirit have this, Mat. 18, 19, 20 and 11. 11. Luke 7. 28. Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. for
the Scripture is as silent of John's baptising himself, and so others, as for
one. After the defection of Antichrist to baptize himself, being worse then
the Apostasy of Israel: And this is plain, for the Spirit does not call them
fallen Israelites, but Sodomites, and Egyptians, that were the worst of all
Pagans; and so of all the Gentiles* Rev. 11. 2. 8.

3. Isreal's Apostasy d^d not race the foundation of the constitution of the
Church of the Jews, for that was of an infant of Abraham's seed, or a
Prosselite to be circumcised, Exodus 12. 48. and so long as they did this, their
constitution was true in the Land of Canaan, Gen the 17. 10, 11, 12.

But it is plain, that Antichrist, as he has changed all other Ordinances,
both in the Church Minist^y, Worship and Government, Esai. 24. 5. So has he
destroyed that true Apostolical institution: the matter whereof being
believers confessing sins and faith, desiring the Ordinance, Matthew. 3. 6. Acts
8. 36, 37. to false matter of carnal infants, not newborn Babes of that
everlasting Father, Begotten by that immortal seed, Isai. 6. 9. 1 Pet. 2. 23.
First being Christ, Gal. 3. 29. and not a fleshly Generation, for that which is
borne of the flesh, is flesh, that have not visible Faith neither can they
seal unto the Lord. John. 3. 33. as all true believers do, for all true
matter for the true church under the Gospel, must know the Lord, Jere. 31. 34.
And be all taught of God, Isai. 54. 13. And therefore did the church of Rome or
England, Baptize believers, only confessing faith and sins, desiring it, we
would never separate from them, much less remove their Baptizme, as false,
because it is Gods ordinance in it self, but so was never the sprinkling of
infants.

2. Whereas you say we are filled with prejudice, that we have not patience to
hear, we shall be ready, as we have ever been, to speak, or write: and
concerning the vessels of the Lords House, if you perform your promise, I hope
you will change your mind; for the Vessels of the Lords House had no relation
to the sprinkling of Infants, as has been formerly answered, for they were
his own Ordinance, and need not be new cast, so long as they remained the
same, but the sprinkling of Infants was never. And so the Argument to no
purpose.

But put the case the Babilonians had destroyed the Lords Vessels, and in stead
had made them of Brass, Copper, Tin, or Lead, whereas they were to be of pure
Gold and Silver; had they been then the Lords Vessels, or would his people
have used them in his service and worship, or brought them back, Ezra 1. 11.
or would the Lord have accepted them for his own Vessels. And thus it stands
in truth for the Dipping of Christ, destroyed and raced out both for matter and
form, as has been formerly showed, the matter being a believer desiring it,
the true form, dipping them into Jesus Christ, in the New Covenant, to be
visible heirs, Romans 8. 17. Gallat. 4. 5. Matthew. 28. 20. whereas the other is
but a tradition of the Church. As Master Rogers in his Treatise of Baptism,
shows that his conscience was never convinsed by any Word of God. Also
confessed by the Jesuits in the 17 controversies. Therefore though in words you
deny traditions, yet for the sprinkling Infants you have no better Arguments.

3. Whereas you say the whole Church of ^olosse; and so children being a part
thereof, were baptized. To which I answer, could you prove them Saints and
faithful brethren in Christ, with experience of their love, 1 Chap. 2. 14. 21,
22. and 2. 11. and 3. 8. wherefore he exhorts the Church to beware least any
man spoil them through Philosophy, and vain deceit, after the traditions of
men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ, they being
complete in him, in whom dwells the fullness of the Godhead* bodily, being
circumcised with the Circumcision made without hands, and so buried with Christ
in baptism, wherein also they were risen with him through the faith of the
operation of God, which was by regeneration, and not generation, as Christ
says, John 3. 3. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 3. 1. 3. 21. Romans 10. 10. and formerly proved,
having tasted that the Lord is gracious, to whom coming as unto a living
stone, elect and precious; they as living stones, are built up, a Spiritual
House, an holy Priesthood to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God
by Jesus Christ.

And whereas he says, some hold that Christ is to come and Reign at
Jerusalem; wherefore he would have had them to stay till then for the
Ordinance. To which I answer, if the want of the visibility of the Church
proves Christ a Widdower; then the state of the Church of which P. B. is a
Member, was unheard of within these two hundred years, and so Christ a
Widdower, unless he hold the Church of Rome a true Church; which if he do,
how dare they separate from her? If not, some of them, being loving friends,
holding the same Principle; how dare they raise up a State before Christ comes,
as they say, to restore all things.

Lastly, whereas the clothes, or vestments are said to be holy, which they
wear when they receive the Ordinance of Dipping, they being dipped into the
death of Christ: for answe^, he might as well have said, the clothes are holy,
preached unto, exhorted to repentance, faith, and other duties that men wear
when they are in their Assemblies; but as is the man, so is his strength, and
for setting our parts Judge. 8. 21.
by Gods parts, Ezekiel. 43. 8. Whether the Dipping believers, which Christ
command, or springling Infants, which he commanded not, be it, let every wise
man judge; and the Spirit; of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor.
14. 32. And for the whole household, that he speaks of, did he but consider
the Apostles first preaching to them the Word of Faith, and their believing,
Acts 16. 31. 32. 34. This Objection is soon taken away, but this has been
sufficiently spoken to before: therefore I shall leave it to Gods blessing, and
thy censure.

FINIS.

