POCULA CASTALIA^

The Authors MOTTO. Fortunes Tennis-Ball. ELIZA. Poems. Epigrams, etc.
By R. B. Genesis

OVID. Vilia miretur vulgus, mibi flavus Apollo, POCULA CASTALIA plena
ministret aqua. LONDON, Printed by W. H. for Thomas Dring, and are to be sold
at his shop at the sign of the George, near Cliffords-Inne in Fleet Street.
1650.

Aetat: Suae 19
portrait of Robert Baron

^u^tus Apollinea ^ictu^ Barone (...) est
(...) Apollinea ^^^^itur art liber.
W. Mars(...) John Hebart Gent:


To the Rare, and most Hopeful Gentleman Mr. Robert Baron, upon his Pocula
Castalia.
MAy great Apollo with his Holy Quire
Of charming Girls my brain no more inspire,
May I never fetch more naps on Phocis Mount,
Or drink one drop of Aganippes Fount
If these Castalian cups were not to me
As Nectar, as pure Nectar from the Be.
Your Pregnant Muse bears ripe fruit in her Spring.
Her green is yellow; If She thus take wing
To reach the Laurel, and so fast improve
The stock of Poets by such heats of love,
You may in time, where now old Phoebus sits,
Be Lord Chief- Baron of the Court of Wits.
JAM: HOWELL*

To the growing branch of Virtue Mr. R. B. upon his Castalian Cups.
THose who have tipled on Nep^nthe Cups may taste
on these, and see how far they are surpast.
Each drop so full of wit, Apollo swears
The Gods a better Nectar broached here.
Then he that Cup Bearer to thee will prove
Must be a Ganymede fetched from above;
Or if he will pledge thee here, he surely must
Speak like a Poet with a curious Gust;
Or else displume some Apollinean wing,
And a new Mercury below must bring.
The Imperial Baies which minor Poets wore,
Was never twisted with such threeds before.
Their greenness from thy Youth may painted be,
Their permanence from thy maturity.
The Muses when they filled these Cups, each one
Disgusts their old and makes these Helicon:
And to enhance thy worth, they keep in thee
Their own and the Cyprian Queens Academy:
There they did all Commence, and though they strive
Thou made each one's degree superlative;
This in thy morn of Youth did soar so high
As the early Lark of well-fledg'd Poetry:
And if thy rising Sun did blaze so soon
How will thy splendour dazzle us at Noon?
Sure those Meridian rays will make each man
Adore thy shadow and turn Persian.
Each beam of thine has such Conspicuous light,
Twill puzzle Mathmaticks to take thy ^eight,
To take a prospect to thy heavenly sphere
Not Jacobs Staff but Ladder must be there;
If pens to praise (Imp't by thy wings) aspire,
From thee, Prometheus like, they must steal fire.
What Optic glass can take thy altitude.
In The First or Second or Third magnitude?
Three of thy glorious Stars already sent,
To disinvelop Nights dark Firmament;
Which could we disinsphere, each single one
Has light to make a Constellation:
Each Volume's but an Index of thy mind
And shows a better yet is left behind.
How prepnant does thy teeming brain appear,
That thus conceives and brings forth every Year!
The first a miracle of Youth may well be styled,
Where Virgin Years brought so than aged Child.
The Cyprian Queen first wooed thee, then her Son
Made an Apology and thus begun:
And thy Hymnean rites to solemnize
These Cups are broached, thus thus to tanta'ize.
Married how can thou be to any Dame
When every Muse thy parts and arts do claim?
To one and yet to all thou art wed: for there
The Graces all concenter in thy Dear:
They claim thy Head, and She thy heart by vow,
Though they plead contract, she pleads contact now:
Thus may each Poet Prophet be and Priest,
And show the Muses choice Polygamist.
THO. MOORE, of the Inner Temple,

De Lauro effigiem Nobissilimi Amici Rob. Bar. circumvallante.
EN, tua, Surgentes allato vertice Laurus
Vt cingant ramis tempora docta suis.
Ecquid bonos major dixit, mea Laurus, Apollo?
(Dixit and Aonii turba novenna chori)
Ecquid honos major? quam summo principe vatum
Ornari, quemfas, castus and ardet Amor.
Bacche Pater, tua rura colet decorataracemis
Bassasidum effuso Nectare tincta cohors;
Frons mea, (Caesarea veluti dominator Arend)
Gandeat, ex domini laud superba sui,
Sitque triumphatrix, qualis Vulcania conjux,
Quam rotut I dalii cand: da big a Dei.
Saepe ego mirabar quid talia verba volebant,
Exposuit gryphos Delius ipse suos;
Laurus V^rgine^ dat solus Apollo Poetae:
Sola dat impuro myrtea serta Venus.
Raptim, C. B. Art Baccha.

THE AUTHORS MOTTO.
Qua obtineam est tentanda via INDELEBILE NOMEN,
Quod nec Fata queant, nec edax abolere vetustas.

I Will blow the Mount to Atoms, but i will climb
Its steep fork'd Top, and triumph over Time.
How shall I pluck from's iron teeth my Name,
That Bards unborne yet, may embalme't with fame
To last for aye? This PHOEBUS meant should be
A chief effect of my nativity.
Never did JAPETUS son to wonder frame
His manly Statue, and inspire't with flame
Filch'd from JOVE'S Harth, meaning he should ascend
The Stage, there Scrape a Leg, and so descend.
For if a man should be brought forth, and cry,
And score a score of Lusters up, then Die,
And steal into his grave with no more noise
Than a black Ribband makes, or branch of Bays,
And there lie mouldring under a silent stone
That courts no eyes to read the Inscription;
He were like Glow-wormes that creep out in the dark
At the bottom of the Hedge, whilst no eyes mark,
If any difference 'twixt them there be
The Worms skin shines more than his memory.
Since it is decreed then, by Impartial Fate
We all must be reduced soon, or late
To our first Principle, Dust, Its my intent
To rear my self a death-lesse MONUMENT:
Not that I do desire to shroud my bones
The labor of an Age in piled stones,
Or that my worthless Ashes should be hid
Under a skie-invading Pyramid.
For we of Delphos may secure our Fames
By inscribing in Times brazen leaves our names.
It is enough that we in each mouth raise
A speaking Statue to our long-lived praise.
Rouse then Invention, and call Judgment in,
I know my task, teach me how to begin
And perfect this great work. But first of all
Of what perennious material
Shall I erect my MONUMENT, to last
Strong as the Poles? sweet as the fragrant East?
Clear and perspicuous as noones bright eye
Whilst he shall hold forth light to see it by?
Shall I court cursed BELLONA with intent
To carve out with my sword my MONUMENT?
No: the Pen out lasts the Pike, and in mine ear
MINERVA'S Pipe sounds than her Trump more cl^er.
I Will wear no spungie Buffe, nor fortify
My self (my little city) martially
With walls and countermures of steel; when I
Court Ajax shield, and the Art of Engenry
Its chiefly to oppose and keep the stout
And haughty foes of Virtue, Passions, out.
MARS shall not see me locked in Brass, or wield,
A spear again, Ith blood-bedabled Field;
Unless my PRINCE, Honor, and Virtues cause
Call to assert their Rights, and equal laws.
But should I (as young Lions new taught to prey
Invade the Herds) flow like a violent sea
On hostile Troops, or armed with wroth and heat
Plough up whole Armies and walled Towns subvert;
Or enter breaches like a winter flood
Till the resisting Cities swam in blood;
The fame of the deed with the next Gazzet would burn
And with the rac'd Forts ashes find its urne.
Actions, though never so arduous and high
Have no more life than one man's memory,
Unless some hallowed Pen in Castaly's
Sweet Nectar dipped give them eternity.
Romes glory (for whom Fame flew greater then
For other men) his acts had sullied been
With Dust of Time, had not his wiser skill
Again done o'r, and brusht them with his quill.
Halfe's Tenure in his Book, not all in's Sword
Lay, Ex utroque CAESAR was the word.
Letters boast longer life than Porphyry
Or Marble, only these can never die.
The Chapel sacred to great MARO'S name
May sink under Times weight, but not his fame,
That shall new burgeon in his high-rear'd strain,
And in his Verse his Bay shall sprout again.
Though others wither, only this chaste Tree
From storms, from blasting, and from bolts is free.
Not NASO'S face engraven in Rings of Gold
And worn by Princes, made his fame so old,
But his sweet MUSE that soared so even, yet high,
This, this 'twas took from him the power to die.
Trophies and Crowns in the Field are but half given
In The Study half. Deeds glorious as Heaven
Till Poesy send them 'bout the World to run
On even measured feet, are but half done,
They are not fledged till imp'd with the Poets Quil
(The chiefest feather in Fames wing) his skill
Reads men and Deeds their doomes, his breath, like Fate
Can what he please make or annihihalate.
He gilds o'r Princes Crowns, his numbers can
Make Ease taste bitter, sweet Affliction.
Was not neat OVID, a poor exiled thing,
More honored than Assyria's wanton King
Melting to lust at home? --
Conquered Troys Son, and conquering Latium's Sire,
Lost not so much bliss by the Midwifes ire,
As by that golden Trumpet of his Deeds
VIRGIL, he gained; 'twas he raised up his Head
To Heaven with Statues: though the hot youths Flame
Wasted the Town 'twas He preserved the name.
Thou not immortal art great THETIS son,
For being dipped in Stix but Helicon,
By the blind Bard: He left not out thy heel,
Deaths dart thou, nor thy name, no more shall feel.
Great He (the Muses high Priest) traveling
To lift unto the Stars the Ithacan King,
A Monument eternal has brought forth
Which shall from eating Age preserve them both.
Of Princes this, of Poets that the Glory,
HOMER by ULYSSES live, he by his story.
PALLAS strong arm (there) heaves them both so high
That Kings for such a Tomb would wish to die,
These Tombs shall live, and will admirers have,
Although MAVSOLUS his prove its own grave,
And needs a MUSE that memory to afford
T'its self, that it should do unto his Lord.
Since their names longest last whom their own terse,
Or others pens embalme with sacred Verse,
By this I Will strive to be no sluggard known,
And to make every Age to come mine own.
I Will court the Sister Quire with praises meet,
To teach my words to run on measured feet.
At PHOEBVS Shrine my vows i will make and pay,
And on his Altar Sacrifices lay
And pil'd-up Hecatombes: His Harths I Will feast
With odors fragrant as the Phaenix neast.
Sweet gummes shall smoke in curles, and in his fire
Spice crackling yield sounds pleasant as his lyre,
In his wise ear: Thither my sweet-breathed prayer
Shall up in clouds of Incense climb; the air
My Hymns shall lull; Heaped perfumes pious light
With flames full clear, and as his own rays bright
Shall gild his Fane, till he unsealed has
The holy Eount; there will I drench and bath
My brains, till they from earth and thickness are
Refined, and pure as are those streams; I Will there
With crowned bowls swell me, till my fancy flies
Near Heaven, entranced and filled with ecstasies,
Then sing notes worthy his own Harp, and prove
The Acts of the Theban and EVRYDICE'S Love
No truthlesse tales, for duller things my Lays
Shall nimblier move, and stranger structures raise.
I Will scrue the spheres up higher, and lend again
The Harmony of their round race to men.
I Will fix the Almighty Poets Pen upon
The Zodiac a Constellation.
If MOMVS snarles, in drumming tunes my wrath
Shall rhyme the Dog, like Irish Rats, to death.
In keen Iambick's I Will untrusse the Elve
Till he runs mad, or wisely hangs himself
LYCAMBES like. I Will squirt his eyes with Ink
Shall ^ot the wretch, his Libels Leth' shall drink.
Or placed above his reach, his rage I Will scorn,
And laugh to see his shafts on's own pate turn.
I Will make each friend a Star, and fill the skies
Unfurnished rooms with them, and give more eyes
To Heaven to see those Hero's I will seat
Borne up by Statues, on a Pyramede
Of Glory in my Poems; I shall be
Eternized thus by them, and they by me.
Then if no Issue of my Loins convay
My Spirit down unto Posterity,
That of my brain will: my loved Poetry,
My Son my History and TOMB shall be.
R. B.

MARTIAL.
Carminibus nec Fata nocent, ac saecula prosunt,
Solaque non n^runt hac MONUMENTA mori.

FORTVNES TENNIS-BALL.

A MORAL FABLE.

The Author R. B. Gent.

JUVEN. Si FORTVNA volet fies de Rhetore Consul.

LONDON, Printed by W. H. for Tho: Dring. 1650.

TO The Choicest of my Noble Friends, JOHN WROTH Esquire.
I AM big with love. How shall I (gentle WROTH)
Set it, and the cause of it, thy merit, forth?
I Am no rare Herald to fetch far thy name,
Or patch together coats to cloth thy Fame,
Yet I do more than that when call thee Good;
For Virtue's higher nobleness than blood.
I Am no grave Antiquary, to present
Old Medals, or some dusty Monument
Of some great Ancestor, by Relics foes
Envy and Time, robbed of an Ear or Nose.
For WORTH I will not rake their sleeping Vrnes,
That which but glowed in them, in thee bright burns.
Thee, who had old Rome in her Glory seen,
Thou amongst her hundred Statues placed had been:
But safe in them thy Name could not have stood,
From Times sharp teeth, even them he makes his food.
The Memphian wonders that so long did boast
Their neighborhood and kin to Heaven, are forced
To bow their proud tops, and begin a new
Acquaintance with low Earth, where first they grew.
Rhodes haughty Colosse that bestrid the Flood,
Is now but Aier wherein once it stood,
And needs the evcrlasting MUSE to tell
The World it once had such a Miracle.
The MUSE 'twas furnished Heaven with Deities;
Fames Roll with Hero's, and with Stars the Skies.
Her works will last, 'twas She that Power did give
To some men longer than those Pyles to live.
And if that I find grace with her to grow
In favor, she shall do much more for you.
Yours, More than mine own. ROBERT BARON.

TVCHESPHAIRA: OR, FORTUNES TENNIS BALL.
1.
GReat CESAR'S Barn, Romes life, and Granary,
That so august, so great, so fertile Isle,
Where the kicking Monster on his back does lie,
Spitting forth flames through the Aetnean pile,
Whose smothering smoke, and sparkles at random driven
Do seem to lend new clouds and Stars to Heaven.
2.
THEREVTVS ruled; A far worse man than King,
A Zealous Vot'ry of DIANA'S borne,
His shrill voice made each Quire of Eccho's ring,
His only music was the Hunting Horn,
And game to see his flapmouth'd kennell follow
The chase, and yelping keep time with his hollow.
3,
Near to Palermo was a flowrie valley,
Levelled and trimmed by sweating Mowers hand,
Some Rivolets slide swift, some slowly dally
With the even bosom of the sluced Land.
There Nature wanton was, and the high way
Did seem enclosed, though it open lay.
4.
Pastures in FLORA'S tapst'rie clad were gay,
With golden ears to pay the Ploughmans fees
Each field shon bright, the scaly Nations play
In flowing cristall, fringed with wavering trees.
As if Industry joynd with Art so nice
To represent or excel Paradise.
5.
But to what end if man was banished thence,
Was this Elizian Palace of delight?
What though the West has gems, the East Frankincense,
If this feasts not our smell, nor those our sight?
What ere is fair or good was made for use,
And the not use of things is things abuse.
6.
No wight durst tread that in-vaine pleasant soil,
For the adjoining Thicket and curled Grove
Sheltered a Boar AMYNTAS hopes did spoil,
Like him that toar from Lovesick Love her Love.
This fate (Woods mutter) he deserved, hunting there,
When VENUS would be's Park, if he her Dear.
7.
His jaws with double sword, his back was armed
With a set Battle of Pikes sharp and brisly,
His crooked tushes slew, not lightly harmed
What ere he kissed with his Urchin snout so grisly.
His foam besnow'd the trampled corn, the fair
Meads he plough'd up, his fume inflamed the air.
8.
The Rosie-finger'd Morn did there disclose
Her beauty ruddy as a blushing Bride,
Gilding the Marygold, painting the Rose,
With Indian Chrysolites her cheeks were died:
But when this Monster roused him in the vale,
Fear chased her blush, and frighted Day looked pale*
9.
The Sun durst not see him devour his Prey,
But peeping through the leaves of Poplars green,
They shak'd; and trembling streams did run away
Groaning, and crowding strove to pass unseen.
Birds, Beasts, yea buzzing Flies petitioned Nature
To stop his breath, or change his ugly feature.
10.
This prodigy of Nature and the Wood,
The fields Mower, the Mowers terror, watered
Parched droughty Pastures with a crimson flood,
Then made them white with bones of bodies slaughtered.
Hardy THEREVTVS longed to see this Beast,
(Fierce as himself) come smoking to a feast.
11.
His Hounds by fast made eager of the Prey,
His Javelin whetted sharp as Crocea Mors,
Clad all in green, as he were Son of May,
He mounts his well-breathed wind-out-running Horse.
Now like the God that bears the silver Bow,
Encountering with huge Python, did he show.
12.
Ere village Cocks (the Laborers shrill Alarms)
Had thrice done Salutation to the morn,
He rouzed Echo from NARCISSUS arms,
Instead of CHAUNTICLEER his early Horn
Called PHOSPHORVS into the milkie way,
And Nights faint shades flew fore his conquering Ray.
13.
AURORA blushed to be found in Bed.
The Greenes with Roseall dew did wash their face
Against SOL's uprise; the Hours opened
Heavens folding gates, through which with awful pace
Bright TITAN issued, clothed in Tissue gay,
Attended by his spangled Page, the Day.
14.
The Aire's all noise, the hot-sent-snuffing Hounds
Awaked the Terror with their challenging knell.
In swelling rage the innocent Earth he wounds,
And like three-headed Porter (Swisse) of Hell,
Rushed forth resolved to break his fast on them
That durst presume so near his Den to come.
15.
As fell MEDUSA covetous of slaughter
Did drive the waves before his mighty breast,
Shaking his ears above the troubled water,
Disgorging new seas from his monstrous chest,
Extending yawning Jaws: so showed this Swine
Fiend-like as he, fierce as the angry Brine.
16.
As cowards vaunt ere wreathed brass bids the Base,
Bragging they will shoostrings make of guts of foes,
But when MARS seizes for Deaths use the place,
And all whom courage rescues not, and blows,
Then Palsy fear supprize their joints, which fright
Does knock together, and make another fight.
17.
So the mungrill currs, erst bold as to defy
The unseen Monster, (so rash is rage) now stand
Afraid to view him with half open eye,
Gazing like Armies in the Netherland.
Finding their balefull foe so grim and cursed,
They all strain court 'sie which should cope him first.
18.
When Trumpets loud Tantarra to the fight,
Blows make bruiz'd Armours Echo to the noise:
So the Horn into these Dogs infused new sp'rit,
Their mouths they spend, and are become all voice.
The airy Queen (sounds child) each yell replies,
As if another chase were in the skies*
19.
The merry Horn filled with courageous breath,
Proclaimed Parley to the woods grim wonder.
He stoutly scorned the summons of his Death,
And mocked their challenges with his mouths thunder.
The busy flies he snarl'd at, and did chase*
His own foul shadow on earths wrinkled face.
20.
The Boar his Tuske in many a Dog did sheath,
Their goar, his foam, like blood with milk bespread
(Whilst them he tossed now over now beneath,
His fangs and head) bepainted all with red
His frothy mouth. The Hounds are at a Bay,
The eager cry still 'ith' same place does stay.
21.
Howling with anguish here is a brace of Hounds,
There lay two other dew-bedabbled wretches
Kennel'd in Brakes, licking their venomed wounds,
Shaking their ears, tattered and torn with scratches,
Their stiff tails against the grass they clap and beat,
And lard the thirsty ground with blood and sweat.
22.
When the Huntsmans voice spoke Terror to the Boar,
Terror the Parasite Echo said, like him.
When the churlish Swine Death to the Dogs did roar
Death said the flatterer, like the beast so grim.
As Apes do postures she mocked every cry,
Thus newters do with either side comply.
23.
The blunt Boar scorning to be kept in mew,
To ly besieged by snarling Curs too proud,
Like the Lernean Snake he rouzing show,
And rushed through the-in-vaine opposing crowd.
Swift as a Roe up to the Hills he flew,
The hot-spur'd Hunters, with full cry pursue.
24.
By this the Fountain of Light low did run,
Enchanting Philomel chanted her Vesper,
The silver erst, now golden (setting) Sun
Trebled each shade; the Owl peeped out with Hesper.
Green TETHYS from her sweaty bed thrust Night,
Expecting there her far more fair delight.
25.
All on a sudden Darkeness doubled was,
Flashes and noise the moving Sky distracted,
BOREAS sung terror in a blustry base,
Both Night and Winter in a storm contracted.
Thunderbolts split the Cedars that aspired,
Their blasted tops the nimble Lightning fired.
26.
The dabled South, ruffe-footed Aquilo,
Came rushing like two Rams whose steeled Horns
Dart fiery sparks and Stars; the Clouds crushed so
Breath flames: the Air distilled in rain and storms,
Which suffered no two together stay,
Each, as in ship wrack shift their several way.
27.
No friendly Star or Moon-like Pylots kind
(Oh Fate of Darkness!) guide them on their way,
The foremost curse them that did lag behind,
And they the foremost; all ride on and stray.
Their voices all are spent, and they that follow
Can track the first no longer by their hollow.
28.
They wander and take Bridges to be Styles,
When King THEREVTVS (from his train aloof)
In spite of Night and error, spies the whiles,
A small light glimmering in a smoke dried roof.
Thither he makes, such straglers as these are,
A Candle weak admire more than a Star.
29.
His Highness meant not to discover here,
His true estate, and greatness of his name,
'Cause he would not affright the Cottager,
But learn what of himself said common fame.
So through his Camp disguised went PHILIPS Son,
To hear how opinions Tide on him did run.
30.
In this low thatched patched Graung dwelt ADELIN^
A Swain whose quiet life honesty completed,
Of him the wandering unattended King
A homely lodging for that Night entreated,
The poor wight (rich in love and gentle words)
Proffers the best his humble shed affords.
31.
Then set he fore his Guest (whom he not knew)
Sweet Growte, and Whig, and Flap-jacks of fine meal,
A sheeve of household bread of nut-brown hue,
Cheese white as Milk, nor lacked there bonney Ale,
Nor Wildings and ripe fruits, which to the eye
Gave pleasing taste ere they the mouth came nigh.
32.
The King with unexcited Appetite,
Appeased his craving Maw with these plain Cates;
Then did he half envy the secure Wight,
With whom of Shepherds easefull lives he chats,
Praising a Cottage 'bove a slippery Court,
To which the Hind replied in such sort.
33.
" A Prince that in the Cedars top does build,
" And scorns the Sun, and dallies with the Wind,
" Only a Title has his care to gild,
" His gay robe's lined with a restless mind.
" They that stand high have many blasts to shake them,
" And falling from on high, the more they break them.
34.
" The more we graspe the Waves the less we hold:
" So who seeks ease in greatness, ease him flies.
" Just as the Persians did by slaves of old,
" Fate does by Kings, Crown them for Sacrifice.
" Glories, like Glow-wormes, a far off shine bright,
" But looked to near have neither heat nor light.
35.
" The Court is Fortunes cheating Lottery,
" Where places are like to the Beds that fill
" An Hospital, where this man's head does lie
" At that man's feet, so lower and lower still.
" When a Star glides (we say) a Child is born,
" So this Lard mounts when that slips into scorn.
36.
" Soldiers, whose prize is praise, and Trophies skars,
" When they through new red seas for many a year
" Have swam to glory, become Astronomers,
" And Almanacks in their dry bones they bear;
" Or they turn Geometricians, and so
" Practice their Art on crutches as they go.
37.
" Tough pale-faced study bookish men does pine,
" This is that Vulture which PROMETHEVS tore;
" Merchants that dwell with Fish in the blew brine,
" Often lose their lives seeking to increase their store;
" The toyling Craftsman drinks his own sweat,
" And out hard iron hammereth his meat.
38.
" Content the Shepherds Cottage only fills,
" With the early Sun he does his Flock unfold,
" And all day long on easy climbing Hills
" Or flowrie Plains he merry chat can hold,
" Or indite Sonnets in an amorous vein,
" And with the setting Sun he folds again.
39.
" Then jogging home he turns a Crab, or else
" He tunes a round, or sings some chearly rhyme,
" Or on the tongs he counterfeits the Bells,
" Nor lacks he gleefull tales to cheat slow time.
" There sits he, and whilst round the bowl does trot,
" Sings care away, till he to bed has got.
40.
" There sleeps he sound, forgetting morrowes cares,
" Ne storms, ne frayes, ne crack of credit lost,
" Ne blasts he fears, nor uttering of his wares,
" Nor franklier spends than's Flock defrayes the cost.
" Swains sleep and make more quiet nights and days
" Than their great care-bit Lords, whose herds they graze
41.
" Low set and richly warm, our Proverb wot,
" Dangers o'r fly us, mifchiefes hit the high,
" Content's the Crown, this is the Shepherds lot;
" A King is but a Man, and so am I.
" Not to compare, I would not change my place,
" With great THEREVTVS, Heaven shield his Grace.
42.
Now leaden sleep 'gan weigh their eyelids down,
The Lamp with darkness strove, being almost spent.
When the weary King (half out of love with his Crown)
Unto a cleanly, though scarce soft, Bed went,
Sleep is not tied to softness, more soundly
Hinds rest than they that in down smothered lie.
43.
When slumber had shut in, and MORPHEVS barred
The windows of his soul, and locked out care,
In The silent time of night a voice he heard
As from above, calling to Him Fear, Fear.
Lost in amazement did he then uprise
Frighted, as Soldiers taken in supprize.
44.
As did DAMETAS when PAMELA fled,
He struts about the room with hair upright:
And cries, who calls, but is answered
Only by ECHO, and the Bird of Night.
Then takes he is Bed again, and this fright numbers
Amongst the mockries of unquiet slumbers.
45.
The next voice touched his Organ was Yield, Yield.
Then waked in's mind a thought of treachery.
Amidst these sweaty doubtings he beheld
The Genius of the Graunge before his eye,
Crowned with such Chaplets as adorn a Wake:
Bowing his Cornu-copiae, thus he spoke.
Mighty Souveraigne,
I am come
" From the blessed Lalarium,
" The seat of the Household Gods,
" Where the Lares have their quiet abodes,
" To tell thee it is the Thunderers will,
" Thou call'st to mind his Oracle,
" Which when thou asked'st who should be
" Thy Successor, thus answered thee.
The Oracle.
" When a Lamp shall be thy Star,
" And thou both King and Cottager,
" And when thou to Bed shall go
" Twice in one night, then shall thou know.
The Resolution.
" This is the Time, the Lamp whose light
" Brought thee hither, thy Star I hight.
" Whilst here thou dwel'st with ADELING,
" Thou Art Cottager as well as King.
" You left, and took again, this Night
" Your Bed, being seized and rid of fright.
" Know then, Great, and as good, King,
" APLOTE daughter of ADELING
" This night has borne a smiling Boy,
" The Gransires hope, the Mothers joy,
" The Heir by his Nativity
" To Natures wealth, Fates Poverty.
" But Fortune means in him to show
" How great she can from meannesse grow.
" Architects low foundations lie,
" When they intend the building high.
" See! how the spangles of the Night
" Do sparkle with unusual light,
" Heaven puts his cloudy tresses by,
" And smiles on him with open sky,
" Whilst all the Planets seem to throw
" Their Golden radience at his brow,
" Which by reflection Divine
" Shall thence upon his Subjects shine.
" The Imperial Thunderer, with her
" That Crowns ad placitum confer,
" Have sworn by the salt Stygian Floods,
" That glide through the dark Midnight Woods,
" That He, and his redoubted race,
" (Whose Acts shall break Fames wind to blaze)
" Shall wear (thee dead) thy Diadem,
" And add more Luster to the Jem.
" Seek not to cross Fate, lest (wave like)
" You break upon the Rock you strike.
" Strive not against the stream. Alas!
" Who spits at Heaven, spits in's own face.
46.
The Genius vanished, THEREUTUS laid,
In a mixed Passion betwixt fear and hate.
No sleep he saw with his prickling eyes, which straid
On objects of his fall, his Heiers state.
Soft sleep requires of thoughts a vacancy,
She dwells in TITYRVS'S not TIBERIUS eye.
47.
By this the Quiristers of the Wood did shake
Their wings, and sing to the bright Suns uprise,
Whose new embroaderie did gild and make
Rich houses tops, and leaves of whistlings Trees.
Modest morn blushed 'cause SOL saw'r rise from Bed,
As LIEER had her cheeks with Claret spread.
48.
The King descending said. "Come Envy, come,
" Here will be subject for thy pined snakes; hurl
" About this Brats neck evry loving worm
" In clinging foulds, till I bid them uncurle
" And break their kn^ts, and shoot at length, and hide
" Their keen trifork't stings in his malic'd side.
49.
Then with a smoothed Front he bad good Day,
And happy Omens to old ADELING,
Asking, "What noise was that chased sleep away,
" Sounding like cries of women traveling?
Quoth the Hind, "I hope in good time my desire
" This night has crowned and made me a Grandsire.
50.
May thy joys grow with his years, said the great Guest,
And asked the Swain on's hopes young pledge to look,
In swaddling bands the Babe he brought forth dressed,
Whom in his Royal arms the Monarch took,
So flattering JUNO hugged poor SEMELE
In The likeness of her Nurse old BEROE.
51.
Whilst here (with SINON-like embrace) he hold
The tender Child, the Cottage black Cat ran
Betwixt his legs, and mewed, whereat (he filled
With deep sense of ^^e Prodigy) waxt wan,
Knowing such was an Omen of the fall
Of great SEIANUS FORTVNES TENNIS-BALL.
52.
But thinking his state 'bove chance, as his sp'rit
He called home Man, and did himself regain,
" And asked his Host if he knew who that night
" Had been his Guest? A friend, I hope, (quoth the Swain)
" Whom I desire what use you here do find,
" To measure not by 'ts own worth, but my mind.
53.
" How much are we a Captive to thy Love?
" (The Prince replied,) which we with wealth and style
" Will guerdon. Know who did thy kindness prove
" Is the Imperial Monarch of this Isle,
" THEREVTVS, who thy humble Shed will raise
To greatness crowned with wreaths of Oak and Bays.
54.
" Nay use thy legs, (the wight die kneel and shake,)
" Since we thy Guest were when this Bird broke forth
" The shell (his first Cage) it is our will to take
" Him to our Court (the forge of States and worth)
" There (if vice checks not) will we him advance
" Bove Envies sting, or griping reach of chance.
55.
" Baptize him TVCHESPHAIRA, but this make
" Thy Province, with maternall Love and Fear
" To foster him, our self will send and take
" Him to the tutele of our Royal care,
" Ere twice Times measurer, the Nimble Sun,
" Has made the Toure of Heaven, and his race run.
56.
Lest Fairies should put him among their rapes,
He marked him with his signet on the front,
So pliable's the Virgin wax of Babes
To take what figure you please stamp upon it.
Here Is a poor Sheep for the shambles marked, and hate;
Thus does man purpose, but dispose does Fate.
57.
A Troop of Courtiers shining bright and gay,
Broad-^y'd in quest of the last-night-lost King
(By diligent scrutiny being led this way)
Here found him, mingling breath with ABELING.
He mounted (guarded so) with JOVE-like port,
His course for to direct to his longing Court.
58.
But making to an Elm of cleanly growth,
Whereon he (lest thereby betrayed should be
To his Hosts knowledge his great state and worth)
Had hung his Crown, s^ifted from the chaste Tree;
Which (like a Charm) against Thunder fenced his hoad,
He found one half often withered and dead.
59.
A Prodigy able to have seized the sense,
And routed all powers of a mortal breast.
But he (of Passions, well as men, a Prince)
Soon gathered up himself, and them suppressed.
And since game's Heleborum, he once more,
To chase sad thoughts away, would chase the Boar.
60.
The jolly Horn did chafe the blunt Beasts ears,
And with loud accents lent the Woods a voice.
He, whose tough brawny sides were proof against spears,
Echoed the jangling pack with as great noise.
The game is roused, the ^iend from's Cabin springs.
Pursuit like lightning puts on Eagles wings.
61.
The Swine unto a Bay was soon brought, since
The last days labor being stiff and soar,
The Hounds beleager'd him, and the brave Prince
With His Javelins point his churlish breast did gore.
He, wounded, howles, The Huntsmen fill the skies
With His many holla's, as the brute with cries.
62.
Even as a ravenous red-bearded Pack
Of Serjants, hale (with taunts) a poor Bankrouter,
Some drawing on, some thrusting at his back,
To one 'oth' City Pounds, the killing Compter:
The Dogs seized so, behind some, some before,
Wounded and dragged along the gasping Boar.
63.
See of a Tyrans death an Emblem fair!
The grim Swines head (even dreadful although killed)
Fixed on a Pole was carried in the air.
Thousands whose smiling mouths glad Peans filled,
To meet the Conqueror, came out the City,
His Paths with boughs they filled, his ears with Ditty*
Song.
1.
CLubfisted Hero, no more thine own Trump be,
To tell how you tamed the Arcadian Boar:
Her terrible paws so rudely did thump thee
As even yet thy broad back and bones are full sore.
THEREVTVS does claim all our praise as his due*
Alas! we have none at all left us for you.
2.
Archer of Heaven, sure-handed APOLLO,
Vaunt you no more of the huge Pythons slaughter,
But whistle to Cut, and still thy Cart follow,
Founder not thy Team to tickle us with laughter.
THEREVTVS does claim all our praise as his due*
Alas! we have none neither left us for you.
3.
Bright Youth that were got in a shower of Gold
By Heavens Cuckold-maker, never more warble
Thy victory over Medusa of old
That turned all that looked upon her to Marble.
THEREVTVS of all our Praise has bereft us,
For any other we have no more left us.
64.
Now Muse to reach the Forest put on wing,
There taste the Rose, and suck in subtlier air,
And visit TVCHESPHAIRA, who (fond thing)
Thou shall please better with a Plumb or Pear
Than lists of's honors upon honors pyl'd,
In The morn a Poet's aptest, not a Child.
65.
Much of Man's sand through times wide glass does run,
Many of his freshest years do periods know.
A long part of his Lives short web is spun
Ever he considers what he is borne to do.
Before he begins his task, or knows what't was,
Much time he had to do it in, does pass.
66.
When PHOEBVS Race-nags almost twice had run
Through the round Zodiac their full careere,
His toung-strings 'gan to loose, and he begun
To lispe argologies. In a whole year
Though reason rears her Tribunal up in Man,
He cannot shew't so much as Parets can.
67.
Now, now began he to be like himself,
With purile vigor MARS, with forinitie
VENUS, Combined to adorn the dapper Elve,
Doubtless two Stars which glided from the sky
Have lighted in his beamy eyes, and there
Set fixed as in their high Olympic Sphere.
68.
Fair Cloris plucked her Lillies, and bespred
Their silver wealth upon his brow so sleek,
His skin with Violets she enamelled,
And planted a fresh Rose on either cheek,
Where Nature painted them with fairer blush
Than ere they knew upon their Thorny bush.
54.
Corn crowned CERES with a golden crop
Uberiously his flourishing head has graced,
Whereof each sprig is ripe and bows the top.
Courteous POMONA on his plump lips placed
Too early blushing Cherries, where they be
Far more inviting than upon the Tree.
55.
Did you not hear his Lallation, nor see
Him trip about like MAB, you would think he were
(AS ABANTIADES did ANDROMEDE)
Marmoreum opus, or some Statue rare
Carved out of Virgin wax, or Ivory pure,
Which had it wings would seem an Angel sure.
71.
Now did he find his feet and gin to move
Upon a wheel of danger, were it not
Restraind, each thing an ATROPOS would prove
His web to clip ere scarce to the Rock it got,
Or fatal Axe this new sprung spray to fell,
Or Sextons hand to toule his passing Bell.
27.
But from the Court his good and evil sprung,
There the King chose out two Lords whom he much loved
Men of sound ^ame Cicilians among,
Whose truths often true as Truth its self had proved.
To these he trusted all the former story,
Adding thereto this cruel Mandatory.
73.
" Have to the Grange, there with perfumed words
" Demand the Infant in our Royal Name,
" Then dig his side with your remorcelesse swords,
" And bear to us the entrails of the same.
" We would not slay if we could safely save,
" Yet than a Throne it is cheaper' give a grave.
74.
" But seal your lips up, and be sons of night
" And silence, if you have (which I not fear)
" A chinck in you, through which this peeps to light,
" Our reputation deeply wounded were,
" You die like snuff and stink, our selfly under
" The lash of Censure, and tongues brutish Thunder.
75.
The Lords replied, "Fate Love us as we lock
" This secret deep from Day and peering foes,
" Firm shall our Faiths stand as the Pirean Rock.
" Be it your care to see what you impose,
" Our Duty's to obey. Bright Cicil's Sun
" You are a God, and your high will be done.
76.
Just as the King Decreed the Babe to slay,
The Sea burst forth, and bellowing raged along,
And half the City Thindaris bore away.
" So just is Heavent' avenge the guiltless wrong.
The Brine too in the haven turned fresh and sweet,
As once before, when DENIS lost his seat.
77.
The Nobles hasted to the Swain, so free
From the loud Tumult and the roar of state,
Of him the Infant they demanded; He
(Making each slowing eye wet griefs floudgate)
Deliverd him fraught with a thousand blisses,
Sealed with as many ceremonious kisses.
78.
Home wards they took their way, and by and by
Their bounding steeds they checked, having reached
A bushie Grove, pricking the lookers eye,
As if the Thorns them tears and pity teacht,
And shook their arms, as if they would let them know
They meant to scratch them if they gave the blow.
79.
The Lords to execute the Kings command
Emptied the sheath of the sharp threatening skive,
For which the silly babe reached forth his hand,
Thrice touched and rac'd his tender skin the knife,
And thrice his smiles drew forth their tears; once more
They did begin and ended as before.
80.
" Betide us Life or Death, live still (at least
" For us) they said, and so threw down the blade.
" Herein shall we obey our Sovereign best
" That he by our hand is not guilty made.
" Who serves his Prince in what is judged unjust
" By his own Law, serves not his power, but Lust.
81.
But 'cause the Monarch charged them to bring
His entrails, they a young Pig slew with have,
Resolved to bear his inwards to the King,
Since every Man within is like this Beast.
And some without, whom malice and strong Wine
Make churlish as a Hog, drunk as a Swine.
82.
Since by a Wolf Romes Founders suckled were,
Great CYRUS by a Bitch robbed of her young,
Troy's firebrand, hot PARIS, by a Bear,
JOVE by a Goat the swelling hills among,
For this poor Innocent were there hopes as good
Ifleft to the wild Nurses of the Wood.
83.
In an old hollow Oak, whose top a Swarm
Of Bees (the Muses Birds) had made their hive
They left the Child, with Gold, and 'bout his arm
Bracelets of Jems whose shine with his eyes did strive.
These their Loves gave, that who so him should find
Might be, if not for Loves, for wealths sake kind.
84.
The Lords then to the King did spur on have
(Whose every thought 'bout their succes did wake,)
Shaking with scorn the entrails of the Beast,
Entering the Presence, thus they silence brake.
" Live Great THEREVTVS, behold here all that
" The Wild Beasts teeth, have left of yonder brat.
85.
The King with JVY arms his Lords embraced,
(Who had made purchase of his Love for ever)
With looks for scorn fit, into fire he cast
The Pigs (he thought the Infants) Heart and Liver,
Saying, "Now Dreams are lies, the Delphic Rood
" A trunk of Fables, at best common wood.
86.
In the wild Desert TVCHESPHAIRA laid
Whom the Bees fed with their Ambrosiall sweat,
Whilst with them, as with Birds, he (fearelesse) played,
The insected Animalls their stings forgot.
The Woods plumed Quiristers forsook their neasts
To charm him with the wonder of their breasts.
87.
A full dug'd Hind came, and her milkie teat
Gave to the lips of this poor outcast creature,
As't were his mothers breast he sucked thereat.
Reader, think not this story crosses Nature,
But read on, and you will say, in this the Hind
Was to her self, as well as to him, kind.
88.
The fruit of the Hind (thus Nature wills) swells so
In her straight womb she never could bring it forth,
If JOVE did not his Queens task undergo,
And (playing the Midwife) help it to the birth.
He tears the skies with thunder, which does fright
Her into Travel, and her young to light.
89.
The Fawn (well grown already) soon forsakes
The pleasure of the teat for that of Liberty.
The Dam pained with much Milk, which bulks and aches
In her stiff Dugs, often succles willingly
Creatures of different Species to ease her,
Why might not he, as well as Beasts, then please her?
90.
EVSTACHVS, one o'th Kings grave Counselors,
(A Person both of Blood and Honor stockt
In a long race of virtuous Ancestors)
His mind, with deep Idea's tired, unlockt,
And with delight to sweeten his State care,
Of The Woods side gat on foot the purblind Hare.
91.
The Dogs were at a fault, and flockt about
Snuffing and fawning on the Infants Tree,
Which made the Patriot (thinking they smelt out
Some willy Fox there eathed), ride up to see,
Where, on his back, the smiling Boy he found
Sucking the Hind, and stroaking of a Hound.
92.
'Cause with rich Jems and Gold so bright ^e shon
The Lord of Parentage right Noble deemed him,
And bore him thence; Lacking himself a Son,
He fostered, and as his own esteemed him.
Who proved (as he of Time had got the start)
The Early Miracle of Arms and Art.
93.
But here the Reader is to be advised,
That when this Youth found in the Forest was,
EVSTACHVS (Ignorant he was baptized
Before he found him) named him ULORVS,
The which name he must bear, till my Muse can
In The Songs close, call him TVCHESPHAIR again.
94.
THEREVTVS when bald time upon his wing
Had stolen his fiftieth Year for a Jub'le
Revoked exiles from pale wandering,
Pardoned State Cankers and set Captives free,
And shamed DARIUS in a solemn Feast,
To which each man of name was called a Guest.
95.
Tilting the Day, masquing the Night chac't thence,
Perfumes did raise sweet Mists in every room
To keep the air in awe of the nice sense,
Attalick garments clothed each swaggering Groom,
Rich Tyrian Arras evry Wall, hung round
With meddalls in old Gaul or Carthage found.
96.
Scorning (there ordinary) Corinthian Plate
Men quaft in Stone at dearer prices sold,
At Jvory tables, or wood of higher rate
They eat, on quilted Beds of Silk and Gold.
Their wanton tastes had only in request
Newest and rarest things, though not the best.
97.
The feathered River Phasis could not yield
Them Foul enough, nor Oysters Lucrine Lake,
They spring each Thicket, Foul each bush and Field,
All seas they draw, all Ponds in nets they take,
Circes too (Natures Larder) do they seek
To please the witty gluttony of a week.
98.
Lachrymae Christi flowed down, and the blood
Of Tuscan Grapes swelled high each joviall mind.
Had Nature lost her Species, air her brood,
Water her spawn, here might they seek, and find.
APITIVS a Carthusian was to these,
And AESOPE'S Platter a poor Scholars mess.
99.
The Palace cracked with weight of thronging Guests
As Theaters when some fine sock is on,
EVSTACHVS there was seen among the rest,
And with him VLORVS, his reputed Son.
Who now wrote man, and full of hopes most high,
Assumed the vesture of virility.
100.
In COMVS'S heat and Pride the glorious King
Viewing the young man with a settled eye,
Through his loose hair the print of his seal Ring
Spied on his front; this dash't his jollity.
This mark, a mole, his Phisnomy assured him
'Twas he against whom he thought death had secured him.
101.
His mirths spread wings were clipped, the pale desire
Of revenge seized him, with hot fury stockt,
But that which swelled his flood of Passion higher,
Was, that the Lords by whom he was so mocked,
Full of grand Honors, wounds, and days, were dead,
And with wet Elegies their Hearses spread.
102.
Rufling his brow, biting his lip he sat
Waking all forces of his fantasy
To guide his wrath: being observed, this fit
He called a spice of an old Lethargy.
Then rallying his wiser thoughts, he spoke thus
Unto the good (that's more than great) EVSTACHVS;
103.
" How happy are you in a Son (my Lord)
" So rich in Natures store and Arts best things;
" Only you ought not so great wealth to hoard,
" Jems shine not in the Quarry, but in Rings.
" Leave him with us at Court, so shall he seem
" Engloried by the Place, the Place by him.
104.
EVSTACHVS; covetous of so good hap
Gave to the King his VLORVS much loved:
Who, as if he upon some Courtly lap
Had always slept a formal Courtling proved.
His mouth the mint of complement, and he
The very Tyrant in bare courtesy.
105.
His phrase, and gests were followed and allowed,
So full of Man his evry Act was shown.
And (which was chief) not borrowed it showed,
But all he did became him as his own,
And seemed as proper, and as natural
As breath with life, or light with radient SOL.
106.
Which is the soul of Courtship, he became
The Marigold of every Ladies shine,
Teaching each beauty t'give and take a flame,
Approaching it in its own height and Line.
All Ladies with one Luer caught are not,
No more than all Birds are with one bait got.
107.
The proud he tickeled with praise of theirs,
Dispraise of others Beauties, modes, and dresses.
The witty with Romants he pleased and verse,
The amourous with Love Legends mixed with kisses.
And flourishing still in the Spring of the Fashion,
He got a credit beyond admiration.
108.
But now, Heaven moved by the late excess,
Or by THEREVTVS Tyrannous intent,
Hot painted feavours clad in spotted dress
(Plagues Harbingers) among the Sicilians sent,
And (no auspicious Omen) in each field
Sholes of hoars Ravens unwonted musters held.
109.
Then envious Stars shot poison from their Sphere,
Or Earth from the dark Dungeon belch't it forth,
Or angry winds did puff it through the air.
That the Isle one Pesthouse made, one grave the Earth.
O Dismal Argument! black subject! where
All comma's sighs should be! each point a Tear!
110.
The sweeping Plague's begun; some fall, all fear,
As when in the Night fires are discovered.
Fates (as if vexed they meant to blunt their sheares)
Warps by whole hanfulls cut, not thread by thread.
Mortal Abaddon with keen sickle hovers,
Flesh like Grass mowing, making few Passeovers.
111.
Think but how fast at evry puff of wind
From Trees the mellow leaves in Autumn glide,
In The steps of Cattle some interment find
Some on the wings of wanton briefes ride:
So in this busy Term of Death folk died
Faster than those alive could graves provide.
112.
No Songs, but Dirges, filled the infected air,
No Music but the Bells sad Knells is heard.
Pebles which erst much peoples feet did wear
And pollish, now, with grasle oregrown, Churchyard
Rather than street seem; along which there wave
Black Beers, that strive which first should reach the grave.
113.
Churchyards so delv'd and harrow'd are, none now
As type of Resurrection Grass affords
This death (a Schismatic) will not allow
Of Ceremony, Men on slings and boards
Uncovered are posted to the grave,
Which, although free Land, none may single have.
114.
That best of Nature, Neighberhood, was gone,
With hateles treason, friends by friends breath died.
They Are safest who like salvage live alone,
And although debtlesse, from this Serjant hide.
No help is left but all help to forgo,
To join their forces were to augment their foe.
115.
For Deaths use seized are all naked streets,
Which who so dares adventure to pass by,
A press of thronged Funerals he meets,
And People that their lofty Mansions fly.
Daring to dying sheds their lives commit,
Which each blast shakes into a Palsy fit.
116.
Each carkase of a Grange has Guests, some hide
In vacant Windmills, some in tented Boat
On watery floores, rocked by the tumbling tide
With their sick household at dead Anchor flote.
Yea who no tilt could hope but open skies
Dare home forsake, so Sicil Sicil flies.
117.
Palermo differed from Palermo so
As does a Tree which erst did blow and bear,
But naked in December stands, like to
A Skelleton, rattling its bones all bare.
Such solitude as this in the waxen Town
Appears when the winged honey Host is flown.
118.
As prudent mice from salling roofes make have,
And thence to sounder walls for shelter flee:
So from sick Sicilie her brood flock't fast
To neighboring Isles, as Caene and Strongile,
Now with like luck as when two Suns appear
'tk'clouded sky, two Sicilies there were.
119.
THEREVTVS self from's royal place retired
To's Tusculanium in the Country,
Not built to envious show but health desired,
And to the adjacent Islles Aeoliae,
(Where Aeolus his Throne of old was seen)
He sent his only Daughter and great Queen.
120.
The Queen HYMETTA, whose each part a story
Of Beauty was, 'oove wonder far renowned,
Of her fair fex she the fair Crown and Glory,
Who yet all these stiaines in her virtues drowned.
But her chief Elogie (to veil all other)
Is this, she was the ^are ROSELLA'S Mother.
121.
SOSELLA, without whom the Court was dark,
Fresh morn her handmaid was, and Roses strew
About Loves Hemisphere; each heavenly spark
Wheg she arose, ecclipz'd, and sad withdrew
For shame to be out-shin'd by her bright eyes,
Who, more than they the Earth, did gild the skies.
122.
Old JVNO, seeing a new let her plumes fall,
The Graces wondered at themselves to see
They Would framed a Grace that far surpast them all,
And had exhausted quite their Treasury
To shame themselves by one, on whose each part
Fame might spend all her voice, Verse all her Art.
123.
She was of Goddesses a Rapsodie,
Boasting AVRORA'S rosy fingers small,
SATVRNIA'S stately front, PALLAS gray eye,
VENUS her dimpled chin, and Beauties All.
Of CERES Daughter the life-wasting wast,
And Gorgons curled hair, before it hist.
124.
She was the only Loadstone of all Eyes,
She was the only Touchstone of all Hearts,
The Whetstone of all brains and Fantasies,
Making each Freshman Master in Loves Arts.
She chewed with Studs of Pearl, with Rubies kissed,
She looked with diamonds rescuing Day from Mist.
125.
This Saint and Angel both did harbor give
To as much winning beauty as could die,
And to more heavenly virtues than do live,
Which in her blessed Urne I Will let quiet lie,
Lest all to whom such Miracles are told,
Or turn Idolaters, or think her old.
126.
A VENUS and DIANA mixed in one
She was, whose wit was even in greenest years
Flowing as Nectar, ripe as Autumn shown,
And crowned with graces envied by white hairs:
Which who can tell? and yet who cannot tell?
Well may I praise her, but not praise her well.
127.
To do it meanly were no less disgrace,
Than a course garment to a Princely Dame,
Or homely painting to a lovely face,
Or a brass setting to a precious Gemme.
Think not weak Muse by thy low Song to raise her
It Is praise enough that none enough can praise her.
128.
Here of this wonder of nice Natures sweat
Taking my Leave, I am for Sicilie
Embarked, from whence PHOEBVS withdrew his heat
And fled, as he too feared the Malady.
Winter the Isle shut up in icie bars
As close as sickness did the Islanders.
129.
With the years heat (Plagues nurse) the Plague outwore,
The mortal Angel sheathed his Sword, the street
Put off its mossie mantle, and once more
Began a new acquaintance with men's feet.
Still Piles are built and blaze, still Bells loud call,
But for devotion more than Burial.
130.
All ask what friends Heavens Besom swept away,
And who is left. All gape for fresher air,
And like Stags snuffing 'bout the Fields they stray;
So Fishes stifled with long ice repair
Unto the hole, when as the Leatherine Hine
With Axes break the frost to water kine.
131.
Now men with health (as Swallows with the Spring)
Again to their dear Mothers Bosom run,
Once more Palermo the desired King
Blessed with his Presence, showing like the Sun
Scattering the Egyptians long loathed Night away,
Or out black Chaos striking Crystal Day.
132.
He seeing admired VLORVS become
The tenth Sphere of the Court, drawing all after him,
And daily triumphing ore the Hearts of some:
Grieved that the fatal Angel spared to slaughter him,
He sat in Council with his thoughts, at strife
How to remove his fear, the youngmans life.
133.
His busy brain was like an Howerglasse,
Wherein Imaginations like sands ran
Filling up hasty time, but then (Alas!)
Were turned and turned and ended as began,
So that he knew not what to stay upon,
And less to Crown with execution.
134.
To thrust him out of life sans process, were
To blot himself out of the Rolls of Fame,
To send him to the wars, in hope that there
Quick death might find him, were to augment his Fame,
A Hero locked in brass will force all breath
To chant his Trophies brave, or braver Death.
135.
Taking the wisest counsel of his brain,
At last Invention prompted a course to him
For which he hugged his wit and cruel vein,
And this was masked in friendship to undo him.
Malice in Love disguised was in all time
Most safe and common held, yet is it a crime.
136.
So poisonous Snakes in Roses ly in wait,
And lurk in honny-dropping Grass to sting.
So the Hyenna murders by deceit.
So from the Rocks the alluring Sirens sing,
And call down the high notes of the sweet Spherse
Before they prey, to fill the wretches ears.
137.
The Senate of his thoughts decreed to send
The Young Man to the Queen to Aeoliae
With secret Letters; feigning as a Friend
The honoring of him with the Embassy,
Which was, that as soon as he should await her
She privily execute him for a Traitor.
138.
To paper he this Mandate did commit,
And with his Seal enjoined it secrecy.
Then charged his Favorit ULORVS with it
Unto his Queen on hasts spread wings to fly.
From DAVID so, to JOAB once before
URIAH his one fatal sentence bore.
139.
The Favorite (proud of the employment) rode
Attended with no long yet trusty train
To the next Port, his venurous foot there trod
Upon the rude throat of the scalding Main.
FAVONIVS and THETIS mixed in one
To bless him with kind Transfretation.
140.
About the Noon of Night he reached the shore,
And took up's quarters in a common Inn,
Where (partly, 'cause for manners sake, before
The Sun had, he would not salute the Queen.
Partly to compose his Sea shuffled head)
He made his clothes poor to make rich his Bed.
141.
One of his Train (having Athenian ears
Itching for news) much longing to descry
His Lords quick message, when the band of cares
Soft sleep had seized him and his company,
He crept into his Chamber in the dark,
And stole his Packet thence, whilst none did mark.
142.
Being no Novice in that knavish trick
Of ripping Seals, and closing them again,
(A Burglary baser than locks to pick;
For that robs but our coffers, this our brain,)
Not dared by's Kings dumb face, he opened
Nicely his Royal Packet, and thus read.
T. R. ad H. R.
THEREVTVS to his Queen HYMETTA dear
Sends the same health which he enjoys here.
Rebecca's Twins, love, hatred, this scroule bears,
The first is thine, the last this Messengers,
Whom we have thus employed, that we migh have
By this unsmelt means, Safety, he a Grave.
This ULORVS is the Ague of our Reign,
He shakes it, as Winds stoll'n into Earths vein
Do our dull staggering Mother. He Is the ill
Conscience of the State, that never lets it be still.
'Twas in our thoughts by just help of our Laws
That this effect might Cease, to seize the cause.
But being such a Minion of the rude
Beast with so many heads, the Multitude;
We judged him not here, in their sights, to die,
Lest they mistake Justice for Tyranny
In us, and in themselves Rebellion
For Pity; Lest our Bark of State split on
These Rocks, We Have sent him to your Court, that there
His Death may be close as his Treasons here.
If of his Fate you can all eyes prevent
We Will father it upon some accident.
How ever do it; if you cannot stop Fames wild breath
We Will draw up's Posthume Process after's Death.
Grieve not to nip this young weed in the bloom,
A young Wolfes Death to soon can never come.
Yet were it cruel, it is Fate is harsh not we,
Self preservation warrants Cruelty.
SICILIE* T. Rex.


143.
" Alas! (Quoth the Servant) whilst my Lord aims at
" The honor of being but a Royal Post,
" His self is lost. So patient Chemists get
" But Smoke, Dust, Hope, for all their real cost.
" So the Dog that on the waters face did catch
" At the shadow of his Morsel, lost the flesh.
144.
" Poor MERCVRY, whose being so's thy Death!
" Losing true Treasure for an empty name,
" Thy self for Honor, Yet but breath for breath,
" The breath of Life for the fond breath of Fame!
" Ah! how much more than pity it is to fell
" A blooming Spray that sprouts so straight and well!
145.
" Brood with me HERMES, help this Plot to hatch,
" That this Anti-IXION whose strift is
" To grasp but a Cloud, airy Fame, may catch
" A real JVNO, or a fairier piece,
" What though he nor rewards nor knows my pain?
" In virtuous Acts the very doing's gain.
146.
" Or it is a crime or none to have opened this Letter.
" If none, I Have pleased my self, not wronged the King.
" If it is a Sin, to purge it no way's better
" Than good out of intended evil to bring.
This said, he took a blank, and altering the
Mind of the Monarchs Letter thus wrote he.
The Kings Letter changed.
THEREVTVS to his Queen HYMETTA dear,
Sends the same health which he enjoys here.
This paper Bark a freight of Love does bear*
To be shared 'twixt thee and this Messenger,
Whom we have made so, that he may inherit
(To all our joys) the meed of his high merit.
This ULORVS, so high famed, and so allowed
(Of whom our Court, and Natures self is proud;
To whom both PALLAS arts alike are shear'd,
A sage Philosopher without a beard.
Who, if his mind as his green years increase,
His Age will always than himself be less.)
We Have sent to attend you, that you may behold
The truth that unbeliev'd Report has told
Though too too nigardly of his great worth.
To honor virtue is to set it forth.
We will you treat him then with every rare
Device that Love and Honor can prepare.
Since our People, gilding each act of his
With liking, make it better than it is,
Since they have given up themselves unto him, so
As they have a Law within themselves to do
His Mandats binding, and that Law is Love
Which Princes as their strongest fort approve.
Since Fate denies us a Male birth to be
The ATLAS of our Realm and Family,
(But had we AEGIPTVS's number, none could be
Worthier such honor than this MERCVRIE)
Therefore In The Carnavall (midst mirth and Laughter)
We will you marry him to our only Daughter.
Muse not we speak of Consummation, ere
Thet's due approaches made; for young and fair
Have made acquaintances in Nature, so
When their eyes meet they have the less to do.
SICILIE. T. Rex.


147.
Now wrapped he up this Scroule so counterfaite
In the same fashion as the King had his,
Then ripped (with curious heed) the seal from that,
And with a Wafer fixed it (whole) to this.
Next to the Chamber (on fears socks) he crept,
And left it there, whilst still his Master slept.
148.
Soon as the early Lark even tired with rest,
From his moist Cabinet sprung up on high,
Waking the morning, from whose dewy breast
Heavens wandering Knight rose to his errantry,
The Ambassador don'd rich embroideries pride,
And to the Court his paces did divide.
149.
Whilst there he waited in a Gallery.
Hung round with TITIANS and rare Hylliards hands,
The Queen stepped in, clad in such Majesty
As the Great Goddess that ties Nuptial Bands
Used, when she did contend on Ida's plain,
From Beauties Queen Beauties bright prize to gain.
150.
Low on his knee he kissed her Royal Hand,
Then filled it with the Packet, (by happy bliss
For him (without him) from its first self changed)
Which read, she gave once more her hand to kiss.
And putting on her best looks to delight him,
She to a Royal banquet did invite him.
151.
Now they descended to the Palace Hall,
Where hundred objects claimed his doubtful eye,
Which though the least alone had filled it all,
Was famished amidst variety.
Now this he tastes, then that he glances on,
Diversity confounds election.
152.
But gather up thy sense and fortify,
Weakness in fractures, strength in union lies.
Now youth the valor of thine Optics try,
Here, here an object comes that is worth all eyes.
But (as who stares as SOL finds night at noon)
She having such bright ones make all else have none.
153.
ROSELLA the rare Princess (in quaint dressing
Of Sea green Tabie, whose wat'ring seemed apace
Like Waves to move with her, the Lace expressing
Silver Rocks) entered, with such winning grace
As CYPRIA wore, when of Troys royal Swain
She (worthily) did Beauties prize obtain.
154.
Her Hair, alas! too cold a word! Her Beams
O'r-shaddowing her Robe with loose command
Out-shin'd his rays that gild the tottering streams.
Her bared Breasts appeared Loves Scylla and
Charibdis, betwixt whom no eye might steer
But must (perforce) become a Prey to her.
155.
Her Stomacher was cloth of Gold veiled ore
With subtle Tiffana, to show the Land,
Strewn with such Margarites as enrich the shore,
And Spangles, crookt, like shells that paint the sand.
The gum'd Silk's whistling must be understood,
VVLTVRNVS milder breath curling the flood.
156.
The Youth made haste his trembling knee to bend
(As dazzled Pilgrims before some glorious shrine)
With devout fear he kissed her melting hand
(As they do Relics, or some Rag divine)
Now rights he out his knee, but still does look
Like to an Aguish Asp that is Planet struck.
157.
She also felt a civil war in her
Distracted thoughts, all forts wild Passion seized.
Love General, quartered in her eyes while ere
(Making her brows bows to shoot all that gazed)
From those Frontiers, unto her Heart retired,
Where finding Reason possessed, the Fort he fired.
158.
Reason his blind foe with Cowardice then taunteth
Saying Noblest Conquerers do wreeks avoid.
He answers, if a Heart ROSELLA wants,
I Will give her ULORVS his to be enjoyed,
Yet that must flame first, for like Gold we prove
Hearts must be fined and melted ere they love.
159.
If their Hearts, Gentle Tyrant (Reason replied)
Smell sweetest in the flames, like Cassia,
If they (like Martyrs, though their sect divide)
Will accord best in their sweet misery,
Let us love too, and blow the coal together,
Good reason, they, young and fair, should love each other
160.
Both did desire, both were desired, though neither
Knew eithers wish; yet saw they whence their grief
Sprung, even from whence they must expect their cure,
Yet feared, who would kill would deny Relief.
Love mixed so with them by his mistick Arts
As he soon had for Trophies both their Hearts.
161.
The Heart-rob'd Youth resolved, by his Tongue
His Hearts Atturny, his suit to commence,
But was a drawing up the charge so long
New wounds came thick, and th'formers grief chased thence.
Yet when to make the motion he would assay
His words were crushed to sighs, and all was Ah!
162.
She echoed him, thinking each sigh did bring
Loves summons, she, by hers* her yielding sent*
Whereat the feathered Wag did Io sing
And in her fresh cheeks pitched his crimson Tent,
Displaying his blush-colour'd Ensigns there,
Showing his Almighty self as Conqueror.
163.
The Tables furnished were as they would invite
A bedrid stomach that surcharged lies
With potions to a freshmans appetite.
But ULORVS best dish was ROSELLA'S eyes*
As Lovers use when their mawes call to eat,
He cut his fingers in the stead of mear.
164.
And with much gazing on (Heavens map) her face
He hungry rose, (in this too like a Lover.)
His words he left half spoke, or did misplace,
Or (Lover like still) he spoke them twice over.
Questions were put, but when he would reply
His answers (Lover like) were quite awry.
165.
The joyous Queen with smiling cheer did see
The wounding friends shoot their hearts each at other
Through their eyes, hoping every look would be
A new dart, to continue them together;
She strait commands a Masque, then does invite
Them to grace the short bravery of the night.
166.
The nimble Masquers danced as movingly
As Joves nine Twins on the Pierian Lawnes,
Or Thebes Stones a AMPHION'S melody,
Or brisk PAN and his Herd of light heel'd Fawnes.
But how could their feets freedom please this pair
Whose hearts lay tangled in each others hair?
167.
Such melody courted their ears to hark
As th'orbes harmonious journey make, which they
No more regarded than the child does mark
His lesson, when he has got leave to play:
For how could ORPHEUS Raptures take those eare^
Whose notes were only sighs, their closes tears.
168.
Now the ones eyes laid themselves open wide
To receive all the darts the other threw,
Then were they close with admiration tied
To keep the wealth they had already drew,
Or cast their Lids as curtains ore the rare
Image of Beauty each look painted there.
169.
Affection increased their looking, and
Their looks augmented their affections,
Their eyes (like children before whom sweetmeats stand)
Eager, but fearful of their Guardians.
When one did sigh, as if that sigh were to
Be waited on, the other sighed also.
170.
The Scene is closed up, the Soul mingling-pair
(Whose fancies traveled undelivered
With throes of fear desire and despair)
More overcast with thought than sleep, were led
To several Lodgings, there they vent their breasts
With sighs and wishes, the rest retired to rest.
171.
When SOL the Captain of the Planets bright
Came armed in burnisht Tinsell to Heavens Guard,
To relieve the winking Sentinels of Night,
And give them leave to rest whilst he would ward;
The Princess, seeing sleep was banished fro
Her weary Bed, she left it empty too.
172.
So day broke out of Chaos hurling Night
Unto the Center. So the Skie-wanderer
Unfetters from the Arms of Amphitrite.
So Roses break forth and perfume the air.
Only the first, the second, the last, be
Not half so clear, so bright, so sweet, as she.
173.
Now stood she like the beauteous APHRODITE
New risen from her frothy Mothers Bed,
Her purer smock looked much like that pure white
Foam that the Goddess limbs yet all bespred.
Her Bed (like bodies when their souls are flown)
Turned pale and cold for grief that she was gone.
175.
A mantle of green Velvet (wrought to wonder)
Her maidens o'r her curious limbs did cast,
It over her left shoulder went, and under
Her right Arm; on her breast it was made fast
With claspes of radient Diamons, now as
A Dazie showed she, in a field of grass.
176.
Now th'Queen her Mother came, and did impart
To her the message from the King was brought.
This somewhat lightened her heavy heart,
To think what she so wished her Father sought.
But then her joys did flag again, through fear
Lest he she so loved, took no thought for her.
177.
By this the climbing Sun with warmth does thaw
And tender make the of-late crusty Earth,
Each naked twig blood from the root does draw
To swell the branch, and give a lively Birth
To the dead leaves, now filled again within
With plump juice, and without painted with green.
178.
The pretty firstlings of the infant year
Now make their mother smile* and their gay heads
(Which late in icy graves did dead appear)
Advance afresh above their easy Beds,
Like Types of the Resurrection, and show
Like weeping Virgins all bepearl'd with dew.
178.
The Groves shrill Quiristers whose frozen throats
Late wanted motion and male heat to strain
Their little Organs, now have found their notes.
Now PHILOMELA'S tongue is grown again,
She scrues her sprightly Seraphins voice up high,
To teach men Art from Natures Melody.
179.
Now all things else smile with the forward Spring,
No Vine so young now fears the blasting storms
That foul-mouthed Auster carries on his wing,
Or the South-west wind hurries in his arms.
No rugged Boreas blows, but Zephyr's calm
Sweep flowery Gardens, and the air embalme.
180.
So smiled the days from Chaos first when sprung,
As now, then did the loughing Ox repair
Not to warm stalls, but open Fields; among
The Woods herds dwelt, and chattering Birds the air
Filled with their Song* then Natures frame to uphold
Heaven tempered this sweet mean, nor hot, nor cold.
181.
This serene season seemed to beseech
The sweet ROSELLA (Earths and Heavens Pride)
Net only one poor chamber to enrich
And so impoverish every place beside,
But to walk forth and with her smiles to bring
An early Summer on the forward Spring.
182.
The Grass did court her soft tread, and then wept
For Grief that she so soon off it was gone,
And perfumed tears upon her small foot left.
The Flowers that did require no other Sun
As she approacht did start from their soft Beds,
And for a sight of Her, steal out their Heads.
183.
Here in an odorous Bower rich in shade
She took a seat, whereon a Primrose grew.
" FLORA'S first Daughter! Ah! (she sighing, said)
" How like me in my loving state art thou!
" Blubbered with dew thou standst, and in mine ears
" To whisper seem, Loves sweets are washed with tears.
184.
" How yellow green and sick thy leaves appear!
" Like ripening Girls that junket on Loam walls,
" Or Feast on chalk and coals; to Earth how near
" Thy weak stalk bends, yet neither breaks nor falls.
" These to the nimble fancy do discover
" The doubts and fear-shaken hopes are in a Lover.
185.
Whilst here she sat one the embroidered ground
Musing on her new Love, her busy head
With thoughts was crowded. Now reason would have found
No cause to Love, because no hope to speed,
Then Love crossed that; when from a Grot hard by
Her shady couch, she heard this melody.
Song.
1.
Of all dread Monarchs falls, I wonder lest
At thine CYRUS of Persia.
The Son may fall, and's Plumes adorn thy crest,
But thou must be the Mothers prey.
With men to fight that Sex has ods
That triumphs both o'r Men and Gods.
2.
In Peace, their arrows s^ay, yet draw no blood,
In war, they win when lose the Day.
Though Captives, on their Conqu'rers necks they tread,
And the fierce Victor make their prey.
Strong Sex! who from your chain is free,
That though he foyles ye, bound must be?
186.
The Echo of the Grot much added to
The voice and words, but for this cause it was
Sweet music in ROSELLA'S ear, she knew
By the Tone it came from her dear ULORVS,
Whom thus (known though unseen) in his own strain
She answered, and he replied again.
ROSELLA. 3.
No, no, the Yoke must ever gall our neeks
Our harsh Fates made us to obey.
In childhood we observe our Parents becks,
Then men do steal our hearts away.
Wretched as weak our Sex is grown
Whose Wills and Hearts are never our own,
VLORUS. 4.
How wretched's he whose fortune lower lies
Than his Love will bow unto't?
JOVES royal Bird preys not on silly Flies,
Shrubs wither at the Cedars root.
Fond ICARVS, rather then die tame
With secret grief than open shame.
ROSELLA. 5.
How fond is he his sword away will throw
Ere victory to his foe flies!
The highest Sun does daign to shine below,
Palms suppressed does higher rise.
Then live, or let thy fall b fair
By brave attempts, not base Despair.
187.
When her sweet Grace this word of comfort gave
To her sad Servant, now so nigh Despair,
She, modest, blushed, he smiled, and seemed to have
New sp'rit infused to him by her kind air.
Resolved at last his doubtful prize to try,
And by her favor live, or frowning die.
188.
She his approaches met as the ccole stream
Does bathing Virgins, when they first uncase
And come nigh, the coy Nymph to stop them seem,
But entered, she their limbs kiss and embrace.
Now nothings wanting but the Churches rites
To fill with joy their days, with sport their nights.
189.
The Youth to the foresaid Bower would often resort
To kiss the leaves his Mistress sat among.
There one day musing of his future sport
He in an ecstasy this Rapture sung.
Think not this Humors madness, wise men say
All great wits have of Madness some allay.
A Rapture.
1.
COme (Fairest) through the fleeting sky
Lets cut a way with nimble pace,
On CVPIDS pointed wings lets fly
To Paradise, which is my place
Where I may banquet on thy face.
2.
Hark! the Springs Quiristers conspire
With aires might make an Hermit dote
T'invite us to their leavy Quire,
And PHILOMELA'S well-strung throat
Is tuned with an alluring note.
3.
The flowrie Floore's embelished
With CLORIS'S painted Tapsterie,
By Nymphs at Loves command here spread,
Who meant that these should be for thee
A downy Bed, and thou for me.
4.
No spies shall lurk here to reveal
To ears that itch with jealousy
The hours of Pleasure we two steal:
Great JOVE knew no such Liberty
When he embraced bright DANAE.
5.
Being set, lets sport a while (my Dear))
I will look Babies in thine eye,
Which shall in the shade make sunshine clear,
And Love knots in thy locks I Will tie
Wherein my Heart does fettered lie.
6.
I Will turn Loves Be, and feast a while
On either Rose which kindly do
Unite in thy fair cheek, whose smile
Might make a Cynick love thee too,
And tempt him from his Tub to woo.
7.
I will bedew with fervent kisses
The fresh ADONIS on thy lip
That balmy Theater of blisses,
Chorus of kisses there shall skip
And in unnumbred Galliards trip.
8.
The Violets of thy veins I Will taste
That in blew archt Meanders lay*
Thence to the vale of Lillies have
In whose smooth allies I will stray,
And among their Mazes lose my way.
9.
Next downwards I Will my way devour,
To Loves sweet-bramble bush I Will fly,
And cull from evry spicy flower
Fresh bag's of honey, till that I
Have swelled therewith my laden thigh.
10.
Then to thy hive my Load of Balm
I Will bring, where (as in thought before)
Half smothered in a sweaty Qualme,
I will unlade my plenteous store,
And roam about thy fields for more.
190.
Now 'gan their Hymeneal's to approach,
The time's set. TITAN, often the Youth did say
Oftener the Maid, Lash on thy lazy Coach:
How thick thy cried, kind PHOSPHORVS bring the day.
It came at last (though their desires thought late,)
Then these Doves coupled, in this Masque-like State.
191.
Bright Juga JVNO'S Orgies are begun,
Above her Altar in a Sapphire Cloud
Her airy Majesty displaid her Throne,
Supported by two Peacocks gay and proud.
The charming spirits of the air did beat
Their sacred concords 'bout her Starry seat,
192.
With a white Diadem her brow was crowned
From whence a swelling veil descended, flying,
Whose upper end a silken Fascia boun'd
Of several hues, the many dies implying
The various mutations of the sky,
Of causing these she having the faculty.
193.
The wealthiest Gems in NEPTVNES cabinet
Shon on her Fascia, in the top high
With Roses blooming as her cheek, and set
With Pestan Lillies, which her milk did die
That from her breast dropped, when JOVE thence did pluck
Her Privignus, laid there by stealth to suck.
194.
A Royal Scepter in her right hand shon,
Her left a Timbrell held; her golden feet
A Lions shaggie hide trampled upon.
Thus in her Argive Temple did she set,
As 't'were insulting o'r her Lords two scapes,
The Monster-Master, and the God of Grapes.
195.
The Region of Fire in an even
Circle was ever whirling 'bove her seen:
JOVE standing in the top, (figuring the Heaven)
Brandishing flaming Bolts as if he would been
To charge the Giant Host. IRIS below
Her Saphrie Throne, bent her enammel'd Bow.
196.
Eight Ladies 'bout her Altar measured paces,
Enstil'd her Powers or her faculties,
Veiled, lest all mortals with their dazzling graces
Should (as the armed Boy did) lose their eyes.
All these some Surname bore given properly
TO JVNO, for some nuptial mystery.
197.
The first was CVRIS, named from the Sabine Sphere
That Hasta Coelibaris, that had stuck
In the slain Gladiator: the Brides hair
With this she did divide, and keem and deck,
To tell her, as in him that fast did 'bide,
So close must she unto her male be tied.
198.
Or it portended valiant men to come
Out of her loins, or else this badg of sway
Denoted her subjection to her Groom:
Or rather it might be in memory
Of their first Marriages, by force contracted
With them that came but to see Psaies, yet acted.
199.
Next UNXIA with her woollen Fillets stood
The Posts and Columns of the Houset' adorn,
And to anoint with hollowed Oils approved
And fat of Wolves and Bears mixed in a Horn
Ever the Bride enters: to expel thereby
All frights and evils from the Family.
200.
The third was JVGA (that soul-mingling grace)
In silken Yoke the loving Pair that bind
Ready to Union to sacrifice
Two hearts melted and mixed into one mind.
Thus as two Maids of different sex made one
And to that state restored that first was known.
201.
The fourth takes care that they remain so still,
GAMELIA, that behind the Altar throws
The Gall: no strife is left, no stubborn will,
But Peace and Love and Faith betwixt them grows.
Such was the golden Chain let down from Heaven
Of Linkes consisting thus well joined and even.
202.
The fifth and sixth were ITERDVCA, and
Her sister DOMIDVCA, these are they
That were the Brides fair footsteps to attend
When to her Spouses house she took her way.
The seventh was CINXIA, that defends the Maid
Quit of her Zone, whilst in that state she staid.
203.
The last was TELIA, she that crowns all,
That brings the grateful hour, and excites
Lovers to reap the fruit of their long thrall,
Embracements, kisses, and those short delights
And melting toys chaste Love allows; the same
That gives Perfection, and a woman's name.
204.
The Altar dressed, first to it did approach
The Quinque Corei attired in white.
These were five Pages, bearing each a Torch
Of Virgin Wax; their number, in the rites
Implied Perfection, seeing five is
The number whence sweet Union claims her Bliss.
205.
The Bridgroome, behind these, with Myrtle crowned
Walked (like Loves Champion ready for the Lists)
With longing looks. His hair was short and bound
With party-colored Ribbands and Gold twists.
Her garments hues the whitest Lillies stained,
And ruddy'st Roses that ever XEVXIS feigned.
206.
In Saffron-colour'd robes next HYMEN came,
His under vestures white, his Socks were Gold,
His head with Roses crowned and Marjoram:
A Torch of Pine Tree his right hand did hold,
His left a blushing veil, to signify
The bedded Virgins bashful modesty,
207.
Then came Camillus, a young youth in white,
Bearing a Torch of white and blooming Thorn,
To fright all malice with the ominous light,
In sign too of Increase this Tead was born.
Next came a Rock and Spindle, nothing good
These show, gives check unto the highest blood*
208.
'Twixt them the Lovely Bride was led; Her Head
A Ros^e Crown had like a Turret made,
Her loosly flowing hair with gray was shed
To show she entered to a Matrons state.
Wherefore a Weathers Snowie fleece was worn
At her back, that she might not labor scorn.
209.
Her robe so white, was nothing else durst vie
With it, but her pure skin. Bout her small wast
In many many folds and contrary
Circles her Virgin Zone of Wool was cast,
Yet met in one Herculean, that binds,
To intimate, so should all married minds.
210.
With fire and water the Auspices came next,
To show, that as each Birth is helped to life
By female moisture with male Heat well mixed:
So for their likeness sake join Man and Wife.
Last, the Musicians came, with Rosebuds crowned,
Strayning their Organs high, this air to sound.
Song.
VIrgins Imprison your liberal flowing hair
In Ribbands white:
Bright Unions Altar, and her rites prepare,
Her cl^er Pines light
And Io sing, then dew your eyes
'Cause you are not the Sacrifice.
211.
Now leave ye JVNO'S Orgies to begin
The Gods whose nights outshines his days so far.
The Idalian Star that so long wished has been
Now gives Alarm to the peaceful War.
And chides you for dalaying rites behind
That have, though less of state, yet more of kind.
212.
See! Mirtles trim your way. See* Roses there
Flow in whole showers, and Violets seem to grow
In The Chamber, as if VENUS Mead it were,
Where you shall revell in Loves Sphere, and know
Nor fear, nor change; exalted far above
Even hope, and the Wheel that spins the fates of Love.
213.
The Zones strong knots the Gallant has unti'd,
And's ready other pretty difficulties
T'encounter. Matrons sage have placed his Bride,
Whilst he then out his clothes like lightning flies
And shoots himself into her Bosom, notes
We Will borrow of the Spheres to tune these votes.
Epithalamium.
TO Bed, Ye two in one united, go,
Pass Doves in billing:
Mix ye, and struggle till your marrow flow,
Embrace more willing
Than the Loving Palms (great Unions wonder)
That never bore any fruit asunder.
Be young to either, when Winter and gray hairs
Your heads shall climb,
May your affections like the merry Spheres
Still move in Time;
And may (with many a good Presage)
Your Marriage prove your Merry Age.
214.
Next Day, when the fair Bride might boast a name
More noble, and 'rose perfect as her Mother,
All sorts joined hands to celebrate her fame,
And grace the Pomp with some device or other.
Songs lulled the Aier, and the battering feet
Of tilting Steeds dull Earth to motion beat.
215.
The honest Swains, whose Rustic pains and Love,
The noblest Princes are too high to scorn,
Joined in a Pastoral, both their mirth to move
And show what dutious minds by them were born.
To name no more, there WILLIE to his mate.
The last days Pomp thus bluntly did relate.
A BALLADE Upon the Wedding.
1.
I Tell thee Jack as I sought out
A straggling Lamb which straid about
The Hony-suckled Plain,
Mine eyes met such brave things in the way,
As I never saw before that day
Nor never shall again.
2.
From yon gay House there came a Band
Of simpring Courtiers hand in hand,
Dressed wondrous brave and fine.
But O their Leader was a Lad
In such a gaudy habit clad,
As he did all outshine.
3.
Our Lord of the Town bears not such Port
When he sits talking Law in the Court,
With His Tenants round about.
Should he be on the green at Night,
(Jack) thee and I each Less would slight,
And crowd to take him out.
4.
But wot you why he went so gay,
It seems it was his wedding Day,
And now to Church he go.
Me thought he looked often at the Sun,
As if he wished his race were run,
So did the Bride also.
5.
The Bride! the bravest in the row
Our Town and all our Hundred too
Cannot show the like I Will swear.
I never saw Lady at a May
Or Shrovetide, or on Whitsonday
That with her might compare.
6.
Of a pair of Indies I Have been told,
Where men find precious stones and Gold,
I wot not where they are.
Nor do I wind to go to see,
But doubtless if such things there be
I think they are both in her.
7.
The East, the tramells of her hair
Gilt by Phoebus beams appear
Like to a golden Fleece,
More rich and fair than that which
Was stolen by the Colchan Witch
And the bold Youth of Greece.
8.
Her sparkling Eyes are Jems so fair,
Their luster dims the twinkling Star
Which bids us Shepherds fold.
Her lips be Corrall of great price,
Her breath is Violet buds, and Spice
Whose worth cannot be told.
9.
The other Indies men call West,
These she has too, and he is blessed
That sought their secret treasure;
But did he dig in those mines though,
So often as some in thought did do,
He Would labored out of measure.
10.
Her milkie skin and front did show
Like Meadows clad in Winters Snow
Or Cotshall Wool new dressed;
Or like the girdle of the Sky,
Or a smooth mount of Ivory,
Or like to curds new pressed.
11.
Her cheeks (wherein both Roses join)
Seemed Milk commixt with Claret wine,
Such as we drank last May Day.
No Tulip ever such color wore,
They looked like Strawberries sugared o'r,
Such as we eat last Play Day.
12.
When to the new swept Church they came,
The lightning which this Princely Dame
Shot from her eyes so bright
Struck blind the Parson, so that he
Poor Beauty-blasted Man, could see
Scarcely to read aright.
13.
For all his Coat or Gravity,
I think he wished as ill as I
Or any that stood by her.
Though all did look as who should say
Their very souls did melt away,
And drop before the fire.
14.
The rites done (which like long Grace do
But keep them off that would fall to)
The two, now one, went home,
And called the waiters (Sans delay)
To serve the dinner up, though they
Had their Feast yet to come.
15.
The Cooks to give the Guests content
Had plundered every Element,
And rifled Sea and shore.
Beshrew my Heart I never did see
Boards decked with such variety,
And laden with such store.
16.
Now were our Heads with Rosebuds crowned
And flowing cups ran swiftly round,
We all did drink like Fishes;
That joy and pleasure may betide
The Bridegroom, 'specially the Bride,
Each lusty Gallant wishes.
17.
The Women's eyes dwelt on the Maid,
Some liked this Lace, some that, and said
'Twas A la mode du France.
And drew the picture of the Peak:
But then the Youth did silence break,
And called them forth to dance.
18.
No dapper Elves or light-heel'd Fawnes
Could nimblier Trip it o'r the Lawnes,
Or Faries o'r the green.
Though by the Bride all were as far
Outstript as frisking Faries are
By Mistress MAB the Queen.
19.
No Jack a Lent danced such a way,
No Sun upon an Easter Day
Is such a bonny sight.
Yet in her eyes I read that she
Meant to outstip her self, and be
Much nimbler far at night.
20.
Now Supper came and Healths went round,
In full filled crowned Bowls we drowned
The slow and tedious Day.
In Singing, Kissing often, and Dancing,
In sighing, wishing well, and glancing,
We drove the Time away.
21.
Till the Nightingale did chant her Vesper
And our curled Dogs were warned by Hesper
To Congregate our Sheep.
Till the gay Planet of the East
Took leave of Iris, and did have
To's seagreen Couch to sleep.
22.
Now (Jack) the unwilling willing Bride,
With th'busie Virgin crew, aside
Was stoll'n to undresse.
The Youth whose active blood began
To strike up Loves Tantarra, came
Within an hour and less.
23.
In came he, where she blushing lay,
Like to a Musk-Rose into a
Lap full of Lillies cast.
What pity it is we still should stay,
And make them riper Joys delay,
Only a kisss to taste!
24.
But still as 'twere to cross their bliss,
The Bridemaids Banquet entered is,
The Youth devoured it half,
To end it, not his taste to please.
For minding those sweats coming, these
Were dull, as Whey and Chafe.
25.
At last, the lights and we, went out.
Now what remained to do, they do it.
Some say they danced a Jig.
If so (Jack) 'twas but such as that
That thou and I in the Bower had
With Betty and with Peg.
216.
But ah! how short's the tenure of man's bliss
On this side immortality! alas!
The gaudiest Fate with black lines dapled is.
What mortal ever so bright a day did pass,
But viewing o'r the hours at Night, has seen
Some he had wished had not so gloomy been?
217.
Ye happy Hermits! secured by kind fate,
From the gilt curse of Fortunes flattery!
Your bliss alone enjoyes a fixed seat,
Ours ebb and flow; you only wealthy be
In voluntary Poverty, and still
Pleased what ever comes, since what is heavens is your will.
218.
Whilst we are the blind Idol Fortune's sport,
We are her Balls (stufft (ah) how beggarly)
The world so hazzardfull's her Tennis-court,
Contents the Cord, Her bandying Rackets be
Hope and Despair, with these, she (wanting eyne)
Toss us, ofter below than 'bove the Line.
219.
Soon to THEREVTVS this cross news made wing
That ULORVS (who now he thought had made
The Worms a feast) on Beauty banqueting
In his fair Daughters arms entwined laid.
So stead of being into his first dust thrown,
Of his own flesh was a chief member grown.
220.
No Bear robbed of her Cubs, no hunted Boar
Melted to foam, chaft with so buncht a brow.
As dread Tarpean Jove when is thunder tore
The Welkin, and his forkt bolts laid full low
The ambitious Piles the hundred hands had reared;
With wrath so armed the furious King appeared.
221.
How can an Infant Muse reach at such woe?
Which only he can tell that Father is
To but one girl (whom Cypria did indew
With her choice gifts, and Delius with his)
When he sees him clasped in her dear armesly
Whom he thinks his, and her worst enemy?
222.
What Earthquakes in a Land the Kings anger makes!
As the Forest trembles when the Lions roar,
As Schoole-Boyes when his rod their Master shakes:
Such Palsy seized the Court, And horror more
Than curiosity made all long to know
Since the dread arm was up, whose should be th'blow.
223.
But these are safe in their best suit of Male
Their Innocence, the Queen and hers are meant.
So meannesse often times is the low shrubs bail,
When Cyclops sweat the lofty Cedars rent.
Now overhasty Prince, who would not be
Rather a Groom than Wife or Child to thee?
224.
The King no sooner thought it than he sent
To th'Ile a Confident, a man whose will
He knew was melted into his, and bent
To feast all is humors were they good or ill.
He in Commission strong and's trusty Band
Soon left his own, and gained the Aeolian strand.
225.
What time the pale Moon peeping through a cloud,
The secrets of the sullen night behold,
He and his train through the Queens guard did crowd
With the Black Rod in's hand, which, her, he told
The King had sent, in token she must go
With him, the cause and end she soon should know.
226.
The patient Queen with humble grace replied,
" And wills the King I soon my end should know?
" I thank his Grace, by making me his Bride:
" He heaved me to the highest ^eat Earth can show,
" And still he is good (since then this Earth has none
" More rich) in giving me a Heavenly Throne.
227.
To the Princess Lodgings next this Messenger
Of Death made way, where he did virtue see
With valor sporting; she with her brave Dear,
She the sweet burden of the Gallants knee.
So Turtles bill, so Kids upon the Plain,
Their snowie limbs do wantonly enchain.
228.
One of her hands (that compact of firm snow
And softer Ivory) he glew'd to's Lip,
Her other played with his jetty Locks. Doves so
From twig to twig as her quick fingers trip
From curl to curl, do hasten; but as they
Are the Fowlers: so must these be Fortunes prey.
229.
Now blasts their ears the cruel Message sent
From the angry King; now they (O harshest Death!)
From eithers sweet embracements must be rent.
This melts the Princesse's eyes, the affright her breath
Stopped, and she fainting caught fast at her Dear,
As drowning men at any bough that is near.
230.
Upon his Arm she her declining head
Did rest, whilst death in gliding sleeps disguize
Crept softly o'r her silence; fear bespred
Her silver Lids as curtains before her eyes
(Wherein the Sun was set) that her loss might
Not give her fresh wounds by the bitter sight.
231.
Those Corrall twins her Lips which late I guest
Blood hardened into blushing stone, turned clay.
Her Breath retired to perfume her Breast;
Her Roses and her Lillies droopinglay;
Her late swift Pulses slept, and did constrain
Their wanton dances in her Sapphire vein.
232.
The uncivil Pursivant armed with the wreath
Of his dread Master, falls foul upon
The noble Youth; naught threats he less than Death,
Than which the vigorous Law more harsh had none.
So Falstaff triumphed o'r Hotspur's stiff clay;
But, what cannot resist is Asses prey.
233.
The Gallant youth who in just ragee'r while
Would such unmannerly souls kick from their slime,
Now seems no sense of injury to feel
Because the Man's high trust secured his crime
From private chastisement; words poised should be
Not by their own weight but the tongues degree.
234.
The Ladies that their due attendance paid
To the sweet Princess in the fright all shear.
Distracted thus, few to their Mistress laid
Their helping hands, which they employ to tear
Their hair now skar'd on end: all their tongues thus
Secure thy self by flight Lord ULORVS.
235.
As the last Trump shall at that great Assiise
(That Day of raising bones, and quickening clay)
Rallie our scattered attomes, and we'rise
From out the mouldie Beds wherein we lay:
So at that Loved name ROSELLA broke
The bars of drowzie Death, and gently woke.
FINIS.
ELIZA The Author R. B. Gent.

OVID. -- Huic labrr est placidam exorare Puellam.

LONDON, Printed by W. H. for Tho: Dringo. 1650.

Upon the first sight of ELIZA, Masked.
WHen her saint Metaphore, Heavens radiant eye
Puts his black Velvet Mask of darkness by
And freely shines, those Statues of live Jet
In The Eastern shores half pickled up in sweat
Adore his Luster; but they never bow
Whilst Clouds case up and nightcap his fair Brow:
So when mine eyes first reached her, she (alas!)
Was Masked, and Ignorant I by did pass
Without adoring, when such Shrines as hers
May make Saints crowd to be Idolaters.
When Lady-like Loadstones in boxes cased
I Have sometimes seen near Iron wedges placed
The amorous metal waved, and still crept near,
As if it knew its Love were shrined there.
I felt this sympathy, and in my breast
(Like a stray Bird now fluttering near his Neast,
Or like the Needle) my warmed Heart did hover,
As who would say, the North I do discover,
The Center, cease then amongst the Rocks to steer
Thy course, but fix with presporous Omens here.
Now with devouter eyes I looked again,
But her black veil not drawn, thus (thought I then)
Thus Angels Pictures in the Sacred Quire
Are veild to raise our adoration higher.
Still (fair one) for the common good thus shroud
Your beams in waving curl, or silken cloud,
Or you will scorch more than Phaeton with one Ray,
Whose shine might send the Cime'rans a Day.
Each Heart an Aetna, evry man must turn
A Salamander, and even living burn.
Blind as wag Cupid your refulgency
(As it did his) will strike each daring eye.
Myriads on each side as you walk must fall
As spurious Eaglets before your Emblem Sol.
Thus you would with looks Philosophy control
And Fate, and leave the world without a Soul,
Or prove (which I confess, since I was hit)
This all has but one soul, and you are it.
On ELIZA Unmasked.
When her bright eyes (those ruling Stars which now
Must guide my Fortune, and mine Actions too
Boasting a power 'bove Fate) pleased to dispell
Those silken mists and clouds which trembling fell
Fore them, as bowing to those Rays Divine,
And whilst they did eclipse, adore their shrine.
Now darted she her beams through Beauties skies
And kindled willing me her Sacrifice.
So Heaven its holy fire once did fling
On its Elijab's piled offering,
Like it, in pure and Turtle flames I burn
Never to be quenched till the Pyle shall ashes turn,
Then, like a coal in dust of Juniper
Mine Heart shall glow a Martyr still to her.
Since then i am turned all heat, had she not best
Consult with coldness, so to slake my breast?
No, Fondling no, then (as the deeper well
Makes fuel of the Ice) my flame will swell.
Thou then, the twang of whose Bow all commands,
Turn thy plumed shafts to sacred fierbrands,
And make her Breast the Vestall Harth, that she
May sweetly burn in equal flames with me,
So (Love's 'bove Nature) this fire that sh'ant smother
But both vie Ardour, and maintain each other.
Sonnet. To ELIZA upon May day morning. 1649.
1.
See! (Fairest) Virgins gather dew;
Winged Heralds blaze on every bough
May's come; if you say so, it is true.
For thus your Power's 'bove his that seasons sway,
He brings the Month, but you must make it May.
Arise, Arise
Bright eyes,
And silver over Beauties skies:
You set, Noon's Night, you up, each Day
Turns jolly May.
2.
Now Venus hatches her young Doves,
This fruitful Month's proper for Loves,
Though April says like her it moves
Full of sad change; but you may chase away
All showers with smiles, and make all our days May.
Arise, Arise, etc.
3.
All, but you, Love, (though all love you.)
The Birds their song each morn renew,
Even Earth has dond her gaudy hue.
Since all things else are blithe, let your kind Ray
Do more than Sol's, and make in me too May.
Arise, Arise; etc.
4.
May this Month last, when bald Time shall
Climb your fair Hill of Youth, may all
His steps be slip'rie, and he back fall
To Beauties Spring, that your cheek may always
That luster wear that now adorneth May.
Arise, Arise
Bright eyes,
And silver over Beauties skies, etc.
Song. A Dialogue 'twixt Passion and Reason.
P. Why does her smiling eye shoot Rays
(Able to gild a Captives Days,)
Which kindle in my Soul Desire?

R. 'Cause Love that dwells there is a fire.

P. But why is tender Pity barred
Out of her Heart that is frozen hard,
And cold as ycie Scythia?

R. 'Cause Love's a Nymph born of the Sea.
And like her wavering Dame to be
Is faithless, as the Moon or She.

Chorus.
Love is cold, and yet a fire,
It Is a hot cold fiction,
A pleasant Affliction,
A fond Desire,
That puzzles Reason with a mere contradiction.
To ELIZA, with my Cyprian Academy.
Lady,
NOw has the Youthful Spring unbound
The Icie fetters of the Ground.
And ransomed Flora from beneath
The frosty Prison of the Earth.
Fresh clothes of State she spreads upon
The Downs, in hope you would walk thereon,
And many fair flowers she does create
Your fair cheeks to imitate,
Then borrowes perfumes for her Birth
From the Spicery of your Breath.
Shall I more barren than the thick
Element be? no, I Am more quick,
When she but leaves, see! fruits I bring,
Though scarce (I fear) well rellishing.
Their only excuse is, they be
Early, in the years Infancy.
Even tender Weeds among Sallads pass,
And young things claim to prettiness.
These clusters, if yet sour of taste,
As being somewhat too soon Pressed,
and nipt with many an envious blast)
^hus still may hope maturity,
from the kind sunshine of your eye.
^aign but to gild them with one Ray,
And evry sprig shall turn a Bay
Green as that coy one. And I Will dare
^o swear they are good when yours they are;
^n you and shrines Divinity dwells
That hallowes all your utensills.
So I may hope too your sweet Power
Might make even me good were I
Your R. B.

Upon a Black patch on ELIZA'S cheek, cut in the form of an Heart.
What Is this, that holds that happy place
Her Cheek? and to requite such grace
^erves for a foil unto her face?
^uch Mole, the Queen hot Hearts obey,
^uch Spots she bears that makes Night Day,
^uch The One of Love wore Helena.
At distance, like a Cloud it shows
In The Sky when Morn does first disclose,
Or like a Fly upon a Rose.
Near, it is an Heart, which being so nigh
The Torrid Zone of her bright eye,
Is scorched into the Negro's die.
I guest it some poor Heart, which late
Died the Martyr of her Love and Hate,
Now Mourner turned for its sad fate.
And for Reward of Loyalty
Made by some pitying Destiny
A mourning Star in Beauties sky.
Strait on my Breast my Hand was thrown,
From whence I found my Heart was flown,
And thought to claim this for mine own.
But mine flames bright like Juniper,
A Turtle Sacrifice to her,
Not turned a coal by black Despair.
Yet lively this does Typifie
My State me thought, if January
Should keep her Heart as June her eye.
But since my Heart will be her Guest,
May it not be shut out, but rest
For ay in the Paradise of her Breast.
Song. The Rose.
1.
FFrom Eliza's Breast
(That sweet Nest
Where my heart and Cupid rest)
I took a Rose-bud, which flew thither
For shelter from the droughty weather.
2.
Whilst a Place it held
In that field
Of Lillies with Violet Mazes rill'd,
It gathered all its sweetness there,
And smells not of it self, but Her.
3.
I thought to kiss the
Stalk, but see
It (angry) raiz'd it is fangs at me,
And pricked my lips in poor revenge
For making it its sweet bed change,
4.
Whilst it therein laid
In its shade
Thousand Cupids frisk'd and played
With Fairy Graces thither come
To prove her Breast Elysium.
5.
Whence had it this die?
Did the sky
Lend it her Ruby Livery?
No, No, it only blushed to see
Her cheeks excel its gallantry.
6.
See! so to be shamed
And be taken
From her bosom, the poor wan
Languishing flower its leaves has spread
For Grief, and lies (griefs Martyr) dead.
7.
In it yet does lie
Fragrancy;
Thus must choycest Beauties die,
But as this after death shall be
Still odorous in their memory.
The Temper.
1.
CEase me with Ardour to infest
Fierce Leo, and Heavens burning stone,
The Idalian fire has made my Breast
Loves Africa, Cupids Torrid Zone,
Or Aetna, which does feed such great
Flames, as I need no other Heat.
2.
Invested in thine icye tire
Come hoary Hyems to my relief.
But yet I fear before my fire
Thou Wilt drop away; or else for Grief
Dissolve to briny tears to see
My fever, and drown thy self and me.
3.
If Poison Poison can allay,
Sol fires extinguish with his beams,
Come Titan, with thy scalding Ray
Look out my flame. If by the extremes
I chance to get a Calenture,
That Is cool to what I now endure.
4.
Cease Winter crowned with Cristall ice
To frigidate my Eliza.
Her Heart's the Court of Dian nice,
Who makes it Greenland, Scythia
Or Caucasus, the frozen Station
Of cold which needs no Augmention.
5.
She Is white enough, and well may spare
Thine ashie fleece, a foil to her,
Which when it sees it self so far
Excelled, dissolves into a tear,
For spite its not so fair as she,
It turns dirt foul as others be.
6.
Come Phoebus armed with scorching beams,
Besiege her with Iunes heat. But I
Fear ever she will thaw to amorous streams
Thy self wilt freeze, or from her eye
(The Cittadell of the God of Love)
Thou it be shot and my Rival prove.
7.
If Snow can keep the Saplings warm,
If Wells be hottest in December,
Winter thy self with Ice go arm,
And come beleager evry member,
Till she yields Dian shall be sent
Into perpetual Banishment.
8.
When thou have chased her from her hold,
And art possessed thy self of it,
If by thy over-chilly cold
She chance an Ague for to get,
She shall extract from me such Cyprian heat
As'l cast us both into a panting sweat.
The Lovers Sun.
1.
LEt age-dry'd Aeson Sacrifice
To Sol, and he whose weather-wise
Autumnine joints at evry blast
Of Bore as keener Breath are cast
Into a Palsy, and do find
As much ado to stand in the wind
And frost, as the thatcht should, which he
Erected in's Minority.
And let Amyntas, and the Swain
Whose Soul is corn, and Hope the gain
That the kindly-ripning Springs
And Golden-headed Harvest brings,
Evry Year
An Altar rear
To the gay Planet of the East,
And with a fatted Horse him feast.
2.
Think not (Loves tell-tale foe) to see
These Superstitious rites from me,
For I acknowledge unto you
No Orgies or Allegiance due.
It Is not thy Atom-thronged Beam
Creates the Day in my esteem,
But bright ELIZA'S eyes which are
Than thee more radiant by far.
Compared with them, thou seem to me
Like Bristow stones compared with thee.
Nor is it thy abscence (flaming stone)
That makes my crystal daylight gone,
But when dear she
Frowns upon me,
And shuts her eyes, Oh, then am I
Involved in Tenebrosity.
3.
I owe not to thy sparkling Ray
The benefit of Night or Day,
Did she ever smile, thy light would be
Just as useless unto me
As is thy bicorn'd Sister Moon,
When sometimes she peeps out at Noon.
When my Saint shuts those heavenly lids
Whose wink each daring thought forbids
I hate to see thy glaring Light
And love my melancholy Night.
I wish thy race were shorter yet;
For when my Souls fair Sun be set
My heap of clay
Needs no Day.
Besides, thou want enough of Light
To make it day when she makes Night.
So smiles or frowns she me upon
I either slight, or wish thee gone.
4.
Nor owe I unto thee, but Her
All the four Seasons of the year.
When Hyems has benumbed the World
And such a cold about it hurld
As thou thy self had need to shine
Wrapped in an Irish Gausopine,
If I obtain a Glance of Her
Or if her Name but strikes mine ear,
I am with a strange heat possessed,
A Lightning's darted through my Breast,
And in my glowing Soul Desire
Has kindled such a Vestall fire
As Trent and Thames
With all their streams
Shall never quench; but for aye shall burn,
And warm mine ashes in mine Urne.
5.
When thy fierce heat (Olympic coal)
Has cracked and thawed the Icye Pole,
And thou have wrought thy toylsom track
Up to the losty Lions back.
And thereon rid'st environed
With beams ejected from thine Head,
That rive the ground, and singe the Grass
And tan the jolly Shepherd esse.
The Ox now grazes not, but lies
Tormented by the stinging Flies,
Or runs to find a cooler Bower,
I Will slight thy Tyrannizing Power,
I Will not in (vain)
Wish frost again,
But shroud me from that flame of thine
In her sweet Grove of Eglantine.
6.
Neither can thou (for all thy heat)
Two Seasons at one time create,
But all succeed by turns. In her
All four at one Time appear.
The Spring perfumed with fragrancy
In The Violets of her veins I spy;
To evidence it is Summer Time
Her Lips bear Cherries in their prime;
Wish I Autum? Lo, all the Year
On her Cheek hangs a Katherine Pear;
And Apples on her Breast be set
By Nature fairer far than that
Which tempted Eve
TO eat without leave.
If I desire a Winters Day
Warm Snow upon her hands does lay.
But Ah! (which most I grieve to tell)
He also in her Heart does dwell.
Upon a black patch on ELIZA'S Breast cut in the form of a Dart.
SUre Cupid thou have lost thine Art?
See how near, yet in vain thy Dart
Flew to my dearest dearest's Heart?
What triumphs can such Archery claim?
Reason would have thought in half this time
You might have taken surer aim.
But Pardon, I blaspheme in Jest,
Yet dread not thy Revenge in the least,
Thou can not wound me more than the have.
But 'cause I Would have thee not refuse
Again at her thy Bow to use,
I Will cog, and frame thee this excuse.
You gazed so long her eyes upon
(Far brighter than thy Psyche's own,
Or Heavens illustrating stone)
As dazzled with the wondrous flame,
Alas! you lost your levelled aim,
And with half strength thine Arrow came;
Which, losing the point did side-waies fall,
And on her Breast hung like a small
Anchor upon a freestone wall.
To ELIZA with my Apology for PARIS.
SEe! (Sweet) the Trojan Prince is come
To you to attend his final doom,
His judgment often has Judged been,
And controverted Pro and Con,
But if you please to allow it just
He Will henceforth scorn each Critics gust.
And from your mouth our Oracle
We Will him Loves Minos ever call.
If my soft Muse you think ran low
In blazing Cypria, and I show
But a pale shadow of her worth,
Alas! it is 'cause I drew it forth
Before your eye beams did inspire
My fancy with Idalian fire.
If this I said for the Queen of Love
What had I said if you had strove?
In your behalf? but (fairest) then
No Argument had needed been,
The least glance of your conquering eyes
Had made the youth lay Beauties prize
And's Heart too, at your feet, without
Which to prefer the smallest doubt;
And then he had not needed me
To coin him this Apology.
Such choice even Cato had approved,
And Caesar for it had him loved.
For this I Will prove, with small expense of wit,
VENUS gat Beauties prize, you merit it.
To ELIZA, with a Tulip fashioned Watch.
Lady,
THis measure of Time accept with serene eye
From him, whose Love to you shall Time outvie.
See! what disguise this spy of Day does wear,
A Tulip! as the forge its Garden were.
Indeed heat procreates even Flowers, but this
A piece of an Egyptian Mystery is.
Time, by a Flower denotes how suddenly,
Earths frailer crops bloom, flourish, fade, and die,
In special Beauty (that sweet Tulip) hasts
To wait on Time, then use it whilst it lasts.
When these small clicking orbs you busy hear,
Panting in their round journey, like the Spheres,
Think so my constant heart does palpitate
Toward you, and the Pulse of my Affections beat,
Never to stand, till she that each happy thing
Envies (the peevish sister) cuts the string.
Song. The Maiden Blash.
Where have thou been Aurora bright?
With Bacchus revelling last Night?
And now the Clarret thou drank'st there,
In The tincture of thy cheeks appear.
Or thou art turned Gallant gay?
And wilt perhaps to Court to Day?
And for thy more admired grace
Have painted thy enchanting face?
But Eliza has not revell'ing been
Nor means to be in the Presence seen,
And yet the same Vermilion
Her Rosie-tincted cheek is on.
Or Morn does blush to see, so far
Her self excelled in hue by her,
Else sure carnation Heaven does die
Her cheeks, or they bepaint the sky.
Doubts and Feares^
Rouse Erra Pater, and erect a Scheme,
Tell, tell me, may I hope one cheering beam
From my Loves eye? say, shall my Joys become
Perfect on this side of Elysium?
Cast, Cast a figure, shall I find that place
On Earth in a sweet Heaven of her embrace.
Why should hope flatter me? since her fair hands
I find so loath to tie those life-long bands?
But why should she shun Juno's fane? or be
So adverse to the Genial Deity?
Truth on men's tongues (she says) does seldom sit
But what they rashly swear they soon forget.
She says they write in Sand when they take oaths
And keep their vows just as they wear their clothes,
Whilst only they be new and fresh in the fashion
But once grown old (like words they speak in Passion)
They lay them by forgot, and their Loves leave
With watery eyes to wail the faith they gave
To their more watery vows; And then in Pride
In scorns Triumphall Chariot will they ride
Over their spoils, and tirannously glory
How many female Trophies deck their story.
So quick-eele Theseus of two conquests vapor,
Poor Ariadne and the Minetaure,
And leaves Fame in the Labyrinth to tell
Of that, or himself which was beast most fell.
So did false Jason by his vow-breach prove
'Twas gain he sought for, not Medea's Love.
Thus slippery streams the yielding banks do court,
Then gliding thence, say they but loved in sport.
Thus winds woo Flowers, but having of their smells
Robbed them, sly thence perfumed to other cells.
Rouse ye infernal Hags, ye direful three
From the foul lakes of Nights dark Empery.
Give me a bunch of Scorpions to lash
Lady-deceivers, and to tear their flesh
With stings, more than they did the gentle hearts
Of maids they cheated with their Crocodile Arts.
Hells curse on the inconstant crew that took
Loves sacred name their fraud or lust to cloak.
Vipers to your own kind, its long on you
Ladies scarce credit us that would be true.
Rest thee Ixion, these deserve to feel
The weary service of thy constant wheel.
May the inconstant Stone disturb your rests,
And ravenous Vultures banquet on your Breasts.
And 'cause your flame of Love went out, fry there
In flames eternal as your shame is here.
There (though not here) be constant in your tones,
But let them be Caligula's music, groans.
May heaven invent new Plagues, and Poets add
More curses for you to the store we had.
And may your Ribs in Hell a Grydiron be
Whereon your souls may broile eternally.
But ah! I faint! I fear my fate is near,
I feel that colder poison sad Despair
Invade my veins, shaking my cot of clay,
Warning my soul out; thus warned none can stay.
Yet may I ere on Earth I quit my room
Bespeak a better in Elysium.
Sweet SVCKLING then, the glory of the Bower
Wherein I Have wantoned many a geniall hour,
Fair Plant! whom I have seen Minerva wear
An ornament to her well-plaited hair
On highest days, remove a little from
Thy excellent CAREVV, and thou dearest TOM,
Loves Oracle, lay thee a little off
Thy flourishing SVCKLING, that between you both
I may find room: then, strike when will my fate,
I Will proudly have to such a Princely seat.
But you have Crowns, our Gods chaste darling Tree
Adorn your Brows with her fresh gallantry.
Stay, I Will go get a wreath too, the Saint I
So long adored a Willow cannot deny,
I Will claim it, and of that as proud be seen
(Cause it is her favor, and in her hand has been)
As you of Laurel; it is as fresh, as green.
Sonnet. The Protestation.
1.
FIrst stones shall races upward run,
Scots forget craft, and Avarice Jews;
The Needle its dear North shall shun,
And Impudence the public Stews;
First supple flattery Nero's Court shall flee,
E're I cease thee to Love, and only Thee.
6.
If any object to mine eye
Seems fair, but what in thee is found;
If my dull ear hears melody
Besides thy voice in any sound;
If my abused taste its art should miss,
And relish ought besides thy balmy kiss;
4.
If my false touch should think it has
Felt any thing smooth or soft, but thee;
Or if my smell, besides thy Breath
Counts ought Perfume, or Nard to be;
May Titians Kites feast on me, whilst I see
My Rival joy in and enjoying Thee.
FINIS.
POEMS.

The Author R. B. Gent.



LONDON, Printed by W. H. for Tho: Dring. 1650.

Upon Birth and Infancy.
1.
BIrth is a kind of Resurrection;
For Man is buried ere he be brought forth.
The membrane that veiles the tender Embrion
Is first its winding sheet, then swaddling cloth.
Death ushers in man's life, so that the womb
Is both his genethliack Inn and Tomb.
2.
Birth is a kind of Goal delivery.
A Prisoner ere he knows what is to be free
Man is. Thrice three Months does he cloystered lie
In a maturnall Dungeon, after, he
Lives half in nights; whom Lucine forth dothlet
Leaves not his darkness, but exchanges it.
3.
Gods Commissary Nature does bestow
The inborn Principalls and Physical
Dictates of Reason on him, this ye don't know.
And thus alone he proves he is rational,
He wailes with cries which no salt tears do want
The Ignorance of which he is Ignorant.
4.
His lives twilight, or dawning of the Day
In this same wheel or circular is spent,
He sucks, sleeps, cries, Tria sunt omnia.
As if he deemed Death gain, Life punishment.
He Is quiet but sleeping when in jest he dies,
But when he wakes, and finds he lives, he cries.
5.
He is beholding to (though he is by Birth
The Monarch of the whole creation)
Brute Animalls and hospitable earth
Both for his vestments and nutrition.
Being clothed he is lulled asleep by his own cry,
So, ere he 'gins to live, he learns to die.
In Principem arma petentem.
-- Erit ille mihi semper Deus.

ANd wears his Highness Buffe? stir, Vulcan, stir
The coals, and forge bolts for Heavens Thunderer.
To nail his foes to earth with. Now assume
Celestial Archer thy sure Bow, new plume
The Shaft that pierced the Python; Neptune bear
Thy Fork aloft and many maid thy Spear.
Sern Mars girt on thy sword and shake the Lance,
Thy knotty Club, great Hercules, advance.
Arm Gods, and Hero's arm, keep watch and ward
About his Person and be his Life Guard.
May evry Sun present him with fresh Bay,
May he never know what it is to miss of the Day.
May's name (like Zisca's Drum) his foes affright,
May their hearts drop into their heels at's sight;
And may our arms pave all the way he treads
With peaceful Olives, or bold Rebels heads.
Kind Jove give Fortune eyes, for could she see
Whom she attends upon, it could not be
That (to what place so e're he would betake him)
She should so hate her self, as to forsake him.
TO That Darling of Virtue his dear Friend JOHN WROTH, Esquire;
I Love thee highly, but for what?
Is It for thy blood or Births sake? no
I Am not so fond to dote on that
Which balanced no weight does know,
Nor object to the eye does bear,
But only fills the vulgar ear.
Nor for thy fortunes, since we know
They (sometimes) like the faithless sea
Ebb from the good, to th'impious flow,
And them with flattery betray:
Stealing, like to the theevish sands,
When most they grasp them through their hands.
From dead men's urnes and dust does come
Gentilitie, but wealth does take
Its rise yet lower, that is but scum
Of the sulphury boiling Lake.
These I respect, but what I love
In thee, is something from above.
Virtue it is, which as a Star
In thy ennobled Soul does shine
Fixed, as in its proper Sphere,
And making thee (like it) Divine.
For the rest I honor thine Ancestors;
Greatness we borrow, Vertu's ours.
To that emulated piece of Perfection the Lady Diana Willoby. With Sir. Tho:
Overbury's Wife.
Lady,
HEre comes a Wife to kiss your hand
By whom both Death and Life her Parent got.
Yet she is not the worse to be entertained
Since the first was her ill fate, the last her Plot.
Her chief fault (whereof all have some) that I
Find, is that hitherto she'th mist your eye.
Your eye! ah! too too dark a word! our Sun
To which all Poets their braines-births should bring
There to be tried (as Eagles often have done
Their young ones to the Planets glorious King;)
And banish those, as spurious from their Nest
That could no: 'bide your most judicious Test.
View her then (Madam) or rather your self view;
For she is your shadow, you her substance are.
What he Lord wished in her, yours find in you,
As you the original, she the copy were.
Use her thereafter, if she welcome miss
You are harsh even to your self, for you she is.
And I your etc.

To my Honored Friend Benjamin Garfield Esquire; Upon his excellent Tragi-comedy
Entitled The Unfortunate Fortunate.
ANd is thy Sock on friend? ascend the Stage
And tell the Antimaskers of our Age
Thalia's harth shall Smoke yet; what though that
Pig-wiggin Satyrist makes the poor Press sweat
With dull invectives against her Comic train?
Pox, it is 'cause he wants ears to hear her strain.
We find (such surfeit the Iron Age has taken)
More moralls at a Theater than some Fane,
Our British Turks exhort us there with heat
With Poleaxes into men's heads to beat
Their new Capricio's, this Enigma there,
To obey Kings by opposing, is called clear.
These are the truest Plays, those we style so
Teach us in jest in earnest what to do.
They Are Sermons in disguise, a good Play is
A Lecture of humanity. So is This.
Thy Muse, the goodliest of the Iove-born Quire,
(From whose Syrenious voice and mellow Lyre
Orpheus might learn to tune the chiming Spears)
Unto a Music Banquet calls ours ears,
Where (cause best melody in Discords dwell)
Country and Court our hearing Organs fill.
First Balaam's Asses bray, beasts set on end,
Souls drowned in lumps of flesh that downwards tend.
Yet among these walking clods thine EFFRE shows
Like one of Venus team trooping with Crows.
She thus disguised is no more blemished
Than a rich Diamon'd that is set in Lead.
Of their Rusticitie she partaked less
Than the scaly Tribe do of the seas brackishnesse.
So Danube scorns with Sava's muddy tide
To mix though both through the same channel glide.
Thus the coy River Arethusa ran
Piercing the bowels of the Ocean
Some hundred Leagues, and then forth issued
Free from salt Tincture as at her springs head.
Thou tell us how one Dart struck two together,
Plumed with a Turtles, not a Sparrows feather.
But oh the frowns of chance that Lovers meet!
" Less 't had sour sauce Love were too sweet a meat.
Now a foul Dungeons echo must reply
Their itterated vows of constancy.
Yet nor this storm of Fate, nor cage them moves,
But here like Nightingales they chant their Loves.
" A great mind, maugre usurpt Power, or thrall,
" Is free in CARISBROOK as in WHITEHALL.
At length their Innocence breaks forth like Day
And chase black Nights suspicious clouds away.
Fortune's like Proteus the changling Kern,
" But kick and she will to her true shape return.
Thy Lovers fortitude in hard assays
Got them the Nuptial Garland, thee the Bays,
In which ere verdant wreath no branch of Vine
I spy, its dew'd with Helicon, not Wine.
With strenuous sinewie words that CAT'LINE swells
I reckon't not among the Men-miracles.
How could that Poem heat and vigor lack
When each line often cost BEN a glass of sack?
" When brisk Canary flows with Castaly,
" Wits torrent swells, and the proud ^loud boiles high.
If you mixed ought with the Aganippe flood,
'Twas but an Heritiques, not God Bacchus's blood,
The Hop's the Heritique, yet thou art he
Bring'st Truth of Poesy out of Heresy.
If such things flow from the fat, a Brewers horse
I Will yoke with Medusean Pegasus.
The Grape and Hop in the same scale I Will put.
Now, now, the Hoghead's equal with the Butt.
Go, forth, and live, great Master of thy Pen,
And share the Laurel with thy namesake BEN,
Whose Genius thou have as well as name,
And as your wits are equal, May your Fame.
It rests, but that I wish the Actors may
As well as thou have written, make the Play.
" Plays written are not finished, made they are
" In The study first, next on the Theater.
ERYNIS, OR, Discords Speech in a private Presentment.
HOop, Hoop me, or I burst! to what a feared
Stupendous height I have my Trophies reared?
Though yet my Power and wishes be not even
My head at each step tilts against stars in Heaven,
In Heaven, where only Jove me rule denies,
But as he has me from above the skies
I Have banished him beneath; so of the tripple
World he but one part holds, but I a couple.
Far, as the mess of jarring Brothers I
Do puff my severing breath, if they swell high
And stiffely plead their claims to the airy throne
In Thunder that hoarse Stentors base does drown,
These my officious worms as loud have hist,
And pressed from Haemus top Mars to assist
Their rage, with artificial claps that mock
Joves idle terrors, and his Region shake.
If they disigning to invade the sky
Throw crystal mounts on mounts to scale thereby;
And from their Potgun throats belch gusts that tear
(Granado like) the Houses of the air,
In this my knotty bunch* worse storms each Snake
Can raise, which down at last in red showers break.
Thanks dutious Son, more sage than Machiavel
(Though the joke says he scarce is matched in Hell)
Thanks for abusing the aspiring train
Their easy faith with, but Divide and Reign.
To their hopes scene now longing court they me
Where I make them toil for their Tragedy.
Thus gulled, they find no Reign, but that of blood,
And Plagues high swelling as Ducalions Flood.
Whilst I and Spoil, like mercenary Bands
Quell them that call us in, and share their Lands.
Thus Slaves crowd in, whilst I with smiling cheer
But clap my hands and cry fight Dog fight Bear.
Success thus makes the Oraculous sentence good,
Divide and DISCORD Reign, she is understood*
An Anniverse on the fifth of November.
YOu that derive your far-fetched Pedigree
From mighty Brute, from the Son of Saturn He,
Sing Io, Io, and fill the sportfull skies
With songs, for joy you tore them not with cries.
This is the Day (meant for your Day of Doom)
In which to Babell, rather than to Rome
Your Commons, Peers, your Prince, your Queen, and King
Were all intended a burnt-offering.
The Pyle was built, the sulphurous train was laid
Which had but one Squib of a Nation made;
Had the least spark but lent it breath't had driven
In bright Elijahs Chariot to Heaven
Princes and Prophets; tattred limbs had filled
The air, where blood had in red showers distilled.
Quick Death had given no time to fear his spite,
The active flame had seized ere had the fright.
The coward Dame had cut threads unprepared,
And wounded men ere they could wake to ward.
Who ere were those unfortunate male contents
That of this dire Treason were Instruments,
The Author was that subterranean Fiend
The common Enemy of Man, his end
A scandal and an odium to bring
Upon those People whom their peaceful King
So strongly guards from all his other harms.
And to cast dirt he meant by traytrous charms
On their Religion, that she might here
As foul as she does fair in heaven appear.
The Powder Plot, a Mouster Hell did hatch,
Was such, for which no story has a Match.
FINIS.
EPIGRAMS, etc.

FIRST BOOK.

The Author R. B. Gent.

MARTIAL. -- Queritur laesus Carmine nemo meo.

LONDON, Printed by W. H. for Tho: Dring. 1650.

I. To my Lady E. R. Commending his Muse.
Madam,
IF weight or light in my weak lines you spy,
Weight from your mouth they take, Light from your eye.
II. To the same, On War.
War, that black word, composed of thousand ills,
Ladies never speak nor think, but against their wills;
The Lute sounds pleasant, harshly stern alarm's,
They love not Armed Men, but Men in Arms.
III. On the Picture of LOVYS the fourteenth King of France.
THis, this is He that turned the storm to calm,
And fenced his Lillies with triumphant Palm,
And by his actions, so far greater then
His Age, proves Kings are never childeren.
IV. Antithesis, to the conclusion of Sannazarius his Epigram on the City of
Venice, which when he has compared to Rome, he says Illam homines, dices, hanc
posuisse Deos.
Those men you will say,
These stones the Gods did lay.

IN silence be the worlds Seven wonders lost,
Thy stately Hills Proud Rome, no longer boast.
See here! men dwell with Fish! a City stands
In The water! and the God thereof commands!
Neptunes great Realm's invaded thus, and tamed!
Not Men (you say) but Gods, this Wonder framed,
That makes the wonder less; it is Venice's praise
That mortal Men, not Gods such Piles could raise.
V. To a Cadet.
What though thy Creditors call Pay? never fret,
A Pound of care cannot pay an ounce of Debt.
VI. An Epitaph, Upon Henry the eighth King of England, Translated out of
Spanish.
O Henry more than this cold cover
Of stone, thy worth do hide and smother
The Love of Luscious Venery,
And stubbornness in Heresy.
How with thy greatness I demand
(Poor Cosen'd Briton) could it stand
To let a Woman on thee tread
And yet to be the Churches Head?
VII. Another, on Queen Elizabeth.
TThis Urne does Iesabels dust comprise.
Here the new Athalia lies.
Of The Western ore the Harpye,
The cruel firebrand of the Sea.
Here lies a wit, of Fame the most
Worthy that ever Earth could boast,
If, to arrive at that blessed Bay
Of Heaven, she had not missed her way.
VII. To Sim the Letcher.
I Told Sim if he breathed his last at Rome
His dust with Courtizans should mingled lie:
For Whores and Heretics there find one Tomb.
He answered, that is a happy turn, for why
Alive but one at one time I enjoyed,
But dead in that Elizian grave shall I
With thousands lie at once and not be cloyed.
VIII. To Momus.
MOmus, my Poems I have sent
Abroad ere the Carnavall is spent,
Cause I would have Carpes cheap in Lent.
IX. On the same.
MY Book, like Persius, against the wall he hurries
Saying, Dicitque tibi tua Pagina fur^es.
And it is more crime (Synesius did suppose)
To steal a dead man's labors than his clothes.
What Author in the Vatican is left,
If this be true, unblemished with theft?
I must confess I Am guilty as the rest,
And am (like them) contented to be Pressed.
X. To Will: Ad. upon his Marriage.
NOw thou had need be very mild and still,
Seeing thy Kate is wedded to her WILL.
XI. On Wittoll:
VVIttell said, he hoped his Love
Would a pretty Fortune prove.
As so she has indeed, for she
Is famous for Inconstancy.
XII. On Horns.
When as the Wife deserves them
Why should the Man horns wear?
Because he is his Wifes head, and
No Beast wears Horns but there.
XIII. Epitaph, On Henry the fourth, surnamed the Great, King of France.
STay Traveller, see Honors frail decay,
Then pass, and wash with tears thy further way,
Seek not in Sols whole round a nobler Tomb.
A Greater King never laid in lesser Room.
No Death ere drew more Rivers from swollen eyes,
No Funeral broke the air with sadder cries.
Pallas was so shared in him 'twere a bold word
To say which sharpest was his wit or sword.
These drops o'^ all the blubbered marble spread
Are Pearl like Tears, Griefs gems, to crown him dead,
Weep too, lest thou be'st harder than these stones;
Then passing say, (in broken sounds and groans)
Although a Bruter hand robbed him of Breath,
France owned a Caesar in brave Deeds and Death.
XIV. On Sir John Suckling.
THe Rose (the Splendour of Flora's Treasury)
Smells sweeter when it is plucked than on the Tree.
So odorous Suckling (when he lived a Flower
Able alone to make the Nine a Bower)
Is held since he by Times Since mowed has been
The Sweetest Plant in the Pierian green.
Nor envious Fate, nor Northern blasts together,
Though he was nipt in the* bud can make him wither.
XV. On Spend-all.
SPend-all to Court, to learn some manners went,
But there in revelling, all his Manors spent.
XVI. To Leigh the Linguist.
I Often have heard thee spend much of thy lunges
Praising the copious French, Greek, Latin, Tongues.
English thou say is poor, and much does want
Emphatick Phrases, words significant
TO express the Ideas that the mind affords,
It Is easly helped; Marry, you I want no words.
XVII. To Mr Robert Brownrigg.
Prophetic Delius, (to whom is seen
What is, and what shall be, and what ere has been,
From whose instructive Genius, Meeter springs,
And how to touch the well-concording strings,)
Being banished Delphos (where he used to show
Inquisitive Mortals what should ensue)
To Abions Woollie Isle he came, to find
A Monastry where he might sit enshrined.
Upon thy Head he happily has hit,
Where he reigns, mounted on a Throne of wit;
And by Prerogative has given to thee
The manor of Tempe, to hold in Capite
XVIII. To Mrs Diana Willoby, Upon her marriage Day morning it being very dark
and misty.
Why is the Sun so thrifty of his light?
Is it to show a Lovers Day is Night?
No. I Have the Reason, the God of amorous heat
Takes up your eyes to light his torches at;
So bankrupt Sol, the wandering Knight so fair,
'Can't borrow thence one beam to gild the air.
Look then, and rescue with a glimpse Divine
From almost conquering clouds his fainting shine.
As with us (Madam) so it fares with him,
Without you shine all beams are sick and dim.
Astrologers (the Lanthorn-men of the year)
Shall henceforth tell, that from Diana clear
Sol borrowes light, not she from his pale Ray,
Since you make both his and our (Wedding) Day.
XIX. To his Rival.
IPrethee why, since Twins in Love we be,
May not one Mistress serve both thee and me?
Since in the Worlds embroidered Canopy
There Is but one Virgo for the Gemini?
XX. The Rivalls Answer.
Whilst both unmarried be there needs no strife;
One Mistress may serve two, but not one Wife.
XXI. To Sir John Falstaff.
THou think Sack makes men fat, faith't makes them lean
If they drink much often, against the wall I mean.
XXII. Upon the Picture of my Nephew Mr. John Man.
THe Simulachre of the Queen of Love
In which Apelles cunning hand did prove
It abler skill, by adverse ^ates was crossed,
But Art, loath to have such a piece quite lost,
Only th'intended sex of Feminine
Have Metamorphos'd into Masculine,
And though not Cypria, it is a Young man
Whose fittest Epithet is Cyprian.
XXIII. Of Suits.
Tailors are Liquids, Lawyers be no Mutes,
Yet here they jump, they both do live by Suits.
XXIV. Epitaph, On ascolding Woman, Sub persona mariti.
HEre lies my Wife interred; oh how
Good is it for her quiet, and mine too.
XXV. The Golden Age.
THe Golden Age, that gild such golden rimes,
Was but a Prophecy of our now Times,
Though somewhat antidated, or (Sans doubt)
Now the great Year of Plato's wheeled about.
For this wherein Laws Lives and all are sold
Is, or the Golden Age, or the Age of Gold.
XXVI. To Kate common.
IF like loves like, why should thou love the night
And deeds of darkness, since thou art so light?
XXVII. On the same.
TO sell her self is her chief care,
She is both her own shop and ware.
XXVIII. On the same.
PEacocks and Whores are near allied,
Since both their Tails maintain their Pride.
XXIX. Occupations.
It Is an hard Time say Tradesmen, if it so
Continues, our Hair soon through our Caps will grow.
But whosoever breaks, who ever thrives,
Hoarse Lawyers will live, and sweet-tooth'd Midwives.
Especially the last, for young and old
Stir every stone, to make their trading hold.
T'wish their gain more than Lawyers is no sin,
They Jars, these wish agreement friends between;
They live by fallings out, these falling in.
XXX. To an Antidated Cuckold.
THou said 'cause War makes Men scarce, Women common,
Thou would never marry, less to some great woman.
Nor have thy hand thy tongue and oath beguild,
Thou'st married a great woman, (to wit) with child.
XXXI. Women strongest.
Why should we women the weaker vessels call?
The vulgar Reason, we put them next the wall?
When I Have heard say one Ladies single hair
Can draw more than of Oxen twenty pair?
And less it be in constancy we men
The exceed in strength; nay the Devil himself, for when
He shows his face he only makes (weak fiend)
Our hair, these make our flesh to stand on end.
XXXII. To Mal: Winter.
Would know why thy name's Winter? there is reason for it,
Thou Art like a Winters Day, durty and short.
XXXIII. To cursed Tib.
'CAuse her low Husbands breeches are so short,
Long-shank't Tib raves, and beats the Tailor for it;
Peace Tib, what need you care what wears the Else?
O, cry a mercy, you would wear them your self.
XXXIV. To loan Tosse-pot
AMongst courageous drinkers thou
Do surely bear the Bell.
Though like a foundered Jade thou look
Yet thou draw'st passing well,
XXXV. Campo-musae.
SIlvan by wagging of a bough,
Did becken me forth to see how
The Spring (the fair mother of Flowers)
Had given new coats to whistling Bowers.
In this gay Palace of the Spring
To hear May's harmless Sirens Sing.
And teach Nymph Echo aires, I spread
My limbs upon a spicy bed
Of sweet though ordinary flowers
Perfumed with West winds balmy showers,
Here many a theme my fancy hit,
Each object drew my thoughts to it*
I saw the Marygold (Clytie pale)
Her beauty to the Sun unvaile,
As if she hoped he would be to her
No longer coy, but came to woe her.
I thought no Plant in all the Bower
So like a woman as this Flower,
'Cause when she feels a little heat
She opes her leaves and wide does spread.
But she does this whilst the Worlds eye
Does brave the East, and gild the sky;
When he descends into the maine
And makes night she shuts-close again.
With that my Muse her Theme did vary,
Knowing Women do the contrary.
XXXVI. To my Lady Venetia Gray.
MAdam, from whom virtue might copies take,
And Nature learn more beauteous forms to make,
Chide not my Muse, your humblest servant, when
Even in your softer sex she spares not sin,
Since this e're was and e're shall be her care
To tax the crimes but yet the persons spare.
XXXVII. To the same, on her Wedding day morning.
GOod morrow to the Bride, who (only) can
Show us the Day, Sol like a Servingman
Attends her windows, whilst she sits undrest
He Westward seems, though newly ros^^^th' East.
XXXVIII. To my Poetique friend, I. S.
DAphne is star-proof, fork'd bolts never,
Her flourishing trunk could split or sever;
She having then secured thine head,
What need'st thou foul tongues thunder dread?
XXXIX. To Poetaster.
OF Admiration Ignorance is Sire,
But I know thee, therefore I don't admire.
XL. To fiery Face.
TElling some pranks of thee (plump Jack) you blamed
Me, and desired, lest I should make ye ashamed,
Your name to hide; why fear thou that (Jack) tush,
Thy face is shame-proof, Scarlet cannot blush.
XLI. Too a covetous Puritan.
A Cross you dare not see, for you
From that and neck-weed fear your due.
XLII. To the same.
CRosses you hate, and wish them banished hence,
Reform your Purse first, cast away your pence.
XLIII. To a Detractor.
I Thank thee Aristarchus or stark Ass,
For taking with a sour Tobacco face
My Lines, in Snuff, still spitting on each Letter,
For this makes me review and make them better.
XLIV. Past recovery.
Hei mihi quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbis!
When sage Lycurgus, Sparta's Law inactor,
Made mulcts for this and the other Malefactor,
No Penalty for Paricides he set,
Thinking none would so foul a crime commit.
So Aesculape the Physic Deity
Gave salves for every other Malady,
But none for Loves sore, 'cause he thought indeed
No Liver so corrupt was such a Plague to breed.
XLV. Perfumed corruption.
YOu that quaffe Amber, and with Musk-cats lie,
Embalming your corrupt bodies before you die;
Who rottenness to make sweet by Perfumes think
Lose coin and time to gain a dearer stink.
FINIS.

