THE Regenerate man's growth in GRACE. SHOWING, That Regeneration of necessity
requires an augmentation in Grace.

With the Motives to move us to grow, Signs to know whether we have grown; the
lets that hinder our growth; and helps to further our growth

Preached in a Sermon at Lancaster, upon a day of Humiliation, by N. B.
Minister thereof.

Si fulminis aquae fistare caeperit putrescit, fi^gratiarum decursus ubi
recursus non fucrit. Bern. LONDON, Printed by John Dawson for John Williams.
1646.

TO MY LOVING PARISHIONERS OF LANCASTER.
THESE first fruits of my labors, were purposely commended to the Press; for
the benefit of you my faithful flock, who were pleased (about three years
ago) to choose me (minimus Apostolo^um) to be your Pastor to feed your souls.
And since I came amongst you; I have set my shoulders unto my work, and
according to that poor talent, God has given me, have labored to build you
up in the knowledge of God, in that perfect building, whereof Christ is the
corner stone. I bless God, that I can see the fruits of my labors, in any of
you; that you use the means for grace, and the knowledge of God, and labor to
thrive herein; hold on, and Gods blessing will guide, and go along with you;
that of babes and children in Christianity* you may all grow to be tall
Christians in time: therefore have I joined the following Sermon, to stir you
up to growth in grace. Which shall be ever my endeavors, and prayers; for God
is my witness, I have not sought yours, but you, and am resolved with the
Apostle to spend and be spent for you. Had I sent this subject to the public
view, before these times of troubles; it would have been distasted, as it was
there, where it was first preached; but God (by his special providence) having
brought me amongst you (a willing people) I am encouraged to recommend it to
you, for protection; desiring it may find as much affection with you, now
Printed, as it did attention, when it was Preached to you; I confess my book
is brought forth in a bloody time, when our crying sins have caused clouds to
rise every day, and pour down showers of blood on the land; It comes into a
critical age, and will meet with many Annomus, many Antagonists; therefore I
have sent it for protection, to my Parish, from whence it came, and where it
was most respected; you must expect it will be carpt at, though it have many
friends; yet you know I am not without enemies, who have cast dirt both at you,
and me; and shall my book think to escape scot-free; nay, whose malice has
endeavored, to diverse me from you, and to cut a-sunder, the conjugall knot
betwixt us; but a curse I fear will follow them; who seek to put asunder,
those that God has joynd together; yet I Will leave their censure to the God of
justice, and pray for them, that God would forgive them; for they know not what
they do; and that the God of patience, Romans 15.5.
and consolation, would make us all followers of God, as dear children; and
grant that we may be like minded, one toward another in Christ Jesus. And my
prayer for you, is that our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our
Father, which has loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and
good hope through grace, would comfort your hearts, and establish you in every
good word and work.

Your loving Minister, NEHEMIAH BARNETT.

To the Christian Reader.
TOrment me not (good Reader) upon the rack of thy rash censure, that I should
be grown so audacious as to meddle with so weighty a subject as this; and
crowd in for company, among such a throng of writers as now pester the world: I
deny not, but the Press is over-pressed with many worthless works of petty
Pamphletors; and Censurers be so busy every where, enough to blast the first
fruits of my labors in the bud; but who can escape the scourg of evil
tongues, for there be many that dee little less, but gird at their brethrens
labors. If any Questionist, shall demand why I publish this tract; one reason
amongst the rest, that induced me to it; was the declining age wherein we
live: wherein there is many dwarfes in grace, and others grow slowly, or rather
decline, and fall away more and more. Another was the request of some friends;
that so earnestly desired the coppies of it; that I thought by sending it to
the Press, it might be a good means to free my self from future troubles:
yet the importunity of friends I outstood, who could not prevail with me, for
the publishing of it; when lo at length, the improbity of hard censures has
wrung it out of my hands, for when it was first preached, it was branded for a
factious Sermon by some; therefore I was willing the world should be judge
between me and my Censurers, whose ga^l'd backs were then pricked by my
reproves: Therefore (good Reader) peruse it with a single eye, and if thou
can read not well deserving in it, thou may perceive my well meaning

But for mine own part, I slight every Momus, I am so well acquainted with the
worlds folly, that I scorn either to flatter, or fear it.

Is it not a strange and harsh humer (too much abounding in the world) to
misinterpret other men's actions, rather then to give them a charitable
construction: and it is the nature of many men, to behold with sore eyes, their
brethrens new grown felicities; but the best is, I had rather be dispraised
by true speaking, then honored for lying; although many men had rather be
praised with lies, then reproved with truth. Therefore if any poor soul,
shall reap benefit thereby (as I do not doubt, but through Gods blessing many
will, I shall comfortably undergo the censure of such as mistake my aim
herein; and if any thing be herein profitable, and well done, I give the glory
to God, and praise to his Name: If any thing amiss (as alas needs must,
being done by me) Qui sum maximus peccatorum minimus Sanctorum) The shame light
on me who sought not divine assistance, with that self emptiness as I ought:
thus hoping good Christian Reader) thou will take in good part that which I
have penned, for public profit, I commend it to thee, and thou to God, and the
Word of his grace, and remain

Thine in Christ Jesus, N. B.

THE REGENERATE Man's growth in GRACE.
2 Peter 3.18. But grow in grace, etc.


THe Character of a true Christian, consists in the augmentation of grace: This
is an unfallable distinction, betwixt the Regenerate, and Unregenerate man;
this is the best way to get Gods blessings here, and a blessed reward
hereafter; for the best of blessings wait upon the growth of grace, as a
hand-maiden on her Mistress; honor on virtue: and the reward of a gracious life
here, is an eternal life hereafter. Prestat non nasci quam sine gratia mori
But know, 'its better to be unborne then to die without grace, and he that
grows not in grace never obtaines a blessing of God in this life; nor let him
look to dwell with him in the life of glory. Then grow in grace.

IN this Chapter our Apostle Peter seems to have met with some in his time,
Coherence.
that doubted of the day of Judgment, saying, Where is the promise of his
coming. To verse. 4.

Therefore he produces arguments to assure us of the certainty of Christ's
coming to Judgment. To verse. 8.

Proclaiming the perdition of ungodly men at that day, and therefore warnes us
to hasten our repentance, and that because the day of the Lord will come as a
thief in the night. verse. 10.

In which day we must look for the heavens to be dissolved, the elements
consumed, and the earth burned; seeing we are in expectation of these things,
he exhorts to be diligent, that we may be found of him in peace without spot,
and blameless. verse. 14.

Now to prevent us from falling away, he warnes us that we be not led by the
errors of the wicked, and so fall from our own steadfastness. verse. 17.

And to this end, prescribes us a preservative, from falling into Apostasy in
these words. But grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, to him be glory both now and for ever.

Let us first enquire,

1 What is meant by grace here. 2 What it is to grow in grace. 3 Who is a
subject fit for growth
Of these in their order.

1 Grace is either taken for the love and favor of God, Grace is twofold
either active or pasive.
whereby we are accepted of him in Christ, and so it is Active.

2 Or for the gifts wrought in us by Gods spirit, and so it is Passive.

The former is gratia acta, grace begun. The later is gratia aucta, grace
increased; which is the grace here commended.

grace in Scripture, for brevities sake, I omit: but if it be the grace that
has reference to God, it should note the grace of Election; which St. Paul
says, was according to his purpose, and grace. 2 Timothy 1.9.

bestowed upon us by God, in this sense. See John 1.16. of his fullness we
receive grace for grace. Pet. 1.13.

Now our Apostle looks not at the first acceptance of grace, which is of
Election; because it is without life and cannot grow: nor at the last, because
we cannot get to glory unless we have grown, for the life of glory is past
growth, but it has reference to the middle which is the gifts of the Spirit,
as renovation by his Spirit, redemption by his Son, in sending him out of his
bosom to disclose his secrets unto us which are of two sorts.

1. Such as have respect to the esse, and been esse of a Christian, as those
cardinal graces, faith and repentance; love and obedience.

2. Such as have respect ad ornatum, to the decking of a Christian, as good
wit, memory, and good invention; questionless the Apostle means we should
grow in all grace, but especial in the best.

2. What it is to grow in grace.

As the body may grow in stature till it be taller: So the soul may grow in
grace till it become holier. For there is a quickening life of the soul whereby
it grows in goodness: as well as there is a natural life of the body whereby
it grows in tallness. You know what it is for a child to grow, when his food
is well disgested, his members thereby nourished, his spirits augmented, his
strength increased, and his whole proportion of body enlarged, you will say that
child grows.

So it is with the soul, when Gods word which is the souls food is well
disgested; so that the soul thereby is nourished, his desires more enlarged;
his affections more quickened, the life of grace more augmented, you may call
this a growing Christian.

When his faith is more and more strengthened, his charity more and more
enflamed.

When his conscience is more obedient, and his obedience more conscionable.

When he labors for more holiness here, that he might have more happiness
hereafter: and strives to get more grace, that he might have more glory. This
is to grow in grace.

3. Who is a subject fit for growth. He must be such a one as is neither in the
state of unregeneracy, nor yet in the state of glory.

1. Not an unregenerate man because he has no spiritual life in him whereby
he may be said to grow.

2. Not a glorified man, for he is come to the perfection of his growth, and
cannot be said to grow.

3. It must be one in a middle estate: A regenerate man, such a one that has
shaken off his corruption. Such a one as is ascending higher to some
perfection, increasing both the multitude and measure of his grace: Such a one
as is traveling in the way of glory, yet not got to glory: So that when the
Apostle bids us grow in grace; I conceive the subject fit for growth must be a
regenerate man, such as to whom Saint Paul writes Ephesians. 3.18. (...), being
rooted and grounded in love. Now the Apostles injunction being cleared, hence
this proposition may be raised.

That Regeneration requires an augmentation of grace. The Proposition.


Or more briefly.

A Regenerate man, must needs be a growing man

A Christian newly Regenerate, is like a child newly borne, that desires to
suck the breasts of his mother, and receives that wholesome nourishment, that
thereby he may increase in strength and stature: therefore Saint Peter wishes
us, as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word that we may grow
thereby. 1 Pet. 2.2.

And the Prophet David Psalm. 92.13, 14. Tells us that the trees that be planted
in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our God, They shall
still bring forth fruit in old age, and shall be fat and flourishing. Where
there is no fruit to be found, there is no growth to be expected; and there is
no Symptom of a Christian growth without fruits: The tree is for the fruit,
and but for the fruit there had been no tree: When there is no hope of fruit
we cut it down, and make it serve for fuel.

Men do delight to plant trees in their orchards for delight; as for shade in
hot summer seasons: But God delights to see no such trees in his Orchard, such
that bear nothing but green leaves or glorious blossoms, I mean such as
satisfy themselves with Hypocritical shows and fruitless formallities. But
if we be growing trees we be fruitful, let us show our Faith by our fruits,
and let the grapes of piety, clusters of equity, and fruitful branches of
sobriety, testify eternally, internally, externally, to God, to our own
conscience, and to the world, that we are growing and fruitful Branches,
inoculated by the Art of Regeneration into the stock of our Vine, Christ Jesus.

Reasons why a Regenerate man must be a growing man.

We should grow in grace, let it never be said that we are non-proficients,
loyterers, dunces in the School of Christ.

Our Universities admit of no Scholars in those famous Societies; but such
that are as well grown in some good measure of learning, as of stature: So
here it holds true no Abcedarie can be admitted to the University of glory;
but first he must be admitted into the free-schoole of Election, and there
well grounded in the Grammar of grace, well skild in the Art of mortification,
and every day read a lecture of Repentance; and I must tell him in this
School he must sometimes taste of the whip and scourge of affliction, and he
must not only be a good Artist, but a good Linguist, especially be able to
speak the language of Canaan.

Then I may boldly say he is fit for the Academie of heaven, where he shall
find God his Creator, to be his chief Chancellor, Christ his Redeemer to be
his Tutor, the blessed Saints and Angels, to be his fellow Pupills, and there
take the degrees of glory according to the growth of his grace. Then grow in
grace.

We should be growing or make an Augmentation of our grace, Paul bid us run,
which argues, 1 Cor. 9.24.
that we have not yet got the goal of perfection? Does not he bid us fight,
which argues, 1 Timothy 6.12.
we have not yet got the conquest over it? And does not Saint Peter here bid us
grow, which argues, we have not grown to perfection.

The best of us are but striplings and Infants in goodness, the truth is, we
are but in the womb of the Church while we live in this world, our deaths day
must be our birth day, till then we must be making a continual Addition of
grace to that we have received.

I deny not but the grace we received at first, may be said to be perfect in
regard of parts, as a child is so far a perfect man, because it has all the
parts of a man; but not perfect in respect of degrees, so that when we first
receive this grace, we are but babes in Christ; yet babes may be tall men in
time.

Wherefore if we that are Scholars in Christ's School, would credit our
Schoolmasters: If we that are babes in Christ would come to perfection. Then
let us grow in grace, etc.

We should grow in grace, helpers in the Church of God, to strengthen the weak
Christians and to comfort those that are afflicted.

Will it not be a comfort to any Minister or private person, that has been an
instrument to further the growth of grace in any, He may say with Saint Paul,
what is our hope, our joy, our crown of rejoicing, Is it not you in the
presence of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ at his coming. 1 These. 2.19.
Therefore we should not satisfy our selves with what grace we have, but labor
to get more, make our selves unsatiable coveteous after grace, and never think
we have enough, labor every day to be more holy, more heavenly minded, more
patient, more temporate, more praierfull: That the weak may be strengthened by
our virtues, and may by our good works which they shall behold glorify God in
the day of visitation. 1 Pet 2.12.
And that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, 2 Cor. 1.4.
by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. Grow, grow I say
every day better and better, if we would have Gods favor, and desire to be
compast under the clouds of his protection: If we would administer comfort to
our own consciences, and gain us glory in Christ's Kingdom, if we would
credit Christ our Schoolmasters, if we desire to attain to perfection, and
would become helpers in the Church of God, to strengthen the weak and comfort
the afflicted. Then grow in grace.

We should grow in grace least we being led away with the error of the wicked,
fall from our own steadfastness. 2 Pet. 3.17. For we shall mere with many
enemies and have many sieges, that we shall not be able to keep our standing
in grace, unless we be grown to some strength in grace; for no sooner is the
fallow-ground of our hearts plowed, and the seed of Gods grace sown there; but
presently Satan that enemy of our souls is ready to steal it away, Mat. 13.25.
and sow his tares there. No sooner has God laden the ship of our souls with
the treasures of his grace; but the Devil is ready like a Pirate to rob us of
it, and strives to make shipwreck of our souls: He still is striving by the
fierce tempests of his temptation, to split our souls against the rocks of
despair, and will still be laboring with his mustring forces to stop our
happy progress in grace. He Will come to us with Haec omnia tibi dabo, All
these things will I give thee, if we will hearken to him: and envying our
growth, does still labor to nippe our budding graces, with the cold frost of
affliction, and tempests of of temptation; therefore they that must go into
boisterous tempests, had need to be grown to be men and not children. But we
must all through the boisterous tempests of Satan's storms; and therefore had
need to be grown to some strength and height in grace, otherwise, we should
never be able to hold our steadfastnesse. If we would credit Christ our
Schoolmaster, if we would attain to perfection, if we would be able to
strengthen the weak, and keep our former steadfastnesse. Grow then in grace.

We should grow in grace, Christianity does admit of no Solstice, but a
continual spring, as long as we have the life of grace: It is a saying not so
old as true, Non progredi est regredi, not to go forward in the growth of
grace, is to go backward: Still there must be a plus ultra; what Saint Paul
says, Pray continually, rejoice evermore. 1 These. 5.17. is true of a
spiritual growth, grow continually, increase evermore, never stop nor stay in
grace. This growth must not be by fits, a little to day, and less to morrow,
and afterward give over. But we must proceed in a continual growth, never
declining or desisting: If the stream of the water course stand still, it will
corrupt: So of grace. In rowing up a River, if we rest our oars we fall down
the stream. We know the Arc would not stay with the Philistians; neither will
the grace of God tarry with sinners. 2 Cor. 6 14.
Light would never have Communion with darkness: they will never keep company
together; let us then like Christians, follow grace as a Scholar does his
study; he is at it to day, and to morrow, and the next day, and all the days
of his life; he is laboring to increase his learning, and grow in knowledge:
Though sometime he meets with a play day, and be taken off from his study, yet
if ye seek him, you know where to find him, he is or should be in his study:
So a Christian should every day be growing in grace, and in knowledge,
especially, of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; though sometimes some
dullness may creep upon him, yet he quickens himself, and sets to it again,
never ceasing till he lie down in his grave, for never till then, is he at his
journeis end.

If we would credit Christ our Schoolmasters. If we would attain to
perfection. If we would strengthen the weak, and comfort the afflicted. If we
would be able to keep our steadfastness, and standing in grace. If we would
not decline. Then let us grow in grace.

a growth in grace, will procure a growth in glory; the more holiness we
attain to here, the more happiness hereafter; nay, every dram of grace shall
be rewarded, with a pound of glory,

If we be steadfast, 1 Cor. 15.58.
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as we know
that our labor is not in vain in the Lord.

We know this life is our seed time, that to come our Harvest; let us then sow
liberally, that we may reap plentifully.

Hoc momento unde pendet eternitas. This life is a moment of time, whereof all
eternity of life, or death, depends: Then it behooves us to grow in grace
here; that we might augment our happiness hereafter. Rev. 2 10.
He who can give thee a crown of life, if thou be faithful unto the death, is
faithful to perform; he will not fail to give thee a Crown, a Crown of life;
that gives life, that keeps life, life everlasting; a life of immortality, a
life of eternal felicity. The heads of all.


1 If thou would credit Christ thy Schoolmasters. 2. If thou would
attain to perfection. 3. If thou would strengthen the weak, and comfort
the afflicted. 4. If thou would be able to keep thy steadfastnesse, and
standing in grace. 5. If thou would not decline. 6. And if thou would win
a Crown of glory, Grow then in grace, etc.
We will now apply it, and we shall find, that all sorts of people, of what
state and condition soever, comes in the first use to be reproved. The
meditation of this reclining age wherein men were colder in Christianity, and
deader in all spiritual duties; caused this subject first to be the object of
my meditations, wherefore this reprehension shall be directed.

1. Ad Populum; To the people. 2. Ad Clerum; To the minister. 3. Ad
Magistratum; To the magistrate.
First, Ad Populum; unto the people, wherein there is no growth found; but
rather a decaying, and you shall find this decaying to be amongst too many:
once they were constant comers to Church, and diligent hearers of the Word,
but now slow paced to Gods house, and are become careless, and negligent
hearers: once they were often in prayer, and frequent in reading; but now they
are strangers to the Throne of grace, and seldom read: once they were lively
in the service of God, but now (more is the pity) little less then dead. The
grapes of good words, and fruit of good works decays in them. So that it is
to be feared, a consumption has taken all their virtues; or what should be the
reason, that there should be such a change and alteration in them: Do they
think the Word less powerful to work Faith in them, that they less
frequent it, do they think prayer less prevalent with God, that they are
less exercised in it? Do they think reading the Scriptures, less profitable
to increase their knowledge, because now they have laid it aside? O that they
would but consider, how extremely they dishonor God, discourage others, and
endanger their own souls, by this declining in grace. We may complain as
Paul, Heb. 5.12. For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need
that one teach you again, which be the first principles of the Oracles of God,
and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. Though the
Lord has sent forth many painful laborers in his Vineyard: Though the Word
of God be preached plentifully in most places, yet in many of these places
where the means of grace is plentiful, are not there many found as ignorant,
(I had almost said,) as Pagans in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ? I pray God there be not many amongsts us that are dwarfes in grace, and
dunces in knowledge; our growth is like that of the oak, slow and insensible,
so that we may sooner find it crevisse, then crescere. Although we of all
others have enjoyed better means for growth, greater helps for knowledge, we
have had the word of grace powerfully, and painfully preached a long time unto
us; therefore more will be required of us, it will be expected that we be
grown strong men in grace, men of knowledge. Let us not be like Hezekiahs
sun that went backward; but David's sun, that rejoiced to run his race. Let
us no longer decline and decay in grace, no longer be fruitless, no longer
stand at a stay. But let us grow in grace.

Secondly, Ad Clerum; To the clergy, All of us come under this roof to be
reproved; I as well as you, yea, all of us are justly to be reprehended of
non-proficiencie, that we have not grown according to that education, and
means, God was pleased to afford us.

O that I had nothing to accuse my self and my brethren off. We that should be
teachers of others, had need to be taught our selves, in the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. We that should be watchmen over other men's
souls, had more need of others to watch over our souls. We that should be
the salt of the earth to season others, have little salt in our own hearts. We
that should be dispensers of grace, we have no grace of our selves to dispense.

Some of us instead of feeding our flocks, starve them; and such as be full of
science; but where is their conscience? What soul can say he was the better for
their profound knowledge, this neglect of feeding our flock, is the cause of so
many barren souls, and dwarfs in grace. Shall painful preaching be censured
for preciseness? God forbid; shall we that are the spiritual Physicians (whom
God has trusted with his peoples welfare, which he has purchased with his
own blood) neglect to heal the broken hearted, recover the lost, bring home
the wandering sheep to the sheepfold of Christ, God forbid. Shall we that are
placed in the Church; as mothers to bring forth children to God, be barren and
bring forth none, or when we have them, put them forth to nurse. This (as
Doctor Adam says wittily) is not more unkind in a natural, then unnatural
in a spiritual mother.

Has God given us milk to feed his sheep, and shall we put them over to
hirelings, who suffer the wolf to enter and tear the lambs: O where is our
care of those souls committed to our charge.

Ac si victuri essent sine cura, cum pervenerint ad curam.

As if they had forgotten all care, when they had gotten a cure.

But Saint Bernard concludes against them: If thou love not thy charge thy
People, Plus quam tua, plus quam tuos, plus quam te, More then thy goods, more
then thy friends, more then thy self, thou art not worthy to undertake this
office. Are not we stewards, and laborers in Gods Vineyard, and shall we be
found negligent, and loyterers? God forbid. Let our hearty desires for the
good of our people, break forth with Saint Austine, into open wishes, that
when Christ comes to judgment, (if it be his will) Inveniat nos precantem, vel
praedicantem, either praying for, or preaching to our people; that thereby we
may forward others in the growth of grace.

Thirdly, Ad Magistratum, Unto the magistrate: That the word of God may become
powerful for the beating down of sin, for the strengthening of grace, and
the furtherance of growth in grace in any, it ought to have the sword of
justice joined with it; for we that are Gods messengers may point at sin; but
it must be you that are Gods vicegerents, that must punish sin; he has put
the sword of justice in your hands to suppress sin, so far as it lies in
your power, whose authority is to restrain raging sins, that they reign not
amongst us.

O pity miserable souls that have no pity to themselves, our words will not
work upon them, let your swords compel them to the service of God. Verbum
informet, sed virga reformat. The Word may inform them; but the sword does
reform them. The law unless it be put in execution, is (by some) compared to
a wooden dagger in a fair sheath; and those that have the sword in their
hands, stand like the picture of Saint George with his hand up; but never
striking, then think not your office well discharged, if you but threaten
offenders; hence it is that so many tap-houses swarm with drunkenness,
beggars wandering the paths of idleness, and so many Sabboths spent in
profaneness: Dare you suffer persons popishly addicted to contemn and revile
Religion, to persecute and afflict the Church of God, to molest, and masecrate
his Ministers, and not oppose their Popery, hinder their oppressions, and stop
their profaneness; have you not God to support you herein, the Law to direct
you, Religion to rule you, conscience to encourage you, and all these on your
side to help and further you; then up and be doing, and the God of Heaven aid
and prosper you. ^ King 20.42.
Take heed lest his life go for your life, if you let such escape. Are not
Magistrates our commonwealths Pilates, that should save the Ship of men's
souls from perishing; but if either threatenings can terrify him, or men's
favors move him to swerve from Justice: He is unfit for these profane times.
Are not Magistrates Gods swordbearers: why then should not they unsheath them
in Gods cause, that thereby piety might be defended, the poores poverty
relieved, and the widows wrongs rited; and then the profane will fear you,
the godly will praise you, the poor will bless you, and many prayers will be
laid up in Heaven for you. And let me deal plainly, for plain dealing is
best. The Magistrates neglect of restraining of sin, is a speedy way to incense
the wrath of God; the Philosopher will say, Nec hesperus nec vesperus,
formosior est justicia: Neither the evening nor morning star, more glorious in
heaven, then Justice is on earth. He spoke well that said, It is very
acceptable to God, when the Gods of the earth are like the God of Heaven, just
and impartial in punishing offenders, which is a means to turn Gods wrath
from us, to continue his gracious presence with us, to open the windows of
heaven, and pour down upon us his blessings in this life; and Crown us with
everlasting glory in the life to come. O help! for Christ his sake, help us
to further others in this growth of grace.

Of examination, to enforce this examination.

By this spiritual search, 1 Moti.
we shall prove whether we have profited in the School of Christ, and
discovering our backwardness and non-proficiencie; it will make us question
our estate thus: what have I had so much teaching, and am I ignorant? what a
non-proficient am I, have I heard so many sermons and am never the better? what
a dunce am I, have I lived so long unto the Gospel, and have profited nothing?
what a beast am I, have I had so many opportunities of doing good works of
mercy, works of charity, and have neglected them? Certainly I am still carnal;
this examination will discover our unprofitablenesse.

This spiritual search, 1 Moti
will make us speedily to pluck up our feet, and run more swiftly in the
ways of Gods Commandments. When a traveller has consumed most part of the
day in loytering, and shall pluck out his watch, and shall perceive how much
time he has mis-pent; it will make him spur the harder, and ride the faster
to his journyes end: So the knowledge of this mis-pent time; will make us play
the good husbands for the time to come, and prove a good preservative against
prodigality of time: Yea, the knowledge of this mis-pent time, will make us
run more swifter in our spiritual race toward heaven.

This spiritual examination, 3 Moti.
will administer wonderful consolation to that Christian, that shall find by
this search, that he is a growing Branch in Gods Orchard; for thereby he shall
be assured that he is partaker of the spiritual juice of the true Olive tree.

By this growth he may be assured, that he has this spiritual life of
Regeneration; which assurance comes with comfort to the soul, like the Angel
to the shepherd; the comfort is, that he may be assured he is the Son of
God, which comfortable words whispered in the ears of a dejected soul, were
enough to make him leap for joy; this is comfort that will make him caper,
this is comfort that makes the rough ways to Heaven seem pleasant, this
comfort revives the heart of Gods children, after they have been tossed with
afflictions. There is no tongue able to express the inestimable sweetness of
that consolation, that is comunicated to a Christian, by a sensible feeling of
a growth of grace; it is that sweet stream of pleasure, which coming from the
banks of Heaven; waters by secret passages the hearts of the godly: I Will
appeal to the Regenerate, whether they can find any comfort like to this, The
Children of God are not able to conseale this comfort, that call to their
brethren; saying, come and i will tell you what God has done for my soul.

In the examination by it self, we shall discover to every one these signs,
whether they have grown or no.

I may perceive a child has grown, when he can digest stronger points of
Reprehensions, and Exhortations. When he can brook the threatening of the law,
as well as the promise of the Gospel. When he can digest harsh Doctrines,
which are terrifying to the flesh; as well as pleasing promises, which are
refreshing to the soul. In a word; When he can digest rigorous precepts, for
the reformation of his life; as well as sweet sentences, for the Salvation of
life. This man has a good disgestion; which is a sign he is grown in grace,
past a child, he will quickly become a tall Christian, a strong man. This is
the first sign to discover your growth.

Secondly, will conclude he has grown: So when the Spirit of God shall
discover our corruption, that thereby we do discern the garments of our
righteousness, too short to cover our wickedness, to hide our spiritual
nakedness Then we might conclude we have grown.

When Gods spirit discovers unto us our impiety, and shows us our spiritual
poverty, and uncovers our wretchedness, and makes naked our unrighteousness;
so that we see the garments of righteousness, too short for us; then we fly to
the righteousness of Christ Jesus, who has garments fit for all Gods Saints;
but none can be partaker of it, but by the union which he has with Christ
Jesus: his diety being the fountain from whence all grace and Salvation does
flow, and his humanity being the Conduit, by which all the waters of Gods grace
be conveyed to us from him, as from a Fountain; we have strength from him, we
have life from him, and by the virtue of this Vine, we grow more and more in
grace. This is the second sign.

Thirdly, We may know a child to have grown, when we find him more
serviceable to us, when for his strength he is able to perform some service
for us: So if we are grown in grace, we are able to perform more acceptable
service to God, we are more active in his service: as long as we are in our
Minority, we are but Pidlers in his service, we can do nothing to any purpose,
nothing worthy-praise, nothing worth acceptance; but when we are grown to some
strength, we are more serviceable in the Church of God; to strengthen weak
Christians, to raise up them that are fallen, to comfort those that are
afflicted, by our exhortation, and supplications; when we can cry Abba father,
when we are able to put up petitions to the Court of Heaven, that are prevalent
both for our selves and others; when our faith is grown stronger, then when we
were first converted; when our love is grown from a few friends, to the love
of many; when our patience grows meeker, our humility lower; for humility is
best when it is lowest; when you shall find it with Job in the dust, there it
grows both in favor of God and man. This is the third sign.

Fourthly, When a child is able to bear a burden, it argues that he is
grown: So when a Christian is better able to bear the burden of affliction
and crosses; it argues that he is grown in grace. Before we were converted,
the least wrong molested us; now we can bear a load of injuries: once words
would provoke us, once we accounted sufferings torments, afflictions,
punishments; now we account them preferments, when persecution for Christ's
sake and the Gospel, is held our honor and dignity. Ipsamque Crucem, Coronam.
And the Cross a Crown. Then we may conclude we are grown in grace.

1. Was not Paul grown to be a strong Christian, that could say, Who could
separate us from the love of Christ, Romans 8.38.
neither tribulation, nor anguish, nor persecution, shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, in Christ Jesus; and what Saint Paul promised, he
performed, for all this he was able to bear; for though the sword separated
his head from his shoulders, yet it was not able to separate him from his head
Christ Jesus.

2. Was not Job grown to be a strong Christian, that he could bear such a
burden of affliction, they were such as if heaven and earth had conspired to
over-load him; yet he was grown able to bear them, and resolved though the
Lord would kill him, he would put his trust in him. Job 13.5.

3. Is it not manifest that David was grown to be a strong Christian, that he
could bear such a heavy burden of persecution? though he was a man after Gods
own heart; yet here he was but as a Pelican in the wilderness, his
afflictions were such, that he went still with weeping eyes, while he lived in
this valley of tears.

These strong Christians, knew there was no Crown without crosses, no reigning
without suffering; though Aegritudo carneni vulnerat, sed mentem curat,
Afflictions wound the flesh, but cure the spirit. Grow then in grace, that we
may be able to bear the burden of affliction.

Of exhortation, then making a continual progress in the virtues of Christ
Jesus, and the graces of his Spirit; therefore let there be no declining in any
case, no revolting in any kind, for by declining we shall proclaim to the
world, that Gods service, is an unprofitable service; by revolting we do but
occasion a discouragement to our fellow brethren, and Jeoperdize our souls
safety, and hazard the full fruition of eternal happiness: let us not slack
our pace in this spiritual progress; but as the God of heaven renews his
mercies to us, and enricheth us daily with his bounties; so let us renew our
obedience, and let our graces be thriving more and more; but above all things
take heed of backsliding: If any man draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him, etc. Saint Peter says, It had been better they had not known
the way of righteousness, Heb. 10.38.
then after they knew it, to turn from those heavenly commands given unto
them. 2 Pet. 2.21.

If you shall demand,

Regenerate, may totally fall; because God has expressly promised, that he will
make to his Servants an everlasting covenant, That he will not turn from them
to do them good,: but will put his fear into their hearts, that they may not
depart from him. Jer. 32.40. And if ye do these things, ye shall never fall,
says Saint Peter. 2.1.10. If you examine the verses before, you shall find
that the adding of grace to grace, is a good means to prevent backsliding;
for grace is of a preservative power, that if a Christian be once ingrafted
into Christ by Regeneration, and add grace to grace, he can never totally, and
finally, fall from grace: I deny not but the Child of God may fall from some
degree of that grace, which he has had in former times, he may fall with David
in some gross sins, he may fall from the sense and feeling of Gods grace, and
think himself utterly deprived of grace; and this may be by reason of some
strong and powerful temptation, as in David: or bad company is many times the
fall of Gods children, as the impious high Priests wicked servants, prompted
Peter to deny his Master; or the fear of some persecution, and loss of great
men's favor, or some such natural infirmity, does prove to be the fall of
many; there may be this lapsus, or fall, in the best of Gods servants that are
truly Regenerate; but there is in them again, a rising by Repentance, which
preserves them from perishing; for God has put his fear into their hearts,
that they may not depart from him. I confess that an hypocrite that seems to
be regenerate, and is not, that seems to have saving grace, may with Judas and
Demas, fall from that which he seems to have; because they that embrace the
profession for by-ends, as for profit, or carnal respects, as to please
others, such a profession as is emrbaced for such causes, must needs cease when
the cause is ceased; for he that in Hypocrisy begins a profession, commonly in
Apostacy ends it; but Lord put thou thy fear in our hearts, that we might
never depart from thee. Jer. 32.40. That this exhortation might be more
prevalent: I shall endeavor, first, to remove those lets that may hinder our
growth, and then prescribe some helps to farther it, that the lets being
discovered might be avoided, and helps being prescribed might be embraced.

The first let, is not living under the means of grace, 1. Let.
that doctrine of the Gospel, that Ipsissimum dei verbum, the very Word of God,
living not under the sunshine of the Gospel may hinder our growth; I dare not
say that all that live under the means of grace, therefore necessarily do
attain unto grace. No we see Plants and Stones, wet with the moisture of the
same clouds; warmed with the beams of the same Sun, the Plants grow; yet you
discern no alteration of the Stones: So there are many that live in the
sunshine of the Gospel, and have the fructifying dewes of Gods grace,
plentifully shoured upon them; yet their hearts are so cold and hard, that it
neither warmes, nor mollifies them: so that no growth at all can be discerned
in them; can there be any growth expected, either in our Popish recusants, that
resuse the word of grace, or in our wordly recusants, that absent themselves
from it? How can Faith either be begot or increased in any that neglect the
Word, and live out of the climate, or compaste of grace: Saint Paul says, Romans
16.17.
Faith comes by hearing, not by seeing, not by feeling, but by hearing; the
fire of Faith is not kindled in us without hearing.

Slighting the preaching of the Word, 2. Let.
and neglecting the hearing of the same; when as preaching is the Pipe, our
ears the Channel to convey grace from Christ the Fountain, into the Cisterne
of our souls: so that the reason why many grow not, because either this grace
is tendered, but not embraced, or embraced, but not improved: when we come to a
neighbors feast, we strive to be there first; but how slow are we in coming
to feast at Gods house, unto many soule-fatting days have we been invited, to
feast our lean starved souls; but we come not our selves, but send our
excuses, one has bought a farm, he must go to see it, he cannot come;
another has married a wife, and though he be earnestly invited, yet he cannot
come, can these excuses be taken: Postponetur deus bovibus, qui nos aequavit
Angelis; When God is set behind your oxen, who has made you equal with his
Angels: or shall a wife keep you from coming, it were better to live alone,
then to have such a help; if lawful business might not hinder our coming,
much less, sporting, and revelling, sleeping, or drinking. What if some heavy
sickness, when thou art sporting or playing should visit thee, such a
playfellow will presently turn a marmirth? and it had been better that he had
found thee praying, then playing. What if thou when thou art sleeping, grimme
Death should take thee napping, and cast thee into thy last sleep; had it not
been better that he had found thee praying in the Church, then sleeping at
home? what if when thou art drinking while thou should be hearing, the King
of fear should make that draught thy last? had it not been better that he had
found thee praying, reading, or hearing; then playing, sleeping, or drinking.
Many judgments may fall upon men, for their absence from the house of God.
Keep then within the spear of grace, and then the God of grace will keep
you; let it be your joy, and rejoicing, as it was David's, to go into the house
of God; David pronounced them blessed that dwelt in Gods house: Ps 84.4.
dwelling implies a continual residence there, our children must be there, our
servants there, our hearts and affections there, that if Christ should come, he
might find us rather in the house of prayer, then in the den of thieves.

The abuse of the doctrine of grace, 3. Let.
which is the Gospel, or the promise of grace, covenants; Sacraments. When we
prize not the doctrine of grace, when we make it not our portion, and account
it not our chief treasure; many make it their talk, and others their
pretense; and these are accounted good gospelers; but where is the man that makes
it his chief delight, that earnestly hearkens to its commands, that willingly
submits himself to be molded by it: we do not acknowledge that it is
Evangelium, a message sent unto us from God, as a token of his love, containing
the means how we may be saved: and so much Saint Paul includes in those words
to the Jews; Act. 13.26.
to you is the word of Salvation sent: Now if God send it, and we slight it,
God cannot choose but take it ill at our hands: put the case the King should
find us rebellious subjects, Traitors to his Highness, violating his laws,
abusing his ambassadors; it cannot be denied, but such Traitors deserve
terrible tortures; yet grant that he out of his love, and princely clemency to
his subjects, should send often times his servants, with messages of peace, which
contains the means and way how thou may be saved; would it not incense his
Majesty the more, if thou should slight his message, and despise his
messengers, scarce giving them the hearing: Even so the God of Heaven, the King
of Kings has sent his Gospel unto us, his rebellious subjects, containing a
way whereby we may be brought to Salvation, and be perpetually preserved from
perishing, yet if we neglect this benefit, slight this message, abuse his
Ambassador, God cannot choose but be provoked, his wrath much incensed, and we
must needs expect punishment, correspondent to our rebellion; answerable to
our ingratitude, which were the intolerable torments of an eternal Tophet.

And Secondly, we abuse the promise of grace, by deriving, an encouragement,
and boldness to finne; because God is gracious, and merciful; they will go
on in their ungracious courses, with this encouragement, that God is gracious,
and make this the burden of their song, that God is merciful, and makes Gods
mercy, a pack-horse for his iniquity, and conceives God to be all composed with
mercy, and no Justice; but God might fitly be compared, to the Be which is
full of sweet honey; but being provoked, we shall find him to have a sting: So
God is full of sweet mercy; but if we provoke him by our impenitent sins,
and abuse his merciful promises, we shall find that he has justice to punish
us for our offenses: will you hear Gods pleading with his mercy against
ungracious men, that stand guilty at the bar of Gods Tribunal.

Mercy pleades; Psa. 111.4.
I am full of compassion, slow to anger and of great kindness; I will not
deal with him according to his sins, Psa 103 10
nor reward him according to his iniquities Ps. 103.10

Justice sharply answers, Deu. 32.35.
vengeance is mine, and I will repay it: as for his sin, I am of purer eyes,
Hab. 1.23.
then to behold his iniquity; But mercy pleades, Isa. 1.18
though his sins be as red as scarlet, yet I will make them as white as snow;
Jer. 31.34.
I Will blot out all his sins, and remember his iniquities no more. But justice
answers, Jude 4.
he has turned my grace into wantonness, he has departed from me; and
therefore shall he perish. But mercy answers, Ephe. 2.10.
they are the workmanship of mine own hands, you know whereof they are made,
Psalm. 103.14.
Remember they are but dust.

But Justice says, They have added iniquity to iniquity, Ezech. 7.8.
let me pour the fury of my wrath upon them. But mercy pleades, Ezech. 33.11.
I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he repent him of his
wickedness, and live.

Justice answers; he has abused my grace that I offered him, and lives still
in his unrepented sins; nay, Reve. 2.21.
I have given him time to repent him of them, but he would not, therefore shall
he perish. Now mercy is silent, and stops her ears, when she sees the sinner
has abused her; now she gives place to Justice to pass the sentence of
judgment on the ungracious impenitent sinner. Take not then boldness to sin
with presumption of Gods mercy, for God has but two ways to deal with us;
By his sweet mercy, or by his just judgment: He has tried by his mercy, but
that has not wrought upon us; that we have abused. Now we must expect that
he should deal justly with judgment, and if this will not prevail with us,
and work upon us, there is no hope of us: then Lord have mercy upon us.
Therefore, let us either renounce our interest and title we have in our sins
and iniquities, or else of necessity, all interest or title we challeng to Gods
mercy, or Christ's merits. When the mercy of God is abused by wretched men, when
Christ's merits shall embolden men to commit that for which he dyed, they seem
to cast their sins behind them on the back of Christ's merits; and so ride
swiftly with mercy in their mouths to hell.

And thirdly, When we abuse the pledges of grace, which are the Sacraments.

Either of Baptism, Baptism; and there every Christian is initiated into
Christ's Kingdom, and takes his oath to be a true subject to Christ his
Captain; to renounce the world, the flesh, and the devil. We have done thus
and thus; and have taken Christ to be our Prophet, that he may show the way
that leads to happiness; and were willing to take him to be our Priest, that
he may purchase for us eternal glory: but when he should be our King to
govern us, to rule and reign over us, to bridle our usurping lusts, to
restrain our rebelling wills; this we cannot away withal: our unruly lusts,
our untamed wills, and obstinate hearts, will then renounce our oath, and we
will show our selves disloyal subjects to our Sovereign, disclaiming that
oath we took in Baptism.

So in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; Sacrament signifies an oath: so that
to receive the Sacrament, is to take an oath, to forsake our former sins and
lusts, and to walk more watchful for the time to come: we covenant with God to
deal with our sins, as our sins dealt with our Savior; they crucified
him, and put him to death. So we should crucify and put them to death; but if
we do neglect this, forget our covenant, following our former sins,
returning like a dog to his vomit again, we proclaim our selves perjured
persons: I have read a story to this purpose, that when the Pagan, beheld
Christians receiving the Sacrament; and beheld with what reverence, and with
what devotion they demeaned themselves in that holy business, he was
inquisitive what that action meant; and being answered by one of them, that
after God had emptied their hearts of pride, envy, coveteousnesse, contention,
etc. He did now enter in himself with a purpose to dwell there. Then he was
silent for the present, but following them home, and observing them (that were
communicants) for two days; and when he saw them fall to quarrel one with
another, to uncleanesse, and drunkenness, he past this censure upon them, with
exclamation: I confess your Religion may be good, your devotion good, your
profession good; but your hospitality is stark naught: are you so unhospitable
that you would not suffer your God to dwell two days in your hearts, in these
words; Apud quos ne Deus quidem biduo comorari permittitur. This is the shame
of Christians; this is the disparagement of grace; and these are the lets that
hinder our growth. We will prescribe you now some helps to further your
growth. Prayer: and I may well begin with it, for it is a special help to all
graces; it is that Clavis Coeli, which opens the treasure-house of Gods graces;
it is that Nuncius Dei, that fetches grace to the soul. Prayer procures it a
being in us, and like the former, and latter rain, makes it grow in us: if
thou would grow continually, take the Apostles advice, and pray continually;
1 These. 5.17.
this course Monica Saint Austines mother took, she went twice a day to the
Church, and kneeling down upon her knees, poured forth many tears from her
eyes, not begging gold, or silver, of God; but that he would be pleased to
pour his grace upon her son, and convert him to the true faith: and thus
must we do; otherwise, in vain may we expect that blessing of grace; for
which we do not so much as beg: if thou lack grace, ask of of God, Jam. 1.5.
that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth none, and it shall be given
him. Dare vult deus, S. Aug
sed non dat nisi petenti, ne det non capienti. God is willing to give, but he
will not give, but to him that asks; least he offer his blessing to him that
is not willing to receive it; it is a general rule, Petite, et dabitur vobis;
ask and have, without asking no having. The second is a good desire; which is
the spiritual appetite of the soul: that man-child that has a good
appetite, or stomach, is like to prove a growing child: So it is with the
regenerate man, finding his wants and emptiness of grace; has a continual
desire of more grace, and labors to increase that which he has received; he
considers with himself, how far short he comes of what he might have
obtained, and what others have obtained; or if the best of us shall compare our
selves with those of Gods servants, who are mentioned in holy Scripture, for
our imitation, we shall find our selves come so short of them, that we may
doubt of our selves, whether we have any grace at all.

How short are we of Moses, for meekness; how far short do we come of
Nehemiah, in zeal for Gods worship; how short of Job in patience, in the time
of his affliction: and thus comparing our selves with Gods Saints, we shall
find we come so short of them, that it will stir up our desires, and whet
our appetites; it makes us press harder toward the mark; And study what
course to take, that we may fill up those virtues that are wanting in us, that
we might increase those Talents that God has bestowed upon us; that we might
get more grains of grace, unto that little which we have received; and when
the Lord shall perceive our desires, to be thus sharpened, it will be a good
argument to move the Lord to bestow more grace upon us: for he loves to feed
the hungry, and give drink to the thirsty: Boethius says, Quod unicuique viro
bono incerto est quaedam cupiditas boni, That in every good man, there is a
fervent desire of more good; and what good can any man desire, rather then
grace; Non dormientibus, sed vigilantibus, It falls not to the sluggards share,
but those that are desirers of it. Therefore he that desires not grace,
deserves not glory. food, a good help to further the growth of the soul: The
best food is Christ, that bread of life, that water of life, that word of
life, nay, life it self. If you remain in me says our Savior, ye shall
bring forth much fruit. This word is offered unto us, in the Word and
Sacrament; for what sin soever the Word discovers to us, we must run to
Christ for strength to overcome it: what obedience the Word commands, we must
fly to Christ for power to perform it: what affliction soever we are burdened
with, we must hasten to Christ, and seek to be reconciled to God, in and
through him: so that come crosses, come tribulation, or persecution; yet our
hungry souls shall fully feed on Christ, that true bread of life. Ignatius.
As Ignatius, Bish. of Antioch, Saint Peter's successor, who was by the King of
Assyria, commanded to be torn in pieces by wild beasts; and being led to the
place of torment, uttered this golden sentence: Nihil moror visibiium, nec
invisibilium, modo Jesum Christum acquiram: I care neither for things visible,
nor yet for things invisible, only this is my care that I may attain Jesus
Christ, and with him everlasting Salvation.

And when the Beasts were let loose upon him, these were his last words, as
says Saint Hierome; I am Gods corn, and the teeth of these wild Beasts must
grind me to pieces, that I may be pure bread, and sine manchet, for Jesus
Christ's table in heaven.

The Saints of God did so hunger after Christ, the spiritual food; that before
they would loose that, they would loose life it self: they did not care what
course fare their bodies were fed with, so that Christ the food of their
souls, might not be taken away: they did not care how their bodies were used,
so that God would spare their souls: and he that feeds on this living bread,
which came down from Heaven cannot choose but grow: Out of this strong, Judges
14.14.
came sweetness.

The Lion of Juda yields honey, such as never came out of any earthly hive; he
is both Victor and Victus; Conqueror for us, and food to us; and who gives this
food to us, but he that gave himself for us, and drank to us the cup of the
New Testament, in his own blood: his blood and wounds does nourish our souls
like the Pelican; rather then her yong-ones shall perish, feeds them with her
own blood; so that in the Sacrament, we eat not only Panem Domini, but Panem
Dominum, not only the bread of the Lord, but the bread the Lord.

Hence it may be called Viaticum animae, the food that nourishes our souls, in
it is voyage to heaven. God grant that we may never want this food, to nourish
our hunger starved souls. It may be dear in regard of the preciousnesse of
it; but not dear in regard of the price, we pay nothing for it, but faith,
and love. John 6.34.
Let us all pray with the Disciples; Lord evermore give us this bread.

Why should our souls be starved, while there is bread enough in our fathers
house? Luke 15.17.
Why should we fast, while we may feast? why should we stand at a stay, while
we have plenty of growing food.

Let us Christians be like travelers, that pass from town, to town, till
they come to their home; so we from grace to grace, till we come to Heaven. is
a good disgestion; when the natural food is conveied into the stomach, and
there well concocted by natural heat; and is made fit to be dispersed into
the other members, and parts of the body, for the strengthening of them: so the
Word of God must be disgested in the soul; must be showed by meditation, and
pondring the word in our hearts, suffering our thoughts to dwell on it some
good while: then it proves wholesome nourishment to our weak and hungry souls.
Your coming to hear, does manifest a desire to have your souls fed. Now you
know a child that receives food in his mouth, and also in his stomach, and
does not retain it there, but casts it up speedily again, does not digest
it; and that child's strength cannot be augmented, nor growth increased: So if
you receive the Word into your ears, and let it fall again speedily, and not
retain it in your hearts, and there digest it by meditation; your souls
cannot be strengthened, and cannot grow at all. We must remember, that God does
not require our bare bodily presence at the Church, or at any of his
ordinances; but we must bring our souls to Church, as well as our bodies; we
may be present with body, but absent in mind; our mind must be set on what is
delivered: we must hear as it is the Word of God, and not of man, as it is the
only means appointed for the planting of grace in our hearts; as it is a
powerful means to beat down sin in us, and build us up in the new man,
and to change our barrenness, into fruitfulness. Thus if we would digest the
Word of God, the God of Heavens would not fail to give his blessing to it. To
make it powerful to Salvation, to every one of our souls; causing us daily to
bring forth more fruit of good living, to the honor and praise of his holy
name. We must know that the Word of God is full of spiritual sap, and heavenly
moisture, which is of a fruitful, and growing nature; now we might be growing
Christians, if we were not slothful: let us be no longer sluggards to our own
souls; But practice the policy of the painful Be, to lodge the sweet honey,
of Gods Word, in the hive of our hearts, against the day of dissolution. If we
had any love to grace, we would labor after the means of grace: we see what
pains the voluptuous man takes, to pursue his pleasures; we see what labor
the ambitious man takes, to attain to more honors; we see what care the
coveteous man takes, to obtain riches; and why should not we that are
Christians, and somewhat illuminated with Gods word; use the like pains, care,
and diligence, to increase the goods of our souls, and labor to get a higher
degree of this spiritual promotion, and strive to enjoy a fuller fruition of
heavenly pleasures. There is no commodity, so profitable, no dignity, so
honorable, no felicity, so delightful, as to be fruitful in good works, and
to abound more, and more, in the virtues, of the inward man, and the grace of
Gods blessed Spirit.

Therefore good Christians, if ever you desire, to be accounted good Scholars
in Christ's School, if ever you will visit the universitie of glory, if ever
you purpose to be placed in the Paradise of God himself; Grow then in grace,
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to him be glory,
both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprimatur.

CHARLES HERLE.


