A Few WORDS Minding the REPRESENTATIVE OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND How
they may pay their Armies, and ease the People of their Taxes, which have a
long time been a heavy burden upon the poorer sort.

And the sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the great River Euphrates, and
the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the Kings of the East might be
prepared.

Rev. 16. 12. WILLIAM BANES.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold at the Black-spread-Eagle near the west
end of Paul's, 1659.

A few words, minding the Representative of the Commonwealth of England, how
they may pay their Armies, and ease the People of their Taxes.
AS every one that is a true Believer which has felt and tasted of the good
word of life, the anointing which teaches all things, Jesus Christ revealed
and made manifest within, does know and can witness the fulfilling of the
prophesies in himself; so is there also, and shall be a fulfilling of them
without in the world, among the Nations. The City of Babylon was situated on
an Island in the River Euphrates, so that the waters did encompass the City
that nothing could pass or come to it but by virtue and benefit of the Waters
of the River; and this was that great City which was so eminent among the
Nations for her great Idolatry; and against this City the Prophets did
prophecy, Esaias 46. 47. Ier. 50. 38. 51. 74. 52. 47. and this City of Babylon
was a figure of Mystery Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots, and
abominations of the earth; and the whole National Clergy, or Parochial Curates
and Priests, with all their Attendants, and the Steeplehouses and Academies,
and those which send them forth; this whole rabble (in all nations which call
themselves Christians) is this Mystery Babylon, the great Whore that sits
upon many Waters, and corrupts the earth, and with whom the kings of the
earth have committed fornication, and the inhabiters of the Earth have been
made drunk with the wine of her fornications: Rev. 17. 2. 5. 18. 3. 11. 19. 2.
and this is found true here in England by woeful experience; for are not our
false self-erected Priests as bad as those which the Prophets called greedy
dumb dogs, that sought their gain from their quarter, and could never have
enough; which preached for hire, and divined for money, and speak peace to the
wicked for the gift sake; but if it was not put into their mouths they prepared
war against them: And these are the Merchants of the earth which are waxed
rich through the abundance of her delicacies, and they shall weep and mourn
over her, for no man buyeth their Merchandise any more: These are sayers and
not doers, and love to be called of men Master, and bind heavy burdens upon
the people: Isa. 56. Jer. 5. 23. Mich. 3. 5. Matthew. 23. it is time for us to go
out from Babel, from these Antichristian shepherds, who goes into the
sheepfold at the theevish backdoor, covering their Wickedness with Christ's
sufferings and death, and with false hypocrisy to please men for their favor
and reward; and is not all done for money? And by the wit and subtilty of this
Whore of Babel, are the people lead on to hypocritical ways: She boasts much
of her faith, and leads people on in an historical faith, which is but mere
notion: She teaches the notion, and he that does not stick to that is counted
an Heretic: She is big with darkness and wrath, and yet she always cries
out, Here is the true church, flock all hither; yes, run after the Whore of
Babel who is big with stately pride; give something toward her childbed that
she may satisfy her hypocritical stinking pride: She is like a Whore, who when
she is said to be a whore, will not endure it, but curse and rail; and so also
when the spirit of truth lays her open, then she cries, O Heretiok, Heretic,
begone from him all of you, the Devil is in him: Thus is the spirit of God
miscalled, because they do not know it: And the sixth Angel poured out: etc.

And the Waters of the River Euphrates which encompassed the city Babylon were
a figure of the corrupt and unjust Laws of the Nations, by virtue of which this
My-Mystery Babylon does demand and exact from the people their undeserved hire,
and ill-gotten reward, and it does bring them a curse along with it, as may be
seen generally in their posterities.

And now oh Parliament of England see with your own eyes, and look inward and
discern the signs of the times; and between the righteous and the wicked;
between him that serves the Lord, and him that serves him not; and in regard
the tithe or tenth of the increase of the earth is due and payable from the
people to the State, and it amounting to such a vast revenue, let it be given
no longer to such an undeserving and unthankful generation of men as the
Priests of these Nations are; but let it be employed to maintain our Armies
against the enemies and disturbers of our peace, of which the Priests are
chief; so that it may no more assist (as now it does) our spiritual enemy the
Devil in his agents the wi^ked Priests; many of which like hell hounds being
greedy after the blood of the righteous, by stirring up the unjust Magistrate
against them, have procured their imprisonment till death. Oh horrible
wickedness, that the chief Magistrates has connived at these things! for
which, together with their pride, the Lord has cut them off in their full
strength. Christ does not send out his messengers to be persecuters, as Wolves
among sheeep: but his must be as sheep among wolves: but this Whore of Babel is
a great devouring wolf, and she is one and the same in all Nations, only there
is some difference in her garb and dress: and now let it appear that the Lord
has chosen you to be his instruments to do his work, whereby our Nation of
England, and its Dominions may be happy in being the first, that falls off
from her spiritual Idolatry. Consider how the Almighty has situated this
Nation, in his infinite providence: that it might be an example and a
forerunner to other Nations in doing his great work. We have seen the pouring
forth of the fifth vial upon the seat of the Beast in this Nation, viz. the
Antichristian Magistrate, and his kingdom (viz. his party) full of darkness,
and how at this very time they do gnaw their tongues for pain and madness, and
how the Lord has cut him off that set himself up in this seat, not having
regard to do his work: and now the sixth angel is pouring forth his vial in
this Nation, and the great allowance whereby the Antichristian priesthood is
maintained and kept up in their stately pride, must be taken away, wherefore be
ye willing to do the Lords work, in this the day of his power. Rev. 16. 19. and
your enemies, though more then ten for one, shall be as dust before the wind,
and as stubble to the fire; for they are the blind, zealous, self-conceited,
Pharisaical hypocrites, with the priests, and the blackmouth'd, ignorant, rude
multitude, and though you do it not, yet ^e ye sure this work shall be done
before this generation (which are now grown men) pass away; remember Jehu, and
others: therefore do ye not the Lords work to halfs, and be ye sure that you
leave none of those waters running in the channel of that river, but let it be
made quite dry, that the kings of the earth may pass without any let or
hindrance; for they do bring the message of truth, and deliver it freely, not
demanding any reward, it is glad tidings of great joy, a revealing of the
mystery that has been hid from ages, and these are the true Magi, or wise men
(though fools in the worlds account) that have seen the morning star of the Son
of righteousness, the light of Jesus Christ in the soul, the voice of him who
is the Son of God, by an eternal generation, calling to the sons of men, and
checking their consciences in the first motion or thoughts of committing sin,
saying, This is the way, walk in it; and whosoever says this is natural, is a
liar, and shall have his portion with them; and by hearkening to this voice,
and following of this light, they have found him whom their soul loves, that
pearl of great price, which makes them sell all their own righteousness and
earthly vanity to buy it, which is the true Messiah, Christ now made manifest
within; and they freely and willingly shows all, how they found him, and
where he dwells, but none regards, nor will go to see, saving those who are
true Israelites indeed. And these are those which the world (out of scorn and
Antichristian fury) rails at and calls them Quakers, not considering the
Scriptures, which says, they, and they only are Gods people, who are humble
and resigned in him, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at his word, Isa.
66. 25. Babel makes a great stir, and talks much of the Scriptures, but
makes no other use of them, but only to palliate or cloak their ungodly
vicious lives, but these people are those which do make the right use of the
Scriptures, because they do understand them; for they have the true key, the
revealing mystery within them, which is the hidden Manna, the white stone, the
new name written, which no man knows, saving he that receives it, there is a
continual giving and receiving of the flowings of life. As for my own
particular I am a stranger to these people as to the outward (being in my
Calling a Surgeon, having been a servant to this commonwealth, abroad in
their armies ever since the Earl of Essex marched forth of London, and these
last ten years in the Service of Ireland) but in their heavenly Doctrine my
soul is knit to them, and I can witness it, and set to my seal, that it is the
truth, as it is in Jesus. Happy were England if it did know its own good, in
having these people in it; but the contemners of them, will one day see their
error, to their eternal misery, when they shall cry out as Solomon says in
his book of Wisdom 3. chap. 2. v. in the sight of the unwise shepherd to dye,
and their end was thought grievous, and their departing from us destruction,
but they are in peace. chapter 5. v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. when they see him, they shall
be vexed with horrible fear, and shall be amazed for his wonderful
deliverance, and shall change their minds, and sigh for grief of mind, and say
within themselves, This is he whom we sometime had in derision, and in a
parable of reproach: we fools thought his life madness, and his end without
honor. How is he counted among the children of God, and his portion is among
the saints! therefore we have erred from the way of truth, and the light of
righteousness hat^ not shined unto us, and the son of understanding rose not
upon us. Woe to those that cherish vice, and discountenance virtue, but happy
shall he be that choseth rather to suffer affliction with the people of God,
then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

THE END.

