THE ATTVRNEYS GVIDE, FOR Suing out of Fines, Concords, and Recoveries, etc,
BEING Choice and Exact Presidents for all sorts of Fines, Concords and
Recoveries.

Together with full Instructions in all proceedings relating thereunto, and the
certain charges of the same.

With a Table of all the Particulars.

Perused and Approved by G. T. an able Practioner, and others.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Tho. Firby, and are to be sold at his Shop, near
Gray's Inn Gate, 1656.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THis Treatise was at first intended only for Private use, but having been
perused by some Eminent Practizers of the Law, and Commended by them to be of
Public benefit and concernment, I have adventured (with their advice) to
present it to thee in Print. I hope thou will reap so much benefit by it, as
will (at least) deserve thy acceptance; However pass favorably by what Errors
thou find, and thou shall in as great a matter oblige both the Printer, and

Thy Friend, I. B.

The Definition of a Fine.
IT appears by many Writers of the Common Law; That a Fine is nothing but a
friendly composition, or final concord had between persons of and concerning
any lands or tenements, rent or other thing hereditable, being in esse tempore
finis, acknowledged and recorded formerly by the consent and license of the
King, now of the Lord Protector, or his Justices before a competent Judge, to
the end to cut off all controversies, that neither of the parties litigant from
it may after depart. And therefore well may it be said to be fructus exitus,
and finis legis. Plo. fol. 357. If we but consider that the Law was made to no
other end than to settle peace.

In every Fine there are two several parties, the Cognisor, and the Cognisee,
the party levying the Fine is called the Cognisor, and he to whom it is levied
is called the Cognisee: There are five essential parts in a Fine: first, the
original writ taken out against the Cognisor: the Kings license formerly so
called, giving the parties liberty to accord, for which he had a Fine called
the Kings silver, being accounted a part the Crowns revenue. Thirdly the
Concord it self, which thus begins. Et est concordia talis, etc. Fourthly
the note of the Fine, which is an abstract of the original concord, and
begins thus. ss inter R. quaerentem, and S. and E. Uxorem ejus desorcientes,
etc. Fifthly the foot of the Fine, which begins in this manner. Haec est
finalis concordia facta in curia Domini Protectoris apud Westminster. a die Pasche in
quindecim dies, anno, etc. so that the foot of the Fine includes all
containing the day, year and place, and before what Justices the Concord was
made. Coke, v. 6. cas. Teye. fo. 3* 8, 39.

There are two sorts of Fines, the one at Common Law, the other levied and
proclaimed according to the Statute.

1 R. 3. cap. 7. 4 H. 7. cap. 24. 32. 14. 8. cap. 36.
In the levying and proclaiming of a Fine, two several Statutes are chiefly to
be considered; the one of them is the Statute of 1 R. 3. chap. 7. The other is
the Statute of 4 H. 7. chap. 24. being in some thing afterward explained by a
Statute made in Anno 32. H. 8. chap. 36. The Proclamations are four, and are to
be made four several Terms, as hereafter shall be expressed. Concerning Fines
with Proclamations, 5 things are to be observed. 1 The time of levying and
proclaiming the same. 2 The place where, and before whom it is to be levied. 4
What Ceremonies therein are to be observed. 5 the several times are to be
observed and considered First that the Fine be levied after the Feast of
Easter, which was in the year of our Lord 1496. for all Fines levied before
that time are out of the compass of this Statute. 4 H. 7. as it appeateth by
the letter of the same Statute. 2 That the Proclamation must be made in time of
the Term, and therefore if any of those proclamations do happen to be made,
either before the beginning, or after the end of any Term, or on a Sunday, or
other festival day, exempted from the Term, as on the Feast day of the
Purification of St. Mary the Virgin, Ascension day, All Saints, All Souls, or
on the Feast day of St. John Baptist, if it happen on any other day than on the
Friday next after Trinity Sunday, and to be recorded accordingly, then if it be
not helped by the Statute of 23. Eliz. cap. 3. all the Proclamations are
reversable by a Writ of error, or by plea; as it appears in Finches case,
Plow. com. 266, 267. and then the Fine will be of no other nature and force,
than a Fine without proclamations. And albeit the Proclamations were all made
within the Terms according to the form of the Statute; yet if the record or
records, do purport the contrary, they are reversable by error, or avoidable by
plea, if it be not helped by the said Statute; for a record is of that credit
in law, that no averment may be admitted to the contrary.

A Fine does for ever conclude, and bar as well privies as strangers to the
same, except such strangers as are women covert (other than be parties to the
Fine) and every other person being within age, viz. the age of 21 years, in
Prison or out of this Realm, or not of whole mind at the time of such Fine
levied. But this exception is conditional, viz. that they or their heirs
inheritable to the same lands, etc. do take their action or lawful entry
(according to their right and title they have to the Tenements therein
contained, at time of the engrossing thereof) within 5 years next after they be
of full age of 21 years, out of prison, uncovert within this Realm, and of
whole mind.

Now let us see who are privies, and who are strangers to a Fine, according to
the Statute there are three privities only. 1 privity in blood only. 2 privity
in Estate only. 3 privity in blood and estate.

There are three kinds of privities. 1 in blood tantum. 1 one when a man is
heir to his late Ancestor, and yet has nothing by descent from him. As for
example, if a father seized of lands in Fee does thereof infeoffe a stranger
and his heirs, or if he by his last Will and Test. in writing did dispose the
same being holden in soccage, to another in Fee, and has issue and dies in
this case, such issue is privy in blood, having nothing by descent.

2 Another kind of privity in blood, is, when something is descended unto him,
as heir unto his Ancestor, and yet he claims the same by some other right;
and not as heir to such an Ancestor. As for example, if there be a Father and
Son, and the Son purchases lands of a stranger in Fee, and is there of
disseised by his Father, who dies thereof seized, and the same descend to his
Son, a^ heir in this case, the Son is privy also in blood, but not in estate,
for although the possession of the same land came to him by descent, as heir to
his father, yet he was therein remitted forthwith to his former estate.

3 And a third kind of privitie in blood tantum, is where a man in some respect
is privy in blood and estate, and in another respect privy in blood tantum. As
for example, if there be two brothers, and the eldest purchases lands in Fee,
is thereof disseised by his younger brother, afterward disseised by a stranger,
and that stranger dies thereof seized, the younger brother being within age,
and afterward the elder brother dies without issue, the younger Son has two
manner of rights to the land, the one is a right of entry against such heir as
is in by descent during his minority, but that right is only in respect of his
former possession, which he obtained by disseisen, and not as heir to his
brother, and in this respect he is privy in blood to his eldest brother, but
not privy in estate. The other right that is now in the younger brother, is
only a right in action, and not a right of entry, and this is in him as heir to
his brother, whose entry was taken away by the said descent, in respect of his
right, he is privy in blood and estate to his brother.

Privity in estate tantum, is where a man claims an estate in land, as
assignee to another; as if A infeoffe B. in this case, B. and his heirs are
privy in estate to A. Privity in blood and in estates are of two sorts, whereof
the one may properly be called a privity of blood and estate, the other is so
called improperly, and in a borrowed sense. That which is properly called a
privity in blood and estate, is when both privities do acrew by descent, by or
from one Ancestor. The other is, when one of them acreweth by one manner of
title, and the other by title of another kind; as for example, if there be a
father and a son, and the father purchases lands, and dies thereof seized,
and the same does descend to his Son, he is to his father in a proper sense
privy in blood and estate, because both those privities do to him acrew, by
one descent from one Ancestor.

It is to be noted that such privies as the Statute means are after the
engrossing of the Fine and Proclam. made according to the form of the Statute,
absolutely barred without hope of recovery or restraint, by any claim; but such
as are strangers, are barred only conditionally, if they or their heirs, do not
claim according to the form of the Statute, within the times therein
prescribed. It is a rule in Law, that no error in the fault of the Judge can be
assigned to reverse a Judgment, unless it may be tried by view of the Record,
or by inspection of the person; for if it should, many grave Judgments would
be overthrown by corrupt trials of false surmises, to the subversion of
Justice, and maintenance of Vice: But if the Judge give Judgment for the one
party, upon the matter appearing of record, whereas he ought to give judgment
for the other party, this is reversible by error, because such a fault of the
Judge through ignorance of the Law, is apparent by the view of the Record,

What persons may be Cognisors in Fines, and what not.
AN Infant ought not to be Cognisor especially if it be a Feme covert, for that
she cannot reverse it during the coverture, which continuing till she come to
full age barreth her for ever. 50 E. 3. fo. 5. 21. Ass. 53.

7 H. 4. s. 23. 43 E. 3. f. 20.
Also no feme covert ought to levy any Fine without her husband, is avoidable
by the entry of him, yet since a Fine levied at this day and proclamation
according to the form of the said estate of 4 H. 7. 31 Eliz. cannot be avoided
by the entry of the Husband, of the Cognisor, as to the estate of inheritance,
but only to the frank tenement, during the Coverture, and so long afterward as
he shall be tenant by the courtesy, if he had issue by his said Wife before the
Fine levied. And in that case albeit the Husband do enter in 5 years, or before
Proclamations had and made, the feme and her heirs are barred as privies to the
Fine; the words of the said Statute of 4 H. 7. be, the Fine to be a final end,
and conclude as well privies as strangers; and yet all strangers shall not be
barred by such Fine: The King is no such stranger as is comprised in the the
said Act; for if the Lawmakers had meant to conclude the King thereby of his
right, then it is not to be doubted (his greatness being such as it could not
be forgotten) but they would have made some provision for his claim, which
thing they have not done, because they never intended to conclude him; but
others being bodies corporate of things that go by way of succession, are
comprised in this word (strangers) in the body of the Act. And yet they are not
contained in the letter of exception, or of any of the savings which do save
r^ghts to men and their heirs, speaking nothing of Corporations or successions,
or of any thing in succession.

He which intrudeth upon the Kings possession ought not to be Cognisor, for his
Fine is void, for by his entry upon the King after office, and before livery
sued, he gains no freehold. 1 H. 7. fo. 9. 24 E. 3. f. 65; but if the Fine be
levied without intrusion, it binds the Cognisor and his heirs, if the Husband
levies a Fine of his wives land without her, it is void. 32 H. 8. c. 28.

If a woman be Cognisor she ought to be examined, whether she do of her own
free will, or by compulsion of her Husband, but being Cognisee she is not to be
examined, because it is for her benefit. 3 H. 6. f. 42. E. 3. f. 7.

A Woman may not levy a Fine of such lands, etc. as she has in Dower,
Jointure, or for her life, or in tail of the gift of her husband, or of any of
his Ancestors, or of any person seized to his use, upon pain to loose her
estate. 11 H. 7. c. 20.

Neither an Idiot natural, nor any other person of non sane memory ought to be
Cognisors, for their Fines (as it seems) may not be reversed. 17 E. 3. f. 52.
and 78. 17 Ass. 17.

A Tenant for life may not, without danger to forfeit his estate, be Cognisor
in a Fine upon grant and render; but upon a grant and release he may. 44. E. 3.
f. 36.

And he may also be Cognisee in a Fine of release, without forfeiture of his
estate. 1 H. 7. f. 9.

Rent cannot be reserved upon a Fine sur cognizance de droit come ceo que il
cognisee ad del done de cognisor, nor sur fine sur release, otherwise than by
render, because such Fines execute the estate in the Cognisee forthwith. But
upon Fines executorie; as Fines sur cognizance de droit only, or sur grant,
rents may be reserved, for upon those estates are executorie. 5 E. 3. 50 and 39.

It is requisite that either the Cognisor, or the Cognisee be seized of the
lands contained in the Fine, at the very time of the levying thereof, for if
they be not, the Fine is void. 27 H. 8. f. 4. 22 H. 6. f. 47. 5. E. 3.

Nevertheless a Fine between the Vouchee and the Demandant is good, by reason
of the privitie which is between them, for that he is as it were Tenant in Law.
5. H. 7. f 41, and 8 H. 45.

What persons may be Cognisees in Fines.
ALL lawful subjects may take benefit by Fine, whether they be of full age, or
within age, or Femes Coverts, or Idiots, or men of non sane memory, imprisoned
within or without the Realm, or bodies Civil. And if a Feme covert be Cognisee,
she needs not to be examined, as appears before; yet before a Fine be
engrossed for a Corporation, a Writ ought to be directed to the Justices of the
Common place quod permittant finem illum lavari. Dyer. f. 188. p. 9. and the
like writ has been used, when Fines have been levied of lands holden in
Capite. Fitz. N. B. f. 147.

A particular Tenant, as Tenant in Dower, by the Courtesy, or for life, cannot
by Fine grant and surrender his estate to the owner of the reversion, or
remainder; but he may by Fine grant and release the same. 17 E. 3. f. 661. 14
E. 3. 20 E. 3. 24. E. 3. f. 26.

Of what things Fines may be levied, and of what not.
FInes may not be levied of uncertain things, and therefore they may not be of
a Tenement, 3 E. 4. f 19. 11 H. 7. f. 25. but of certain things, they may be
levied, as of a Message, Toft, Dovehouse, Garden, Land, Meadow, Pasture, Wood,
Underwood, Heath, Moor, Reeds, Marish, Willowes, rent, per Register, f. 2. a,
of the Rectory of the Parish Church of M. and of the tithes of grain, herbage
and Hay to the same Rectory belonging, etc. or with all tithes of Corn,
Herbage, and Hay to the same Rectory belonging. Thel. lib. 8. cap. 9. Sect. 2.
de Rectoria. 2 E. 3. of a furlong of land. 4 H. 6. 14. of a passage of the
water of T. of pasture for certain Oxen, Sheep and other beasts, and of a
Common for all Cattle, or for all manner of beasts, or of free fishing, free
warren, or of the advowson of the Church of D. or of any special service, as of
service of one Knights Fee, one pair of gilded spurs, or of service to find a
man, horseman, or footman, to go or to ride in the Army to Wales or Scotland,
etc. of a Fishing 13 E. 3. of an office, 27 H. 8. f. 12, of the profits of an
office, 12 E. 3. of an Advowson Register, f. 165. of a Corody, 18 H. 6. f. 20.
of Chiminage, 2 E. 3. f. 46. of the profits of a mill, 18 E. 3. f 56. of a free
rent in the Writ, and in the Record, That the aforesaid A has recognized the
aforesaid rent, with the appurtenances, together with the homage and the fealty
to B. and his heirs of all the tenements, which, etc. 1 E. 3. f. 1. and 5. of a
frankfold, 1 E. 3. f. 1. of a Fair and a Market. 1 E. 3. f. 4. of a Franchise,
1 E. 3. f. 4. of a Mine of lead, and all kind of metal, with the appurtenances,
etc. Register f. 165. of the tith of the Herbage unto the Church of N.
belonging, Regist. f. 165. of the advowson of the third part of the Church,
etc. or of the third part of the advowson of the Church, or of the moiety of
the advowson of a Church. 33. H. 6. f. 11.

And generally, in every case where a precipe quod reddat. lies, and of
diverse other things Fines may be levied, for which consult the Reg.

No Fine ought to be levied of lands in ancient demeasne, and if any be levied
it may be reversed by a Writ of disceit brought by the Lord of the ancient
demeasne. 21 E. 3. f. 20. and 17 E. 3. 7 H. 4. f. 28. and 44. 8 H. 4. f. 23.
which will restore the Lord to his seignory. But such Fine remains good
between the parties to the same. 8 H. 4. f. 24.

By what names things may pass in Fines.
AN Honor may pass by the name of a Manor, or by his proper name, as de.
honor de Tickhill, or de Manerio de T.

It suffices to demand a Manor by his proper name, without naming of the Town
wherein it lies, for it may be out of any Town, or extend into several Towns
and Countries, as de Manerio de D. cum pertin. yet it seems best to express
all the several Towns into which it extends; as de Manerio de S. cum
pertinentiis in B. C. and D. 19 E. 4. f. 9. and 43 E. 4. f. 9. a. Bracton lib.
4. cap. 31. S. 3. 9 E. 4. f. 61. 16 a. and 17 b. 11 H. 7. f. 49. 9 E. 4. f. 3.
a. 11 H. 7. f. 22. 6.

A Castle or a hundred may be parcel of a Manor, and pass by the name of the
Manor whereof they be parcel. 26 Ass. 54. And some one Manor may be parcel of
another 2 E. 3. f. 56. And a Castle may be demanded by his proper name, as, de
Castello de B. cum pertinentiis. 1 E. 3. f. 4.

An hundred may be demanded by it self, as, de Hundredo de S. 27 H. 6. f. 2.

Messuagium is a dwelling house: by the name of a Message may pass a
Curtilage, a Garden or Orchard, a Dovehouse, a Shop, a Mill, as parcel of an
house Eract. lib. 5. cap. 28. sect. 1. Plo. f. 169, 170, 171. The like of a
Cottage, a Toft, a Chamber, a Cellar, etc. yet may they be demanded by their
single names.

A Chapel or an Hospital must be demanded by the name of a Message, 13. Ass. 2.

A Toft is a place wherein a Message has stood.

A Curtilage is a Garden or a yard near or belonging to a Message Plow.

Molendinum, a Mill, is good without adding ventriticum, or aquaticum, or
granaticum, viz. a Windmill, or a Water-Mill, or a Corn-Mill, albeit the
latter be more usual. 44 E. 3. f. 13.

Land is to be demanded by the certain measure of the superficial quantity
thereof, as Hidra, Carucata, Bovata, Virgata, Acra, etc. roda, etc. terrae.

In like manner, boscus, suboscus, bruera, mora, juncaria, mariscus, aluetum,
and ruscaria, may be demanded by the number of acres thereof. 16 Ass. 9.

Turbarie may be demanded by the name of Morae.

Rent by the number and multitude of the things that are to be rendered, as 10
l. or six pence, or a half penny rent, etc.

Housebote, Haybote, and Plowbote may be demanded by the name of Estrovers,
thus, of reasonable estrovers in the woods, viz. in 10 acres of wood of him the
said A. in D. etc.

Parsonages, Rectories, Advowsons, Vicaredges, or tithes impropriate, pass not
by the name, de advocatione Ecclesiae, but, de rectoriae Ecclesiae de S. cum
pertinentiis.

But when it is but of a presentation, it must be de advocatione Ecclesiae de
S. and non cum pertin.

And of all Vicar edges endowed, the Writ must be, de advocatione vicarie
Ecclesiae de S. etc. and not cum pertin.

And where no Vicaredge is endowed, it passes under these words, de
advocatione Ecclesiae de S. etc.

The Order and form of placing things in Fines.
Message is set before Land, a Manor before a Message, a Castle before a
Manor, 7 H. 6. 39. Plo. 168, 169.

Genus or thing general, before the things special, as land being the genus to
meadow, pasture, wood, Juncarius, Mariscus is first to be placed. And wood
being general to wood-grounds, as aluetum, salicetum, etc. to be set before
them in the writs.

de Manerio de C. and medietate Manerii de B. cum pertin, etc.

f. 6. de Manerio de D. cum pertinentiis in C. excepto unto messuagio, duobus
acris terrae, and advocatione Ecclesiae de C.

And every thing excepted ought to be certainly named, it needs not to say,
cum pertinentiis after the thing excepted, 40 E. 3. 25. and the exception must
always be of such things whereof they will lie. Regist. f. 228, 229. For which
for the present see the example following, viz.

Command A. B. that he render to C. D. etc. of one Message, one Cottage, and
the moiety of one Message, and ten acres of land, with the Appurtenances,
except one acre of land in N. etc.

And finally the form and order of placing the particulars in a Writ of
Covenant, is in all things, as in a praecipe quod reddat of lands.

And further observe the rules of the Register. f. 2. which partly appears in
these verses ensuing.

suagium, um, lendinum, umbare, dinum, ra, tum, tura, cus, ra, Mes, toft, mol,
col, gar, ter, pra, past, hos, brue, mora. ria, cus, tum, ditus.

Junca, Maris, alue, red, sectare priora.

The place wherein the lands lie.
FUrthermore the place wherein the lands do lie, as the Shire, Town, Parish, or
Hamlet, for, a Fine is good in a Hamlet, 38 E. 3. f. 19. 8 E. 4. f. 6. and 7 E.
6. in Brook Fines. 44. and 91.

Nevertheless it is good also to name the Town wherein the Hamlet is, as it
seems, and that with addition for distinction, if there be diverse Towns of
the same name in the same County.

Of the Forms of Concords.
NO Concord ought to be levied to diverse persons and their heirs, but of such
Tenements as were formerly holden of the King or Queen: for (it was for their
own) now their successors advantage to have many such Tenants, 33 H. 6. f. 52.
7 H. 4. f. 7.

If a Fine be levied to two Cognisees or more, in the Concord thereof the
Cognisor shall knowledge the right thereof to be to the one of the same
Cognisees only. And the release and warranty therein contained, shall be
limited only to him, and his heirs. 3 H. 6. f. 42. 33 H. 6. f. 52. 21 E. 3. 24
E. 3. f. 36. 27 E. 3. f. 84.

None can take by the first estate granted or rendered by a Fine, but some of
the parties named in the Writ; but any estranger may take an estate in
remainder. 30 H. 8. Br. Fines. 108. 7 E. 3. 31.

The Warranty contained in Fines ought to be made by the heirs of them, from
whom the inheritance of the land passes. As if the Husband and Wife levy a
Fine of the Wives lands, the Warrantie must be from the Husband and Wife, and
the Heirs of the Wife, otherwise if it were of the Husbands lands, then the
Warranty must be from his heirs. 42 E. 3 f. 13. 44 E. 3. f. 21. and from the
Heirs of one only. 21 E. 27. except it be of lands in Gavel-kind. 24 E. 3. f.
66.

No Fine ought to be levied upon any Condition, Nam finis finem litibus
imponere debet, but clauses of distress may be in Fines. 33 H. 6. f. 52. 44 E.
3. f. 22.

Also some Fines be sur cognizance de droit come ceo que le cognisee ad del
done le cognis. 2ly. some other sur cognizance de droit tantum. 3ly. some other
of grant and release, and lastly some of grant and render, and upon grant; All
which plainly appear by examples hereafter ensuing.

Also in Concords be not repeated all the words in the Writ, but the general
words thereof only, as Manor, Tenement, Rent, Common, Advowson, etc. as
appears in the ensuing examples of Concords.

Observations at the knowledging of Fines; and first how to acknowledge a Fine
before the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.
FIrst you are to take notice, that none but the Lord Chief Justice can take
cognizance of Fines without dedimus potestatem, which privilege is given him by
the prerogative of his Office. Dyer, f. 224. Pla. 31.

Wherefore if you would acknowledge your Fine before him out of Court; you must
first draw your praecipe and Concord in paper, and bring the parties that must
acknowledge the Fine, to my Lords Chamber, and deliver your praecipe to my
Lords Clerk of the Fines, who will read it to them in presence of my Lord, and
their hands being first set to it, he acknowledges it before my Lord, and he
puts his hand to it, for which you pay to the Clerk for my Lords see 9 s. 8
d.

Which being done, the Clerk will ingross the precipe and Concord in Parchment,
and get my Lords hand to that, which you must fetch from him, and give him his
fce for the engrossing thereof; then you must carry it to the Cursitor of the
Shire where the land lies, and leave it with him, to have a Writ of Covenant
made by it; when the Writ is made, before you pass it under seal, you carry it
to the Alienation Office, where you are to pay a Fine for license or leave to
alien, and there it is you must make your composition, which is set by the
Commissioners sitting for that purpose, when you have informed the value, there
is one sits purposely with the Commissioners to take it, who was formerly a
Doctor.

The value being set down by one of the Commissioners, if it exceed forty
shillings (or else there is nothing to be paid) you must go to the Receiver in
the same Office, and pay the Fine so assessed, which is the Kings silver for
the Kings License, which License the Clerk of the Kings silver enters; when
the money is paid, the Receiver will set his hand to the back of the Writ, then
you must give it to the Doctor to sign, who has 4d. for his hand, then get the
hands of the two Commissioners to the back of the Writ, which done you must
carry it to the 3 Clerks sitting, to be endorsed and entered.

This being done, you bring back your Writ to the Cursitor, and he will get it
sealed, and then you pay him for his fee 2 s. 6 d. then having broken it open,
you are to return it as follows.

Toward the upper end of the Writ thus.
John Do pledges of pro secuting Richard Roo.

Toward the middle of the Writ thus.
John Den, Richard Fen.

This is now by a late erected Office done by an Officer, who takes for the
doing of it, and entering of it 1 s. 6 d.

Note, you are to file a Warrant of Attorney with the Clerk of the Warrants,
where your Writ of Covenant must be signed, which Warrant is as follows (the
Shire in the margent) G. W. puts in his place T. L. to prosecute a Writ of
Covenant against T. H. of lands and Tenements in A. and C.

That done, file your Writ of Covenant and your Concord which you had from the
Lords Clerk together, and carry them to the Custos brevium to the Clerk that
deals for that Shire, and leave them with him to enter in his book, and to
endorse the Writ, when he has done, fetch them from him, and pay him for the
same 3 s. 8 d.

Then carry them to the Kings silver Office, to enter the Kings silver, which
is the Fine for the value which you paid to the Receiver in the alienation
Office; (The form of which entry you may see hereafter set down, together with
more clear examples of proceedings in the acknowledging of Fines, than I have
here briefly written.) for which you pay him 6 d. which done, you deliver it to
the Secondary in the Chirographers Office, who takes it forth in his book, and
has for his fee 5 s. 8 d. if it be in the Term, if it be out of Term, you pay
him twelve pence more for allowing the Proclamation in the same Term. That
done, you must in the same Office deliver it to the Clerk of the Office, who is
appointed to write for that Shire, wherein the land lies, to ingrosse, he has
for engrossing it 2 s. 6 d. if small, but if great, 3 s. 6 d. or more, in case
it be exemplified.

When your Fines are engrossed, which are by way of Indentures, get one part
from him, and deliver it your Clyent to keep.

The Charges of the Fine aforesaid.
l. s. d. IMprimis, for drawing the Concord 0 3 4 For the Lord Chief Justices
fee for acknowledgement. 0 9 8 To his Clerk for engrossing the Concord. 0 1 6
For the Writ of Covenant. 0 2 6 For the return 0 2 0 For the Post diem thereof
0 0 4 For the Fine 0 0 0 To the Receiver for making the Writ of Covenant. 0 0 6
For the entry and endorsment. 0 1 6 For the Doctors hand. 0 0 4 For the Warrant
of Attorney and filing it. 0 0 8 To the Custos brevium. 0 3 8 To the Clerk of
the Kings silver. 0 1 4 To the Chirographer. 0 6 8 For engrossing the Fine. 0 3
0 For the Attorneys fee. 0 6 8

Observations at the knowledging of a Fine out of Court, by a special Dedimus
potestatem.
IF the Fine be knowledged out of Court, the day and place of the taking of the
Fine is by 23 Eliz. cap. 3. to be entered, thus, taken and knowledged at S. the
10th. day of May, etc. for otherwise the Clerk or Officer receiving the same,
loses 5 l. for every offense.

Also at the knowledging of every Fine, if the Justice or Commissioners that
take the Cognizance thereof, do not know the Cognisors, it is requisite, that
some other credible person to him known, who knows the Cognisors be present,
and inform such Justice or Commissioners, that they be the self same persons
against whom the Writ is brought. 34 H. 6. f. 19.

Lands bought of diverse persons or by diverse persons, may pass in one Fine, if
the Writ of Covenant be brought against all the vendors by all the vendees: But
then the clause of Waranty in the Concord thereof, should be several against
every vendor by himself and his heirs: For it were very absutd, that one man
should warrant against all men, land sold by others.

In regard of the Cognisors debility of body, or remoteness from London or
Westminster, or other occasion, you are to sue out a dedimus potestatem,
reciting that the Writ of Covenant is depending, and bearing Test after the
Writ of Covenant, directed to some Justice, or to a Sergeant at Law, or a Lord
or Knight or two, and some other expert man to take the same Cognizance in the
Country, and to return and certify the same to the Justices of the Common
place, with the dedimus potestatem and Cognizance.

If they certify not, a Certiorari is to be awarded to them, comprehending all
the matter of the said Writ, and commanding them to certify etc. which if they
do not, there lies against them Alias plur, and Attach.

If any Justice or Sergeant take the knowledge of a Fine of lands, nor lying
within his Circuit, the Writ of Dedimus potestatem thereof is used to be signed
by a Justice of the Circuit where the land lies. Dier, f. 220. p. 15.

And every special Writ of Dedimus potestatem to special Commissioners, must be
signed either by the Commissioners, or by the Chief Justice of the Common
pleas, of some of the Justices of Assizes in the Circuit of the Country where
the land lies, which is to pass thereby.

But Justices of the Assizes by virtue of their patents may take the knowledge
of Fines in their Circuits, before any Dedimus potestatem be sued out. Dier, f.
224. pla. 31. yet must a Dedimus potestatem be sued out upon the note directed
to them, before they can certify the same.

Also Fines have been levied before Justices in Eire, li. int. scire fac. in
Aid 2.

But a Justice cannot take the knowledge of a Fine to himself, that is, where
he himself is Cognisee. 8 H. 6. f. 21.

Now the Order to sue forth a Fine to be acknowledged before Commissioners in
the Country by special Dedimus potestatem is this.

First you must draw your praecipe in a sheet of paper, as a note for the
Cursitor to draw the Dedimus by, then ingrosse your praecipe and Concord in a
piece of parchment, and go with it to the Cursitor of the Shire where your land
lies, and upon your praecipe in paper insert your Commissioners names, which
must be four in number, whereof one at least must be a Knight, and get him to
make your Dedimus potestatem, for which you must pay him (...) and in paying of
him (for he takes for them all) you pay a Fine, and for a Judges hand, and for
the Master of the Rolls his hand, which hands must be had before it be sealed,
and then having it under Seal, deliver it so, and the Concord, before any two
of the Commissioners named in the Dedimus potestatem, and your Cognisors being
present, let them take the caption, which being done, they must return the Writ
of Dedimus, and their execution thereof, in manner and form as hereafter by
example shall be showed.

Note, that upon every Fine past, where a Fine is paid, there is within 4 or 5
Terms a post Fine, that comes in Charge to the Sheriff to levy in the County
where the land lies, and that Fine is as much, and half as much as was paid
before in the Alienation Office.

Charges of the Fine by special Dedimus potestatem taken before Commissioners.
IMprimus for drawing the praecipe and Concord. 0 3 4 For the special Dedimus
potestatem. 1 0 0 For the return. 0 3 0

For the rest of the Fees they differ very little from what are paid upon Fines
otherwise acknowledged.

How to acknowledge a Fine before a Judge out of Court by Dedimus potestatem.
YOu must proceed in taking the acknowledgement, and passing the Writ of
Covenant through the Alienation Office, in like manner as is before showed,
which being done, and delivering your Writ back to the Cursitor, you must
bespeak a Dedimus potestatem, which the Cursitor is to make; and when you have
your Writ of Covenant and Dedimus potestatem under Seal, you must deliver the
Dedimus to the Judges Clerk of the Fines, and he will ingrosse the praecipe and
Concord, as before is showed, and return the Dedimus, and get the Judges hand
to it; which Dedimus so returned, Concord and Writ of Covenant, you must annex
together, and pass them through the Custos brevium, Clerk of the Warranty,
Clerk of the Kings silver, Mr. Jones his Office of Inrolments, as its termed,
and the Chirographers Office, in like manner as is before showed: The course
and proceeding, and fees being all one, more than this, that you pay to the
Cursitor for your Dedimus potestatem 9 s. 2 d.

Charges of a Fine knowledged by Dedimus potestatem before a Judge, and
exemplified.
FOr drawing the praecipe and Concord. 0 3 4 To the Judge for his Fee. 0 9 ^ To
the Clerk for the return of the Dedimus, and engrossing the Concord. 0 2 6 For
the Writ of Dedimus potestatem. For all other Fees, as in the last proceeding,
for the several Offices. 0 9 2 For the Exemplification. 0 2 8 For the
Exemplifying. 0 5 6 For the Seal thereof. 0 2 2

Having thus far proceeded, it remains to show how to sue forth a license of
Alienation of lands holden in Capite.

You must first get the Clerk of the Alienations, to make you a Docquet in
Paper, which you must carry to the Alienation Office, and there compound for
the value of the land, which must be also by composition, or affidavit, as is
showed before.

The value being set down underneath your Docquet, you must pay a third part of
the value assessed by way of Fine for your License, which you must likewise pay
there in the same Office, and you must give the Receiver over and above what
you pay 6 d.

Then you are to get the Doctors hand to your Docquet, for which you must give
him 2 s. and you must then get the Commissioners in the same Office to set
their hands to the Docquet, then deliver it to the Register there to enter, for
which you pay him 6 d.

And after it is entered, then carry it to the Clerk of the Alienation again,
and he will get the Lord Chancellor or Lord-Keepers hand to it, and will
afterward ingrosse your license of Alienation, and pass it under the great
Seal for you. The Charges are as follows.

FOr drawing the Concord. 0 3 4 For my Lord Chief Justice fee for
acknowledgement. 0 9 8 To his Clerk for engrossing the Concord. 0 1 6 For the
Writ of Covenant. 0 2 6 For the return. 0 2 0 For the post diem thereof. 0 0 4
For the Fine. 0 0 0 To the Receiver for marking the Writ of Covenant. 0 0 6 For
the entry and endorsement 0 1 6 For the Doctors hand. 0 0 4 For the Warrant of
Attorney, and filing it. 0 0 8 To the Custos brevium. 0 3 8 To the Clerk of the
Kings silver, 0 1 4 To the Chirographer. 0 6 8 For engrossing the Fine. 0 3 0
For the Atturneys fee. 0 6 8

How to acknowledge a Fine at the Bar in Court.
IF the acknowledgement be to be made in open Court, you must have your Writ of
Covenant made by the Cursitor, and there compound it at the Office of
Alienation, where it must likewise be endorsed and entered, and so fitted for
the Seal, to which must be annexed your praecipe and Concord in parchment,
which you must deliver to some one of the Sergeants at Bar to draw it for you,
and then you pay him 3 s. 4 d. the other fees payable in Court are certain, and
are not great, for by the acknowledgement in Court, the Client saves diverse
Fees and Charges whicb otherwise the Caption would cost.

The Caption being past, you proceed with your praecipe and Concord, and Writ
of Covenant, through the Alienation Office, Kings silver, Custos brevinm, and
Chiroprapher, as before was showed in other acknowledgements.

Charges of the Fine acknowledged at Bar.
FOr drawing the praecipe and Concord. 0 3 4 For the Writ of Covenant. 0 2 6
For the return of the same. 0 2 0 For the filing thereof. 0 10 0 To the
Sergeant at Bar. 0 3 4 To the Prothonotary. 0 0 6 To the Secondary. 0 0 6 To
the Crier Tipstaves and Court keeper. 0 1 6 For the Doctors hand. 0 0 4 For the
Warrant of Attorney and filing of it. 0 0 8 To the Custos brevium. 0 3 8 To the
Clerk of the Kings silver. 0 1 4 To the Chirographer. 0 6 8 For engrossing the
Indenture of the Fine. 0 3 0 For the Fee. 0 6 8

Since that we have hitherto seen how to sue forth a Fine, let us also know
what things hinder the certifying and engrossing of Fines knowledged.

If the Cognisor dye after the knowledging of a Fine, and before it be
engrossed, such Fine ought not to be certified nor engrossed. 33 H. 6. f. 52. 1
H. 7. f. 9. In like manner if the Cognisee die.

But if the Writ of Covenant and Dedimus potestatem be returned, and thereupon
the Kings silver entered, and before the Fine be engrossed the Cognisor or
Cognisee die, yet is the Fine thereof good, and may afterward be engrossed,
though it be in another Term; Haec est finalis Concord. facta, etc. in Crastino
pur. beatae M. Et post concessa and recordata in quindena Pasc. etc. Dier. f.
220. p. 15. and f. 254. p. 104.

But if the King die after the Writ of Covenant be returned, and the Kings
silver entetred, and before the Fine be engrossed, yet the Writ of Covenant
shall be resummoned, and the Fine engrossed, otherwise if the Kings silver be
not entered. 1 H. 7.

And in like manner, if any Commissioner or Justice before whom a Fine is
knowledged, chance to die or be discharged of his or their Office, before the
Kings silver thereof be entered, then may a Writ of Certiorari be directed out
of the Chancery to the Justices discharged, or to Executors or Administrators
of such Commissioners or Justices so dying, commanding them to certify the
note of the said Fine and Concord. Fitz. f. 174. b. 8 H. 4. f. 5. 1 H. 7. f. 9.
which being returned the Fine may proceed and be engrossed.

A Fine knowledged of lands holden in Capite, ought not to be engrossed before
a License of Alienation be sued out thereupon. 33 H. 6. f. 52. and a Writ of
quod permittat finem levari, etc.

A Fine of a reversion ought not to be engrossed until the Tenant for term of
life atturn, for until atturnment he is dispunishable of wast, neither can the
Cognisee avow upon him for the rent behind before Atturnment. 22 H. 6. f. 13.
plow. f. 431. b.

And the Cognisee may compel such Tenant for life to atturn by quid Juris
clamat. and if the Fine be of services he is compellable to atturn by a Writ of
per quae servitia: if of rent, by a Writ of quem redditum reddit. No. na. br.
f. 47. a. b. and such Writs must be sued after the note of the Fine knowledged,
and the Kings silver entered, and before it be engrossed.

And by the Statute of 23 Eliz. ca. 3. notes of Fines and Concord knowledged,
for the levying of Fines, are to be certified within one year next after the
knowledging thereof, or else the person taking knowledge of such Fines is not
bound to certify the same: Nevertheless if it be certifyed afterward, it is
good enough.

Thus having briefly discovered the impediments that hinder the certifying and
engrossing of Fines knowledged, and having left nothing untoucht of the
proceeding in suing forth Fines, let us go on to the subject matter, the very
forms of Fines and Concords.

A Writ of Covenant of Common.
COmmand, etc. of three Messuages, etc. with appurtenances in D. and T. and of
Common, of pasture for all and all manner of beasts, and of pasture for 400
sheep, with the appurtenances in D. in the Parish of C. And unless he shall do
it, then summon by good Summoners, etc.

Of Land and Sheep walk.
COmmand, etc. of one Message, one Cur^ilage, one Garden, etc. and five pounds
rent, with the appurtenances in F. Also of liberty of one Foldage and of Sheep
walk, with the appurtenances in F. And unless, etc.

Of Wood and Foldage,
COmmand, etc. of one hundred acres of wood, with the appurtenances in N. and
of the liberty of Foldage for 40 sheep, wirh the appurtenances in S. And
unless etc.

Of Wood.
COmmand o^ etc. and four roods of Wood, etc. in the Parishes of B. and L. etc.

COmmand, etc. of 2 parts in 3 parts to be divided, 8 acres of land, 40 acres
of pasture, 40 acres of fresh and marish land, with the appurtenances in D.
etc. And unless, etc.

Of a Parsonage impropriate, and of the Moiety of tithes.
COmmand, etc. of the Rectory impropriate of H. with the appurtenances, and of
the moiety of all the tithes of Grain, Corn, Herbage, and Hay, of the lands
called the B. lands, with the appurtenance; in H. aforesaid, etc. And unless,
etc.

Of a Manor of rent, and of free-folding for Sheep.
COmmand, etc. of the Manor of, etc. And ten shillings rent, and of
free-folding for sheep, with the appurtenances in R. and of the hundred of L.
And unless, etc.

A Writ of Covenant of 3 parts of 4 Messuages, 4 Cottages, etc.
COmmand W. S. that he hold Covenant, etc. of the 3 part of 4 Messuages, 4
Cottages, one Mill, 10 Gardens, 10 Orchards, 200 acres of Land, 200 acres of
Meadow, 200 acres of Pasture, 30 acres of Moor, 30 acres of Turbarie, and 5 s.
rent, with the appurtenances in A. B. C. D. and of the third part of the view
of frank pledge of the goods and Chattles waived, of Fugitives put in exigent,
felons de se, deodands treasure found and extrahur, with the apurtenances in M.
etc. Also of the third part of the Rectorie of the Church of K. with the
appurtenances, And unless, etc.

A Writ of Covenant of Tithes.
Leic. ss.
COmmand T. N. Knight, that he hold Covenant, etc. of the profits of Grain, Hay,
Wool, and Lambs, and of all other Tithes, with the appurtenances in M. And
unless, etc.

A Writ of Covenant of the Site of a Monastery.
Derb. ss.
COmmand A. B. that he hold Covenant to C. D. of the Site of the Monastery of
B. with the appurtenances, and of 20 Messuages, etc. and of Common of Pasture
for all manner of beasts and of 100 shillings rent, and of the rent of henns,
and rent work, with the appurtenances in ^. and F. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid A. B. has recognized the
aforesaid Site, Tenement, Common of Pasture, and rents, with the appurtenances
to be the right of the said C. as those, etc. (with release and Warranty, etc.)

A Writ of Covenant of diverse things.
Linc. ss.
COmmand F. M. Esquire; and T. M. Son and Heir apparent of the ^ame F. that they
hold Covenant to F. F. and N. R. Gentlemen, etc. of the Manors of T. S. and H.
near N. upon Trent. And of 40 Messuages, 20 Cottages, 40 Tofts, 30 Barns, 2
Water-mills, 1 Windmill, 3 Dove-houses, 40 Gardens, 40 Orchards, a thousand
acres of land, a thousand acres of Meadow, 1000 acres of pasture, 500 acres of
wood, 100 acres of Marish, 100 acres of Furs and Heath, 100 acres Willows,
100 acres Rushes, 500 acres of Moor, 4 l. rent, and the rent of half a pound of
pepper, with the appurtenance^ in T. etc. And also 50 Mines of Coal, with the
appurtenances in T. S. and also of the Advowson of the Church of T. and H. And
unless etc.

A Writ of Covenant of Dismes and Tithes.
Notting. ss.
COmmand D. F. that, etc. he ^old Covenant to R. Y. Esquire; etc. of the Titnes of
Sheafs, Grain, and Hay, with the appurtenances in R. and W. and of the tithes
af Hay in V. also of the tithes of Wool, Lambs, Offerings, Obventions and
Emoluments, and of all other tithes whatsoever, coming, growing, and renewing
in W. aforesaid, And unless, etc.

COmmand T. B. and A. his Wife, that they ^old Covenant to C. W. Esquire: etc.
of the Rectorie of L. and of the Advowson of the Vicaridge of L. and of 10
Messuages, 10 Cottages, 10 Barns, 10 Gardens, etc. with the appurtenances in L.
aforesaid, And unless, etc.

COmmand, etc. that justly, etc. of 10 Messuages, etc. in W. also of the
Rectory of the Church of G. and of the tithes of Grain, Hay, Wool, Lambs, and
all other tithes whatsoever in G. aforesaid, and also of the Advowson of the
Vicaridge of the Church of G. ^foresaid with the appurtenances, And un^esse,
etc.

A Release by Fine by one to two.
Surr. ss.
COmmand, W. W. that justly etc. he hold to L. and A. P. Covenant, etc. of six
Messuages etc. with the appurtenances in C. W. and E. etc. And unless. etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid W. has recognized the
aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances, to be the right of the said I. as
those which the same I. and A. have by the gift of the aforesaid W. And those
he has remised and quite claimed from himself and his heirs to the aforesaid
I. and A. and their heirs for ever. And furthermore the same W. has granted
for himself and his heirs, that he will warrant to the aforesaid I. and A. and
the heirs of him the aforesaid I. the aforesaid Tenements, with the
appurtenances against the aforesaid W. and his heirs for ever. And for this etc.

A Fine upon Cognizance de droit by the Husband and Wife, to two.
Surr. ss.
COmmand I. T. and A. his Wife, that justly etc. they hold to W. R. and R. D.
Covenant etc. of 4 Messuages, 4 Tofts, 40 acres of land, 20 acres of Meadow,
120 acres of Pasture, and five shillings and four pence rent with the
appurtenances in S. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid I. and A. have recognized
the aforesaid Tenement, with the appurtenances to be the right of him the said
W. as those which the said W. and R. have by the gift of the aforesaid I. and
A. And those they have remised and quite claimed from the said J. and A. and
the heirs of him the said I. to the aforesaid W. and R. and the heirs of him
the said W. for ever. And furthermore the same I. and A. have granted for
themselves and the heirs of him the said A. that they will warrant to the
aforesaid W. and R. and the heirs of him the said W. the aforesaid Tenement,
with the appurtenances, against the aforesaid I. and A. and the heirs of him
the said I. for ever. And for this Recognisance, remise, quite claim, Warranty,
Fine, and Concord, the same W. and R. have given to the aforesaid I. and A. two
hundred and forty pounds sterling.

A Fine by Baron and Feme, and another.
Linc. ss.
COmmand R. B. Gentleman, and T. R. and M. his Wife, that they hold to T. B.
Gent. Covenant, etc. of 30 acres of land, 2 acres of Meadow, 3 acres of
Pasture, and 6 acres of wood, with the appurtenances in C. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid R. T. and M. have
recognized the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of
him the said T. B. as those which the same T. has by the gift of the aforesaid
R. T. and M. and those they have remised and quite claimed from them the said
R. T. and M. and the heirs of him the said R. to the aforesaid T. B. and his
heirs for ever: And furthermore the same R. T. and M. have granted for
themselves, and the heirs of him the said R. that they will warrant the
Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances to the aforesaid T. B. and his
heirs against the aforesaid R. T. and M. and the heirs of him the said R. for
ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine of a parcel in reversion by a Coparcenar.
Surr. ss.
COmmand T. W. and K. his Wife, that justly, etc. they hold to G. S. the
Covenant between them made, of the third part of 8 Messuages, 7 Gardens, 40
acres of land, 10 acres of Meadow, 20 acres, of Pasture, 50 acres of Wood, with
the appurtenances in A. B. C. and D.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid T. and K. have recognized
the third part aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of the
aforesaid G. and have granted rhat the same third part, with the appurtenances
which M. B. Widow, holds for Term of her life, of the inheritance of the
said K. the day that this Concord was made, and which, after the death of the
same M. unto them the said T. and K. ought to revert, shall remain to the
foresaid G. and his heirs for ever, to hold, etc. Moreover the same T. and K.
have granted for themselves and the heirs of him the said K. that they will
warrant to the aforesaid G. and his heirs the third part aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, as aforesaid, against themselves, and the heirs of him the said
R. for ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine by an Earl, Husband and Wife, to an Arch bishop, and one other.
Midd. ss.
COmmand I. L. Knight, Lord L. and I. his wife, that justly, and without delay
they hold to the reverend father in Christ T. Y. by the Divine permission
Archbishop of York Primate of England, and G. E. the Covenant between them made
of the Manors of R. and M. with the appurtenances, and of 50 Messuages, 500
Tosts, 200 Cottages, 6 Mills, 500 Barns, 500 Gardens, 5000 acres of land, 1000
acres of Meadow, 6000 acres of Pasture, 1000 acres of Wood, 10000 acres of
Furs, and Heath, and of five hundred pounds rent, with the appurtenances in
R. C. A. or else S. T. V. W. and E. and of the Advowson of the Church of E.
aforesaid, And of the view of Frank pledge of K. C. and A. aforesaid, And
unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid I. L. Knight, Lord L. and
I. his Wife have recognized the Manors, Tenements, Rents, Advowson, and view
of Frank pledge aforesaid, with the appurtenances to be right of him the said
T. Y. Arch bishop of York, as those which the same T. Y. Arch bishop, and G.
and L. have, by the gift of the aforesaid I. L. and I his Wife, and those they
have remised to T. Y. Arch bishop and G. L. and the heirs of him the said T. Y.
Arch bishop for ever. And moreover the same I. L. and I. his Wife have granted
for themselves, and the heirs of him the said L. that they will warrant the
Manors, Tenements, Rents, Advowson, and view of Frank pledge aforesaid, with
the appurtenances to the aforesaid T. Y. Archbishosh of York and G. L. and the
heirs of him the said T. Y. Archbishop, against all men for ever, And for
this, etc.

A Concord from two to two, with special Warranty.
ANd the Concord is such, that the aforesaid A. and B. have recognized the
aforesaid Manors, Mills, Dovehouses, Tenements, Common of Pasture, with the
appurtenances to be the right of him the said C. as those that the same C. and
D. have by the gift of them the said A. and B. and those they have remised and
quite claimed from themselves, and the heirs of him the said A. to the
aforesaid C. and D. and the heirs of him the said C. for ever. And furthermore
the same A. has granted for himself and his heirs, that he will warrant to the
aforesaid C. and D. and the heirs of him the said C. the aforesaid Manors,
Mills, Dovehouses, Tenements, Rents, Common of Pasture, with the appurtenances
against themselves and their heirs for ever, And furthermore the same B. has
granted for himself and his heirs, etc. (as above.)

A Fine upon recognisance of right, as that which he has of his right, with
release and warranty by Husband and Wife to a third person, with a general
Warranty.
Devon. ss.
COmmand I. H. and V. his Wife, that justly etc. they hold to R. P. Gent. the
Covenant of the Manor of B. with the appurtenances, and of 20 Messuages, 3
Tofts, 6 Cottages, 4 Barns, one Water-mill, one Windmill, one Fulling-mill,
one Dovehouse, 20 Gardens, 10 Orchards, 100 acres of Land, 100 acres of Meadow,
1000 acres of Pasture, 10 acres of Wood, 20 acres of Willows, 100 acres of
Furs and Heath, 20 acres of Moor, 20 acres of Turbarie, 30 acres of Mosses, 6
acres of Rushes, 20 acres of fresh Marish, and 30 acres of salt Marish, 2 acres
of Alders, 10 Marks rent, with the appurtenances in B. C. and D. Also of free
fishings in the waters of B. C. and D. and of several fishing in the water of
S. also of the advowson of the Church of B. by turns when it shall happen. And
unless, etc.

And the Concord is such to wit, that the aforesaid I. and V. have recognized
the manors and tenements, rents, and free fishing aforesaid, with the
apurtenances, and the advowson aforesaid to be the right of him the said R. as
those which the same R. has by the gift of the aforesaid I. and V. and those
they have remised and quite claimed from them the said I. and V. the heirs of
him the said I. to the aforesaid R. and his heirs for ever, and moreover the
said I. and V. have granted for themselves, and the heirs of him the said I.
that they will warrant to the aforesaid R. and his heirs and assigns the
aforesaid manors, tenements, rents, and free-fishings, with the apputtenances,
and the advowson aforesaid, against all men for ever. And for this recognizance
remise, quite claim, warranty, fine, and concord, the same R. has given to the
aforesaid I. and V. forty pounds.

A Concord of many things together sur cognizance de droit come ceo, etc.
THis is the final etc. in the year etc. before etc. Justices and other
faithful men then there present, between I. A. Plantiff, and M. B. Deforcient
of the honor of D. the Castle of the Shriefdome of S. with the hundred, the
members and their appurtenances, the Isle of D. the Barony of D. the hundred of
D. the borough of D. one Knights-fee in D. the Site, Circuit, and precinct,
late of the Monastery, of D. the manor of D. with the appurtenances, the
Site of the manor of D. the Grange of D. the Park of D. the pre^end of D. one
capital Message. 2 Messuages, 2 Tofts, 2 Cottages, 1 Dove-house, 1 Fulling
Mill, 1 Water-Mill, 1 Windmill, 1 Malt-Mill, 1 Corn-Mill, 1 Barn, 1 Garden, 1
Orchard, 10 acres of Land, 10 acres of Meadow, 20 acres of Pasture, 4 acres of
Wood, 40 acres of Furs and Heath, 30 acres of moor, 50 acres of Salt-marish,
9 acres of Fresh marish, 30 acres of Turbary, 9 acres Rushes, 9 acres of
Willows, 9 acres of Mosses, 4 acres of land covered with water, Common of
Pasture for all or all kind of Beasts, for 100 sheep, 10 Horses, Cows, Hogs,
Geldings, etc. free warren, free fishing, liberty of foldage, freefold for a
Cart with salt peter, lead, a pit of Salt water, twenty pounds, ten marks, ten
shillings, one penny, one half penny, farthing rent.

And the rent of one pair of Gloves, one pair of gilded Spurs, a barbed arrow,
one pair of Shoes, 1 Coulter of a plow-sheer, one pound of wax, one pound of
pepper, one pound of Cummin, one clove gilly flower, one basket of madder, one
needle and thread, one quarter of Corn, one quarter of Barley, one pair of
Capons, forty Cocks, twenty Hens, a thousand of Sheep, and 100 Geese, with the
appurtenances in D.

And of the common of pasture which the aforesaid M. B. has and was wont to
have for all his beasts. in a hundred acres of pasture of the said I. A. in D.

And of all and all manner of oblations, tenths of Grain, Sheafs, Hay, Wool,
Flax, Hemp, Swine, Geese of the fields, etc. and other emoluments, whatsoever
belonging, appertaining, growing, or being within the said appurtenances in D.

And Thanage, Stallage, Picage, Pontage within the borough of D. of a certain
corodie for ones bread, one flagon of beer, for all men in D.

And of a water pit, and a watercourse running from a place called H. beneath
and through the lands called K. unto the Mill called S.

A wear or floudgate in D. and of the view of Frank pledge, the liberty and
Franchises in D. also of the custody or office of the Custody of B. of the
keeping of the Park and Forest of D. and of the ofice of a Steward in D. of
the Bayliwick, or office of a Bayliffe in D.

Also of the Fairs of D. every year at the feasts of N. M. there to be kept,
the Markets of D. quiet or free passage over the water D. the rectory of D. the
advowson, presentation donation free disposition and right of patronage of the
Church of D. a certain portion of tenths and pensions in D.

Also of the moiety of the manor of D. with the appurtenances, and of the
third part of the tenement of C. in three parts divided, except and always
reserved the patronage together with the Advowson of the Vicaridge of the
Church of D. and the Chapel to the same Rectory annexed, and all tithes of
Grain, view of Frank-pledge, and all things which to the view of Frank-pledge
belong, Wards, Marriages, Escheats, Cattles, of Felons waived, extrahur,
Felons, Fugitives, Outlawes attainted with the Lands, and Tenements of Outlawes
and Waives whatsoever, estraies, Markets, wreck of the sea, and all and so many
rights, jurisdictions, privileges, franchises, and free-holds aforesaid, or any
of them concerning, and to the said M. B. and his heirs, as of the Mannot of D.
belonging.

Whereupon plea of Covenant was summoned between them in the said Court, to
wit, that the aforesaid M. has recognized the aforesaid Honor, Castle,
Sheriffdom, Isle, Baronie, Hundred, Borough, Knights-Fee, Site, Manor, Park,
Prebend, Tenement, Rents, Common of Pasture, free Warren, free Fishing, liberty
of Saltpeter, Lead, Bullen, Pit, Rectory, Tithes, Oblations, Thanage, Stallage,
Piccage, Pontage, Corrodie, Water pit, view of Frank pledge, Liberties,
Franchises, Custodies, Office of Steward, Balywicks, Fairs, Markets, Passage,
Wreck of the Sea, Moiety, and third parts, with the Appurtenances, and
Advowsons, Presentations, free Disposition, right of Patronage, Portions and
Pensions aforesaid, to be the right of him the said I. as those which the fame
I. has by the gift of the foresaid M. And those he has remised and quite
claimed from himself and his heirs to the aforesaid J. and his heirs for ever.

And furthermore the same M. has granted for himself and his heirs, that he
will warrant to the aforesaid I. and his heirs the aforesaid Honor, Castle,
Sheriffdome, Isle, etc. (as above) against himself and his heirs for ever, and
for this recognisance, fine etc.

A Fine of a Rent.
Not. ss,
COmmand J. Earl of H. and Dame K. his Wife, Countess of H. that justly, and
without delay, they hold to W. C. Covenant, etc. of 40 pounds yearly rent,
issuing out of the Manor of E. etc. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid Earl and Countess have
recognized the rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him
the said W. as those which the said W. has by the gift of the aforesaid Earl
and Countess, and those they have remised and quite claimed from themselves
and their heirs to the aforesaid W. and his heirs for ever. And furthermore the
said Earl and Countess have granted for themselves, and the heirs of him the
said Earl, that they will warrant the rent with the appurtenances to the
aforesaid W. and his heirs against all men for ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine of part of a rent by Husband and Wife.
Suff. ss.
COmmand R. and J. his Wife, that they hold to H. C. Covenant, etc. of the third
part of five pounds, six shillings and eight pence rent, with the appurtenances
issuing out of the Manors of K. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid R. and I. have recognized
the third part aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the
said H. as that which the same H. has, by the gift of the aforesaid R. and I.
And that they have remised and quiteclaimed from themselves and the heirs of
him the said I. to the aforesaid H. and his heirs for ever. And furthermore the
same R. and I. have granted for themselves and the heirs of him the said I.
that they will warrant to the aforesaid H. and his heirs the aforesaid third
part, with the appurtenances against all men for ever, And for this etc.

A praecipe with an exception and saving some parcels.
COmmand, etc. Covenant, etc of the Rectory of T. with the appurtenances,
except the Advowson of the Vicaridge of the Church of T. And unless, etc.

And the Concord, etc. That the aforesaid A. has recognized the Rectory
aforesaid, with the appurtenances (except before excepted) to be the right,
etc. And that he has remised, etc. except before excepted) And furthermore the
same, etc. has granted for himself, etc. that he will warrant to the
aforesaid, etc. the Rectory aforesaid, with the appurtenances (except before
excepted, etc.)

A Concord with a render for life to the Husband and the Wife, being the
Conusors of parcel of Manors and Lands contained in the Writ of Covenant, the
remainder to the first and second begotton Sons of the Conusors in tail, and to
the heirs Mal^s, and for default of such issue, then to the Conusors in general
tail, and for default of such issue, then to the right heirs of the Conusors
for ever; with grant and render of ten Messuages, etc. residue of the same
Manor, etc. to the said Conusors.
ANd the Concord is such (to wit) that the ^foresaid T. and F. have recognized
the Manors, Tenements, and Rents aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the
right of him the said E. as those which the same E. and R. have by the gift of
the aforesaid T. and F. and those they have remised and quite claimed from them
the said T. and F. and the heirs of him the said F. to the aforesaid E. and R.
and the heirs of him the said E. for ever. And moreover the same T. and F. have
granted for themselves, and the heirs of him the said F. that they will warrant
the Manor, Tenements, and Rents, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid E.
and R. and the heirs of him the said E. against them the said T. and F. and the
heirs of him the said F. for ever. And for this recognisance, etc. the same E.
and R. have granted to the aforesaid T. and F. the Manor of S. aforesaid, with
the appurtenances, and 10 Messuages, 8. Cottages, 20 acres of Land, 20 acres of
Meadow 160 acres of Pasture, 300 acres of Moor, six shillings rent, with the
appurtenances in A. and F. aforesaid, parcels of the Manor, Tenements, and
rent aforesaid. And those to them they have rendered in the same Court. To have
and to hold to the aforesaid T. and F. for the term of the lives of them the
said T. and F. and the life of the longer liver of either of them, without
impeachment of any manner of wast. And that after the decease of the aforesaid
T. and F. and the longer liver of either of them, the aforesaid parcels of the
Manor, Tenements, and Rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, shall remain to
the first begotten Son of the bodies of the aforesaid T. and F. between them
lawfully begotten, and to the heirs males of the body of the aforesaid first
begotten Son, lawfully begotten. To hold etc. and if no heir of the body of the
said first begotten son, shall be lawfully begotten, the aforesaid parcels of
the Manor, Tenements, and Rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, shall remain
to the second begotten Son of the body of the aforesaid T. and F. between them
lawfully begotten, and the heirs males of the body of the said second begotten
Son, lawfully begotten, to hold, etc. And if no heir of the body of the said
second begotten Son, shall be begotten, then the aforesaid parcels of the
Manor, Tenements, and rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances to remain to the
heirs of the bodies of the said T. and F. between them, lawfully begotten, to
hold, etc. And if no heir of the bodies of the said T. and F. between them
shall be lawfully begotten, then the aforesaid parcels of the Manor,
Tenements, and Rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, shall remain after to
the right heirs of the said T. and F. for ever, to hold, etc. And furthermore
the same E. and R. have granted to the aforesaid T. and F. ten Messuages, etc.
with the appurtenances in B. and C. aforesaid, being the residue of the
aforesaid Manor, Tenements and Rent aforesaid. And those to them they have
rendered in the same Court, etc.

A Fine of homage, rent, and services.
Salop. ss.
COmmand E. T. Esquire, that he hold to N. P. Covenant of one acre of land, and
fifteen shillngs rent, with the appurtenances in G. and F. Andunlesse, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid E. T. has recognized the
aforesaid acres of land, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the
said N. as that which the said N. has by the gift of the aforesaid E. And that
he has remised and quite claimed from himself and his heirs to the aforesaid
N. and his heirs for ever. And the aforesaid E. has granted to the aforesaid
N. the aforesaid rent, together with homage, and all service of the said J. H.
and his heirs, for so many tenements as the aforesaid E. first held in F.
aforesaid, to have, perceive and enjoy the aforesaid rent, together with the
homage and all the service to the aforesaid N. and his heirs for ever. And the
aforesaid E. and his heirs will warrant to the aforesaid N. and his heirs, the
aforesaid acre of land, and the rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances,
together with the homage and all the service aforesaid (so as it is said)
against all men for ever. And for this, etc,

A Fine of a Manor, and Knights fees, and services by the Husband and Wife,
and others.
BBtween H. W. and J. B. plaintiffs, and T. M. Knight, and T. son of the same
T. and E. wife of the same T. the Son. and W. M. Deforcients, of the Manor of
T. with the appurtenances, whereof plea of Covenant was summoned between them
in the same Court, (to wit) that the aforesaid T. T. E. and W. have recognized
the aforesaid Manor, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said
H. as that which the same H. and I. have by the gift of the aforesaid T. T. E.
and W. together with seven Knights Fees in the same Manor. And have granted to
the aforesaid H. and I. the aforesaid Manor and Fees, with the appurtenances,
together with the homages and all services of M. W. and I. N. and their heirs,
of so many Tenements, as of the aforesaid T. T. E. and W. first they held in
the same Manor, and those to them they have rendered in the said Court. To have
and to hold to the same H. and I. and the heirs of the said H. of the chief
Lords of that fee, by the services which to the aforesaid Manor and Fees
pertain for ever. And moreover the same T. T. E. and W. have granted for
themselves, and the heirs of him the said E. that they will warrant to the
aforesaid H. and I. and the heirs of him the said H. the aforesaid Manor and
Fees, with the appurtenances, as aforesaid, against all men for ever. And for
this Recognisance, Grant, Warranty, Fine, and Concord, the said H. and I. have
given to the aforesaid T. T. E. and W. twenty pounds sterling.

An old Fine in Frank almonie, before Justices in Air, in Anno 55. of King
Henry the third.
THis is the final Concord made in the Court of the Sovereign Lord the King at
Lincoln, in 8 days of St. Michael. In the year of the reign of Henry Son of
King John the 55. before R. A. G. P. W. W. W. H. and I. O. Justices Itinerate,
and others of the Sovereign Lord the Kings faithful Subjects then there
present, between J. D. plaintiff, and the Prior of C. Deforcient of the
Advowson of the Church of D. with the appurtenances, whereof plea of Covenant
was summoned between them in the same Court (to wit) that the aforesaid I. has
recognized the aforesaid Advowson, with the appurtenances to be the right of
him the said Prior, and of his Church of S. Mary of C. as that which the said
Prior and his Church have by the gift of W. Son of W. ancestor of the said I.
whose heir he is: To have and to hold to the said Prior, and his successors,
and his Church aforesaid, of the aforesaid I. and his heirs, in pure and
perpetual free alms, free and quit from all secular service and execution for
ever: and the aforesaid I. and his heirs, will warrant, acquit, and defend the
same Prior, and his successors, and his Church, the aforesaid advowson, with
the appurtenances, etc. And for this, etc. the same Prior has remitted to the
aforesaid I. all the benefits and prayers, which hereafter shall be made in his
Church aforesaid for ever.

A Concord of lands in the County Palatine of Lancaster.
Lancaster.
THis is the final Concord made in the Court of the Lord Protector at L. the 15
day of June, in the year of our Lord 1654. before I. C. third Baron of the
Exchequer of the Lord Protector, and F. R. one of the Sergeants of the Lord
Protector at Law, Justices of the Lord Protector at L. and other faithful men
of the Lord Protector then there present, between H. T. and R. H. plaintiffs,
and W. C. Gent. Deforcient, of one Message, etc. with the appurtenances in T.
whereof plea of Covenant was summoned between them in the same Court (to wit)
that aforesaid W. has recognized, etc.

A Lease for years, reserving a rent.
Ebor. ss.
COmmand F. T. and M. his Wife, that justly, etc. they hold to I. H. and K. his
Wife Covenant, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid E. and M. have granted the
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, to have and to hold to the said I.
and K. from the Feast, etc. which shall be in the year, etc. to be complete, if
the aforesaid M. shall so long live; yielding therefore at the Feasts, etc. by
equal portions to be paid, during all the Term aforesaid, etc. And if it
happen, etc. Quaere, whether this be a good lease at this day against issue in
tail.

A Lease for years, rendering rent.
Ebor. ss.
COmmand T. P. Esquire; and W. Gent. that justly etc. they hold to I. W. and E. M,
Covenant, etc. of one message, etc. with the appurtenances in H. and B. and of
a free fishing in the water of B. and unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid T. and W. have recognized
the tenement and free fishing aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the
right of him the said I. as that which the said I. and E. have by the gift of
the aforesaid T. and W. and that they have remised and quite claimed from
themselves, and their heirs to the aforesaid I. and E. and the heirs of him the
said I. for ever; And furthermore the said T. and W. have granted for
themselves and the heirs of him the said T. that they will warrant the tenement
and free fishing afo^^said, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid I. and E.
and the heirs of him the said ^. against all men for ever* and for this
recognisance, remise, quite claim, warranty, fine, and concord the said I. And
E. have granted to the aforesaid. W. the tenement and free fishing aforesaid,
with the appurtenances, and that to him they have rendered in the same Court. To
have and to hold the tenement and free fishing aforesaid, with the appurtenancs
to the aforesaid W. and his assigns, from the Feast of St. Martin in winter
last past, unto the end of the term of 60 years from thence next following, and
fully to be complete, yielding therefore yearly to the aforesaid ^. and E. and
the heirs of him the said I. the yearly rent of 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. of lawful money
of England, at the Feasts of St. M. and P. by equal portions during the Term
aforesaid to be paid. And if it happen the aforesaid yearly rent of 3 l. 6 s. 8
d. to be in arrear, and unpaid in part or in all by the space of XX days next
after any of the aforesaid Feasts, at which it ought to be paid, that then and
from thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful for the said I. and E. and the
heirs of him the said I. into the said tenement with the appurtenances to enter
and distrain, and the distresses so there taken and had lawfully to take drive
and lead away and in his custody, to retein until of the said yearly rent, of
3 l. 6 s. 8 d. together with the arrerages thereof, if any shall be to him, he
shall be fully satisfied and paid: also the said I. and E. have granted to the
aforesaid T. as well the reversion of the tenements and free fishing aforesaid
with the appurtenances, as the aforesaid rent, of 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. thereupon
reserved; And those to him they have rendered in the said Court. To have and to
hold as well the reversion of the tenements and free fishing aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, as the aforesaid rent of 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. thereupon reserved to
the foresaid T. and his heirs for ever, to hold etc ut supr.

A Lease for years by Fine, by one and his Wife.
Ebor. ss.
COmmand C. and A. his wife that justly etc. they hold to W. S. and I. his wife,
covenant etc. of etc. exexpressing the tenements etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid C. and A. have recognized
the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the
said W. as those which the said W. and I. have by the gift of the said C. and
A. And those they have remised and quite claimed from themselves and their
heirs to the aforesaid W. and I. and the heirs of him the said W. for ever. And
moreover etc. and for this etc. the aforesaid W. and I. have granted the
tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the said C. and A. and those to
them they have rendered in the same Court. To have and to hold the tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the said C. and A. and their assigns,
from the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel last past, unto the end of the
Term, and for the Term of 40 years, then next following, and fully to be
complete; And furthermore the said W. and I. and the heirs of the said W. will
warrant the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid C.
and A. and their assigns during the Term aforesaid against all men. And for
this etc. ut sup.

A Lease by Tennant for life, for 21 years, if she live so long.
York ss.
COmmand I. P. Gent. and E. his wife, and R. L. Esquire; that they hold to I. M.
Covenant, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that whereas the aforesaid I. P. and E. have
and do hold to them for term of the life of her the said E. the aforesaid
tenements and fishing, with the appurtenances, (the reversion thereof after the
descease of the said E. to W. T. and his heirs belonging) the same I. F. and E.
and R. have granted to the said I. M. the aforesaid tenements and fishing, with
the appurtenances, to have and to hold to the said I. and his assigns during
the life of the said E. And furthermore the aforesaid I. F. and E. and R. will
warrant to the said I. M. and his assigns, the tenements and fishing aforesaid,
with the appurtenances, (as it is said) against the aforesaid I. F and E. all
the life time of the said E. And for this grant, warranty, fine and concord,
the same I. M. has granted to the aforesaid R. the tenements and fishing
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and those to him he has rendered in the same
Court. To have and to hold the tenements and fishing aforesaid, with the
appurtenances to the same R. for the term of 21 years next following, and fully
to be complete, if the said E. shall so long live, yielding therefore yearly:
to the aforesaid I. M. and his assigns, 14. pounds at the Feasts etc. by equal
portions yearly to be paid all the life time of the said E. and if it happen
etc. the aforesaid I. M. also grants to the aforesaid I. P. and E. the
reversion of the Tenements and Fishing aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and
the rent aforesaid thereupon reserved, and those to them he has rendered in the
same Court. To have and to hold to the said J. F. and E. of the chief Lords of
that Fee, by the services which unto the tenements and fiishing aforesaid, with
the appurtenances, do belong, all the life time of the sa^d E. And after that
term ended, the Ten. aforesaid, with the appurt. shall wholly remain to P. and
his assigns for the term of 21 years after the Feast of St. Martin in Winter,
next to come, immediately following, and fully to be complete: yielding
therefore yearly to the aforesaid P. and E. and the heirs of the said P. all
the Term aforesaid one red rose at the Feast of St. John the Baptist, yearly to
be paid, if it shall be demanded. And after that Term ended, the Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances shall wholly remain to the aforesaid E. and M.
and the heirs of the said E. for ever of the chief Lords of that Fee, by the
services which unto the aforesaid tenement do belong for ever.

A lease to the Wife for 21 years, to commence after her Husbands death,
reserving a rent, the Conusees grant back the same reversion and rent.
South. ss.
COmmand C. C. Esquire; and D. his W^fe, and R. B. Gent. that they hold to H. M. and
C. M. Covenant, etc. of two Messuages, with the appurtenances, in little S. And
unless, etc,

And the Concord is such, (to wit,) that the aforesaid C. and D. and R. have
recognized the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of
him the said H. as those, etc. and those they have remised, etc. And
furthermore, etc. And for this, etc. the aforesaid H. and C. have granted to
the aforesaid R. the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and those to
him they have rendered in the same Court. To have and to hold the Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid R. all the life time of the
said R. and immediately after the decease of the said R. the tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, shall wholly remain to M. the Wife of the
said R. her executors or assigns, for the Term of 21 years from thence next
following, and fully to be complete: yielding therefore yearly to the aforesaid
H. and C. and the heirs of the said H. one annuity or yearly rent of 5 pounds
of lawful money of England, at the Feast of St. Martin the Bishop, and
Pentecost, by equal portions yearly, during the said Term to be paid. The first
payment thereof to begin at the next feast of the feasts aforesaid after the
decease of the aforesaid R. And if it happen the aforesaid annuity or yearly
rent of 5 l. to be in arrear, etc. Also the aforesaid H. andC. have granted to
the said C. C. and D. as well the reversion of the Tenements, with the
appuetenances, as the aforesaid Rent of 5 l. thereupon reserved. And those to
them they have rendered in the same Court. To have, hold and perceive the
aforesaid reversion of the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances and the
rent aforesaid to the aforesaid C. C. and D. and the heirs of her the said D.
for ever.

A Fine of a remainder for years.
York ss.
COmmand, etc. C. N. and T. T. that they hold to M. B. and E. D. Covenant, etc.
of, etc. And unless, etc.

And the Concord, etc. that whereas I. R. has and holds ^^ himself, and the
heirs ^^ his body lawful begotten, the tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances (the remainder thereof after the decease of the said I. if the
said I. shall die without heir of his body lawfully begotten, to the aforesaid
C. and his heirs belonging) the said C. and T. have granted the tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid M. and E. and the heirs of
M. for ever. To hold, etc. And the aforesaid C. and his heirs will warrant to
the aforesaid M, and E. and the heirs of him the said M. the Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, as aforesaid, against all men for ever. And
for this grant render warranty fine and Concord, the said M. and E. have
granted to the aforesaid T. the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances,
and those to him they have rendered, etc. To have, etc. to the said T. and his
assigns from the Feast of St. Martin in Winter, next after the decease of the
aforesaid J. if the said J. shall die without heir of his body lawfully
begotten, unto the end of the term, and for the term of one thousand five
hundred years from thence next following, and fully to be complete, without
impeachment of any wast: yielding therefore yearly to the aforesaid M. and E.
and the heirs of him the said M. one penny at the Feast etc. yearly to be paid
all the term afo^^^aid, if it shall be demanded. And after that term ended; the
aforesaid Tenements with the appurtenances wholly shall remain to P. T. one of
the Sons of the aforesaid T. and the heirs of him the said T. for ever, etc. ut
supra.

A Lease in reversion, paying rent.
North. ss.
COmmand A. B. and E. his Wife, that they hold to C. D. Covenant, etc. of one
Message, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid A. B. and E. have granted
the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid C. D. and his
assigns. And those in the same Court to the aforesaid C. D. have rendered. To
have and to hold to the same C. D. from the Feast of Pentecost, which shall be
in the year of our Lord, etc. unto the end of the Term of one and twenty years
from thence next following, and fully to be complete: yielding therefore yearly
to the aforesaid A. B. and E. and the heirs of him the said E. seven pounds of
lawful money, etc. at the Feasts of St. M. the Bishop, in winter, N. A. and P.
by even portions yearly, during the term aforesaid to be paid. And for this etc.

A Lease to diverse for 90 years, if the parties live so long, reserving a
rent, and the best beast after the death of every Tennant, in the name of an
Herriot.
Land. ss.
COmmand I. R. Esquire; and M. his Wife, and T. B. that they hold to R. C. and V. C.
covenant of one Message etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid I. M. and T. have
recognized the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of
him the said V. as those etc. With a release and warranty. And for this etc.
the said R. and V. have granted to the aforesaid T. B. the aforesaid tenements,
with the appurtenances, and those to him they have rendered in the same Court.
To have and to hold to the same T. and I. his Wife B. B. and T. ^. son of the
said T. so long as they shall live, or so long as any one of them shall live:
yielding therefore yearly to the said R. and V. and the Heirs of him the said
V. 4 pounds of lawful money of England, at the Feasts of the Annuntiation of
the blessed Virgin Mary, of the nati^vity of St. John the Bapt^ist, St. Michael
the Archangel, and the nativity of our Lord, by equal portions yearly to be
paid all the Term aforesaid, and paying after the decease of T. B. the Father,
and after the decease of every Tenant, thereof, his best Beast, in the name of
an Herriot. And if it happen the aforesaid rent of 4 l. to be behind and unpaid
in part, or in all, after any Feast of the said Feasts in which as aforesaid it
ought to be paid or if it happen the aforesaid best Beast in name of a Heriot
to be unpaid or subst^acted as aforesaid to be paid after the decease of every
one of the Tennants of the premises, That then it shall be lawful for the
aforesaid R. and V. And the Heirs of him the said R. into the aforesaid
Tenement, with the appurtenances, to enter and distrain, and the distresses so
there taken and had, lawfully to lead bear and drive away, and in his custody
to retain until of the aforesaid rent of four pounds and the arrerages thereof
(if any shall be) together with the best Beast aforesaid, when it shall happen
fully shall be satisfied and paid: also the aforesaid R. and V. have granted to
the said I. and M. the reversion of the Tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, the said rent of 4 pounds and the aforesaid rent of the best
Beast in the name of an Heriot above reserved; And those to them they have
rendered in the said Court. To have and to hold to the said I. and M. and the
heirs of the said I. and M. and the heirs of the said I. of the chief Lords of
that fee for ever, etc.

A Lease reserving a Rent of 20 l. With a nomine paene and a distress.
Midds. ss.
COmmand E. P. Esquire; and M. his Wife and R. B. that they hold to I. R. and T. S.
Covenant of one Message, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid E. P. M and R. B. have
recognized the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, to be the right of
him the said I. and T. as those which the said I. T. have by the gift of the
said E. M. and R. (with a Release and warranty and for this etc. The said I* I.
and T. have granted to the said R. the Tenem. aforesaid with the appurtenances,
and those to him they have rendered in the said Court; To have and to hold, to
the said R. from the feast of St. Michael last past, for the term of 31 years
from thence next following, and fully to be complete, yielding therefore yearly
to the said I. and T. and the Heirs of him the said I. twenty pounds. of
lawful money of England, at two Terms of the year, (to wit) at the Feast of
the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary, and of St. Michael the Archangel
by equal portions. yearly to be paid all the term aforesaid. And if it happen
the aforesaid rent of 20 l. or any parcel thereof to be in arrear and unpaid
in part or in all, by the space of forty days after any Feast of the said
Feasts in which the same ought to be paid, that then the aforesaid R. shall
forfeit to the said I. and T. and the Heirs of the said I. 5. pounds in name of
a pain, and that then and so often it shall be lawful for the said I. and T.
and the Heirs of the said I. into the aforesaid Tenements with the
appurtenances to enter and distrain, and the distresses so there taken and had,
lawfully to lead, bear, and drive away, and in their custody to retain, until
as well of the aforesaid 20. pounds as of the aforesaid 5. pounds in the name of
a pain as aforesaid forfeited, with the arrearages thereof, (if any shall be)
he shall be fully satisfied and paid. Also the aforesaid I. and T. have granted
to the aforesaid E. and M. the aforesaid Tenements with the appurtenances, and
the aforesaid rent of 20. pounds thereupon reserved, and the aforesaid sum of
5 l. in the name of a pain. And those to them they have rendered in the said
Court. To have and to hold to the said E. and M. and the Heirs of the body of
him the said E. lawfully begotten; To hold etc. And for default of such Issue
the remainder thereof to W. W. and his heirs for ever. To hold, etc.

A Fine upon grant and render to one for term of life, without impeachment of
wast and for 16 years after her death, then the one moiety to one in fee, and
the other to another.
York ss.
COmmand E. A. Widddow late Wife of W. A. W. Knight deceased, that she hold to
T. E. Covenant of the moiety of the Manor, of H. etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that whereas E. A. has recognized, etc. And
for this, etc. the same T. E. has granted to the aforesaid E. A. the moiety
aforesaid, with the appurtenances. And that to her has rendered in the same
Court. To have and to hold the aforesaid moiety of the Manor, etc. to the
aforesaid E. A. for the term of her life, without impeachment of any wast, of
the chief Lords of that Fee, by the services which unto the aforesaid moiety do
belong, all the life time of the said E. and for the term of sixteen years,
from thence next following, after the death of the aforesaid E. and after the
aforesaid Term of 16 years ended and determined, that then one moiety of the
aforesaid moiety of the Manor aforesaid, etc. with the appurtenances, shall
remain to B. G. now Wife of G. Esquire; and the heirs of her the said B. to hold
of, etc. And the other moiety of the aforesaid, moiety of the Manor, etc.
aforesaid with the appurtenances, shall remain to E. G. now Wife of N. G. and
the heirs of her the said E. to hold of the chief, etc.

A Render for life, the reversion to one, and his heirs males, the remainder to
another, and his heirs.
Essex ss.
COmmand N. A. and W. that they hold to R. C. and T. C. Covenant of three
Messuages,

And for this, etc. the said R, and R. have granted to the aforesaid W. the
tenements, with the appurtenances. And those to him they have rendered in the
same Court. To have and to hold to the same W. and his assigns. To hold of the
chief Lords of that Fee, by the services, which unto the aforesaid tenements do
belong, all the life time of him the said W. and after the decease of him the
said W. the said tenements, with the appurtenances wholly shall remain to I. C.
and the heirs males of the body of him the said I. lawfully begotten. To hold
etc. And if there be no heir of the body of the said J. lawfully begotten, then
the said tenements, with the appurtenances, shall wholly remain to I. C. the
brother of the aforesaid I. and his heirs for ever. To hold, etc.

A Lease for life, the remainder for life to the Wife, in the name of her
Jointure, with the remainder in tail.
ANd the Concord is such, etc. And after the decease of him the said J. the
aforesaid, etc. with the appurtenances, wholly shall remain to I. W. the
Daughter of I. W. in the name of a Jointure, whom (God willing) the said I. C.
will take to his Wife, to hold of the chief Lords, etc. all the life time of
her the said I. and after the decease of her the said I. the aforesaid, etc.
with the appurtenances wholly shall remain to the heirs males of the body of
the aforesaid I. C. lawfully begotten. To hold of the chief Lords, etc.

A Fine where the Husband buyeth lands, and grants them again to the
Cognisors for his Wifes life.
York. ss.
COmmand T. C. Esquire; W. R. Esquire; T. P. Esquire; and L. B. Gent. that they hold to J.
D. and E. his Wife, the Covenant of the Manor of C. N. and E. with the
appurtenances, and of 200 Messuages, etc. and of twenty pounds rent, with the
appurtenances, in C. N. and B. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid T. C. W. R. T. P. and L.
have recognized the Manors, Tenements, and rents aforesaid, with the
appurtenances to be the right of him the said I. And those they have remised
and quit claimed from themselves and their heirs to the aforesaid J. and the
heirs of him the said J. for ever. And for this, etc. the same I. and E. have
granted to the aforesaid T. C. W. R. T. P. and L. the aforesaid Manors,
Tenements, and Rent, with the appurtenances, and those to them they rendered in
the same Court. To have and to hold to the same T. C. W. R. T. P. and L. all
the life time of her the said E. And the aforesaid I. and his heirs will
warrant to the aforesaid T. C. VV. R. T. P. and L. the aforesaid Manors,
Tenements and Rent, with the appurtenances, (as it is said) against all men,
during the life of her the aforesaid E. etc.

A Concord of diverse Tenements, Rents, of a Rectory, and Advowson, etc.
THis is the final Concord made in the Court of the Lord Protector at W. from
the day of Easter in 15 days in the year, etc. before E. A. T. M. F. W. W. P.
Justices, and other faithful men then there present, between I. B. Gent. and
R. Gent. Plaintiffs, and R. C. the elder, Gent. and R. C. of Grays Inn in the
County of Middlesex, Gent. Deforcients, of 100 Messuages, 100 Cottages, 2000
acres of Land, 1000 acres of Meadow, 2000 acres of Pasture, 100 acres of Wood,
1000 acres of Furrs and Heath, and 100 shillings rent, with the appurtenances
in etc: also of the Rectory of K. with the appurtenances, and of the Advowson
of the Church of K. whereof Plea of Covenant was summoned between them in the
same Court (to wit) that the aforesaid R. and R. have recognized the aforesaid
Tenements, Rent, and Rectory, with the appurtenances, and the Advowson
aforesaid, to be the right of him the said J. as those which the same J. and R.
have by the gift of the aforesaid R, and R. And those they have remised and
quit claimed from them the said R. and R. and their heirs to the aforesaid I.
and R. and the heirs of him the said J. for ever. And furthermore the said R.
and R. have granted for themselves and the heirs of him the said R. C. the
elder, that they will warrant to the aforesaid J. and R. and the heirs of him
the said J. The aforesaid Tenements, Rent, and Rectory, with the appurtenances,
and the Advowson aforesaid, against the aforesaid R. and R. and the heirs of
him the said R. C. the elder for ever. And for this Recognisance, remise, quite
claim, Warranty, Fine, and Concord, the said J. and R. have given to the
aforesaid R. and R. two thousand pounds sterling.

A Fine of the fourth part of two Messuages, the one by a Coparcenor of his
part etc. to two strangers.
THis is the final Concord made in the Court, etc. between G. I. and W. W.
Plantiffs, and I. C. and I. his wife Deforcients of the fourth part of 2
Messuages. 4 Tofts, 2 Gardens, 2 Orchards, 200 hundred acres of Land 20 acres
of Meadow, 40 acres of Pasture, 12 acres of Wood, and 100 acres of Moor, with
the appurtenances in G. and L. in four parts divided whereof plea of Covenant
was summoned between them in the same Court, (to wit) that the aforesaid T. and
I. have regcognised the aforesaid fourth part with the appurtenances, to be the
right of him the said G. as that which the said G. and W. have by the gift of
the aforesaid I. and I. And that they have remised and quit claimed from them
the said I. and I. and the Heirs of the said I. to the aforesaid G. and W. and
the Heirs of him the said G. for ever. And furthermore the said Jo. and Ja.
have granted for themselves. and the heirs of her the said Ja. that they will
warrant to the aforesaid G. and W. and the Heirs of him the said G. the
aforesaid fourth part with the appurtenances. And that to them they have
rendered in the same Court. To have and to hold to the same I. and I. of the
chief Lords of that Fee by the services which unto the aforesaid fourth part do
belong during the lives of them the said I. and I. and the life of the longer
liver of either of them without impeachment of any wast. And after the decease
of them the said I. and I. the aforesaid fourth part, with the appurtenances,
shall wholly remain to B. C. Son of the aforesaid I. and I. and the heirs of
the body of the said B. lawfully begotten. To hold of the chief Lords of that
Fee, etc. for ever. And if it happen that the said B. shall die without heir of
his body lawfully begotten, then after the decease of him the said B. the
aforesaid fourth part, with the appurtenances shall wholly remain to P. C.
another Son of the said I. and I. and the heirs of his body, etc. to hold of
the chief, etc. for ever. And if it happen that the said P. shall die, etc.
then after the decease of him the said P. the aforesaid fourth part shall
wholly remain to R. C. another Son of the aforesaid I. and I. and the heirs of
his body, etc. To hold of the chief, etc. for ever. And if it happen that the
said R. shall die, etc. then after the decease of the said R. the aforesaid
4th. part, with the appurtenances, shall wholly remain to the right heirs of
the aforesaid J. To hold of the chief Lords of that Fee, by the services which
unto the aforesaid fourth part do belong for ever.

A Fine of lands, part in possession, and part in reversion of a third part,
for term of the life of the Tennant in Dower, and for Term of the life of
another Tenant for Term of life.
York ss.
COmmand J. W. and A. his Wife, that justly, etc. they hold to I. L. and E. E.
Covenant of one Message, etc. also of the third part, in three parts to be
divided of 4 Messuages, with the appurtenances, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid I* and A. have recognized
the Tenements aforesaid, and the third part aforesaid, with the appurtenances,
to be the right of him the said J. of which the said J. E. and E. E. have one
Message, with the appurtenances, in the aforesaid Towns of T. and B, parcel of
the Tenements, aforesaid, and the aforesaid third part of four Messuages, etc.
with the appurtenances in T. and B. parcel of the Tenements aforesaid, by the
gift of the aforesaid I. and A. And that they have remised and quit claimed
from them the said I. and A. and their heirs, to the aforesaid J. E. and E. E.
and the heirs of him the said J. for ever. And have granted for themselves, and
the heirs of him the said A. that twenty acres of land, six acres of Meadow,
etc. with the appurtenances, in the aforesaid Town of B. parcel of the
Tenements and the third part aforesaid which J. A. and F. his Wife, hold for
term of the life of her the said F. of the heirs of the aforesaid A. the day
that this Concord was made. And which after the decease of him the said E. unto
the aforesaid I. A. and his heirs ought to revert, after the decease of him the
said A. wholly shall remain to the aforesaid J. E. and E. E. and the heirs of
him the said J. for ever. Also the said J. W. and A. have granted for
themselves, and the heirs of the said A. that one Message, with the
appurtenances, in the aforesaid Town of B. residue of the Tenements aforesaid,
which J. A. holds for Term of his life of the heirs of the aforesaid A. the
day that this Concord was made, after the decease of him the said A. shall
wholly remain to the aforesaid J. E. and E. and the heirs of him the said E.
for ever.

A Grant and Render of a Reversion of a Moiety.
York ss.
COmmand N. G. and E. his Wife, W. G. and B. his Wife, that they hold to F. A.
Covenant of the moiety of the Manor of H. with the appurtenances, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that whereas E. A. Widow, late Wife of W. A.
deceased, has and holds the aforesaid moiety of the Manor of H. with the
appurtenances. And the aforesaid moiety of the Tenements and fishing aforesaid,
with the appurtenances, for the term of her life, without impeachment of any
wast. And that after the death of the said E. the aforesaid moiety of the
Manor, Tenements, and fishing aforesaid, shall remain to the Executors of the
Testament of the said E. for the term of 16 years then next following, after
the death of the said E. without impeachment of wast. And which, after the
death of the aforesaid E. A. for the term of the aforesaid 16 years to N. G,
and E. his Wife, and W. G. and B. his wife, and the heirs of him the said E. B.
should revert. The aforesaid W. G. and B. his Wife, N. G. and E. his Wife, do
grant, that the said moities of the said Manors, Tenements, and fishing, with
the appurtenances, after the death of the aforesaid E. A. and after the
aforesaid term of 16 years ended, and determined shall wholly remain to the
aforesaid F. A. and his heirs. To hold of the chief Lords of that fee, by the
services which unto the aforesaid moieties of the said Manor, Ten. and fishing
do belong. And those they have remised, and quit claimed from the said W. G.
and B. his Wife, N. G. and E. his Wife, and their heirs, to the aforesaid F A.
and his heirs for ever. And furthermore the said W. G. and B. N. G. and E, have
granted for themselves, and the heirs of him the said N. that they will warrant
the aforesaid reversion of the moiety of the said Manor, Tenements, and
Fishing, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid F. A. and his heirs, against
them the said W. G. and B. N. G. and E. and their heirs for ever. And for this,
etc. the said F. has granted to the aforesaid W. G. and B. N. G. and E. the
aforesaid reversion of the moiety of the Manor, Tenements, and Fishing
aforesaid, with the appurtenances. And those to them he has rendered in the
said Court. To have and to hold the said reversion of the moiety of the Manor,
Tenements, and fishing aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the said W. G. and
B. N. G. and E. from the Feast of Philip and James which shall be then next
after the end of the said 16 years unto the end and term of 21 years from
thence next following and fully to be complete, without impeachmhnt of any wast.

A Render to the Conusor for one week, after to a Stranger for life, and to his
wife for life, if she keep her unmarried, the Reversion to another Stranger and
his Heirs of his body, upon M. his wife begotten, the remainder to another and
his Heirs.
York. ss.
COmmand I. W. and E. his wrfe, that they hold to W. A. and O. S. Covenant of
two Messuages etc. in S. And that unless, etc.

And for this etc. The said W. and O. have granted to the aforesaid I. the
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, And those to him they have rendered
in the said Court. To have and to hold to the said B. for the term of one week,
and after that Term ended, the aforesaid Tenements with the appurtenances
wholly shall remain to B. To have and to hold to the said B. of the chief Lords
of that Fee by the services which to the aforesaid Tenements do belong all the
life time of the said B. And after the decease of the said B. the aforesaid
Tenements with the appurtenances shall wholly remain to I. Wife of the
aforesaid B. to hold etc. all the life time of the said I. if the said I. shall
so long live sole and unmarried. And after the decease or spousal of the said
I. if either shall be, the aforesaid Tenements with the appurtenanes, shall
wholly remain to E. W. Son and Heir apparent of the aforesaid I. and the
Heirs of the body of him the said E. upon the body of M. his Wife, between them
lawfully begotten. To hold etc. And if it happen that the said E. shall dye,
without Heir of his body, on the body of the aforesaid M. between them lawfully
begotten, then after the decease of them the said E. and M. the Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenancs shall wholly remain to the aforesaid I. and his
Heirs: To hold etc. for ever.

A Fine of two Reversions.
York. ss.
COmmand R. N. and A. his Wife, that they hold to G. E. Covenant etc. of two
Messuages, one cottage etc. in N.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid R. and A. have recognized
the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of the said G.
and have granted for themselves and the heirs of the said R. that the aforesaid
Cottage, twenty acres of Land. ten acres of Meadow, etc. Parcel of the
Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances in N. aforesaid, which W. B. and A.
his Wife do hold for term of the life of her the said A. of the Inheritance of
the aforesaid R. the day that this Concord was made, and which after the
decease of her the said A. unto the aforesaid R. and his heirs ought to revert,
wholly after the decease of her the said A. unto the aforesaid G. and his
heirs, shall remain, to hold etc. Also the aforesaid R. and A. have granted
that the aforesaid 2 Messuages. etc. theresidue of the Tenements aforesaid with
the appurtenances in N. aforesaid, which W. P. and D. his Wife, hold for term
of the life of her the said D. of the Inheritance, etc. ut antea. And
furthermore the aforesaid R. and A. and the Heirs of him the said R. will
warrant the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances to the aforesaid G. and
his heirs as (^t is said,) against the aforesaid R. and A. and the Heirs of him
the said R. for ever. And for this etc.

A grant to the Cognisee, and his Wife, and the Heirs of their two bodies, with
Warranty.
York. ss.
COmmand H. F. Gent. that justly, etc. he hold to H. M. and I. his Wife,
covenant etc. of the Tenements in S. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid H. F. has granted the
Tenements and rent aforesaid with the appurterances to the aforesaid H. W. and
I. And those to them he has rendered in the said Court. To have and to hold to
the said H. W. and I. and the Heirs of the bodies of them the said H. W. and I.
between them lawfully begotten. To hold etc. and the aforesaid H. F. and their
Heirs will warrant to the aforesaid H. W. and I. and the heirs of the body of
them the said H. W. and I. between them lawfully begotten, the Tenements
aforesaid (as it is said) against all men, for ever. And for this, etc.

A Grant, with a Render back again, for life, with Remainders in tail dividing
the Lands.
Hereff. ss.
COmmand N. B. and A. his wife that they hold to T. R. and R. G. Covenant etc.
of one Message etc. with the appurtenances in E. etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid etc. with Release and
warranty, etc. and for this etc. the said T. R. have g^anted to the aforesaid
N. and A. the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances. And those to them
they have rendered in the said Court. To hold to the said N and A. for the lives
of them the said N. and A. and the life of the longer liver of either of them,
without impeachment of waste, all the life time of the said A. To hold etc. And
after the decease of them the said N. and A. one Message etc. with the
appurtenances in F. aforesaid, being parcel of the Tenements aforesaid, shall
remain to T. B. one of the Sons of the aforesaid N. and A. and the Heirs male
of the body of the aforesaid T. lawfully begotten, and then after the decease
of the said T. the aforesaid Tenements, being parcel of the aforesaid
Tenements, wholly shall remain to I. B. one other of the Sons of the
aforesaid N. and A. and the Heirs Males of the body of him the said I. lawfully
begotten. To hold etc. And if it happen, etc. after the decease of the said I,
the aforesaid Tenements, parcel of the said Tenements, shall wholly remain to
B. F. one other Son of the aforesaid A. and the Heirs males of the body of
the aforesaid B. lawfully begotten. To be held, etc. And if it happen etc. that
then the Tenements aforesaid shall remain (to diverse others) and the right
Heirs of the aforesaid D. for ever. To hold, etc. And furthermore the aforesaid
T. and R. have granted, that after the decease of the aforesaid N. B. and A.
his wife, 44 acres of Land, 2 acres of Meadow, etc. with the appurtenances in
B. aforesaid being residue of the aforesaid Tenements shall wholly remain to
the aforesaid B. F. and the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten. To hold etc.
And if it happen that the said B. shall die without Heir of his body lawfully
begotten, that then after the decease of the said B. the Residue of the
aforesaid Tenements, shall wholly remain to the aforesaid T. F. and his Heirs
and assigns for ever.

A Fine to entaile Lands to the Heirs of o^^ deecased
Leicester. ss.
COmmand I. C. Esquire; that he hold to M. C. Widow, Covenant of three Messuages,
etc.

And the Concord is such, that the aforesaid I. has granted to the said M. the
aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances. And that to her has rendered in
the said Court. To have and to hold to the said M. and the Heirs of the body of
her the said M. of the body of I. C. lately her Husband deceased, lawfully
begotten, of the chief etc. And if it happen that the said M. shall dye without
Heir on her body of the body of the said I. C. lawfully begotten, then after
the decease of her the said M. the aforesaid Tenements; with the appurtenances,
shall wholly remain to the right Heirs of the said I. C. deceased. To hold etc.
And the aforesaid I. C Esquire; and his Heirs will warrant to the aforesaid M. and
the Heirs of her body, of the body of the aforesaid I. C. deceased, and also to
the right Heirs of him the said I. C. if the said M. shall dye without Heir of
her body, of the body of the said I. C. deceased lawfully begotten, the
aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances (as is said) against the aforesaid
I. C. Esquire; and his Heirs for ever. And for this etc.

A Grant by a Duke and his wife, as in the right of his wife, to the Conusee
for life of the Tennant for life, with warranty: a Render to the Cognisor for
the Wives life, to convey her title to her Husband.
COmmand. T. Duke N. and M. his wife, that they hold to T. T. Esquire; Covenant
etc. of the Tenements in W. and unless, etc,

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid Duke and M. have granted
to the aforesaid T. T. the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and
whatsoever the said Duke and M. have in the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, for term of ^ive of her the said M. And those to them they have
rend^ed in the said Court. To have and to hold to the said T. T. and his Heirs
of the chief Lords of that Fee, by the services which unto the said Tenements
with the appurtenances do belong, all the life time of her the said M. And
furthermore the said T. and M. have granted for themselves, that they will
warrant to the aforesaid T. T. and his Heirs, the Tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, against all men, all the life time of the said M. And for this
etc. the said T. T. has granted the Tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances to the aforesaid Duke, and those to him he has rendered in the
said Court. To have and to hold the said Tenements, with the appurtenances, to
the said Duke and his Heirs all the life time of the said M. to hold ut supra.

A Concord o^ a moiety of diverse things in p^^^ession, and of a reversion in
Fee.
THis (...) final Concord made etc. be^^^en ^. ^. and ^. H. Plantiffes. and T.
N. and I. his wife; one of the Cousins and Heirs of R. E. Defortients of the
Moiety of the Man^ors of W. and R. with the appurtenances, and of the Moiety of
80 Messuages, 40 acres of Land, 300 acres of Meadow, 50 acres of Pasture, 100
acres of Wood, 30 acres (...), and Heath, 160 acres of Moore, 200 acres of
Marish, and 20 shillings rent with the appurtenances in W. R. W. P. T. (...) of
the advowson of the Moiety of the (...), of E. W. P. and R. and (...) of the
Moiety of the (...) of L. whereof Plea of Covena^^ (...) between them in the
(...) that the aforesaid T. and ^. ^ave (...) the aforesaid Moyeties with the
appurt^nances, and the advowsons afo^^said to ^e ^^e right of him the said A.
of which the said A. and L. have by gift the Moiety aforesaid, of the Manor of
R. with the appurtenances, also the Moiety of 80 Mess^^ge^. 260 acres of Land,
100 acres of Meadow. ^00 acres of Pasture. 80 acres of Wood, 200 acres of Ling
and Heath, 140 acre; of Maris^, 100 acres of Moore, and six pounds six
shillings rent, with the appurtenances in R. T. H etc. and also the advowson of
the moye^y of the Church of R. and the advowson of the moiety of the Monastery
or Priory of L. parcel^ of the Moiety of the Manors, Tenements, rent, and
advowsons aforesaid, by the gift of the aforesaid T. and I. and those they have
remised and quite claimed, from them the said T. and I. and the Heirs of him
the said I. to the aforesaid A. and L. and the Heirs of him the aforesaid A.
for ever. And furthermore the said T. and I. have granted for themselves and
the Heirs of him the said I. that the moiety of the Manor of W. and the moiety
of 30 Messuages 250. acres of Land, 100 acres of Meadow, etc. with the
appurtenances in W. P. E. and W. aforesaid, and the advowsons of the moiety of
the Churches of P. E. and W. aforesaid, being the residue of the moiety of the
Manors, Tenements, rent, and advowsons aforesaid, which E. E. holds for term
of her life of the inheritance of the aforesaid I. the day that this Concord
was made, and which after the decease of the said E. E. unto the aforesaid T.
and I. and the Heirs of him the said I. ought to revert, after the decease of
her the said E. E. wholly shall remain to the aforesaid A. and L. and the Heirs
of him the said A. to hold together with the aforesaid moiety and advowson,
which to them by this Fine do remain of the chief Lords of that Fee, by the
services which unto those moyeties and advowsons do belong for ever. And the
aforesaid T. and I. and the Heirs of him the said I. will warrant to the
aforesaid A. and L. and the Heirs of him the said A. the aforesaid moyeties,
with the appurtenances, and the advowsons aforesaid, (as aforesaid) against all
men for ever. And for this recognisance, remise, quite claim, warranty, fine,
and Concord, the said A. and L. have granted to the aforeaid T. and I. the
aforesaid Moyetie o^ the Manor of R. and the moiety o^ the Tenements with the
appurtenances aforesaid, in R. T. H. etc. aforesaid. Also the advowson of the
moiety of the Chuch of R. aforesaid, and the advowson of the moiety of the
Monastery or Priory of I. aforesaid, and those to them they have rendered in the
said Court. To have and to hold to the said T. and I. and the Heirs of him the
said I. of the chief Lords of that Fee, by the services which unto those
moyeties and advowsons do belong for ever. And also the said A. and L. have
granted the aforesaid moiety of the Manor of W. with the appurtenances, and
the aforesaid Moiety of the the Tenements with the appurtenances in W. P. E.
etc. aforesaid to the said T. and I. and those also have rendered in the said
Court. To have and to hold immediately after the death of the aforesaid E. E. to
the said T. and I. and the Heirs of him the said I. of the chief Lords of that
Fee, by the services which unto that moiety and advowson do belong for ever.

A Grant of Lands by Fine to two, who render to the Cognisor in tail, and for
default of such issue to R. T. in general tail, the remainder to another and
his Heirs for ever.
ANd the Concord is such etc. that the aforesaid A. has recognized the
Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said I.
as those which the said I. and D. have by the gift of the aforesaid A. and
those he has remised, etc. and for this etc. the said I, and D. have gran-to
the aforesaid A. the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, And those to
him they have rendted in the said Court To have and to hold to the said A. and
the Heirs of the body of him the said A. lawfuly begotten and for default of
such issue, then the Tenements aforesaid with the appur^enances whloly shall
remain to the Heirs of the body of R. T. Son of the aforesaid A. and the Heirs
of the body of them ^awfully begotten, and for default of such issue, then the
Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, shall remain to D. E. and his
Heirs for ever, etc.

A Grant of Lands in tail, to be holden of the Grantor in Soccage.
York. ss.
COmmand S. B. Esquire; that he hold to W. S. Covenant of three Messuages etc. with
the appurtenances in C. And unless etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid S. has granted to the
aforesaid W. the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and those to him
he has rendered in the said Court. To have and to hold to the said W. and the
Heirs of his body lawfully begotten, of the aforesaid S. and his Heirs in
Soccage, by Fealty only for all services and demands which unto the aforesaid
Tenements do belong for ever. And if it happen that the said W. shall dye
without Heir of his body lawfully begotten, then after the decease of him the
said VV. the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, shall wholly remain
to I. S. Grandfather of the aforesaid W. and the Heirs of the body of him the
said I. lawfully begoten. To hold, etc. (ut antea) And if no Heir of the body
of the said I. shall be lawfully begotten, then the aforesaid Tenements with the
appurtenances, shall wholly revert unto the aforesaid (...) and his Heirs,
quite from other Heirs of the a^or^said W. and I. to hold of the chief etc. And
furthermore the aforesaid S. and his Heirs will war^ant to the aforesaid W. and
the Heirs of his body lawfully begoten, and to the aforesaid I. and the Heirs
of his body lawfully begotten, if the said W. shall dye without heir of his
body lawfully begotten, the aforesaid Tenements with the appurtenances (as it
is said) against all men for ever, And for this etc.

A Grant of Lands in tail to be holden, of the Grantor by suit of Court, and
six shillings rent.
Essex. ss.
COmmand I. G. Gent. that he hold to P. I. Covenant of 16 acres of Moore, with
the appurtenances in K. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid I. has granted to the
aforesaid P. the Tenements aforesaid with the ppurtenances. and those to him he
has rendered in the said Court. To have and to hold the Tenements aforesaid,
with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid P. and the Heirs of his body lawfully
begotten, To hold of the said I. and his Heirs by Knight service and suit of
his Court at K. twice a year, and yielding yearly to the aforesaid I. and his
Heirs six shillings etc. at the Feasts, etc. by equal portions yearly for ever
to be paid. And the aforesaid, I. will warrant the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, to the aforesaid P. and the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten
(as it is said) against the aforesaid I. and his Heirs for ever. And for this,
etc.

A Fine of Knights Service, Castle-gard, and Murage, upon a writ of Customs and
Services.
THis is the final Concord, made in the Court of our Sovereign Lord, the King
at Westminster, from the day of St. Michael in 15 days in the year of the reign
of King H. Son of King J. the one and fiftieth, before G. D. P. and R. of M.
Justices, and other of the Sovereign Lords, faithful subjects then there
present, between W. of P. Plantiff, and H. B. Deforcient, of the Customs and
Services which the said W. did require of the aforesaid H. for his Freehold,
which the aforesaid W. holds in W. and W. (to wit) of one Knights fee and a
half, with the appurtenances. And whereupon the said W. demanded of the
aforesaid H. that he should do to him for Castle-gard of B. when it shall
happen, and for the Murage of the said Castle, when it shall be necessary, as
much as does belong to the aforesaid Tenement, which services the said H. to
him has not acknowledged. And whereupon Plea between them in the said Court
was summoned (to wit) that the aforesaid VV. has granted for himself and his
Heirs, that the aforesaid H. and his Heirs, and their Tenants of the honor of
B. be quit from the aforesaid Services for ever: saving to the said W. and his
Heirs, all other Services unto the aforesaid Tenement belonging. And for this
grant, fine, and Concord, the said H. has given, by the assent and will of the
said Sovereign Lord the King that grants it etc. This old Fine is in Dyer fo.
179. pla. 46.

A Fine of a Manor in Possession, and other Lands in reversion.
Salop. ss.
COmmand VV. B that he hold to F. R. Covenant of the Manor of R. with the
appurtenances, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid W. has recognized the
Manor and Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him
the said F. of which the said F. has the aforesaid Manor with the
appurtenances, two Messuages with the appurtenances in R. aforesaid, parcel of
the Tenements aforesaid, by the gift of the aforesaid VV. and those he has
remised, etc. And has granted for himself and his Heirs, that two Messuages
with the appurtenances in R. aforesaid, residue of the Tenements aforesaid,
which A. B. widow holds for Term of her life, of the inheritance, etc. after
the decease of the said A. shall wholly remain to the aforesaid F. R. and his
Heirs, To hold, together with the aforesaid Manor and parcel of the Tenements
which to him by this Fine shall remain, of the chief Lords etc. And the
aforesaid VV. B. and his Heirs will warrant to the aforesaid F. and his Heirs
the aforesaid Manors, and Tenements, with the appurtenances, (as it is said)
against all men for ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine of Lands, part in possession, and part in Reversion, with a Render
again to the Cognisors, and their Heirs.
Midd. ss.
COmmand T. M. Esquire; and M. his Wife that justly, etc. they hold etc. to A. S.
Covenant of the manor of W. near Y. VV. in C. and G. with the appurtenances,
and of 350 Messuages, etc. also of the advowson of the Church of W. in G. in
the County aforesaid. And of the Manor of D. with the appurtenances, and of 10
Messuages, etc. and seven shillings eight pence half penny rent, with the
apputtenances in D. in the County of G. And of the manor of S. with the
appurtenances, and of 6 Messuages, etc. with the appurtenances in S. C. and V.
in the County of D. etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid T. and M. have recognized
the Manors, Tenements, and rent, with the appurtenances, and the advowson
afore^^id, to be the right of him the said A. of which the said A. has the
aforesaid Manors of W near Y. W. in D. etc. and the advowson aforesaid in the
said County of G. and the said Manors of South C. with the appurtenances, and
the aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances in South C. and V. aforesaid,
in the said County of D. parcel of the Manors, Tenements, and rent aforesaid
by the gift of the aforesaid T. and M. And those they have remised etc. and
have granted for themselves, and the Heirs of the said M. that the aforesaid
Manor of S. aforesaid, in the said County of S. And also the aforesaid Manor
of D. with the appurtenances, in the aforesaid County of S. residue of the
Manors Tenements, and rent aforesaid, which F. S. Esquire; and E. his wife, do
hold for term of the life of her the said E. of the inheritance of ^he
aforesaid M. the day that this Concord was made, and which after the decease of
him the said E. unto the aforesaid T. and M. and the Heirs of the said M.
should revert after the decease of the said E. wholly shall remain to the
aforesaid A. S. and his Heirs, To be held together with the aforesaid Manors,
Tenements, and rent, which to him by this fine shall remain, of the chief Lords
of the Fee, by the services which unto the aforesaid Manor Tenements, rent and
advowson, do belong for ever, and the aforesaid T. and M. and the Heirs of the
said M. will warrant to the aforesaid A. and his Heirs, the asaid Manors,
Tenements, and rent, with the appurtenances, and the advowson aforesaid (as it
is said) against all men for ever. And for this, etc. the said A. has granted
to the aforesaid T. and M. the aforesaid Manors, Tenements, and rent with the
appurtenances, and the advowson aforesaid, and those to them he has rendered in
the said Court. To have and to hold to the said T. and M. of the chief Lords
etc. for the life of the said T. and M. and the longer l^ver of either of them,
without impeachment of any wast: And after the decease of the said T. and M.
the aforesaid Manors, Tenements, etc. shall wholly remain, to the Heir of him
the said T, of the bodies of him the said T. and M. lawfully begotten; To hold
etc. And if no Heir of the said T. of the bodies of the said T. and M. shall be
lawfully begotten, then the aforesaid Manors etc. shall wholly remain to the
Heirs of the body of the said M. lawfully begotten. To hold etc. And if no Heir
of the body of the said M. shall be lawfully begotten, then the aforesaid
Manors etc. shall wholly remain, to the right Heirs of the said T. for ever.
To hold, etc.

A Fine of a Reversion of a Rent.
Essex. ss.
COmmand etc. that justly etc. hold Covenant, etc. of forty shillings rent, with
the appurtenances, issuing out of the Manor of F. and of 6. Messuages etc. And
unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid I. has recognized the
aforesaid rent, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said R. and
has granted for himself and his Heirs, that the aforesaid rent, with the
appurtenances, which H. T. and A. his wife hold for term of the life of her the
said A. of the aforesaid I. the day that this concord was made, issuing out of
the aforesaid Manor, etc. with the appurtenances which I. H. Knight now
holds, and which after the decease of the said A. unto the aforesaid I. F.
and his Heirs ought to revert; after the decease of the said A. wholly shall
remain to the aforesaid R. and his Heirs, for ever. And the aforesaid I. F. and
his Heirs will warrant to the aforesaid R. and his Heirs the aforesaid rent,
with the appurtenances (as aforesaid) against I. Abbat of the Monastery, etc.
and his successors for ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine of the Reversion of a Rent.
THis is the final Concord made, etc. between R. P. Plaintiff and I. B.
Deforcient of ten Marks rent, with the appurtenances in B. which P. of A.
holds for term of life, whereof plea of Covenant was summoned between them in
the said Court, (to wit) that the aforesaid I. has granted for himself and his
Heirs, that the aforesaid rent, with the appurtenances, which the aforesaid P.
holds for term of life, by the demise of the aforesaid I. in the aforesaid
Town, the day that this Concord was made, and which after the decease of the
said P. unto the aforesaid I. and his Heirs ought to revert, after the decease
of the said P. wholly shall remain to the aforesaid R. and the Heirs of his
body begotten. To hold of the chief Lords of the Fee by the services which unto
the aforesaid rent do belong for ever. And if it happen that the said R. shall
die without Heir of his body begotten, then after the decease of the said R.
the aforesaid Rent, with the appurtenances, shall wholly remain to the right
Heirs of him the said R. to hold of the chief Lords of the Fee, by the services
which unto the aforesaid rent do belong for ever. And for this Grant, Fine, and
Concord, the said R. has given to the aforesaid I. one hundred Marks of Money.

A Fine of Rent service.
Not. ss.
COmmand etc. that justly etc. hold Covenant, etc. of eleven shillings rent,
with the appurtenances in B. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit,) that the aforesaid E. has recognized the
aforesaid Rent, with the appurrenances, to be the right of the aforesaid W. and
the said E. hereupon has granted to the said W. that the rent, with the
apputtenances, together with the Homage and all the services of S. F. R. L. and
I. D. and their Heirs, for so many Tenements as they severally of the said E.
before held in the aforesaid Town, To have and to hold to the said W. and his
Heirs, of the chief Lords of the Fee, by the Services which unto the aforesaid
rent do belong for ever. And the aforesaid E. and his Heirs, the aforesaid
rent, with the appurtenances, (as is aforesaid) to the aforesaid W. and his
Heirs against all men will warrant for ever, etc.

A Fine where the Husband and the Wife sell the Wives ^ointure or Dower
absolutely to him in the Reversion.
York. ss.
COmmand T. G. Esquire; and B. his Wife, that they hold with I. W. and E. his Wife
Covenant, of 4 Messuages. etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that whereas T. and B. have and hold the
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, for term of the life of the
aforesaid B. (the reversion thereof to the aforesaid E. and his Heirs after the
decease of the aforesaid B. belonging;) the said T. and B. have granted to the
aforesaid I. and E. the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and all
and whatsoever in the said Tenements with the appurtenances, for the term of
the life of her the said B. they have, to the said I. and E. in the said Court
rendered, To have and to hold to the said I. and E. and the Heirs of the said E.
during all the life of the said B. of the chief Lords etc. And the aforesaid T.
and B. will warrant to the aforesaid I. and E. the Tenements aforesaid A. with
the appurtenances (as it is said) against the aforesaid T. and B. during all
the life of her the said E. and for this, etc.

Tenant for Term of life makes a Lease, reserving a rent during her life,
Suff. ss.
COmmand L. H. and D. his Wife, that they hold to B. B. Covenant of the Manor
of S. with the appurtenances, and of 6 Messuages etc. with the appurtenances in
S.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid L. and D. have granted
the Manor, Tenements, and Rent, with the appurtenances, which the said L. D.
hold for term of the life of her the said D. (the reversion thereof after the
decease of the said D. to one R. R. and his Heirs belonging) to the aforesaid
B. B. to have to him and his assigns all the life time of the said D. And
furthermore the said L. and D. have granted that they will warrant the Manors,
Tenements, and Rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances to the aforesaid B. and
his assigns, all the life time of the aforesaid D. against them the said L. and
D. for ever, And for this etc. the said B. has granted to the aforesaid L. and
D. one yearly rent of forty Marks, of lawful etc. issuing out of the Manor
and Tenements aforesaid, To have and perceive the said yearly rent of forty
Marks, to the aforesaid L. and D. for term of the life of her the said D. at
the Feasts etc. by equal portions yearly to be paid, and if it happen that the
aforesaid yearly rent, etc.

A Fine of a Reversion.
Norff. ss.
COmmand P. A. that he hold, Covenant etc. of one Message etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit,) that the aforesaid P. has recognized the
Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said E.
And has granted for himself and his Heirs that the aforesaid, Tenements which
W. B. and A. his Wife hold for term of the life of the said A. of the
inheritance of the said P. the day that this Concord was made. And which after
the decease of the said A. unto the aforesaid P. and his Heirs ought to revert,
after the decease of the said A. shall wholly remain to the aforesaid E. S. and
his Heirs for ever. To hold etc. and the aforesaid P. has granted for himself
and his Heirs, that he will warrant the aforesaid Tenements, with the
appurtenances (as it is said) against all men for ever, And for this etc.

A Fine in Fee farm of a rent granted out of a Manor only.
Salop. ss.
COmmand A. C. Widow that she hold to H. C. Gent. Covenant of the yearly rent
of 40 l. issuing out of the Manor of S. with the appurtenances in S. And
unless etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid A. has granted to the
aforesaid H. the aforesaid rent, with the appurtenances. And that to him has
rendered in the said Court. To have and perceive the aforesaid 40 l. to the said
H. and his assigns at the Feasts of the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin
Mary, and of St. Michael the Archangel, by equal portions yearly to be paid,
during the life of the said H. etc. And if it happen the aforesaid rent of
forty pounds to be in arrear, etc. that then it shall be lawful for the
aforesaid H. and his assigns, during her life, into the aforesaid Manor, with
the appurtenances, to enter and distrain etc. And the aforesaid A. and her
Heirs will warrant to the aforesaid H. and his assigns the aforesaid rent of
forty pounds, with the appurtenances (as it is said) against ^he aforesaid A.
and her Heirs, during the life of the said H. for ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine of several rents granted out of a Manor.
Staff. ss.
COmmand E. B. Widddow. E. B. Gent. R. B. Gent. and R. B. Gent. that they hold
to R. G. Covenant of the Manor of H. with the appurtenances, and of ten
Messuages. etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid Eliz Edw. Bald. Ra. and
Rich. have recognized the aforesaid Manor, Tenements, and rent, with the
appurtenances, to be the right of him the said R. (cum Release ^^ warrant.) And
for this, etc. The said Rog. has granted to the aforesaid Edw. one annuity or
yearly rent of 6 l. 13s. 4 d. issuing out of the Manor and Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances. And those to them he has rendered in the
said Court. To have and perceive the said yearly rent of 6l. 13. s. 4 d. to the
aforesaid Edw. and his assigns, during his life, at the Feast of the nativity
of St. John the Baptist, and the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary by
equal portions yearly to be paid, And if it happen, etc. Also the said R. has
granted one annuity or yearly rent of 6l. 13 s. 4 d. ut supra cum claus.
district. And moreover the said R. has granted to the aforesaid R. one other
annuity etc. of 6 l. 13 s. 4. d. in manner and form aforesaid: furthermore the
said R. has granted to the aforesaid E. the aforesaid Manor, Tenements, and
Rent, with the appurtenances. And those to them he has rendered in the said
Court. To have and to hold to the aforesaid E. and his assigns, during the life
of the said E. of the chief Lords of the Fee, etc. And after the decease of the
said E. the aforesaid Manor, Tenements, and Rent, shall wholly remain to the
aforesaid E. and his Heirs. To hold of the chief, etc.

A Fine of a Rent, with a Pain of 8 l. for every five weeks that the Rent is
behind, for every week after the 5 weeks, to forfeit 8 l. nomine Poene, with a
clause of distress.
ANd for this etc. the said A. and B. have granted to the aforesaid W. and F.
one annual rent of 90 l. out of the aforesaid Manor, and Tenements, with the
appurtenances, and those to him they have rendered in the said Court. To have
and perceive the aforesaid annual rent of 90 l. to the said W. and F. and the
Heirs of the bodies of the said W. and F. lawfully begotten, at the Feasts of
St. Michael the Archangel, and of the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary,
by equal portions yearly to be paid, And if it happen that the said W. and F.
shall dye without Heir of their bodies lawfully begotten. Then after the
decease of the said W. and F. the said yearly rent of ninety pounds, shall
wholly remain to the right Heirs of the said W. at the Feasts aforesaid yearly
to be paid. And if it happen the aforesaid annual rent of ninety pounds to be
in arrear, and unpaid, in part or in all, by the space of 5 weeks after any
Feast of the aforesaid Feasts, wherein as aforesaid it ought to be paid, (if in
a lawful manner it be demanded at C. aforesaid,) that then and so often the
aforesaid W. T. and his Heirs, shall forfeit to the aforesaid W. and F. and the
Heirs of their bodies lawfully begotten, and also to the right Heirs of the
said W. if the aforesaid W. and F. shall die without Heir of their bodies
lawfully begotten, eight pounds in name of a Pain. And so every Nomine poene.
week, after the aforesaid 5 weeks, eight pounds as often as the aforesaid
yearly Rent of ninety pounds shall be in arrear: that then and so often, it
shall be lawful for the aforesaid W. and F. and the Heirs of their bodies
lawfully begotten, and also for the right Heirs of the said W. if the said W.
and F. shall die without Heir of their bodies lawfully begotten, into the
aforesaid Manors and Tenements, with the appurtenances, to enter and distrain,
and the Distresses so there taken and had, to lead, bear, and drive away, and
in their custody to retein, until as well of the aforesaid yearly rent of
ninety pounds with the arrearages thereof, (if any shall be) as of the
aforesaid eight pounds as aforesaid, in the name of Pain forfeited, after the
aforesaid 5 weeks, and for 8 l. for every week after the aforesaid 5 weeks as
aforesaid, they shall be fully satisfied and paid, etc.

A Fine in fee Farm yiedling a Rent, with a distress.
Essex. ss.
COmmand T. S. of C. Esquire; and A. his Wife, that they hold to W. D. Covenant of 5
acres of Land with the appurtenances in E. etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid T. and A. have recognized
the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances to be the right of him the said
W. as those which the said W. has by the gift of the aforesaid T. and A. and
those they have remised and quite claimed from themselves and their Heirs to
the aforesaid W. and his Heirs for ever. And furthermore the aforesaid T. and
A. have granted for themselves and the Heirs of the said T. that they will
warrant to the aforesaid W. and his Heirs, the Tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, against all men for ever. And for this etc. The aforesaid W.
has granted to the aforesaid T. one annuity or yearly rent of 20 s. of lawful
money of England, issuing, and to issue of and out of the Tenements aforesaid,
with the appurtenances, and that to him they have rendered in the said Court. To
have, hold and perceive, the aforesaid annuity or yearly Rent of 20 s. at
foresaid to the aforesaid T. and his Heirs, a-the Feasts of St. Martin the
Bishop in winter, and of Penticost, by equal portions yearly for ever to be
paid. And if, and as often as it happen the aforesaid annuity or yearly rent of
20 shillings aforesaid to be in arrear, and unpaid, in part or in all, by the
space of forty days, after any feast of the feasts aforesaid, wherein, as
aforesaid, it ought to paid, that then, and so often, it may and shall be
lawful for the aforesaid T. and his heirs, into the aforesaid Tenements with
the appurtenances, to enter, and to distrain. And the distresses so there
taken, lawfully to lead bear and drive away, and in his custody to retain,
until of all the aforesaid annuity or yearly rent of 20 s. aforesaid, together
with the arrearages thereof (if any shall be) he be fully satisfied and paid,
etc.

A Fine in fee farm, rendering a rent, suit of Court, and Heriot after decease,
recease, and alienation.
South. ss.
COmmand A. B. and C. D. that they hold to F. G. Covenant of 20 acres of land,
etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid A. B. and C. D. have
recognized the tenements aforesaid, to be the right (Ut in sine sur
recognisance de droit rele^se and warranty) And for this, etc. the aforesaid T.
has granted to the aforesiid A. B. and C. D. one annuity, or yearly rent of 12
d. of lawful money of England, issuing and to issue from and out of the
tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances. And those to them he has rendered
in the said Court. To have and to perceive the aforesaid annuity, or yearly
rent of 12 d. to the said A. B. and C. D. and the heirs of the said A. at the
Feasts of St. Michael the Archangel, and the Annunciation of the blessed
Virgin Mary, by equal portions yearly to be paid. And also the aforesaid F.
has granted for himself and his heirs, to the aforesaid A. B. and C. D. and
the heirs of the said A. to do suit of Court yearly to the aforesaid A. B. and
C. D; and the heirs of the said A. at his Manor of C. twice in the year, upon
lawful warning thereof aforehand to be given. To hold, etc. And to pay after
the decease, recease and alienation, as well of the aforesaid F. and his heirs,
as of every other Tenant, being free Tenant of the Tenements aforesaid, or of
any parcel thereof, the best beast of very such Tenant in the name of a
Heriot. And if it happen the aforesaid annuity or yearly rent, to be in arrear
and unpaid, in part or in all, after any feast of the feasts aforesaid, wherein
as aforesaid it ought to be paid, or suit of Court aforesaid not to be done, or
the Heriot aforesaid, when it shall happen not to be paid or delivered, that
then it shall be lawful for the aforesaid A. B. and C. D. and the heirs of the
said A. into the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to enter, and to
distrain, and the distresses so there taken, lawfully to lead, bear, and drive
away, and in his custody to retain until, as well of the aforesaid annuity or
yearly rent of 12 d. together with the arrearages thereof, if any shall be, as
of the suit of Court and the Heriot aforesaid being in arrear, the said A. B.
and C. D. and the heirs of the said A. shall be fully satisfied, contented, and
paid, etc.

A Fine in Fee-farm, rendering a rent; with a Nomine poene, for default of
payment.
Warw. ss.
COmmand A. B. Esquire; that he hold to C. D. Covenant of the Manor of L. with the
appurtenances: Also of 4 Messuages and ten shillings rent, with the
appurtenances, in L. aforesaid, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid A. B. has recognized,
(ut in fine sur recognisance de droit,) And for this, etc. the said C. has
granted to the aforesaid A. one annuity or yearly rent of seven pounds of
lawful money of England, issuing, and to issue out of, and in the Manor and
Tenements, with the appurtenances. And that to him he has rendered in the said
Court: To have and perceive the aforesaid annuity or yearly rent of seven
pounds to the aforesaid A. his heirs and assigns, the tenth day of September,
between the ninth hour before midday, at the third hour after midday of the
same day yearly, at the house or dwelling, commonly called S. situate in his
Marker, called the Market stead, in the Town of C. in the County of D. to be
paid. And if it happen the aforesaid annuity or yearly rent of seven pounds to
be in arrear, and unpaid, in part, or in all, by the space of fourteen days
after the aforesaid tenth day of September, wherein, as aforesaid, it ought to
be paid; that then the aforesaid C. and his heirs, shall forfeit to the said A.
and his heirs, 13 s. 4 d. in name of a pain, so often as the aforesaid annuity
or yearly rent, or any parcel thereof, shall happen to be so in arrear. And it
shall be lawful for the aforesaid A. and his heirs, into the aforesaid Manor,
and other the premises, with the appurtenances, and into every parcel thereof
to enter, and distrain, as well for the aforesaid annuity or yearly rent of
seven pounds, and every parcel thereof, as for the aforesaid 13 s. 4 d. in
name of a pain, to the said A. and his heirs forfeited, Nomine poene.
so often as it shall so happen to be in arrear, and unpaid: and the distresses
so there taken and had, lawfully to lead, bear, and drive away, and in his
custody to retain, until as well for the aforesaid annuity, or yearly rent of
seven pounds, as for the aforesaid 13 s. 4 d. in name of a pain, so often
forfeited, the said A. and his heirs shall be fully satisfied and paid, etc.

A Fine by the Husband and the Wife, to the Husband and Wife, with a Render.
Staff, ss.
COmmand, etc. that justly, etc. keep Covenant, etc. of the Manor of B. And
unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid I. ^. and E. have
recognized the Manor aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him
the said R. as those which the said R. and M. have by the gift of the aforesaid
I. and E. and those they have remised and quite claimed from them the said I.
and E. and the Heirs of him the said E. to the aforesaid R. and M. and the
Heirs of him the said R. for ever. And furthermore the said I. and E. have
granted for themselves and the Heirs of the said E. that they will warrant the
aforesaid Manor, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid R. and M. and the
Heirs of him the said R. against all men for ever. And for this recognisance,
remise, quite [claim; warranty, fine, and concord, the said R. and M. have
granted for themselves and their Heirs to the aforesaid I. and E. and the Heirs
of the body of him the said E. lawfully begotten, four pounds rent, issuing out
of the Manor aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and those to them they have
rendered in the said Court. To have and perceive every year (that is to say) one
moiety thereof at the Feast of St. M. and the other moiety thereof at the Feast
of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, to the said I. and E. and the
heirs of the body of the said E. lawfully begotten, by equal portions, yearly
to be paid, by the hands of the Tenants, which shall hereafter hold the said
Manor, with the appurtenances. And moreover, the said R. and M. have granted
for themselves and their heirs, that if the aforesaid rent at any term wherein
it ought to be paid, shall be in arrear, in part, or in all; that then it shall
be lawful for the aforesaid I. and the heirs of the body of him the said I.
lawfully begotten, to distrain the aforesaid R. and M. and their heirs, and
those which hereafter shall hold the said Manor, by all their goods and
chattels in the said Manor, with the appurtenances, found, for twenty
shillings, in name of a pain, for every Term so being in arrear, by the space
of one month. And those to retain until full payment, as well of the aforesaid
four pounds rent, as of the aforesaid twenty shillings Nomine poene, which to
them shall be in arrear, etc.

A writ of Covenant that was for the King, for the Tith-corn of a Parish, and
the manner of the endorsment thereof used by his Attorney General.
Essex ss.
COmmand A. B. and C. that they hold to us Covenant, between us and the
aforesaid A. and C. made of all and all manner of Tithes of grain, growing,
coming, or renewing, within the said Parish of Hotton. And unless they shall
do it, summon by good summoners, etc.

The Endorsment is thus,
Edward Coke, Esquire; Attorney General of our Sovereign Lord the King, for the
said Sovereign Lord the King prosecutes this Writ.

A Fine knowledged by T. W. to I. R. of one Message, one Barn, of Land,
Meadow, and Pasture; and warranty against all men.
Essex ss.
COmmand T. W. Esquire; that justly etc. he hold to I. R. the Covenant between them
made, of one Message, one barn, 25 acres of land, 4 acres of meadow, and 10
acres of pasture, with the appurtenances in L. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid T. has recognized the
Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of the said I. as
those which the said I. has by the gift of the aforesaid T. And those he has
remised, and quite claimed, from himself and his heirs for ever, And
furthermore, the said T. has granted, for himself and his heirs, that he will
warrant the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid I.
and his heirs, against all men for ever. And for this recognisance, etc.

A Fine knowledged by the Husband and Wife, and the Cognisee by the same Fine
grants and renders back again the premises to the said Conusors, and to the
heirs of the Husband, one of the said Conusors, for ever.
COmmand T. B. and E. his Wife, that justly, etc. they hold to W. L. and I. K.
the Covenants between them made, of the Manor of W. with the appurtenances,
and of 2 Messuages, 80 acres of land, 100 acres of Pasture, 60 acres of wood,
and 5 shillings rent, with the appurtenances in H. and B. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid T. and E. have recognized
the Manor, Tenements, and Rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the
right of the said W. as those which the said W. and I. have by the gift of the
aforesaid T. and E. and those they have remised and quit claimed from the said
T. and E. and their heirs to the aforesaid W. and I. and the heirs of the said
VV. for ever. And furthermore the said T. and E. have granted, for themselves
and the heirs of the said E. that they will warrant the Manor, Tenements and
rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, unto the aforesaid W. and I. and the
heirs of him the said W. against all men for ever. And for this Recognisance,
etc. the said W. and I. have granted to the aforesaid T. the Manor, Tenements,
and Rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and those to him they have rendered
in the said Court. To have and to hold to the said T. and his heirs for ever.

A Fine knowledged by H. K. and I. his wife, I. C. and K. his Wife, to R. G. of
one Message, one Garden, of land and pasture, and the same Conusors, for them,
and the heirs of Jo. do warrant two parts of the premises in 3. parts divided,
to the Conusee and his heirs, against all men for ever.
COmmand I. H. and I. his Wife, that justly, etc. they hold to R. G. the
Covenant between them made of one Message, one garden, 40 acres of land, and 4
acres of pasture, with the appurtenances in, etc. And unless, etc. And the
Concord is such, that the aforesaid I. and I. have recognized the Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of the said R. as those
which the said R. has by the gift of the aforesaid H. and I. I. and K. and
those they have remised, and quite claimed for them the said H. and I. I. and
K. and their heirs, to the aforesaid R. and his heirs for ever. And
furthermore, the said H. and I. I. and K. have granted, for themselves and the
heirs of the said I. that they will warrant two parts of the Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, in three parts, divided, to the aforesaid R.
and his heirs, against all men for ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine acknowledged by I. F. Knight, and M. his Wife, and R. H. of 2 Messuages
1 Garden, 1 Orchard and of Land, Meadow, and Pasture to T. B. and I. K. with
warranty against all men. And the Conusees by the said Fine, Grant, and Render
to the said R. one of the Conusors in the Fine, 6 acres of Land, etc. parcel of
the Premises, for one month to come next. and afterward the same to remain to
one I. now the Wife of R. N. and R. N. Son of the said R. and I. during their
lives and the longer liver of them, and after their deceases, the said 6 acres
of Land to remain to I. N. Daughter of the said. R. and I. his Wife, during her
life, reserving a Rent with clause of Distress, for non-payment thereof, and
the residue of the Premises, viz. The two Messuages, one Garden, one Orchard,
etc. the said Conuses, grant, and render to R. H. for one month, and afterward
to one R. N. and I. his Wife. To have and to hold to the said R. and I. during
their lives and the longest liver of them, reserving also thereupon a Rent with
a clause of Distress for non payment thereof. And lastly the said Conusees do
grant and render the reversion of the whole Premises, and the several rents
reserved upon the said Grants, and Renders, unto the said I. F. and M. his
Wife, two of the said Conusors, and to the Heirs of the said I. F. for ever.
COmmand I. F. Knight, and M. his wife, and R. H. that justly etc. they hold to
T. P. and I. K. etc. of 2 Messuages one Garden, one Orchard, 21 acres of Land,
nine acres of Meadow, and 58 acres of Pasture, with the appurtenances in M. And
unless, etc.

Warranty.
And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid I. M. and R. have
recognized the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances to be the right of
the said T. as those which the said T. and I. have by the gift of the aforesaid
M. and R. And those they have remised and quite claimed, from them the said I.
M. and R. and their Heirs to the aforesaid T. and I. and the Heirs of the said
T. for ever. And moreover the said I. F. M. and R. have granted for themselves,
and the Heirs of the said I. that they will warant the Tenements aforesaid with
the appurtenances, to the aforesaid T. and I. and the Heirs of him the said T.
against all men for ever, and for this, etc. The said T. and I. have granted to
the aforesaid R. six acres of Land, 6 acres of Meadow, and 46 acres of Pasture,
of the Tenements The Render of the parcel of the Premises.
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and those to him they have rendered in the
said Court. To have and to hold to the said R. for term of one month henceforth
next to come. And after that term ended. the said 6 acres of Land, 3 acres of
Meadow, 46 acres of Pasture, with the appurtenances, shall wholly remain to one
I. the now Wife of one R. N. and to one R. N. Son of them the said R. N. To
have and to hold to the aforesaid I. and R. during the life of them the said I.
and R. and of the longer liver of either of them, and after the decease of the
said I. and R. the said 6 acres of Land, 3 acres of Meadow, and 46 acres of
Pasture, with the appurtenances, shall wholly remain to I. N. Daughter of the
aforesaid R. and I. his Wife. The Rent.
To have and to hold to the said I. the Daughter all the life time of the said
I. the Daughter yielding therefore yearly to the aforesaid T. and I. and their
Heirs 108 s. 10 d. at the Feasts, etc. by equal portions yearly to be paid; A
clause of Distress.
And if it happen the aforesaid annual rent of CVIII shillings, X pence, or
any parcel thereof to be in arrear and unpaid in part or in all after any
Feast of the Feasts aforesaid wherein or in which (as aforesaid) it ought to be
paid, that then it shall be lawful for the aforesaid T. and I. their Heirs and
assigns, as well during the natural life of the aforesaid I. and R. N. now
Wife of the aforesaid R. and of the longer liver of either of them as during
the life of the aforesaid I. the Daughter, into the aforesaid 6 acres of Land,
etc. with the appurtenances, and into every parcel thereof, to enter and to
distrain and the distresses so there taken, it may be lawful from them to lead
and drive away, and in their custody to retein until of the aforesaid annual
rent of 108 s. 10 d. and of every parcel thereof, together with the arrears
thereof, if any shall be, they shall be fully satisfied and paid. And
furthermore the said T. and I. have granted to the aforesaid R. H. The render
of the resi^ue.
two Messuages, one Orchard, one Garden, sixteen acres of Land, 3 acres of
Meadow, and 12 acres of Pasture, with the appurtenances, being the residue of
the Tenements aforesaid. And those to him they have rendered in the said Court,
To have and to hold to the said R. for the term of one month, and after that
term ended, the said 2 Messuages, 1 Garden, 1 Orchard, sixteen acres of Land,
three acres of Meadow, and twelve acres of Pasture, being the residue shall
wholly remain to one R. N. and I. his Wife. To have and to hold, to the said R.
N. and I. during the life of the said R. N. and I. and of the longer liver of
Rent for the Residue.
them, yielding therefore yearly to the aforesaid T. and I. and the Heirs of
them 13 s. of lawful money of England, at the Feasts aforesaid, by equal
portions yearly to be paid. And if it happen the aforesaid yearly rent of 13 s.
A clause of Distress.
or any parcel thereof to be behind and unpaid in part or in all after any
Feast of the Feasts aforesaid, wherein (as aforesaid) it ought to be paid, That
then it shall be lawful for the aforesaid T. and I. into the aforesaid two
Messuages, one Garden, one Orchard, 16 acres of Land. 3 acres of Meadow, and 12
acres of Pasture^, being the residue with the appurtenances, and every parcel
thereof to enter and distrain, and the distresses so there taken it may be
lawful from thence to lead, drive The render of the reversion of all the
premises, and all the Rents reserved.
away, and in their custody to retein until of the aforesaid Rent of 13 s.
together with the arrerages thereof, (if any shall be) they shall be fully
sat^fied and paid. Also the aforesaid T. and I. K. have granted to the
aforesaid I. F. and M. the reversion of all and singular the Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and all the rents aforesaid thereupon
reserved. And those to them they have rendered in the said Court. To have and to
hold to the said I. and M. and the Heirs of him the said I. for ever, of the
chief Lords of the Fee by the services which unto the aforesaid Tenements with
the appurtenances do belong for ever.

A Fine accknowleged by G, H. and D. his Wife. T. S. Esquire; and M. his Wife. of
forty acres of Land, to R. B. and W. N. with Warranty, and the Conuses do grant
and render to the said D. and to his Heirs, all mines of Coals in a Close,
parcel of the Premises called Stanley Field, with liberty to dig for the same.
COmmand G. H. Esquire; and D. his Wife T. S, Esquire; and M. his Wife, that justly,
etc, they hold to R. B. and W. W. the covenant between them made, of 40. acres
of Land, with the appurtenances, in Stanley and Spendon. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid G. D. T. and M. have
recognized the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of
him the said R. as those which the said R. and W. have by the gift of the
aforesaid G. D. T. and M. and those they have remised and quite claimed from
them the said G. D. T. and M. and their Heirs to him the aforesaid R. and W.
and the Heirs of the said R. against the aforesaid G. D. T. and M. and the
Heirs of him the said T. for ever, and for this recognisance The Conusees do
grant and render (...) mines, in part of the Premises to (...) of the Co^^sor^
and (...) to get ^he^.
etc. the aforesaid R. and W. have granted to the aforesaid G. D. all mines of
coals being in a field, patcel of the Tenements aforesaid called Stanley
Field. also free ingress and egress in and upon the aforesaid Field, to dig
in those mines for those Coals, all times of the year at the free will and
pleasure of the said G. and D. and the Heirs of him the said D, And all those
to them they have rendered in the said Court. To have, take, and perceive the
aforesaid mines, ingresse, ^gresse, and liberty aforesaid with the
appurtenances, to the aforesaid G. and D. and the Heirs of him the said D. for
ever.

A Fine knowledged by W. K. and K. his wife of the third part of one Message,
one Barn, one Garden, etc. to I. K. and T. H. with warranty against all men,
and the said Conusees do grant and render to the said S. one of the Conusors,
the said third part of the Premise^ from Mich. or the Annuntiation etc. which
first shall happen to be the next after the death of one E. now the Wife of W.
T. for the term of 21 years, reserving a rent yearly to the Conusees, with a
clause of Distress, for the said rent, and lastly, the said Conusees, grant,
and render the reversion of the said Premises to W. K. and K. his Wife, being
two of the said Conusors in the said Fine, and to the Heirs of the said K* for
ever.
COmmand W. K. and K. his Wife, that justly, etc. they hold to I. K. and T. H.
the Covenant between them made, of the third part of one Message, one barn,
one garden, 30 acres of land, 2 acres of meadow, and 10 acres of pasture, with
the appurtenances, in etc. And unless, etc.

Warranty.
And the Concord is such, to wit, that the aforesaid W. K. and S. have
recognized the third part aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of
the said I. as those which the said I. and T. have by the gift of the aforesaid
W. K. and S. And those they have remised, and quite claimed, from them the said
W. K. and S. and their heirs, to the aforesaid I. and T. and the heirs of him
the said I. for ever. And furthermore, the said W. K. and S. have granted, for
themselves, and the heirs of him the said K. that they will warrant the third
part aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid I. and T. and the
heirs of him the said I. against all men for ever. And for this recognizance,
the said I. and T. have granted to the aforesaid S. the third part aforesaid
with the appurtenances, and that to him they have rendered in the said Court. To
have and to hold to the said S. from the Feast The render
of St. Michael the Archangel, or from the Feast of the Annunciation of the
blessed Virgin Mary, which shall first and next happen, or shall be after the
death of one E. now Wife of W. T. and late wife of R. C. deceased, unto the end
and term of 21 years from thence next coming, and fully to be complete;
yiedling therefore by the year to the aforesaid I. and T. twelve pence, at the
Feasts of the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary, and of St. Michael the
Archangel, by equal portions to be paid. And if it happen the aforesaid
yearly rent of twelve pence, or any parcel Clause of Distress for the rent.
thereof to be behind and unpaid, in part or in all, after any Feast of the
Feasts aforesaid, wherein as aforesaid it ought to be paid. That then it shall
be lawful for the aforesaid I. and T. their Heirs and assigns, into the third
part aforesaid, with the appurtenances and into every parcel thereof to enter
and distrain, and the Distresses so there taken, it may be lawful from them to
lead, drive, bear away, and in their custody to retein until, of the aforesaid
yearly rent of twelve pence, and of every parcel thereof, together with the
arteages thereof, if any shall be, they shall be fully satisfied and paid. Also
the said I. K. The Grant of the reversion and the rent reserved upon the Lease,
for 21 years.
and T. H. have granted to the aforesaid W. and K. the reversion of the third
part aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and the rent aforesaid, above reserved.
And those to them they have rendered in the said Court. To have and to hold, to
the said W. and K. and the Heirs of him the said K. for ever, of the chief
Lords of the Fee by the Servic^s which unto the said third part do belong for
ever.

A Fine knowledged by W. P. and M. his Wife, of a Manor etc. one water-Mill,
one Windmill, three Dove-houses, etc. to E. B. and R. C. and the Conusees by
the same Fine, do grant unto the said M. a yearly rent of twelve pounds going
out of the said Manor: Habendum from Mich. or the Annuntiation next after the
death of the said W. P. her Husband, and one of the Conusors in the said Fine,
during her life, in the full recompense of her Title of Dower, or jointure in
any of the Lands of her said Husband, with a clause of Distress for the said
rent. And lastly, the said Conusees grant and render again the said Manor,
etc. to the said VV. P. the Conusor and Husband, to the said M. and to his
Heirs for ever.
warranty.
ANd the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid W. and M. have recognized
the Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, to be the right of
him the said E. and R. as those which the said E. and R. have by the gift of
the aforesaid W. and M. and those they have remised and quite claimed from
themselves and their Heirs to the aforesaid E. and R. and the Heirs of him the
said E. for ever. And furthermore the said W. and M. have granted for
themselves and the Heirs of the said W. that they will warrant the Manor and
Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances to the aforesaid E. B. and R. and
the Heirs of him the said E. against all men for ever. And for this
recognisance etc. The said R. and E. have granted to the aforesaid M. one
yearly rent of 12 l. issuing A Grant of a rent in recompense of jointure and
Dower.
out of the aforesaid Manor and Tenements, with the appurtenances. To have and
to hold, and yearly to perceive the aforesaid yearly rent of 12 pounds to the
aforesaid M. and his assigns, from the Feasts of St. Michael the Archangel, or
the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary next, and immediately following
after the death of the aforesaid W. for and during the natural life of the
said Mary, at two Terms of the year, viz. at the Feasts of St. Michael the
Archangel, and the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary, by equal portions
yearly to be paid, in full recompense of all the Title either of jointure, or
Dower which to the said M. ought to happen of any of the Lands or Tenements, of
the aforesaid W. P. And if it happen the aforesaid yearly rent of 12 pounds, or
any parcel thereof to be behind and unpaid after any Feast of the Feasts
aforesaid, wherein as aforesaid, it ought to be paid. That then and so often it
shall, and may be lawful for the aforesaid M. and his assigns, into the
aforesaid Manor and Tenements, or into any parcel thereof, to enter and
distrain, and the Distress or Distresses so there taken, to lead, drive The
render of the manor etc. To the Conusor and his Heirs for ever.
away, and in their custody to retein until of the aforesaid yearly rent of 12
pounds, and of every parcel thereof, together with the arrearages of the same,
(if any shall be) they shall be fully satisfied and paid. And furthermore the
said E. and R. have granted to the aforesaid W. the Manor and Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances; and those to him they have rendered in the
said Court: To have and to hold the aforesaid Manor, with the appurtenances,
to the aforesaid W. and his heirs for ever. To hold, etc.

A Fine knowledged by I. G. alias G. and M. his wife, to R. R. Knight, Lord R.
of one Message, one Barn, and one hundred shillings rent, the parsonage of B.,
and the advowson of the Vicaridge of B. with warranty against the Conusor and
his wife, and the Heirs of the Husband.
COmmand I. G. otherwise G. I. and M. ^is wife, that they hold to R. R. Knight,
Lord R. the Covenant, etc. of one Message, one Barn, fifteen acres of Land,
six acres of Meadow, twenty acres of Pasture, and five pounds rent, with the
appurtenances in B. and of the Rectory of B. aforesaid. Also of the advowson of
the Vicaridge of the Church of B. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid I. and M. have recognized
the aforesaid Tenements, Rent, and Rectory, with the appurtenances and the
advowson aforesaid, to be the right of him the said Lord R. as those which the
said Lord R. has by the gift of the aforesaid I. and M. and those they have
remised and qu^te claimed from them the said I. and M. and their Heirs to the
aforesaid Lord R. and his Heirs. And furthermore the said I. and M. have
granted for themselves, and the Heirs of the said I. that they will warrant to
the aforesaid Lord R. and his Heirs, the aforesaid Tenements, Rent, and Rectory
with the appurtenances, and the advowson aforesaid, against the aforesaid I.
and M. and the Heirs of him the aforesaid I. for ever And for this etc.

A Fine knowledged by I. S. and M. his wife of one Garden, etc. with two
several warranties, The first warranty against the Conusors, and their Heirs
only: and in the second, the said I. S. and M. his wife, grant to warrant the
Premises for them, and the Heirs of the Husband against all men.
COmmand I. S. and M. his wife, that justly etc. they keep with N. M. the
Covenant between them made of one Garden, and ten acres of Land, with the
appurtenances in S. and unless. etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid I. and M. have recognized
the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said
N. and those they have remised and quite claimed from them the said I. and M.
and their Heirs to the aforesaid N. and his Heirs for ever. And furthermore 1.
warranty.
the said I. and M. have granted for themselves and the Heirs of him the said
I. that they will warrant the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances to the
aforesaid N. and his Heirs for ever. And moreover the said I. and M. have
granted for themselves and the Heirs of him the said I. that they will warrant
2 Warranty
the aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid N. and his
Heirs against all men for ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine knowledged by E. R. of a Manor, etc. with warranty against all men.
COmmand E. R. Esquire; that justly, etc. he hold to H. W. Gent. the Covenant
between them made, of the Manor of S. with the appurtenances, and of 12
Messuages, 10 Tofts, 10 Gardens, 2 Wind-mills, 600 acres of Land, 40 acres of
meadow, 6 acres of pasture, 200 acres of Wood, 50 acres of Furrs and Heath, and
6 pounds rent, with the appurtenances in etc. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid E. R. has recognized the
Manor, Tenements, and rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right
of him the said H. W. as those which the said H. has by the gift of the
aforesaid E. And those he has remised, and quite claimed, from him the said E.
and his heirs, to the aforesaid H. and his heirs for ever. And furthermore, the
said E. has granted for himself and his heirs, that they will warrant to the
aforesaid A. and his heirs, the Manor, Tenements, and Rent aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, against all men for ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine acknowledged within the County of Chester, by H. S. Esquire; to W. F. and
R. C. of diverse Manors, etc. with warrantie against all men. And the Conusors
by the same Fine, grant and render the same Manors, etc. unto the Conusor and
his heirs males; and for default of such heirs males, then to certain persons
for the life of I. S. brother unto the said Conusor, and after his death to his
heirs males. And if the said I. S. died without heir male, then to diverse
others of the name and kindred of the Conusor, and to their heirs males, and
for default of such heirs, the last remainder in fee to the right heirs of the
Conusor for ever.
THis is the final concord, made in the Court of etc. at Chester, Wednesday,
etc. In the year, etc. before M. H. Knight, Justice, etc. between W. F. and R.
C. Plaintiffs, and H. S. of O. in the County of Chester, Esquire; of the Manor of
O. and O. with the appurtenances, and of 14 Messuages, 500 acres of Land, 200
acres of Meadow, 500 acres of pasture, 60 acres of wood, 100 acres of Moor and
Marish, and 2 shillings rent, with the appurtenances in O. O. in C. and W. and
of the moiety of the Manor of E. with the appurtenances, and of 6 Messuages,
100 acres of Land, 100 acres of Meadow, 20 acres of Pasture, 2 acres of Wood,
20 acres of Furrs and Heath, with the appurtenances in E. whereof plea of
Covenant was summoned between them in the said Court; to wit, that the
aforesaid H. has recognized the Manor, Tenements, and rent aforesaid, with
the appurtenances, and his aforesaid moiety of the Manor of E. and the
aforesaid Tenements in E. aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of
him the said W. as those which the said W. and R. C. have by the gift of the
aforesaid R. And those they have remised and quite claimed, from him the said
H. and his heirs, to the aforesaid W. and R. and the heirs of him the said W.
for ever. And furthermore, the said H. has granted, for himself and his heirs,
that he Warranty.
and his heirs will warrant the Manors, Tenements, and Rent aforesaid, and the
aforesaid moiety of the said Manor of E. and the aforesaid tenements in E.
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid W. and R. and the heirs of
him the said W. against all men for ever. And for this recognizance, remise,
The render.
quite claim, warranty, fine, and Concord, the aforesaid W. and R. in the said
Court have granted to the aforesaid H. M. the Manors, Tenements, and rent
aforesaid, and the aforesaid moiety of the aforesaid Manor of E. and the
aforesaid Tenements in E. aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and those to them
they have rendered in the said Court. To have to remainders in tail.
the said H. and the Heirs males of his body lawfully begotten. And if it
happen the aforesaid H. to die without heir male of his body The remainders
after the death of I. S. the Conusors brother, to the heirs male of the said I.
S.
lawfully begotten; That then the aforesaid Manors, Tenements, and rent, and
the aforesaid moiety of the aforesaid Manor of E. and the aforesaid Tenements
in E. with the appurtenances, after the death of the aforesaid H. S. to R. S.
son and heir apparent of T. S. Esquire; to R. S. son of E. S. to R. B. and E. B.
for term of the life of I. S. brother of the aforesaid H. may remain: so that
the Manors, Tenements, and rent aforesaid, and the aforesaid moiety of the
aforesaid Manor of E. and the aforesaid Tenements in E. with the
appurtenances, after the death of the aforesaid I. S. to the heirs males of the
body of the aforesaid I. lawfully begotten, may remain. And if it happen the
The other remainders if the said I. S. die without heir male.
said I. S. to die without heir male of his body lawfully begotten, that then
the Manors, Tenements, and rent aforesaid, and the aforesaid moiety of the
aforesaid Manor of E. and the aforesaid Tenements in E. aforesaid, with the
appurtenances to T. S. of S. Esquire; and the heirs males of his body lawfully
begotten, may remain. And if it happen the aforesaid T. S. to die without heir
male of his body lawfully begotten; That then the aforesaid Manors, Tenements,
and rent, and the aforesaid moiety of the said Manor of E. and The last
remainder in fee to the right heirs of the Conusor for ever.
the aforesaid Tenements in E. aforesaid, with the appurtenances to T. S. son
of I. S. and the heirs males of the body of the said T. S. son of the aforesaid
G. lawfully begotten, may remain, etc. And if it happen the said G. to die,
without heir male of his body lawfully begotten, that then the Manors,
Tenements, and Rent aforesaid, and the aforesaid moiety of the said Manor of
E. and the Tenements aforesaid, in E. aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the
right heirs of the aforesaid H. S. may remain for ever.

A Fine knowledged before the Justices of Chester, by B. P. and E. his Wife, of
a Manor, etc. one Water-mill, one Dove-house, one Garden, two Orchards, etc.
with warranty.
COmmand B. P. and E. his Wife, that justly, etc. they hold to I. S. Esquire; the
Covenant between them made of the Manor of O. alias O. and of one Windmill,
one Dove-house, one Garden, two Orchards, 100 acres of land, 60 acres of
meadow, 200 acres of pasture, 40 acres of wood, 100 acres of heath, 300 acres
of Moor, 100 acres of Turbary, 50 acres of Marish, 30 acres of Land covered
with water, with the appurtenancs in O. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid B. and E. have recognized
the Manor and Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of
him the said I. And those they have remised and quite claimed, from themselves
and their heirs to the aforesaid I. and his heirs for ever. And furthermore,
the aforesaid B. and E. have granted for themselves and the heirs of the said
B. that they will warrant the Manors and Tenements warranty.
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid I. and his heirs, against
the aforesaid B. and E. and the heirs of him the said B. for ever. And for
this, etc.

A Fine knowledged by an Earl and his wife, of a Manor, advowson, liberties,
free warr^n, and free fishing, and a sold course for 2000 Sheep.
COmmand Thomas Earl of Sussex, and Fran. his Wife, that justly etc. they hold
to Will. Curson Esquire, the Covenant between them made of the Manor of B.
with the appurtenances, and of 80 Messuages, 80 Cottages, 10 Tofts, 100
Gardens, 60 Orchards, 400 acres of Land, 60 acres of Meadow, 200 acres of
Pasture, 20 acres of Wood, 40 acres of Furies and Heath, 200 acres of Moor, 100
acres of Willows, 20 s. rent, with the appurtenances, in Billingsod, otherwise
Billingforth; Bilowe, otherwise Bylingh, etc. Also of the advowson of the
Church of Bilingford, and of the liberty of fold age for 2000 sheep, free
Warren, and free fishing in B, etc. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid Earl and Frances, have
recognized the aforesaid Manor, Tenements, and rent, with the appurtenances,
and the advowson, liberty, free warren, and free-fishing aforesaid, to be the
right of him the said W. as those which the said W. has by the gift of the
aforesaid Earl and Fran. And those they have remised, and quite claimed, from
them and their heirs for ever. And moreover, the said Earl and Fr. have
granted, for themselves, and the heirs of him the said Earl, that they Warranty.
will warrant the Manor, Tenements, and rent aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, and the advowson, liberty, free warren, and free-fishing
aforesaid, to the aforesaid W. and his heirs, against all men for ever. And for
this, etc.

A Fine knowledged by the Husband and the Wife, and a third person, of certain
acres of land, meadow, and wood, and the Husband and the Wife warrant the land
to the Conusees, and to the heirs of one of them; and the same Conusees grant,
and render again the land to E. wife of one of the Conusors, from Michaelmas
past, for the term of 99 years, without impeachment of wast; yielding a rent to
the Conusees, and to the heirs and assigns of one of them; with a clause of
distress for non-payment of the rent: and afterward they grant the rent, and
the rereversion of the lands in fee to one W. W.
COmmand W. Walgrave Esquire, E. his wife, and E. E. that justly, etc. they
hold to R. R. and T. G. the Covenant, etc: of two acresand a half of meadow,
and; 70 acres of wood, with the appurtenances in E. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit,) that the aforesaid W. E. and E. have
recognized the aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances, to be the right of
him the said R. as those which the said R. and T. have by the gift of the
aforesaid W. E. and E. And those they have remised, and quite claimed, from
them the said W. and E. and their heirs, to the aforesaid R. and T. and the
heirs of the said R. for ever.

Warranty.
And furthermore, the aforesaid W. and E. have granted, for themselves, and the
heirs of the said W. that they will warrant to the aforesaid R. and T. and the
heirs of him the said R. the aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances,
against all men for ever. And for this recognizance, etc. the aforesaid R. R.
and T. G. have granted to the aforesaid E. the aforesaid Tenements, with the
appurtenances. And those to him they have renred in the said Court. To have and
to hold to the said E. from the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel now last
past, until the end and The render.
term of 99 years then next following, and fully to be complete, without
impeachment of any wast: Yielding therefore yearly to the aforesaid R. and T.
and the heirs and assigns of the said R. during all the Term aforesaid, 60 s.
and one penny of lawful money of England, at the Feasts of the Annunciation of
the Rent.
blessed Virgin Mary, and St. Michael the Archangel, by even portions to be
paid. And if it happen the aforesaid rent of 60 s. and 1 d. to be in arrear and
unpaid, in part or in all, after any Feast of the Feasts aforesaid, in which,
as aforesaid, it ought to be paid. That then it shall be lawful for the
aforesaid R. and R. and the heirs and assigns of the said R. into the
Tenements aforesaid, with the Clause of distress.
appurtenances, to enter and distrain, and the distresses there so taken, to
lead and bear away, and in their custody to retain, until of the aforesaid
rent, together with the arrearages thereof, (if any shall be) they shall be
fully satisfied, contented, and paid. And The render of the rent and reversion
of the land to one in Fee.
moreover the said R. R. and T. G. have granted the aforesaid rent of the
aforesaid 60 s. 1 d. and the reversion of the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, to the aforesaid W. W. and his heirs for ever.

It has been taken and acknowledledged before me W. Bendlose. Sergeant at Law,
at S. in the Parish of B. etc.

A Fine knowledged by two unto one, with warranty against all men.
A Fine sur cognizance de droit.
ANd the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid L. G. and T. B. have
recognized the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of
him the said I. G. as those which the said I. has by the gift of the aforesaid
L. and T. and those they have remised and quite claimed from them the said L.
G. and T. and their Heirs for ever. And furthermore the said L. G. and T. have
granted for themselves and the Heirs of the said The warranty.
G. that they will warrant to the aforesaid I. and his Heirs, the Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, against all men for ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine knowledged of two Messuages, and two Gardens, etc. by the Husband and
the Wife, and diverse others, to W. G. with several warranties.
COmmand R. F. and E. his Wife, and G. C. and B. his wife, that they keep with
W. G. Gent. the Covenant etc. of 2 Messuages, 2 Gardens, one Orchard, 30 acres
of Land, 10 acres of Meadow, 40 acres of Pasture, and 16 s. rent, with the
appurtenances in W. D. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid R. and E. G. and B. have
recognized the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the ^ight of
the said W. as those which the said W. has by the gift of the aforesaid R. and
E. G. and B. And those they have remised and quite claimed for them the said R.
and E. and the Heirs of the said G. E. and B. to the aforesaid W. and his Heirs
for ever. And moreover, the General warranty
said R. and E. have granted for themselves and the Heirs of the said E. that
they will warrant the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the
aforesaid W. and his Heirs against all men for ever. And furthernore, Special
warranty.
the said G. and B. have granted for themselves, and the Heirs of the said B.
that they will warrant the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances to the
aforesaid W. and his Heirs, against the aforesaid G. and B. and the Heirs of
him the said B. for ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine knowledged of 4 Messuages, 1 Toft, 3 Barns, 3 Gardens, 3 Orchards, etc.
to W. S. and N. W. with warranty.
BEtween W. S. and N. W. Plantiffs, and O. B. and A. his wife Deforcients, of
four Messuages, one Toft, three Barns, three Gardens, three Orchards, twenty
acres of Meadow, six acres of Pasture, with the appurtenances in K. and B.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid O. and A. have recognized
the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of the said W.
as those which the said W. and N. have by the gift of the aforesaid O. and A.
And those they have remised and quite claimed from them the said O. and A. and
the heirs of the said A. to the aforesaid W. and N. and the heirs of the said
W. for ever. And furthermore, the said O. and A. have granted for themselves,
and the heirs of the said A. that they will warrant to the aforesaid W. and N.
and the heirs of the said W. the aforesaid tenements, with the appurtenances,
against the aforesaid O. and A. and the heirs of the said A. for ever. And for
this, etc.

A Fine knowledged by two Husbands, and their Wives, of two Messuages, and two
Gardens, with several warranties.
COmmand G. F. and R. his Wife, A. I. and K. his Wife, that they hold to G. T.
the Covenant, etc. of two Messuages, two Gardens, with the appurtenances, in K,
etc. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wi^) that the aforesaid G. and R. and A. and K.
have recognized the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the
right of the said G. as those which the said I. has by the gift of the
aforesaid G. and R. and A. K. and those they have remised and quite claimed,
from them the said G. and R. and A. and K. and the heirs of the said R and K.
to the aforesaid G. and his heirs, for ever. And furthermore the said G: and R.
have granted, for themselves, and the heirs of the said R. that they will
warrant to the aforesaid G. and his heirs, the aforesaid Warranty.
Tenements, with the appurtenances, against the aforesaid G. and R. and the
heirs of the said R. And moreover, the said A. and K. have granted, for
themselves, and the heirs of the said K. that they will warrant to the
aforesaid G. and his heirs, the aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances,
against the aforesaid A. and K. and the heirs of the said K. for ever. And for
this, etc.

Note, That Dyer, that was Chief Justice, says, That if the women had been
sisters, that then there needed not double waranty in form aforesaid, but
single warranty is good asserts.

A Fine knowledged by the Husband and his Wife, to a man and his wife, of one
Message, one Garden, one Orchard, one Barn, one Stable, one Wharf, etc. with
warranty.
COmmand R. I. and H. his wife, that justly, etc. they hold to A. I. and K. his
wife, the Covenant, etc. of one Message, one Garden, one Orchard, one Barn,
one Stable, one Wharf, and one acre of Wood, with the appurtenances, in K. upon
K. And unless, etc.

warranty.
And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid R. and H. have recognized
the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of the said K.
as those which the said A. and K. have by the gift of the aforesaid R. and H.
And those they have remised and quite claimed, for them the said R. and H. and
their heirs, to the aforesaid A. and K. and the heirs of the said K. for ever.
And furthermore, the said R. and H. have granted, for themselves, and the heirs
of the said H. that they will warrant to the aforesaid A. and K. and the heirs
of the said K. the aforesaid Tenem. with the appurtenances, against the
aforesaid R. and H. and the heirs of the said H. for ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine knowledged by an Earl, and his Wife, to W. C. of a rent of 40 pounds,
going out of diverse Manors, with warranty.
COmmand F. Earl of H. and Dame K. his wife, Countess of H. that justly, and
without delay, they hold to W. C. Esquire; the Covenant, etc. of 40 l. rent, going
out of the Manors of B. S. etc. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid Earl and Countess, have
recognized the Rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him
the said W. as those which the said W. has by the gift of the aforesaid Earl
and Countess. And those they have remised and quite claimed from themselves,
and their Heirs, to the aforesaid W. and his Heirs for ever. And moreover, the
said Earl and Countess do grant, for themselves, and the Heirs of him the
said warranty.
Earl, that they will warrant the Rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to
the aforesaid H. and his Heirs, against all men for ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine knowledged by the Husband and the Wife, and one R. D. to R. B. of one
Manor, etc. one Message called M, etc. with warranty; who grant and render
the same again to R. D. one of the Conusors, for term of 21 years, to begin at
a time to come, reserving a Rent; and afterward the Conusees grant the
reversion of the said Manor, etc. and the reversion to one of the Conusors and
his wife, and to the heirs of the Husband, to hold of the chief Lords of the
Fee.
COmmand I. F. and B. his Wife, and R. D. that justly, etc. they hold to R. B.
the Covenant, etc. of the Manor of C. and I. with the appurtenances, and of
two Messuages, called B. 20 Messuages, 40. acres of Land, 100 acres of Meadow,
500 acres of Pasture, 200 acres of Wood, and 40 acres of Furrs and Heath, with
the appurtenances in W. F. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid I. B. and R. have
recognized the aforesaid Manors and Tenements, with the appurtenances, to be
the right of him the said R. B. as those which the said R. has by the gift of
the aforesaid I. and B. and R. and those they have remised and quite claimed
from themselves and their Heirs to the aforesaid R. and his Heirs for ever. And
furthermore the said I. and B. have granted for themselves and the Heirs of him
the said I. warranty.
that they will warrant to the aforesaid R. and his Heirs, the aforesaid
Manors and Tenements, with the appurtenances, against all men for ever. And
for this, etc. the same R. has granted to the aforesaid R. the aforesaid
Manors and Tenements, with the appurtenances, and those to him he has
rendered, etc. To have and to hold to the aforesaid R. from the Feast of St.
Michael the Archangel, The Term, and the beginning thereof.
which shall be in the year of our Lord 1650. until the end of the Term of 21
years from thence next following, and fully to be complete. Yielding therefore
yearly to the aforesaid R. and his Heirs, one yearly Rent of Rent.
27 l. and 6 s. of lawful money of England, at the Feast of Saint Michael the
Archangel, and of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, by equal
portions yearly to be paid, (the first payment thereof beginning at the Feast
of St. Michael the Archangel, which shall be in the year of our Lord, 1651.)

Clause of Distress.
And if it happen that the aforesaid rent of 27 l. 6 s. to be in arrear, in part
o^ in all, after any Feast of the Feasts aforesaid, in which, as aforesaid, it
ought to be paid: That then it shall be lawful for the aforesaid R and his
Heits, into the aforesaid Manor and Tenements, with the appurtenances, to
enter, and to Distrain, and the Distresses so thereupon taken and had, to lead,
bear, and drive away, and in his custody to retain, until of the aforesaid Rent
of 27. l. 6. s. with the arrerages thereof (if any shall be) he shall be fully
satisfied and paid. Also the said The grant of the Reversion, and the rent to
the Husband and the wife (being the Conusees) and to the heirs of the Husband.
R. has granted to the aforesaid I. and B. the reversion of the Manors and
Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and the aforesaid Rent above
expressed and reserved, and those to them he has rendered, etc. To have and to
hold, to the said I. and B. and the heirs of him the said I. of the Chief Lords
of that Fee, by the services, etc.

A Fine knowledged by the Husband and wife, to one I. L. Esquire, of 2 Manors
etc. with warranty, in consideration the Conusee grants a rent to the
Husband, and his wife, and to the heirs of the Husband.
COmmand R. P. and I. his Wife, that they hold to I. L. the Covenant, etc. of
the Manors of A. and W. with the appurtenances, and of 4 Messages, 6 Cottages,
1 Dovehouse, 200 acres of land, 40 acres of Meadow. 300 acres of pasture, 20
acres of wood, 20 acres of furs and heath, with the appurtenances in W. and
W. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the A rent granted by the Conusee.
aforesaid R. P. and I. his wife, have recognized the Manors, and Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said I. as those
which the said I. has by the gift of the aforesaid R. P. and I. his wife. And
those they have remised, etc. And furthermore, etc. And for this, etc. the same
I. L. has granted to the aforesaid R. and I. his wife, and the heirs of the
aforesaid I. the annual rent of 30 l. to be paid at two accustomed When the
rent shall begin to be payable.
Terms of the year (that is to say) at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel,
and of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, by equal portions, the
first payment thereof beginning at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, or
of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, which shall next happen after
the death of the aforesaid L. and C. being his now wife, or any other which
afterward shall A clause of distr. for the rent, after it has been lawfully
d^manded.
happen to be his wife. And if it happen the aforesaid yearly rent of 30 l. to
be behind and unpaid, in part, or in all, by the space of, etc. after any Feast
of the Feasts aforesaid. wherein, as aforesaid, it ought to be paid, if it be
lawfully demanded, that then, etc.

A Fine knowledged by the Husband and the wife, to H. C. of the third part of a
rent issuing out of a Manor, with a warranty against all men.
COmmand R. and I. his wife, that justly, etc. they hold to H. C. the Covenant,
etc. of the third part of 5 l. 6 s. 8 d. rent with the appurtenances issuing
out of the Manor of K. And unless, etc.

VVarranty
And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid R. and I. have recognized
the third part of the rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right
of him the said H. as those which the same H. has by the gift of the aforesaid
R. and I. And those they have remised and quite-claimed from themselves, and
the heirs of him the said I. to the aforesaid H. and his heirs for ever. And
furthermore the same R. and I. have granted for themselves and the heirs of him
the said I. that they will warrant to the aforesaid H. and his heirs, the
aforesaid third part of the rent, with the appurtenances, against all men for
ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine knowledged by the Husband and his wife to one T. H. of the third part
of 34 acres of Meadow, by these words, viz. concesserunt and reddiderunt. etc.
during the wives life; with warranty also during her life.
COmmand H. P. and M. his wife, that they hold to T. H. the Covenant etc. of
the third part of 34 acres of Meadow, 44 acres of Pasture, and 6 acres of wood,
with the appurtenances in S. And unless, etc.

A fine upon release of dower by the husband and wise. The estate The wa.-
And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid H. and M. have granted and
rendered the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid T.
and his heirs, during the life of her the said M. And the aforesaid H. and M.
will warrant the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid
T. and his heirs, during all the life of her the said M. And for this etc.

A Fine knowledged by V. K. knight to I S. knight, E. G. the Queens Attorney
general, and others, of two Manners, 70 Messuages and Cottages, etc. which the
Lady V widow has for her life, of the inheritance of the Conusor, the day of
the Concord made, and ofter her death is to revert to the Conusor, the which by
this sine, after the death of the said Lady V. is wholly to remain to all the
Conusees in the fine, and to the heirs of the said I. S. knight, the first of
the Conusees in the laid fine; with warranty against all men.
A Fine of the reversion after Tenant in Dower.
COmmand V. K. Knight, that he hold to I. S. knight, E. G. our Attorney general
R. W. Esquire; and W. R. Gent. the Covenants, etc. of the Manors of H. otherwise
of the Prior H. and M. otherwise Prior M. of 70 Messuages and Cottages.

The widows estate in the Conusors inheritance.
And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid V. has recognized the
Manors, Tenements, and rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right
of him the said S. And has granted for himself and his heirs, that the Manors
Tenements and Rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, which Dame V. K. widow,
holds for term of her life, of the inheritance of the aforesaid V. the day
that this Concord was made. And that after the decease of the same Dame V. unto
the aforesaid V. and his heirs ought to revert, which after the decease of him
the said I. S. to dame V. shall wholly remain, to the aforesaid J. E. R. and W.
and the heirs of him the said I. S. for ever. And furthermore the said W. has
granted, for himself, and his heirs, that he will warrant The reversion granted
to the said Conusees, and to the heirs of one of them.
the Manors, Tenements, and rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the
aforesaid I. E. R. and W. and the heirs of him the said I. S. against all men
for ever. And for this recognisance, etc.

A Fine knowledged by a Widow, and another, to the President and Scholars of
Saint John's College in Oxon, of the Site and principal house of the College,
commonly called, the White Friars, in the suburbs of Oxon; and 6 Messuages, 6
Gardens, 6 Orchards, etc. also in the same Suburbs, with warranty.
A Fine sur cognizance de droit.
COmmand I. P. Widow, and E. P. Gent. that justly, etc. they hold to W. E.
President of the College of St. John the Baptist, in the University of Oxford,
and the Scholars of the same College, the Covenant of the Site and principal
house of the College, commonly called The white Friars, in the Suburbs of the
City of Oxford, with the appurtenances, and of 6 Messuages, 6 Gardens, 6
Orchards, 20 acres of Land, 20 acres of Meadow, and 6 acres of pasture, with
the appurtenances in the Suburbs of the City aforesaid. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid I. and E. have recognized
the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the
said President and Scholars, as those which the same President and Scholars
have, by the gift of the aforesaid I. and E. And those they have remised and
quite claimed, from themselves, and the heirs of him the said E. to the
aforesaid President and Scholars, and their Successors, for ever. And moreover,
the same I. and E. have granted for themselves and their heirs, that they will
warrant to the aforesaid President and Scholars, warranty.
and their Successors, the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, against
the aforesaid I. and E. and the heirs of him the said E. for ever. And for
this, etc.

A Fine by two, and the Wife of one of them, of Lands, Meadow, and Pasture,
with warranty against the conusors, and the heirs of the Husband.
A Fine sur cognizance de droit.
COmmand R. B. Gent. T. R. and M. his Wife, that they hold to T. B. Gent. the
Covenant, etc. of 30 acres of Land, 2 acres of meadow, 3 acres of pasture, and
6 acres of wood, with the appurtenances, in C. And unless, etc.

The warranty.
And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid R. T. and M. have
recognized the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, to be the right of
him the said T. B. as those which the same T. has by the gift of the aforesaid
R. T. and M. And those they have remised and quite claimed from them the said
R. T. and M. and the Heirs of him the said R. to the aforesaid T. B. and his
Heirs for ever. And furthermore, the same R. T. and M. have granted for
themselves, and the Heirs of him the said R. that they will warrant the
Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid T. B. and his
heirs, against the aforesaid R. T. and M. and the heirs of him the said R. for
ever And for this etc.

A Fine knowledged by T. N. Knight, to G. T. Esquire, of one Manor, one
Message, etc. with warranty against all men.
A Fine sur cognizance de droit.
COmmand T. N. Knight, that justly, etc. he hold to G. T. Esquire, the Covenant,
etc. of the Manor of T. with the appurtenances, and of one Message, ten acres
of Meadow, fifty acres of Pasture, and thirty acres of wood, with the
appurtenances in T. and G. And unless, etc.

The warranty.
And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid T. N. has recognized the
Manor and Tenements, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said
G. as those which the same G has by the gift of the aforesaid T. and those he
has remised and quite claimed from himself and his heirs, to the aforesaid G.
and his Heirs for ever. And furthermore, the same T. has granted, for himself
and his Heirs, that they will warrant the Manor and Tenements aforesaid, with
the appurtenances, against all men for ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine knowledged by T. VV. and K. his wife, to G. S. of the third part, of 8
Messuages, 6 Gardens, etc. the which one M. B. Widow holds for term of her
life, and which is of the inheritance of the Conusors wife, the day of the
Concord made, and which ought after the death of the said widow, to revert
unto the Conusor and his wife, as in the right of his wife: and by this fine
after the death of the said widow, being tenant for life, is to come and
remain to the said Conusee and his heirs for ever, with warranty against all
men.
COmmand T. W. and K. his wife, that justly etc. they hold to G. S. the
Covenant between them made of the third part of 8 Messuages, 6 Gardens, 6 acres
of land, 10 acres of meadow, 20 acres of pasture, 50 acres of wood, with the
appurtenances, in A. B. etc. C. etc.

A fine of a reversion after the death of Tenant in Dower.
And the Concord is such (to wit) that the foresaid T. and K. have recognized
the Third part aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of the
aforesaid G. and they have granted, that the same third part, with the
appurtenances, which M. B. Widow holds for term of her life, of the
inheritance of the said K. the day that this Concord was made, and which after
the death of the said M. unto them the said T. and K. ought to revert, to
remain to the aforesaid G. and his heirs for ever. To hold, etc. And moreover
the same T. and K. have granted for themselves, and the heirs of her the said
K. that they will warrant to the aforesaid G. and his heirs, the third part
aforesaid, with the appurtenances warranty.
(as aforesaid) against all men for ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine knowledged by the Husband and the Wife, to one I. I. of 9 Messuages,
etc. with warranty against all men.
A fine sur Cognizance de droit.
COmmand E. P. Gent. and E. his Wife, that justly, etc. they hold to I. L. the
Covenant between them made, of 9 Messuages, 9 Gardens, 300 acres of Land, 100
acres of Meadow, 100 acres of Pasture, 20 acres of wood, 100 acres of Furrs and
Heath, etc. And of the moiety of 20 Messuages, 20 Gardens, one Water-mill, one
Dove-house, 60 acres of Land, 200 acres of Meadow, 300 acres of pasture, 60
acres of wood, 100 acres of Furs and Heath, with the appurtenances, in N. B.
C. D. etc. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid I. P. and E. have
recognized the aforesaid Tenements, and moiety, with the appurtenances, to be
the right of him the said I. L. as those which the same I. L. has by the gift
of the aforesaid I. P. and E. and those they have remised, and quite claimed,
from themselves and their heirs, to the aforesaid I. L. and his heirs for ever.
And furthermore, the same I. P. and E. have granted for themselves, and the
heirs of her the said E. that they will warrant to the aforesaid I. L. and his
heirs, the aforesaid Tenements, and moiety, with the appurtenances, against all
men for ever. And for this, etc.

The order of taking the knowledge of a Fine by a Dedimus Potestatem directed
to diverse, but the knowledge taken only by two of the Commissioners, and the
certifying thereof by the Commissioners that took the knowledge.
AFter the Fine is acknowledged, the Commissioners must write under the Concord
of the said Fine, as follows:

Taken and knowledged this day, etc. in the year, etc. before A. B. Esquire,
and C. D. by virtue of the writ of the Lord Protector of Dedimus potestatem, to
us and others directed.

Commissioners A. B. C. D.

Then write upon the back of the Dedimus Potestatem,



The Answer of A. B. Esquire; and C. D. Gent. two of the Commissioners within named.

The execution of this Commission appears in a certain Schedule to this
Commission annexed.

Then must the Commissioners subscribe their names.



A Fine knowledged by W. D. and I. D. to I. R. and I. D. of one Message, and
one Cottage in Ipswich, with warrantie against all men. In consideration
whereof the Conusees do grant and render the premises to the said I. D. one of
the Conusers for the term of 7 days next following, and afterward the same
premises wholly to remain to one M. G. for her life, and after her death, the
premises wholly to remain to the said W. D. oneof the said Conusors, and his
heirs for ever.
COmmand W. D. and I. D. that justly, etc. they hold to I. R. Gent. and I. D.
the Covenant of one Message, and one Cottage, with the appurtenances in I. And
unless, etc.

warranty.
And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid W. D. and I. D. have
recognized the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of
him the said I. as those which the same I. and I. D. have by the gift of the
aforesaid W. D. and I. D. And those they have remised and quite claimed from
themselves and rheir heirs, to the aforesaid I. I. and the heirs of him the
said I. for ever. And furthermore the same W. and I. have granted for
themselves and the heirs of him the said I. D. that they will warrant to the
aforesaid I. and I. and the heirs of him the said I. the tenements aforesaid,
with the appurtenances, against all men for ever. And for this recognisance,
etc. the same I. and I. have granted the tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances to the aforesaid I. D. And The render
those to him they have rendered in the same Court. To have and to hold to the
said I. D. for term of 7 days, from hence next following. And after that Term
ended, the aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances, shall wholly remain to
one M. G. To have and to hold to the said M. to hold of the chief, etc. during
the life of the said M. and after the decease of the said M. the aforesaid
Tenements, with the appurtenances, shall wholly remain to the aforesaid W. D.
and their heirs for ever, to hold of the chief, etc.

A Fine acknowledged by the Husband and his Wife, to H. S. Esquire of of 2
Messuages, etc. with warranty against all men.
THis is the final Concord made in the Court, etc. at, etc. the day, in the A
Fine sur cognizance de droit.
year, etc, between H. S. Plaintiff, and W. G. and S. his wife Deforcients of 2
Messuages, 2 Witch-houses, otherwise Salt-houses, 2 Shops, 2 Chambers, one
Stable, 10 acres of land, 4 acres of Meadow, and 6 acres of Pasture, with the
appurtenances in, etc. whereof plea of Covenant was summoned between them in
the same Court (to wit) that the aforesaid W. and E. his Wife have recognized
the tenements aforesaid, with the appurcenances, to be the right of the
aforesaid H. S. as those which the same H. S. has by the gift of the aforesaid
W. E. And those they have remised and quite-claimed from themselves and their
heirs to the aforesaid H. and his heirs for ever. And moreover the aforesaid W.
and E. have granted for themselves, and the heirs of him the said W. that they
and the heirs of the aforesaid W. the tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, to the aforesaid H. and his heirs will warrant for ever. And for
this, etc.

A Fine acknowledged before the Justices of the Common pleas at Westminster,
etc. with warranty against all men.
warranty.
THis is the final Concord, in the Court of the Lord Protector at Westminster,
in 8 days of St. Martin, In the year, etc. before E. M. W. S. H. B. and I. H.
Justices, and other faithful, etc. then there present, between R. B. Esquire,
and J. L. Gent. and R. L. Gent. Plaintiffs, and H. D. Deforcient of 2
Messuages, one toft, 80 acres of land, 20 acres of Meadow, 40 acres of Pasture,
and 3 acres of Wood, with the appurtenances, in H. and W. whereof plea of
Covenant was summoned between them in the same Court (to wit) that the
aforesaid H. has recognized the aforesaid tenem. with the appurt, to be the
right of him the said R. B. as those which the same R. J. and R. have by the
gift of the aforesaid H. and those he has remised and quit claimed from
himself and his heirs, to the aforesaid R. J. and R. and the heirs of him the
said R. for ever. And furthermore the same H. has granted for himself and his
heirs, that he will warrant to I. R. and the heirs of him the said R. the
aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances against all men for ever. And for
this remise, quit claim, warranty, fine, and Concord, the same R. I. and R.
have given to the aforesaid H. 38 l. sterling.

A Fine acknowledged by R. H. of P. to R. B. of the Mnnnor of I. with warranty
against the Conusor and his heirs.
COmmand R H. of P. Esquire, that justly, etc. he hold to R. B. R. H. etc. the
Covenant between them made, of the Manor of J. otherwise J. with the
appurtenances, and of 20 Messuages, 500 acres of land, 100 acres of Meadow, 500
acres of Pasture, 100 acres of wood, 100 acres of Moor and Marish, with the
appurtenances in J. alias. I. W. and N. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid R. H. has recognized the
Manors and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, to be the right of the
aforesaid R. B. as those which the said R. etc. have by the gift of the said R.
H. And those he has remised and quit claimed from him the said R. and his
heirs, to the aforesaid R. etc. and the heirs of him the said R. B. for ever.
And furthermore the same R. H. has granted, for himself and his Heirs, that he
will warrant the warranty.
Manors and Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid R.
etc. and the heirs of him the said R. for ever. And for this, etc.

This is the Fine as it is engrossed of Record, whercof the Fine next before is
but the Note.
THis is the final Concord made in the Court of the Lord Protector, at etc.
(tali die) etc. in the year, etc. before I. T. Esquire; Justice of the said Lord
Protector of Chester, at Chester, and other faithful, etc. then there present.
Between R. B. R. H. and H. H. Plaintiffs, and R. H. of P. Esquire; Deforcient of
the Manor of I. with the appurtenances, and of, etc. whereof plea of Covenant
was summoned between them in the same Court, to wit, that R. H. has recognized
the Manors and Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of
the aforesaid R. B. as those which the same R. R. and H. have by the gift of
him the said R. H. And those he has remised, and quite claimed from him the
said R. and his Heirs, to the aforesaid R. etc. and the Heirs of the said R. B.
And turthermore, the same R. H. has granted, for himself and his Heirs, that
he will warrant the Manor and Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to
the aforesaid R. B. and H. and the Heirs of him the said R. B. for ever. And
for this Recognisance, Warranty, Fine, and Concord, the same R. etc. have given
to the aforesaid R. H. 100 pounds of silver.

The nine Proclamations of the Fine next before made, according to the Statue
of 2 Ed. 6. made for Fines, with Proclamations within the County Palatine of
Chester.

THe first Proclamation was made on Wednesday in that same Sessions. The second
Proclamation was made Thursday in the very same Session. The third Proclamation
was made in full Sessions here, at etc. holden the day, etc. in the year, etc.
Et sic de caeteris, etc.

Note.
Three Proclamations in every Sessions.

A Fine knowledged by A. B. to T. F. and G. H. of a Manor, with warranty
against all men: and the Conusees in the same Fine, grant and render again the
said Manor to the said A. B. for one week, and afterward to N. M. for 21
years, to begin after the Feast of St. Martin the Bishop in winter, reserving a
red Rose at Midsummer, if it be asked. And after the end of the said Term of 21
years, the said Manor, etc: wholly to remain to the said A. B. the Conusors,
and his heirs for ever.
COmmand A. B. that justly, etc. he hold to T. F. and G. H. the Covenant of the
Manor, etc.

The warranty.
And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid A. has recognized the
Tenement aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said T.
as those which the same T. and G. have by the gift of the aforesaid A. And
those he has remised and quite claimed, from himself and his heirs, to the
aforesaid G. and his heirs for ever. And furthermore, the same A. has granted,
for himself, and his heirs, that he will warrant the Tenements aforesaid, with
th'appurtenances, to the aforesaid T. and G. and the heirs of him the said T.
against all men for ever. And for this, etc. the said T. and G. have granted,
and in the same Court rendered the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances,
to the aforesaid A. The render.
for one week. And after that Term ended, the Tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, shall wholly remain to N. M. and his assigns, for the term of 21
years, after the Feast of S. Mart. the Bp. in winter next to come, immediately
following, and fully to be complete, Yielding therefore yearly to the aforesaid
T. and G. and the heirs of him the said T. during all Term aforesaid, one red
Rose, at the Feast Rent.
of the Nativity of S. John the Baptist, if it be asked. And after that Term
ended, the Tenements Remainder in fee to the Conusor.
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, shall wholly remain to the aforesaid A. and
his heirs for ever, etc.

A Fine knowledged by R. B. of two Messuages, etc. to I. A. with warranty
against all men: and the Conusee grants the premises again to the Conusor for
one week, and afterward to one W. B. for life, reserving a rent, and
afterward to the Conusor for his life, and after to S. B. his wife for her
life, and after to J. B. son of the Conusor, and his wife, for life: and
afterward the said Conusee grants the reversion of the premises and the
rent, to the said R. B. the Conusor, and his heirs, for ever.
COmmand R. B. Gent: that justly, etc. he hold to I. A. the Covenant, etc. of
two Messuages, etc. And unless, etc.

warranty.
And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid R. has recognized the
Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said I.
A. as those which the same I. has by the gift of the aforesaid R. B. and those
he has remised and quite claimed from himself and his Heirs, to the aforesaid
I. and his Heirs for ever. And furthermore* the same R. B. has granted for
himself and his Heirs, that he will warrant the Tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, to the aforesaid I. A. and his heirs, against all men for ever.
And for this recognisance etc. the same I. has granted to the aforesaid R. B.
etc. and those to him he has rendered in the The render
same Court. To have and to hold the Tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, to the aforesaid A. R. B. for term of one week: and after that
term ended, the remainder to W. B. for term of the life of him the said W. B.
Yielding therefore by the year to the aforesaid Rent.
I. A. and his Heirs 40 l. at 4 Terms of the year, viz. at, etc. by equal
portions to be paid. And after the decease of him the said R. B. the remainder
thereof to S. B. wife of the aforesaid R. for term of the life of her the said
S. Yielding (ut supra.) And after the decease of her the said S. B. the
remainder thereof to I. B. son of the aforesaid R. for term of his life.
Yielding therefore, ut supra. And also, the aforesaid I. A. has granted to the
aforesaid R. B. the reversion and rent of the Tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, and those to him he has rendered in the same Court. To have and
to hold the reversion The grant of the reversion, and the rent.
and rent of the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the same R. S.
and his heirs for ever: To hold of the chief Lords of the Fee, etc.

A Fine of Rent issuing out of 6 Messuages, and 6 Gardens, with warranty
against all men.
COmmand W. A. and A. his wife, that justly, etc. they hold to R. B. the
Covenant, of one annual rent of 5 l. issuing out of and in 6 Messuages, and 6
Gardens, with the appurtenances in L. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid R. has recognized the
Manors aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said H.
as those which the same H. has by the gift of the aforesaid R. and those he
has remised and quite claimed, from himself and his heirs for ever. And the
aforesaid R. has granted, for himself, and the heirs of him the said W. that
they will warrant the rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid
R. B. and his heirs, for ever, against all men. And for this, etc.

A Fine knowledged by K. L: of a Manor, etc. to H. G. with warranty against
all men; In consideration whereof, the Conusee by the same fine grants to the
Conusor and his heirs one annuity of 8l. issuing out of the same Manor, to be
paid yearly at the Mansion house of the said Conusor, at a certain day and
hour; imposing a pain of 18. s. to be forfeited, in default of payment of the
said Annuity; with a clause of distress for the said Annuity and rent.
COmmand R. L. that justly, etc. he hold to H. C. the Covenant, etc. of the
Manor, in O. etc. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid R. has recognized the
Manor and Tenement aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him
the said H. as those which the same H. has by the gift of the aforesaid R. and
those he has remised and quite claimed, from himself and his heirs, for ever.
And furthermore, the same R. has granted, for himself and his heirs, that he
will warrant the Manor aforesaid, with warranty.
the appurtenances, to the aforesaid H. and his Heirs against all men for
ever. And for this, etc. the aforesaid H. has granted to the aforesaid R. one
annuity or yearly The grant of an Annuity.
rent of 8 l. of lawful money of England, issuing and to issue, out of and in
the Manor aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and that to him he has rendered
in the same Court; The day, hour, and place of payment of the said Annuity.
To have and perceive the aforesaid annuity or yearly rent of 8 l. to the
aforesaid R. his heirs and assigns on the 8th day of September, between the
ninth and twelfth hour before noontide of the same day, at his Mansion house in
the Town of R. in the County of S. to be paid. And if it happen the aforesaid
annuity or yearly rent of 8 l. to be in arrear and unpaid, Clause of distress
for the annuity, and penalty.
in part or in all, by the space of twenty days after the aforesaid eighth day
of September, in which as aforesaid, it ought to be paid; That then the
aforesaid H. and his heirs, shall forfeit to the same R. and his heirs, 18 s.
of lawful money of England, nomine poene, so often as the aforesaid annuity or
yearly rent, or any part thereof, shall happen to be in arrear. And it shall be
lawful for the aforesaid R. and his heirs, into the aforesaid Manor, with the
appurtenances, and into every parcel thereof to enter, and to distrain, as well
for the aforesaid annual rent of 8 l. and for every parcel thereof, as for the
aforesaid 18 s. nomine poene, to the said R. and his heirs forfeited, so often
as it shall so happen to be in arrear, and unpaid; and the distresses so there
taken and had, it may be lawful to lead, bear and drive away, and in his
custody to retain, until as well of the aforesaid annuity or yearly rent of 8 l.
as of the aforesaid 18 s. nomine poene, as often as it shall be forfeited, the
said R. and his heirs, shall be satisfied and paid.

A Fine knowledged by A. B. Esquire of 2 Messuages, etc. to S. H. in tail
general, to hold of the Conusor, and his heirs by the XL. part of a Knights
Fee, and 15 s. 4 d. rent, with warranty against all men.
COmmand A. B. Esquire, that justly, etc. he hold to S. H. the Covenant of two
Messuages, etc. with the appurtenances in M. And unless, etc.

An estate in general tail.
And the Concord is such, (to wit) that the aforesaid A. B. has granted the
Tenements aforesaid, with the apurtenances, to the aforesaid S. and the heirs
of the body of him the said S. lawfully begotten. To hold of the L. A. and his
heirs, by the fortieth part of a Knights fee, and by the rent of 15 s, 4 d. by
the year, The tenure rent.
at the Feast, etc. yearly to be paid. And furthermore, the aforesaid A. has
granted for himself and his heirs, that he will warrant the Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, Warranty of the estate tail.
to the aforesaid S. and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, as aforesaid,
against all men for ever. And for this, etc.

A Fine knowledged by A. B. and M. his Wife, of a Manor, etc. to S. P.
reciting that where the said Conusors hold the said Manor for the life of the
said M. the reversion thereof to the said Conusee and his heirs belonging. The
said Conusors grant to the Conusee all that their estate in the said Manor,
during the life of M: one of the Conusors, with warran^y against them during
the life of the said M.
COmmand A. B. and M. his wife, that justly, etc. they hold to S: P. the
Covenant etc. of a Manor, etc. And unless, etc.

And the Concord is such, (to wit) That whereas the aforesaid A. and M. have
and hold, for term of the life of her the said M. the Manor aforesaid, etc.
with the appurtenances (the reversion thereof to the aforesaid S. P. and his
heirs belonging, the same A. and M. have granted to the aforesaid S. the Manor
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, and all and whatsoever in the Manor
aforesaid, etc. they have, to the same S. during the life of her the said M.
And the aforesaid A. and M. will warrant to the aforesaid S. the Manor, etc.
with the appurtenances as aforesaid, against the aforesaid A. and M. during the
life of her the said M. And for this, etc.

A Fine knowledged by J. C. and T. his Wife, of 2 Messuages, 1 Barn, etc. to
one H. P. with warranty: and the said H. P: in consideration of the said Fine,
grants and renders again by the same Fine, the premises to the Conusors for
one day, and afterward to I. P. widow, for her life, and after her death, the
premises wholly to remain to H. P. and his heirs for ever.
COmmand I. C. and T. his wife, that justly, etc. they hold to H. the Covenant,
etc. of two Messuages, one Barn, etc. And unless, etc.

warranty.
And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid I. and T. have recognized
the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the
said H. as those which the same H. has by the gift of the aforesaid I. and T.
And those they have remised, and quite claimed, from themselves and their
heirs, to the aforesaid H. and his heirs for ever. And furthermore, the
aforesaid I. and T. have granted for themselves, and the heirs of him the said
I. that they will warrant the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to
the aforesaid H. and his heirs, against all men for ever. And for this
recognisance, etc. the aforesaid H. has granted the tenements aforesaid, with
the appurtenances, The Render
to the aforesaid I. and T. And those to them he has rendered in the same
Court. To have and to hold to the same I. and T. for term of one day; so that
after the said Term ended, the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances,
shall wholly remain to I. P. widow, for term of the life of the same I. And
after the death of the aforesaid I. the Messuages and Barn aforesaid, etc.
shall wholly remain to H. P. and his Heirs for ever. To hold of the chief Lords
of that Fee, etc. and 5 acres of land, and one acre of meadow, with the
appurtenances, being residue of the tenements aforesaid, shall wholly remain to
A. B. and his heirs for ever. To hold, etc.

The taking of the knowledge of the Fine.
TAken and recognized before James D. Knight, chief Justice of the Common
bench, in the year, etc.

Notes to be observed in Fines.
1. Note that there be some more things pass in the Praecipe, which are not
named in the Concord. 2. Note that a Cause of re-entry may not be in a Fine. 3.
Note that if a man purchase diverse parcels of Land of diverse men, he shall have
all the parcels pass in one common fine, but he must have several warranties
of every one of the parties for their several parcels. 4. Note that Catlin,
Chief Justice of the Upper Bench, said, that South nosme de bois haut bois et
Subbois passera en un fine. 5. Note that by Dyer a render cannot be made, but
only to him that is named in the Fine: but a remainder may be limited to one by
a Fine, though he be not named in the Praecipe.
A Fine knowledged by the Husband and wife unto two, of 30 Messuages, etc. the
Cognisees render the same again to the said Conusors for term of their two
lives; with diverse remainders over after their deaths in general tail to the
Children of the said Conusors, and for default of issue of the said Conusors to
the right heirs of the wife of the Conusor for ever.
THis is the final Concord made in the Court of, etc. (such a return, and tali
Anno) before R. B. A. F. T. E. and W. S. Justices, And afterward in 8 days of
the Holy Trinity, in the year, etc. there granted and recorded before the same
Justices, and other of the faithful of the Commonwealth of England then there
present, Between W. H. and I. R. Plaintiffs, and I. C. and T. his wife
Deforcients, of 30 Messuages, 200 acres of Land, 300 acres of Pasture, 10 acres
of Wood, 200 acres of ling and heath, and 30 s. rent, with the appurtenances in
P. F. etc. whereof plea of Covenant was summoned between them in the same
Court; to wit, that the aforesaid I. C. and T. have recognized the aforesaid
Tenements, with the appurtenances to be the right of him the said I. R. as
those which the same I. and W. have by the gift of the aforesaid I. C. and T.
And those they have remised, and quite claimed, from them the said I. C. and T.
and the heirs of him the said T. to the aforesaid W. and I. R. for ever. And
furthermore the said I. C. and T. General warranty.
have granted for themselves and the heirs of him the said T. that they will
warrant to the aforesaid W. and I. R. and the heirs of him said I: R. the
aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances, against all men for ever. And for
this recognisance, remise, quite claim, warranty, fine, and Concord, the same
W. and I. R. have granted to the aforesaid I. C. and T. the aforesaid
Tenements, with the appurtenances. And those to them they have rendered The
render
in the same Court. To have and to hold to the same I. C. and T. of the chief
Lords of that Fee, by the Services which unto the aforesaid Tenements do
belong, all the lifetime of the said I. C. and T. and the longer liver of
either of them. And after the decease of the said I. C. and T. the aforesaid
tenements, with the appurtenances shall wholly remain to I. C. son of the
aforesaid I. C. and T. and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten; To hold of
the chief Lords of that fee, by the services which unto the aforesaid Tenements
do belong for ever. And if it happen that the said J. C. the Son shall die
without heir of his body lawfully begotten, then after the decease of him the
said J. the aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances, shall wholly remain to
R. C. one other Son of the aforesaid J. C. the Father, and T. and to the heirs
of his body lawfully begotten. To hold of the chief Lords of the Fee, by the
services which unto the aforesaid Tenements do belong for ever. And if it
happen the said R. to die without heir of his body lawfully begotten; then
after the decease of him the said R. the aforesaid tenements, with the
appurtenances, wholly to remain to the heirs of the bodies of the aforesaid J.
C. the Father, and T. lawfully begotten. To hold of the chief Lords of that
Fee, by the services which unto the aforesaid Tenements do belong for ever. And
if no heir of the bodies of the aforesaid J. C. the Father, and T. shall be
lawfully begotten, then the aforesaid Tenements, with the appurtenances, shall
wholly remain to the right heirs of the aforesaid T. To hold of the chief Lords
of that Fee, by the services which unto the aforesaid Tenements do belong for
ever.

Adjuncts of Concords.
THe adjuncts of a Concord be of two sorts, Internal and External; Internal be
such as be contained within the very Concord it self, of which sort be the
clause of reservation, of the Services, Rent, or other thing, the clause
Reservation, Nomine poene, Distress,
of Nomine poene, the clause of Distress, and the clause of Warranty: All
which clauses of Reservation, Nomine poene, Distress, and Warranty, are to be
made in such words, and in such forms, as the like are made in Instruments
extrajudicial.

Warranty.
And warranties be sometimes general, that is to say against all men; some
against all, except certain persons; some against certain persons only; some
against every Cognisor and his heirs severally; and some against one of the
Cognisors and his heirs only; some of all the lands in Fine; some of all,
except part, and some of part only, certainly expressed.

License, Alienation.
The External adjuncts of Concords be the license of alienation, the Dedimus
potestatem, the examination of the parties, and the cognizance. The license of
Alienation is a power or authority given by the King now by the L. Prot. to the
parties, that lands may be alienated without incurring the danger of contempt.

And every such license is either to alien lands holden in Capite, or to alien
lands into mortmain.

The license of alienation of lands holden in Capite, may vary from the Fine
and be good, 32 H. 8. Br Alienation 4. 30.

Docket.
For the obtaining of which license, the Clark of the licenses does use to draw
a Docket in paper, containing the effect of the Fine, Feoffment or other Deeds,
whereby the alienation is to be made.

Affidavit.
And thereupon affidavit or composition must be made for the value of the lands
which are to pass thereby, which is to be signed by the Doctor of the
Chancery, that has power to take Oath: Then the Kings Fine is to be paid to
the receiver of Fines, who will sign the Docket. And after the same is to be
signed by two of the Commissioners of the Office of of Fines and Licenses; and
upon that Docket the Clerk of the Licenses is to make the License, and get it
sealed with the great Seal: which license is to be made in form following.

OLiver, etc. To all to whom these present Letters shall come, greeting: Know
ye, that we of our special grace, and for 3 pounds to us paid in our treasury,
have granted and g^ven license, and by these presents do grant and give license
for us and our heirs, as much as in us is, to our beloved friend J. F. that he
all the Moiety of the Manor of C. with the appurtenances, and 40 Messuages, 20
Cottages, 40 Gardens, 50 acres of Land, 40 acres of Meadow, 300 acres of
pasture, 30 acres of wood, 300 acres of Moor, and twenty pounds rent, with the
appurtenances in W. and elsewhere in our County of N. to the said moiety
appertaining, or belonging, parcel thereof being reputed or accepted as they
are held of us in Capite, may give grant, alien, sell, bargain, enfeoffe,
warrant, or knowledge by sine in our Court, before our Justices of the Common
Bench, or otherwise, or by any mean whatsoever, to our beloved friend E. R. To
have and to hold to the same E. his heirs and assigns of us and our heirs, by
the service aforesaid, for ever, as aforesaid, by the tenor of these presents;
we have likewise given license, and do give special license, unwilling that the
aforesaid I. or his heirs, or the aforesaid E. or his assigns aforesaid, by
reason of the premises, by us, our heirs or successors, Justices, Escheators,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, or other our Officers, or Ministers whosoever, of our heirs
or successors thereof, should be occasioned, molested, disturbed, vexed or
grieved in any thing, or any of them should be occasioned, molested, disturbed,
vexed or granted in any thing. In testimony of which thing these our Letters
Patents, we have caused to be made. Witness my self at Westminster the last
day, etc.

A license to alien in Mortmain.
OLiver, etc. To all, etc. know ye that we of our special grace, and for 40 s.
to us paid in our treasury, have granted and given license, and do give
license for us and our heirs, as much as in us is, to R. S. that he the
advowson of L. to the Abbot and Covent of L. in the County of E. may give and
grant. To hold to them and their successors of the said sovereign Lord and his
heirs, in free, pure, and perpetual free alms for ever. And to the same Abbot
and Covent, that they the advowson from the aforesaid R. S. may receive, and
appropriate that Church; and that so appropriated may to their own uses hold to
themselves and their successors of the said Lord Protector and his heirs, in
free, pure, and perpetual free alms for ever. Nilling, etc. Ut supra.

Quod permittat finem levari
ANd after that such license is had, the use was (which is not now in use) to
have a writ mentioning the license and the effect of the Fine directed to the
Justices of the Common place, commanding them, that they print the Fine so
levied, Register, f. 176. a. 1. E. 3. ca. 12. 34 E. 3. ca. 15. 33 H. 6. f. 2.
The form of which writ succeeds.

REx, To his Justices of the Bench, greeting, Whereas by our Letters, Patents
of our special grace, we have granted to I. S. that he of his Manors of F. and
W. with the appurtenances, which are held of us in Capite, may infeoffe to K.
etc. (reciting the whole Charter) as in our Letters aforesaid more fully it is
contained, and our Writ of Covenant hangs before you in the Bench aforesaid,
between the aforesaid I. and K. of the Manors aforesaid, to levy a Fine
thereof between them, according to the Law and Custom of our Kingdom of
England, as we have been informed: we command you that that Fine between the
parties aforesaid, of the Manors aforesaid, before you in the same Bench to be
levied ye permit, according to the tenor of our Letters aforesaid. Witness etc.

But before the 20 H. 3. the Kings tenant in Capite might have aliened his free
lands without license, 14 H. 4. 3. 20. Ass. P^ac. 17. as it seeemeth.

The Writ of ad quod damnum.
BUt before the granting of any such license, either to alien Lands holden in
chief, or to alien lands in Mortmaine, or release right in Mortmain, or
exchange, the ancient use was to have a writ ad quod damnum, containing the
substance of the Kings license out of the Chancery, directed to the Escheator
in the County wherein the Lands lie, to be aliened, to enquire and certify
into the Chancery, what damage or prejudice the alienation thereof will be to
the King, or the other chief Lord, of whom they are holden. And of what tenure
and value the Lands be. And whether there remains sufficient freelands, besides
those to the Alienor, to sustain public charges, and to be in Assizes and
Juries, etc.

And this is as well where the Alienation is made by the King, or by a
Corporation, or a Feme covert, as by any other.

The like inquiry by Writ of ad quod damnum, has been used, before the King
made any grant or pardon for alienation, lease, release, confirmation or
license, and after the Inquisition returned and certified into the Chancery, to
effect the same accordingly, F. N. B. f. 221. and inde usque f. 227.

But now experience is to the contrary, in lieu whereof, the use of late has
been to put in the Kings Patents, in these words: absque aliquo brevi de Ad
quod damnum, seu aliquibus aliis b^evibus, seu mandatis, super inde habendis,
fiendis aut prosequendis.

And one Writ of ad quod damnum will serve for divets Purchasers, and a license
to alien in Mortmain of one King, will serve in the time of another. But not so
of Lands holden in chief, 22 E. 3. F. N. B. in brevi, de ad quod damnum.

Of a pardon for alienation.
A fine of pardon.
BUt if perchance any alienation be made without license, a Pardon must be sued;
the fine whereof is the value of the Lands by one year, and the mean profits
between the Inquisition and the pardon, 31 H. 8. Br. Alienation 29. unless the
Commissioners will more favorably compound for the same, as in some cases upon
reasonable cause showed they use to do; which Pardon being purchased, the
Purchaser is to hold the Land still, 14 H. 6. 26. 50. Ass. p. 2. 1 E. 3. c. 12.
34 E. 3. c. 15.

Fine of license.
But the Fine of a License to alien Lands holden in Capite, is the third part of
the yearly value thereof, 26 H. 8. Br. Alienation 29.

Mortmain.
But if a lienation of Lands into Mortmaine be made without license, the King
may seize them as forfeited or escheate^d, Mag. Char. ca. 36. West. 2. ca. 32.
And for a license thereof to be granted, the fine thereupon to be paid, is the
value of the land by 3 years, 26 H. 8. Br. Alienation ^9.

Variance.
But variance between the license and the fine is not material, if it be all one
alienation, 32 H. 8. Br. Alien. 30.

Release.
And it seems that a Fine sur release, or other release, is none alienation,
and therefore no fine due for the same. P. 37 H. 8. Br. Alienation 31.

Recovery.
But fines are payable, and licenses to be sued upon common recoveries, 39 H. 6.
32 H. 8. c. 1. 4. E. 3.

Will.
Devise by Will is an Alienation, 3. Ma. 1. Br. Alien. 37.

Of the Dedimus Potestatem to take Cognizance of a fine.
A Dedimus Potestatem to take knowledge of a Fine is, as aforesaid, a Writ
Commissional, directed to one or more, giving them-power to take and certify
to the Justices of the Common Place, the cognizance of the Cognisees, when they
cann^t conveniently travel to do it in Court, and it ought to rec^te the
substance of the writ or Covenant, and bear test or date after it. F. N. f.
146. g.

The form of the writ of Covenant and Dedimus Potestatem, with the returns
thereof ensue.

The writ of Covenant.
OLiver, etc. To the Sheriff of York greeting. Command T. B. Esquire, and A. his
wife, that justly, and without delay they hold to V. P. Gent. the Covenant
between them made of the Manor of T. with the appurtenances; And of two
Messuages, 3 Cottages, five Tofts, one Dove-house, five gardens, five Orchards,
110 acres of land, 50 acres of meadow, 50. acres of pasture, 10 acres of wood,
100 acres of ling and heath, 40 s. rent, and common of pasture for all manner
of beasts; with the appurtenances in W. B. And unless they shall do it, and
the aforesaid W. shall secure you for prosecuting his complaint, then summon by
good summoners the aforesaid T. and A. that they be here before our Justices at
Westminster in 8 days of St. Michael to show wherefore they will not do it.
And have you there the Summoners, and this Writ. Witness, etc. the 14th day of
N. In the year, etc.

Fine.
And the Fine thereof was wont to be entered under the Writ thus.

For xx s. paid to the Farmer of the Fines of ou^ Sovereign Lord the King, by
virtue of the Kings warrant.

Indorsement.
Then must the writ of Covenant be indorsed thus,

By E. S. for the fine within written, who affirms that the Tenements within
named, do not exceed the value of 10 l. by the year.

The Sheriffs return, E. S.
Pledges of persecuting
John Do, Rich. Roo.
Sumoners.
John Den. Rich Fen.
The Commis. of Fines
W. L. T. W R. Eure. Esquire; Sheriff.


The Dedimus potestatem thereof.
OL. etc. To our beloved and faithful etc. greeting, Whereas our writ of
Covenant hangs before our Justices of the Bench, between W. P. Gent. and T.
B. Esquire; and Ann his Wife, of the manor of T. with the appurtenances, and of 2
Messuages, 3 Cottages, 5 Tofts, 1 Dove-house, 5 Gardens, 5 Orchards, 110 acres
of Land, 50 acres of Meadow, 50 acres of Pasture, 10 acres of Wood, 100 acres
of Ling, and Heath, 40 s. Rent, and Common of Pasture for all kinds of Beasts,
with the appurtenances, in W. and B. in the County of Tork, to leavy a Fine
thereof, between them, before our Justices aforesaid, in the Bench aforesaid,
according to the Law and custom of our Commonwealth of England. And the
aforesaid T. and A. are so impotent, that without the greatest danger of their
bodies, unto Westminster. at the day in the said writ contained to make Cognisances,
which in this behalf are required, travel they cannot, as we have received: We
to the state of the said T. and A. pitiful in this behalf, have given to you
four, three, or two of you, power to receive the Cognisanses, which the said T.
and A. before you four, three, or two of you, shall make of the Premises. And
therefore you four, three, or two of you, we command that unto the aforesaid T.
and A. personally going, you receive their Cognisances aforesaid, and after ye
have received them, our Justices aforesaid thereof, under the Seals of four,
three, or two of you, distinctly and openly you certify; that then that Fine
between the parties aforesaid of the Premises, before our Justices aforesaid,
in the Bench aforesaid, may be levied according to the Law and Custom
aforesaid; sending to the said Justices this writ: witness my self at
Westminster 14th day of November. In the year etc. Garth.

The name of the Cursiter.
The said Dedimus potestamus must be endorsed thus: By the Commissioners of the
great Seal of England, at the i^st^^ce of the demandant (...) formerly it was
thus. Per Dominum custod. magni Sigilli Angliae ad instanc. petend.

The Commissioners etc. names must be subscribed thereunto, and the Justice of
the Circuit thus.

The Commissioners names I. P. C. D. and E. F. The Justice of the Circuit F. B.
Return.
The execution of this writ appears in the Schedule to the same annexed.

The Precipe, and Concord which must be filed to the Dedimus Potestatem.
The writ of Covenant.
COmmand T. of P. Esquire; and A. his York. ss.
Wife, that justly etc. they hold to W. P. Gent. the Covenant etc. of the
Manor of T. with the appurtenances, and of 2 Messuages, 3 Cottages, 5 Tofts,
one Dove-house, 5 Gardens, 5 Orchards, 100 acres of Land, 50 acres of Meadow,
50 acres of Pasture, 10 acres of Wood, 100 acres of Ling and Heath, forty
shillings rent, and Common of Pasture for all Manner of Beasts, with the
appurtenances in W. and B. and unless, etc.

And the Concord is such (to wit) that the aforesaid T. and A. have recognized
the aforesaid Manor, Dove-house Tenemments, Rent and Common of Pasture, with
the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said W. as those which the said
W. has by the gift of the aforesaid T. and A. And those they have remised and
quite claimed from them the said T. and A. and the Heirs of him the said T. to
the aforesaid W. and his Heirs for ever. And furthermore the said T. and A.
have granted for themselves, and the Heirs of him the said T. that they will
warrant to the aforesaid W. and his Heirs, the aaforesaid Manor, Dove-house,
Tenements, Rent, and Common of Pasture, with the appurt* against themselves,
and the Heirs and assigns of him the said T. and against the Heirs and assigns
of I B. Esquire; and against all men claiming or having any right, title, estate,
use, interest, or demand, of or in the same Manors, Dove-houses, Tenements,
Rent, and Common of Pasture, with the appurtenances, or of or in any parcel
thereof, by, or from under the said T. and I. his Heirs or assigns, or the
heirs or assigns of either of them and for this etc.

Taken and acknowleged at K. in the County of York the ninteenth day of January
in the year etc. before

The Commissioners names.
G. Shrew. W. West.
The names of the parties.
T. B. A. B.
A Dedimus potestatem upon a Writ of Customs, and Services for a Fine thereof
to be levied.
O. etc. to his beloved and faithful R. H. one of the Justices of the Bench
greeting. Whereas our Writ of Customs and Services hangs before your
Associates our Justices of the Bench, between W. B. Esquire; and E. A. Esquire; of the
Customs and Services which the same E. to the said W. ought to do, of his free
Tenement which of him he holds in N. as in Homages, Fealty, Releifes, and
other Services, in the County of S. And we at the petition of the aforesaid W.
and E. have given them License thereof to Concord, and the aforesaid W. and E.
of themselves are so impotent, that without very great danger of their bodies
unto Westminster, at the day in our writ contained, to make the Cognisances
which in this behalf are required, are not able to travel, as we have received,
We pitying the state of the same W. and E. in this behalf, have given to you
power to receive the Cognisances which the same W. and E. before you shall make
of the Premises. And therefore we command you that unto the aforesaid W. and E.
personally coming, you receive their Cognisances aforesaid. And when you have
received them, your associates thereof, distinctly and openly you certify,
that then the Fine between the parties aforesaid, of the Premises, before you
and your associates aforesaid, in the Bench aforesaid, according to the Law,
and Custom of our Commonwealth, of England, may be sevyed. And have you then
there this writ, witness etc.

Of the Fine formerly called the Kings Silver.
THat was called the Kings Silver that was wont to be paid to the King now to
the Lord Protector for the License of the Concord, which upon writs of Covenant
was taxed after the rate followings That is to say, for Lands of the yearly.

value of l. s. d. is paid l. s. d. 3 6 8 ^ 6 8 5 6 8 0 10 0 7 13 4 13 4 8 13 4
0 16 8 11 0 0 1 0 0 12 0 0 1 3 4 14 6 8 1 6 8 15 6 8 1 10 0 17 13 4 1 13 4 18
13 4 1 16 8 20 0 0 2 0 0 22 0 0 2 3 4 24 6 8 2 6 8

Every 5 Marks and 20 s. pays fine-6 s-8 d. from 5-Marks and 20 s. unto
5-Marks and 40 s. pays-10 s. and above 5 Marks and 40 s. unto 10 Marks and 20
s. pays 13 s-4 d. and in like proportion for all other Fines, and it is
commonly entered by the Clerk, in this form,

Entry of Kngs silver
I. W. gives to the L. P. 10 s. for a York. ss.
License of concording with E. W. Esquire; and I. his wife, of a plea of Covenant
of one Message, 10 acres of Land, 10 acres of Meadow, and 10 acres of Pasture*
with the appurtenances, in D. Reciting the substance of the writ, And they have
the Handwriting by the Peace admitted before R. W. one of the Justices of the
Lord Protector of the Bench, being Justice in the County.

Observations necessary at the knowledge of Fines.
Tbe titling of the note.
When a Fine is to be knowledged it is meet that before the parties come before
the Judges or Commissioners, the titling of the writ of Covenant and Concord be
fair written, according to the parties minds, and duly examined and also signed
or subscribed by all the Cognisors.

Knowledge of the Cognizes.
It is also requisite that either of the Cognisors be known to the Justices or
Commissioners that must take the Cognizance thereof, or that some other
credible person, known to him which takes the Cognizance, who knows the
party, be present, and do sufficiently enform the Judge; that they be the
self-same parties, against whom the writ is brought, for some will covenously,
knowledge Fines in the names of others that be owners of the Land, 34. H. 6.
Fol. 19.

Examinations of Wives.
And if a feme Covert be Cognisor, she must be persuaded, to yield her consent,
and be fully agreed with, before she be examined, for in all cases where a Feme
Covert is to depart with any thing by fine, she must be examined by the
Justices or Commiss. that take this Cognizance, and confess that she does make
Cognizance freely, and not through fear or compulsion of any, before the
Cognizance will be accepted. But where she is to take benefit by a Fine, she
shall never be examined, 42 Ed. 3. 7. 3 H. 6. 42. 46. E. 3. 15 8 H. 6. 2. 4 Ed.
3. 62. Statut. de finibus. 18 Ed. 2.

Value.
Also the yearly value of Lands should be set down under the Concord, and some
honest person which knows the Land, brought thither to make oath for the
value thereof, for Oath.
without such oath or composition the Fine cannot pass.

Composition.
And composition with the Commissioners will not readily be made without oath,
or some late Fine, License, or other matter of Record, to inform the
Commissioners, of the value thereof, which being done, the writ of Covenant is
again there to be entered, (and the fine thereof if it be finable) must there be
paid to the Receiver, and the writ must be signed by the said Commissioners,
and that done the said writ must be sealed and returned with the Concord, and
Dedimus Potestatem, if the Cognizance was taken by Dedimus Potestatem, and then
the said writings must be taken out and signed by the Custos brevium, and
thence they must be carried to the Clerk of the Prot. Silver, who must take a
note thereof, for the entry of the P. Silver, and sign the same again, and then
must they be delivered to the Chyrographer of fines, to be engrossed and
proclaimed. The examples whereof appear in their apt places.

How, and when Cognisances of Fines must be certified, and what may hinder the
same.
Certifitate
JF they which have taken Cognizance of a Fine will not certify the same, a
Certiorar. is to be awarded unto them, comprehending the matter of Dedimus
potestatem, and command them to certify, etc. which if they do not, there
lies against the Commissioners an alias pluries and attatchment etc. Fitz. N.
B. 147. b.

Time.
But they are not bound to certify such Recognisances, but within a year after
such caption thereof; but if they do, it is good enough, 23. El. c. 3. And with
every such Certificate they must certify the day and year wherein the same was
knowledged thus, Taken at R. in the County of York, the 20th day of October, in
the year etc.

Else no Clerk or Officer may receive the same but shall forfeit for every writ
otherwise For forfeiture.
received, five pounds 23. El. c. 3. If any of the parties to a Fine die after
recognifance thereof, and before it be certified, it ought not to be certified.
1. H. 7. 9. 33. H. 6. fo. 52 Dyer fo. 146. pl. 68. 7. El.

But if such Cognizance of a fine be certified and the Prot. silver entered, the
fine is good, and may afterward be engrossed though it be in another Term.
Thus,

THis is the final Concord made, etc. In the morrow of the Purification of the
blessed Virgin Mary, and afterward granted and recorded in fifteen days of
Easter, Dyer f. 220. pl. 15. and fo. 254. pl. 104.

If the Justice or Commissioner that has taken the knowledge of a Fine, die
before Justice o^ Commissiners. dies
it be certified, their executors, or administrators may certify the note of
the fine to the Justices of the Commonplace, by writ Certiorari out of the
Chancery to them directed 8. H. 4. 5. 1. H. 7. 9. Fitz. N. B. f. 147. b. The
form of which Certiorari is thus.

Certiorari to the Execut. of the Justice upon the cognizance of the fine.
O. etc. to his beloved B. W. widow executrix, in, of the Testament of T. W.
late one of our Justices of the Bench, greeting, We willing for certain causes
to be certified upon certain cognisances of a fine between T. D. and I. G. of
one Message with the appurtenances in T. and in the County of E. by the
aforesaid late Justice taken, and in your custody, by reason of the execution
of the Testament aforesaid, being as it is said, We command you that the
Cognisanc^^ ^foresaid, to our Justices at Westminster under your seal
distinctly and plainly without delay you send, and this writ that th'aforesaid
Justices, further to levy that fine, may cause to be done that which of right
and according to the Law and Custom of our Commonwealth of England ought to
be done, T. etc.

Justice discharged.
In like manner, if a Justice having taken cognizance of a fine be discharged of
his Office before he has certified the same, he may not certify it without
alike writ notwithstanding that he be restored to his place again, 8. H. 4. 5.
1. H 7. 9.

And thereupon it has been used that a writ has been directed to the said
Justices, to receive the same cognizance, but it is not in use at this day. F.
N. B. 147. E.

Kings death.
But if the King die after the cognizance taken, and before the certifying
thereof, the Justices cannot then certify, n^m per mor^em s^u dimissionem
Regis c^ssat potestas Judicis 1. H. 7. 9. yet learn, for I think the statute of
1. Ed. 6. c. 7. does give remedy in this. For the words thereof be these in
effect.

By the death, and demise of any King, no action, bill, or plai^t, that shall
depend between party and party in any Court of Record, shall be discontinued or
put without day, ^ut if the King dye after the Kings silver is entered, and
before the Fine be engrossed, the writ of the Covenant may be resummoned and
the Fine engrossed, 1. H. 7. 9.

Femes
If a Feme sole by Dedimus Potestatem knowledge a Fine, and before the return
thereof marry, this Fine may be certified and engrossed as of a Feme sole,
because the taking of her Husband after the Fine knowledged is her own
voluntary act, and such Fine shall bar her, and her Heirs for ever. Dyer fo.
246. pl. 68. Mich. 7. and 8. El.

Signed.
Every writ of Dedimus Potestatem (to special Commissioners, for the taking of
the Cognizance of fines) ought to be signed by the Lord Chancellor, or Lord
Keeper, now the Lords Commissioners, or chef Justice of the Common Place, or
the chief Justice of the Circuit where the Land lies.

Of the Inrolement of Writs of Covenant, Dedimus Potestatem, and knowledges
thereupon, which is termed the foot of the Fine.
Inrollment.
BEfore the engrossing of the fine by the Chiographer, the writ of the Covenant,
the writ of Dedimus Potestatem, with the knowledges and notes of the same, must
be enrolled, and in a Roll to be of Record for ever to remain in the safe
custody of the chief Clerk of the Custos brevium. Fee.
Common place, (which is the Custos brevium) and his successors, who must have
22 d. fee for enting of the Concord, to the intent that if the notes of the
Fines in the Custody of the Chyrographer be embezelled or lost, execution
Embezelling. Proclamations. The foot of the Fine
may be had upon the said Roll. 5. H. 4: c. 14. upon this Roll the
proclamations are endorsed and these notes are termed the foot of the Fine.
Dyer fo. 321. pl. 19. 15 El.

Of the Note of the Fine.
The note of the fine.
THe note of the Fine, is a note thereof made by the Chirographer before it be
engrossed, which begins thus,

York. ss.
BEtween A. B. Plantiff. and C. D. Deforcient. of 2 Messuages, 2. Cottages, 100
acres of Land, 40 acres of Meadow, 20 acres of Pasture one acre of Wood, 8
acres of Ling and Heath, and one penny Rent, with the appurtenances in A. A
Note of the Fine.
whereof Plea of Covenant was summoned between them etc. (that is to say) that
the aforesaid John has recognized the Tenements and Rent aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, to be the right of him the said A. and has granted for himself
and his Heirs that the aforesaid Tenements and Rent with the appurtenances,
which the aforesaid G. and I. hold for term of the life of him the said I. of
the Heirs of the aforesaid C. the day wherein this Concord was made, and which
after the decease of him the said I. unto the aforesaid C. and his heirs ought
to revert, after the decease of him the said I. shall wholly remain to the
aforesaid A. and his Heirs, to hold of the chief Lords of that Fee, by the
Services which unto the aforesaid Tenenement and Rent do belong for ever. And
for this recognisance, grant, fine, and Concord, the said A. has given to the
aforesaid B. 100 Marks sterling.

Upon which note, before the engrossing of the Fine (if it be of a remainder,
reversion, rent, or Seigniory) writs of Q^i^ Juris clamat per quae servicia, or
quem reddi^um reddit, must be sued, as the case requires, Plo. fo. 43. b. 22.
H. 6. 13.

Quid Juris clamat.
Quid Juris clam. is a Judicial writ, and issues ^ut of the Record of the
Fine, remaining in the keeping of the Custos brevium of the Common place, Plo.
43. b. before it be engrossed, for after the engrossing it cannot be had, Plo.
fo: 431. b. 22, H. 6. 13. F. Not. Br. 147 a. which lies for the grantee of a
reversion or remainder, when the particular Tenant will not atturn to enforce
him to atturn, 22. H. 6. 13. Plo. 431. b, And it is made in this form.

Summons.
O. etc. To the Sheriff greeting, we command you that you cause to come before
our Justices, etc. (^ali die) G. and A. his Wife, to know what right they claim
in one Message, etc. with the ^p^urtenances in B. which Tenements with the
appurtena^ces, M. who was the Wife of G. in our Court etc. has granted to A.
of B. by a Fine thereof there between them made, And have you etc.

And the final cause of this writ of quid Juris clamat is that the grantee or
cognisee of the reversion or remainder, may by that Atturnment of the
particular Tenant, be enabled (if cause be given) to bring an Action of wast or
to avow for rent reserved, or services behind which he cannot do without
Atturnment Plo, fo. 431. b. 22. H. 6. 13.

Tenant in Dower.
Tenant in Dower shall atturn. though the writ suppose her to be Tenant for
life, because she claims no greater estate than Frank Tenement Hill. 3. E.
Fitz. Quid Juris clamat 3. yet it seems she thereby loses her warranty, and
advantage to be newly endowed, if she be evicted 10. E. 3. Fitz. Quid juris
clamat, etc. 41.

If a gift be for life, the remainder for life, the writ must mention the
remainder Hill. 3. E. 3. 15. Fitz. Fines 9.

It is meet therefore to learn who are compellable hereby to atrurn and who
not, and by whom.

What Persons may obtain Atturnment by Quid Juris clamat and what not.
Grantee of a reversion
THe grantee of a reversion void of impediment 34. H. 6. b. Fitz. Na. Br. fo.
168 b. F. N. B. 147 a.

Infant.
But an Infant cannot, because if a Lease for life without impeachment of wast,
be pleaded in Bar, he cannot confess it, 43. E. 3. 5. Contr. 23. E. Fiz. quid
Juris. etc. 42.

Nothing in the reversion. Feme Covert.
If the Cognisor have nothing in the reversion, the Tenant shall not atturn.
Lib. Int. fol. 436.

A F^me Covert without her Husband, albeit the Fine was levied when she was
sole. 11. H 4. 7.

Diverse.
If there be diverse Pleas, and one die, hanging the Plea, yet shall the Tenant
atturn to the rest. 48. E. 3. 32.

Diverse.
Or if diverse sue the writ, and one be nonsuit, yet attournment shall be unto
the other, without Summons and severing of the other 46. E. 3. 32.

Abbot.
Abbot avera atturnment dum ten. pur vie sans mre. license et nest forfeiture
17. E. 3. 7.

Disseasor.
If Cognisee discease the Tenant of part he shall have no atturnment, 19. E. 2.
Fitz. Quid Juris etc. 46.

What Persons be compellable to atturn by Quid Juris clamat, and what not.
T. for life.
THe writ of Quid Juris clamat, lies against the particular Tenant of the Land
for life, 34. H. 6. b. Not. Br. fo. 168. b. Fitz. Not. fo. 147. a 49. h. though
he be but a Tenant for life of Land holden in Capite, or a Feme Covert.
Feme Covert 45. E. 3. 11.

And a Tenant for years shall atturn 3 H. T. for years
4. 3.

T. In tail.
But Tenant in tail is not compellable because of the estate of inheritance
which is in him, 38. E. 3. 20. Nor Tenant in tail after T. in tail after
possibilities etc.
possibility of issue extinct, for the inheritance that was once in him. 43. E.
3. 1. 46. E. 3. 13. et 72.

T. for life of Lands in Capite.
A particular Tenant for Lands holden in Capite, is not compellable to atturn
without sight of License of alienation, lest his Lands should be subject to a
Fine for the alienation without license, 45. E. 3. 6.

Executors.
If A. and B. have an estate for ten years, as executors, and B. have five years
in reveru^on in his own right, he must atturn, because he is possessed of the
whole term and the attornment of one executor of a Term is good enough, 32. E.
3. Fitz. Quid Juris 5. p. Stanh.

T. pur vie ove. A. pur ans.
But if A. Lease to B. and C. for six years, and after confirm the Estate of B.
for life, the note of the fine shall make mention of B. only, per Seton. 32.
E. 3. Fitz. Quid Juris, etc. 5.

T. in Dower. T. by the Courtesy.
If Tenant in Dower or by Courtesy grant their estate, yet the Quid Jur. clam.
lies against them, for none but they can be Tenant in Dower, or by the
Couttesie, 18. E. 3 5.

T. for years upon Condition.
If a Leasee for years with livery be upon Condition, that if the Leasee pay 10
pound such a day, or the Leasor die within the term etc. He shall have Fee, if
before the day the Lessor alien by Fine, this Tenant shall atturn (salvis
advantagijs) And yet if he pay the ten pounds at the day, or the lessor die
during the Term, the leasee shall have have fee. 6 R. 2. Fitz. Quid Juris
clamat. 20.

Against T. in common.
If a Quid Juris clamat be against two, as Tenants in the Common, he which
appears must atturn, if he plead not that they are joynt-tenants, 16. E. 3.
Fitz. Quid Juris 21. After assignment.


If a particular Tenant grant over his estate after the note levied, yet must
he atturn. 17. E. 3. Fitz. Quid Juris, 11.

Once atturn.
If the Tenant atturn once upon the grant of the Cognisors he shall atturn no
more, 4. E. 3. Fitz. Quid Jur. 45.

Joynt-tenant. T. in common.
If a joint-tenant or tenant in Common of a Reversion, grant his part by Fine,
the particular Tenant shall not be compelled to atturn 5. E. 3. Fitz. Quid Jur.
40.

T. for life upon condition.
Upon a Lease for life upon condition that if the Leasee die within twenty years
that his Executors, Administrators or Assigns shall hold unto the end of twenty
years: the Lessee shall atturn as Tenant for life, with protestation to save
his interest, 16. E. 3. 20. E. 3. Fitz. Quid Jur. 22. 31.

Joint tenant of a reversion.
If the reversion of two joint Tenants for life be granted by Fine, supposing
the one to be sole Tenant, the Tenant is not compellable to atturn, 32. E. 3.
Fitz. Quid Jur. 5. per Seton.

Tenant by elegit.
But Tenant by Statute or elegit seems not compellable to atturn, because the
cognisor cannot compel him to account, and he may hold the Lands, after his sum
satisfied, until he have levied his damages, 6. E 3. 53. Fitz. Fines 99. E. 3,
F. Quid Juris 47.

Baron sole Cognisor.
Nor a Tenant for life, where the Husband sole is Cognisor of his Wives land:
for if he do atturn, the Wife surviving, her Husband may enter for forfeiture,
27. E. 3.

A Clerk.
And a Clerk which has no lay fee is not compelled to atturn, 38. E. 3. 18.

Reversion.
Nor Tenant for life in reversion or remainder 34. H. 6. b.

Frank marriage. Infant. Idiot.
Nor Tenant in Frank marriage lib. Intr. Quid Juris clamat 10.

Nor an Infant, 43. E. 3. 1.

Nor a Lunatic mad man or Idiot as it seems, because of their disabilities.

But atturnment made by such persons as are able, but not compellable to
atturn, is good. 12. E. 4, Not. Br. fo. 170. b.

With exception.
And an atturn^ent may be with an excepon if the Tenant have a Lease for life
without impeachment of wast, as he may atturn, saving his advantage, and it
shall be so entered 45. E. 3. 11. 24. E. 3

Covenants. Annuity. Warranty Acquitall.
If the Tenant have Covenants to repair etc. 48. E. 3. 32. or have an annuity
out of the Land, 48. E. 3. 32. or Covenant of warranty or acquitall, 41. E. 3.
48. or to fell trees, he may atturn, saving these advantages.

Grant. Remainder in fee.
If A. seized of Lands in fee thereof enfeoff B. to the use of the said A. for
life, and after to the use of his Executors and Assigns for twenty years after
his death: And then to the use of C. in fee, Quere whether A. shall be
compelled to atturn in Quid Juris clamat supposing him Tenant for life only,
and not mentioning the Term, without saving of his Term by protestation, Dyer
fo. 309. pl. 77. 14. El.

No view lies in a Quid Juris clamat, 15. E. 4. 28.

What Places will bar the Plantiff of Atturnment.
Seisinin fee.
IF the Tenant plead that he is seized in fee the day of the note levied without
that, that he was then seized for life, without showing how he is so seized,
15. E. 4. 28. 1. H. 7. 27.

The Cognisor had nothing.
Or if the Tenant for life plead, that before the fine, an estranger was seized
in fee, and released to him in fee, without that that the recognisor had any
thing in the Lands, the day of the note levied 3. H. 4. 3.

Non tenure.
If a particular Tenant plead he holds not of the Cognisot, the day of the
note levied he must show what estate he claims, and from whom; 3. E. 3. 6.
Fitz. Quid Juris clamat. 6. 14. E. 3. Fitz. Quid Jur. 9.

But if he claim fee he shall not show how 14. E. 3. 3. Fitz. Fines 7. but
traverse that he holds for life, 1. H. 7. 27.

Leasee for eight years, upon condition, that the Leasor alien within the term,
he shall have Seisin in fee. Seisin de tali. Stat. Qual etc. For parcel.
fee; cannot allege that and say that he claims estate according to the
Tenor of his Deed, but must plead his estate certainly, 2. E. 2. Fitz. Quid
Jur. 38.

If the Tenant confess for part and plead a plea which may forfeit his estate
therein, he must atturn by and by. 11. H. 4. 57. Cont. 22. E. 3. 18. Fitz.
fines 33.

Release.
Release of the Cognisor before the Cognizance, to the Heir or his Ancestors in
fee is a good bar, 44. E. 3. 34.

Forfeiture for term of years.
If a Lessee for years claim for life, and fail of it* he forfeits his Term, 6.
R. 2. Fitz. Quid Jur. 20. Plesingtons case.

WHAT PROCESS Lie in a Quid Juris clamat.
Process.
THe Process in a quid juris clamat, is Summons and distress infinite, Not.
Imprisonment.
br. 169. a. But if the Tenant appear, and plead no good Bar, and yet will not
atturn, he shall be imprisoned, 37. H. 6. 14.

Disclaimer.
But if the Tenant disclaim, and if it be found against him, he shall atturn, 4.
E. 3. 27.

But if the Tenant for life, years, in Dower, by the Courtesy, or extent, by
Plea, Claim, Fee, or Fee-tail, and it be found otherwise, he does forfeit his
Estate, 15. E. 4. 28. Not. Br. fo. 168. b.

And the Tenant may atturn by Dedimus Potestatem, At. by dedimus potestatem.
the form whereof ensues.

Oliver, etc. to his beloved and faithful I. M. Knight, etc. whereas our Writ
of Covenant hangerh before you and your Associates our Justices of the Bench
between R. and P. of 100. Acres, etc. which I. holds for his life of the
aforesaid P. to levy thereof a Fine between the aforesaid R. and P. according
to the Law and Custom of our Commonwealth of England, whereby by our Writ we
have commanded our Sheriff of Norfolk, that he cause to come before our
aforesaid Justices, the aforesaid I. at the day in that Writ contained, to
acknowledge what right he claims to have in the Land aforesaid* and the
aforesaid I. being of himself so impotent that unto the Bench aforesaid at the
day to him given, without the greatest danger of his body, he is not able to
travail, to acknowledge what right he claims to have in the Land aforesaid:
we tendering the State of him the said I. in this behalf, have given you power
to receive the cognizance, and to testify the Atturnment which the aforesaid
I. before you shall do in this behalf: And therefore we command you, that unto
the aforesaid I. personally going, the cognizance which before you in this
behalf he shall do, ye receive: And when you have received it, and he before
you as it is the manner have atturned himself, your foresaid Associates of the
cognizance aforesaid distinctly and openly ye certify, the aforesaid
Atturnment certifying, that, that fine between the parties aforesaid, of the
Land aforesaid, before you and your Associates aforesaid, in the Bench
aforesaid may be levied, according to the Law and custom aforesaid: And have
you, etc.

Default.
By default of appearance, distring. ad atturnandum shall be awarded, 2 E. 3. 9.

Nonsuit.
Nonsuit in quid juris clamat is not peremptory, ry, 18 E. 3. 6. Fitz. Quid
Jur. ^7. 24. Ed. 3. 3. Fitz. quid, etc. 39.

The Writ of Summons in Quid juris clamat.
Summons.
OLiver, etc. to the Sheriff of York greeting, we command you that you cause to
come before our Justices of the Bench, from the day of Easter in 15. days, A.
B. to acknowledge what right he claims in one Message, and ten Acres of
Land, with the Appurtenances in B. which M. N. in our Court, etc. has granted
to C. D. by fine thereof there between them made. And have you there, T. etc.
upon which Writ none essoin lies, 9. H. 6. 22. 33. H. 6. 5.

At the return of which Writ the Sheriff does return him summoned thus endorsed
upon the back of the Writ.
Pledges of the within named
A. B. I. M. R. K.
S. E. Sheriff.
And if the plaintiff appear, and the Tenant Default.
make default, the entry is thus.
The Sheriff of York was commanded, that he should cause to come here from the
day of Easter in 15. days, A. B. to acknowledge what right he claims in one
Message, etc. with the Appurtenances in B. which M. N. in the Court of the
Lord Protector here has granted to C. D. by a Fine here thereof between them
made: And now at this day came the aforesaid C. by H. I. his Attorney, and the
aforesaid A. B. came not, and was mainprised by I. M. and R. L.

Distress.
Therefore he into all, etc. And he is commanded that he distrain him by all his
Lands and Chattels, etc. And that of the profits, etc. And that he have his
body here from the day of the Holy Trinity in three weeks, to acknowledge in
form aforesaid. etc. And the same day is given to the aforesaid C. here, etc.

Essoin.
At the return hereof none essoin lies, because it is judicial, 9 H. 6. 22. 33
H. 6. 5.

The Distress in quid juris clamat.
OLiver, etc. to the Sheriff of York greeting, we command you that you distrain
A. B. by all his Lands and Chattels in your Bayliwick, so that neither he nor
any for him do lay hand thereupon, until you shall receive further command
thereof from us, And that you answer us of the profits of them, so that you
have his body before our Justices at Westminster, from the day of the holy
Trinity in three weeks, to acknowledge what right he claims in one Message,
etc. with the appurtenances in B. which M. N. in our Court before our Justices
at Westminster has granted to C. D. by Fine thereof there between them made,
and to hear thereupon his Judgment for many defaults. And have you there this
Writ, T. etc.

If at the day of the return hereof the parties appear, the entry is thus.
Atturnment general.
Heretofore even as it appears in the Term of the holy Trinity last past in
the Roll 60. it is thus contained ss. The Sheriff of E. was commanded that he
should distrain A. B. by all and Et supra in brevi inde until (and to hear,
etc. And then. And now here at this day came as well the aforesaid C. D. by his
Attorney aforesaid, as the aforesaid A. B. in his proper person, and hereupon
the same E. B. prays, hearing of the Writ aforesaid, and to him it is read,
he prays also hearing of the note, whereupon the Writ aforesaid issued forth;
and to him it is read in these words, E. S. Between C. D. Plaintiff, etc. as
the note is. And then if the Tenant will atturn generally the entry further is:
For that they being heard and understood, the same A. B. says, that he
claims to hold the aforesaid Message, etc. for Term of his life, as by the
note aforesaid is supposed, and that he is ready to atturn himself thereof to
the aforesaid C. D. and himself to him, the Court here thereupon has atturned,
and recognized, etc. And had done fealty: therefore let the Fine thereof be
engrossed.

Or if Atturnment be made out of the Court, the Cognisee may inform the Court
thereof, and at his suit, then this entry shall be, viz.
And now here at this day came the aforesaid C. D. in his proper person, and
says, that the aforesaid A. B. has atturned to him thereof in his proper
person, and prays that the Fine thereof may be engrossed at his peril,
therefore let the Fine thereof be engrossed at his peril, etc.

Atturnment special.
But if the Cognisee appear, and will atturn specially, it may be done thus: The
Sheriff was commanded, etc. ut supra reciting the Process, and the Tenant
demanding, and having Oyer of the Writ, and note of the Fine, he may plead
thus, viz.

And hereupon the same A says, that he holds the Tenements aforesaid with
the appurtenances for Term of his life, by the demise of M. N. by his certain
Deed indented, the other part whereof with the Seals of the aforesaid M. N.
signed, the same A. here in Court produces, the Tenor of which follows in
these words. This Indenture made, etc. reciting the whole Indenture, and saving
to himself all advantages and conditions written aforesaid, says, That he is
ready to attorn to the aforesaid C. D. of the Teneme^ts aforesaid, by virtue of
the note aforesaid. And the aforesaid C. D. acknowledging not the writing
aforesaid, says, that of whom the same A. B. holds the Tenements aforesaid
with the appurtenances, by the demise of the aforesaid, M. N. according to the
force and effect of the note aforesaid, he prays that the same A. B. may
attorn himself thereof to him, etc. And the aforesrid A. B. says, that saving
to himself all advantages, and benefit of the writing aforesaid, he is ready to
atturn himself thereof to the same C. D. of the Tenements aforesaid, etc. And
afterward the same A. B. saving to himself the advantages of the writing
aforesaid, himself to the aforesaid C. D. here in Court has atturned, and
acknowledged, etc. And has done to him Fealty, etc. Therefore let a Fine
thereof be engrossed, etc.

Bar.
But if the Tenant will pleadin Bar, he may do it thus, if he be Tenant in
Frank-marriage, The Sheriff was commanded, etc. ut supra.

Gift in Frank-marriage.
And the aforesaid A. B. says, that one P. N. Father of the aforesaid M. N.
whose heir he is, etc. by his Deed gave the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances to the same A. B. in Frank-marriage with E. his daughter, saving
to himself the reversion, etc. which said E. died without issue of his body
begotten, And so he faith, that he holds the Tenements aforesaid, by form of
the Deed aforesaid; and that the reversion thereof, after his death, does
belong unto the aforesaid R. M. and prays Judgment, whether he of such his
Estate ought to atturn himself thereof to any, etc. and produces, here in
Court the Charter aforesaid, that the gift aforesaid, in form aforesaid
testifies, etc. And the aforesaid C. D. says, that the day wherein the note
of the Fine aforesaid was levied (that is to say) the 9. day, etc. the
aforesaid A. holds the aforesaid Tenements for Term of his life, as by the
note aforesaid is supposed, without this, that he then held the Tenements
aforesaid in Free-marriage, as he above alleged. And this he prays that, etc.
therefore, 12, etc.

Or thus, if the Tenant Claim Fee, or be not Tenant.
Which being read, the same A. B. says, that he by virtue of the note
aforesaid, himself to the aforesaid C. D. ought not to atturn, for that one
Message, etc. which are in the aforesaid Town of S. of the Tenements aforesaid
in the note aforesaid contained, the same A. B. says, that at the time of the
levying of that note was seized of the aforesaid Message, etc. in his demeasne
as of Fee by the gift and Feoffment of one L. T. to him thereof made, without
this that he at the time of the levying of that note, held that moiety for Term
of life only, as by that note is supposed; and tbis, etc. whereof he prays
Judgment whether he by virtue of the note aforesaid, himself to the aforesaid
C. D. of the aforesaid Message, etc. ought to atturn, etc. And as touching the
Tenements aforesaid residue of the Tenements in the note aforesaid contained,
the same A. B, says, that he neither at the time of the levying of the note
aforesaid, nor at any time afterward held the same Tenements, but rather that
W. A. who as yet is in life then was thereof Tenant, as of his freehold, and
as yet is. And this, etc. whereof, etc. ut supra.

And the aforesaid C. D. says, that he from having the atturnment of the
aforesaid A. B. by virtue of the note aforesaid ought not to be barred for that
as touching the aforesaid Message in L. aforesaid, the same C. D. says, that
the aforesaid A. B. at the time of the levying of that note held that Message
with the appurtenances for Term of his life only, as by that note is supposed.
And this he prays that, etc. And the aforesaid A. B. likewise. And as to the
residue of the Tenements aforesaid he says, that at the time of the levying of
the note aforesaid, the aforesaid A. B. was Tenant thereof for Term of his
life, as by that note is supposed. And this he is ready, etc. whereof he
prays Judgment, and that the aforesaid A. B. may atturn himself thereof, etc.

And the aforesaid C. D. says, that the aforesaid A. B. at the time of the
levying of the note aforesaid was not Tenant of the aforesaid residue of the
Tenements for Term of his life as, etc. And of this, etc. therefore 12, etc.

Or thus, where the Cognisor has nothing in the reversion.
The Sheriff of D. was commanded, etc. ut supra, which being read and heard,
the same A. B. says, that he by virtue of the note aforesaid, himself to the
aforesaid C. D. ought not atturn, because he says, that the aforesaid M. N.
who recognized the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances to be the right
of him the said C. D, etc. had nothing in the reversion of the same Tenements
with the appurtenances at the time of the levying of the note aforesaid; and
this he is ready to verify, whereof he prays. etc. ut supra.

And the aforesaid C. D. says, that the aforesaid A. B. at the time of the
levying of the note aforesaid, to wit, in eight days of Saint Hillary, etc.
held the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances for Term of his life; the
reversion thereof after his death to the aforesaid M. N. who recognized, etc.
and to his heirs belonging, as by the note aforesaid it is supposed. And this
he prays that it may be enquired by the Country. And the aforesaid A. B.
likewise, therefore let 12, etc.

But if the Tenant claim an Estate tail by devise, thus.
Which being read and heard, etc. the same A. B. faith, that he by virtue of
that note, himself to the aforesaid C. D. of the tenements aforesaid he ought
not to atturn, because he says, that before that the aforesaid M. N. any thing
had in the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, one I. F. was seized of
the Tenements aforesaid in his demeasne as of Fee, and that the same Tenements
with the appurtenances are held, and at the time of the levying of the note
aforesaid were held of W. S. in Soccage by Fealty to him, etc. And the same I.
being so seized thereof, the 1. day of May last past, made his last will and
Testament in writing, and by the same bequeathed to the aforesaid A. B. the
Tenements aforesaid by the names, etc. to have to him and the heirs of his body
lawfully begot^en, and afterward there died, after whose death the aforesaid A.
B. into the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances entered, and was thereof
seized in his demeasne as of Fee-tail, to wit, to him and his heirs by form of
the Statute and last will aforesaid. And this, etc. whereof, etc.

And the aforesaid C. D. says, that he by any things before alleged from the
atturnment of the aforesaid A. B. by virtue of the note aforesaid ought not to
be barred, because he says, that well and true it is that the aforesaid I. F.
was seized as above, as in the Writ aforesaid above it is alleged: but the same
C. D. says, that the same I. F. by his said Testament and last will amongst
other things bequeathed the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, etc. by
the names aforesaid, to the aforesaid A. B. for Term of his life, and afterward
the same I. F. dyed, after the death of which said I. F. the same A. B. into
the Tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances entered, and was thereof seized
in his demeasne as of Freehold, by the Form of the Testament, and last will
aforesaid, without this, that the same I. F. by his last will and Testament
aforesaid bequeathed to the aforesaid A. B. etc. ut supra, as the aforesaid A.
B. above alleged. And this, etc. and whereof, etc. And the aforesaid A. B. as
before says, etc. (ut supra in brevi) as he before alleged. And of this, etc.

The Tenant may atturn for parcel, excepting the rest, and plead thereunto.
Attornment for part and plea to the rest.
ANd now at this day here in the Court came as well the aforesaid E. I. by W. W.
his Attorney, as the aforesaid I. E. in his proper person, and hereupon the
aforesaid E. I. by his Attorney, aforesaid Prayed, that the aforesaid I. E. to
him thereof may atturn, etc. And the aforesaid I. E. prays hearing of the
Writ aforesaid, and to him it is read, etc. he prays also hearing of the note
of the Fine, whereupon the Writ aforesaid issued forth; and it is read to him
in these words: Between R. Plaintiff, and P. Deforcient etc. rehearsing the
whole note; which being read and heard, the same I. F. as touching the
Tenements aforesaid, except 10 Acres in D. parcel thereof, says, that he is
ready to the aforesaid R. thereof to atturn, and himself to him in Court here,
has attorned of the Tenements aforesaid, except the aforesaid 10. Acres of
Land, and has acknowledged, etc. And has done Fealty, etc. And as touching
the aforesaid 10. Acres of Land in D. the same I. F. says, that he at the time
of the levying the note aforesaid, was seized of the same 10. Acres of Land,
with the appurtenances in his demeasne as of Fee, without this that he at the
aforesaid time of the levying of the note aforesaid, the same 10. Acres of Land
with the appurtenances held for Term of life only as, etc. therefore let a Fine
thereof be engrossed, Dyer f. 212. p. 35. 4. Eliz.

And when the Tenant does atturn, the note of the Fine is to be delivered to
the Chirographer: And then it must be written upon the backside of the same
note, thus.

The within named A. B. has atturned himself to the within written C. D. by
virtue of this note, as it appears, etc.

Attorney in quid Juris clamat.
UPon such a Plea pleaded, that the Tenant may forfeit his Estate, he may make
an Attorney, 21 E. 3. 48.

Or if the Tenant suggest in Chancery, that he will plead so as he forfeit his
Estate, he may make an Attorney by dedimus potestatem; thus.

Oliver, etc. To his beloved faithful F. B. etc. Whereas our Writ of Covenant
hangs before you and your Associates, our Justices of the Bench between R.
and P. of a hundred Acres, etc. which I. holds for his life of the aforesaid
B. for a Fine thereof between the aforesaid R. and P. according to the Law and
custom of our Common-weath of England, to be levied, whereby our Sheriff of
York by our Writ we have commanded, that he should cause to come before our
said Justices, the aforesaid I. at the day in that Writ contained, to
acknowledge what right he claims to have in the Lands aforesaid; and on the
behalf of the said I. it is given us to understand, that he upon the Fine
aforesaid ought not to atturn, for that, that before the levying of the note of
the Fine aforesaid, one S. being seized of that Land in his demeasne as of Fee,
gave it to the aforesaid I. and the heirs of his body. And he at the day to him
given in the Bench aforesaid, that matter to the Writ aforesaid will plead. And
yet he is so impotent and worn with age, that unto the Bench aforesaid at the
day to him given, without very great danger of his body, he is not sufficient
to travail, to plead that plea, we tendering the State of the same I. in this
behalf, have given you power to receive an Attorney, whom before you in his
stead, he shall will to atturn in this behalf, to gain, or to lose, and
therefore we command you that unto the aforesaid I. personally you going, you
receive an Attorney, whom in his stead, he shall will to Atturn in this behalf,
and of the name of the same Attorney, to us in our Chancery under your Seal,
distinctly and openly you certify, returning to us this Writ,

Witness my self, etc.

The return thereof.
I Puts in his place A. B. his Attorney against R. in a Plea in quid juris
clamat to gain or lose.

And as the Tenant may make an Attorney by dedimus potestatem, so he may
atturn, the form whereof follows.

Oliver, etc. To his, faithful I. and M. greeting whereas our Writ of Covenant
hangs before you and your Associates our Justices of the Bench, between R:
and P. of a hundred Acres, etc. which I holds for his life of the aforesaid
P. for a Fine between the aforesaid R. and P. according to the Law and custom
of our Commonweal of England, to be levied, whereby, by our Writ we have
commanded our Sheriff of Norfolk, that he cause to come before our said
Justices the aforesaid I. at the day in that Writ contained, to acknowledge
what right he claims to have in the Land aforesaid, and the aforesaid I. of
himself is so impotent, that unto the Bench aforesaid at the day to him given,
without very great danger of his body, he is not sufficient to travail, to
acknowledge what right he claims to have in the Land aforesaid, we tendering
the state of him the said I. in this behalf, have given to you power to receive
the knowledgement and to testify the Atturnment, which the aforesaid I. before
you shall will to make ye receive: And when you have received him, and he
before you as it is the manner have atturned himself, your aforesaid Associates
of the cognizance aforesaid distinctly and openly you certify, the aforesaid
atturnment testifying, that, that Fine between the parties aforesaid of the
Lands aforesaid before you, and your associates aforesaid, in the Bench
aforesaid may be levied, according to the Law and custom aforesaid. And have
you, etc.

After issue joined, the Tenant may be essoigned thus.

York ss. A. B. against C. D. in a Plea of quid juris clamat in one Message,
etc. whereof the Jury by W. C. in 15. days of Saint Hillary, etc.

If the issue be found with the Plaintiff, the Judgment is in this form.
Judgment.
ANd hereupon the premises being seen, and by the Justices more fully
understood, it is ordered, that the aforesaid C. D. for seisin, of the
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, against the aforesaid A. B. by
occasion of the claim and Plea aforesaid forefeited, to have (if he will) he
may prosecute, and also, that the Fine aforesaid, if he will, may be engrossed,
and the aforesaid A. B. in mercy, etc.

But atturnments entered upon record, before the party mentioned to atturn, do
first appear in Court in person, or by attorney, warranted by the hand of one
of the Justices of the one Bench, or of the other, or one Justice of Assize
upon a Writ of quid juris clamat, quem redditum reddit, or per quae servitia,
as the case requires, is void without Writ of error, 23 Eliz. c. 3. upon which
Judgment the Cognisee may have execution by habere facias seisinam, in this
form.

Oliver, etc. To the Sheriff of York greeting, Know you, that whereas C. D. in
our Court before our Justices at Westminster, by order of the same Court, has
recovered his seisin against A. B. of one Message with the Appurtenances in L.
which M. N. in the same Court granted to the aforesaid C. D. by a Fine thereof
between them made, therefore We command you, that to the same C. D. plenary
seisin of the Message aforesaid, with the appurtenances, without delay, you
cause to have, and what thereof you shall do, you certify to our said Justices
at Westminster in eight days of Saint Martin, etc. And have you there this
Writ, T. etc.

A Distringas ad Atturnandum.
And upon the Judgment to Atturn does issue a Distringas ad Atturnandum in this
form.

Oliver etc. To the Sheriff greeting, We command you that you distrain A. S.
by all his Lands, etc. So that he be before our Justices of the Bench to atturn
to C. D. in a plea of Quid juris clamat in one Message with the appurtenances
in L. which M. N. in our Court, etc. has granted to the aforesaid C. D. by
fine thereof between them made, and whereupon it is ordered in the same Court
that the aforesaid A. S. himself to the aforesaid C. D. thereof shall atturn.
And have you there this Writ, T. etc.

Quem redditum reddit.
The Writ of quem redditum reddit is a Writ judicial, and issues out of the
note of the fine against the Tenant of the Land, to compel him to atturn to
the Cognisee, upon the grant of a Rent charge or Rent seck, issuing out of the
Land, N. B. F. 170. b. the form whereof follows.

Oliver, etc. to the Sheriff of E. greeting, We command you, etc. that you
cause to come here from the day of St. Michael in fifteen days E. F. to
acknowledge what Rent he was accustomed to yield, issuing out of one message
with the appurtenances in E. which A. B. in our court before our Justices of
the Bench has granted to C. D. by a Fine there of between them made. And have
you there this Writ, T. etc.

If the Defendant appear not upon this Writ, a Distringas issues forth in this
form.
OLiver etc. To the Sheriff of York greeting, We command you that you distrain
E. F. by all his Lands, etc. And that you answer to us of the profits of the
same, and that you have his Body here, etc. in eight days of St. Michael next
to come: To acknowledge what Rent, etc. issuing out of one Message with the
appurtenances in L. which A. B. in our Court, etc. has granted to C. D. by a
Fine thereof between them made, and to hear his Judgment for many defaults. And
have you, etc.

At which day if the Tenant appear, the entry may be in this form.
E. F. In mercy for many defaults, etc.

The Sheriff of E. was commanded that he should distrain the aforesaid E. F.
etc. as in other Writs of Distringas above. And now here at this day came
as well the aforesaid C D. by W. W. his Attorney, as the aforesaid E. F. in his
proper person. And the aforesaid C. D. prays that the aforesaid E. F. may
atturn himself to him of the Rent aforesaid, etc. And the aforesaid E. F.
prays hearing of the Writ aaforesaid, and to him it is read, he prays also
hearing of the note of the Fine, whereupon the same Writ issued, and to him it
is read in these words. Between C. D. Plaintiff, etc. reciting the note, etc.

Atturnment entered.
In which case if the Tenant atturn, the entry shall be as in a quid Juris
clamat, and so shall the Judgment and Execution be also, mutatis mutandis, but
the atturnment must be in Court, 9 H. 6. 21. 8. H. 6. 15.

Diverse Tenants.
If this Writ be against diverse Defendants, and some appear, and some make
default, Those which appear, shall not atturn without the rest, until they
appear, and after make default. 8. H. 6. 15.

Default.
If the Tenant once appear, and after make default, a Distringas ad atturnandum
shall be awarded. 9. H. 6. 21. 8. H. 6: 15:

A Cognisee of a Rent charge, or Rents for years, shall not have Atturnment,
quaere Dyer fo: 401. Pl. 37. and 38.

Attorney,
The Tenant cannot plead by an Attorney, but ex consensu quaerentis, 1. H: 7: 27.

In a Quem redditum reddit, the Tenant appearing, is to demand what the
Plaintiff has to show for the Rent, and then he must show the commencement
thereof, and his title thereunto, which the Plaintiff may answer, 31. H. 6. 8.
35. H. 6.

Disclaimer
In quem redditum reddit, if the Tenant will disclaim, he may plead, that he was
not Tenant of the Land the day of the note levied, for this Writ lies against
none but him which is then Tenant, 8 H. 6. 15:

Per quae servitia.
PEr quae servitia is a judicial Writ, issuing from the Note of a Fine, and
lies for the Cognisee of a Manor, seigniory, chief Rent, or other services,
to compel him that is Tenant of the land at the time of the note of the fine
levied, to atturn unto him, 43. E. 3. 8. H. 6. 17. Pl. 46. B. which is made
thus.

The Writ.
OLiver, etc. To the Sheriff of K: greeting, We command you, that you cause to
come before our Justices at Westminster (tali die) S: F. R: L. etc. at L. etc.
to acknowledge by what services they hold their Tenements with the
appurtenances in B. which services E. L. in our Court before our Justices at
Westminster has granted to W. B. by a Fine there thereupon between them made.
And have you there this Writ. Witness, etc.

If the Lord grant the services of his Tenant by Fine or otherwise, the Lord
before Atturnment shall have such things as lie in prender; as the Ward of the
body of the heir and of the Land, escheats etc. but not such things as lie in
render; as Rents and relief, Herriots and other services, for he cannot avow
for them before the atturnment.

If a man grant the services of his Tenant for life, This Writ lies, Br. per
quae servitia 13.

Upon a grannt for life:
If services be granted to I. S. for life, the reversion to N. N. and I. S. dye
before atturnment, he in reversion shall have per quae servitia. 20. H. 6. 7.

If per quae servitia be brought against diverse, of which some only appear,
they are compellable to atturn, 21. E. 3. 48. T. 32. E. 3.

Upon whose alienations the Tenant is not compellable to Atturn.
If Tenant in Tail of services levy a Fine Tenant in tail.
thereof, the Tenant of the Land is not compellable to atturn. 48. E. 3. 23.
Because that if the Cognisor die the Tenant is subject to the distress, both of
the Cognisee, and of the issue in tail, 24. E. 3. 25. 43. E. 3. Nevertheless
upon a Fine with Proclamation in such case, which barreth the issue in tail,
the Tenant seems compellable to atturn.

Cognisor never seized
If a Fine be levied by him that was never seized of the services, the Tenant is
not compellable to atturn. H. 6. E. 2.

To a particular Tenant.
If the Tenant for life, or any other particular Tenant of services, which have
them not in fee, levy a Fine thereof, the terr Tenant is not compellable to
atturn, Itin. North. 3. E. 3.

Joint Tenant.
If one joint tenant a seignory grant, etc. the Tenant is not compellable to
atturn. 9. E. 2.

Against whom a per quae servitia lies, and whom not.
Terre Tenant.
It lies against him only that is Tenant of the Land at the time of the note of
the Fine levied 8. H. 6. 17. 18. E. 4. 10. And therefore must not vary from the
Fine. 18. E. 4. 10. 25. E. 3. 3. 35. E. 3. 50.

And therefore it seems that if he which is Tenant at the levying of the note
dye or alien before Atturnement had, that neither his heir nor the alienee is
compellable to atturn, H. 26. E. 3. 56. 18. E. 4. 25. E. 3. 50. 10. yet this
atturnment is good, ibid. M. 31. E. 3

A recluse.
A prioresse recluse is compellable to atturn, 43. E. 3. and an Infant, 26. E.
3. 62. and a man only dumb by writing or sgines. 26. E. 3. 62.

But a man surde and mute is not compellable Mute. Deaf.
to atturn, 26. E. 3. 62.

Madness. T. by courtesy. Late Feoffment.
Nor a man non sanae memoriae, as a mad man, a lunatic, an Idiot, 26. E. 3. 62.

Nor a Tenant by the courtesy for the feebleness of his estate, 9. E. 3. 31.

He that is infeoffed by the Lord post stat. qui emptores; etc. is not
compellable to atturn, for he holds of the Lord Paramount, 39. E. 3. 19.

Quantity.
The Writ of per quae servitia ought to show the quantity of the Tenancy, H.
14. E: 3. for it is traversable, T. 20. E. 3. H. 26. H. 6.

All persons that may be Cognisees may have this Writ.
County.
Per quae servitia ought to be in the County where the Fine is knowledged,
albeit the Manor be in one County, and the services in another County, 21. E.
3. 18.

Nonsuit.
Nonsuit in this action is not peremptory, 24. E. 3. 25. nor the death of the
Cognisor after the note levied.

Time.
Per quae servitia lies a year or more after the note levied, 29. E. 4. 46.

Attorney.
After peremptory issue joined the Tenant in per quae servitia may make
Attorney, for if the issue be tried against him, it does countervail
atturnment, and then he may be distrained before Atturnment, 48. E. 3. 24. 39.
E. 3. 26.

Non tenure
Non tenure the day of the Note levied, is a good bar in Per quae servitia, 8.
H. 19. 21. H. 4. 72. Former grant.


It is also a good plea, that before the note levied, the Cognisors granted the
services to another, and that he thereupon did atturn, 9. E. 3. 31.

The Tenant in per quae servitia cannot disclaim, Disclaim.
but may plead, non tenure ut supra. 21. H. 4. 72. Process after Judgment.


After Judgment process is Distringas ad Atturnandum, 4 E. 3. 2. E. 3. 9. 5. E.
4. 2.

Atturnment with an exception.
If the measne levy a Fine of his mesnaltie to A. for life, the remainder to B.
in fee. A. brings a per quae servitia, and the Tenant atturneth, saving his
Acquitaile, yet shall not he in the remainder avow, before he also acknowledge
the acquitaile, 18. E. 4. 7.

Feme Covert.
But a Feme Covert cannot confess acquitaile in per quae servitia, because she
is not examinable in this suit, 9. E. 2. 45. E. 3.

Acquitaile
And the Tenant may atturn, saving acquitaile and warrantie, according to a Deed
thereof, M. 15. E. 3. 5. 5. H. 5. E. 3. Itinere North.

Seisin.
A man may grant services before he have seisin thereof in Deed, H. 5. E. 2.
Fitz. per quae servitia 22.

A Manor.
It seems upon the grant of a Manor cum pertin. the services pass without
attornment, as parcel of the Manor, and that the Lord may avow without
Atturnment, 26. H. 6. Fitz. per quae servitia 21.

Fine. Imprisonment.
If the Tenant in per quae servitia appear, and confess the Action at the
distringas ad atturnandum after Judgment, and will not atturn, he is punishable
by imprisonment or Fine, at the discretion of the Court, as it seems 3. E. 3.
Itiner. North. Fitz. per quae servitia 17.

Essoine.
Coperceners, Joynt-tenants, and Tenantsin Common, may not fourch by essoine, to
essoine severally, but have only one essoine, as one sole Tenant might have, w.
i. c. 43. E. 3. E. 1. Rast. essoine 4.

Of the engrossing of Fines.
When the note of the Fine is made with the Custos brevium, if it be of Lands
in possession, or when Atturnment is made, if it be of a Reversion, Remainder,
Rents or services, then may it be engrossed by the Chirographer.

Ingressing.
And the engrossing of a Fine is nothing else but the entry of the Concord
thereof with the Chirographer, and the writing and delivery of the Indentures
thereof. F. N. B. 147. a. 5 H. 4. c. 14. which be called the Chirograph of the
Fine, and is made in form following, viz.

Fine in tail of the reversion of the Rent.
This is the final Concord made in the Court of the Lord Protector at
Westminster from the day of Easter in 15. days, In the year of our Lord God
1653. before O. L. R. W. and T. B. Justices of the Lord Protector, and other
faithful then there present, between A. B. Plaintiff, and L. C. deforcient, of
ten Marks Rent with the Appurtenances in B. which P. D. of A. holds for term
of his life, whereof plea of Covenant was Iummoned between them in the same
Court, (that is to say) that the aforesaid L. has granted for himself and his
Heirs, that the aforesaid Rent with the appurtenances which the aforesaid P.
holds for Term of his life by the demise of the aforesaid L. in the aforesaid
Town, the day wherein this Concord was made, and which after the decease of him
the said P. unto the aforesaid L. and his Heirs ought to revert, after the
decease of him the said P. Rem. to the heirs of his body.
shall wholly remain to the aforesaid A. and the heirs of his body begotten, to
hold of the chief Lords of that Fee by the services which unto the aforesaid
Rent do belong for ever. And if it happen that the same A. shall dye without
heir of his body begotten, then after the decease of him the said A. the
aforesaid Rent with the appurtenances, shall wholly remain to the right heirs
of him the said A. to Rem. to the right heirs.
hold of the chief Lords of that Fee by the services which unto the aforesaid
Rent do belong for ever. And for this Grant, Fine and Concord, the same A. has
given to the aforesaid L. one hundred Marks of silver.

And so of others according to the diversities of their cases.

Of the tabling of Fines engrossed.
Tables.
THe Chirographer of Fines of the Common Pleas, for ever must write and make one
table for every County where the Protectors Writ runs, containing the
contents of every Fine that shall pass in any one Term, as the name of the
County, Towns, and places wherein the Tenements mentioned in any Fine be, the
name of the Plaintiff and Deforcient, and of every Manor named in any Fine. And
the first day of the next Term after the engrossing of every such Fine, shall
fix every of the said Tables in some open place of the Court of the Common
Pleas, and so every day of the said Term during the sitting of the said Court:
And the said Chirographer shall deliver to every Sheriff of every County, his
Under Sheriff, or Deputy, (...).
fair written in Parchment, a perfect content of the Table so to be made for
that Shire in the Term, that shall be next before the Assizes to be holden in
the ^ame County, or else between the Term and the said Assizes, to be set up
the first day and every day of the next Assizes in some open place of the
court, where the Justices of Assizes then shall sit to continue there so long,
as they shall fit in the said Court, if either the Chirographer or Sheriff fail
herein he forfeiteth five pound and the Chirographers see for every such Table
is 4 d. 23. El. c. 3.

How many Proclamations are to be made upon Fines, and when.
FOur Proclamations only are now to be made upon every Fine with Proclamation,
(to wit) one in the Term in which the Fine is engrossed, and in every one of
the three Terms next ensuing the engrossing thereof, one Proclamation, 13. El.
c. 2.

Adjournment.
But if any of the same Proclamations fail by reason of the adjournment of any
of the said Terms by Writ of Adjournment duly made, yet is such Fine good, and
a good Fine with Proclamations, as if the same had been proclaimed, 1 M. c. 7.

Sundaies.
But if any Proclamations be made upon a Sunday, it is error, because it is not
dies Iuridicus. Dyer fo. 128. Pl. 53. 55. 2. Eliz.

Of the Proclamation of Fines at the Assizes and general Sessions how they
must be certified.
Sessions.
TO the end better notice of Fines may come to them to whom that appertains,
it is ordained by the said Statute of 4. H. 7. c. 24. That the Just. of the
Common place shall send Assizes.
a transcript of such Fines to the Justice of Assize in the Counties where the
Land does lie, to be proclaimed openly and solemnly at all the Assizes which
shall be therein holden, within one year after the engrossing of such Fines,
and that the like transcript be made to the Justices of Peace there to be
proclaimed at four several Sessions in the said Counties, and both the same
Proclamations to be made and certified into the Common place the second day of
the return of the Term then next following. And it is to noted, that while the
said fines are read, all pleas must cease. 4. H. 7. c. 24.

Proclamation.
The form of every such Proclamation is thus:

After the Crier has made O yes for silence, saying: O yes, les fines lies, or
to that effect, the Chirographer or his Deputy, reads the fines thus.

York. A fine with Proclamation between A. B. Plaintiff, and C. D. Deforcient,
of Tenements in D. etc

Cognisee dead.
If the Cognisees in fines die before the Engrossing thereof, no Proclamation
shall be made, because they had their Election to have the fine with
Proclamations or without, which Election is now by their death determined. Dyer
fo. 254. Pl. 104. 8. El. Plow. fo. 266. b.

Of the Inrolment of all the part of Fines, at the engrossing thereof, and
Proclamations passed.
The Inrollment Office
BY the Statute of 23. El. c. 3. it is ordained, that there shall be for ever an
office of Inrolment, called the Office of Inrolments of Fines and Recoveries.
And the Justice of the Common Pleas for the time being, other than the Chief
Justices shall have and take the care and charge of the Inrolments aforesaid,
see the examinations thereof, and write their names unto the Rolls thereof, and
have and enjoy the said Office and the disposition thereof, and carefully see
and look to the execution thereof, and have for the inrolment and examination
of every such Fine, six shillings eight pence.

Exemplification.
And for every exemplification of every such Inrolment of any fine five
shillings; for one years search four pence, for every sheet of paper containing
fourteen lines, four pence.

Punishment
And the Justices of the Common place have power to take order in all things
convenient for the said Inrolments, and upon examination in the said Court, to
assesse fines and amerciaments upon persons offending, for their misprision,
contempts, or negligences for not doing or misdoing of any thing, of in or
concerning any such fines, as they shall think meet and convenient, 23. El. c.
3.

And every Writ of Covenant and other Writ whereupon any fine is levied, the
return thereof, the Dedimus potestatem made for the knowledging thereof, the
return thereof, the Concord, the Note, and foot of every such fi^e, the
Proclamations made thereupon, and the Kings Silver, upon the request, or
election of any person, may be enrolled in the said Office: and the Inrolments
of the same, or of any part thereof, shall be of as good force and validity in
the Law, to all intents for so much of any of them so enrolled, as the same
being extant and remaining, were or ought by Law to be, 33 El. c. 3.

Of the exemplification of the parts of Fines enrolled.
WHen any of the parts of a Fine be enrolled according to the said Statute,
then may the same be exemplified, either under the Seal of the office, or under
the great Seal of England: but to exemplify such a Fine under the great Seal
has this Commodity.

That if any errors remain in the record of the same Fine, they be not
amendable after the exemplification thereof, 23 Eliz. c. 3. but i^ seems this
extends only to Fines levied before the same statute, 23 Eliz. c. 3.

These inrollments and exemplifications seem very necessary, because that the
privity and warrant of the said Court, many errors hapening in the former
records thereof may be amended; and these inrolments will suffice, if the
former Record thereof, or any part thereof, be imbezelled, or otherwise
defaced, 23 Eliz. c. 3.

The exemplification of a Fine enrolled according to the Statute of 23 El. c. 3.
OLiver Lord Protector, etc. To all to whom this present writing shall come,
greeting. Know ye, that among the Inrolments of Writs, and other things
depending for Fines, according to the form of the Statute, of the Term of
Easter at Westminster, in the year of our Lord God, 1654. in the 7. Roll, it is
thus contained, ss. Essex ss. Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland and Ireland, etc. To the Sheriff of Essex greeting. Command
E. W. Esquire, and I. his wife, that justly, and without delay, they hold to I.
W. and I. S. the Covenant between them made, of two Messuages, two Gardens, two
Orchards, 20. Acres of Land, 20. Acres of Meadow, 40. Acres of Pasture, and
100. Acres of Furs and Heath, with the appurtenances in B. and W. And unless
they shall do it, and the aforesaid I. and I. shall secure you for prosecuting
their plaint, then summon by good summoners the aforesaid E. and I. that they
be before our Justices at Westminster. in 8. days of Saint Michael, to show
wherefore they did it not; and have you there the summoners, and this Writ.
Witness my self at Westminster the 13. day of September, in the year, etc.
Pledges of prosecuting, John Do, Richard Roo, summoners, John Den, Richard
Fen, John T. Esquire Sheriff, ss. I. W. gives to the Lord Protector six
Shillings and eight pence for a license of Concord, with E. W. Esquire, and I.
his wife of a plea of Covenant of 2. Messuages, 2. Gardens, 2. Orchards, 20.
Acres of Land, 20. Acres of Meadow, 10. Acres of Pasture, and 100. Acres of
Furs and Heath, with the appurtenans in B. and W. And he has a Certiorari by
the peace admitted, before R. H. one of the Justices of the Lord Protector of
the Bench, Justice in the Country, ss. Oliver Lord Protector, etc. to his
beloved and faithful R. H. one of his Justices of the Bench greeting. Whereas
our Writ of Covenant depends before you and your Associates, our Justices of
the Bench, between I. W. and I. S. E. W. Esquire, and I. his wife, of 2.
Messuages, 2. Gardens, 2. Orchards, 20. Acres of Land, 20. Acres of Meadow, in
B. and W. in the County of Essex, to Levy a Fine thereof between them before
you and your Associates aforesaid, in the Bench aforesaid, according to the Law
and Custom of our Commonwealth of England; and the same E. and I. are of
themselves so impotent, that without very great danger of their bodies, unto
West. at the day in the Writ aforesaid contained, to the knowledgements, which
in this behalf are required to be made, to travail they are not sufficient as
we have received: we tendering the state of the same E. and I. in this behalf,
have given you power to receive the recognizances which the aforesaid E. and I.
before you shall make of the premises. And therefore we command you, that unto
the aforesaid E. and I. personally going, their cognizances aforesaid ye
receive: And when he have received them, your aforesaid Associates thereof,
under your Seals distinctly, and openly ye certify, that then that Fine
between the parties of the premises before you, and your Associates aforesaid,
in the Bench aforesaid may be levied, according to the Law and custom
aforesaid; And have you there then this Writ, witness my self at Westminster
the 27. of September, in the year, etc. The answer of the within named R. H.
unto this Writ; The execution of this Writ appears in a certain Schedule to
this Writ annexed. And the Concord is such, (that is to say) that E. and I. in
the Writ to this Schedule annexed, have reknowledged the Tenements in the said
Writ specified, with the appurtenances, to be the right of I. W. in the same
Writ named, as those which the same I. and I. S. in the said Writ named, have
of the gift of the aforesaid E. and I. and those they have remised, and quit
claimed from themselves, and their heirs, to the aforesaid I. and I. and the
heirs of him the said I. W. for ever. And furthermore the same E. and I. have
granted for themselves, and the heirs of him the said I. that they will warrant
the tenements aforesaid, with the apputtenances, to the aforesaid I. and I. and
the heirs of him the said I. W. against all men for ever. And for this, etc.
the same I. W. and I. S. have granted the Tenements aforesaid, with the
appurtenances to the aforesaid E. and I. and the heirs of the body of him the
said E. by the aforesaid I. lawfully begotten, and for want of such issue, the
tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, shall wholly remain to the
aforesaid I. and the heirs of the body of him the said I. lawfully begotten,
and for default of such issue, the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances,
shall wholly remain to the right heirs of him the said E. for ever. To hold,
etc. R. H. S. This is the final concord made in the Court of the Lord
Protector at Westminster, in 8. days of Saint Michael, in the year, etc.
before I. D. R. W. I. W. and R. H. Justices and other of the Lord Protectors
faithful then there present, between I. W. and I. S. plaintiffs, and E. W.
Esquire, and I. his wife deforcients of 2. Messuages, 2. Gardens, 2. Orchards,
20. Acres of Meadow, 40. Acres of pasture, and 100. Acres of Furs, and Heath,
with the appurtenances in B. and W. whereof plea of Covenant was summoned
between them in the same Court, to wit, that the aforesaid E. and I. have
recognized the aforesaud tenementss, with the appurtenances, to be the right of
him the said I. W. as those which the same I. and I. S. have by the gift of the
aforesaid E. and I. And those they have remised and quite claimed from them the
said E. and I. and their heirs, to the aforesaid I. and I. and the heirs of him
the said W. for ever. And furthermore the same E. and I. have granted for
themselves, and the heirs of him the said I. that they will warrant to the
aforesaid I. and I. and the heirs of him the said I. W. the aforesaid tenements
with the appurtenances, against all men for ever. And for this recognizance,
remise, quite claim, warranty, Fine and Concord, the same I. and I. have
granted to the aforesaid E. and I. the aforesaid tenements with the
appurtenances. And those to them they have rendered in the same Court, to have
and to hold to the same E. and I. and the heirs of the body of him the said E.
by the aforesaid I. lawfully begotten, of the chief Lords of that Fee, by the
services, which unto the aforesaid tenements do belong, for ever: And if it
happen that the same E. and I. shall die without heir of the body of him the
said E. by the aforesaid I. lawfully begotten, then after the decease of them
the said E. and I. the aforesaid tenements with the appurtenances shall wholly
remain to the heirs of the body of him the said I. lawfully begotten. To hold
of the chief Lords of that Fee, by the services which unto the aforesaid
tenements do belong for ever. And if no heir of the body of him the said I.
shall be lawfully begotten, then the aforesaid tenements with the appurtenances
shall wholly remain to the right heirs of him the said E. to hold of the chief
Lords of the Fee, by the services which unto the aforesaid tenements do belong,
for ever, according to the form of the statute. The first Proclamation was made
the 22. day of November, in the Term of Saint Michael (tali anno) within
written. The second Proclamation, the 24. day of November in the same Term. The
third Proclamation the 26. day of November the same Term. The fourth
Proclamation the 29. day of November the same Term. The fifth Proclamation was
made the 7. day of February, in the Term of Saint Hillary, in the said year
within written. The 6. Proclamation, the 9. day of Feb. the same Term. The
seventh Proclamation, the 10. day of February, the same Term. The eighth
Proclamation, the 12. day of February the same Term. The nineth Proclamation
was made the 14. day of May, in the Term of Easter (tali Anno) the same Term.
The tenth Proclamation, the 17. day of May, the same Term. The eleventh
Proclamation, the 23. day of May, in the same Term. The 12. Proclamation, the
23. day of Maey, the same Term. The thirteenth Proclamation was made the 22.
day of June, in the Term of the holy Trinity, in the year within written. The
fourteenth Proclamation, the 25. day of June the same Term. The fifteenth
Proclamation, the 27. of June the same Term, all and singular which at the
request of W. W. gent. by the tenor of these presents, we have drawn to
exemplify. In Testimony of which thing, we have by these presents caused our
Seal to be put unto the Writs, deputed to be sealed in the Bench. T. F. W. W.
and F. R. Justices of the Bench aforesaid at Westminster, the day, etc. (tali
Anno) etc.

W. P. and R.

How Fines executory be executed.
THe execution of a Fine is the obtaining of actual possession of the things
contained in the same, by virtue thereof, and it is either by entry into the
Lands, or by Writ.

By entry into the lands, as if upon a Fine sur cognizance de droit que il ad
de son done, If the Coguisor remain still in possession, And the Cognisee by
virtue of such Fine enter upon him, as he lawfully may, without any Writ of
habere fac. seisin, because such Fine is executed, 41 E. 3. 14. 14. E. 3. 5.
And if a Fine be levied to the husband and wife in special tail, the
remainder to the heirs of the body of the husband, and the wife dies without
issue, the remainder is executed in posseshon in the husband, for the estate
tail meets with the freehold, and drowneth it, 7 H. 4. 23.

Execution of Fines by Writ.
EXecution of Fines by Writ, is either by habere facias seisinam, or by Scire
facias.

A Writ of Habere facias seisinam in this case is a Writ judicial, issuing out
of the Record of a Fine Executory, directed to the Sheriff of the County, where
the Land lies, commanding him to give the Cognisee, or his heirs, seisin of
the Land, whereof the Fine is levied. And this Writ lies within the year,
after the Fine, or Judgment upon a Scire facias. And may be made in these
forms.

O. To the Sheriff, etc. We command you, that without delay, you cause to have
to B. R. A venire fac. in a Scire fac. on a Fine upon issue joined, whether the
parties were seized at the time of the fine levied. Granted and recorded.
his seisin of the Messuages, with the appurtenances, in N. which A. T. in our
Court, etc. has rendered to the aforesaid, B. by a Fine thereof between them
made according, T. etc.

Twelve, etc. of the vicinage, etc. And who neither to E. nor R. and A. his
wife any, etc. to know whether at the time of the levying of a certain Fine
levied in the Court of the Sovereign Lord Charles late King, etc. at
Westminster in the morrow, etc. in the year, etc. before R. B. and his
Associates then Justices of him the said late King, of the Bench. And afterward
in the morrow of all Souls, etc. in the year, etc. there granted, and recorded
before the same late Justices, and other faithful of the same late King then
there present, between T. R. and R. F. plaintiffs, and I. B. and I. his wife
deforcients, of four shillings rent, with the appurtenances Fine of rent.
in S. whereof the aforesaid G. in our Court, etc. prays Execution against
the aforesaid R. and A. by virtue of the Fine aforesaid, and of other tenements
and rents in the same fine contained, The aforesaid T. R. and R. and the
aforesaid I. B. and I. who were parties to that Fine, were seized of the
aforesaid four shillings rent with the appurtenances, as by the same Fine it is
supposed, by which the aforesaid E. execution of the aforesaid four shillings
rent, with the appurtenances against the aforesaid R. and A. by virtue of the
Fine aforesaid, ought, to have as the same E. says, or not, but neither the
aforesaid T. R. and R. nor the aforesaid I. B. and I. who were parties to the
Fine aforesaid* at the time of the levying of the same Fine had any thing in
the aforesaid four shillings rent with appurtenances, nor in the Message from
whence that rent is supposed to come, whereby the aforesaid E. from the
execution aforesaid of four shillings rent, with the appurtenances, against the
aforesaid R. and A. by virtue of the Fine aforesaid to be had, ought to be
barred of, as the same R. and A. say; because as well, etc. Habere facias
seisinam upon a recovery in a Scire sac. out of a fine by confession.


Know you, that it is ordered in our Court, that W. L. and others, etc. have
execution against W. T. of ten Acres of Land, with the appurtenances in D. by
virtue of a Fine thereof levied in the Court of the Sovereign Lord Charles late
King. etc. at Westminster, from the day, etc. in the year, etc. before R. B.
and his Associates then Justices of the Bench aforesaid between I. G. the
younger, and W. G. plaintiffs and E. P. and M. his wife deforcients of the
aforesaid ten Acres of Land with the appurtenances, and of other Lands and
Tenements in the same Fine contained by the cognizance of the aforesaid W: T.
of the Action of the aforesaid W. L. and others, and therefore we command you,
that to the same W. L. and others of the aforesaid ten Acres of Land, with the
appurtenances, without delay plenary seisin you cause to have, etc.

Know you, that it is ordered in our Court, etc. Habere faas seisinam upon a
recovery by the defend. in a Scire fac. out of a Fine.
That T. B. Cozen and heir of W. brother of P. son of W. and M. his wife, have
execution against R. R. etc. of 40. Acres of wood with the appurtenances, in B.
by virtue of a Fine in the Court of the Sovereign Lord Charles late King, etc.
at Westminster, etc. between the aforesaid W. and M. plaintiffs, and W. of B.
and R. son of W. etc. deforcients, etc. of the tenements aforesaid, levied by
default of them the said, etc. And therefore we command you, that the same T.
B. of the aforesaid tenements, with the appurtenances without delay, plenary
seisin, and execution you cause to have, witness, etc.

OLiver, etc. to the Sheriff greeting, know Habere facias seisinam upon a
recovery by the defendant in a Scire fac. out of a fine.
you, that it is ordered in our Court before our Justices at Westminster. that T. B.
Cozen and heir of W. B. have execution against R. D. of the Manor of A. with
the appurtenances in your County, by virtue of a Fine levied in the Court of
the Sovereign Lord Charles late King of England, etc. at Westminster, from the
day, etc. in the year, etc. before R. B. and his Associates then Justices of
him the said late King, of the Granted and recorded.
Bench; and afterward in eight, etc. in the ye^r, etc. there granted and
recorded between the aforesaid W. plaintiff, and A. deforcient, of the Manor
aforesaid, by the default of him the said R. And therefore we command you, that
to the same T. B. of the Manor aforesaid, with the appurtenances, without delay
plenary seisin and excution you cause to have, T. etc.

Know you that it is ordered in our Court, etc. Habere facias seisinam upon a
recovery by verdict in a Scire facias out of a Fine.
that R. M. and R. A. Cozen and heir of H. of B. and M. his wife, have
execution against I. C. etc. of two parts of the Manor of Y. with the
appurtenances, by virtue of a Fine levied in the Court of the Sovereign Lord
Charles late King, etc. at Westminster, in the morrow, etc. in the year, etc.
before T. W. and his Associates then Justices, etc. of the Bench, between H. B.
and M. his wife plaintiffs, and B. D. and B. his wife deforcients, of the
aforesaid Manor, with the appurtenances, and of the Advowson of the Church of
the same Manor, as by a certain Jury before our beloved and faithful I. T. and
W. A. two Justices of the Common Bench, by the form of our Statute thereof
provided the day, etc. at R. thereof between them taken it was found. And
therefore we command you, that to the same R. and R. of the two parts aforesaid
with the appurtenances, without delay, execution Nisi prius
and plenary seisin you cause to have, T. etc.

Of Execution of Fines by Scire facias.
A Writ of Scire facias upon a Fine lies in the same Case, that a Writ of
Habere facias seisinam does, saving that it is to be sued a year and a day
after the Fine is levied, whereby the Sheriff is commanded to warn the
terrtenant to appear, and show cause, if he can, why the Cognisee, or his
heirs, should not have execution, at the return whereof, if the Tenant appear,
and show no cause to the Contrary, the plaintiff shall have an Habere facias
seisinam ut supra. And the form of diverse Scire facias in like case ensue.

OLiver, etc. to the Sheriff greeting; Whereas a certain Fine was levied in the
Court A Scire facias out of a fine for the heirs in tail. Attorney in Fine.
of the Lord Protector at Westminster in eight days, etc. in the ^ear, etc.
before R. H. and his Associates, our Justices of the Bench, between G. P. and
I. his wife plaintiffs, by W. F. put in the place of them to gain or lose, and
S. H. deforcient, of the Manor of C. with the appurtenances, whereof plea of
Covenant was summoned between them in the same Court, that is to say, that the
aforesaid G. has recognized the Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances to be
the right of him the said S. as that which the same S. had by the gift of the
aforesaid G. And for that recognizance, Fine and Concord, the same S. did grant
to the aforesaid G. and I. the Render to the husband and wife, and to the heirs
of the has^and of the body of the wife begotten, rendering rent and foreign
service.
aforesaid Manor with the appurtenances, and that to them he has rendered in
the same Court, To have and to hold to the same G. and I. and the heirs which
the same G. of the body of her the said I. should had begotten of the aforesaid
S. and his heirs for ever, yielding therefore by the year, one Rose at the
Feast, etc. for all service grant and action unto the aforesaid S. and his
heirs belonging, and doing therefore to the chief Lords of that Fee, for the
foresaid S. and his heirs all other services which unto that Manor did belong:
so that if it should happen that the aforesaid G. should die without heir of
the body of him the said I. begot. then after the decease of them the said G.
and I. Remainder in tail.
the aforesaid Manor with the appurtenances should wholly remain to W. Brother
of the same G. and the heirs of his body begotten to hold of the aforesaid S.
and his heirs by the aforesaid services as aforesaid for ever, And if it should
happen that the aforesaid W. should dye without heir of his body begotten then
after the decease of him the said W. the aforesaid Manor with the appurtenances
should wholly remain to I. Brother of the same W. and the heirs of his body
begotten, to hold of the aforesaid S. and his heirs by the aforesaid services,
as aforesaid for ever, And if it should happen the aforesaid I. to die without
heir of his body begotten then after the decease of him the said I. the
aforesaid Manor with the appurtenances, should wholly remain to E. Brother of
the same I. and the heirs of his body begotten to hold of the aforesaid S. and
his heirs by the aforesaid services, as aforesaid, for ever, And if it should
happen that the aforesaid E. E. should dye without heir of his body begotten,
then after the decease of him the said E. the aforesaid Manor with the
appurtenances should wholly revert unto the aforesaid S. and his heirs, quite
from other the heirs of them the said C. and I. W. and I. and E. to hold of the
chief Lords of that Fee by the services which unto that Manor should belong,
for ever: And now by the information of I. L. and M. his wife being one, and T.
V. and T. his wife being another, also of H. B. being the third, of the Cozens
and heirs of the aforesaid G. and I. of their bodies begotten, we have received
that the aforesaid G. and I. are dead. And that T. L. and R. I. into the
aforesaid Manor with the appurtenances now are entered, and it they hold against
the form of the Fine aforesaid, And for that we will those things which are
done in our Court be duly demanded for execution, we command you, that by
honest and lawful men of your Bayliwick, you cause the aforesaid T. L. and R.
to know that they be before our Justices at Westminster, in 8. days, etc. to
show if they have, or know any thing to say for themselves, wherefore the
aforesaid Manor, with the appurtenances, which they hold in form aforesaid,
after the death of the aforesaid G. and I. to the aforesaid M. T. and H. Cozens
and heirs of them the said G. and I. of their bodies begotten, ought not to
remain according to the form of the Fine aforesaid, if it shall seem expedient
to them; and have you there the names of them, by whom you shall cause them to
know, and this Writ, witness, etc.

OLiver, To the Sheriff greeting; Whereas A Scire fa. for the Heir of him in
remainder.
a certain Fine was levied in the Court of the Sovereign Lord James late King,
etc. tali die and Anno, before A. and his Associates then Justces of the same
Sovereign Lord James, of the Bench, between W. plaintiff, and R. Deforcient, of
the Manor of T. with the appurtenances whereof plea of Covenant was summoned
between them in the same C. to wit, that the aforesaid R. has recognized the
aforesaid Manor with the appurtenances to be the right of him the said W. as
that which the same W. had by the gift of the aforesaid R. and for that
recognizance, Fine and Concord, the same W. had granted to the aforesaid R. the
aforesaid Manor, with the appurtenances, to have and to hold to the same R. of
the aforesaid W. and his Heirs Males of his body begotten, all the life of him
the said R. yielding therefore by the year, etc. And after the decease of him
the said R. the a-aforesaid Manor, with the appurtenances, shall wholly remain
unto the aforesaid W. and his Heirs quite from the Heirs of the aforesaid R. to
Render for life with revertur to him in tail, and remainder over in tail.
hold of the chief Lords of the Fee by the services which unto that Manor
should belong for ever, and if it should happen that the aforesaid R. should
dye without Heir Male of his body begotten, the aforesaid Manor, with the
appurtenances; should wholly remain to T. Brother of him the said W. and to the
Heirs Males of his body begotten, to hold of the chief Lords of that Fee, by
the services aforesaid, for ever; and now by the insinuation of A. son and Heir
of the aforesaid T. we have received that the aforesaid R. is now dead, and
that the aforesaid W. dyed without Heir Male of his body begotten, and that I.
into one Message, etc. with the appurtenances, which were parcel of the Manor
aforesaid now is entered, and those holds against the form of the Fine
aforesaid. And for that we will those things, etc. if he has or knows any
thing to say for himself, wherefore the aforesaid tenement, with the
appurtenances, to the aforesaid A. son and heir of the aforesaid T. ought not
to remain according to the form of the Fine aforesaid, if it shall seem
expedient to him, etc. And have you, * c.

Scire facias against several tenants. Return of sc. fecit.
And now here at this day came as well the aforesaid I. S. by S. his Artorney,
as the aforesaid W. and A. by F. his Attorney, and the Sheriff returned, that
he caused the same W. and A. to know of being here at this day to show
severally in form aforesaid, by R. and F. honest, etc. And hereupon the
aforesaid I. says. that he is Cozen and Heir of the aforesaid I. and Cozenage
alleged.
E. that is to say, etc. and prays against the aforesaid W. and A. severally
execution in form aforesaid, etc.

And now the aforesaid W. and A. as to the A bar that the parties to the Fine
had nothing in the land at the time of the fine, but I. whose estate the tenant
has.
aforesaid tenements, whereof execution against them is prosecuted, and the
aforesaid R. and I. as to the aforesaid tenements, whereof execution against
them is severally prayed, severally do say, that neither the aforesaid I. nor
the aforesaid W. and B. whom by the Fine aforesaid he supposes to be parties
of that Fine, have nothing in the tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances,
whereof execution against W. and A. is severally prayed, at the time of the
levying of the same Fine, but that one I. and C. was thereof seized at the time
of the levying of that Fine, of which estate of the said I. C. in those
tenements, whereof execution against them is prayed, which the aforesaid R. and
I. severally have in the tenements aforesaid, whereof execution against them is
severally prayed, they severally pray Judgment, whether the aforesaid I.
execution thereof against them
ought to have, etc. And the aforesaid I. says, that at the time of the
levying of that Fine the aforesaid I. and I. who were parties of that Fine were
seized of the tenements aforesaid Issue that I^ was seized at the time of the
Fine levied.
with the appurtenances, whereof execution against the aforesaid W. and A.
severally in form, and manner aforesaid is prosecuted, as by that Fine it is
supposed; And this he prays, etc. therefore 12, etc.

A Scire Facias upon a Fine.
WHereas a certain Fine was levied in the Court of the Sovereign Lord E.
heretofore King of England, our Grandfather, from the day of the Holy Trinity
in 15. days, in the year, etc. before I. of B. and his Associates then
Justices itinerate of him our said Grandfather, at York, between Alan
plaintiff, and A. defendant of ten pounds of Land, with the appurtenances in A.
in the Manor of L. in the County of N whereof plea of Covenant was summoned
between them in the same Court, (to wit) that the aforesaid Alane has
recognized the aforesaid tenements with the appurtenances, as in his demeasne
Rents, etc. and in all other things unto the aforesaid tenements belonging, to
be the right of him the said Alane, furthermore the same A. has given and
granted to the aforesaid Alane, five marks of rent, with the appurtenances in
A. in the County of R. and all the Manor of B. with the appurtenances in your
County, as in his demeasne, etc. To have and to hold to the same Alane, and E.
his wife, and the Heirs of the bodies of them the said Alane and E. begotten,
of the chief Lords of those Fees for ever, doing therefore all the services,
wkich unto the aforesaid tenements should belong, and the aforesaid A. and his
Heirs, did warrant to the same Alane and E. and their Heirs aforesaid, all the
aforesaid tenements, with the appurtenances, by the aforesaid services, against
all Nations for ever, and if it should happen that the aforesaid A. and E.
should dye without Heir of the bodies of them the said Alane, and E. begotten,
etc. And the aforesaid A. and his Heirs did warrant to the same Alane and E:
and their Heirs aforesaid, all the aforesaid tenements, with the appurtenances,
by the aforesaid services, against all Nations for ever, and if it should
happen that the aforesaid A. and E. should dye without Heirs of the bodies of
them the said Alane and E. begotten, after the decease of them the said Alane
and E. the aforesaid tenements, with the appurtenances, unto the aforesaid
Alane and his Heirs, wholly should revert quite from other Heirs of them the
said A. and E. for ever, and now by the insinuation of Anthony de L. and I.
Cozens and Heirs of the aforesaid Alane we have received that the aforesaid
Alane and E. are now dead, and that John Son and Heir of the same Alane and E.
died without Heir of his body begotten, and also William Son of the aforesaid
Alane and E. and Brother and Heir of the aforesaid John now is dead without
Heir of his body begotten, and that one Joan, which was the wise of John of W.
into the aforesaid Manor of B. with the appurtenances is entered, and that
holds contrary to the form of the Fine aforesaid. And therefore we commanded
you, that by good and lawful men of your County, you should cause to know to
the aforesaid Joan, that she should be before our Justices at Westminster, from
the day of Saint Michael in 15. days last past, to show if she might have, or
could know any thing to say for her self, wherefore the aforesaid Manor of B.
with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid Anthony, and I. Cozens and Heirs of
the aforesaid Alane should not revert, if it did seem expedient to her; and for
that the same I. afterward in our said Court said, that the aforesaid Anthony
prosecuted execution of the Fine aforesaid of the moiety of the Manor of B.
against the aforesaid Joan: the same Joan came in the same Court and said, that
she holds the aforesaid Manor of B. with the appurtenances, by the name of
the Manor of R. by the demise of N. of C. and that the reversion thereof, after
the death of the same Joan, unto the aforesaid N. belongs without whom she
cannot answer to the aforesaid Antbony of the aforesaid moiety of the Manor
aforesaid, and prays aid of him the said Nicholas. And therefore we command
you that by good, etc. you cause to know to the aforesaid N. that he be, etc.
at Westminster, from the day, etc. to answer to the aforesaid A. together with
the aforesaid Joan, of the aforesaid Plea, if he will; And have you their the
names, etc. T. etc.

Whereas a certain Fine was levied in the Scire fac. super Aid.
Court of the Sovereign Lord E. late King of England, our Grandfather, in the
Term of the Holy Trinity in the year, etc. before A. and his Associates then
Justices itinerate of him our said Grandfather at E. between B. plaintiff, and
C. deforcient of ten pounds of rent with the appurtenances in B. in the Manor
of S. in the County of E. whereof Plea of Covenant was summoned between them in
the same Court, (to wit) that the aforesaid C. did recognize the tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, as in his demeasne rents, etc. and in all
other things unto the aforesaid tenements belonging, to be the right of him the
said B. furthermore the same C. did give, and grant to the aforesaid B. five
marks of rent, with the appurtenances in A. in the County of S. and all the
Manor of D. with the appurtenances in the same County, as in his demeasnes, To
have and to hold, to the same B. and E. his wife, and the Heirs of the bodies
of them the said B. and E. issuing, of the chief Lords of the Fee for ever,
doing therefore all the services, which unto the aforesaid tenements should
belong: And the aforesaid C. and his Heirs did warrant to the same B. and E.
and their Heirs aforesaid all the aforesaid Manors, with their appurtenances,
by the aforesaid services against all Nations for ever: And if it happen that
the aforesaid B. and E. should die without Heir of the bodies of them the said
B. and E. begotten, then after the decease of the aforesaid B. and E. the
aforesaid tenements, with the appurtenances, unto the aforesaid C. and his
Heirs should be wholly reverted quite from other Heirs of them the said B, and
E. for ever: And now by the insinuation of R. and K. Cozens and Heirs of the
aforesaid C. we have received, that the aforesaid B. and E. are now dead, and
that I. Son and Heir of the fame B. and E. died without Heir of his body
begotten, and also W. Son of the aforesaid B. and E. Brother and Heir of the
aforesaid I. is now dead, without Heir of his body issuing. And that one I.
which was the wife of I. W. into the aforesaid Manor of D. with the
appurtenances now is entered, and does hold it against the form of the Fine
aforesaid. And therefore we commanded you, that by honest, etc. you should
cause to know to the aforesaid I. that he should be before, etc. (tali die) to
show if any thing, etc. wherefore the aforesaid Manor, with the appurtenances
to the aforesaid R. and K. Cozens and Heirs of the aforesaid C. should not
revert, if it had seemed expedient to him, and for that, that the same K.
afterward in our said Court, being come, and having said, that the aforesaid R.
prosecuted execution of the Fine aforesaid of the moiety of the Manor aforesaid
of D. with the appurtenances, against the aforesaid I. the same I. (tali die)
came in our said Court, and says that she does hold the Manor aforesaid of B.
with the appurtenances, by the name of the Manor of R. by the demise of N. C.
and that the reversion thereof, by the death of the aforesaid I. unto the
aforesaid N. belongs, without whom he cannot answer to the aforesaid R. of
the aforesaid moiety, of the Manor aforesaid, and prays aid of him the said
N. And therefore we command you, that by honest, etc. you cause to know to the
aforesaid N. that he be, etc. to answer to the aforesaid R. together with the
aforesaid I. in the aforesaid Plea if he will, and have you, etc.

A Mittimus of the Transcript of the Fine, and a Scire Facias thereupon.
THe Sovereign Lord the King, has sent to his Justices this his close Writ in
these words, Edward, etc. (reciting all the Writ) the Tenor of the aforesaid
Fine, whereof in the Writ aforesaid, mention is made (or thus.) The Transcript
of the aforesaid Fine, whereof in the Writ aforesaid mention is made, follows
in these words. This is the final Concord, etc. (reciting all, etc.) And now
to wit, (tali die) in that same Term, came here in Court, A. on Scire Facias
for the Heir of him in remainder against the terre tenant.
the behalf of the aforesaid T. and says, that the aforesaid R. is dead, and
likewise that the aforesaid W. died without Heir-Male of his body begotten, and
that I. into one Message, etc. with the appurtenances, which are parcel of
the Manor afore^aid, is now entered, and holds it against the form of the Fine
aforesaid. And prays a Writ, to the Sheriff of S. to be directed to forewarn
the aforesaid I. to be here, to show, if he has any thing, etc. wherefore the
same Messuages, etc. with the appurtenances, which the said T. claims in form
aforesaid, after the death of the aforesaid W. to the aforesaid T. being Cozen,
and Heir of the aforesaid R. ought not to remain, according to the form of the
Fine aforesaid, for as much as the aforesaid W. is dead without Heir-male of
his body begotten, and it is granted to him returnable here (tale die) or thus,
And by several Writs, Several Scire fac. into several Counties upon one Fine.
A Scire facias for him in the remainder.
to wit, one to the Sheriff of the said County of B. another to the Sheriff of
N. the third to the Sheriff of H. to be directed, to forewarn the same I. to be
here, to show, etc.

It was commanded to the Sheriff, whereas a certain Fine was levied in the
Court of the Sovereign Lord, etc. (tali die and Anno) before, etc. Justices of
him the said Sovereign Lord the King our progenitor, now of the Bench between
W. and I. his wife plaintiffs, and I. E. deforcients of one Message, etc. with
the appurtenances in L. whereof Plea of Covenant was summoned between them in
the same Court, to wit, that the aforesaid W. did recognize the Tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said I. as those
which the same I. had by the gift of the aforesaid W. and for that
recognizance, Fine, and Concord, the same I. did grant to the aforesaid W. and
I. the aforesaid tenements, with the appurtenances, and those to them he did
render in the Render to the husband and wife, and to the heirs of the body of
the husband.
same Court, To have and to hold to the same W. and I. and the Heirs of him the
said W. of his body begotten, of the chief Lords of that Fee, by the services
which unto the aforesaid tenements should belong for ever, and if it happen
that the same W. should die without Heir of his body begotten, then after the
decease of them, the said W. and I. the aforesaid tenements, with the
appurtenances, should wholly remain to I. Son of the same W. and the heirs of
his body Remainder in tail.
begotten, to hold of the chief Lords of that Fee, by the services, which unto
the afores. tenements should belong for ever; And if it should happen the same
I. to dye without Heir of his body begotten, then after the decease of him the
said I. the aforesaid tenements with the appurtenances should wholly remain to
the right Heirs of him the said W. to hold of the chief Lords of that Remainder
to the right Heirs.
Fee, etc. ut supra. And now by the insinuation of T. being Cozen and Heir of
the aforesaid I. Son of W. the King received that the same W. is dead, without
Heir of his body begotten, and that the aforesaid I. is now dead; and that one
A. into the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances, is now entered, and
those he holds against the form of the Fine aforesaid, And for that, etc.
that by honest, etc. you give the aforesaid A. to know that she should be here
at this day, etc. to show, if she has any thing, etc. wherefore the aforesaid
tenements with the appurtenances, which she holds in form aforesaid, after
the death of the aforesaid W. and I. his wife, to the aforesaid T. as Cozen and
heir of the aforesaid I. son of W. ought not to remain according to the form of
the Fine aforesaid if, etc. for as much as the aforesaid W. dyed without Heir
of his body issuing, etc. And now here at this day, came as well the aforesaid
T. by A. his Attorney, as the aforesaid A. by S. her Attorney, and the Sheriff
returned that he had commanded I. L. Bailiff of the liberty, etc. to whom, etc.
which said Sheriff thus answered, that he gave the aforesaid A. to know, to be
here at this day, to show in form aforesaid by T. and G. honest, etc. And
hereupon the aforesaid, T. says, that he is Cozen and Heir of the aforesaid I.
being Son of W. to wit, Son of I. being Son of him the said I. being Son of W.
and prays against the aforesaid A. execution, etc.

Cozenage.
And hereupon the aforesaid W. H. says, that the aforesaid W. Brother of G. in
the Fine aforesaid, named at S. in the County of N. taking one E. P. to him to
wife, and the same E: taking him the said W. to her husband, they were together
betrothed; and after banes between them, upon three holy days, being distant
from themselves in the Church, etc. publicly proclaimed, the spousals between
them, in the face of that Church was celebrated, within which spousall, the
same W. and E. had issue between themselves, T. at H. in the same County of N.
begotten and born, which said T. at T. in the County of N. in the Church of
Saint A. there took unto wife one N. and the same T. and N. after the spousall
between them there celebrated, had issue between them, one H. there begotten
and born, and the same H. at the said Town of N. in the same County, in the
aforesaid Church, etc. took to wife one I. and the same H. and I. after the
spousall between them there celebrated, had issue between them, the aforesaid
W. H. begotten and born, who now prosecuteth, and so the same W. H. who now
prosecuteth, says, that he is Cozen and Heir of the aforesaid W. Brother of G:
of the body of him the said W. Brother of G. begotten, (that is to say) Son of
the aforesaid H. Son of the said T. Son of the same W. Brother of G. and
prays against the aforesaid R. S. etc. execution, etc.

A Fine levied to one by a Guardian.
THe Sheriff was commanded whereas a fine was levied in the Court of the
Sovereign Lord E. late King of England, etc. in Oct. etc. Anno, etc. before,
etc. by a Writ of him the said late King, between S. P. and I. his wife, and S.
son of the same S. and I. plaintiffs, by E. Guardian, or keeper of him the said
S. son of the same S. P. and I. to game, and W. P. parson of the Church of T.
and I. H. Chaplain deforcients, of two Messuages, etc. with the appurtenances
in T. S. and W. whereof Plea of Covenant was summoned between them in the same
Court, to wit, that the aforesaid S. P. did recognize the tenements aforesaid,
with the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said W. as those which the
same W. and I. then had by the gift of the aforesaid S. P. and for the same
recognizance, Fine, and Concord, the same W. and I. did grant to the aforesaid
S. P. and I. and S. son of the same S. and I. the aforesaid tenements, with the
appurtenances, and those to them, they did render in the same Court, To have
and to hold to the same S. P. and I. and S. son of the same S. and I. and the
Heirs of him the said S. son of the same S. and I. of his body begotten, of the
chief Lords of that Fee, by the services which unto the aforesaid tenement
should belong for ever; and if it should happen, that the same S. son of the
same S. and I. should dye, without Heir of his body begotten, then after the
decease of them, the said S. and I. and S. son of the same S. and I. the
aforesaid tenements, with the appurtenances, should wholly remain to the
Heirs-Males of the bodies of them, the said S. and I. issuing, to hold of the
chief Lords of that Fee, by the services which unto the aforesaid tenements
should belong for ever, and if no Heir-Male of the body of them, the said S. P.
and I. should be begotten, then the aforesaid tenements, with the
appurtenances, wholly should remain to M, sister of the aforesaid S. daughter
of the aforesaid S. and I. and the Heirs of her body begotten, to hold of the
chief Lords of that Fee, by the services which unto the aforesaid tenements
should belong for ever; and if it should happen that the same M. should dye,
without Heir of her body begotten, then after the decease of her the said M.
the aforesaid tenements, with the appurtenances, should wholly remain to I.
sister of the same M. and the Heirs of her body begotten, to hold of the chief
Lords of that Fee, by the services which unto the aforesaid tenements should
belong for ever, and if it should happen, that the same I. should die without
heir of her body begotten, then after the decease of her, the said I. the
aforesaid Tenements with the appurtenances, should wholly remain to the right
heirs of the aforesaid S. P. to hold of the chief Lords of that Fee, by the
services which unto the aforesaid tenements do belong for ever; and now by the
insinuation of I. A. Cozen and heir of the aforesaid M. of her body begotten,
the King did receive, that the aforesaid S. P. and I. are dead without
Heir-male of their bodies begotten, and the aforesaid S. son of the aforesaid
S. and I. is dead without heir of his body begotten, and that the aforesaid M.
is likewise dead; and that one R. L. and others into the Messuages, etc. Scire
fac. for the heir of him in remainder.
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, is now entered, and those they hold against
the form of the Fine aforesaid, And for that, etc. you should give to the
aforesaid R. L. and the others to know that they should be here at this day, to
wit, (tale die) to show, if they know, or have any thing, etc. wherefore the
Messuages aforesaid, with the appurtenances, which they hold in form aforesaid,
after the death of the aforesaid S. P. and I. S. etc. and the aforesaid M. to
the aforesaid I. A. Cozen and Heir of her the said M. of her body begotten,
ought not to remain according to the form of the Fine aforesaid, in so much as
the aforesaid S. P. and I. are dead without Heir-male of their bodies begotten;
and that the aforesaid S. son of the aforesaid S. and I. is dead, without heir
of his body begotten, if, etc. And now here at this day, came as well the
aforesaid I. A. by T. B. his Attorney, as the aforesaid R. L. and others, by I.
K. their Attorney, and the Sheriff returns, that he gave to the same R. and
others, to know of being here at this day, to show inform aforesaid, by I. C.
and other honest, etc. whereupon the same I. A. says, that he is Cozen and
Heir of the aforesaid M. of her body begotten, (that is to say) son of I. son
of W. son of S. son of the aforesaid M. And prays execution of the tenements
aforesaid, to him to be a judged, etc. And the aforesaid R. L. and others say,
that Confession of the fine.
they cannot deny the knowledge of the Fine aforesaid, but that the aforesaid
S. P. by that Fine, recognized the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances,
to be the right of the aforesaid W. P. as those which the same W. and the
aforesaid I. then had by the gift of the aforesaid S. P. and that, for the same
recognizance, Fine, and Concord, the same W. and I. by that Fine did grant
those tenements, to hold to the aforesaid S. P. and I. S. son of the same S.
and I. and those to them did render in the same Court, To have and to hold to
the same S. P. and I. S. son of the same S. and I. and the heirs of him the
said S. son of the same S. and I. of his body begotten: So that if it should
happen, that the same S. son of the same S. and I. should dye without Heir of
his body begotten, then after the decease of them the said S. P. and I. and S.
son of the same S. and I. the aforesaid tenements with the appurtenances,
should wholly remain to the heirs-males, of the bodies of them the said S. P.
and I. issuing: And if no Heir-male of the bodies of them, the said S. P. and
I. should be begotten, then the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances,
should wholly remain to the aforesaid M. sister of the aforesaid S. son of the
aforesaid S. P. and I. and the Heirs of her body begotten, and that the
aforesaid S. P. and I. are dead without heir-male of their bodies begotten. And
that
the aforesaid S. son of the aforesaid S. P. and I. is dead without heir of his
body begotten, and that the aforesaid M. is likewise dead, and that the
aforesaid I. A. is Cozen and Heir of the aforesaid M. inform, wherein the same
I. A. above supposes, and all and singular the premises Judgment to have
execution.
they well grant; therefore* it is considered, that the aforesaid I. A. have
execution against the aforesaid R. L. and others, of the tenements aforesaid
with the appurtenances, etc.

Scire Fac. teturned.
And now here at this day came as well the aforesaid E. in his proper person as
the aforesaid T. B. by W. his Attorney, And the Sheriff returned, that he made
to know, etc. And hereupon the aforesaid E. says, that he is Cozen and heir of
the aforesaid E. (that is to say) son of R. son of I. son of A. son of W.
brother of R. of the Father of him the said E. and prays against the
aforesaid T. B. execution, etc: And Cozenage alleged.
the aforesaid T. says, that the aforesaid E. execution, etc. by virtue of the
Fine aforesaid against him ought not to have, because he says that one R.
Father of him the said R. of the Father of E. one I. R: taking to wife, and the
Bar: that another was Heir whose estate he has.
same I. him the said R. taking to husband at R. in the County of N. one to the
other, were betrothed; and after that banes between them by three holidayes,
distant from themselves, in the Parish Church of R. solemnly was proclaimed,
and other things concurrent in that behalf canonically required, spousall
between the same R. and I. in the face of the same Church were lawfully and
solemnly celebrated, within which spousall the same R. and I. at R. aforesaid
had issue between them there begotten and born, the aforesaid E. Father of the
aforesaid E. and one S. the mean, and after the Nativity of him the said S. the
aforesaid W. in the Fine aforesaid named, (the said W. being the younger) to
whom the aforesaid E. makes himself Cozen and Heir, and the aforesaid R.
Father of R. and I. afterward dyed, and the aforesaid R. son of R. of the son
of R. had issue there, the aforesaid E. and died, and she the said E. afterward
died without Heir of her body issuing, (the said W. E. her husband in the said
Fine named her surviving) and he the said W. died, after whose death the
aforesaid T. and M. into the aforesaid Message, etc. in the aforesaid Towns of
E. and M. entered as in their remainder aforesaid, and were thereof seized in
their demeasne, as of Fee tail by virtue of the Fine aforesaid, and dyed
without Heir of their bodies issuing, after whose death, one I. R. as Cozen and
Heir of the aforesaid E. to wit, son of S. of the brother of R. of the father
of the afores. E. into the tene. aforesaid with the appurtenances entered, and
was thereof seized in his demeasne as of Fee, by virtue of the Fine aforesaid,
the estate of which said I. R. the aforesaid T. B. now has in the same; and
this, etc. whereof he prays, etc. if execution, etc.

Cozenage maintained.
And the aforesaid E. says, that he from having execution of the Messuages,
etc. in the aforesaid Towns of E. and M. against the aforesaid T. for any the
matters before alleged, ought not to be barred, for that he says, that long
before the aforesaid spousall between the aforesaid, R. Father of R. and I. R.
his wife, celebrated the same R. Father of him the said R. her the said I.
taking to his wife, and the same I. him the said R. taking to her husband at M.
in the aforesaid County of B. to one the other were betrothed, and all and
singular the things concurrent of right in that behalf canonically being
required, spousal between them the said R. and I. in the face of the Church,
etc. were solemnly, and lawfully celebrated, within which spousall the
aforesaid R. Father of R. and I. his wife at the aforesaid Town of M. had issue
between them (that is to say) Father of the aforesaid E. and the aforesaid W.
in the Fine aforesaid named his middle son, to whom the aforesaid E. makes
himself Cozen and Heir, and the aforesaid S. his younger son, without this that
the aforesaid S. was son of the aforesaid R. of the father of R. and I. his
wife, the elder of the afores. W. as the afores. T. B. above alleged. And this,
etc. whereof he prays Judgment and execution, etc. And the aforesaid T. B.
says, that the aforesaid S. was son of the aforesaid R. of the Father of R.
and I. his wife the elder of the aforesaid W. in form as he above alleged. And
of this, etc. And the aforesaid E: likewise, And for that the Justices here are
not yet advised whether the said issue of the Plea aforesaid ought to be tried
by men of the venue of M. in the said County of E. or by men of the venue of R.
in the said County of W. or by men of one venue, Venue.
and another, day is given to the parties aforesaid to hear their Judgment
here in eight days of Saint Hillary, etc.

Cozenage alleged in the Scire Facias.
ANd hereupon the aforesaid W. L. says, that he is Cozen and heir of the
aforesaid M. to wit, son of I. of the son of I. of the son of him the said M.
begotten and born at T. in the County of N. between I. L. of T. heretofore
husband of the aforesaid M. and her the said M. after the spousall between them
there celebrated, and prays against the aforesaid W. and A. execution, etc:
And the aforesaid W. and A. know not any the matters in the Writ aforesaid, by
the aforesaid W. L. before alleged and contained, and by protesting, that they
as to the begetting and Nativity of the aforesaid I. son of M. so suspected in
Manner and form above alleged by necessity have not, nor by the Law of the Land
are held to answer, protesting also, that the aforesaid M. being the first,
took to her husband one I. L. of M. which said I. and M. had issue between them
one I. and the same I. afterward died without Heir-Male of his body, and the
body of the aforesaid M. begotten, for Plea says, that the aforesaid W. as
Cozen and Heir of the aforesaid M. execution of the aforesaid Manor of W. with
the appurenances, whereof, etc. by virtue of the Fine aforesaid against ^them
ought not to have, for that he says, that long after the death of the
aforesaid I. L. of M. and before any spousall between the aforesaid I. L. of T.
and M. had or celebrated, as well I. of H. the aforesaid M. to his wife, as M.
him the aforesaid I. to her husband taking, at C. in the County of S. together
were betrothed, and there after banes between them in the Church, etc. on three
holy days from themselves distant solemnly proclaimed, the spousall was
between them the said I. of H. and M. in the face of the same Church
celebrated, and they there in Matrimony being lawfully coupled, and within the
spousall all the life time of him the said I. of H. there continued, and before
any spousall between the aforesaid I. L. of T. and M. had or celebrated, the
aforesaid I. of H. and M. had issue between them, one N. at C. aforesaid
begotten and born, and the Fine aforesaid in form aforesaid did levy, and the
aforesaid A. which was the wife of W. afterward died, after whose death the
aforesaid I. of H. and M. were seized of the aforesaid Manor of W. with the
appurtenances in their demeasne, as of Fee tail, Fee and right simple in the
person of her the said M. quiescing, by virtue of the Fine aforesaid, and of
such state thereof they dyed seized, and from them the said I. of H. and M. did
descend the same Manor of W. with the appurtenances to the same N. as son and
Heir of them the said I. and M. which said N. into that Manor, with the
appurtenances entered, and thereof was seized in his demeasne, as of Fee tail,
Fee and right simple thereof in the person of him the said N. as son and Heir
of her the said M. quiescing, by the form of the Fine aforesaid, and had issue
one H. at C. aforesaid begotten, and died, and from him the said N. descended
the aforesaid Manor of W. with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. to the same H.
as son and heir of the same N. which said H. into that Manor, with the
appurtenances entered, and was thereof seized in his demeasne as of Fee tail,
Fee and right simple thereof in the person of him the said H. quiescing by the
form of the Fine aforesaid, and thus thereof being seized, he enfeoffed I. and
E. etc. of the same Manor with the appurtenances, To have to them and their
heirs for ever, by virtue of which, etc. in Fee, whereof one I, etc. the estate
of the aforesaid W. and A. now they have in the same Manor, etc. and this, etc.
whereupon he prays Judgment, if the aforesaid W. L. execution of the same
Manor of W. with the appurtenances, by virtue of the Fine aforesaid against
them, he ought to have, etc. And the aforesaid W. L: knows not any the things
by the aforesaid W. and A. before alleged to be true, but rather false and
imagined, and protesting also, that the begetting and Nativity of the aforesaid
I. L. son of M. by him the said W. L. in his said Declaration of consanguinity,
by what means he is Cozen and Heir of him the said M. are contained, and were
truly and lawfully, and not suspectively alleged, as by diverse Records, as
well in Chancery, before the Chancellor, and in the Exchequer, before the
Barons, as in the Treasury of the Sovereign Lord the King, among the Records of
Pleas of Arms, before the late Constable of England holden, residing also both
by very many evidences, muniments, true, just, and sufficient, and for such in
the Law approved, and confirmed fully appears; For Plea says, that he from
having execution of the said Manor of W. with the appurtenances, by virtue of
the Fine aforesaid, for any the matters by the aforesaid W. and A. thereof
before alleged, ought not to be excluded, for that he says, That the
aforesaid I. L. of M. and the aforesaid I. L. of T. were one and the same
person, and not diverse persons, and that the same I. all his life time, as well
by the name of I. L. of T. as by the name of I. L. of M. was named and known,
and that the said marriage, between the aforesaid I. L. of T. and M. (they
coming first together, as in that before by right, they were canonically
required) at the aforesaid Town of T. in the face of the parish Church of the
same Town, was solemnly celebrated, within which spousall, the same I. L. and
M. had issue between themselves, the aforesaid I. L. son and Heir of the
aforesaid M. there begotten and born, in form wherein the aforesaid I. L. by
the said Declaration, the consanguinity aforesaid it is supposed, which said
marriage between them the said I. L. and T. M. thus celebrated, there was
continued all the life time of the same I. and after the death of the same I.
the aforesaid M. took to husband the aforesaid I. of H. without this that the
aforesaid betrothings, between the aforesaid I. of H and M. by the aforesaid W.
and A. before alleged, were had or celebrated before the said spousall,
between the aforesaid I. L. of T. and M. celebrated, as the same W. and A.
above alleged, and this, etc. whereof he demands Judgment, if execution,
etc. And the aforesaid W. and A. say, that the aforesaid espousals between the
aforesaid I. of H. and M. by the aforesaid W. and A. before alleged, were had
and celebrated before the said espousals, between the aforesaid I. L. of T. and
M. celebrated, in form wherein the same W. and A. above have alleged, And of
this they put, etc. And the aforesaid W. likewise, Therefore it is commanded,
as well to the Sheriff of N. as to the Sheriff of S. that, etc.

Bar that the demandant was born out of the espousall.
And the aforesaid P. says, That the aforesaid W. execution against him ought
not to have, because he says that, where the aforesaid W. by his Writ
aforesaid supposes, and affirms, that he was son and Heir of the aforesaid
T. the same W. was born out of all espousals, and this he is ready to verify,
whereof he demands Judgment, whether the aforesaid W. as son and Heir of the
aforesaid T. or of any other whomsoever, etc. against him ought to have, etc.
And the aforesaid W. says, that the aforesaid T. his Father, did to himself
espouse A. his wife by name, of whom he was born within the espousals between
them the said T. and A. celebrated, and this he is ready to verify, whereof he
prays Judgment, whether, etc. And execution to him to be adjudged, etc. And
the aforesaid P. says as before, that the aforesaid W. was born out of all
manner of wedlock, and not within wedlock aforesaid, as the aforesaid W. above
alleged. And of this he puts himself upon the Country. And the aforesaid
W. likewise. Therefore, etc.

Born before marriage.
And the aforesaid I. P. and A. acknowledge not that they who were parties to
the Fine aforesaid, nor any of them ever had, or have had any thing in the
tenements, and advowson in the aforesaid Fine contained, and say, that the
aforesaid E. as son and Heir of the aforesaid W. execution of the tenements,
and advowson against them ought to have, because they say, that the same W.
took to wife one M. which said M. was espoused to the same W. at E. in the
County of S. and there the espousals between them were celebrated, and say,
that the some E. was born at C. in the County of S. before marriage. And this
they are ready to verify by the Country, of the aforesaid County of S. and as
the Court here shall consider; whereof they pray Judgment if the same E.
execution of the tenements, and Advowson aforesaid, as son and Heir of the
aforesaid E. in this behalf against them, ought to have, etc. And the aforesaid
E. acknowledges not any the things by the aforesaid I. P. and A. above
alleged, and says, that he for any the matters before alleged from execution
of the tenements, and advowson aforesaid, by virtue of the Fine aforesaid,
ought not to be barred, or repelled, for that he says, that the aforesaid W.
his Father took to wife the aforesaid M. to wit, at M. in the said County of E.
and there the espousals between them in a lawful manner, and according to the
Ecclesiastical Court, were celebrated, and says, that hethere within the
espousals between them the said W. and M. celebrated, was born and begotten,
and this, etc. by the Country of the aforesaid County of E. and as the Court
here shall consider, whereof he prays Judgment and Execution, etc. and the
aforesaid, I. P. etc: say, that the aforesaid E. was born at C. in the
aforesaid County of S. before the spousall, between the aforesaid W. and M.
celebrated; and this as before he was ready to verify by the Country, and as
the Court here shall consider, etc. And the aforesaid E. says, that he was
born, and was begotten within the espousal between the aforesaid W. and M.
celebrated, to wit, at M. in the aforesaid County of E. and this as before he
is ready to verify by the Country of the aforesaid County of E. and according
as the Court here shall consider, and because it seems to our Court here that
the issue of the Plea aforesaid, by men of both the Counties aforesaid ought to
be tried; therefore it is commanded to both Sheriffs of the Counties aforesaid,
Trial.
that both of them cause to come here (tali die) twelve, etc. by whom, etc.

A Writ to the Bishop, to certify Bastardy.
THe King to I. by the same grace, Lord Bishop of L. greeting; Whereas I. M.
son of P. of the Brother of G. B. in our Court before us by our certain Writ,
whereupon he certified that he impleaded I. A. and P. G. of a certain Message
with the appurtenances in Fee, and they the said I. A. and P. according to due
premunition, by virtue of our said Writ to him made before us, they appearing
alleged him the said I. to be a Bastard, this pretending to verify, and for
that, cognizance of such like cause, merely belongs to the Ecclesiastical
Court, we command you, that ye call forth before ye, any, which in that
behalf shall seem fit to be called forth, and diligently thereupon ye make
inquisition, and the whole truth thereof by your Letters, under your seal
sealed, to us in eight, etc. wheresoever then we shall be in England, ye render
more certain, and this Writ to us now ye send back, T. etc.

And now here at this day, came as well the Return of the Scire facias.
aforesaid I. B. by B. his Attorney, as the afores. I. H. in his proper person,
and the Sheriff returns that he has made to know to the same I. H. of being
here at this day, etc. to show in form aforesaid by N. B. etc. honest, etc. And
hereupon the aforesaid I. B. prays against the aforesaid I. H. execution,
etc. And the aforesaid I. H. says, that the aforesaid I. B. execution of the
Message aforesaid with the appurtenances, by virtue of the Fine aforesaid I.
to whom the plaintiff makes himself Heir, was seized, whose estate the tenant
has.
against him ought not to have for that, he says, that the same I. was seized
of the same Messuages with the appurtenances in his demeasne as of Fee-tail, by
virtue of that Fine, the estate of which said I. the aforesaid I. H. now has
in those Messuages with the appurtenances, and so he says, that the Fine
aforesaid was executed in the person of the aforesaid I. by his seisin by
virtue of that Fine, and this he is ready to verify, whereupon he prays
Judgment, whether the aforesaid I. B. execution of the Messuages aforesaid
with the appurtenances, by virtue of the Fine aforesaid, in form aforesaid,
executed in this case against him, ought to have, etc. And the aforesaid I. B.
says, that he from having execution of the Messuages aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, against the aforesaid I. H. for any the mattrrs before alleged,
ought not to be excluded; for that he says, that the aforesaid I. was not
scised of the aforesaid Messuages with the appurtenances, by virtue of the Fine
aforesaid, in form wherein I. H. above has alleged, and he prays, that this
may be inquired by the Country, and the aforesaid I. H. likewise, therefore 12.
etc.

And the aforesaid T. R. as to eight Acres of Wood with the appurtenances, in
the aforesaid Town of H. whereof execution now is prosecuted against him,
says, that the aforesaid R. and H. who were parties to the Fine aforesaid, at
the time of the levying of the same Fine, before or after, had nothing in the
same wood with the appurtenances, whereof, etc. as of Freehold, but that one
I. M. then was thereof seized in his demeasne as of Fee, the estate thereof, of
which said I. the aforesaid T. R. now has and the day of the obtaining of the
aforesaid Writ of Scire facias had in that wood with the appurtenances, and
this he is ready to verify, whereupon he prays Judgment, whether the
aforesaid P. son of P. execution of the same eight Acres of wood with the
appurtenances, by virtue of the Fine aforesaid, in this case against him ought
to have, etc. and as to the aforesaid 100. shillings of Rent with the
appurtenances, in the same Town of H. whereof execution likewise is now
prosecuted, the same T. further says, that he is not thereof Tenant,
perceiver, nor deforcient of that Rent with the appurtenances, nor Tenant of
the tenements, from whence the same Rent with the appurenances comes as of
Freehold, nor was at the day of the obtaining of the aforesaid Writ of the
said Scire facias, or ever afterward, And this he is ready to verify,
whereupon as to that Rent with the appurtenances, he prays Judgment of the
Writ, etc. And the aforesaid P. Son of P. as to the said Rent of 100. shillings
says, that the day of the obtaining of his Writ of Scire facias, to wit, the
day, etc. year, etc. the aforesaid T. R. was tenant as of Freehold, of twenty
Acres of Land with the appurtenances, in the aforesaid Town of H. whence that
Rent with the appurtenances increases. And says, that the same T. then was
deforcient of the same Rent, with the appurtenances as of Freehold, as by the
same writ is supposed. And prays at his peril execution of the same Rent
with the appurtenances, against him to be adjudged, etc. therefore, etc. as to
that Rent with the appurtenances, it is considered, that the aforesaid P. son
of P. have thereof execution at his peril against the aforesaid T. R. by
virtue of the Fine aforesaid, etc. And as to the aforesaid eight Acres of wood
with the appurtenaeces, whereof, etc. the same P. son of P. says, that at the
time of the levying of the Fine aforesaid, The aforesaid T. and G. who were
parties to that Fine, were seized of the same wood with the appurtenances,
whereof, etc. in their demeasne as of Fee, etc. as by the same it is supposed;
And this he prays, that it may be enquired by the Country, and the aforesaid
T. R: likewise, therefore as to this issue 12. etc.

Know you that it is considered in our Court, etc. that P. B. son and Heir of
P. B. have execution against T. R. of 100. shillings of rent, with the
appurtenances in H. by virtue of a Fine thereof levied in the Court of the
Sovereign C. late King, etc. at W. in eight, etc. in the year, etc. before W.
B. and his Associates then Justices of the same, etc. of the Bench between R.
etc. plaintiff, and T. P. and B. his wife deforcients of the rent aforesaid
with the appurtenances, and of other Lands and Tenements, in the same Fine
contained by default, etc. And therefore we command you, that to the same P. of
the rent aforesaid with the appurtenances, without delay plenary execution, and
seisin you cause to have, T. etc.

Know you, that it is considered in the Court, etc. that R. son and heir of R.
have seisin, and execution against R. D. of the Manor of A. with the
appurtenances, in your County, by the default of the aforesaid R. by virtue of
a note of a certain Fine lately levied in the Court of the aforesaid C. late
King, etc. at Westminster, (tali die) and Anno, etc. before R. B. and his
Associates, Justices of the aforesaid late King of the Bench, and afterward in
eight, etc. in the Habere facias seisinam sur recovery upon default in a Scire
fac.
year, etc. there granted and recorded before the same Justices, and others
faithful of the same late King then there present, between R. of A. etc. plain
tiff, and I. of S. and E. his wife deforcients of the Manors of O. and R. with
the appurtenances, in the County of N. and of the aforesaid Manor of A. in your
County. And therefore we command you, that to the same R. son of R. of the
aforesaid Manor of A. with the appurtenances, without delay, plenary, sesin,
and execution, you cause to have, T. etc.

Afterward die and loco, etc. came the within-named Recite of ^ Feme Covert
upon her busbands default.
R. W. in his proper person, and the within named W. N. being solemnly exacted
came not, but I. the wife of the same W. within named in her proper person came
and says, that the Manors within specified, are the right of het the aforesaid
I. and that she is ready to show that the aforesaid R. W. execution of those
Manors, by virtue of the fine within written ought not to have, whereupon she
comes before Judgment yielded, being ready thereof to answer to the aforesaid
R. and to defend her right, and prays that she by the default of the
aforesaid W. her husband may not lose thereof her right, but that she may be
admitted thereof to the defending of the right of her the said I. etc.

Certain causes of the nature and form of a Scire Facias upon a Fine.
Surplusage
ANd a Scire Facias to execute a Fine, must agree with the Fine, and then it is
not material, if one thing be twice demanded thereby, as a Manor, and a hundred
parcel of the same Manor, 27 H. 8. 2.

Upon the note.
A Scire facis may be sued upon the note of the Fine, before it be engrossed by
the Chirographer, 22 H. 6. 13.

A fine before memory. Of Land in in lieu of the services.
But of a Fine levied before time of memory, a man shall not have execution by
Scire facias, 1 E. 4. 6. Contr. 16 H. 7. 9.

Where a Fine executory, is levied of a Seigniory, if the Land escheate, or the
Tenant be fore-judged, etc. the Cognisee shall have a Scire facias of the Land
in lieu of the services, 48 E. 3. 11.

A Mittimus makes no mention, whether the Fine be engrossed or no, but,
whereas a certain Fine was levied, etc. 22 H. 6. 13.

If a Fine be levied to A. in tail, the remainder to B. in tail, the remainder
to C. in Fee, And the Record is sent into the Chancery, and the first tenant in
tail dies without issue, and the Record comes back into the Bench by
Mittimus, at the suit of him in the first remainder, and thereupon he had a
Scire facias to execute the Fine, and died without issue before execution had,
he in the remainder in Fee, shall not hereupon have a Scire facias, without a
new commandment, because the Record was once out of the Court, and come again
at the suit of him in the first remainder; unto whom he in the remainder in Fee
is an estranger, yet the issue of him which removed the Record, in this case
might have a Scire facias, without any new commandment, because he is privy,
14 H. 7. 16. 9 E. 4. 15. 11 E. 4. 13.

If two sue a Scire facias to execute a Fine, and the one dies, the survivor
shall have a Scire facias, without any new commandment, 1 E. 4. 13.

But if diverse persons as Heirs unto A. B. pray a Scire facias, it is not
grantable, until they have sued several Writs to the Justices of the Bench,
commanding them to make execution, 11 E. 4. 13. T, 21 E. 4.

Coment Cozen and Heir.
In a Scire facias to execute a Fine, as Cozen and Heir to him in the remainder
or reversion, after the death of the particular tenant, the plaintiff needs
not to show how Cozen and Heir, so long as the Plea has continuance, by idem
dies, etc. given to the tenant, nor at his appearance, nor until the plaintiff
pray execution: And then the How Cozen and Heir.
Coment Cozen and Heir, is to be entered thus in the Roll only: And the
aforesaid I. says, that he is Cozen and Heir of I. W. (that is to say) son and
Heir of T. W. of the Brother and Heir of the same I. W. 33 H. 6. 54. 41 Ed. 3.
13. and 24. 8 H. 4. 31.

Bastarday.
In Scire facias by him in the remainder upon an estate tail against A. B.
supposing the donee to be dead without issue, if A. B. plead that he is issue
to the donee, and the plaintiff replyeth that he is a bastard, it is a good
replication, 40 E 3. 16.

Upon estate executed.
Scire facias upon a Fine levied to T. R. and W. and to the Heirs of the body of
R. the remainder to the right Heirs of the said W. T. died, and R. died without
issue and W. survived and died, his Heirs need no Scire facias to execute this
Fine, because it is executed in his life by the union of the Fee and
Franktenement in W. 40 E. 3. 20. And so if a Fine be levied to a Baron and
Feme, and to W. and his Heirs, and he dies, and then the Baron and feme do
dye, the Fine is executed for one moiety in the life of W. Fitzh. Scire facias
19. 43 E. 3. 9. 24 E. 3. 57. Aid.


Tenant for life in Scire facias had aid of him in remainder, 41 E. 3. fo. 16.
and 20. 22 E. 3. 12.

Death showed.
In formedone in reverter or remainder, the demandant must mention the death of
every one which had estate, and survived his Ancestor, but not so in a Scire
facias surfine, 42 E. 3. 19.

Several estates.
If the plaintiff have several estates created by one Fine, he needs but one
Writ of Scire facias, 43 E. 3. 11. though it be of several things against
several tenants, 11 H. 4. 15. 21 E. 3. 14. 24 E. 3. 25.

Default.
If in a Scire fa. the Sheriff return the party summoned, and he appear not,
execution shall be awarded, 43 E. 3. 13.

Reversion.
If a Fine sur cognizance de droit come ceo, etc. be levied of a reversion by
the name of the Land, it is not executory, 43 E. 3. 15.

Seigniory.
If the services escheat after a Fine levied of the Seigniory, the Cognisee
shall have execution of the Land escheated, 48 H. 3. 11.

Of things out of the Writ.
A Scire fa. lies sometimes of things not comprised in the Writ: as if in a
Fine sur release, the Cognisee render rent in tail, 48 E. 3. 8.

Execution by entry of him in remainder.
If Land be given by Fine for life, the remainder to Baron and Feme in tail, and
the Baron dies, and then the Tenant for life dies, and the Feme enters, the
Fine is executed, so as their issue needs no Scire facias, 49 E. 3 12.

Of a reversion.
Scire fa. lies for the donor in tail, against any that abated after the death
of the donee in tail, by Fine without issue, 22 E. 3. 12.

Upon general non tenure pleaded, the plaintiff Non tenure general or
special. Nihil returned.
may take execution at his peril: But special non tenure seems a good Plea,
7 H. 6. 25:

A man shall not have excution upon nihil returned, because the tenant may be
summoned in the Land demanded, 24 E. 3. 25.

Half blood.
If a Fine be levied to husband and wife in tail, the remainder to his right
Heirs, and they having issue, the husband dies, the wise has issue by another
husband and dies, the issue by the first husband enters and dies without
issue, and his next heir enters, as into the remainder in Fee, against whom
the issue by the second husband brings a Scire fa. and recovereth by reason,
that the Fee could never execute in possession in the Elder Brother, during the
State-tail, 24 E. 3. 30. and 62.

Feoffment.
Feoffment with warranty from the plaintiffs Ancestor, is a good Plea in a Scire
fa. upon a Fine, 22 H. 6. 39.

The Heir shall have his age in Scire fa. Contr. Westminster. 2. ca. 45. 24 E. 3. 28.
and 60.

What Fines with Proclamations bar not the issue in Tail.
NO Fine levied by tenant in tail, barreth his issue maintenant, but where the
tenant in tail is Cognisor, as if tenant in tail bring a Writ of Covenant
against an estranger, and he recognize the Land to be the right of the tenant
in tail, as that which he has of his gift, etc. and the tenant in tail, grant
and render the Land to the Cognisor for years, yielding rent, etc. and die,
this Fine is void against the issue in tail, M. 10. and 11 Eliz. Dyer fo. 279.
p. 7. 36 H. 8. Br. Fines 118.

A Fine with Proclamation levied by tenant in tail, the reversion, or remainder
being in the King, binds not the issue in tail, as it seems Br. Fines 121.
But if such Lands were entailed by the King, such Fine barreth not the issue in
tail, 32 H. 8. Cap. 36.

If an estranger levy a Fine to tenant in tail sur cognizance de droit come ceo
que il ad de son done, and he renders to him a rent in Fee, and dye after
Proclamation, yet the issue in tail may avoid it, for he is remitted, and the
rent is another thing then the Land, 15 E. Plo. fo. 435. per Thornton.

If tenant in tail of an Advowson, grant, and render by Fine the nomination of
the Clerk, it is void, 15 Eliz. Plo. f. 435. b. per Thornton.

If tenant in tail of a rent disseife the Tenant of the Land, and levy a Fine
with Proclamation of the Land, the issue in tail is not barred for the rent,
because the Fine was not levied of the rent, but of the Land, per Thornton, and
granted 15 Eliz. Plo. f. 435. b.

If tenant in tail, grant a rent by Fine, his issue may avoid it, 15 Eliz. Plo.
436. 14. A. ss. p. 4.

What time after a Fine levied and Proclamation made, any man has to enter, or
claim by action, or otherwise, and who are thereby barred forthwith, and who
not.
Hitherto of the forms and execution of Fines, now let us see how they may be
avoided..
TO know what time persons that have cause toenter, or claim, may enter, or
clai master a Fine levied, many things are to be weighed: for some persons have
more time and some less, for the discussing of which question, we must not only
consider the quality of the persons that should claim or enter, but also the
quality of their rights and estates: And the persons be either such as are void
of impediments, or such as have impediments; and the same be either parties, or
privies to the Fine, or estrangers to the same. And again they have either
present right, or future right, such have the same, either wholly after the
fine, or partly before, and parrly after: and some of them have but one title,
and some diverse; and others have no right to the Tenements comprised in the
fine, but to some things therein, or issuing out of the same.

Parties to Fines, void of impediments at the time of the levying of the same,
and their Heirs, are thereby barred presently, and have no time at all to avoid
the same, by entry, or claim, 1 R. 3. ca. 7. 4 H. 7. ca. 24. whether they be
persons having natural capacities, or civil.

If they be such civil bodies, or corporations, as have in themselves absolute
estate and authority of their possessions, so as they may maintain a Writ of
right thereof, as Mayor and Cominalty, Dean and Chapter, Colleges, societies
corporate, and such like, and their successors, and barred by fines presently,
Plo. 338. a T. 20. Eliz.

But Deans, Bishops, Priors, Abbots, Masters of Hospitals, Parsons, Vicars,
Prebendaries, Chauntry Priests, and such like, which may not have a Writ of
right, but either a Juris utrum. Fitz. Not. fol. 48. 1. or sine assensu
Capituli fit. Not. fo. 118. 1 are not barred by such fines if the patron and
ordinary join not with them. Plo. 538. a. 20 Eliz. 375. b. 11. Eliz.

How privies in blood are bound in Fines.
ANd by the same Statutes, 1 R. 3. c. 7. 4 H. 7. c. 24. Privies in blood, as
Heirs of the Cognisors, claiming by the same title, that their Ancestor had
that levied the Fine, be barred presently thereby, whether they be void of
impediments or no. As if Land of Soccage tenure be given to a Baron and Feme,
in special tail, the remainder to the right Heirs of the Baron in Fee, and the
Baron sole levieth a fine with Proclamation to his own use in Fee, and after
devises the same Lands to A. in Fee, and has issue, and then the Baron and
the Feme die, the issue in tail is barred, because he cannot otherwise convey
himself to the tail, and descent in tail, than the Heir of the body, both of
his Father and Mother, Tr. 18 Eliz. Dyer f. 251. p. 24. 9 H. 8. Dyer f. 3. p.
6. 32 H. 8. Br. Fine 109.

Privies.
So if husband and wife, tenants in special tail, have issue, and the wife die,
and the husband Marry another wife and have issue, and levy a fine, sur
cognizance de droit come ceo, etc. and by the same fine, take estate in
special tail, the remainder over, etc. and die, the issue by the first wife is
barred, because he is privy in blood, the continuance of the possession in the
husband notwithstanding, 32 E. 3 Dyer pl. 16 Eliz. f. 354. p. 31. and 32.

But if my Fathers Brother disseise him, and levy a fine with Proclamation, and
my Father and Uncle within five years after Proclamation die, yet may I avoid
it by entry, at any time before the end of the said five years,
notwithstanding, that I am privy in blood unto my Uncle, for that my title to
the Land; grows by my Father, and not as Heir unto my Uncle, P. 19 H. 8.
Dyer f. 3. p. 3.

Nevertheless, if my Father disseise my Grandfather of an estate in Fee, and
thereof levy a fine with Proclamation, and first my Grandfather, and then my
Father die, I am now barred as privy, because I cannot otherwise convey my self
to the Lands, than as Heir unto my Father the Cognisor, P. 19 H. 8. Dyer f. 3.
p. 3.

Of Estrangers having present right and no impediment.
BUt Estrangers to fines (which be all persons, not parties, nor privies) and
being void of impediments natural and legal, and having present right to the
Lands in the fine, have only five years after Proclamations, to enter and claim
their right, 1 R. 3. c. 7. 4 H. 7. c. 24.

Tenant in remainder, or reversion upon an estate for years, or at will.
As if one have a remainder, or a reversion, depending upon an estate or years,
or by Statute Staple, Statute Merchant, or elegit, and the termor be disseised,
and a fine levied, etc. and five years passed, they be all barred thereby: for
that these termors might presently have entered, and he in the reversion, or
remainder for such disseisin, might have had an Assise. So the Statute, 4 H. 7.
c. 24. seems to bar the Termors through negligence by this word Interest,
which comprehends a Term, Pl. f. 374. a.

And if a Tenant in tail be disseised, and a fine levied with Proclamation, and
five years past, and the tenant in tail dies, the issue in tail is bound for
ever, per Dyer and Catlin, for the right was present to the tenant in tail, at
the time of the fine levied, and he cannot claim, but by the same title which
his Father had, which was barred in his life time, Plo. fo. 374. a Dyer fo. 3.
Pl. 19 H. 8. 7.

The like it is of the Laches of him in the remainder, or reversion, for it
barreth him and his Heirs, Pl. fo. 374. a. Dyer fo. 3. p. 6.

Of Estrangers that have present right and impediment.
BUt Estrangers to fines pestred by impediments of infancy, coverture, madness,
idiocy, lunacy, imprisonment, or absence out of the Realm, at the levying of
fines, and having then present right, or interest, have yet liberty five years
after such infirmity removed to make entry, or claim, etc. 1 R. 3. c. 7. 4 H.
7. ca. 24.

Infants.
And therefore an Infant has five years after, he accomplish his full age,
(though he be in his Mothers womb) Plo. s. 367. a. because the Law intends,
that Infants by reason of their tender years, do want understanding to know
their right, and whether their entries be lawful or no, And how to make their
entries and claim, or bring their actions according to their title, Plo. fo.
359. 4 H. 7. c. 24.

Yet if my Fathers Brother disseise him, and levy a fine with Proclamation, and
a year after the Proclamation my Father dies, And after, and within five years
my Uncle dies, I by reason of my Infancy, have only so much time to avoid the
same, as at the death of my Father ^emained to come of the five years next
after the Proclamation, and not now five years, because I claim by the same
title that my Father had, in whom the first five years were attached and begun,
Dyer fo. 3. pl. 2. In like Manner, and for the same reason, if the Father, or
Ancestor be disseised, and the disseisor levy a fine with Proclamation, and
within five years after the Proclamation, the Ancestor dies, his Heir being
within age, yet if he make not his entry, or claim, within the first five years
after the Proclamation, he is barred. Plow. f. 367. b. 377. a. And it is there
adjudged.

Non sanae memoriae.
Madmen, and lunaticks, estrangers to fines, have the like liberty to enter or
claim, that Infants have for their indiscretion, 1 R. 3. c. 7 4 H. 7. c. 24.
Yet as it seems, if nonsanity of memory happen after the fine levied, and
before the last Proclamation be made, the parties be not tied to make claim or
entry, during the first five years, but shall have five years after they be
cured of their said maladies, because they grow by the act of God, Plow. fol.
375. a. and 366. a.

Coverture.
And a feme Covert being an estranger to a fine, has five years after she be
discovert to pursue her right, for that during the Coverture, she wanted power
to do the same, without her husbands consent, who perchance would neither do
it, nor suffer it to be done: howbeit, if a feme sole being an estranger to a
fine, and have present right, etc. take a husband, who suffers the five years
to incur, she is thereby barred for ever, because it was her own voluntary act
and folly, to marry such a husband, Plow. fo. 336. a.

Imprisonment.
Estrang. to fines, impris. at the time of the fine levied, have the like
liberty to avoid fines that Infants have, because the Law intends, that
prisoners are so closely, and straightly kept from the conference of others,
that they know not what happens abroad; and also want liberty to take
counsel, and make their entries and claims, and therefore no laches is in this
behalf imputed to them, Pl. f. 360. a. and 366. a. But if such imprisonment
happen after the fine levied, before the last Proclamation made, it seems he
shall have five years after his enlargement, because the imprisonment is not
his voluntary act, Pl. 375. a. 366. a.

An estranger to a fine being out of the realm, Out of England.
at the levying thereof, has five years after his return to enter, or claim.
But if he had been in England at the levying of the fine, and after had gone
beyond the Seas, and suffered the five years after Proclamation to pass, he had
been barred, Pl. f. 366. a. 7 Eliz. 4 H. 7. c. 24. But if he be sent beyond the
Seas in the Kings service by his commandment, it seems otherwise.

Corporations.
And such civil bodies, or corporations as have in themselves, absolute estate
and authority of their possession, so as they may maintain a Writ of right
thereof, as Mayor, and Communalty, Dean and Chapter, Colleges, Societies
incorporate, and such like, they and their successors, are barred by fine and
nonclaim by five years, Plo. f. 538. T. 7. 20 Eliz.

Corporations.
But Deans, Bishops, Priors, Abbots, Masters of Hospitals, Parsons, Vicars,
Prebendaries, Chauntry Priests and such like, having joint power, and which may
not have a Writ of right, but either a juris utrum, Fitz. Not. f. 48. r. or
sine Assensu capituli, Fitz. Not. fo. 118. 1. are not barred by such fines, and
non claim by five years, Pl. 538. a. 230. Eliz. 375. b. 11 Eliz.

Of Estrangers having diverse defects.
ANd moreover Estrangers to fines, having diverse defects, or infirmities, as
infancy, coverture, non-sanity of memory, imprisonment, absence out of the
realm, to avoid fines, must have five years after, the last of the said
infirmities removed, Plo. 375. a.

But if they have diverse impediments which be all once after the Proclamation
removed, and after they fall into the like again and die, their Heirs are not
to have new five years, but the first five years begun in their Ancestor's
immediately after their first impediments so removed shall proceed, and
non-claim of their Heirs, during all the residue of the said five years,
binding them as their said Ancestors should have been bound thereby, if they
had remained void of such impediments during all the said five years, Pl. f.
375. a.

Of Estrangers without impediments, having future right for cause precedent.
THus much of Estrangers to Fines, having present right; now of such as have
future right: which right is of two sorts: for it grows either wholly before
the Proclamation, or partly before, and partly after the same.

And therefore Estrangers to fines void of the said impediments, whose right,
title, claim, or interest first grows, remains, descends, or comes to
them after the Proclamation, by force of any matter, or cause had, or made
before the same, have only five years after such right, etc. first grows,
descends, remains, or comes unto them, 1 R. 3. c. 7. 4 H. 7. c. 24. As if
a Morgagee be disseised, and the disseisor does levy a fine with Proclamation,
and the five years after the Proclamation, the morgagee pays or tendereth the
money, according to his bargain, he may lawfully enter at any time, within 5.
years after the said payment, or tender, because his title first accrueth
thereby after the Proclamations by reason of the condition, and mortgage made
before the same Pl. f. 378. a. b.

In like manner, and for the like cause, he which has a remainder, or
reversion depending upon an estate of Freehold, has five years, after that
his remainder, or reversion accrueth, to enter, etc. And his Heir, if he die
before entry, etc. has only five years after the death of the particular
tenant to enter, Plow. fol. 374. a. b.

And if tenant in tail levy a fine with Proclamation, after the five years he
dies without issue, the donor has five years after his death, to bring his
Formedon in reverter, because he is the first unto whom the right comes after
the Proclamation, for cause precedent, Plow. fo. 374. a.

And if tenant in tail discontinue in Fee, and the discontinuee levieth a fine
with, etc. and five years do pass, and the tenant in tail dies, yet his issue
has five years after his descender, to bring his Formedon in discender,
because he is the first to whom the right of the entail comes after
Proclamation, by force of the gift in tail made before the fine, Plow. 374. a.
19 H. 8. 7. Dyer f. 3. p. 5.

Of Estrangers with impediments having future right.
ANd Estrangers to Fines, having future right for any cause precedent the fine,
being affected with such impediments. when their right first accrueth, have
five years after such impediments removed to pursue for the same, 1 R. 3. c. 7.
4 H. 7. c. 24. As Infants, as well those which be born, as those which be in
their Mothers womb, when such right happens to them, Plo. f. 367. a. Femes
Covert, Madmen, Lunaticks, Prisoners, persons beyond the Sea, as appears
before, where it is spoken of them having present right, Plo. 366. a. 7 Eliz.

As if a man have issue, a son and a daughter, which son purchases Lands and
dies: and the daughter enters as his Heir, and is disseised by A. who levyeth
a fine, and five years pass without claim. And ten years after the Father has
another son which is Heir to his Brother, he shall have new five years after he
come to his full age, because he is the first to whom the right descended after
the Proclamation, by reason of the descent which was before them, Plo. f. 374.
b.

But if an Estranger to a fine to whom a remainder or other title first
accrueth after the fine do not pursue hls right within five years, he and his
issue are barred for ever, 16 H. 8. Dyer f. 3. pl. 6.

And in like manner, if the first issue in tail to whom the title of the intail
first accrueth, neglect his five years, the whole estate tail is thereby bound
for ever, 32 H. 8. Br. fines 100.

If he which abateth after the death of a tenant in Fee, make a Feoffment upon
condition, and the Feoffee levy a fine, and five years after Proclamation pass
without entry, or claim, made by his Heir, the Heir is barred: But if
afterward the condition be broken, and the abator therefore enter, then the
Heir may have an Assise of Mort dauncester against the abator, or entry upon
him at any time, and he has no defense. For if he plead in bar of the assise,
the Fine levied to the Cognisee, and that he has his estate, the special
matter of the abatement, condition and reentry, may be pleaded in defense
thereof, for he can never challenge privilege by the estate of the Cognisor,
which he himself defeated, Plo. fol. 358. b. 7 Eliz.

Of Estrangers having no right for any cause before the Fine.
BUt Estrangers to Fines, having neither present, nor future right, etc. at the
levying thereof, by reason of any matter had before the fine, whose right
grows either entirely after the Proclamation, or partly before, or partly
afrer, may enter or claim when they please, within the time of the prescription.

As if the Father die seized, his eldest son being professed, and the younger
son enters, and is disseised, and a Fine with Proclamation levied, and after
the elder son is deraigned, it seems, he is bound to no time, Plo. f. 337. a.

Dower.
So if the husband levy a fine of his own Lands, whereof his wife is dowable,
and die, and five years pass after his death, she is not barred of her dower;
because her title to be endowed, accrued after the fine levied, namely, by the
death of her husband, for before his death, she had only possibility of dower,
and not any right title, or interest thereunto, Plo. fo. 373.

And if a Tenant cease one year, and then a Fine with Proclamation is levied:
And afterward a Tenant cease another year, the Lord may have his cessavit
per biennium 20. years after the Proclamation made, because his right and title
grows partly before the Fine, and partly after the fine levied, that is at
the end of the two years of his Tenants ceasser, Plo. fo. 373. b.

Of Estrangers having diverse future rights by diverse Titles.
BUt if Estrangers to Fines, have several future rights by diverse titles
growing at several times, it seems that they shall have several five years,
to make entry, or claim, commencing from such time, as their several titles
first accrue unto them: As if tenant for life, the remainder in Fee, make a
Feoffment in Fee: And the Feoffee levy a fine with, etc. and he in the
remainder suffer the first five years to pass, he is by his laches barred of
his entry, for the forfeiture growing by the alienation of his tenant, during
his tenant for life, because he had present right at the levying of the fine,
to enter for the same, yet if after the tenant for life do dye, he has other
five years, to bring his Formedon in remainder, because that is a new title or
right, by which he could not have his Formedon during his tenant for life. And
he had his election, to take advantage of the forfeiture or not, Plo. f. 573,
b. Quaere, for there ^atlyn thinks otherwise, because his right to the Land
by the forfeiture accrued to him in the life time of his tenant for life.

If I. S. be tenant pur auter vie, the remainder to another for life, the
remainder to the same I. in Fee, and I. S. is disseised, and the disseisor
levyeth a Fine with Proclamation, and the five years pass, I. S. is bound for
his future, and present estate for life: But if cesuy qui vie, and he in the
mean remainder die, now I. S. shall have other five years to enter for his
remainder in Fee, for it then first remains unto him by the death of him in
the mean remainder, and cesuy qui vie for cause grown wholly before the fine,
that is the State so made before, which is another title, Plowden 367. h. per
Welsh. and diverse Justices, Plo. 367. b.

In like manner, if Land be given to I. S. for the life of A. the remainder to
him for the life of B. the remainder to him for the life of C. and he is
disseised, and the disseisor levyeth a fine with Proclamation, now I. S. for
his present right, has five years by the first Saving of the St. 4 H: 7. ca.
24. And five years after the death of A. by the second Saving, which is of
future right, and other five years after the death of B. for his second
remainder, for quando duo Jura in una persona concurrunt, aequum est acsi
essent in diversis, Plo. 368. a.

If any man disseise a feme sole, and after marry her, and have issue by her,
and the Baron is disseised before marriage, or after, and a fine with
Proclamation levied, first the Baron, and after the feme die within five years,
the issue being of full age, the five years past, he is thereby bound as Heir
to his Father, but has other five years after the death of his Mother, to
enter, for albeit it, is but one self same Land, yet the Heir has several
rights thereunto growing at several times, the one as Heir to his Father, the
other as Heir to his Mother, in regard whereof he has several times, Plow.
367. b.

So if the husband makes a Feoffment of his wives Lands, upon condition, which
is broken, he levyeth a fine which, etc. the husband has issue by his wife and
dies, the first five years pass, and then the wife dieh, the Heir is barred of
his entry, for the condition as Heir to his Father, but shall have five years
after the death of his Father, to claim, etc. because it is a title differing
from that which did descend from his Father, accruing to him first by the death
of his Mother, Plow. 167. a.

Estrangers to Fines, having neither present, nor future right to the tenements
in the Fine, at the levying thereof, but only unto rents common, etc. issuing
out of the same.
ANd Estrangers to fines having neither present, nor future right to the
tenements in the fine, but to something in, or issuing out of the same, seem
not barrable at all by any such fine, or non-claim. As if a Tenant in ancient
demesne levy a fine with, etc. at the common Law, of his Land in ancient
demesne, the Lord in ancient demesne, may have his Writ of deceit, and thereby
avoid the fine at any time, and thereupon his Tenant shall be restored to the
Land, because the Lord claims not the Land, whereof the fine is levied, but
his ancient Seigniory, and services issuing out of the same, Plo. 370. b.

It seems such fines do not bar such estrangers, as have Rent, Common, way,
Estovers, nor any such charge out of the Land, for it seems, that these fines
extend only to bind the estate, title, right, claim, entry, and interest, in
and to the Land, and no profits to be taken out of the Lands, nor to take any
power given to executors, or others to sell the Land. Br. tit. Fines 123.

Pleas to avoid Fines:
IT is a good Plea to say, That I. S. was seized tempore levac. and before the
fine levied, without that, that the parties in the fine had any thing therein,
at the time of the fine levied, 9 H. 4. 27. 3 H. 6: 27.

Or to say that the parties to a fine had nothing, etc. but A. B. whose estate
he has, And of this he puts himself upon the Country, 33 H. 6. 18. 26 H.
6. f. 9. 42 E. 3. 20. 4 H. 4. 8. 14 H. 4. 33. 4 H. 7. c. 24.

If there be two R. D. of one name, and the one levy a fine of the Land of the
other, the other may avoid the fine by pleading, that there be two of one name,
and the other R. D. levied the fine, and not he: And in l^ke manner if any
stranger levy a fine in the name of another that is owner of the Land, 34 H. 6.
19. Contr. ten. 19 H. 6. 44. because it is a matter of record, therefore he
has no other remedy in such case, but an Action of deceit.

Neither parties to fines, not their Heirs may plead in avoydance thereof, that
before the levying, and at the levying of the same, and since the demandant, or
plaintiff, or their Heirs, were always seized of the Lands contained in the
fine, or parcel thereof, St. de finibus 27 E. 1. ca. 1. 12 E. 4. 15. and 19.
yet by Fairfax, if tenant in tail, the remainder in Fee, levy a fine sur
cogcognizance de droit come ceo, etc. he in the remainder may aver the
continuance of possession, notwithstanding the fine, and Statute, because he is
neither the party, nor his Heir, and so may a feme covert, where her husband
sole levyeth the fine, 12 E. 4. 12.

The issue in tail may aver continuance of possession against a fine, sur
cognizance de droit tantum, or surrender, but not against a fine, sur
cognizance de droit come ceo* que il ad de son done, because that fine is
executed, and the other executory, 12 E. 4. 15. and 19. 11 H. 4. 85.

Of a Writ of Error.
A Writ of error to reverse a fine, lies where there is error in any fine, and
thereby not the record of the fine it self shall be removed, but the transcript
thereof, upon which transcript of the note of the fine, the plaintiff may
assign his errors: And if the Justices think, that the point assigned for
error, is error, they may send for the note of the fine, and reverse the same,
F. N. B. f. 20. f. As if a Baron and Feme levy a fine to an estranger, the feme
being within age, they may have a Writ of error to reverse the fine, for this
cause during her nonage. F. N. B. 21, d. 27. ass. pl. 17. 50. E. 3. 4. And
when a fine is to be reversed by error, the course is for the plaintiff in the
Writ, to have several Writs of error, one directed to the chief Justice of the
Court of Common Pleas, to certify the Record and Process of the fine, another
unto the Custos brevium of the same Court, to certify the transcript of the
foot of the fine, and the third unto the Chirographer, to certify the
transcript of the record, and process of the fine: the several forms, whereof
he as follows.

A Writ of Error directed unto the chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas.
OLiver, etc. To his beloved and faithful E. A. Knight greeting; Because in
the Record and Process; and also in the levying of a certain fine in our Court
before you, and your Associates, our Justices of the Bench at Westminster. in eight
days of Saint Michael last past, by our Writ of Covenant, between I. G. the
Elder Esquire, M. his wife, and I. G. the younger Gent. plaintiffs, and G. H.
deforcient, of the Manor of G. with the appurtenances, and of one Message, 15.
Cottages, 15. Tofts, 4. Barns, 15. Gardens, 2. Orchards, 200. Acres of Land,
80. Acres of Meadow, 100. Acres of Pasture, 6. Acres of Wood, 300. Acres of
Moor, and Common of pasture for all manner of Beasts, with the appurtenances in
G. in the County of York levied, manifest error has intervened unto the great
damage of him the said G. as by his plaint we have received, we willing in this
behalf, that the error if any shall be, may in a due manner be corrected, and
to the same G. full and speedy Justice be done, we command you that, the Record
and Process of the fine aforesaid, with all things concerning the same, which
in your custody are as it is said, to us under your Seal distinctly and openly
ye send and this Writ. So that we may have them in eight days of Saint
Hillary, wheresoever then we shall be in England, that looking into the Record,
and Process of the fine aforesaid, we may thereupon cause further to be done
for amending that error, that which of right, and according to the Law and
custom of our Commonwealth of England ought to be done, etc.

A Writ of error unto the Custos brevium of the Court of Common Pleas.
OLiver, etc. To his beloved T. S. Esquire, Keeper of his Writs of the Bench
greeting; Because in the Record and Process, and also in the levying of a
certain fine in our Court of the Bench at Westminster. in eight days of Saint
Michael last past, before E. A. Knight and his Associates our Justices of the
Bench aforesaid, by our Writ of Covenant between, etc. of etc. we command you
that the transcript of the foot of the fine aforesaid, with all things
concerning those which in your custody are as it is said, to us under your
Seal, etc. that looking into the transcript of the foot of the fine aforesaid,
etc.

A writ of error unto the Chirographer of Fines.
OLiver, etc. To his beloved T. C. Esquire his Chirographer in the Bench
greeting; Because in the Record and Process, and also in the levying of a
certain fine in our Court of the Bench at W. in eight days of Saint Michael
last past, before E. A. Knight, and his Associates our Justices of the Bench
aforesaid, by our Writ of Covenant between, etc. of, etc. we command you the
transcript of the Record and Process of the fine aforesaid, with all things
concerning those, which in your custody are as it is said, to us under your
Seal distinctly and openly ye send, and this Writ, etc. that looking into the
transcript of the Record and Process of the fine aforesaid, we may, etc.

And note that a Writ of Error is not maintainable by an Infant, to reverse a
fine for his Infancy, but during his Infancy, 50 E. 3. 4. 17 E. 3. 52. 78. 27.
lib. Ass. 53.

For what Errors, Fines, and Proclamations be not reversable.
NO Fines or Proclamations upon fines or common recoveries, shall be reversable
by Writ of Error, for false or incongrunous latin, razure, interlining,
misentring of any warrant of Attorney, or of any Proclamation, misreturning, or
not returning of the Sheriff, or other want of form of words, and not of matter
of substance, 23 Eliz. ca. 3.

Of error in the Proclamation of a fine.
IF error be in the Proclamation of a fine, they shall be reversed by Plea
without Writ of error, but that fine nevertheless remains of good force
still, for they are several matters of Record, yet if error be in the fine,
the Proclamations are void, because the fine is the first Record, whereupon the
Ploclamations depend, and sublato subjecto tollitur accidens, Plo. 266. a. Dyer
fol. 216. pa. 54. 4 Eliz.

Of a Certiorari.
IF a man have recovered, and before he have execution, the Records thereof be
removed into the receipt or treasury, the plaintiff may have a Certiorari out
of the Chancery to the Chamberlain and Treasurer, to remove the tenor of the
Record, and Process thence into the Chancery. And when it is there, it may be
sent thence by Mittimus into the Court whence it came, as the uper Bench, if it
came thence, or into the Commonplace, if it came thence, and there may
execution be sued, 37 H. 6. 16.

A Certiorari with a Mittimus to renew a fine, bearing date before the fine
come into the Chancery, is good enough, 1 R. 3. 4.

In a Writ of error to reverse a fine, the Record it self shall not be removed,
but the transcript thereof, because a Record which comes into the upper
Bench, shall not be remanded: And if the Judgment be affirmed, there is no
Chirographer to ingross the fine, 40 Ass. 19. 29. Ass. 43.

Yet 5. Mary it is holden that in a Writ of error upon a fine, the Record it
self shall be certified, so that no more Proclamations shall be made thereupon,
for if it be reversed, that ends all: and if the fine be affirmed, the Record
shall be sent into the Commonplace by Mittimus to be Proclaimed, and
engrossed; for if the transcript only should be removed, they might
nevertheless proceed in the Common place, B. tit. Rec. 79. Ideo quaere.

A Certiorari of the transcript of the foot of a Fine.
OLiver, etc. To the Treasurer, and Chancellors greeting; because for some
certain causes, we will to be certified, or willing for certain causes to be
certified, or for some certain causes to be certified, upon the tenor of the
foot of a certain fine levied in our Court before our Justices long ago, or
last itinerate at N. in (Com. tali) by our Writ, or in the Court of the
Sovereign Lord Chapter late King of England, etc. in the year, etc. before I. and
his Associates then Justices, etc. of the Bench by his Writ, between A.
Demandant, and B. Tenant, of one Message with the appurtenances in N. we
command you, that you search in the Feet of the fines of the same Iter
signifies a journey, or voyage, etc.
circuit at the time aforesaid levied, or of the fines before the aforesaid
Justices in the year aforesaid levied, which are in our Treasury under your
custody as they say, the transcript of the foot of the fine aforesaid to us
into our Chancery, under the Seal of our Exchequer distinctly and openly
without delay you send;

And this Writ. Test, etc.

Otherwise of the tenor of the note of a Fine.
OLiver, etc. To his beloved Clerk W. greeting; We willing, etc. upon the tenor
of the note of a certain fine levied, etc. Anno, etc. between A: demandant, and
C. Tenant, etc. we command you, that you search in the notes of the fines
remaining in your custody, a transcript of the note aforesaid, to us in our
Chancery under your Seal distinctly, and openly without delay, you send, and
this Writ T. etc.

Otherwise before Justices now of the Bench.
A Fine levied in our Court in the year, etc. before W. and his Associates then
our Justices of the Bench by our Writ, between, etc.

A Mittimus of the Transcript of a Fine out of the Chancery into the Common
place.
OLiver, etc. has sent to the Justices here his Writ close in these words:
Oliver, etc. To his Justices of the Bench greeting; the transcript of the foot
of a certain fine levied in the Court, etc. before R. H. and his Associates
then Justices, etc. of the Bench at Westminster. by his Writ between G. P. and I. his
wife plaintiffs and S. P. desorcient, of the Manor of C. with the appurtenances
to us in our Chancery of our mandate sent, to you we send, in these presents
intercluded, commanding that by the inspection aforesaid for the further
prosecution of I. L. and M. his wife being one, and T. U. and T. his wife being
another, and also of H. B. third Cozen and Heir of the aforesaid G. and I. of
their bodies be gotten, you cause to be done, that which of right, and
according to the Law and custom of our Commonwealth of England ought to be
done, witness my self at Westminster, the eighth day of I. in the year, etc.
The transcript of the foot of the fine, whereof mention is made in the Writ
aforesaid follows in these words: This is the final Concord made in the
Court of, etc. at Westminster. in eight days of Saint Michael, in the year, etc.
before R. H. W. B. P. M. W: H. L. T. and H. S. Justices and other faithful
then there present, between G. P. and I. his wife plaintiffs, by W. F. put in
the steed of them to Attorney in the fine.
gain or lose, and S. P. deforcient of the Manor of C. with the appurtenances,
whereof Plea of Covenant was summoned between them in the same Court, to wit,
that the aforesaid G. has recognized the aforesaid Manor with the
appurtenances to be the right of him the said S. as that which the same S. has
of the gift of the aforesaid G. And for this Recognizance, fine, and Concord,
the same S. has granted to the aforesaid G. and I. the aforesaid Manor with
the appurtenances, and that to them he has rendered in the same Court, To have
and to hold to the same G. and I. and the Heirs which the same G. of the body
of her the said I. shall beget, Render intail.
from the aforesaid S. and his Heirs for ever, yielding therefore by the year
one Rose at the Feast of the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, for all
service, consideration, and exaction unto the aforesaid S. and his Heirs
belonging. And Foreign service.
doing therefore to the chief Lords of that Fee, for the aforesaid S. and his
Heirs, all other services, which unto that Manor do belong: And if it happen,
that the aforesaid G. shall die without Remainder in tail.
Heir of the body of him the said I. begotten, then after the decease of them
the said G. and I. the Manor aforesaid, with the appurtenances, shall wholly
remain to I. Brother of the same G. and to the Heirs of his body begotten, to
hold of the aforesaid S. and his Heirs by the aforesaid services as aforesaid
for ever. And if it happen that the aforesaid W. shall dye without Heir of his
body begotten, then after the decease of him the said W. the aforesaid Manor,
with the appurtenances, shall wholly remain to I. Brother of the same W. and
the Heirs of his body begotten, to hold of the aforesaid S. and his Heirs by
the aforesaid services, as aforesaid for ever ^ And if it happen that the
aforesaid I. shall die without Heir of his body begotten, then after the
decease of him the said I. the aforesaid Manor with the appurtenances, shall
wholly remain to E. Brother of the same I. and to the Heirs of his body
begotten, to hold of the aforesaid S. and his Heirs by the aforesaid services,
as aforesaid for ever. And if it happen, that the aforesaid E. shall die
without Heir of his body begotten, then after the decease of him the said E.
the aforesaid Manor with the appurtenances, shall wholly revert unto the
aforesaid S. and his Reverter.
Heirs, quite from other Heirs of them the said G. I. W. I. and E. to hold of
the chief Lords of that Fee, by the services which unto that Manor do belong,
for ever.

A Mittimus.
OLiver, etc. To the Justices of the Bench greeing; We send to you under the
foot of our Seal, etc. or thus, The transcript of the foot, or thus, The tenor
of the foot of a certain fine levied in the Court of, etc. Anno, etc. before W.
and his Associates then Justices of, etc. of the Bench at Westminster by our
Writ, between I. plaintiff, and W. deforcient de tanto, etc. whom before us in
our Chancery, we have caused to come to you, we send under the foot of our
Seal, that in the plaint which is before you by our Writ, between I. son of I.
demandant and E. tenant, of the same Message, etc. you may be able the more
securely to proceed, etc. T. etc.

A Mittimus for the foot of a Fine.
THe Protector to his Bailiffs of S. greeting; Because in the levying of diverse
fines before I. S. and W. W. late Bailiffs of the Town of S. between W. R. and
M. his wise plaintiffs and W. T. deforcient of eight Messuages, etc. and of ten
shillings of rent with the appurtenances in S. in the year, etc. according to
the liberties to Burgesses of the Town aforesaid by the Charters of former
Kings of England our predecessors, granted to be levied, manifest error did
intervene, as by the inspection of the tenours of the fines aforesaid, and also
of the record and process of the levying thereof, which before us afterward at
the suit of W. M. and Error hy the Heir upon a fine.
H. W. of S: Cozens and Heirs of the aforesaid M. we caused to come, to us
appears. And we in our Court before us, for the errors found in the levying
of the fines aforesaid, and in the record, and process of the same, we have
considered, that the feet of the fines aforesaid from files of the fines
aforesaid be drawn of and cancelled; And therefore we command you, that the
feet of the fines aforesaid, which are in your custody, you send before us
(tali die) wheresoever we shall then ^e, etc. cancelled, according to our
consideration abovesaid. And have ye there this Writ. T. etc.

Whether any but he which reserveth a fine, may reap benefit thereby.
IF the estate contained in a fine, be once within 15. years after
Proclamations lawfully defeated: That party has there by lost his whole estate
both against him, which did revers the same, and all others which had right, or
title paramount, and made no claim within five years: Albeit he which brought
his Action have not Judgeme^t and execution within seven years after the
Proclamations, Plow. f. 358. b.

In like manner, if there be tenant for life, the remainder for life, the
remainder in Fee, and the first tenant for life alien, and the alience levy a
fine with Proclamations, and the second tenant for life enter, or claim (as he
may) he defeateth the fine against himself, and him in the remainder also,
Plow. fo. 359. a. 7 Eliz.

Warrantia Chartae.
A Writ of Warrantia Chartae, lies where a man by deed of grant, Feoffment,
release, or confirmation, or fine, or by exchange, binds himself and his
Heirs to warrant the Land to another, who being tenant of the Land is impleaded
for the Land, or rent out of the same, in an Assise, or in a Scire facias upon
a fine, or in any other Action real, wherein the tenant may not vouch, he may
sue a Warrantia Chartae against him and his Heirs, which made warranty. And for
a tenant by homage auncestrell, or any paiticular tenant upon reservation of
rent, or for egalty of services upon partition, Fitz. Not. fol. 134. d. f. g.
h. Fitz. Not. 135. c. 31 E. 3. 8 E. 4. 11.

The Writ of Warra. Chartae.
THe Protector, etc. That justly, etc. he warrant to D. one Message with the
appurtenances in R. which he holds, and of him claymeth to hold, and whereof
he has his Charter as he says. And if, etc. or thus. The Manor of N. with the
appurtenances, and the advowson of the same Town which he holds, etc. usque
ihi, whereof he has his Charter, or the Charter of R. Father, or Mother, or
other ancestor of the aforesaid H. whose Heir he is, as he says. And unless,
etc.

Of him, that or the same A. warrant to the aforesaid D. the Manors of N. and
R. and the hundreds of F. and G. with the appurtenances, and the advowson of
the Church of N. and therefore we command you, etc.

But if a man infeoffe another with warranty by deed, and the Feoffee infeoffe
another, and take estate from him in Fee, the first warranty is determined,
because he is now in, of a new estate, Fitz. Not. fo. 135. a.

So if A. disseise B. and enfeoffe C. with warranty, who infeoffeth D. with
warranty, upon whom an estranger enters, in whose possession B. the disseisor
releaseth his right, now all former warranties are extinct. And albeit D. is
impleaded, yet shall he not have warrantia Chartae, because he is in of another
estate by wrong, Fitz. Not. 135. g. 11 H. 6. 41. 22 H. 6. 22.

Release by Jointenant.
If there be three joint tenants, and the one release to the rest, they may
deraign the former warranty by vowcher, or warrantia Charitae, for they be in a
3. part by the release, 40 E. 3. 41.

Villenage.
Warrantia Chartae lies against a villain, 48 E. 3. 17.

The Writ of Warrantia Chartae, must be sued hanging the principal Plea, and
before Judgment: as of Assise, or Entry in the nature of assise, 48 E. 3. 2^.
Registr. orig. fo. 158. a. for then if the warranter do die, yet the Writ shall
not abate, but his Heir shall be resummoned, to answer upon the same, yet may a
warrantia Chartae be sued before he be impleaded, quia timet implacitari, and
the plaintiff shall recover in value pro loco and tempore, of such Lands as the
defendant had at the purchasing of the Writ, Fitz. Na. f. 134. E. 12 H. 4. 12.
21 H. 6. 41. 22 H. 6. 22. 24 E 3. 35. But he must not have execution, but if
afterward he be put out by Judgment, he shall have his warranty upon his first
recovery, 21 H. 6. 41. 21 H. 6. 22. 12 H. 4. 12.

Non tenure:
In warrantia Charitae, it is a good Plea for the defendant, that hanging the
Plea, the demandant in the principal Plea has entered upon the plaintiff,
being then tenant of the Land, or that the plaintiff in this action, had
nothing in the Land the day of the first Writ purchased, nor at any time after,
21 H. 6. 49. 3 E. 3. 4. 5 E. 3. 5.

County.
War. Chartae may be brought in any County, if the deed bear not date in a
place certain, 31 E. 3.

Tenant in Common.
Tenants in Common may join in Warrantia Chartae, 28 E. 3. 90.

Count by Baron and Feme upon a fine with warranty.
I. H. Son and Heir of Isabel, which was the wife of R. was summoned to answer
I. T. and I. his wife of a Plea, that they warrant to them one Message, with
the appurtenances in S. which of him he holds, and of him claymeth to hold,
and whereof the Charter of Isabel Mother of the aforesaid I. H. whose Heir he
is, he has, etc. and whereof, etc. he says, that a certain fine he levied in
the Court of the Lord Protector now in 8. days of Saint Hillary in the year,
etc. before T. B. and his Associates then Justices of, etc. of the Bench,
between them the said I. T. and I. plaintiffs, and R. of B. and the aforesaid
Isabell then his wife deforcients, of the Message aforesaid with the
appurtenances, among other Lands and tenements by Inter alia per nomen.
the name of, etc. with the appurtenances in S. in the County aforesaid, by
which fine the aforesaid R. and I. have granted for themselves, and the Heirs
of him the said I. that 4. Acres of land, A fine of the reversion.
with the appurtenances of the aforesaid tenement, which G. and M. his wife
held for term of the life of her the said M. of the inheritance of the
aforesaid Isabel in S. aforesaid, the day that this Concord was made, and which
after the decease of her the said M. unto the aforesa. R. and I. and the Heirs
of her the said Isabell ought to have reverted, after the decease of her the
said M. wholly should remain to the afore-I. and I. and his Heirs aforesaid, to
hold together with the aforesaid tenement, which to them by that fine remained,
of the aforesaid R. and Isab. and the Heirs of her the said I. by the aforesaid
services, as aforesaid for ever. And Tail.
the same R. and Isab: likewise have granted for themselves, and the Heirs of
her the said I. that they would warrant to the aforesaid I. and I. and their
Heirs the aforesaid tenements with the appurtenances, as aforesaid, against all
men for ever. And if it should happen, that the same I. and I. should die
without Heirs of their bodies issuing, then after the decase of them the said
I. and I. the aforesaid tenements with the appurtenances, as aforesaid, should
wholly revert unto the aforesaid R. and I. and the Heirs of her the said I.
quite from other Heirs of the aforesaid I. and I. to hold of the chief Lords of
that Fee, by the services which unto the aforesaid tenement do belong for ever,
and the aforesaid R. and I. afterward died, whereby unto them the said I. T.
and I. belonged to have of the aforesaid I. H. as son and heir of him the said
I. his warranty aforesaid, And one I. R. arraigned a certain assise of novell
disseisin, before T. W. and I. Justices of the Lord Protector now, at the
Assizes in the County aforesaid assigned to be taken, against them the said I.
T. and I. of the aforesaid tenementse and the same I. T. and I. have often
required him the said I. H. as son and Heir of her the said Isab. to warrant to
the same I. T. and I. the aforesaid tenements, and the same I. H. those
tenements so to warrant has denied. and as yet does deny, whereupon they say,
that they are the worse, and have damage unto the value of 100 l. And thereupon
they bring suit, etc.

A Count upon a deed with warranty.
I. T. was summoned to answer H. W. of a Plea, that he render to him, one
Message, etc. with the appurtenances in B. which of him he holds, and of him
does claim to hold, and whereof he has his Charter, and whereupon, etc. he
says, that whereas the aforesaid I. was seized of the tenements aforesaid,
with the appurtenances in his demeasne as of Fee, and so thereof being seized,
by his certain Charter, which the same H. here in the Court brings forth, the
date whereof at B. (tali die Anno. etc. did give, grant, and confirm, to the
same H. the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances Inter alia per nomen.
amongst other Lands, etc. by the name (as in the Deed, etc.) to have to the
same H. His Heirs and assigns for ever, and did bind himself, and his Heirs,
to warrant to the same H. his Heirs and Assigns, the tenements aforesaid, with
the appurtenances against all men for ever: And the same H. by virtue of that
gift, o^ the tenements aforesaid was seized in his demeasne as of Fee, and one
T. arraigned against him the said H. an assise of novel disseisin of the
aforesaid Message and Lands with the appurtenances before I. M. and I. etc.
Justices of the Lord Protector assigned to take the Assizes in the County
aforesaid, whereby the same H. (that Assizes depending) often did require the
aforesaid I. that he, the aforesaid Message, etc. with the appurtenances to
the same H. would warrant, and the same I. that Message, etc. to the same H.
hitherto to warrant has denied, and yet does deny, whereupon he says, etc.
and thereupon produces his suit, etc.

Confession.
And the aforesaid I. T. in his proper person comes and defends the
aforesaid wrong, etc. and says that he cannot deny, but that the Charter
aforesaid is the deed of him the said I. nor but that he gave by that Charter
to the aforesaid H. the tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, nor but
that he was held to warrant those tenements to the same H. in form as the same
H. above against him has declared. Therefore Judgment.
it is considered, that the aforesaid I. should warrant to the aforesaid H. the
Message aforesaid and Lands with the appurtenances, for place and time, etc.
therefore the same I. is in mercy, etc.

E. W. Gentleman was summoned to answer I. B. Gent. and E. B. his Son of a
Plea, that he warrant to them six Messuages, three Gardens, etc. three Orchards
with the appurtenances in the City of B. which they hold of him, and of him
claim to hold, and whereof they have his Charter, etc. And whereupon the same
I. and E. by H. C. their Attorney say, that whereas the aforesaid F. was lately
seized of the tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances in his demeasne as of
Fee, And so thereof being seized, a certain fine he levied in the Court of the
Lord Protector now, here to wit, at Westminster, in eight days of Saint
Michael in the year, etc. before I. D. H. B. A. B. and R. W. Justices, etc. And
afterward from the day of Easter in fifteen days in the year, etc. there
granted, and recorded, before the same Justices, and other of the said Lord
Protectors faithful then there present, between the aforesaid I. and E.
plaintiffs, and the aforesaid F. deforcient of the tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, whereof Plea of Covenant was summoned between them in the same
Court, to wit, that the aforesaid F. did recognize the tenements aforesaid with
the appurtenances, to be the right of him the said E. as those which the same
E. and I. then had of the gift of the aforesaid F. and those he did remise, and
quite claim from himself, and his Heirs to the aforesaid I. and E. and the
Heirs of him the said E. for ever. And furthermore the same F. granted for
himself and his Heirs; that he would warrant to the aforesaid I. and E. and the
Heirs of him the said E. the aforesaid tenements with the appurtenances,
against all men for ever: which said Fine in form aforesaid levied, was had and
levied to the use and behoof of the same I. and E. and the Heirs of the same E.
for ever, under pretext whereof the same I. and E. were seized of the same
Tenements with the appurtenances, scarsly the same E. in his demesne as of Fee,
and the aforesaid I. in his demesne as of freehold. And so thereof being seized
one H. O. before the Mayor, and Sheriff of the Town aforesaid, on Wednesday (to
wit) the 28. day of April in the year, etc. at Guild Hall of the City
aforesaid, arraigned a certain assise of fresh force, according to the custom
of that City, in the nature of an Assise of novell disseisin at the Common Law,
against the same I. B. and E. of the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, whereby the same I. and E. hanging that Assise often required
the aforesaid F. that he, the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, to
the same I. B. and E. and the Heirs of the same E. for ever would warrant. And
the same F. those Tenements with the appurtenances, to the same I. and E.
hitherto in form aforesaid to warrant has denied, whereupon they say, that
they are the worse, and have damage to the value of two hundred pounds, and
thereupon they produce their suit, etc.

And the aforesaid F. in his proper person comes and defends the force and
injury, when etc. and says, that he cannot deny the action aforesaid of I. and
E. aforesaid, nor but that the Fine aforesaid, in form aforesaid, was levied,
nor but that he by that fine was held to warrant the Tenements aforesaid with
the appurtenances to the aforesaid I. and E. and the Heirs of her the said E.
for ever in form as the same I. and E. above against him have declared,
Therefore it is considered, that the aforesaid F. do warrant to the aforesaid
I. and E. and the Heirs of her the said E. for ever, the Tenements aforesaid
with the appurtenances, for place and time, etc. And nothing of mercy to the
aforesaid F. because he came the first day by his, etc.

W. C. Esquire was summoned to answer, E. B. Gent: of a Plea that he warrant to
him 54. Acres of Land, 40. Acres of pasture, and 6. Acres of wood with the
appurtenances in E. which he holds, and of him claims to hold, and whereof
he has his Charter, etc. And whereupon the same F. in his proper person says,
that whereas he was seized of the aforesaid Tenements with the appurtenances in
his demesne as of Fee (and so thereof being seized the aforesaid W. by the name
of W. C. of I. in the County of N. otherwise called W. C. of W. in the County
of Suffolk Esquire, the tenth day of.I in the year, etc. by his certain
writing, which the same E. with the Seal of the aforesaid W. Signed here in
Court brings forth, the date whereof is the same day and year, reciting by
the same writing, that whereas the same W. C. by the name of W. C of I. in the
County of N. otherwise called W. C. of W. in the County of S. Esquire, together
with his Brother C. C. of Lincolnes Inn, in the County of Middlesex Gent. by a
certain Indenture, between the aforesaid W. and C. of the one part, and E. B.
of Lincolnes Inn aforesaid Gent. of the other party, bearing date the tenth
day of F. in the year, etc. bargained, and sold to the aforesaid E. all his
estate and interest, of and in those parcels of Land, containing by estimation
seven Acres, whether it be more, or less there accounted, lying and being in
the Parish of E. in the County of R. now or late in the tenure, or occupation
of one W. S. or his assigns, of which said parcels, one parcel called little
S. otherwise called Q and containing by estimation six Acres, whether it be
esteemed more or less, to have and to hold all the aforesaid Lands, and all
other the premises, with all and singular their appurtenances to the aforesaid
E. B. his Heirs and Assigns, to the sole and proper use and behoof of him the
said E. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, as by the aforesaid Indenture more
fully appears; and whereas also the same W. afterward, by the name of W. C.
of I. in the County of N. Esquire, otherwise called W. C. of W. in the County
of S. Esquire, together with his aforesaid Brother C. C. of Lincolnes Inn in
the County of M. Gent. by a certain Indenture, between the aforesaid W. C. of
the one part, and the aforesaid E. B. of Lincolnes Inn in the County of M.
Gent. of the other part made, bearing date the 19. day of October, in the year,
etc. also bargained and sold to the aforesaid E. all the Lands, Woods, and
Woodlands, and other hereditaments underwritten, by whatsoever name, or
whatsoever names they are called, reputed, or known, viz. all those Lands
called S. otherwise called Q. otherwise called great Q. and the Brom otherwise
S. and the Brom and all other Lands and hereditaments whatsoever, containing
by estimation 15. Acres, whether it be there accounted more or less, by
whatsoever name, or whasoever names the same he called, reputed, or known, now,
or lately in the tenure, or occupation of the same T. B. by the demise of one
I. C. of I. aforesaid Esquire then lately dead, which said parcels do lie, and
are in E. in the County of R. And all those Lands now, or lately in the tenure,
or occupation of one P. W. of E. in the aforesaid County of R. lying and being
in E. aforesaid, by reason of a demise to the same P. made by the aforesaid I.
C. containing by estimation five Acres, whether it be accounted more or less,
and also all those Lands now, or lately in the tenure, or occupation of one I.
I. by the demise of the aforesaid I. C. to the same I. I. made: containing by
estimation 48. Acres, whether it be esteemed more or less, lying and being in
diverse several parcels, in E. aforesaid, whereof some parcels are called, or
known by the name of P. otherwise called, B. some other parcels thereof are
called, or known by the name of R. one other parcel thereof, is called, or
known by the name of S. Dame. And also all those Woods, and Woodlands below
specified, viz. E. W. containing by estimation two Acres, whether more or less
it be there esteemed, the woodland, lying at knowel gate in E. aforesaid,
containing by estimation, one Acre and three rods, whether it be more or less
there esteemed, all which are lying and being in E: aforesaid, to have and to
hold all the aforesaid Lands, Woods, and Woodlands, and all other the premises,
with all and singular their appurtenances, to the aforesaid E. B. his Heirs and
Assigns to the sole and proper use and behoof of him the said E. B. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever. And whereas also the same W. together with the aforesaid
C. his Brother afterward (to wit,) in the Court of, etc. here at Westminster
in eight days of Saint Michael in the year, etc. in part of fulfilling of the
grants and covenant in the aforesaid Indenture specified, recognized all the
aforesaid Lands, Woods, and hereditaments, with their appurtenances, by the
name, or names of 54. Acres of Land, 40. Acres of pasture, and 6. Acres of Wood
with the appurtenances, in E. aforesaid to be the right of the aforesaid E. B.
as those which the same E. B. then had of the gift of the aforesaid W. and the
aforesaid C. his Brother, and those then he remised, and quite claimed from
himself and his Heirs to the aforesaid E. and his Heirs for ever, and the
aforesaid W. by the same writing here in Court brought forth, then approved,
ratified, and confirmed to the same E. B. in his full and peaceable possession
and seisin of the premises being, all his right, title, estate, and Interest of
and in the premises, all which Lands aforesaid pasture, woods, woodlands, and
all and singular other the premises, with all and singular their appurtenances
to the aforesaid E: his Heirs and Assigns, to the sole and proper use and
behoof of him the said E. his Heirs and assigns for ever. And hereupon the
aforesaid W. C. by that writing, did oblige himself and his Heirs, to warrant
to the same E. his Heirs and assigns for ever, all the aforesaid lands, woods,
and woodlands, and all other the prem^ses with their appurtenances, against all
men for ever, as by the aforesaid writing here in Court produced more fully it
appears. And the same E. says, that the aforesaid tenements in the Writ
aforesaid specified, are the same tenements mentioned in the aforesaid writing
here in Court produced, and no other, nor divided, and that one H. R. of the
tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances in form aforesaid, being seized,
prosecuted against him the said E. B. a certain Writ of the Lord Protector of
entry upon disseisin in le quibus of the tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, whereby the same F. (hanging that Writ) has often hitherto
required the aforesa. W. C. that he the tenements with the appurtenances to the
same E. would warrant, and the same W. the aforesaid tenements with the
appurtenances to the same E. hitherto to warrant has denied, and as yet does
deny, whereupon he says, that he is the worse, and has damage to the value of
300 l: and thereupon he produces suit, etc.

And the aforesaid W. C. by T. B. his Attorney comes, and desendeth the force
and injury when, etc. and says, that he cannot deny the action aforesaid of E.
aforesaid, nor, but that the aforesaid writing here in Court produced, is the
deed of him the said W. C. nor, but that he by the same writing, has confirmed
to the aforesaid E. the tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, nor, but
that he the aforesaid W. by that writing is held to warrant the tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances to the same E. in form as the same E. above
against him has declared, Therefore it is considered, that the aforesaid W. C.
do warrant to the aforesaid E. the tenements aforesaid with the apputenances,
for place and time, etc. And nothing of mercy of him the said W. because he
came the first day by summoners, etc. Hill. 13. To. etc. let the like entry be
made against C. C. mutatis mutandis. F. W. Gent was summoned to answer W. R. of
a Plea, that he warrant to him eight Messuages of 6. Gardens, 3. Orchards, 4.
Acres of Land, 6. Acres of Meadow, and 2. Acres of Pasture, with the
appurtenances in B. and B. which he holds, and of him claims to hold, and
whereof he has his Land, etc. And whereupon the same W. by W. C. his Attorney
says, that the aforesaid E. was lately seized of the tenements aforesaid, with
the appurtenances in his demesne as of Fee, and so thereof being seized, the
same F. the 19. day of S. in the year, etc. at B. aforesaid, by his certain
Charter, which the same W. R. with the Seal of the aforesaid F. signed here in
Court produces, the date whereof is the same day and year, gave and granted
the tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances to the aforesaid W. R. to have
to him and his Heirs for ever, and furthermore the aforesaid F. by the Charter
aforesaid, the tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, to the same W. and
his Heirs, against all men did warrant, as by that Charter more fully it
appears, by virtue of which said gift and grant, the same W. was, and as yet
is seized of the tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, in his demesne as
of Fee, and so thereof being seized, one D. D. arraigned against him the said
W. an Assise of novel disseisin of the aforesaid tenements with the
appurtenances, before I. C. one of the Barons of the Exchequer, of the Lord
Protector, and F. R. one of the Sergeants at Law of him the said Protector,
Justices of the same Lord Protector, at the Assizes in the County aforesaid,
assigned to be taken according to the form of the Statute, etc. whereby the
same W. R. hanging that assise often required the aforesaid F. that he the
aforesaid tenements with the appurtenances, to the same W. would warrant, and
the same F. those tenements with the appurtenances to the same W. hitherto to
warrant has denied, and as yet does deny, and whereupon he says, that he is
the worse, and has damage to the value of a hundred pounds, and thereupon he
brings suit, etc.

OF RECOVERIES FOR Assurances, etc.
IN every recovery are to be regarded the demandant, the Tenant of the Land,
and the vouchee as the efficient causes thereof. The Land demanded, as the
matter, which must as certainly be set down in Writs of entry, as in Writs of
Covenant, whereupon Fines are levied. The end and effect of such recoveries, is
to discontinue, and destroy estates tails, remainders, and reversions, and bar
the former owners thereof.

The demandant, is he that brings the Writ of entry, and may be termed the
recoverer.

The tenant is he against whom the Writ is brought, and may be termed the
recoveree.

The vouchee is he whom the tenant voucheth, or calls to warranty for the
Land in demand.

And such persons may be demandants, Tenants, and vouchees, in these
recoveries, as may be cognizors, and cognizees, in Writs of Covenant, and by
such names, mutatis mutandis. Saving if that any recovery be had against tenant
in tail, the reversion, or remainder being in the Kings of England, their
progenitors, and Successors, such recovery will neither bar the issue in tail
of his entry, nor discontinue his estate, nor pluck such reversion, or
remainder out of them, 34 H. 8. ca. 20. Quaere tamen si tiel recovery bar issue
in tail, during the continuance of the esiate tail. Dyer fo. 132. pl. 1.

Item, before such persons, by such means, and in such manner may warrants of
Attorney be acknowledged and certified, as fines knowledged in the Country,
saving that the recognizance of warrants of Attorney, may be taken by any
Justice or Sergeant without a Writ of Dedimus potestatem. And fines must be
paid upon Writs of Entry, as upon Writs of Covenant. And all such Writs of
entry, must be signed by the Protectors Attorney before they can be Sealed.

In a Recovery, with double voucher, the fine must be sued first, to make him
tenant at the time of the Writ of Entry brought, for every Writ of entry, must
always be brought against him, that is tenant of the Freehold of the Land
demanded at the time of the Writ brought, 18. R. 2. and Dyer fo. 252. pl. 98.
for that, that the estate of the tenant in tail which is vouchee. is barred in
respect of the Assets only, which is, or may be recovered in value, Pl. Bassets
verse Manxell, fo. 11. a. and of execution sued by the tenant against him.

And if the tenant have but an estate for life, or in dower, or by the
Courtesy, then to have a good recovery thereof, it is meet that such tenant
make a conditional surrender of his estate to him in the reversion, or
remainder, to the end he may be a present Tenant of the inheritance, and then
to bring the Writ of entry against him, and after that the recovery is
executed, the particular tenant for breach of the condition may enter and enjoy
his Term, notwithstanding such surrender.

In a recovery with a single voucher, are included two Recoveries, viz. one at
the suit of the demandant against the Tenant, and another at the suit of the
tenant against the vouchee. And if it be with a double voucher, there are
incuded in it three recoveries, one by the demandant against the Tenant, one
other by the tenant against the vouchee, and the third by the first vouchee,
against the second vouchee.

And in a recovery, with a treble voucher are included, 4. recoveries, whereof
three are such as were last mentioned, the fourth is a recovery by the second
vouchee against the third, and in these recoveries, the demandant has
judgment to recover the Land against the tenant, and the tenant has likewise
Judgment to recover in value against the vouchee; and if it be with a double
voucher, the first voucher has also the like Judgment to recover in value
against the second; and if it be with a treble voucher, the second vouchee has
the like Judgment against the third. And the record also makes mention of the
execution of the Judgment against the tenant by Entry, or a Writ of Habere
fac. seisinam accordingly.

And when such Recovery is so executed, the uses agreed upon, do forthwith
arise out of the Lands, Tenements, etc. so recovered according to the mutual
agreement of the parties.

The scope of a common Recovery, with a single voucher is to bar the tenant and
his Heirs of such only estate tail which then is in him, to bar others of such
estates, as they have of any reversion expectant, or remainder dependant upon
the same. And of all Leases and encumbrances derived out of such reversions, or
remainders.

The scope of a Common Recovery with a double voucher, is to bar the first
voucher and his Heirs; of every such estate as at any time was in the same
voucher, or any of his Ancestors, whose Heir he is, of such estate, and all
other persons of such right to a reversion or remainder, as were thereupon at
any time expectant, or dependant, and of all Leases, Charges, and encumbrances
derived out of any such reversion, or remainder, and that will be also a
perpetual bar of such estate, whereof the tenant was then seized of in
reversion, or remainder, expectant, or dependant upon the same; etc.

The scope of a common recovery with a treble voucher, is to make a perpetual
bar of the estates of the tenant, and of every such estate of inheritance, as
at any time had been in the first or second vouchee, or any of them, or either
of their ancestors, whose Heirs he or they are, of such estate, and as well of
every reversion thereon dependant, as also of all Leases, Estates, Charges, and
Encumbrances, derived out of any such reversion, or remainder.

Of What things Writs of Entry may be brought, and by what means.
PRecipe quod reddat lies of one Acre of Land covered with water, or of an
Acre of Land, 12 H. 7. f. 4. of a water pit, 10 Ed. 3. and 14. E. 3. 482. Fitz.
Not. br. fo. 191. H. and of a passage beyond the water, Fitz. Na. br. fo. 191.
I. of a Bailywick, 34 E. 3. 423. of an office, 27 H. 8. f. 12. of the Advowson
of a Church, or of the fourth part of Tithes, 34 E. 3. of a Portion of Tithes,
Dyer fo. 84. pl. 83. of a certain parcel of Land, Dyer fo. 84. pl. 83. of the
wardship of Land, and of an Heir, or of the wardship of Land, Register 161. 22
E. 3. fo. 19.

Precipe quod reddat lies of all manner of Ecclesiastical, or spiritual
profits: as of a Rectory Vicarage, Portions, Pensions, Tithes, etc. by the
Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 7. of all and all manner of Tithes, greater, mixed, and
lesser within the Town and Hamlet of B. in the County of A. by whatsoever mean
growing happening and yearly renewing, etc. Thel. li. 8. ca. 9. 8. 2. of the
fourth part of disines, and offerings of the Church of S. P. etc. 16 E. 3. In
old time de hida terrae per Glanvile, de carucatu terrae 4 E. 3. 161. de bovat.
terrae, 6 E. 3. 291. of 6. foot of Land in length, and four foot in breadth,
14. Ass. 13.

A Precipe quod reddat lies of a Toft, and of the site of a Mill, 14 E. 3: of
the Hundred of C. and of the Bailywick of B. 34 E. 1. 3 E. 3. of pasture for 6.
oxen 3 E. 3. fo. 23. 4 E. 2. of a Rod of Land, 3 E. 5. of an Advowson, 34 E. 1.
of a certain portion of Land, 11 H. 4. fo. 40. 5 H. 7. fo. 9. of the moiety of
one Rod of Land, 41 E. 3. of a Shop. Registr. fo. 2. a. of 4. Acres of Heath,
11 Ass. 13, of turbary by the name of More 8 E. 3. fo. 387. and it lies in a
Town, and not in a Hamlet, 8 E. 3. fo. 55. 7 E. 3. 3. 6.

Of what things a Writ of Entry lies not.
A Praecipe quod reddat lies not of a ditch, nor of a Pool, nor of a
Fish Pond, 8 E. 3. 381. nor of the Advowson of the Tithes of one wayn-land.
Registr. fo. 29. nor of Common of pasture, 27 H. 8. fo. 12. of estovers, 2 E.
3. of Homage and Fealty, nor of services to be done, 6 E. 2.

A Praecipe quod reddat lies not de Boveat Marisci, 13 E. 3. fo. 3. of a ridge
of Land. E. 1. for the incertainty, because a felon, or a ridge, which is a
Land, sometime contains an Acre, sometime half an Acre, sometime more, and
sometimes less, It lies not of a Garden, Cottage, or Croft, 14 Ass. 13. 8 H.
6. 3. 22 E. 4. 13. of a Rod of Land, 41. 43. 13 E. 3. of a Quarrey, of a Mine,
of a Market, 13 E. 3. for they lie not in demesne, but in gain, nor of an upper
Chamber, 3 H. 6. fo: 1.

A Writ of Entry ought not to contain one self thing twice, as a Message, and
a house parcel of the same Message, 3 E. 4. fo. 28. 46 E. 3. 26. Nor to name
a Town and a Hamlet, within the same Town, 22 E. 3. fo. 14. 41 E. 3. fo. 22.

In every warrant of Attorney, it is good to put two Atturneys at the least for
fear of death.

In a County Palatine, as Lancaster, Duresme, Chester, etc. may be put in a
warrant, one Attorney, and one of the Justices Clerks.

If the Writ of Entry be returnable Crastino Martini, the Writ of Summons ad
war. thereupon must bear test from that return of Crastino Martini, and be
returnable, 9. returns, after the return of the Writ of enter inclusive, that
is, accounting Crastino Mar. for one of the 9. returns, and tres Paschae, which
is the 9. return after Crasti. Martini for another, And the Test of the Writ
of seisin must be the day of that ninth return, and be returnable 15. days
after. Then the Writ of seisin may be retutned that seisin was delivered by
virtue thereof to the demandant, by the Sheriff of the County, where the Lands
lie, upon any day (not being Sunday) between the Test and return of the said
Writ of seisin. Then the Writs of Enter, Summons, and Seisin, must be returned
and field, with the Custos brevium, and the Judgment entered by the
Prothonatory, and the warrants of Attorney by the Clerk of the warrants.

If a single Recovery, and a Fine be against the tenant, the Writ of Entry must
bear date, and test before the Writ of Covenant, and be returned before.

If a Writ of Covenant be brought against the tenant, and a Writ of Enter
against the demandant; then the Writ of Covenant must bear date, and be
returned before the Writ of Enter, and this is called a double voucher.

A Certiorari to the Executor of the Justice before whom the warrrants were
acknowledged.
OLiver, etc. to his beloved I. R. executor of the testament of Fr. R. lately
one of our Justices of the Bench, greeting; We being willing for certain causes
to be certified, as well upon a certain warrant of Attorney, by which H. S. did
put in his stead, W. B. and R. C. jointly and severally against R. P. otherwise
W. and R. H. of a Plea of Land, in the County of E. as upon one other warrant
of Attorney, whereby H. L. and I. L. whom the aforesaid H. S. called to
warranty, did put in their places A. B. and F. R. jointly and severally against
the aforesaid R. and R. H. of a plea of Land in the said County of E. by the
aforesaid F. R. lately taken and in your Custody being by reason of the
execution of the testament aforesaid as it is said. We command you, that the
warrants aforesaid to our Justices of the Bench at Westminster under your Seal
distinctly and openly without delay you send, and this Writ; that the same
Justices looking into the warrants aforesaid further in our Writ of Enter
hanging before our aforesaid Justices at Westminster, between the aforesaid R.
and R. H. and the aforesaid H. and S. of one Message, etc. with the
appurtenances in T. and D. in the County aforesaid, and process thereof may
cause to be done that which of right, and according to the Custom of our
Commonwealth of England ought to be done, witness my self at Westminster the
day of (...) in the year, etc.

It is returned thus.
THe answer of the within named I. R. unto this Writ.

The execution of this Writ appears in a certain Schedule to this Writ
annexed.

York ss.
Command H. S. that justly, etc. he render to R. P, otherwise W. C. and R. H.
one Message, etc. with the appurtenances in T. and D. which he claims, etc:

York ss.
H. S. puts in his place W. B. and R. C. jointly and severally against R. P.
otherwise W. and R. H. of a Plea of Land.

Taken and knowledged at W. in the County of Y. the 18. day of Feb. in the
year, etc.

I. R.

A Recovery with single voucher.
York. ss.
COmmand G. C. Esquire, that justly, etc. he render to R. C. and R. I. one
Message, and four Acres of Land, with the appurtenances in T. which he
claims, etc. and into which, etc. And unless, etc.

G. C. puts in his place N. M. and M. M. his Atturneys jointly and severally
against R. C. and R. I. of a Plea of Land.

A Recovery with double voucher.
Derb. ss.
COmmand N. L. and M. his wife that justly, etc. they render to T. S. and T. C.
the Manors of N. M. and P. with the appurtenances, and 30. Messuages, 30.
Tofts, 5. Mills, 30. Gardens, 30. Orchards, 100. Acres of Land, 1000. Acres of
Meadow, 500. Acres of pasture, 40. Acres of Wood, 1000. Acres of Moor, 200.
Acres of Ling and Heath, and 3. pounds rent with the appurtenances in N. M. P.
P. and B. which they claim to be their inheritance, and into which the same N.
and M. H. have not enter, but after the disseisin, which H. H. thereof unjustly
and without judgment has made to the aforesaid T. and T. within 30. years now
last past, etc. as it is said, whereupon they complain, etc. And unless etc.

Derb. ss. N. L. and M. his wife do put in their place T. B. and W. B. their
Atturneys jointly and severally against T. S. and T. C. of a Plea of Land to
gain, or loss. W. B. and T. F. whom N. L. and M. Derb. ss.
his wife do call to warranty do put in their place, P. P. and Q. Q their
Atturneys jointly and severally against T. S. and T. C. of a Pea of Land to
gain and lose.

A Recovery with a treble voucher.
Essex ss.
COmmand R. B. and C. S. that justly, etc* they render to A: T. Esquire, the
Manors of B. and Q. with the appurtenances, and 20. Messuages, 12. Tofts, 4.
Dove-houses, 30. Gardens, 1000. Acres of Land, 100. Acres of Meadow, 100. Acres
of pasture, 200. Acres of Lyng, and Heath, 100. Acres of Moor, and 30.
shillings, and one half penny rent, and the rent of one pound and a half of
Pepper, and of one Corn of Pepper, with the appurtenances in B. and Q. And free
fishing in the water of W. and also the Advowson of the Church of B. which they
claim, etc.

Essex ss. R. B. and C. S. do put in their place W. W. and R. R. their
Atturneys jointly against A. T. of a Plea of Land.

Essex ss. M. M. Gent. whom R. B. and C. S. call to warranty, do put in their
place I. I. and L. L. their Atturneys jointly and severally against A. T. of a
Plea of Land.

Essex ss. G. W. Gent. whom M. M. does call thereof to warranty does put in his
place R. G. and R. S. their Atturneys jointly and severally against A. T. of a
Plea of Land.

A Recovery of an Advowson in the County Palatine of Chester.
PLeas of Chester, before R. T. Knight, Justice of etc. at Chester of the
Session, holden there Wednesday the last day of Sept. in the year, etc.

Chester ss. H. S. Esquire by T. B. his Attorney demands against H. D. Esqu.
the Advowson of the Church of T. which to him he has unjustly deforced, etc.
And whereupon he says that himself was seized of the Advowson of the Church
aforesaid as of Fee and right within thirty years now last past, in the time of
peace in the time of the Sovereign Lord Charles late King of England, and so
thereof being seized the same time unto the same Church presented one R. A. his
Clerk, who unto that presentation, was admitted, instituted, and inducted in
the same; by taking thereof exlec, as in greater Tithes, lesser Tithes,
oblations, and obventions to the value, etc. as of the right of his Church
aforesaid, etc. And that such is his right; he offers, etc.

All the parts of a recovery in a writ of right de praecipe in capite.
Exemplified.
OLiver, etc. To all unto whom these present Letters Patents shall come, Know
ye that I. Earl of S. in our Court before our Justices at Westminster, by our
Writ of right of a praecipe in capite has demanded against T. B. the elder and
I. his wife the Manor of C. with the appurtenances, and one Message, 50: Acres
of Land, 50. Acres of Meadow, etc. with the appurtenances in C. B. H. near T.
as his right, and inheritance; which said Writ together with the return of the
same, and the plea upon the same Writ, with all other things touching that
Plea, follows in these words.

The Writ.
OLiver, etc. To the Sheriff of Heref. greeting; Command T. B. the Elder, and I.
his wife that justly, and without delay, they render to I. Earl of S. the Manor
of C. with the appurtenances, and one Message, etc. with the appurtenances in
C. B. and H. near T. which he claims to be his right and inheritance, and to
hold of us in Capite. And whereupon he complains, that the aforesaid T. and
I. him unjustly do deforce, unless they shall do it, and the aforesaid Earl
shall make you secure, for prosecuting his plaint, then summon by good
summoners, the aforesaid T: and I. that they may be before our Justices at
Westminster, from the day of Easter, in fifteen days to show wherefore they
did it not: And have you there the summoners, and this Writ; witness my self at
Westminster, the second day of April in the year, etc. Pledges of prosecuting
R. D. and I. R. The Answer of I. S. Knight Sheriff: Summoners, of the within
written T. B. and I. his Return thereof.
wife. H. F. and R. L.

Pleas at Westminster before I. P. and his Associates Justices of the Lord
Protector, of the Bench of the Term of Easter, in the year of our Lord, 1654.
Rotulo. CCLXIII.

The demandant.
Heref. ss. John Earl of S. by I. S. his Attorney demands against T. B. the
Elder, and I. his wife, the Manor of C. with the appurtenances, and one
Message, etc. with the appurtenances in C. B. and H. near T. by a Writ of the
Lord Protector of Praecipe in Capite, etc. And whereupon The Count.
he says, that himself was seized of the Manor, Message, Lands, etc. with the
appurtenances in his demeasne as of Fee, and right in the time of peace in the
time of the Protector by taking thereof expletion to the value, etc. and that
such is his right he offers, etc.

The defendant.
And the aforesaid T. and I. by W. B. their Attorney came, and do defend the
right of the aforesaid Earl and their seisin, and chiefly of the Manor,
Message, etc. to him do warrant, etc. And hereupon the aforesaid Earl
demands The demandant.
against him the said W. P. the Manor, Message, etc. with the appurtenances in
form aforesaid, etc. And whereupon he says, that he himself was seized of the
aforesa. Manor, Message, etc. with their appurtenances in his demeasne, as of
Fee and right In the time of peace, in the time of the Lord Protector, now by
taking thereof expletion to the value, etc. And that such is his right he
offers, etc.

And the aforesaid W. P. tenant, by his warranty The defense.
defends the right of the aforesaid Earl and his seisin, and chiefly of the
Manor, Message, Lands, etc. with the appurtenances, and all, etc. And he puts
himself thereof, on the Issue to be tried by the grand Assize.
Grand Assize of the Lord Protector, and demands a recognizance to be made,
whether he has more right to hold the Manor, Message, Lands, etc. with the
appurtenances, as tenant by his warranty as he holds them, or the aforesaid
Earl to have the Manor, Message, Lands, etc. with the appurtenances, as he
above demands them, etc. And the aforesaid Earl Imprlance.
prays license of imparling, etc. And he had it, etc.

Default and Judgment.
And afterward the same Earl by his Attorney aforesaid, came again here in
Court, and the aforesaid W. P. although was solemnly called came not again, but
in contempt of the Court made default. Therefore it is considered, that the
aforesaid Earl do recover his seisin against the aforesaid T. and I. of the
aforesaid Manor, Message, etc. with the appurtenances, to hold to the same
Earl, and his Heirs quite of the aforesaid T. and I. and his Heirs for ever.

And the aforesaid T. and I. may have of the Lands of the aforesaid W. P. to
the value of the Manor, Message, Lands, etc. aforesaid with the appurtenances.
And the aforesaid W. P. in mercy, etc.

The warrant of Attorney thereof follows in these words.
HEref. ss. John Earl of Shrewsbury puts in his place I. S. against T. B. the
Elder and I. his wife of a Plea of Land.

Heref. ss. T. B. the Elder, and I. his wife, puts in their place W. B. against
John Earl of Shrewsbury, of a Plea of Land.

All and singular which things at the request of the aforesaid Earl, we have
caused to be exemplified, and our great Seal, which we use for such
exemplifications, and also for all manner of Judicial Writs out of the Bench
aforesaid issuing forth, to be sealed, we have caused to be put to these
presents. Witness O. Saint John at Westminster. the 28. day of May, in the year, etc.

A remission to the Court, in a Writ of right.
TO the Lord Protector, etc. for that A. in our Court before your Justices of
the Bench by your Writ of right, D. E. of one Message, with the appurtenances
in S. which of me is holden by my license mediating does purpose to implead, to
your Highness by the tenor of these presents, I signify that I have remitted
my Court to you thereof in this behalf. Saving to me otherwise the right of the
Lord in the like case, when it shall happen. In testimony of which thing these
my Letters Patent, I have caused to be made; Sealed with my Seal, dated the
third day of May, in the year, etc.

The Exemplification of a Recovery enrolled.
OLiver L. Protector of the Commonwealth of Eng. Ireland and Scotl. and the
dominions thereunto belonging, etc.
To all to whom these our present Letters shall come greeting;
Know ye that among the inrolments of Writs, and other things depending for
common Recoveries, according to the form of the Statute of the term of Easter
at Westminster, in the year etc. in Roll the first, it is thus contained.

The Doctor which took the affidavit for the value.
Essex ss. Oliver, etc. to the Sheriff of Essex greeting; Command I. W. and I.
S. that justly, and without delay they render to Jo. St. and R. P. four
Messuages, 4. Gardens, 200. Acres of Land, 100. Acres of Meadow, 300. Acres of
pasture, 40. Acres of Wood, and 300. Acres of Lyng and Heath with the
appurtenances, in B. T. T. C. D. and H. which they claim to be their right and
inheritance. And into which the same I. W. and I. S. have no entry, but after
the disseisin, which, H. H. thereof unjustly and without Judgeme^t has made to
the afores. I. S. and T. within 30 years now last elapsed as they say. And
whereupon they complain that the aforesaid I. W. and I. S. them do deforce. And
unless they shall do it, and the aforesaid I. S. and T. H. shall make you
secure for prosecuting his plaint, then summon by good summoners the aforesaid
I. W. and I. S. that they be before our Justices at Westminster. from the day of
Saint Michael in 15. days, to show, wherefore they will not do it. And have you
there the summoners, and this Writ,

witness my self at Westminster the 24. day of Septtember, Summoners. The
Sheriffs name.
in the year, etc. Gibon. Pledges.
Pledges of prosecuting
John Do, Richard Roo.
Summoners,
John Den, Kich. Fen.
G. T. Esquire. Sheriff ss.

Oliver L. Protector, etc.
to the Sheriff of Essex greeting;
sum. by good summoners E. W. Esquire. and his wife, that they be before our
Justices at West. from the day of S. Hillary in 15. days to warrant to Joh. W.
and I. S. four Messuages, 4. Gardens, 300. Acres of Land, 100. Acres of Meadow,
300. Acres of pasture, 40. Acres of Wood, and 300. Acres of Lyng and Heath,
with the appurtenances in B. T. T. C. D. and H. which John St. and Tho. P. in
our Court before our Justices at Westminster. do claim as their right, by our Writ of
Entry upon disseisin in le post against them. And whereupon the same Joh. W.
and I. S. in our said Court, have called the aforesaid Edm. and John summoners
in your County, to warrant against them. And have you there the summoners, and
this Writ T. I. D. at Westminster. the 16. day of October. in the year, etc. * Lone.
Summoners, John Den, Rhichard Fen. * T. L. Esquire. Sheriff ss. The prothonatorie
in whose office it is entered. Summoners The Sheriff. The warrant of Attorney.
* Joh. St. and Tho. do put in their stead E. E. against John W. and I. S. of a
Plea of Land ss. John W. and I. do put in their place I. A. against John S. and
Tho. P. of a Plea of Land ss. Edm. W. Esquire. and Io. his wife, whom Johan W. and
I. S. do call to warranty, do put in their place R. C. against Io. S. and Tho.
P. of a Plea of Land, all and singular which things at the request of W. W.
Gent. by the tenor of these presents, we have drawn to be exemplified.

In testimony of which thing, our Seal unto the Writs in the Bench, appointed
to be Sealed by these presents we have caused to be put. T. F. W. P. and F. R:
Justices of the Bench aforesaid
at Westminster. the 16. day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1654. M.
The Judges which examined their inrolment. M. W. P. and R.

A pardon of alienation upon Lands by a Writ of Entry recovered.
OLiver, etc. to all to whom, etc. greeting; Whereas our welbeloved, and
faithful T. Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshall of England, and Knight of the Noble
Order of the Garter; and our beloved, and faithful W. C. Knight our chief
Secretary K. Knight lately, to to wit in the term, etc. in the year, etc. have
recovered against our welbeloved, and faithful Counselor N. B. Knight, Lord
Keeper of our great Seal of England, of his assent, and at his request by our
Writ of Entry upon disseism in le post, according to the course, form, and use
of Common Recoveries, the Manor of Redgrave, etc in our County of Suffolk, to
diverse several uses, intents, conditions, and purposes specified, and declared
in certain Indentures made between him the said N. on the one part, and the
aforesaid Duke W. R, etc. of the other part bearing date the second day of
October, in the year, etc. as by the same Indentures more fully it may appear,
and whereas also the the same Duke W. R. etc. into the Manor, Lands, Tenements,
and other the premises with the appurtenances, by virtue of the recovery
aforesaid, have entered (our license thereof first not obtained) And of the same
premises, were seized in their demeasne as of Fee, to the uses, intents, and
purposes in the aforesaid Indentures specified and declared, which said Manors,
Messuages, Lands, tenements, and other the premises of us are holden in Capite,
as it is said, know ye that we of our special grace, and of our certain
knowledge, and mere good will, saving to us our homage, do pardon, remit, and
release for us our Heirs and Successors, the trespasses in that behalf done,
and all manner of entry, and entries into the aforesaid Manors, Lands,
tenements, and other the premises, or any part, or parcel thereof, as well at
the present day by what way soever made, or perpetrated, as hereafter, by
reason of any use in the aforesaid Indenture specified, or declared to be made
or had. And furthermore we have granted, and for us our Heirs and Successors as
much as in us is, by these presents, do grant to the aforesaid Duke W. R, etc.
that they, the Manors, Messuages, Lands, and tenements aforesaid, and other the
premises, with all and singular their issues, rents, profits, and appurtenances
whatsoever (except before excepted) may have and hold to themselves, and their
Heirs and Assigns to the uses, intents, and purposes in the Indentures
aforesaid contained and specified, of us our Heirs and Successors by the
services thereof due, and of right accustomed for ever, without violence,
molestation, vexation, impediment, or grief of us, our Heirs, or Successors, or
of any our Justices, Escheators, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, or any other Officers,
Ministers, or Subjects, or of our Heirs, or Successors whatsoever. In testimony
whereof, etc.

And it is to be noted, that of all licenses to alien temporal Land in
Mortmain, the fine to the Protector formerly to the King is five years value of
the same.

Of all licenses to alien spiritual Land (as appropriations of Churches, or
other spiritual Benifices) the Fine is four years value thereof.

Of all licenses of alienation made of Lands, holden formerly of the King in
Capite, Fine is the third part of the value, the tenth deducted.

Of all pardons of alienation, by the Kings tenant in Capite, the Fine is one
years value thereof.

Of all licenses of Marriage of the Kings widow, the Fine is the third part of
the value of her dower by a year.

Of all pardons of the Kings widows, married without license, the Fine is the
whole value of her dower by the year.

The Exemplification of a Recovery, with double Voucher, out of the
Prothonatories Office.
OLiver, etc. To all to whom these our present Letters shall come, greeting.
Know ye that among the pleas of Land enrolled at Westminster before E. A.
Knight and his associates our Justices of the Bench, in the term of St.
Hillary, in the year, etc. it is contained thus.

York ss.
F. W. and R. S. in their proper persons demand against I. R. 12 acres of
Meadow, with the appurtenances in M. and K. as his right and inheritance; and
into which the same J. has not entry, but after the diffeisin, which H. H.
thereof, unjustly, and without Judgment made to the aforesaid F. R. within 30
years, etc. And the aforesaid Voucher.
J. by W. W. his Attorney came; And heretofore having called to Warranty T. R.
Esquire, who now by the Summons to him in the County aforesaid, made by T. J.
his Attorney The demandant against the first Vouchee. The Count.
comes, and gratis the aforesaid 12 acres of Meadow, with the appurt* to him
does warrant, etc. And hereupon the aforesaid Fr. and R. demand against him the
said T. Tenant by his warranty the aforesaid 12 acres of Meadow, with the
appurtenances in form aforesaid etc. And whereupon they say, that themselves
were seized of the aforesaid twelve acres acres of Meadow, with the
appurtenances in his Demeasne, as of fee and right in the time of peace, in the
time of the now Protector, by taking thereof expletion to the value, etc. And
into which, etc. And thereupon produces Vouch ouster le defense.
suit, etc. And the aforesaid T. Tenant by his Warranty defends his right
when, etc. And furthermore called thereof to warranty R. H. who is present here
in Court in his proper person. And gratis the aforesaid 12 acres of Meadow with
the appurtenances to him he warrants, etc. And hereupon the aforesaid F. and R.
S. demands against him Demandant against a Vouchee.
the said R. H. Tenant by his Warranty the aforesaid 12 acres of Meadow, with
the appurtenances in form aforesaid, etc. And whereupon they say, that
themselves were seized of the aforesaid 12 acres of Meadow, with the
appurtenances The Count
in form aforesaid in their demeasne as of Fee, and right in the time of peace,
in the time of the now Lord Protector, by taking thereof expletion to the
value, etc. And into which, etc. And thereupon they produce suit, etc. And the
aforesaid R. H. T^nant, by his warranty defends his right, when, etc. And
says that the aforesaid H. The Defense. Has not disseised.
has disseised the aforesaid F. and R. S. of the aforesaid 12 acres of Meadow,
with the appurtenances as the same F. and R. by his Writ and Declaration
aforesaid above do suppose: And of this he puts himself upon the Country, etc.
And the aforesaid F. and R. S. pray license thereof of imparling. And they have
it, etc.

And afterward the same F. and R. came again here in Court in that same Term
in their Default, Judgment.
proper persons. And the aforesaid R. H. although were solemnly called came not
again, therefore it is considered that the aforesaid Fr. and R. S. do recover
their seisin against the aforesaid I. of the aforesaid 12. acres of Meadow,
with the appurtenances. And that the same J. have of the land of the aforesaid
T. to the value, etc. And that the same T. further have of the land of the
aforesaid R. H. to the Recovery in value.
value. etc. And the same R. be in mercy, etc. And hereupon the aforesaid F.
and R. S. do pray the Writ of the Lord Protector to the Mercy.
Sheriff of the County aforesaid to be directed, of causing plenary seisin to
have to them of the aforesaid 12 acres of Meadow, with the appurtenances. And
to them it is granted retornable here from the day of Easter in 15 days etc.
All and singular which things at the request of the aforesaid F. and R. S. by
the tenor of these presents, we have drawn to be exemplified. In testimony of
which thing our seal unto the writs in the Bench aforesaid appointed to be
sealed to these presents we have caused to be put. Witness E. A. at
Westminster the 12 day of Feb. 1654.

When the Writ of seisin is returned, the return thereof must be entered upon
the same Roll, whereupon the Judgment was entered.

Another to the like effect.
OLiver, etc. To all to whom these our present Letters shall come, greeting: Ye
may know, that among the Pleas of Land enrolled at Westminster, before E. A.
Knight, and his dd' verse. te^^.
Associates, our Justices of the Bench, to wit, in the Term of St. Michael, in
the year, etc. in the second roll, it is contained thus.

Not. ss.
R. T. and R. B. in their proper persons demand against P. T. Gent. and W. H.
Gent. the Manors of H. and M. with the appurtenances, and 20 Messuages, The
Count.
10 Tofts, 1 Water-mill, 2 Dove-houses, 30 Gardens, 500 acres of Land, 200
acres of Meadow, 60 acres of pasture, 300 acres of Wood, 1000 acres of Ling and
Heath, 50 Crofts of Moor, and 20 s. rent, with the appurtenances in H. M. D.
etc. as their right and inheritance. And into which the same P. and W. have not
entry but after the Disseisin, which H. H. thereof unjustly and without
judgment has made to the aforesaid R. and R. within 30 years, etc. And
whereupon they say that themselves were seized of the Defense for the lands.
Manors, Tenements, and rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances in his demeasne
as of Fee and right, in the time of peace, in the time of the now Lo^d
Protector, by taking thereof expletion, to the value, etc. And into which, etc.
And thereupon they produce suit, etc.

Demandant against the Vouchee.
And the aforesaid P. and W. in their proper persons came, and do defend their
right when, etc. And call thereof to warranty G. M. Gent. who is present here
in Court in his proper person. And gratis, the Manors, Tenements, and rent
aforesaid, with the appurnances, to them he warrants, etc.

Count.
And hereupon the aforesaid R. and R. demand against him the said G. Tenant by
his warranty, the Manors, Tenements, and rent aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, in form aforesaid, etc. And whereupon they say that themselves
were seized of the Manors, Tenements, and rent aforesaid, with the
appurtenances in his demeasne, as of Fee and right, in the time of Peace, in
the time of the now Lord Protector, by taking thereof expletion, to the value,
etc. And into which, etc. And thereof they produce suit, etc.

Defense by the Vouchee.
And the aforesaid G. Tenant by his warranty defends his right, when, etc. And
furthermore, calls thereof to warranty D. H. who likewise is present here in
Court in his proper person, and gratis the Manors, The Revoucher.
Tenements, and rent aforesaid, with the appurtenances to him, he warrants. etc.

Demand against the 2 Vouchee.
And hereupon the aforesaid R. and R. demand against him the said D. being
Tenant by his warranty, the Manors, Tenements, and Rent aforesaid, with the
appurtenances, in form aforesaid, etc. And whereupon The Count against the 2
Vouchee.
they say that themselves were seized of the Manors, Tenements, and rent
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, in his Demeasne as of Fee, and right in the
time of peace, in the time of the now Protector, by taking thereof expletion,
to the value, etc. And into which etc. And thereupon they produce suit, etc.

Defense by the 2 Vouchees. Non disseisivit.
And the aforesaid D. Tenant, by his Declaration defends his right, etc. And
says that the aforesaid H. has not disseised the aforesaid R. and R. by their
Writ and Declaration aforesaid above do suppose. And of this put themselves
upon the Country, etc. And the aforesaid R. and R. pray License Imparlance
thereof of imparling. And they have it, etc.

The default.
And afterward the same R. and R. came again in the Court in this same Term in
their proper persons. And the aforesaid D. although he was solemnly called,
came not again, but in contempt of the Court departed, and made default:
therefore it is considered, that the aforesaid R. and R. do recover their
seisin Judgment thereupon.
against the aforesoid P. and W. of the Manors, Tenements, and rent aforesaid,
with the appurtenances. And that the same P. and W. have of the Land of the
aforesaid G. to the value, etc. And that the same G. further have of the Lands
of the aforesaid D. to the value, etc* And the same G. be in mercy, etc. And
hereupon the aforesaid R. and Recovery in value.
R. pray the Writ of the Lord Protector to the Sheriff of the County aforesaid,
to be directed, Mercy.
of causing plenary seisin to have to them of the Manors, Tenements, and rent
aforesaid, with the appurtenances. And to them it is ^anted returnable, here
from the day of St. Martin in 15 days.

At which day here came the aforesaid R. and R. in their proper persons. And
the Sheriff, (to wit) I. B. Knight, now returns, that he by virtue of that
writ to him directed the 14th day of November last past, caused plenary seisin,
to have to the aforesaid R. and R. of the Manors, Tenements, and Rent
aforesaid with the appurtenances, as by that writ to him it was commanded, etc.
all and singular which things at the request of the aforesaid R. and R. by the
tenor of these presents we have drawn to be exemplified. In Testimony of which
thing, our Seal unto the writs in the Bench aforesaid, appointed to be Sealed,
to these presents we have caused to be put. Witness, etc.

A Dedimus Potestatem to take knowledge of a warrant of Attorney of the Vouchee.
OL. Lord Protector to his beloved and faithful. Ra. To. Sergeant at law
greeting, whereas our writ of entry upon Disseisin in le post depends before
the Justices of the Bench, between W. S. and R. C. Gent. Demandants, and G. T.
Knight, Lord T. Deforcient, of the Manor of W. with the appurtenances, and of
one Message, 200 acres of Land, 60 acres of Meadow, 100 acres of Pasture, 100
acres of wood, 50 acres of Moor, and 5 s. Rent with the appurtenances in W. and
L. in the County of Salop, and the aforesaid G. in our full Court, there before
our Justices aforesaid appearing, called W. C. to warrant to him the Manor
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, whereupon then and there issued forth our
Summons ad warrantizandum to the Sheriff of the County aforesaid directed,
against the same W. C. returnable before our Justices aforesaid in 15 days of
St. Hillary next to come. And because the aforesaid W. C. is so impotent of
himself, and worn with age that unto Westminster before our Justices
aforesaid, at the day in our said writ of Summons, ad warrantizandum contained,
to travail is not sufficient, as we have been informed. We pitying the estate
of the same W. in this behalf, have given you power and full authority to
receive the Attorney or Attorneys which the same W. C. shall constitute or put
in his place, before you to the warranty to be called to gain or lose in the
Plea aforesaid before our Justices aforesaid, and us thereof in our Chancery of
the name of such Attorney or Attorneys to certify. And therefore we command,
you that unto the aforasaid W. C. if he be not well able to travail to you, ye
personally go, and his Attorney or Attorneys jointly or severally in form
aforesaid ye receive, and when that Attorney, or those Attorneys ye shall so
receive, us in our Chancery, in 15 days of Saint Hillary wheresoever then we
shall be under your Seal, ye duly certify, sending back this writ to us, T.
etc.

It is returned thus.

The answer of the within named R. R. unto this writ.

The execution of this Writ appears in a certain Schedule to this Writ
annexed R. R.

Salop ss.
COmmand G. T. Knight, Lord T. that justly, etc. he render to W. S. and R. the
Manor of W. with the appurtenances, and one Message, etc. (as above in the
Dedimus potestatem verbatim) with the appurtenances in W. L. which he claims,
etc.

Salop ss.
BEing called to Warranty does put in his stead A. B. and F. R. jointly and
severally against W. S. and R. C. in a plea of land.

Taken and knowledged at Firbeek in the County of Salop the tenth day of
February, In the year of our Lord 16^4.

A Dedimus potestatem of receiving an Attorney in a writ of Entry super
disseisinin le post for the Tenant.
THe P. to his beloved and faithful H. W. Knight, greeting. Whereas by our
Writ of Entry upon Disseisin in the post; hanging before our Justices of our
Common Bench, between H. D. and T. H. of 20 acres of land, 3 acres of Meadow,
and 12 acres of Pasture, with the appurtenances in M. in the County of N. And
because the same T. is so impotent, and worn out with age, that without very
great danger of his body before our Justices aforesaid, at the day in our said
Writ contained, he is not well able to travel, as we have been informed, We
godlily pitying the state of the same T. in this behalf, have given you full
power and authority to receive the Attorney or Attorneys jointly and severally,
which the same T. to gain or lose in the plea afotesaid, before our Justices
aforesaid in his stead before you, he shall will to constitute or put, and us
thereof in our Chancery of the name of such Attorney or Attorneys duly to
certify. And therefore we command you, that unto the aforesaid T. (if he be
not well able travel unto you) you personally go, and his Attorney or
Attorneys, jointly and severally in form aforesaid ye receive. And us in our
Chancery of the name of such, Attorney or Atturneys of him the said T. in the
Morrow of Saint J. next to come, wheresoever then we shall be, under your seal
duly ye certify, returning to us this Writ. T. the 25 day of April in the year
of, etc.

It is returned thus.
The answer of the within named H. W. unto this Writ; The execution of this
Writ appears in a certain Schedule to this Writ annexed. H. W.

Not. ss.
COmmand T. H. that justly, etc. he render to H. D. 20 acres of land, etc. (as
above in the Dedimus potestatem verbatim) with the appurtenances in M. which he
claims, etc.

Not. ss.
T. H. Puts in his place A. B. and F. R. jointly and severally against H. D. of
a plea of land.

Taken and knowledged at Firbeeke in the County of Not. the 10th. day of
February, in the year of our Lord 1654

Another Writ of Dedimus potestatem, to receive an Attorney for the Tenant upon
the Writ of Entry.
THe PROTECTOR to his beloved and faithful R. S. and W. B. greeting. Whereas
our Writ of entry upon disseisin in le post, depends before our Justices of
the Bench, between A. B. Knight Demandant, and C. D. Esquire; Tenant of the 4th
part of the Manor of F. with the appurtenances, and 800 acres of Land, 20
acres of Meadow, 220 acres of Pasture, 300 acres of Wood, and 40 l. rent, with
the appurtenances, in F. aforesaid in the County of Essex; And because the same
C. is so impotent of himself, and worn out with age, that without very great
danger of his body unto Westminster at the day in the said Writ contained,
personally to appear, and to do and plead that which in the same then there
should be expedient to be done, he is not well able to travel, as we have been
informed. We tendering the state of the same C. in this behalf, have given to
you, and both of you, jointly and severally, full power and authority to
receive the Attorney of the aforesaid C. which the same C. personally before
you, or one of you, against the aforesaid A. in the Writ aforesaid, depending
before our aforesaid Justices, in his place shall will to put, or constitute,
to call the Plaintiff, to plead the warranty, to gain or lose in that writ. And
therefore you, and both of you, jointly and severally, we command, that unto
the aforesaid C. (if he be not well able to travel unto you) ye personally
going, the Attorney or Attorneys which the same C. personally before you, or
one of you in the Writ aforesaid, before our aforesaid Justices depending,
against the aforesaid A. to call the Plaintiff there at the aforesaid Term, to
plead the warranty to gain or to lose, in his stead he shall will to put or
constitute Attorney, you or one of you receive. And when ye or one of you shall
so receive such Attorney or Atturneys, Us in our Chancery of the name or names
of such Attorney or Atturneys of him the said C. in 8 days of St. Hillary next
to come, wheresoever he shall be, under your seals, or one of yours duly ye or
one of you certify, returning to us this Writ, T. etc.

The Form of a Recovery, with single Voucber.
COmmand S. H. that he render to A. B. and C. D. 40 Messuages, with the
appurtenances in G. D. R. etc.

The aforesaid S. H. does put in his place R. F. and T. N. jointly and
severally against the aforesaid A. B. C. D. in a plea of Land.

W. A. whom the aforesaid S. H. calls to warranty, puts in his stead G. M.
and T. F. jointly and severally against the aforesaid A. B. and C. D. in a plea
of Land.

The aforesaid A. B. and C. D. do put in their stead R. C. and F. C. jointly
and severally against the aforesaid S. H. in a plea of land.

A Common Recovery had by diverse against one, of diverse Manors, etc. within
the County Pallatine of Chester before the Judges of the Shires and Counties.
Of Pleas of the County of Chester at Chester, before T. E. Esquire, Son of T.
E. Knight, Justice of the Lord Protect. there, on Wednesday next after the
Feast of Easter, In the year of our Lord, etc.

R. E. Knight. P. D. Knight, I. S. Son and heir apparent of T. S. of W. T. S.
Son and heir apparent of R. S. of S. and G. L. Chaplain, by Th. B. his Attorney
in the Court of the Lord Protect. here, do demand against H. S. of O. Esquire; the
Manor of O. alias O. with the appurtenances, and 14 Messuages, etc. as their
right and inheritance, and into which the same H. has no entry, but after the
disseisin which Th. Cut. thereof unjustly, and without judgment has made to
the aforesaid R. P. I. T. and G. after that J. S. was made Earl of Chester,
etc. And whereupon the same R. P. I. T. and G. say, that they themselves were
seized of the same Manors, Messuages, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Woods,
Turbary, Mosses, and rent; with the appurt. etc. in their demeasne, as of Fee
in the time of Peace of our Lord Protector taking thereof over in value, etc.
And into which, etc. and there produce suit, etc.

And the aforesaid H. S. Esquire; in his proper person comes and defends his right,
when, etc. and calls to warranty T. N. who is present in Court in his proper
person, and gratis to the same H. S. the Manor, Message, Lands Tenements,
Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Turbarie, Mosses, and rent, and the moiety of the
Manor of E. above demanded, with the appurtenances, he warrants.

And hereupon the aforesaid R. P. I. T. and G. do demand against the same T. N.
tenant by his warranty, the aforesaid Manors, Messuages, etc. and the moiety
of the Manor of E. with the appurtenances, in form aforesaid, etc. and
whereupon they say, that they themselves were seized of the same Manors
Messuages, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, woods, Turbary, Mosses, rent, and moyetie
of the Manor of E. with the appurtenances, in his Demeasne as of Fee, in the
time of peace, in the time of the said Lord Protector taking thereof over in
value, etc. and into which, etc. And thereof they produce their sure, etc.

And the aforesaid Th. N. Tenant by his Warranty defends his right, when,
etc. and says that the aforesaid T. C. has not disseised the aforesaid R. P.
J. T. and G. of the aforesaid Manor, Message, Lands, Meadows, Pastures,
Woods, Turbary, Mosses and Rent, and Moiety of the Manor of E. above demanded,
with the appurtenances, in manner and form as the aforesaid R. P. J. T. and G.
by their Writ and Declaration aforesaid do suppose, etc.

And the aforesaid R. E. P. D. I. T. and G. do pray license thereof of
imparling here, etc. and they may have it. Afterward the same Term, etc. The
aforesaid R. P. I. T. and G. by their Attorney aforesaid came again in the
Court of the Lord Protector etc. And the aforesaid T. N. Tenant by his
Warranty, although solemnly exacted, came not again, but in contempt of the
Court here, departed, and made default. Therefore it is considered by the Jury
aforesaid that the aforesaid R, E. P. D. I. T. and G. recover their seisin
against the aforesaid H. S. of the aforesaid Manor, Message, Lands, Meadows,
Pastures, Woods, Turbarie, Mosses, Rent, Moiety of the Manor of E. above
demanded, with the appurtenances. And that the same H. have of the land of the
aforesaid T. N. to the value. And the same T. N. in mercy.

A Common Recovery by diverse before the Justices of Chester, and Judges of the
same County of a Manor, etc.
Of Pleas of the County of Chester at Chester, before T. E. Knight, Justice of
the LORD PROTECTOR there on Wednesday, tali Anno.

R. B. W. B. B. B. Sons of R. B. Knight, O. B. H. D. Son and Heir of R. D. Esquire;
deceased D. D. of E. and R. C. Chaplain by T. B. their Attorney in the Court of
the LORD PRO^ECTOR here, do demand against R. D. Chaplain, and T. H. of the
City of C. the Manor of W. with the appurtenances, 30 Messuages, one
Watermill, 500 acres of land, 400 acres of Meadow, 200 acres of Pasture, 100
acres of Wood, 20 acre- of Turbarie, 40 acres of Land covered with water, and
40 l. rent, with the appurtenances, in W. and O. as their right and
inheritance, and into which the same R. and T. has non entry; but after the
disseisin which T. C. unjustly, and without judgment has made to the
aforesaid R. W. B. etc. after that J. Scoticus was made Earl of Chester, etc.
And whereupon the same R. W. B. etc. say that they themselves were seized of
the same Manor, Message, Mill, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Turbarie,
Lands covered with Water, with the appurtenances, in their Demeasne, as of Fee
in the time of peace, in the time of the Lord Protect. now taking thereof over
in value, etc. And into which, etc. And thereof they produce their suit, etc.

And the aforesaid R. D. and T. H. in their proper persons do come and defend
their right, when, etc. and do call thereof to warranty W. M. Esquire; who is
present here in Court in his proper person, and gratis the Manor, Message,
Mill, Lands, Meadows, Feedings, Woods, Turbary, Lands covered with water
aforesaid, to the same R. D. and T. H. does warrant, etc. And hereupon the
aforesaid R. W. B. etc. do demand against him the said W. M. Esquire Tenant by
his Wartanty, the Manor, Message, Mill, Lands, Meadows, Feedings, Woods,
Turbary, Lands covered with water, and rent above demanded, with the
appurtenances, in form aforesaid, etc. and whereupon they say that they
themselves were seized of the same Manor, Message, Mill, Lands, Meadows,
Pastures, Woods, Turbary, Lands covered with water, and Rent, with the
appurtenances in their Demean, as of Fee in the time of peace, in the time of
the said L. Prot. now to take thereof over in value. And into which, etc. And
thereupon they produce their suit, etc.

And the aforesaid W. M. Esquire. Tenant by his Warranty defends his right, when,
etc. and calls thereof to warranty Th. Needham, who is present there in
Court, in his proper person, and gratis the Manor, Message, Mill, Lands,
Meadows, Pastures, woods, Turbary, Lands covered with water, and rents
aforesaid, with the appurtenances to the same M. M. does warrant, etc. And
hereupon the aforesaid R. W. B. etc. Do demand against him the said Th. Needham
Tenant by his Warranty the aforesaid Manor, Message, Mill, Lands, Meadows,
Pastures, Woods, Turbarie, Lands covered with water, and Rent above demanded,
with the appurtenances in form aforesaid, etc.

And whereupon they say that themselves were seized of the same Manor,
Message, Mill, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Turbary, Land covered with
water, and rent above demanded, with the appurtenances in their demeasne, as of
Fee in the time of peace, in the time of the said Lord, the now Protect* to
take thereof over in value, etc. and into which, etc. and thereupon they
produce their suit, etc.

And the aforesaid Thomas Needham, Tenant, by his Warranty defends his right,
when, etc. and he says that the aforesaid T. Cut has not disseised the
aforesaid R. W. B. etc. of the Manor, Message, Mill, Lands, Meadows,
Pastures, Woods, Turbary, Lands covered with water, and Rent, with the
appurtenances, in manner and form as the same R. W. B. etc. by their Writ and
Declaration above do suppose, etc.

And the aforesaid R. R. W. etc. do pray license thereof, of imparling here,
etc. and they have it, etc. And afterward in that same County here, etc. the
same R. W. B. etc. by their aforesaid Attorney came again in the Court of the
Lord Protector. And the aforesaid T. N. Tenant, by his warranty, although
solemnly exacted, came not again, but in contempt of the Court here departed,
and made default, etc. Therefore it is Ordered by the Judges of the County
aforesaid, that the aforesaid R. W. B. etc. recover their seisin against the
aforesaid R. D. and T. H. of the aforesaid Manor, Message, Mill, Lands,
Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Turbarie, Land covered with water, and rent above
demanded, with the appurtenances, etc. And that the aforesaid R. D. and T. H.
have of the Lands of the aforesaid W. M. to the value, etc. And the same T. N.
in mercy, etc.

The like Common Recovery in the said County of Chester to the next before, and
of the same Manor and Lands.
Of Pleas of the County of Chester at Chester, before T. E. Esquire; Son of T. E.
Knight, Justice of the Lord Protector, the Wednesday after the Feast of
beheading of S. John the Baptist, in the year, etc.

R. B. of Chester, R. B. W. B. B. B. Sons of R. B. Knight, and O. B. by T. B.
their Attorney, in the Court of the Lord Protector here, do demand against W.
M. Esquire, the Manor of W. 23 Messuages, 1 Water-Mill, 300 acres of Land, 20
acres of Meadow, 100 acres of Pasture, 40 acres of Wood, 10 acres of Turbary,
and 10 acres of Land covered with water, with the appurtenances, in W. M. K.
and W. as their right and inheritance, and into which the same W. M. has no
entry, but after the disseisin which T. C. thereof unjustly and without
Judgment has made to the aforesaid R. R. W. B. and G. after that J. Scoticus
was made Earl of C. etc. And whereupon the same R. R. W. etc. say, that
themselves were seized of the same Manor, Message, Mill, Lands, Meadows,
Pastures, Woods, Turbarie, and lands covered with water, with the
appurtenances, in their Demeasne as of Fee, in the time of Peace, in the time
of the Lord now Protector, to take thereof over in value. And into which, etc.
And thereupon they produce their suit, etc.

And the aforesaid W. M. in his proper person comes and defends his right,
when, etc. And calls thereof to warranty T. N. who is present here in the
Court, in his proper person, and gratis to the same W. M. the Manor and
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, does warrant. And hereupon the
aforesaid R. R. W. etc. do demand against him the said T. N. tenant, by his
warranty, etc. the Manor and Tenements aforesaid above demanded, with the
appurtenances in form aforesaid, etc. and whereupon they say that themselves
were seized of the same tenements, with the appurtenances, in their demeasne,
as of Fee, in the time of peace, in the time of the said now L. Protect. by
taking thereof over in value, etc. And into which, etc. And thereupon they
produce their suit, etc. And the aforesaid T. N. tenant, by his warranty
defends his right, when, etc. and says, that the aforesaid T. C. has not
disseised the aforesaid R. R. W. etc. of the tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, in manner and form, as they by their writ and Declaration above
do suppose, etc.

And the aforesaid R. R. W. etc. do pray license thereof, of imparling here,
etc. and they have it, etc. And afterward in that same County here, etc. the
same R. R. W. etc. by their Attorney aforesaid came again into the Court of
the Lord Protector. And the aforesaid T. N. tenant, by his warranty, although
solemnly exacted, came not again, but in contempt of the Court here, departed,
and made default. Therefore it is granted by the Judges of the County
aforesaid, that the aforesaid R. R. W. B. B. and O. recover their seisin
against the aforesaid W. M. of the tenements aforesaid above demanded, with the
appurtenances, etc. And that the aforesaid W. M. have of the lands of the
aforesaid T. N. the value, etc. And the same T. N. in mercy, etc.

Charges of a Recovery, with two Vouchers in person at the bar.
FOr drawing your Precipe 0 2 6 For taking it into the remembrance 1 0 For your
writ of Entry 2 6 For the Fine of it To the Receiver 0 6 For the Doctors hand
entering and endorsing 1 6 For drawing it at bar, and 4 Sergeants. 13 4 To the
Criers 1 0 To the Box 1 0 To the Warden of the Fleet 0 6 For the Common Vouchee
0 4 For the Attorney Generals hand to the Writ. 10 6 For making the Remembrance
when the Recovery is drawn at the bar 2 0 For the return of the writ of Entry 0
4 For return of the writ of Seisin 2 0 To the Prothonotary, for entry of the
Recovery 14 6 To the Clerk, for exemplifying thereof, and making the writ of
Seisin 7 6 For sealing the Exempl^fication and writs of Seisin 2 9 For filing
the writs of Entry and Seisin. 2 0 For the Fee of the Demandant, Tenant, and
Vouchee in the Recovery. 10 0

Charges of a Recovery by summons, upon a warrant of Attorney.
For drawing your Precipe, and the warrant of Attorney 0 3 4 For entry of the
Summons. 0 6 6 For making the writ of Summons and the Seal 0 2 7 To the Clerk
for drawing the Summons and the entry in Parchment 0 2 6 For filing every
warrant of Atturnment 0 0 8 For return of the writ of summons 0 2 0 For the
filing of it. 0 1 0

Note that every single Voucher has 3 Sergeants; a double Voucher 4 Sergeants;
and a treble Voucher has 5 Sergeants, and so further.

The Prothonotary has, as you see, for his Entry for every Summons 0 6 6 For
every single Voucher. 0 10 6 For every double Voucher. 0 14 6 For every treble
Voucher 0 18 6 For every Dedimus and Mittimus. 0 4 0

The Charges of a Recovery under the great Seal of England.
For the Certiorari 0 13 4 For the allowance thereof 1 9 6 To the Clerk for his
pains 0 6 8 For the Exemplification of every Skin. 1 6 8 For the Seal. 1 0 6

THE TABLE.
THe Definition of a Fine. page 1. Who may be Cognisors in Fines, and who not.
7. What persons may be Cognisees in fines. 9. Of what things fines may be
levied, and what not. 10. By what names things may pass in fines. 12. The order
and form of placing things in fines. 14. The place wherein the Lands lie. 16.
Of the forms of Concords. 17. Observations at the knowledge of fines, and how
to acknowledge a fine before the Lord chief Justice. 18 The charge of the said
fine. 21. Observations at the knowledge of a fine, by a special Ded^mus
Potestatem. 22 The charges thereof. 25. How to acknowledge, etc. by Ded.
Potest. 25. Charges of a fine knowledged by Ded. Potestat, before a Judge, and
exemplified. 26. The charges thereof. 27. How to acknowledge a fine at the bar
in Court. 28. The charges thereof. 29. A Writ of Co^enant of Common. 23 Of
Land, and Sheep walk. ibid. Of wood and foldage. ibid. Of wood. 33. Of a
Parsonage impropriate, and of the moiety of Tithes. ibid. Of a Manor, of rent,
and of free folding for sheep. ibid. Of a writ of Covenant of 3 parts of 4
Messuages, 4 Cottages, etc. 34. A writ of Covenant of Tithes. ibid. A writ of
Covenant of the Site of a Monastery. ibid. A writ of Covenant of diverse
things. 35. A wrir of Covenant of Dismes and Tithes. 36. A Release by fine by
one, to two. 37. A fine sur cognizance de droit by the Husband and Wife to two.
ibid. A fine by Baron and Feme, and another. 38. A fine of a parcel in
reversion by a coparcener. 39 A fine by an Earl, Husband and Wife, to an
Archbishop and another. 40. A Concord from two to two, with special warranty.
41. A fine upon a recognisance of right, as that which he has of his right,
with release and warranty by Husband and Wife to a third person; with a general
warranty. 42. A Concord of many things together, sur cognizance de droit come
ceo, etc. 43 A fine of a rent. 47. A fine of part of a rent by Husband and
Wife. 48. A Praecipe, with an exception, and saving some parcels. ibid. A
Concord, with a render for life to the Husband and Wife, being the Conusors of
parcel of Manors and Lands contained in the writ of Covenant, the remainder to
the first and second begotten sons of the Cognisors in tail, and to the heirs
males, and for default, etc. then to the Cognisors in general tail, and for
default, etc. then to the right heirs of the Cognisors for ever; with render
and grant of 10 Messuages, etc. residue of the same Manor, etc. to the said
Cognisors. 49 A fine of homage, rent, and services. 51. A fine of a Manor, and
Knights Fees, and services, by the Husband and Wife and others. 52. An old fine
in Frank almoigne, before Justices in Air, in Anno 55. H. 3. 53 A Concord of
Lands in the County Palatine of Lancaster. 54 A Lease for reserving a Rent. 55.
A Lease for years, rendering rent. 55. A Lease for years by fine, by one and his
wife. 57. A Lease by Tenant for life for 21 years, if she lives so long. 58. A
Lease to the wife for 21 years, to commence after her Husbands decease,
reserving a rent, the Cognisees grant back the same reversion and rent. 60. A
fine of a remainder for years. 62. A Lease in Reversion, paying rent. 63. A
Lease to diverse for 90 years, for their lives, with rent and herriots reserved,
etc. 64. A Lease reserving a rent of 20l. with a Nomine poene, and a distress.
66. A fine upon Grant and render to one for term of life, without impeachment
of wast, and for 16 years after her death, then the one moiety to one in fee,
and the other to another. 68 A render for life, the reversion to one, and his
heirs males, the remainder to another, and his heirs. 69. A Lease for life, the
remainder for life to the wife in the name of her Jointure, with the remainder
in tail. bid. A fine where the Husband buyeth lands, and grants them again to
the Cognisors for his Wifes life. 70 A Concord of diverse Tenements, Rent of a
Rectory, and Advowson, etc. 71 A fine of the fourth part of two Messuages, the
one by a Coparcener of his part, etc. to two strangers, 72 A fine of Lands,
part in possession, and part in reversion of a third part, for term of the life
of the Tenant in Dower, and for term of the life of another Tenant for term of
life. 74 A Grant and Render of a reversion of a moiety. 76 A Render to the
Cognisor for one week, after to a stranger for life, and to his Wife for life,
if she keep her unmarried, the reversion to another stranger, and his heirs of
his body, upon M. his Wife begotten, the remainder to another and his heirs. 78
A Fine of two Reversions. 79 A Grant to the Cognisee, and his Wife, and the
heirs of their two bodies, with Warranty. 80 A Grant, with a Render back again
for life, with Remainders in tail, dividing the Lands. 91 A Fine to entail
Lands to the heirs of one deceased. 92 A Grant by a Duke and his wife, as in
the right of his wife, to the Cognisee for life of the Tenant for life, with
Warranty, a Render to the Cognisor for the Wives life, to convey her Title to
her Husband. 93 A Concord of a moiety of diverse things in Possession, and a
Reversion in Fee. 94 A Grant of Lands by Fine, to two, who render to the
Cognisor in tail, and for default of such issue to R. T. in general tail, the
remainder to another and his heirs for ever. 97 A Grant of Lands in tail, to be
holden of the Grant or in soccage. 98 A Grant of Lands in tail to be holden of
the Grantor by suit of Court, 6 s. rent. 99 (...) ^^ne of Knights Service;
Castle-Gard, and Murage upon a Writ of Customs and Services. 100 A fine of a
Manor in possession, and other lands in Reversion. 101 A fine of Lands, part
in possession, and part in reversion, with a Render again to the Cognisors and
their heirs. 102 A fine of the reversion of a Rent. 104 Another of the same.
105 A fine of Rent Service. 106 A fine where the Husband and the Wife sell the
Wives Jointure or Dower absolurely to him in the reversion. 107 Tenant for term
of life makes a Lease, reserving a Rent during her life. 108 A fine of a
Reversion. 109 A fine in Fee farm of a Rent granted out of a Manor only. 110 A
fine of several Rents granted out of a Manor. 111 A fine of a Rent, with a
Nomine poene for nonpayment, etc. 112 A fine in Fee farm, yielding a Rent, with
a Distress 114 A fine in Fee farm, rendering a Rent, suit of Court and Herriot
after decease, recease, and alienation. 115 A fine in Fee farm, rendering a
Rent, with a Nomine poene for default of payment. 117 A fine by the Husband and
the Wife to the Husband and Wife, with a Render. 118 A Writ of Covenant that
was for the King, for the Tirh Corn of a Parish, and the manner of the
endorsement thereof; used by his Attorney general. 120 A fine, with Warranty
against all men. 121 A fine by the Husband and Wife, and the Cognisee by the
same fine grants and renders back again the premises to the said Conusors,
and to the heirs of the Husband one of the said Conusors for ever. 122 A fine
of one Message, etc. and the same Conusors for them and the heirs of Io. Do.
warrant 2 parts of the premises, in 3 parts divided to the Conusee, and his
heirs, against all men for ever. 123 A fine with Warranty against all men; and
the Cognisees by the same fine, render parcel of the Premises for one month,
with diverse limitations, etc. 124 A fine of, etc. and the Cognisees do grant
and render all Mines of Coals, in a Close, parcel of the premises etc. 128 A
fine of the third part of one Message, etc. with a general Warranty, And the
Cognisees do Grant and Render the same to one of the Cognisors for years in
reversion, etc. 129 A fine with a Grant of a yearly rent. 132 A fine of a
Message, etc. Rent, Parsonage, the Advowson of a Viccaradge, with Warranty,
etc. 134 A fine with two several Warranties. 135 A fine of a Manor etc. with
general Warranty. 136 A Fine within the County of Chester, etc. 137 A fine
knowledged before the Justices of Chester. 140 A fine by an Earl and his Wife.
141 A fine by the Husband and Wife, and a third person, etc. 142 A fine by two
to one, with general Warranty. 145 A fine by the Husband and Wife, and diverse
others, etc. 145 A fine of four Messuages, etc. with Warranty. 146 A fine by
two Husbands and their Wives. 147 A fine by the Husband and his Wife, to a Man
and his Wife. 148 A fine by an Earl and his Wife of a Rent, etc. 149 A fine by
the Husband and Wife for term of years. 150 A fine by the Husband and Wife with
Warranty, in consideration the Cognisee grants a Rent, etc, 152 A fine of the
third part of a tent, with a general Warranty. 154 A fine of the third part of
34 acres of Meadow, by these words, viz. concesserunt, and reddiderunt. etc.
155 A fine by one to the Queens Attorney, etc. 155 A fine by a Widow to the
President and Scholars of a College, etc. 157 A fine by two, and the Wife of
one of them, etc. 158 A fine with general VVarranty. 159 A fine of a reversion.
160 A fine by Husband and Wife to one, with a general VVarranty. 161 Of the
Order of taking the knowledge of a fine, by Dedimu: potestatem, and the
certifying thereof 162 A fine of one Message of a Remainder. 163 A fine by
Husband and Wife of two Messuages etc. with general VVarranty. 164 A fine
knowledged before the Justices of the Common pleas at Westminster, with general
VVarranty 165 A fine with VVarranty against the Conusor and his heirs. 166 A
fine as it is engrossed of Record. 167 Of the nine Proclamations. 168 A fine
with general VVarranty for years, rendering a red Rose, etc. 168 A fine for
li^es, and aft^r, in Fee. 170 A fine of a Rent issuing out, etc. with general
VVarranty. 171 A fine with general VVarranty of an annuity, with Nomine poe^e.
172 A fine in tail general to hold by the 40th. part. of a Knights ^ee, and by
rent, with general VVarranty. 174 A fine with VVarranty during life. 175 A fine
for life, and after in fee. 176 Of the taking of the knowledge of a Fine. 177 A
fine with diverse remainders. 178 Of Adjuncts of Concords. 180 A License to
alien in Mortmain. 183 Quod permittat finem levari. 184 The Writ of quod damnum
185 Of a pardon for alienation. 186 Of the Dedimus potestatem to take the
cognizance of a fine. 189, 190 The Dedimus Potestatom thereof. 191. The Precipe
and Concord. 193. A Dedimus Potestatem upon a writ of Customs, and services.
195. Of the Kings Silver. 196. Of observation at the knowledge of fines. 197.
How and when Cognisances of Fines may be certified, and what may hinder the
^ame. 199 Of the Inrolment of Writs of Covenant D^d. Potest, and knowledges
thereupon called the foot of the fine. 202 Of the note of the fine. 203 Quid
juris clamat. 204 What persons may obtain atturnment by Quid Juris clamat, and
what nor. 205 What persons be compellable to arturn by Quid juris clamat, and
what not. 206 What places will bar the Plaint. of Atturnment. 210

A Table to the latter Part.
What process lie in a Quid juris clamat, 1. The writ of summons in Quid
juris clamat. 3. The Distress in Quid juris clamat. 4. Tenant may atturn for
parcel, etc. 12. Attorney in Quid juris clamat. 13. The return thereof. 14. A
Distr^ngas ad atturnandum. 17. Of the engrossing of Fines. 24. Of the Tabling
of fines engrossed. 25. How many Proclamations are to be made upon fines, and
when. 26 Of the Proclamations of fines at the Assizes and General Sessions, and
how they must be certified. 27. Of the Inrollment of all the parts of fines at
the engrossing thereof, and Proclamations passed. 28. Of the Exemplification of
the parts of fines enrolled. 30. Of one enrolled according to the Statute 23
El: c. 3. ibid. How fines Executory be executed. 36 Execution of fines by writ.
37. Of execution of fines by Scire facias. 41 A Scire facias upon a fine. 46. A
Mittimus of the transcript of a fine, and a Scire facias thereupon. 51. A fine
levied to one by a Guardian. 55. Cozenage alleged in the Scire facias. 62. A
writ to the Bishop to certify Bastardy. 69. Certain causes of the nature and
form of a Scire facias upon a fine. 74. What Fines with Proclamations bar not
the issue in tail. 78. What time after a fine levied and Proclamation made, any
man has to enter or claim by action, or otherwise, who are thereby barred
forthwith, and who not. 79. How privies in blood are bound in fines. 81. Of
Estrangers, having present right, and no impediment. 82. Of Estrangers that
have present right, and impediment. 83. Of Estrangers having diverse defects.
87. Of Estrangers without impediments, having future right for cause precedent.
ibid. Of Estrangers with impediments, having future right. 89. Of Estrangers
having no right for any cause before the fine. 91. Of Estrangers having diverse
future rights by diverse titles. 92. Estrangers to fines, having neither
present, nor future right to the Tenements in the fine, at the levying thereof,
but only unto rents, Common, etc. issuing out of the same. 94. Pleas to avoid
fines. 95. Of a writ of Error. 97. A writ of Error directed to the chief
Justice. 98. Another to the Custos brevium. 99. Another unto the Chirographer.
ibid. For what Errors, Fines, and Proclamations, be not reversable. 100. Of
Error in the Proclamation of a Fine. 101. Of a Certiorari. ibid. A Certiorari
of the transcript of the foot of a fine. 102. Otherwise of the tenor of the
note of a fine. 103. Otherwise before Justices now of the Bench, ib. A Mittimus
of the transcript of a fine out of the Chancery into the Common place. ibid. A
Mittimus. 106. A Mittimus for the foot of a fine. ibid. Whether any but he
which reserverh a fine, may reap benefit thereby. 107. Warrantia Chartae. 108.
The writ of War. Chart. ibid. Count by Baron and Feme upon a Fine, with
warranty. 110. Of Recoveries for Assurances, etc. 124 Of what things writs of
entry may be brought, and by what means. 128. Of what things a writ of entry
lies not. 129. A Certiorari to the Executors of the Justice before whom the
warrants were acknowledged. 131. The return of the same. 132 A Recovery with
single Voucher. 133. A Recovery with double Voucher. ib. A Recovery with treble
Voucher. 134. A Recovery of an Advowson in the County Palatine of Lancaster.
135. All the parts of a Recovery in a writ of Right, De precipe in Capite,
Exemplified. 136. The warrant of Attorney thereof. 138. A remission to the
Court in a writ of right. 139. The Exemplification of a Recovery enrolled. ib.
A Pardon of alienation upon Lands by a writ of entry recovered. 142. A Common
Recovery by diverse before the Justices of Chester, and Judges of the same
County of a Manor, etc. 161. The like Common Recovery in the said County of
Chester, to the next before, and of the same Manor and lands. 164. Charges of
a Recovery with 2 Vouchers in person at bar. 167. Charges of a recovery by
summons upon a warrant of attorney. 168.

FINIS.

