HEROIC EDVCATION, OR Choice Maxims and Instructions, for the most sure and
facile training up of youth, in the ways of eminent learning, and virtues.

A Treatise very necessary for all men; but most especially for such as
undertake the charge, to govern the young Nobility and Gentry.

IN Two Books, together with a short Appendix.

By I. B. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for William Hope, at the blew Anchor, behind the Old Exchange,
and Henry Herringman, at the blew Anchor in the lower Walk in the Now Exchange.
1657.

WILLIAM OF NASSAV etc: BORNE PRINCE of ORANGE


To the READER.
WHen this small treatise came first to my hands, it was only a confused heap
of several pieces without method, or imbellishment. I obtained it by
communication of a Noble Lady, Illustrious for her birth, and very considerable
in the esteem of the more polite World, for her rare, and excellent qualities.
She had kept it in her Closet as a concealed treasure, to make use of in
particular occasions, which in time might offer themselves. And doing me once
the honor to demand my opinion of it, I presently judged, after the perusal of
some few leaves, that it was the product of some great, and knowing Spirit;
which after a thorough and deliberate reading proved equally solid in all its
parts, and worthy to appear openly. I presently took a resolution to reduce it
to some order, and cloth it in this form to publish it to the World.

I am not ignorant how infinitely rich this subject is for the matter, how
copious, and fruitful a field, and how often it has been already manured, and
imbellished by many rare Pens with the greatest art, and care, which might be
capable to intimidate a more then ordinary courage. Nevertheless far from being
startled at the grand numbers of Writers, I thought I might go on without
reproach, intending with modesty to tread in the same paths which those eminent
Wits had traced out before me.

But that which prompted me the more eagerly, was the approbation of one of the
most Heroic Cavaliers in the world, who by his excellent Virtues, his Noble
Valor, and great Prudence has filled all virtuous men's hearts with his
affection, and admiration.

His name shall live eternally with veneration in the world, norshal the sweet
remembrance of his exquisite parts ever perish but with the last mortal man.
His judgment is equally balanced betwixt delicacy and solidity, 'twere a sign
of temerity, or imbecility to oppose his sentiments. It Is he in fine, that
inspired me with this ardour, and who by a censure very much to my advantage,
has dissipated those thick clouds, which the fear of envy, and medisance might
raise in a soul not truly generous. I am confident you will look on it
favorably, both in respect toward him, and in consideration of the end I have
proposed, which is no other, but the public benefit, and especially theirs,
who do actually, or intend to exercise the like charges; who if they ever take
the pains to read it over, to weigh it, and maturely consider it; Will I am
confident, if they have that experience which I suppose, infallibly find
somewhat that shall profit them, in those precepts, and that doctrine which it
contains in a few sheets, very necessary for the education, and conduct of the
young Noblesse, and Gentry. This is the top of my ambition, and the whole bent
of my desires, to which there is nothing wanting, but to learn the name of this
famous unknown Author, who first made the happy project. Not to enrich my self
with his spoils, but to publish his praises, as well as his Writings, and to
protest I am his admirer, and shall be his humble servant in particular, as I
am to all the judicious, and courteous Readers in general.

Farewell. I. B.

A TABLE Of the Chapters.
Part. I.
CHap. I. Of nature, and our humane condition; and how we must accommodate
things in the education of a young man. Chap. II. Maxims to make good use of
the natural inclinations and turn them to good. Chap. III. The second Maxim,
that the Governor must endeavor to win him to embrace virtue out of a
principle of affection, and not of fear; together with the means to practice
it. Chap. IV. Wherefore we do most ardently, and violently desire forbidden
things. Chap. V. The third Maxim, that he must gain the love of him he
governs, and also love him tenderly again. Chap. VI. How one must make use of
this Maxim. Chap. VII. Three things which hinder the respect, and amity of
young men toward their Governors. Chap. VIII. Of Pedants, and their several
sorts. Chap. IX. Second kind of Pedants. Chap. X. The third kind of Pedants.
Chap. XI. Of the qualities of good Governors. Chap. XII. Of the most ordinary
defects, which breed in young people. Chap. XIII. Three means to correct our
evil inclinations.
Part II.
CHap. I. Three sorts of corporal habitudes. Chap. II. The Governors second end
and care, touching the soul, divided into two parts, the Inferior, and the
Superior. Chap. III. Of the common sense, and memory. Chap. IV. Of reading,
and other means to help the memory. Chap. V. Of true Piety, a solid discourse.
Chap. VI. Of Modesty. Chap. VII. Of Love, of Truth and of Honor. Chap. VIII. Of
Sciences. Chap. IX. Whether one ought to send him to the public Schools. Chap.
X Of History. Chap. XI. Of Philosophy. Chap. XII. Of Morality. Chap. XIII. Of
Policy, and the means to train him up to it in his youth. Chap. XIV. The second
step, or degree to arrive to the knowledge of Politics which is to travel, and
how. Chap. XV. Third step, or degree; the Military Art. Chap. XVI. Fourth step,
or degree of Intrigues, and Negotiations. Chap. XVII. Of those other Sciences
he ought to learn.
Heroicke Education.
CHAP. I. Of Nature, and our humane condition; and how we must accommodate
things, in the education of a young man.
THose who believe, that the Soul is endued with all Science, and knowledge at
the instant of its Creation, which the presence of Objects does afterward only
awaken, and stir up in our memories, do very much derogate from the merits
of virtue, which acquires them through much labor. As likewise those who are
persuaded, that it is a smooth Tablet, where one may easily engrave all sorts
of Images; make no reflection on the power of the temperature or constitution,
nor of the need it has of a commerce with the Senses, by which the species of
all things are presented to it. It Is a naked Tenant which comes to inhabit a
furnished Palace, where it finds the dispositions, and the seeds of habits,
which time, and exercise does afterward bring to maturity. We carry the seeds
of our good, or evil qualities in our veins, and the mass of our body, of it
self insensible, does nevertheless contain the original of those
Sentiments, which the spirit vivifies. The intimate union wherewith the soul
is knit unto it, and the need it has of its Ministry, ought to teach it to
entertain it as a compagnon, and not like a slave. It Is brutishness to
abandon it to its appetites, and it is also a dangerous enterprise to tear them
from it. That is the best period, to which by long and difficult labors, a
mature wisdom can attain, which time, and various fortunes does better teach,
then any discourse possibly can. There are some Philosophers so austere, that
they will have an Angel in a man of flesh, not considering him, but by what
distinguishes him from beasts, without minding that there are many things which
are common to both; if he be rational, he is also animal, and his kind is no
less essential, then his difference. They will reduce this little Republicke
into a Monarchy, whereof each part contributing to the labor, and merits, ought
likewise to participate in the counsel, and the government.

If the aged appear sometimes more moderate in their passions, then the
youthful; they owe this no less to their blood which grows chill, then to
that experience, which illuminates them. Young people have a more puissant
enemy to combat, and weaker weapons to make their assaults. Those who conduct
them, must by their prudence, imitate the wisdom of brave Commanders of
Armies, who not willing to hazard a Battle, endeavor to ruin their enemies
by cutting off all supplies, and provisions, dividing their forces, wearying
out their soldiers by continual alarmes, and handsomely avoiding all their
dangerous attempts. He that should stiffly oppose their passions, which are
ordinarily violent in their beginnings, would produce no other effect but an
augmentation of their desires, by ravishing the means from them; and only make
them become more ingenious to sin with subtilty and secrecy, not being
permitted to do it with impunity. The menaces, and punishments ordained for
vices, does make them indeed to be feared, but not hated. It Is a torrent pent
in with banks, which breaks forth more impetuously, as soon as it can force
the least passage, and the effect subsisting no longer then the cause; the
virtue which proceeds from rigor, and constraint can never last longer then
their fear continues. From thence also there arises a greater inconvenience:
Which is, that the Senses finding themselves too ill entreated, conspire
together to shake off the burden, and make a revolt, which soon overwhelmes
the spirit, if it be weak, or cruelly agitates it if it makes resistance.
There is no man who is not endued with some graces, and a genius peculiar to
his generation: But in stead of knowing and polishing them, we often stifle
those natural gifts, to acquire artificial ones, which not being conformable
to the subject, are like grafted Trees, that never are long lived. Those
virtues that are forced into any one, both against the inclination, and
natural instinct of the man, are like unto stranger Princes, whose Reigns are
seldom peaceable, when they alter the Laws of the Country. One must seek to
conform with that good nature, which providence makes to shine in all its
works, and without seeking other where for new plants, be content to cultinate
diligently, and bring up those, which nature has already lodged in us.

This is that which he must carefully observe, whom persons of Honor do
confide in for the education of their children. Those precious pawnes, in whom
they, having sowed all their virtues, have also founded all their hopes in
them. I doubt not but he will in so fair a subject find matter ample enough
for an easy glory: and his care will be recompensed with advantage, by the
humor which will reflect upon him, from those illustrious actions, whereby
they may one day signalize themselves in the world. Nevertheless, the
fertility of the soil, must not make him neglect the culture; rather the
goodness of his nature should make him use a more diligent observation in his
conduct. Myrtles and Laurels are tenderer then Oaks, and more sensible of the
rugged winter weather, and Roses are sooner parched then Thistles. Virtuous
inclinations do ordinarily border on vices, and always draw defects in train
after them: which hinders them not from being blameworthy, although they be
marks and tokens of virtue. Generous natures do incline, and bias toward luxe
and vanity: Tender and affectionate, to love and softness; the calm and
tranquil, to negligence and sloth: Active and fiery spirits, to levity and
violence; the subtle, to sleights and malice; and good natures, to simplicity
and innocence. It Is no small skill that must separate the Cockle from the pure
grain; because the virtues created with us, are as was the world, before God
had unravel'd the confusion; where the elements, though enemies, lay mingled
together, and their qualities, which make the harmony of the whole body, whose
contrarieties makes us behold the vicissitude of productions, accorded then
together in one mass, which hid and concealed the diffetence of their beings.
Even so before that reason has purified the qualities of our souls, we find
virtues confounded together with vices, the spirit swimming in the blood, and
the Senses disputing for mastery with the will, until time and the truth,
comes to separate this mixture, and prescribes each party its devoir, function
and rank; before which, we can only assist it tenderly and bear with it.

CHAP. II. Maxims to make good use of the natural inclinations, and turn
them to good.
COnsidering him then, as man composed of body and spirit, he by a prudent
moderation must endeavor to accord, as much as may be, the opposition of these
two parts, and not rest so much upon the purity of the one, but that he yield
something to the infirmity of the other; to avoid that interior combat, which
disturbs the peace and tranquillity of our life. Which should oblige him to
become extreme careful to know him thoroughly; to mark all his propensions,
his motions, his aversions, and above all his genius, the strength and extent
of his spirit and mind. Forasmuch as the knowledge of the winds, of compass,
maps, and shelves, serves to a Pilot; and the skill of judging of the
strengths, and weakness of a City is necessary to him that does besiege it; So
much does the art of observing the dispositions of a young spirit profit him in
his directions. It is very difficult to assign particular means, to make this
observation, which depends rather upon the re-encounters, occasions, and
prudence of him that governes, then on any universal principles.
Nevertheless, I shall say in the gross, that he may remarke them, by tempting
him diversely with all kinds of objects, without discovering at first to him the
good, or evil included in them, and sometimes suffering nature to work and
act of her own self, thereby to see what she leads him to, and what she makes
him either choose or reject: Thus it was that Ulysses discovered Achilles his
sex, which he had so long concealed and disguised. A thousand occurrences
reveal (to him that narrowly will observe it) what his temper is; which is
likewise legible in his face, and may be guessed by his color, maladies,
appetite, his dreams, disposition, and agility, and by all the operations of
each part of his body: Also, by his resentment of injuries, the shame he has
for his faults, the care he takes to preserve his honor, his desire to
appear, his jealousy of others, the heat and ardour which leads him to the
ends he aims at, his constancy and resolution in difficulties, the manner of
his own government, the vivacity and promptness of his replies, and the
strength of his reasoning and arguments. On all which he must often try him,
and raise his spirits by delightful objects, to keep him in exercise, and see
his activity. In that tender age we bear a form of what shall be when we come
to virility; Like those Pictures, which being only rough-drawne, though they
want that perfection and luster which the last colors adds to them, yet they
have the perfect shape, and all the lineaments that are necessary. So that what
the pencill afterward does, serves only to embellish it, being ever wrought
exactly by the same strokes. Of all the precepts that can be given on this
subject, use and custom are the surest guides and means, to penetrate and
dive into the very bottomes, and most secret recesses of those young souls,
who having as yet not learned the art to dissemble, expose themselves to any
curious search, and discover what their natures are by acting freely, and
openly of themselves.

CHAP. III. The second Maxim, That his Governor must endeavor to win him
to embrace virtue out of a principle of affection, and not of fear; together
with the means to practice it.
THe insight, and knowledge which he shall gain by the precedent observations,
will show him the place whereon he ought to build, to take his measures
according to the dimensions of the ground-plot, and raise his edifice
proportionably to his foundations. We have nothing, or but very little in us
which may not be applied to some good: All the works of God are good in
themselves, we do make use even of venomous beasts for antidotes, and can
extract a wholesome juice from the least herb that grows. All our motions are
of themselves indifferent, they become good, or bad only by our means, and the
use we make them serve for. Every one desires good, and perfection, and that
which causes so many to stray from it, is the different manner whereby it is
represented: The will never tends to evil, but only when the spirit and senses
do disguise it under the appearance, and flattering shape of some good, and
never erres but by the ignorance, or malice of its guides. Virtue is so
amiable, that there is no soul which can know it, and not be enamored with
it, nor would vice be followed by any one, if it had not found out the art to
counterfeit the other. The principal care consists in well illuminating the
mind and spirit, from whom the will takes all its counsel; that Minister must
be well instructed, that he may faithfully inform his Master. The will is a
Prince which commands, but is nevertheless counseled by his servants, the
Orders and Edicts are made in his name, but his servants lay the plots and
projects; it is he tends toward the objects, and applies all the other powers,
to seek out what he desires; but even those which serve it in its pursuits,
do master it in its deliberation. To these therefore he should make his
address, and when these are persuaded, the other is easily drawn after them.

There are many which cause young men to exercise themselves in virtuous
actions with a kind of constraint, which makes them hate the end, even whilst
they are tending toward it. Although the Oxen draw the plow, yet the yoke is
hateful to them, and how ever we say that use makes perfectness, and custom
renders the most difficult things easy: I believe that to be truer in actions
of the body, then those of the mind; whose essential liberty not being
restrained but by some exterior obstacle: either it endeavors to surmount it
by force, or at least detests it, whilst it does undergo it. One is not
virtuous for doing that which is good, but for loving it, and that which we do
by constraint, is only imputable to the power which compels us. The heavens are
not animated though they incessantly move, their motion coming from a cause
that is separate, in their celerity we admire nothing but the Angels which first
sets them going. When virtue engenders not in our hearts, but comes to us only
from without, by some violent means, we possess it only as a slave, who
seeks but an occasion to escape, and not as our offspring borne of our own
blood and substance. It Is a beauty which will be sought too, and wooed
handsomely; that will command in us, and not be the servant of fear, bestowing
her self only on those whose hearts she has in full possession. If once we
can but inflame a soul with a true love for her, all the little troubles of
seeking and courting her, will be swallowed up in the ardour of its longing
desires. One must endeavor therefore to render this virtue grateful to him,
by discovering all her perfection and amability, and heighten those by the
deformity of her opposite, making him admire in others the glorious effects
which she produces, and dread the shame, and confusion which inevitably follow
all base ignoble actions; One must often highly praise the handsome qualities
of those he frequents, and as loudly blame the bad ones in his presence; So
furnishing him from others, with good examples for himself, which he will more
clearly behold, then he can in his own person. For every fault he shall
commit, you must be sure to make him ressent some trouble in his mind, as
shame, contempt, repentance, blame, the privation of some pleasure, which being
imprinted in his imagination, will make his actions become odious to him of its
self: Whereas the punishments of the body pass more lightly, and cause
nothing but indignation, or at most a servile fear, which does not make him
detest his fault, but only dread the evil which follows. There are a thousand
various means, which depend on the skill of him that shall undertake such a
charge, which cannot be reduced to precepts, consisting only in finding out
sweet, and cunning ways to bring him to the detestation of vice, and a perfect
love of virtue. This we may best bring to pass, by representing it with
pleasing ornaments, advantages and circumstances proportionate to his
inclination: And this first view will beget delectation, from thence will arise
love, which creates desire, and desire will cause a diligent search and pursuit
after virtuous actions, which will beget habits without difficulty, or pain.
He must have the patience to lead him up by all these steps and degrees, for
otherwise too great have may expose him to a fall, or at least run him out of
breath in the midst of his race. He must also mix, and temper his labors with
some delights, and little complacencies, thereby to make him taste and swallow
the profitable and pleasant together. As we use to gild over pills for sick
persons, so he may easily pass his studies under his divertisements, and make
use of his own pastimes to instruct him; which will be far more beneficial
to him, and not so soon distaste him, as those grand contentions of mind, which
leave behind them nothing but lassitude and vexation. Although the stomach be a
part which works necessarily, yet it cannot endure those viands which displease
it, much less the mind which has the liberty and choice of all things. In
conversation one may even fill, and furnish his soul with wholesome things,
and entertain him with solid discourse, delicately seasoned, which delighting
shall yet soundly nourish him. Amongst the exercises of youth, one may entice
him to such, where the mind acts its part, where it aiguises and sharpens, and
refines its self, or to others which harden, fortify, and strengthen the
body, making it become agile, active, and pliant to any useful exercise. And
in so doing, one must without discovery, make him avoid those that are
childish, and superfluous. When he is bent to any thing that is evil, or
useless, one must cunningly and ingenuously change that appetite, without
directly forbidding, or flatly refusing him, by interposing some more pleasing
and solid objects, to divert his idea from that which is hurtful to him under
other pretenses; either by deferring, or by feigning to consent to what he
desires, and contriving some obstacle under hand which may hinder him, or
permitting him sometimes to make trial of it, but withal so disposing of
things before hand, that he may receive some little displeasure thereby; that
so the injoiment it self, of that which he unhandsomely desired, may serve for
a penance, and mortification, which causing a distaste, will make him avoid
the like another time; but should one absolutely refute him, and not practice
these little contrivances, it would but irritate and augment his desire. It Is
the expeperience and observation of all wise men, that the will and desire of
man runs most greedily, and impetuously after forbidden things.

CHAP. IV Wherefore we do most ardently and violently desire forbidden things.
I Believe the truest reason of it is, that the Will will not lose her right of
liberty, it being the richest present she brought from heaven with her. It may
be likewise, because we fancy, and imagine there is more beauty and secret
perfection, in the object that is kept at distance from us. As Pictures show
handsomer afar off, then near at hand; or else even as those things which we
possess, do not tempt us; so those which we have not, excite our desire. A
healthful man, little minds his health, and learned men often despise knowledge,
(the full stomach loathes honey) whereas sick, or ignorant people, would covet,
and envy so much happiness; and this happens because the sentiments require a
certain convenient distance to act, and that which is within us, changes into
our nature, and can no longer be the object of our appetite, but that which is
at distance tempts us ever. If it be any thing easily attained and conquered,
it does not stir up any violent motion, because we do not fancy it so precious,
and even esteem it as good as our own already; being so facile to obtein. But
if it be difficult and thorny, then it is that their irascible is moved, and
stoutly resolves to pass through all obstacles. If it be the nature of the
thing, that it be hard to be acquired, he only labors in the search, and
choice of means, without other trouble: But if those impediments be in
himself, and that one forbids him to seek after that which he might easily
obtain, then the conflict is greater, because he has to deal with his own
passions, which coming to summon all his strength and forces, (as the natural
heat against the outward cold) contends against his reason, and to oversway it,
represents the forbidden object, with new and sweeter charms then was before
imagined. Let him be careful therefore in such like occasions, to temper his
precepts judiciously, that the execution of them may not become troublesome,
and withdraw him from those evils in such a manner, that he do not perceive the
profitable constraint, which is put on him. If the ends he tends toward,
be honest, but the means he uses unhandsome, one must trace him other paths
out to obtein them, and without either opposing or clashing against his
desires, find out some other discreet ways to stop, or hinder his
miscarriages. If his aims be evil, yet it is not the best way roughly to
refuse it, but rather reduce him to the necessity of not desiring it any more,
without suffering the loss of some more grateful pleasure. His passions must
be set against his passions, that so those monsters may destroy each other, and
by their mutual opposition, make a perfect counterpoise, which may restrain,
and tie them up in a just and equal temper. As a knowing Pilot makes every
wind to serve his need, by turning his sails: So a skillful man may apply al
kinds of inclinations to some good. If he be carried to prodigality, one may
moderate his too great profusion, by the same principle, showing him, that by
wasting, or bestowing too largely, he deprives himself of the means, and
pleasure of giving often; and suffer him sometimes to reduce himself to the
necessity of not having the means to do it, and at the same time, present some
occasions thereof to him, to tempt him to it, which will show him, that the
excess of his liberality, makes him incapable to continue it; so this
inclination shall make him reform himself, and this passion will destroy it
self with its own weapons.

Aristotle's counsel herein, seems to me, to be too violent, and of too
difficult performance. The means, says he, to correct any of their excess; is
to do actions that are contrary, or tending to a direct extremity of
opposition: And thus, says he the soul will of it self return to that just
proportion, and mean, where virtue is placed; as a stick is made straight by
bowing and bending it the contrary way. But the use of this precept is
dangerous, and requires great wisdom, an accomplished judgment, and an
undaunted courage. Truly he that should treat young people thus, would expose
them to strange conflicts, and perhaps their senses thus ill used, might revolt
against such tyranny. It is good for such as can, to practice it of
themselves; because the violence which any one does to himself, is never so
sensible, as that which proceeds from another; But to exercise it on those
tender, and delicate bodies, would endanger breaking them, by bowing them so
much. It is safer to prune, and softly pare away the superfluities, and lure
the soul back, by ingenuous diversions, yea, even by greater pleasures, and
delights, then those we would deprive them of, or wean them from. If the youth
will needs pass over a bog, do not hinder him, but lay a plank over it for
him, that he may not bemire, and soil himself: All this consists only in the
manner of managing things; and there is sometimes more trouble in doing evil,
then in doing good.

CHAP. V. The third Maxim, that he must gain the love of him he governs, and
also love him tenderly again.
HE may easily obtain all this, if from the beginning he endeavors to
insinuate himself into his mind, and esteem, and seeks to gain an entire
belief, not by power and authority only, to which reason, respect, and truth
obliges all noble minds, but likewise by sweetness, and complaisance, and the
marks of a strict, and cordial affection which he must strive to establish
reciprocally at the very first, as the foundation of all his future conduct. We
find now adays that Politicians effect more by their secret intelligences, then
by the number of their Soldiers; and strength of Arms. If he can once but knit
a strict correspondency with his heart, he will easily become Master of his
desires, whereof that is the fountain. The heart is the Fort, or Citadel which
commands all the rest of that little World Man. Whoever conquers but that
place, suddenly brings the rest into subjection; but though all the rest were
subdued, yet if that stood out, he has but an exterior puissance, which shall
never make him rule as Sovereign, though he may sometimes force him to
compliance, or obedience. That Woman had no small reason, that vaunted that she
governed the Athenian Republic, because she entirely possessed her Husbands
will, who bare the greatest authority. It Is the heart presides in the council
of our passions, and is that which produces all our desires. In that lies the
spring of all our motions, it is the repositary of our secrets, the primum
mobile of all our actions, the last asleep, and first awake, all the affairs of
man must pass through this office; and though wisdom, or reason do sometimes a
little restrain its power; yet the senses are ever on its side, and being the
head of a strong faction, it may cause many huge troubles, if it be provoked
and stirred by irritations. As soon as the eyes receive the species of any
object, they are immediately presented to the heart by the imagination, and the
mind has no share till after the other powers have tasted their fill. We must
therefore first gain the heart if we will possess the whole man: by this means
we shall not make him only delight, and esteem things present to be good, but
he will take pleasure also to observe them. One may win something by the power
of persuasion on a soul; truth well expressed does ever gain belief; but yet is
not always followed. Words are but wind, as we use to say, they are only a
sound, which cannot enter, unless they find a passage ready opened, but
affection is a Character which penetrates through the heart, opens the door it
self, and makes a deep impression. It Is a Prince which obtains an Empire so
much the more absolute, by how much the obedience is more voluntary. It
produces many good effects, in a person whom one governs: First, it makes him
plyant, and submissive to all commands for fear of displeasing, and so for the
faults he shall happen to commit, there will need no other punishment, but only
to testify a little froideur, or coldness of affection. Even as God punishes
the offenses of those he loves, by withdrawing part of his graces from them;
that thereby their earnest desires to recover those blessings a gain, may
reduce them to their devoir again, and the fear of being deprived of them
afterward may keep them so constantly for ever. Secondly, he will learn with
far greater facility and ease whatsoere shall be enjoined by a person whom he
loves, because the delectation will be joined to the utility. Love is a
puissant Master, having ever both the attention, and assiduity of his
Disciples. The cause why young men learn with difficulty, is because their
heart is as 'twere divided and diverted by exterior objects, they cannot so
easily rally their forces which stray without, and which are necessary to
digest the nourishment which is infused in them; but when their affection
adheres, and cleaves to him that governs, they suck, and greedily swallow all
his precepts, and that amity which makes things become semblable, and alike,
and the means proportionate, produces also a certain communication of species,
and conformity of manners, of sentiments of language, and of actions. As one
may discover in all such as do reciprocally affect one another. I believe the
cause of it is, because one does carefully observe the actions of those whom we
wish well to; and because we always think them noble, and thus considering them
with some delight, they imprint themselves insensibly within us. Or else it is,
because we frequent them oftener, and that constant society, does beget a
conformity of habits; or in fine, because the will does of it self go forth, to
join with the thing beloved, and even be transformed into it. In the third
place, this affection will greatly incite, and prompt the young man to please
him, to hear him, to believe and imitate him. The power of God must in the
first place, reign most soveraignly, and absolutely over men: and in the next
place that of Parents, and last of all the power and authority of those, who
have the care and charge of our education, who are the fathers, as I may fitly
call them, of our minds. It Is God is the first cause of our being, to which our
Parents do contribute afterward; bringing as 'twere the grosser materials,
which being set up in a natural frame, are afterward adorned, and furnished by
these our Tutors. And these must imitate God in all his conduct, since they
immediately succeed him in his authority; Now the first thing God requires of
men, is the heart; when we have given up, and perfectly submitted that part to
him, we find no more repugnance, or reluctance in our obedience, whereas those
who have no other object but the fear of punishments, or the hope of rewards,
seldom attain to any high perfection. It is the same in moral things, if he
that teaches them do not make himself beloved, he will be followed but coldly:
when we would obtain any thing from a great person, we make use of some
pleasing Advocate to mediate for us. The mind and will are absolute Monarchs,
and will have us observe the same circumstances and ceremony toward them. And
the art of pleasing is a powerful motive to persuade, and impetrate.

CHAP. VI. How we must make use of this Maxim.
HE must nevertheless manage this business cautiously, and warily, lest he
confound his respect with his tenderness, or lose his authority of reprehension
by too much complaisance; It Is a great art to know how to accommodate love with
majesty, and join severity with sweetness, without too much softness. Amity
requires a certain proportion which may oblige one to descend sometimes to
youthful Sentiments, which must be practiced in such a manner, that they by
degrees be elbow'd out, and manly ones implanted in their stead. When the Poets
make Jupiter transformed into a Bull, or the like, to communicate himself to
his lovers, they yet always leave some marks and footsteps of his divinity
under those shapes. When Painters make the portraicture of any one in small,
they have a care to keep all the dimensions proportionable to the face, and
body they mean to represent, though in a far less volume. And when God himself,
through his immortal goodness was pleased to give himself to men, and
illuminate them with his own brightness, which was before wrapped up in such
thick Clouds; knowing they were but children whom he would instruct, and whom
the Father had committed to his education, he would not appear in lightning and
thunders, nor in the luster of his greatness, which would have dazzled and
blinded them, in stead of enlightening them; but he became like unto them, and
made himself sensible, that he might enter into their spirits by their senses,
and yet his divinity kept its grandeur, and full majesty, in this lowest
humility, and abasement. Governors of young men, are Gods Lievtenants in this
function, and as he became man, to teach men, so they must in some, sort
imitate Children, whilst they instruct them, always accommodating themselves
to their age, sometimes soothing their humors, and stooping to them, but
having still an eye and ear to make them reap some benefit from all their
actions, and thoughts, ever raising their minds insensibly to higher things,
and making their own sentiments the stairs whereby they must climb up to true
perfection. But yet he must not lose his authority by this compliance. When a
man will take some great burden on his back, he stoops to take it, and then he
not only raises himself again, but bears up the weight that is laid on; In the
same manner ought he to appropriate and fit himself to his charge, and
presently when he is established, and become absolute Master of his mind, and
will, he must advance to his own posture again, and raise the youth up with him
to higher, and nobler things.

It Is an old Proverb, that familiarity breeds contempt; and it is also a most
certain experience, that gravity takes off confidence, and affection. But he
that can preserve a familiar Majesty, that can please without flattery, reprove
without offense, subject without alienating, exercise without wearying, and
recreate without debauching; such an one will illuminate the soul, conquer the
heart, and find every power, and faculty ready prepared to receive any good
impression.

CHAP. VII. Three things which hinder the respect, and amity of young men
toward their Governors.
THere are three things which hinder one from preserving amity, and respect in
a young spirit. The one comes from without, when the Tutor is not honored, and
esteemed by the Parents, Domestics, Friends, or compagnons of him he governs.
Examples are a living Book, whose Characters easily imprint themselves in him
that reads them. Exterior things are very powerful on any soul, but principally
on those who as yet do not act but by the counsel of their senses, who having
not yet their own sentiments fully perfected in them, are constrained to rely
on the judgments of others in whom they confide. The second hinderance proceeds
from the natural inclination of youth, who being prompted to their own
pleasures, abhor, and detest all that restrain, or impede them; which makes
them look on their Governors, as the disturbers of their repose, and enemies of
their delights and sensualities, which immediately breeds aversion in them. And
this is the more difficult to overcome, because it is more natural, and youth
is guided, and conducted at first merely by nature, who bandies against all
that is opposed to her. That which causes distempers, and maladies in the body
is the contrariety of such qualities which are incompatible, and this also
works the same effects in our manners, and produces love, or hatred, according
as the objects are conformable, or contrary to its propensions. He must study
therefore to overcome this obstacle, and not have nature for his enemy at the
first. But make a dissembled agreement with her, to deceive her with the more
advantage. The third proceeds from the Governor himself, when either by
indecent actions, or vicious habits, he loses the authority annexed to his
charge, by such defects in his own person. There is no better Art whereby to
gain esteem, then to become worthy of such esteem; Respect is a tribute which
virtue commands, and acquires even from those that hate it. Those that possess
it need use no Arts, nor false Grimaces, she always keeps her own Majesty, and
is revered by the greatest powers, though she cannot make her self be always
beloved. Let him be careful therefore to deserve honor, and obedience, rather
then to exact it. If he will bring these fruits forth in his disciple, he must
have the root of it to grow within himself. The honor of a Prince, if founded
only in the number, and strength of his guards, is but a vain appearance in his
subjects, and as such an one has no true Majesty, but only a few outward
pomps, and gaudy shows, so neither is he truly respected, or observed, but
only with a retaliation of seeming devoirs, and flattering outward gestures.
That Tutor who has no gravity but in his words, and threats, gains no more
obedience, then his disciple is capable of fear. If he do any ignoble actions,
he pulls down all that his discourse, or teaching had built, and even tempts,
and invites the youth to imitate him, if what he did were pleasing and
voluptuous, or exposes himself to laughter, and derision if his actions were
ridiculous.

CHAP. VIII. Of Pedants, and their several kinds.
IT happens very often, that those who have not any qualities whereby to render
themselves commendable, will seek to gain authority by an affectation of
wisdom, a haughty countenance, or an imperious accent, not speaking but with
disjointed words, or else extending to a prolixity of discourse, as if they did
preach, pronouncing their follies like rare sentences. The poor youth who
hears, but understands them not, is more confounded, then instructed by his
precepts; and as those things which displease do easily distaste, from this
disgust they come to slight such things, and from this slighting there arises
hatred, which does increase if they strive to use force: This they endeavor to
remedy by harsh means, or ruder stripes, and so lose their power by too much
using of it, or if they meet a docile spirit, they make it by such unhandsome
treatments to become dull, and degenerate. They commit another fault, which has
ruined many persons of fair hopes, and promises, and that by ordering, and
proportioning, or disposing of things according to their own nature, and not to
the capacity of him they govern. Like a Tailor that should take measure of his
own body for another man's clothes, or as a Physician who over loving Bacchus
his sucking bottle himself, should prescribe Wine to another man in the height
of a burning Fever. They will reform the subject they are working on, in stead
of conforming themselves to his ability. It must be his care that instructs to
prepare fit precepts for him that is to learn. It is much easier to change the
Lessons, then to alter his understanding. When a Glove is too strait, we must
not cut, or pare away the hand, but choose another Glove that better fits it.

These faults proceed from three different causes, which makes three sorts of
Pedants. The first is want of judgment, and that is essential, and
incorrigible, and such kind of people should never undertake to govern others,
wanting indeed the skill to rule, and govern themselves. Those have this
unhappiness that they do every thing out of time, and never keep a due
regularity, or equality in their actions, if they reprove, it is not without
excess, and outrage, if they Praise it is without discretion, they refuse what
they should grant, and permit what they should forbid; sometimes they dilate
the Spirit by too great a license, and otherwhile depress, and restrain it by
excess of rigor, and wanting a foundation of firm, and solid principles they
do good, or evil only by hap-hazzard.

CHAP. IX. Second kind of Pedants.
THe second kind, is of such who are truly full of knowledge, and also have
some color, and tincture of virtue, but they want that experience which is the
true, and only guide, for having never applied themselves but only to the
contemplation of high notions, they find themselves but Novices, when they come
to action. They have brave Idea's, and speculations of many things, which like
Plato's Commonwealth, can never be put in practice. They speak only out of
Books, and reason altogether with others Arguments; and though they are not
ignorant of what they should do, yet how to do any thing required, they are to
seek for. They will produce myriads of examples, and precepts, but not one that
is expedient. If you ask them counsel, they will give you Seneca's or
Plutarchs, they are more knowing in the intrigues of Caesar, and Pompey, then
in those of England, France, or Spain. They have studied replies, for all sorts
of complements, which they use without choice, or distinction, and are forced
to tie up their tongues in a more becoming silence, when that borrowed store is
exhausted. These most ordinarily do every thing indiscreetly, and unhandsomly,
when they think to stroke they scratch, and spend themselves in useless
labors; for they being only Copies, and not having any thing of their own
stock, are perpetually constrained to beg, and borrow from the dead, those same
things which they distribute amongst the living, and must still have a
consultation with their Authors, and Masters, before they can instruct their
disciples. And therefore we must not wonder if their carriage be often as
ridiculous as the change of times, and customs is various through the world.

CHAP. X. The third kind of Pedants.
THe third sort, or kind, are the half learned, to whom there cleaves much
presumption, and self conceit: they are great talkers, lovers of their own
opinions, enemies of whatever comes from others, rude, and violent in their
conversations, testy, despisers, and melancholy. These kind of creatures should
be excluded, not only from the conversation of all young people, but even from
all humane society. They will show themselves to be of eminent parts, wherever
they appear, always striving to be above others by their extravagancies. Of
these three sorts, the first is dangerous, the second unprofitable, the last
troublesome, and importunate. The one guides not the judgment aright, the
other confounds and intangles it, and the third displeases, and distastes it:
It is almost the same with young, and delicate imaginations, and desires, as
with great bellied Women, who mark the fruit of their Wombs, with impressions
of those objects that are most exposed to their sight, according as they fancy,
or delight in them, for which many douse to place the sweetest, and most
pleasing objects they can before them, that so beholding, and considering
nothing but what is lovely, they may conceive handsome, and rare Ideas. A mind
that is not beforehand accustomed to any habits, does easily take the print,
and form of those actions which it sees much practiced by those he does
frequent, and whom he much affects. That which most ordinarily makes children
resemble their fathers, is not so much the blood, and grosser substance, which
is of it self indifferently apt for any figure, but the mothers lively
apprehension, in whom the image of her husband is commonly more strongly
imprinted, then any other. The Governor is Father of the young man's mind, and
spirit, the imagination which receives all the species, and images of objects
is the mother, who propounds nothing to the understanding, but what she sees
most frequently acted, and which most pleases her.

CHAP. XI. Of the qualities of good Governors.
IT is necessary therefore to have a man, who besides his sweetness of nature,
and virtuous habits, which are essentially requisite in such a charge, must
have also a good garb, and accort carriage in his actions. A mildness, and
facility of speech, ingenious mind and visage, modesty, pleasingness,
complaisance, civility, discretion, a manly, yet humble and discreet
confidence, and above all perfect intelligence of the things of the world,
which concern the active life, which consists in knowing, or finding out the
nature, and propensions of every one, and framing, or accommodating himself to
them without baseness, or flattery; in being versed in the Modes, and Manners
of the times present, and the customs of the places he resides in, in behaving
himself discreetly amongst either great persons, or his own equals, or his
inferiors, in speaking, and being silent in season, in being prudent and
foresighted in judging, and coming off fairly in company without any
affectation of vain parado's, or applause, in finding quick and subtle
expedients, to disengage himself from a bad business, and having a Magazin, or
store of prudence, and courage to make use of in time of particular intrigues,
and rencontres which fall out too often in this unhappy age. As for those other
qualities which concern the soul, piety, probity, erudition, wisdom, and
goodness, I do not bring these into the list, because they are to be supposed
in him, as foundations absolutely necessary without which all the rest would
fall to ruin; and if it seem difficult to meet a man completed with all these
parts and gifts, at least one must choose a person as near this model as it is
possible, and though he have not all these perfections, yet at least let him be
free from the defects that are opposite to them, and so be in some capacity to
attain them.

CHAP. XII. Of the most ordinary defects, which breed in young people.
HE will at first find work enough which nature has prepared for him; for a
young soul how noble, or high soever it be, is ever full of many defects which
he must weed out carefully in the beginning before he cast the good seed in it.
They are so many dispositions contrary to virtue, which must be rid thence,
before you can bring him to a right posture. As before grace can be received,
we must be thoroughly purged from fin. The most common are stubbornness, sloth,
self-love, credulity, aversion from all labor, levity, immodesty, depraved
appetites, and several others, of which some are born with us; others are
communicated by contagion, which often succeed one another, and are ready to
spring up afresh in the rooms of those we had newly rooted out thence. He must
be very wary, and gentle in his proceedings, having an eye to the causes,
qualities, and circumstances of the defects. If they be absolutely vicious, as
certain base, and unworthy inclinations, they must be opposed with more rigor
then others need to be, and be rendered as odious, and hateful as it is possible,
he must show how ill-favored they appear in others, and strive to divert him
from such thoughts by other employments, causing him to undergo some shame,
reproach, or disdain if he fall foul on them again, drawing him by degrees to
actions that are quite contrary, in which he may find both delight, and honor.
And if they be of those little imperfections which are incident to that tender
age, and not to their nature, they must be managed more delicately, and
sometimes even winked at: as being the signs, and tokens of spirit, and wit,
which may be turned into virtues, if they be judiciously wrought upon, and
directed to good ends.

CHAP. XIII. Three means to correct our evil inclinations.
PHilosophers assign three means to correct our selves: the one is to fly from
those objects, to which we are allured; the second is to oppose, and combat our
passions one with another: and the third is to assault them openly by meet
strength of reason. The first of these is neither generous, nor always
effectual; because we happen often to meet that which we think to fly from, nor
is that the way to strike to the root of the evil. Chi e ferito nel cuore in
van si fugge. The second is not virtuous, though it be utile. The third is more
Heroic and noble, but likewise it is more difficult. The best means, is to
blend, and apply all these three together with discretion, according as the
exigency requires. Sometimes they must be diverted, and dispel'd by the luster,
and clear light of truth, by the charming beauty of virtue, and the loathsome
deformity of vice; other times by shunning its sight and rencontre, and now and
then excluding them by entertaining some other honest pleasures, which may
thrust them quite out of doors. When we would weaken an enemy, we create
divisions amongst them. So must we likewise do by our passions, cast in the
apple of discord and let them be destroyed, one by another. The desires of
Glory, and Honor has stifled the motions of sensuality in many breasts. The
love of Women has often made a narrow covetous heart to become liberal, yea
prodigal; But he must have a mighty care to hinder that passion that is Victor
from triumphing over the liberty of the soul, lest it should erect an absolute
tyranny there. Nor must we utterly extinguish the passions, but only tame, and
moderate their excess: for they are vicious only in as much as they exceed; and
being brought to a just, and even temper, they become instruments of virtue,
and make the soul act with the more life and vigor.

The end of the first Part.
The Second Part OF Heroicke Education.
HAving brought him to a temper fit to receive good impressions, his care must
tend toward two things, which con-center in one again, that is, to make an
honest well bred Man. The first is touching the Body, and the other the Soul;
for these two parts being reciprocally dependents, and concurrents together in
actions, they have both need of culture. If Politicians give Princes maxims
whereby to command well, they likewise prescribe Laws to Subjects to obey well.
It Is vain to give the soul light, and illumination whereby to reason, unless
we also dispose the body to follow its counsels. Moreover although habits
depend upon the soul as their original, yet there are some which reside in the
body as in their proper subject: It is therefore needful that he have
dispositions fitted to receive them, as well as a soul to produce and bring
them forth.

CHAP. I. Three sorts of corporal habitudes.
THe corporal habits are of three sorts, some consist of interior actions, and
the conformity of the body with the superior part, by means of which it obeys,
and submits without repugnance to whatever reason prescribes, even against, or
contrary to its own appetites. These are not acquired but through long use and
practice, and are the perfection, and consummation of man's wisdom. The second
have another object, and look not so much to the soul, as upon its union with
the body, both which naturally desire their own preservation. By these a man
uses to restrain, and deprive himself of all those things that might hasten
his end, or discompose his health. And because young people through want of
knowledge, of care, and of power to govern, and curb themselves, do easily
yield to such things as do them hurt, and because the same nature which gives
them the instinct to preserve their health, does likewise give them an appeti^^
to follow that which does destroy it. Therefore those that have them in their
charge must wisely supply those little defects of their age, charity managing
so precious a jewel; not that I would take away the use of all things that are
pleasing, or offend nature whilst I intend to protect it, nor make that life
unhappy which I would prolong: no, I would only pare away what is superfluous.
That which is necessary, is never hurtful, and what is excessive, can never be
necessary. Nature, says Seneca, is content with a little, one may easily
satisfy it, opinion has never enough, because it has no bounds, or limits,
but still leaps from one desire to another. Let us therefore allow nature what
she ought to have, and take from opinion what we ought not to give it. This is
a virtue essential to an honest man, which I place amongst those of the body,
not that it proceeds not from the empire of the soul: But because it terminates
primitively in the body, and tends to take away the means of annoying the
spirit and life. I place this not only in the moderation of eating and
drinking, but universally in the abstinence, from all excess and disorder,
which decays the body, over-clouds the spirit and mind, enervates the strength
and force, invades the health, shortens the life, and makes the soul to become
a slave to its own lust, and pleasures. I am willing one should taste of
innocent enjoyments; but not that they should enjoy, and enchain us. We should
make use of them as Princes do of their Buffoons, whose counsel they never
take, nor ever call them into their presence, but when they mean to lose an
hour, or two in pastime. Of all kinds of excess that of the mouth is the most
shameful, and prejudicial: for being gross, and material, it makes a man all
flesh, and blood; and, as all that is superfluous in us, turns into such humors
which are most predominant. If we are melancholy, it breeds and amasses black
humors, increases choler, and inflames the blood; and so of others the like;
and therefore we thereby do but lend weapons to our passions to make a civil
war in our own bosoms, or heap up fuel on those flames that shall consume us.
From thence arise those gross vapors which climb into our brain, making us
dull, and heavy, unquiet, testy, and sometimes depriving us even of the liberty
of its functions. And this begets also another unhappiness which is that we
accustom, and subject our selves so much to superfluous things, that being
changed into habits, they become at last altogether necessary to us. Which is a
reason why great persons, who are wont to live more delicately then others, are
much more to be pitied when reduced to necessity, standing in need of much more
then nature of her self does want for her conversation. Cato feared the
sobriety of Caesar more then his courage. It Is that which made him
indefatigable in his labors, as fortune made him invincible to his enemies. He
eat little, labored much, went on foot in the front of his Armies, bare-headed
in the most scorching heats of Summer, and the most biting Winter frosts. He
used his body to all hardships, and inconveniences, and gave it no more repose
then what was needful to continue his labor: But above all it is noted that he
drank very little wine. Those who cannot imitate him, I shall counsel them at
least to follow him as near as they can; if they mean to succeed him in his
glory. This virtue must be acquired by degrees, and steps, using the body by
little and little to be deprived of its ease, or at least not to be subject to
it. This indeed cannot be practiced without using a kind of violence to nature.
But being for its good, there should be no complaint, since the remedy though
it be harsh is salutary.

The third sort are touching the body and exterior actions, consisting in
exercises, which are ordinarily taught the young Nobility, for which having
particular Masters, the Governor need to have no other care, but to make him be
assiduous, and diligent, and to make him to love those exercises, in such sort,
that he do not thereby draw off his affection from higher and more noble
things, but esteem of them as his divertisement, not his employment. For those
are no fundamental qualities, nor do they make a man commendable of themselves,
but only in as much as they direct him toward virtue, and are joined to the
divine graces of his mind and spirit, especially in men of great quality, who
will not take any profession, and should only scorn to be altogether ignorant
of them. In this rank I place riding the great horse, fencing, music both of
voice, and instruments, dancing, vaulting, plausibility of speech, a graceful
garb, and accort carriage, a handsome mind and presence, and all other such
like qualities which only concern his behavior, and comeliness of action,
which indeed one should endeavor to have, but never propound them as the
highest aim, or perfection, but as ornaments, and embellishments fitting for
men of rank and quality. For as great persons never put all their estates in
Jewels, and ornaments, so neither must we make our capital and foundation of
such virtues, which may be common to vicious persons. Neither must we despise
them; because they are handsome additions, and little heightnings, which sets
off the luster of the soul, with greater advantage, and admiration. The best
Maxim I can give to gain these, and to do all things completely, is to do them
without constraint, or affectation, with a natural assurance, and an ingenuous
confidence, employing all on^s art, to hide that art from open view. But above
all not to brag of any thing, whatsoever advantage one may have above others.
For in that instant that we make a show of knowing much, and doing things well,
or having a good opinion of our selves, we gain the disesteem of all others. It
is extreme good likewise to frequent such persons very often, whose manners,
and actions are pleasing, which without labor will insensibly inspire the
gesture, and behavior into our imaginations, and that without either
affection, or studied po^.

CHAP. II. The Governors second end and care, touching the soul, divided into
two parts, the Inferior, and Superior.
THe Second, and principal end, and aim of the Governor, is to dress and
cultivate the soul, which we consider two ways, according to the diverse
functions it does exercise. First, as it imagines, receives, retains, and
digests the species coming from the senses. Secondly, as it reasons, and
deliberates. The first is composed of three powers, which require an exact
care: for from those all the defects, or perfections of man do ordinarily
proceed, viz. from the imagination, common sense, and the memory: The first of
these must be regulated in its designs, disordered agitations, its false
apprehension of objects, and above all vulgar opinions, which consist in
admiring too facilely, acting by custom and by example, embracing the
judgment of others, passionately siding with parties, loving, hating,
praising, blaming without good grounds, entertaining opinions, becoming
refractory, and easily relishing, and favoring the passions, and interests of
others, judging and censuring all things, and a thousand other such like
weaknesses, which arise from the imbecility, or laziness of the imagination,
which had rather rely, and trust the reports of others, then take the pains to
present every thing to the judgment to examine them thoroughly. He must be
careful therefore to fit and freight the imagination with good, and choice
things, maintain it in a liberty of considering and weighing every thing,
applying it to solid things, and showing him the vanity of those objects it
apprehends, and falsely admires. This power and faculty, has one great defect,
which is that it represents things greater then they are, and often abuses the
mind and will, making them believe and desire that which is false and evil. He
must endeavor earnestly to enlighten this, and restrain that impetuosity,
which does oversway, and biass it, and makes it rove and wander, and this he
must fix on what it does, and mingle some pleasure with all its occupations
that it may still be present, for having some pleasing end, it will wholly apply
it self thereto, and not be scattered, and parcel'd toward so many several
objects at the same time.

CHAP. III Of common sense, and the memory.
THe second, which is the commonsense, is a piece of great importance. It Is
that which purifies, disgests, and ranges all the species in a prepared
readiness for the mind, and judgment. One must therefore be very careful to
teach him all things with an easy method, and a certain order, that may make
him see every thing clearly, and not entangle and perplex him, strengthening him
with universal principles, which may serve him for a foundation, by no means
confounding, or puzling him with multitudes of precepts, and lessons: But by a
sweet succession make him pass from one step to another, raising him by degrees
from the lowest, to the highest things, and using him betimes to observe the
like order in all his actions, and to sustain himself upon firm principles.
This contributes very much to judgment and discourse, and is extreme
necessary, as well for the acquisition of profound Sciences, as for the
ordinary conduct of ones life.

The third which is Memory, has been slighted, and despised by many men.
Seneca makes but small account of it, yet there are others that approve, and
improve it as much as possible. To me it seems very useful: as Barns and
Cellars to those that will buy provisions of Corn and Wine. I confess,
according to that Idea which they propound of an austere Savage, and unsociable
Wisdom which some affect, it is not so considerable to them. But for such as
will tame, and familiarize Virtue, and Sciences, and make them enter into our
common commerce, and conversation, such ought to make good provision of things
laying up a store in the cells, and repositories of their memory, to make use
of upon occasion, it being needful for them to know how people lived in times
past, as well as what the Modes of the times present are. It is particularly
requisite for those that intermeddle with affairs of State, either in Peace or
War. It plays its part in all occurrences, and ought still to accompany the
Judgment, as the Secretary that has the keeping of all its registers, and
does first propound all the subjects on which a man is to act: It is requisite
likewise for the facility, and elegancy of discourse, to provide fit, and apt
words whereby to express our thoughts quaintly, without grating the ears of the
hearers, by disjointed and harsh words, which seem as they were drawn like a
bucket out of a deep well, and yet run like a kennel, whose little stream
follows in a continual succession, without the least interval till it is quite
dry. This is one of those exterior qualities which indeed renders a man more
grateful, and is somewhat rare in these days. We find many that have merit and
sufficiency enough, and yet are so unhappy in this particular, that like large
bottles with narrow necks, there comes nothing from them but drop by drop.
Others have a great facility in speaking ill, both importuning, and stopping
those ears that listen to them. These are not content to be sots only, unless
all the world know it; if they have a story to relate, they must needs make its
beginning rise with the beginning of the world, and then they dwell so long
upon frivolous circumstances, that they are insensibly drawn to other matters,
into which they hop, like birds from branch to branch, and sometimes in the
very midst of their relation they wander so far from the subject they had in
hand, that they are forced to seek about for it again, as the young lad did for
his Fathers Asses: Others to raise themselves above the vulgar, esteem it too
mean for them to use the same words as their Servants do, coin many new ones,
and for fear they should speak like others, they use a canting Jargon which
none can understand without an interpreter. A young man must fashion himself
betimes to a good dialect, his language must be smooth, intelligible,
significant, and as concise as possible can be without obscurity. To which
three things are necessary; a promptitude, or swiftness of thoughts, an
abundance of choice words, and language, and apt disposition to it. The first
requires the presence, and vivacity of imagination. The second a strong
retentive memory: The third, a clean and able common sense. Such as have these
three gifts, have a great advantage above others. Nevertheless art, and study
may bring a man to these, though of himself he have but little inclination to
them. To this end, one should be instructed from infancy, when we are most apt
to retain, and when these powers are commonly most vigorous. Caesar's eloquence
is attributed to his Mother Aurelia. She spoke her language purely, and by her
continual converse imprinted that neat and fluent language, in him which we so
much admire in all his writings. The young Gentleman, should therefore have one
by him, that knows all the beauties and graces of speech, which he must teach
him in all his conversation, not only pointing out his faults, but instructing
him in the quaintness he must use in his discourse; and also exercising him by
writing letters on all kinds of subjects, which will be a means to complete him
in his style, and language.

CHAP. IV. Of reading, and other means to help the memory.
REading does much enlarge and open the understanding, and make the memory
fruitful in good words. But the Governor must make choice of books for him, and
then let him form and shape his style of himself, without tying, or obliging
him to any example: For discourse, and writing being the images of the soul;
every one expresses his thoughts differently according to his own genius, which
if it be made subject to another, will appear full of constraint, and
affectation. It Is no matter how he speaks, or writes, so he do it well: And the
best rule that one can give him, is to let him see how others have spoken, and
then let him do, as he shall judge best himself.

Another means and help to improve the memory; is to exereise it often, and
accustom it daily to retain somewhat, not to use in a vain ostentation; but to
feed it with good nourishment, which by little and little changes into our own
proper nature, and enlightens the mind to improve, and heighten those
conceptions which we gather, and cull from others, and keeps the memory from
decaying for want of exercise. And to this purpose the Governor must be of
ingenious, as to whiten two walls with one brush. That Is to say, that since the
storehouse must be filled, let him take care that it be not toys and trumpery,
or which is yet worse, sordid ordure; but let them be useful, and excellent
things, which may one day serve to assist his judgment, when he shall come to
that maturity, as to know how to manage them. Young men are ordinarily set to
learn Horace, Martials Epigrams, Cicero's Epistles, and other such like things,
but I would not have him dwell too long upon those, nor vainly fit that place
with them, which is ordained for more noble treasures. There should be nothing
hoarded up, which may not be beneficial in its time, and therefore there must
be a great regard to the quality, and condition of him that is to be taught,
and to the profession he intends to follow afterward, thereby to teach and
instruct him in such principles as are fit, and laying them up in his memory,
even before he thoroughly comprehends them, by reason of his youth. These are
such provisions, and preparations, as are requisite to be made ready for the
judgment, against it begins to act; that so it may find all the materials
rightly disposed, according to the design before resolved on; But above all
things he must be furnished amply with wholesome, and sage documents, both for
his society, manners, and the actions of his life. And when these three powers
shall be thus brought, and ranked in their just posture, it will not be
difficult to raise the soul to a high pitch of knowledge and understanding, and
to inflame the will with an ardent love of true honor. There is no more to do,
but only to elect, amongst the great number of things, which may be known,
those which are most proper and suitable to his birth and and condition; and
life being very short, and sciences infinitely many, he must take measure of
the necessity which nature has imposed on us; and not being able to attain to
the knowledge of all, choose those which are most utile, and most excellent.

CHAP. V. Of true Piety, and solid discourse.
THe first piece wherewith he must be armed, and furnished; is that true, and
essential Piety, which is the foundation of all other virtues, and the path to
our maine, and last end, without which all other perfections are but vain
appearances, and false Diamonds, which have indeed a little glistering
likeness, but want the true luster, worth and value of the true beauteous
Jewel. It Is that which will conduct us to sovereign perfection, which renders
us pleasing to God, and to men, which makes our lawful designs prosper, and
shields us, or rather takes away the jurisdiction of fortune. Let him therefore
be assiduously careful above all things, to plant and water the seeds of
Religion, as he made promise at his Baptism, and let him endeavor to discover,
in all the things he beholds the grandeur, and wonders of his God; let him
accustom, and use himself betimes, in the days of his youth, to invoke and
adore him on all occasions, and knit himself so closely to him, that no power
in this world may be able to divide, and separate him. There are some who fancy
an incompatibility betwixt God and the Court, and believing the soul is
indivisible, think it impossible to be shared betwixt those two Masters. But
this is easy to be reconciled, if we consider God, as the chief and highest
end, toward whom, and in whom all our actions must tend, and center, and look
on the Court as the circle wherein we must run, and the Theater on which we
must act our parts. Though all the spears follow, and obey the primum mobile;
that hinders not, but they at the same time do move in their own spears; we
may submit to this first cause, and yet act in the world. Those abuses, and bad
examples which are in Courts, are not in the nature of them, nor by
institution: they crowd in there by force, and remain there without
establishment, and if a soul be guided aright, it still find more cause to
admire the providence, and goodness of God, then occasions to offend him. The
ancient Fathers found the Devil in the deserts. He ranges about Cloisters,
Cells, and secret meeting places; and as virtue has no confined abode, but
presents it self to any invitation; So neither is vice limited, nor has any
settled dwelling, but nestles into every corner where it is entertained, or
softly cherished. How brave a thing it is to see a young man, of great quality,
make an open profession of Piety, and be studious, and careful to keep his soul
pure, and untainted, from the soil, and leprous spots of sin. What man can
refuse his respect, and affection, to him that pleases his God? And what is he
not able to perform, when he that can do all things is his friend, and
counselor? I speak not of that morose and servile devotion, which apprehends
God, more then it loves him, and never considers him, but as a Judge. Such a
virtue, if it deserve that noble name, proceeds only from a base timorous soul,
and lasts no longer then the dread and fear possesses them. I have known many,
that have been very precise, and retired in their greener years, having the
image of hell ever before their eyes, and being in their thoughts surrounded
with a legion of devils still ready to torment them, as soon as they should
have committed but the least peccadillio; and yet lusts, and sensual pleasures
did delight, and tickle their hearts, and thoughts, but they durst not
adventure to taste them, because they feared the punishments. By little and
little they began to fortify and encourage themselves against these
apprehensions, and seeing others sin without death, or visible danger; they
adventured at last to imitate them, and in a short space left most others
behind them, in their unhappy progress to damnation. So that this virtue,
which arises only from a servile fear, may be fitly compared to those golden
Apples, guarded by Dragons, which were soon lost, when the ugly Dragons were
defeated. I mean, therefore a true solid Piety, whereby a man loves God out of
a pure principle of esteem, because he is absolutely good, and perfect, and
continues thus, till he by his especial grace vouchsafes to turn that esteem
into tenderness, and higher flames of heavenly love and zeal, and fear to
offend him, as we fear to displease those whom we entirely love, and not only
as we apprehend to oppose that power which we dread. To bring him to this, he
must be led and guided with sweetness, by facile, and honest means, which may
neither breed repugnance, or weariness in him; and not impose devotion as a
yoke, but invite him to it, as a means to set his soul at rest, and calm his
passions with tranquillity, arming him against all accidents, and alluring all
hearts, and affections to him. By discoursing frequently of the immense
goodness, and mercy of God, making him delight in the sweet music of a quiet,
and pure conscience, showing him good examples, entertaining him with little,
but often repeated acts of Piety, furnishing him incessantly with high and
sacred thoughts of this real good, handsomely preventing any thing that might
divert him, and reaping some profit, and advantage of every little accident
that intervenes, by making him admire Gods providence in them all; and all this
with a certain method, which neither is Bigot, nor scrupulous.

CHAP. VI. Of Modesty.
FRom this root of Piety, Modesty will spring up, which is one of the most
desirable, and amiable things, and yet one of the rarest that is amongst men,
especially such as are of high births. It consists in words, and in actions;
and I esteem it altogether necessary for any man, that will perform great
actions. It wins men's hearts, which are the springs, and engines, whereby
difficult things must be executed: it begets a familiar confidence immediately
in those that treat with us, when they behold a friendly, and ingenuous
countenance, which neither stoops to soft affected caresses, nor wanders after
apish, ridiculous fanfaronneries, but carries an even temper. For men use to
give little credit to those that overflow in the mouth; above all one should
never speak of ones self, neither good nor ill; for fear of being disproved,
or avowed; the virtue of that man will be thought very little, that is forced to
trumpet forth his own praises. He should proclaim, and make himself known by
his brave actions, and not feign it by specious words. It has its defect, and
its excess. The proud have changed it into gravity, and the effeminate into
softness. The one is full of vanity, as much as the other, and they differ
only in that they take diverse ways to seek the same false glory; the one
exacting it as a tribute, the other begging it as an alms. To find a mean, and
keep the right path, we need but to observe this, we must render our selves
worthy of all honor, and not trouble our selves with others, if they do not pay
that honor to us, which we justly deserve, for this being above our reach, and
disposing, and depending on the fancies of others, we must be content that we
at least deserve it, though we do not receive it. He that would never come to
be despised, let him do nothing that is unhandsome, and let him neither become
dependent on another through vain hope, nor tyranny over any, because of higher
abilities. There are other particular means which must be taught young men, as
to know perfectly all the civilities, ceremonies, modes, and customs, which
men have invented, and do practice, according to the places, birth, and
dignities of every one; teach the youth also to receive every one courteously,
and to send them away well satisfied, to know the difference of every one,
their interests, and passions, thereby to behave himself with judgment
accordingly, and to acquire a free, and universal spirit, which may put it
self into any form, and shape, comply with any humor without constraint, or
affectation. Which he may easily do, if he first free himself from the vanity,
and love of his own opinions. Let him fit his discourse to his own, or the
companies capacity, and conform it to the time present, using no studied
complements, but speaking modestly, and indifferently. There are some who
embrace the first commer, use the same caresses to all the world, and through a
facility of promising, reduce themselves to the necessity of deceiving. He
should be reformed betimes of all bash-full shame, and trained up to a generous
confidence, so that he be not subject to a timorous complaisance, but either
grant, or refuse, with a courteous boldness, and make a handsome retreat in
any dangerous occasion, to which many hazard themselves for want of a
resolution to deny. Let him set one hour apart every day, to consider, and make
reflections on his past actions, and mildly point out to him his sailings, and
how he might have done better, and have pleased some whom he sent away
discontented, without any prejudice to himself, how he might have disengaged
himself from company that was not fitting for him, showing him that he did not
answer so generously as he might, to what was spoken, that he contested too
long for his own opinion, that he had not testified so much gratitude as was
requisite for some service which was done him, that he neglected to gain a good
friend, and oblige an honorable person; and especially in the close of the
day, make him relish the sweetness there is in employing his time nobly, and
profitably, and the bitterness in losing, or mispending it. Sometimes lauding,
or blaming him, even showing more love, and respect, as he increases in virtue,
and nobleness, and testifying an indifferency, and froideur, when he declines,
procuring all his friends, in whom he trusts and confides, to do the same, by
seeming to withdraw their affection from him, when he falls into any
miscarriage. And in fine, losing no occasion to make use of for his advantage.

CHAP. VII. Of the love of Truth and of Honor.
IF one will have him become a man of honor, one must make him be enamored
betimes with true honor, and breed an aversion in him to all that might stain,
or soil him. This quality consists in many things, and particularly in being
true, sincere, and cordial, especially keeping ones faith, and promise
religiously, and inviolable, which gains a mavelous esteem, and credit in the
world, deceits, and artifices are nets, which are easily discovered if they be
too gross, and are quickly broken if they be more finely woven. Let the
Governor not suffer him by any means whatever, to lie, or to deceive, even in
things indifferent. In this case only I wish him to use severity; For it is so
insinuating, and subtle, that at the least connivence, it takes footing, and
if it get the smallest root, it multiplies abundantly, and can never be
exterminated. It makes every one keep at a distance from us, blurs the
reputation, corrupts the manners, and discredits all we say; That it is the
wisdom of Kings to dissemble, had need to be interpreted, and well explicated.
That may be true of their passions, their designs, and their resentments for
injuries they have received, when the good of their affairs does in this manner
oblige them to play Desoubs le masque, under a vizzard; for they ought not to
consider of their particular persons, or affairs, but in reference to the good
of the State, for whose safety they ought to sacrifice all their private
passions. But to feign, and promise, that which they will never perform, to make
snares of their words, instead of security, and an asyle, to write and treat
captiously, and prostrate their honor, and conscience to their interest; This
is the virtue of Tyrants, which helps sometimes to aggrandize them, but can
never make them renowned. True policy, does not consist in this, as we shall
show hereafter. So that above all things we must imprint these in a young
spirit, which by how much it is the more lively; So much the more will it have
need of a restraint, and curb in this regard.

CHAP. VIII. Of Sciences.
IT is very difficult to bring him to such a perfect rule, unless one call in
the Sciences for their assistance, which fortify the mind against vices,
divertise him from bad employments, animates him to the love of virtue,
enlarges the understanding either for discourse, or action, on all occasions;
Not that I would have him possess them as a Master, nor that he should spend
so much time in meditation, which he ows to a more active life. But as he wears
a sword to defend himself from his enemies, so his soul may be furnished with
weapons to war against vices, and that grand Monster Ignorance, which many
great ones would have to be esteemed a virtue: One must give him a good
tincture of literature, to make use of, and to discourse with solidity, and
knowledge, and not be obliged as many are, to a forced silence, as often as the
discourse falls upon any other subject, besides Hawks and Hounds. But amongst
that infinite number of Sciences, which one single humane wit cannot fathom, or
comprehend; he must choose such as are most useful for his life, and conduct,
leading him to the knowledge of them by facile ways, and not as many use to
teach them. They make them become so unsociable that no body dares approach
them. But he should strip off the prickles, and present him only the roses. It
will be therefore very necessary, that he that shall instruct him do possess
them purely himself, and know how to manage and accommodate them to the
affairs of the world, that so he may draw out such sap, as may afterward turn
into substance; for this he will not so much need those profound Sciences,
which serve for ostentation, as those that are profitable and a judicious skill
to fit, and prepare his lessons to the young Gentleman's capacity, and need. It
is almost the same with Sciences, as with the slights of juggling, to see them
only, one would believe there were some magic in it, but when we know the
secrets, it appears very facile, and easy. The chiefest thing consists in the
manner of teaching well, and purifying them from the School: and for this
reason many persons of good understanding would not permit (though with little
wisdom in this particular) that their children should be taught in the
public Schools, or Accademies, believing that the time they spent there, was
not recompensed by the fruit they reaped there.

CHAP. IX. Whether one ought to send him to the public School.
THis is a question which I will not here decide, I will content my self in
relating what I have observed on this subject, leaving the judgment of it to
better understandings. There are some maintain, that in the Colleges, and
public Schools, bad examples, are more frequent, and more taking then good
ones. That there one becomes acquainted with all sorts of people, and of all
conditions, who not being trained up in any manners, do easily imprint their
defects in a young spirit: That one wallows eight or ten years in that dust
only, to learn the Latin Tongue, and a few shreds of History worth nothing,
because they are but pieces disjointed, which have no dependence: that they
often change their Masters, and by consequence alter the Method, and rules of
learning: That the Masters are ordinarily young, and serve their
Apprentiseships at their Scholars cost, as new Physicians do in Hospitals.
Besides, having the charge of so many, they cannot take such particular care of
every one. But now turn the other reverse of the medal, and we shall find, that
young men in the Colleges, are instructed by such as are learned, pious, and
faithful: that they animate one another by examples, and emulation: they
exercise by speaking in public, they note the defects, or perfections of each
other; they are ambitious to appear more eminently then their fellows: The
punishments, and recompenses do move them to desire, and fear: They apprehend
their failings more, because their faults are public, they do communicate what
they know to one another: they have set times and rules prescribed, which serve
very much to their advancement; and the Sciences are taught them by certain
degrees, and steps, which easily lead the judgment from one thing to another.

Here we must consider touching our young Cavalier, that one must as much as is
possible, make him frequent such persons, whose judgments are well settled, and
framed, and who nevertheless have the industry, and ingenuity to accommodate
themselves to his tender age. And that one must regard the Sciences in this
young man, but only as an instrument which is necessary to help, and further
his other exercises, to which he is allotted, and that he ought to seek them,
but only in as much as they open the understanding, fortify the mind, sweeten
his behavior, and embellish his soul, not that he should become a Professor, a
Preacher, a Judge, or a Philosopher: But a Soldier, a Politician, a Courtier,
and man of action and affairs; and therefore it will suffice him to know, as
much as he ought not to be ignorant of, and not so much as it is possible to
know, but what is fit, and sufficient to attain his ends, that they may serve
him as a wheel to facilitate his motions, and turnings, and not prove a weight,
to toil, and overburden his mind. They must therefore be prepared for him
accordingly, that he may use them in his life and actions, and he that has
this great charge of him, must take special care, to direct all his lessons and
instructions to that mark and end.

For this purpose it will be needful to teach him the Latin tongue, as
succinctly, and purely as it is possible, and not trouble him with all those
affected words, and phrases which many look after, and make use of that they
may not be understood.

CHAP. X. Of History.
AT the same time, whilst the memory is yet fresh, and easy to take
impressions, he must be instructed in History as distinctly, and methodically
as may be; This consists in searching out things from their original, and
following them according to the order of time exactly from their source,
pointing out the progress, the declinings, and the various mutations, and
changes of all the Governments in the world from the Creation, without
entangling him with a confusion of Authors: Choosing for every age such as have
written with most faith, and purity; causing him to take notice of the graces,
the defects, the documents, the intrigues, and politic reasons that are
inserted: as also the original of those corruptions which have ruined States,
the foundations upon which others have been raised, and the Maxims wherewith
they have maintained themselves: opening his understanding to reason, and
discourse upon all events, not only simply reading them over like Romances, and
feeding his imagination with the prodigies he meets withal, without exercising
his common sense, in observing the causes, and reasons of things: or to lead
him more readily at first to the more perfect knowledge of History, it would be
necessary that he that teaches him should draw out the most material passages
in those Historians, and so make a pithy Epitome, or Body of History very
succint; but it must be very exact for matter of time, and this will much
abbreviate, and facilitate his studies, opening the way to an universal
knowledge, and intelligence in all History, and be a great ease and help to his
memory. He may also entertain him often of these matters in his familiar
converse, and make him exercise himself in relating what he has learned,
thereby to make the deeper impression, especially of Modern Histories, which
concern us more nearly, and will be of greater benefit. As the reign of Charles
the fith, and his Successors, the Original of the Wars in the Low Countries,
the troubles and revolts in Germany, the Wars with France, and England, their
beginnings, treaties, leagues, and other circumstances necessary for such as do
intend ever to undertake any great exploits: Upon which he may raise handsome
discourses, and thereby reap some profits even from others failings, and in rich
himself by others industry. This will make him fruitful in expedients,
foreseeing against the future time, resolute in all accidents, and intelligent
in the interest of all the Potentates in the world. Which will be one degree,
and step toward the knowledge of Policy, a thing that he ought to possess
most eminently above all things else, and which will render him most
considerable, and useful in the world, as we shall show hereafter.

CHAP. XI. Of Philosophy.
THat is the first thing, with which his mind must be prepared, which being
fortified by that knowledge in History, shall be afterward quite perfected and
brought to maturity, by discovering the Principles of Philosophy to him, which
teaches our reason, how it must make use of its self. Many have judged it
useless, and pernicious to the active life: because that by raising the soul
up to contemplation, it as 'twere unties it from the body, which should act.
And indeed, I would have him possess it as his Wife, and not as a Mistress. I
mean, that he should have an inseparable love for her, and that she might be
subject to him, but not a passion, which would make him become a slave. I would
have him be served by her, instead of serving her, and not do anything without
her counsel; I would have him know that Philosophy, which discourses, which
enlightens, which rules our manners, which loves society: and not that which
raves, which contends, which creates Chimera's, and loves naught but solitude.
This last is vain, ridiculous, importunate, and idle. The first is solid,
pleasing, tranquil, and salutary. And I esteem it no less needful for a man
that is exposed to the storms, and agitations of Courts, then the Rudder and
Compass is to a Ship. But not to lose time, one must leave out all that is
superfluous, and take only that which is substantial nourishment, teaching him
to reason and argue handsomely, to draw one thing skilfully from another, to
maintain a good position firmly, to divide and distinguish aright, and discover
and untie all sophisticate, and specious arguments. This art serves for all
things, and may be applied on any occasion. In counsels they do nothing but
reason, and argue. In Courts all their art consists in drawing consequences,
and penetrating into things unknown, by the appearance. War is a continual
reasoning. And in fine, man cannot show he is such, but by that only. The world
attributes all to experience alone: But art teaches the rules, which are truly
drawn from thence, but purified and set on work by those, whom she had most
illuminated, which makes us enjoy without labor, the fruit of those labors,
wherein they have wasted their lives.

CHAP. XII. Of Monality.
FRom thence, one may proceed to discover superficially unto him, the secrets
of nature, the order, the productions, the causes, the ends, and the connection
of all things, the springs of the senses, the powers and faculties of the soul;
and the manner how they act, without nevertheless engaging him too far in this
knowledge, which serves more for his divertisements, then his profit. But as to
that part, which concerns his manners, and which teaches one to seek for
tranquillity, and to set the soul at repose, to restrain vice, practice
virtues, suffer the blows of fortune constantly and nobly, to be undaunted and
resolved amidst dangers, to despise death, and not to be inveigled with the
love of false honors: of this he must make his principal and stock, from
whence he may all his life time supply himself with those treasures, which
will be necessary for him, in the voyage he is to make through the world, and
particularly in knowing, and often reflecting seriously upon himself. Without
this support, we are apt to fall at every little opposition. Therefore on all
occasions, and rencontres he should be exercised, and instructed in this
knowledge. It consists altogether in operation, and does not teach the mind,
but only that it should master, and over rule the body: and to this end there
must be a continual care, to make him practice every day virtuous actions
according as the occasions are presented, teaching him to purify them, and to
perform them gracefully without ostentation, vain glory, or interest; being
only affected with that which is really just, and good. To love honest people,
treating every one according to his merits, and not abusing his own power: but
preferring that which is right before any other interest; as for the choice of
friends, it is a thing that I would leave to his own disposition, only
advertising him of the good, or bad qualities, of those whom he would honor
with his confidence, drawing him, however handsomely away from such, as would
prove pernicious to him, and teaching him not to be too prodigal, and bestow
that favor too lightly: That so he may not be often obliged to resume it again
and disavow his election by a change.

CHAP. XIII. Of Policy, and the means to instruct him therein in his youth.
AS for Policy, if he will attain to high things, he must be instructed
therein, by a continual exercise. Not in that Policy which subjects all Law,
Honor, and Conscience it self, to private interest: But in that enlightened
prudence, which foresees the future without consulting the Stars, which
establishes States by a solid, and durable government, which understands, and
observes the Laws: under the care whereof the people may peaceably repose, and
which does furnish fit remedies to every grievance, and distemper, by
prescribing wholesome physic, and not daubing things over with emperical
essences.

To lead him to this without trouble, one must begin betimes to dispose and
bend his mind to it, by accustoming him not to do any thing without some
design to make choice of the subtilest, and surest means to obtain it, to know
the nature, and the interests of each one, to find out the most hidden, and
dissembled slights and deceits, which are used in every profession, to make him
both detest, and know how to shun them at the same time. One must make him give
reasons for all his actions, create, or raise little intrigues, and troubles,
and leave his mind entangled in some necessity, and then see how he can
disengage himself: make him observe every ones discourse, and then discover
the secret intentions they had therein to him, the ends they aimed at, and the
artifice that lay hid in their speeches: make him attempt several ways to
gain one thing, that so he may come to find out which are the most certain to
compass his design; never conceding any thing he wishes for earnestly, till he
have used some ingenious stratagem to obtain it: striving sometimes to deceive
him cunningly, and showing him the craft afterward, that he may beware of it
another time: disco^^^sing frequently in his presence upon all sorts of
subjects, and accidents, upon the actions, and the conduct of others, showing
him their failings, or their skill. How it was hurtful and prejudicial to one,
for having spoken too much: and that another believed too lightly: that the one
did not consider the danger which threatened him, that the other was not so
reserved in his passion as he should, that he needlessly made one his enemy,
whom he might handsomely have kept still for his friend, and many other things,
which daily fall out by occasion. On which he must be often exercised. After
this, his mind being settled, and his judgment regulated, one must teach him
the principles of this Science, the nature of all Governments, their Maxims,
and fundamental Laws, the main Questions, which come in Controversy; the
diverse kinds of Monarchies, and Republics, those things that ruins them, that
which augments them, the remedies to hinder their dissolution, the nature of
Treaties, Leagues, Alliances, and what is observable therein. The cause of
Wars, Order, Policy, Providence, and all the rest, on which many have written
in general, showing him the means to make his use of them, and applying all
these precepts to particular affairs, and to present examples, on the which he
must often discourse. From thence he must descend to more particular things, he
must learn the state, and interest of all Courts, as well in particular, as in
general: and principally of that wherein he is to reside, the pretense of every
one and the reasons they have, the means they use, and apply, their friends,
confederates, forces, allies, their intrigues, their riches, their forces, and
their inclinations: to make use of in time, and know how to catch every one
with advantage, either in gaining a friend handsomely, or overcoming an enemy,
and make him incapable of doing any prejudice.

CHAP. XIV. The second step, or degree to arrive at the knowledge of Politics
which is to travel, and how.
AS soon as he knows these principles in Idea, he should exercise them by
experience, and draw them in the great Book of the World, whose animated
Characters do touch the Soul more lively, and make him digest the Science of
Books, by his own observations, as feeble stomachs, which use some exercise to
increase their decayed heat. Things are not true because Authors have said it:
but they contain in themselves the truth which every one may discover according
as he is illuminated: It will be therefore expedient to wean him as soon as one
can from the delights of his home, to show him that there are other Manners,
other Men, and other Cities then those of his own Country; which excites the
diverse sentiments in us, and the diversity of things sensible: because the
power indifferent of it self cannot be determined but by the object. The
actions of the mind are the same, if we do not offer it diverse things, it
cannot apply it self but to those that are presented to it, and though the
imagination does often travel without the body, it never returns fully
satisfied, fancying to its self things that have no substance, but in its own
imagination, unless the eyes and the other senses do serve, and become guides
and compagnons to it. That which we learn only by reading, or hearsay, we
cannot affirm but one the faith of others: words, and books, are but
expressions, and copies, which never have all the graces and perfections of the
original. He that would know things as they are, must draw them from their
source, and spring head. There happens a thousand accidents in Travels, on
which the spirit, and mind must exercise themselves. We behold every where
great example to instruct us. One frequents

CHAP. XIV. The second step, or degree to arrive at the knowledge of Politics
which is to travel, and how.
AS soon as he knows these principles in Idea, he should exercise them by
experience, and draw them in the great Book of the World, whose animated
Characters do touch the Soul more lively, and make him digest the Science of
Books, by his own observations, as feeble stomachs, which use some exercise to
increase their decayed heat. Things are not true because Authors have said it:
but they contain in themselves the truth which every one may discover according
as he is illuminated: It will be therefore expedient to wean him as soon as one
can from the delights of his home, to show him that there are other Manners,
other Men, and other Cities then those of his own Country; which excites the
diverse sentiments in us, and the diversity of things sensible: because the
power indifferent of it self cannot be determined but by the object. The
actions of the mind are the same, if we do not offer it diverse things, it
cannot apply it self but to those that are presented to it, and though the
imagination does often travel without the body, it never returns fully
satisfied, fancying to its self things that have no substance, but in its own
imagination, unless the eyes and the other senses do serve, and become guides
and compagnons to it. That which we learn only by reading, or hearsay, we
cannot affirm but one the faith of others: words, and books, are but
expressions, and copies, which never have all the graces and perfections of the
original. He that would know things as they are, must draw them from their
source, and spring head. There happens a thousand accidents in Travels, on
which the spirit, and mind must exercise themselves. We behold every where
great example to instruct us. One frequents many kinds of people, of several
humors, and spirits. One learnes the different customs, the orders, and
Policy of every City; their civilities, their usage, their laws, and their
language, which breeds a conformity in us to their fashions, and is a great
advantage if we afterward chance to have to do with them. This weanes one from
his false love to his own country, and makes us Citizens of the whole world, or
at least brings one easily to comply with every one. Another great benefit
which is reaped from hence is, that a man learnes to know himself. Great men
in their own Countries are environed with flatterers, who sooth up, and
disguise their vices, and care for nothing, but to please them only. They
receive nothing but respect, submissions and complaisances: they see none but
such, whom they have the power to command; and unless they be timely drawn off
from it, they contract an imperious humor, and pride, and cannot endure any,
but such as fear them, because they are used to awe all such as live within the
verge of their power; But in strange countries, they behold none, but unknown
faces, who give them no more respect, and honor, then what they first receive
from them, and from thence they learn indeed, what they truly are, by the
esteem such men have for them, who neither pretend any thing from them, nor
depend upon them. Besides they become subject to the Laws of those places where
they go, and habituate themselves by being forced to observe those, to keep
their own Laws voluntarily, which they might otherwise violate without fear of
punishment: But they will need a guide to conduct them, and show them how to
make their profit of all things: otherwise they shall see nothing but Walls,
Cities, Palaces, and Fountains, and nothing but their eyes shall travel. One
must make them penetrate into the interests of Courts, make comparisons of one,
with another, taking notice of what is good, and bad, and strive to make them
become considerable in the esteem of foreign Princes, and Ministers of State,
establishing a strict, and faithful correspondency between them and those men
of renown they shall meet with in their travels, that so they may become the
more useful to their own Prince at home, as having these engines abroad, which
may be able to act much for them, at a need in all great affairs. He must also
be careful to bring them to the knowledge of all such, as he shall hear of in
any country who do excel in any Art, or Science. If he delight in their
company, he will in short time dive into their greatest knowledge, and enrich
himself without trouble with their Secrets, and laborious learning: it being
impossible but that from this frequentation, there should remain much of that
great light in him, which shall keep him from being deceived.

CHAP. XV. Third step, or degree; the Military Art.
AFter he has passed in this occupation that age, which uses to be idle,
which we ought scarcely to account in the number of our years: If one think it
fitting one may make him try some occasions of War, thereby to learn that noble
Art, and confirm his courage. If he be absolutely destined to that exercise,
one must go the more slowly on in his instruction, and make him pass through
all offices, that he may be the more capable to command, having first learned
well to obey. But if he be intended for a man of Counsel, which is the highest
sphere of all, which, like the second Region of the Air, is above all storms,
where one may sit in tranquillity and behold the clouds showring down floods,
and tempests, which were formed near that place; Then in this case it will
suffice to let him know the rules of Military Art, and be instructed in the
duty of each Officer, in the orders and necessary provisions, in the manner of
assault, and defending, and whatever else of this nature. After which it will
be enough if he apply himself two years to learn the experience, and let him
have one with him, that can discover all the subtilties, and the secret ways
made use of in any action; guiding him ever to the right end, which is to make
him a grand Politician, making him search out the very bottom of every
business, and not stop at the appearance which is most times false; showing
him the strength of true reasons, that he may clearly see the conduct of
Ministers of state, and give a better judgment of things then the vulgar are
capable to do.

CHAP. XVI. The fourth step, or degree of Intrigues, and Negotiations.
WHen he shall know so much as to be no longer ignorant, one may begin to put
him into employments, and make him taste of all things that they may be
familiar to him betimes. First, he must be made capable of the affairs of his
house, of the state of his goods, and rights, of his Subjects and his
pretensions, of his enemies if he have any, of the intrigues of his Ancestors,
of the order he must follow, not only to maintain himself in their luster; but
to raise and elevate himself above his Predecessors: make him choose a rule to
live by, and a determinate end, and aim, for his propounded object, on, and
toward which he must frame all his actions, that so himself may be the guide of
his own fortune, and not be dragged about after her wheel: like those that act
only by hazard, and are not resolved in any certain thing, but take their
resolution in the midst of their race. It Is in this choice, that one must
consider his inclination, the capacity of his soul, and what promise there does
appear, mildly following those paths which nature shall seem to guide him into.
Some are good for counsel, others for the execution; some for Intrigues and for
the Court, others to speak, and other some to write. Close handed nature
seldom drops all her treasures into one bosom. We must therefore search what
qualities are born in us, and by them judge of the end whereto she calls us, by
the means, and facility she has given us to attain it. This is such counsel,
as cannot be taken till the judgment be settled, and mature, and the capacity
fully known. It will not be very difficult to get employments fitting his
condition, as offices, commissions, ambassages, and other such like, in which
he may begin to reduce all his Science into Practice, and make use of those
weapons, or instruments his studies shall have furnished him withal. But at the
first he will yet need some body to enlighten him in all his actions, but in
such a manner withal, that he may let his spirit work freely of it self, and
be content only to fortify and uphold it: otherwise he will never be any other
but a Copy, and will be accustomed ever to rely upon the counsel of others. Nay
sometimes it will be good to give him bad counsel, and color it with seeming
reasons, to see if he will have the judgment to penetrate into it, and then
presently discover the falsity of it to him, if he do not perceive it of
himself: that so he may be always on his guard, and not let himself be easily
surprised, nor trust so much to the opinions, and belief of others, as not to
weigh them exactly in the scale of his own judgment, and esteem the real
truth, before the false friend. That which makes that so many Princes have
nothing but the title and ornaments of Royalty, proceeds from the faults in
their education: For he that has them in charge, being unwilling that his
power should end with their infancy, will be sure not to open their judgments,
and understanding too much, lest they becoming capable enough of themselves,
should not want their help to govern them. The Governor must act sincerely, and
lay down his own authority by little and little, according as the other
increases in knowledge, letting him act of himself, and only following him
close, to be ready to help him if he stumble. When one would build an Ark, they
set up a frame of wood first to uphold it, but when it is completed; that
support is taken away, that it may subsist by its own strength. The spirit has
no need of a guide, but then when it is blind: But one must not purposely leave
it in its obscurity, that we may have occasion to lead it the longer, nor keep
open the wound to have the longer practice. Let him instruct his disciple so
well, that he may have the virtue not to forget his care that taught him, and
inspire so much goodness as to deserve and receive a bountiful reward, and let
him endeavor as speedily as he can, to change the name of governor into that
of domestic, and friend. If he prove happy in his conduct, he will gain more
glory, and benefit from the second then the first. Let him instruct him to
consider the fruit, not the basket, the counsel, not the counselor, to examine
and weigh the sense, the subject, and circumstances of all things; and not
oblige himself to any persons, but according as he finds their fidelity. Let
him prove, both the bottom, and to the most secret recesses and tortuosities of
the hearts, and affections of those he loves most, and let him purge every
thing from opinion, and custom. Let him not be too apt, and light to believe
the good, or evil that is said of any one. Let him try them by the touchstone
himself, to know the reality, and purity thereof. In fine let him appropriate
to himself all the actions, and all the sentiments, and his friends have no
more power, then they shall have truth and goodness. They may counsel him with
artifice if they be wicked, and they may also deceive themselves how subtle,
and clear-sighted soever they be.

CHAP. XVII. Of those other Sciences he ought to learn.
I Have enlarged on this part of the active life, because it is the point upon
which all actions do run, and without which the Sciences are but as good
weapons in the hands of an impotent man. But these should be also accompanied
with some other Arts, which will be very useful instruments unto him: As some
parts of the Mathematics, that which does not consist altogether in high, and
useless meditations; but which instructs the senses, and is appliable to
exterior things for the public benefit. To learn this, Geometry must be the
foundation, he must know the rules, and demonstrations, after Arithmetic,
which is absolutely necessary for him. He should be taught Cosmography as
exactly as possible, in so much that he should carry, as 'twere, a little Map
of all the World in his imitation. after which it will not be very difficult to
teach him the Art of Fortification, with all the inventions, engines, and
instruments of War. As for drawing, or painting, if he had any inclination, it
would not be amiss for him to bring his hand to make some delineations, and to
draw a platform exactly with its dimensions. For Poetry it is an indifferent
thing, which does not misbecome a Cavalier, when it is but an accessory in him,
and an ornament to his other virtues. If he have any Genius to it, it should
not be hindered altogether, but he may sometimes use it, it will make him the
more able and free to discourse, and will whet his wits: but unless he be
disposed of himself to it, I am not of opinion that he should be at all
prompted thereunto.

FINIS.
A short APPENDIX Containing These few Chapters following,
CHAP. I. OF natural dispositions to civil virtues in some more then in others.
Chap. II. Of natural dispositions to acquire the virtues of the understanding.
Chap. III. Of natural dispositions to moral virtues. Chap. IV. Of Nobility.
Chap. V. Of the instruction, and education of Children, and the helps toward
natural generosity and nobility.
A short APPENDIX.
CHAP. I. Of natural dispositions to civil virtue, in some more then in others.
THere are in some morenatural dispositions to civil virtue, then in others.
These dispositions are of two sorts: for there are such as serve to acquire
knowledge: and to comprehend Arts, and Sciences with ease, and to become
prudent, and advised in ones conduct and carriage. There are others which serve
to conform men to moral Virtues. The Latins call the first Ingenium, and the
others Indolem and Ingenuitatem. The Philosophers call them demy-vertues:
virtues are acquired by exercise, but these dispositions and demy-vertues
proceed from nature.

CHAP. II. Of natural dispositions to acquire the virtues of the understanding.
THe virtues of the understanding are Science, Prudence, Art, and other Virtues
which shall be afterward mentioned. We see in some certain men an aptitude to
acquire these virtues, who comprehend that which is taught them with facility,
and keep it faithfully: who have much clarity in their discourse, and a
dexterity to conjecture: which proceeds from the purity, and subtility of the
vital and animal spirits, and the good constitution of the brain. The
globularity of the head keeps the ventricles of the brain from being overmuch
pressed, or crowded, and leaves a more large and free space, or shop for the
animal spirits and imagination to work in. Those whose heads are long, and the
temples pressed inward, have ordinarily defective spirits. The climate does
also contribute; For there are some countries where the spirits are more
lively. The purity of the air we suck and breath from our infancy, and the
less gross meats we feed on do also help. Moderate melancholy serves toward
prudence: But where choler and gall predominates, they are rash and
precipitate. Prompt and fiery spirits have ordinarily least judgment, like
those dogs which being most swift to run have no scent. There are some which
comprehend a thing quickly, but forget it immediately, semblable to soft Wax
which easily takes any impression, but it is as easily put out again.

CHAP. III. Of natural dispositions to Moral Virtues.
THe same diversity is found in the dispositions and inclinations to moral
virtues, for there are natures of better tempers some then others, and which
are more fit and proper for generous actions. We find some men naturally
patient under any pains, who endure the wrack without groaning, or starting out
into horrid cries. And others that will weep and sob for the least blow. There
are some who are resolute amidst dangers, and others that are shook with fear
where no cause of fear is. Some are not to be moved with injuries, and others
take a pigue, or snuff for the least occasion. We find some in a constant
Taciturnity, and others which perpetually babble. There are some as hard as
pumices, without a drop of pity, and others so tender and compassionate, their
eyes are ever showring down moist tears for others miseries. Some we see are
naturally sober, others ever blowzing in Bacchus sucking bottle. Yea we find
some Children have much ing enuity, and desire of praise, coupled with modest
bashfulnesse, and others that are bold and impudent, and full of insolency.

Truly instruction and examples do help these inclinations, but nature and the
temperature contribute also mainly. For those that are phlegmatic, and have a
soft flesh, their joints not close knit, and narrow chested, are fearful, and
quickly sink under much labor. The choleric, are hasty and desperate. The
melancholic retain their spite and anger a long time. The sanguine are of gay
humors, great eaters, and inclined to luxury.

CHAP. IV. Of Nobility.
In these demy-vertues and good natural dispositions, which are found in some
more, then in others, consists the natural Nobility. For there are two sorts of
Nobless, the one is natural, and the other evil.

The natural Nobility is that which is called generosity, by which a man is
endued with a noble courage, and prompted to great actions, and not only great,
but also just and honest, who is handsomely composed of body and mind: who is
not astonished at unexpected accidents, but having a spirit above such arrests,
acts with constancy and freedom.

Men that are endued with minds and bodies extremely vigorous, become excellent
when they apply themselves to good; but if for want of Heroic Education, and
good examples, or falling under the unhappy government of bad Masters, or
having worn out their youthful years in idleness, they come to be corrupt and
degenerate, they become infinitely wicked, and the vilest of all men. (The most
generous Wine turns into the tartest Vinegar.) They are most subtle and
inventive, and desperate to commit base and cruel actions, like those grounds
which being most fertile of themselves, do but bring forth the most poisonous
weeds if they be not manured. Cyrus in his young age being bred up amongst
country peasants, did not know his own extraction. But every one perceived a
natural generosity in him, by which he ruled over the other village children,
and gained much respect. The like marks appeared in Alexanders greener years,
but he corrupted himself afterward by drunkenness, pride, and impiety. He
outstript his Father Philip as well in vices as in virtues. The Lacedemonian
Republic, and that of the Romans brought forth many such like spirits, nor
must we doubt but that amongst the herd of poor people of mean conditions,
there are many of excellent natures, whose poverty pinnions their courage, and
who want nothing but means, and opportunities to raise themselves to an eminent
height. All Nations does produce good wits, and daring courages, as appears by
Anacharsis a Scythian, and Democritus an Abderite. Sweden is a country on which
the Sun does look asquint, where every thing seems to be frozen, yea, even
virtue it self, notwithstanding it brought forth of late memory a King so
completed with Heroic virtues, that he may be opposed to those ancient Greeks
and Romans, which swell so many volumes to declare their actions.

The Civil nobility is that which proceeds not purely from the indulgence of
Nature, but the extraction of Ancestors, the success of affairs, and the
opinions of men. It Is this raises the Nobless above the peasantry, which begets
Titles, Arms, Genealogies, and the luster of their Ancestors. It took its
original from violence, the victorious raising themselves by conquests, and
disarming those that were subdued. For in the beginning none but the Nobles
were permited to wear a sword in times of peace. Of which violence we may yet
read the Characters in their coats of Arms, which for the most part are Lions,
Panthers, Eagles and Griffins: but rarely any Sheep.

This Civil Nobless is a glorious Ornament when it is joined to the natural
Nobility. Virtue is more perspicuous, exemplary and utile, when it is seated in
a person of an eminent quality: and without doubt to be of an illustrious
family is no small spur to virtue; but it frequently falls to the share of such
as are degenerate, weak, of ill-composed bodies and minds, who would hardly be
received into any employment if they were poor, and of an abject condition.
Nothing appears in them but arrogant ignorance, and quarrelsome puntillious
humor, standing a tip-to on some false point of honor, raising uproars on
imaginary affronts, oft-times staining the reputation of an ancient family by
some ignoble action which a peasant would scorn to second him in. It Is a
reproach to a man to be the first Gentleman of his race: but it is a greater
shame to be the last. This Cicero being of mean birth, raised himself to great
dignity by his virtues: But his Son soyl'd and lost all that honor in Taverns.
And if the King should ennoble a vicious peasant it would not change his nature.

This civil Noblesse has great need of riches. Nobility tied to poverty is a
great burden: for to maintain their quality and rank they are obliged to great
charges, which sinks them every day deeper into the quagmire of want and
poverty: There being nothing more contemptible, in the esteem of these days,
then a Gentleman that speaks of his race, and brags of his extraction, and yet
wants bread to eat.

Now that this sort of Nobility consists for the most part in opinion, appears
by this, that he who makes a show of his Genealogy, presupposes that all the
Women from whom he descends have been honest: and likewise, because if any one
that is not of a noble family, be but esteemed so, he is no less honored then
the true ones. And if any one from a low degree do but climb up to the highest
dignities, and become the chief in a Nation, he shall not want the titiles by
which he may draw his original either from the ancient Scipions, or what other
great fountain he please. Any flatterer (...) gain his favor may draw his
Genealogy from many ages. Some seem to be raised and elevated above others,
only to discover their defects the more apparently, like Monkies which
clambring to the ridge of a house, stand mowing at all those that pass by
underneath them.

This appears also because the families rise, or fall according to the success
of affairs. Also, because the customs, and opinions of people are different
thereupon. In the Republic of Athens those were the prime and most honorable,
who had such a certain quantity of wheat annually. Amongst the Romans, by
Roscius Law, to be a Roman Knight, and have place in the fourteen seats at the
Amphitheater, a man must have had at least the value of four hundred thousand
Sesterces. In Italy the Gentry dwell in the Cities, and are Merchants. In Spain
they call such a man as wears a sword, and leads an idle, or a military life,
though in great poverty, Hidalgue. In France, to live in the Campania, or
Country, spend their time in hunting, wear a sword, perpetually chained at
their sides, gives one the title of a gentleman. And if a Farmers Son can but
sell his Plow and Farm so well as to buy a Barony, he shall be called a Baron.

But, in fine, Earth has not any thing more glorious, then ancient Nobility,
when it is found with virtue. (Says a learned English Author) what barbarous
mind will not reverence that blood which has untainted, run through so large a
succession of Generations? Besides, virtue adds a new splendour, which together
with the honor of his house, challenges a respect from all. But bad greatness
is nothing but the vigor of vice, having both mind and means to be
uncontrollably lewd. A debauched son of a Noble family, is one of the
intolerable butthens of the Earth, and as hateful a thing as Hell: For all
know; he has both example and precept, flowing in his education; both which
are powerful enough, to obliterate a native illness: yet these in him, are but
Auxiliaries to his shame; that which was the brightness of his Ancestors,
makes his own darkness more palpable. Vice in the Son of an ancient Family, is
like a clownish Actor in a stately Play; he is not only ridiculous in himself,
but disgraces both the Plot and the Poet. Whereas virtue, in a man of obscure
Parents, is like an unpolisht Diamond, lying in the way amongst Pebbles; which
howsoever it be neglected of the uncivil vulgar, yet the wise lapidary takes it
up as a Jewel unvaluable; it being so much the more glorious, by how much the
other were baser. He that is good and great, who would not sell his life to
serve him nobly: otherwise being good, he should be loved better, whose Father
expired a Clown; then he that being vicious, is in a lineal descent from him,
that was Knighted with Tubal-cains Fauchion which he made before the flood.

CHAP. V. Of the Instruction, and Education of Children, and the helps toward
^^^ral Generosity, and Nobility.
1. FIrst provide them betimes, with honest, prudent, and learned Governors,
not humorous, or pedantique, but such as know what belongs to noble
conversation, and civility.

2. They must be taught as it were playing, and encouraged by gifts, and
rewards, but rarely by any rude correction. And let those things which are
given to others out of necessity, be bestowed upon them as recompenses.

3. Let them by no means be brought up tenderly, or nourished with delicate and
exquisite meats. Let them not refuse either course or ordinary fare.

4. Their inclinations must be warily sifted, and found out, and by no means
applied to any study contrary to their genius, and inclinations.

5. They must not be overcharged, or toiled with too much exercise, or study;
but let them often play, to exercise their bodies, and recreate their spirits,
by unbending and refreshment. But never let them droop and rust in idleness. No
wine can keep long that had not some greenness at the first. But age will fix
that Mercury.

6. Too great a herd of condisciples is hurtful; for besides that there will be
many perverse ones amongst them, the Master cannot have so strickt an eye over
them all.

7. They must be spurred on by emulation, praising some others in their
presence, that has done better then themselves; this emulation is greatest
amongst a few. Solitary studies seldom succeed. The spirits of children are
either benumbed, or grow vain and proud by a false persuasion of being learned.
He presumes too highly of himself, who has none with whom to make comparison.

8. To make them grow courageous and resolute, it were good to Alarm them with
false fears, and try them by dissembled dangers and perils.

9. A too grand subjection, makes them start out into debauchments, like wild
colts newly broke loose when they begin to enjoy, and taste their own liberty,
and have the elbow room to act their own desires. They hate those studies that
have tormented them. It is therefore good to let them know what liberty is
sometimes, that it may be no new thing to them when they come to command
themselves.

10. Above all let them be imbued, seasoned, and fraighted with useful and
solid learning and studies, by which they may arrive to the knowledge of God,
and to fear and serve him, and also to know themselves thoroughly. Also, those
studies which teach them to know and admire the works of the Almighty, and the
structure of the Universe. When their judgments are mature, let them be
instructed in the Ethics and Politics: as also in History, and the state of
their own countries. Poetry is an Ornament if natural, but too great a waster
of precious time, if much practiced, which may be better laid out in more noble
employments.

11. They ought not to travel till they have attained to some ripeness of age,
to be able to make inquiries into things of importance, and distinguish good
customs from evil ones.

12. And because in Courts, or Armies, men are in danger to be corrupted, the
contagion of vices being very puissant and infective, it will be necessary,
before they are let loose to such places, to let them be well armed, and
furnished with strong and wholesome principles and preservatives against such
contagions. The best conservatory of all is the true fear of God.

And he that would know the virtue, force, and benefit of such Heroic
Education may see it in every place, if he do but travel from the Court to the
Country, or but from a Village, to an Academy, or considers but a Horse well
managed, and another Resty, in his own fierceness.

FINIS.

