To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Honorable Court of Parliament.
The humble Petition of many his Majesty's loyal and faithful subjects, some
of which having been miserably persecured by the Prelates and their Adherents,
by all rigorous courses, for their Consciences, practicing nothing but what was
instituted by the Lord Jesus Christ, who was Lord of all Administrations, Math.
28.19. and practiced by the Primitive Christians; submitting to his Majesty
and his Laws, so far as concerns our Estates, Liberty, and Lives; and so,
as we conceive, give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God those
things that are his.
FIrst, then were our Religion as false as our Adversaries pretend, yet were
that no ground to take away our Lives or Estates: for Security being had, for
our Loyalty to our Prince and Country (which when we refuse to give, we
desire no longer to live) we say, our Errors in Judgment were it proved
against us (as we are sure by the Word of God it can never be) were no ground
for Persecution; as is clear by the Parable of the Tares and Wheat, Math. 13.
By the Tares, must needs be understood men professing a false Religion: which
when some desired to have plucked up, the Lord declared his mind to the
contrary, and gave command they should be let alone, Math. 18.17.1 Cor. 5.5.
John 16.2. Romans 13.1 These. 1.7, 8. Romans 2.8, 9, 16. Romans 13.1.1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
and grow with the Wheat unto the Harvest in the World, not in the Church, lest
men undertaking to pluck up the Tares, wanting wisdom to distinguish, should
pluck up the Wheat in stead thereof, as it has and shall come to pass:
according to the words of Christ, which shows, that some shall be so blindly
devoted, as to kill the Saints, thinking they do God service; and therefore
Christ will have the Tares let alone with the Wheat until the Harvest: Then
who, without sin, can attempt to pluck them up, before that time? And this
does no way contradict Gods Word, which says, That the Magistrates are Gods
Ministers, to take vengeance on them that do evil: the Tares being sinners
against God in false Religion, whom he has reserved to be punished with
flaming fire at the day of Christ; the other being trespassers against men, and
are justly to be punished by the Magistrate.

Secondly, Math. 15.14.
the same Christ our Lord commands, That those that are blindly led on in a
false Religion, and are offended at him for Teaching his, should be let alone;
and refers their punishment, to the falling into the Ditch.

Thirdly, the Lord Christ reproves those Disciples, that would have had Fire
come down from Heaven, and devour those Samaritans that would not receive
him, Luke 9.54, 55, 56.
in these words; Ye know not of what spirit ye are, for the Son of man is not
come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. Which shows plainly, that
Christ would have no man hurt for Religion, yea, though they were refusers of
himself.

Fourthly, when the Lord Christ sent forth the Twelve to preach the Gospel of
the Kingdom, this is the utmost that he directed them unto concerning those
that should refuse to hear their words, Math. 10.14, 15.
namely, to shake off the dust of their feet for a Testimony against them,
leaving their further punishment to the Day of Judgment. This was clear under
the Law, where none was compelled to the worship of God by the Authority of
the Magistrate, but as the Lord did persuade the heart by his Word. And as this
was so under the Law, much more in the time of the Gospel, Genesis 9.27. Exo.
35.5.21, 22, 29. Levit. 3.1. Coloss. 2.17. Psalm. 18.44. and 110.3. Mat. 28.19,
20 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.2 Tim. 2.24.
the Body being of Christ: as first, by the Commission of Christ given to the
Apostles; where Christ shows, though all power in Heaven and Earth was his,
yet he only appoints Preaching the Gospel for the gathering his Churches
throughout the world: according to Paul's words, where he says, The Weapons of
our Warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of
strong Holds, casting down Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God.

Again, the same Apostle commands, That the servant of the Lord strive not,
but be gentle toward all men, suffering the evil, instructing with meekness
the contrarie-minded, proving if God at any time will give them repentance,
that they may acknowledge the Truth, and come to amendment, out of the snare of
the Devil. Which plainly shows, that Repentance must be continually waited
for, and not constrained by violence or persecution; Ephesians. 2.5.
and that because Repentance is the gift of God, and cannot be given by man:
and therefore Religion not to be forced or compelled.

According to these Commands, the holy Prophets foretold, That when the Law of
Moses should cease in matters of worship, and the Law of the Messiah should be
set up in stead thereof, that then the carnal Weapons should cease, Isa. 2.4.
Micha 4.3, 4. Isa. 11.9. Isa. 42.1, 2, 3. Math. 12.18, 19, 20.2 Tim. 2.24.25,
26.2 Cor. 10.4.
They shall break their Swords into Mattocks, and their Spears into Sythes,
Nation shall not rise against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more;
They shall sit every man under his Vine, and under his own Fig Tree, and none
shall make them afraid, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it; There shall
none hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain, for the Earth shall be filled
with the knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Seas. Which when Christ
came, he taught and practiced, and so did his Apostles and servant: Behold my
servant whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my Soul is well pleased; I will
put my Spirit upon him, and he shall show Judgment to the Gentiles; he shall
not strive nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets; a
bruised Reed shall he not break, and smoking Flax shall he not quench, till he
send forth Judgment unto Victory. Advising them to be so far from
persecuting those that should oppose, Romans 12.14. to the 20.
and not be of their Religion, that when they were persecuted they should pray,
when they were cursed they should bless, leaving the Judgment to God.

The reason of all is, They who are now blind, may see; They who now reject the
Truth, may receive it; They who are now Tares, Acts 8.3. Acts 9.5, 6.1 Cor.
6.9.1 Pet. 2.10.
may become wheat; They who are now in the snare of the Devil, through wicked
works, and Adversaries to the Truth, may hereafter come to Repentance; They
that are now Blasphemers and Persecutors, as Saint Paul was, may in time become
most glorious aod faithful Witnesses, as he did; They that are now Idolaters,
as the Corinthians sometimes were, may hereafter, as they, become true
worshippers of God; They who for the present are no people of God in visible
appearance, nor under mercy, may hereafter become the people of God, obtaining
mercy as the Saints have done: Math. 20.6.
for some come not till the Eleventh Hour, though some came at the First,
Third, and Sixth Hour, yet some not till the Last; which, should they be put to
death, because they come not with the First, they then would be prevented from
coming at all.

It is affirmed by King James of famous memory, in his Speech at the Sessions
of Parliament, Anno 1609. That it is a sure Rule in Divinity, That God never
loves to plant his Church with violence and Bloodshed.

Again, in his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, Page 4. speaking of those
Papists that took the said Oath, says; I gave a good proof for it, that I
never intended persecution for Conscience cause, but only desired to be
secured of them for Civil obedience. It was usually the condition of the
Christians to be persecuted, but not to persecute. And lamentable it is to see
the folly of late times, and we cannot but grieve at the folly of men, who
think by humane Inventions, and carnal aid of Laws and Statutes, to help
God, and with worldly power and pomp to defend the Churches of Christ; Math.
26.52, 53, 54.
as if he by his own power were not able to do it, and to perform his own
will.

The Church of Christ has formerly been known, by enduring Misery and
Imprisonment; John 15.18, 19. Revel. 13.3.
but it is the mark of the Church of AntiChrist, to terrify others by
Imprisonments, Banishments, and Persecutions, boasting her self, that she is
highly esteemed in the world, whereas the true Church cannot but be hated of
the same.

It was commanded by the Law, Deuteronomy. 22.25. Aosea 2.19.2 Cor. 11.2.
If a man met a betrothed Damsel in the field, and the man force her, he was
to die: Then what shall those expect, that shall force the Conscience, the
Spouse of Christ?

The example of many Nations, both in Scripture, and at this day known, may
suffice to suffer the Conscience free: Genesis 20. Genesis 23. Genesis 13. Genesis 26.
Abraham lived in Egypt, in Gerar, among the Philistines; after, with the
Hittites: Lot in Sodom; Isaac, in Gerar; Israel, in Egypt 430 years; after, in
Babylon 30 years; yet never constrained in their Religion. Also in the days
of our Savior, how many Religions were there in that Empire of Caesar's, yet
not by him persecuted, or constrained to his Religion.

It was the judgment of Luther, Psalm. 89.27. Isa. 33.22. Phil. 2.9.2 Tim.
3.16. James 4.12. Rev. 22.18, 19.
That the Laws of the Civil Magistrate extended no farther then over the
bodies and goods, and that which is external; for over the Soul, God will
have none to rule but himself. And therefore, wherever the Civil Magistrate
undertaketh to set Laws for the Souls and Consciences of men, he usurpeth
that Government and Authority to himself, which appertains only to God.

And therefore we conceive it the highest of Antichrists impierie, sitting in
the Temple of God as God, showing himself that he is God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. in
giving Laws to the Conscience, which is Gods Prerogative.

In the building of the Temple, Deuteronomy. 27.5. Josuah 8.31. Isa. 60.11. Revel.
21.24.
there was no sound of Iron heard, to show, that Christ will have in his Church
a free consent, not compelled nor constrained by Laws and Statutes, for the
Kings of the Earth shall bring their glory unto it.

Again, the Churches of Christ must look for suffering, Romans 8.29. Phil.
3.10. Heb. 2.10.
with every particular member thereof, as he himself did, who is their Head,
being thereby made perfect, being the way and means that God has appointed to
publish the Gospel: Which caused the Fathers to say, The Blood of the Martyrs
was the Seed of the Church.

Therefore Christians are to be exhorted, not compelled: for he that will not
do that whereunto he is exhorted and persuaded, the Gospel injoyning, is no
true Christian as yet; 2 Timothy 2.24.
and they that go not this Gospel way, to persuade men by exhortation and
counsel, but seek to do it by constraint, show themselves not Gospel
Teachers.

For consider, if an earthly King will take it so ill, as surely he may at his
subjects hands, to have any equalize themselves with him, or to make Laws for
his subjects to be guided and ruled by; Deuteronomy. 4.2. Prove. 30.6. Rev. 22.18, 19.
John 4.24. John 3.8.2 Cor. 5.10. Gal. 1.10.
how much more the King of Kings, Christ Jesus, by whom alone Kings reign,
will he suffer himself to be displaced, and an earthly King placed therein?

Thus we conceive it is clear, That no man ought to be forced in matter of
Religion, the Gospel being spiritual, and requires only spiritual
worshippers, like to it self: which cannot be made so, but by the Word and
Spirit of God, which breaths where and when it lists, and not where and
when men's Laws and Statutes pleases; which may make hypocrites, but not true
Christians.

Give glory to God through Jesus Christ alone, Phil. 3.3. By Edward Barber,
sometimes Prisoner in Newgate for the Gospel of Christ. In all humility
submitting to better Judgments.
Printed in the year 1641.


