GODS Lift-up Hand FOR Lancashire, Presented in a Sermon Preached before the
Honorable Committee of the County at Lancaster.

Upon the 18th of December 1645. Being a Solemn day of Thankesgiving to God
for clearing of the County, in subduing the enemies thereof.

By NEHEMIAH BARNET, Minister at Lancaster.

LONDON, Printed by W. WILSON, for JOHN WILLIAMS, and are to be sold at the
Crown in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

To the Worshipful, Mr. Major, The Baylifs and Burgesses of the Town of
Lancaster, N. B. desires their sanctification on earth, and glorification in
Heaven.
GENTLEMEN,
MY thoughts have been long perplexed to find out some way or other whereby I
might return some acknowledgement of the many expressions of love, and
underserved favors, which I have received from you; I dare not deny, but I am
deeper indebted to you; then to any people under Heaven, and the debt I owe to
you is above my ability, not willingness, to pay; I here tender you earnest,
let your goodness please to accept of this in part, (if it may be in good
part) till the whole comes.

I offer herein some of my first fruits unto you, and do earnestly desire you
would accept them, and wish them safe protection, for I dedicate not only
them, but my self unto you, necessitated thereunto by an obliged duty of
thankfulness; and receive them as from one that unfeignedly desires the
salvation of your souls.

In the preaching of this Sermon you might perceive, I did not seek so much to
please, as to profit, not to inform the judgment, as to work on the
affections; but till God blessed it in both, I never purposed it should have
been broached abroad, because it might seem as a candle lighted at noone day;
it found such approbation, that it was thought fit that it should not be
confined within the narrow limits of a Parish; but that it should be
communicated to others, by these silent speaking characters.

It is a true saying, that Printing is a kind of Preaching, though not so Solet
acceptior esse sermo vivus quam scriptus. Bern.
plausible and prevalent to persuade, yet it is of larger extent (seeing a man
may Preach to more by his pen then his tongue, and be farther heard out of the
Press, then the Pulpit) for a dead man may live in his books, and by them
preach to the living, though unborne, when he dies. I would account it a
double happiness if I could do good both ways.

I am sensible of the curiosity of the times, and of my own insufficiency,
those small abilities God has given me to profit others, are rather in the
Pulpit, then the Press: yet for the benefit of sleepy and secure Malignants in
the North (whereof some received some light from this poor talent of mine)
therefore it is come to light, and for a light; that they may see how far in
the day it is, that it is time for blind believers to awake, and behold God
every day by his lift-up hand, putting matter of thanksgiving both in our hands
and hearts. It is a part of my prayer that God would wind up our hearts to the
right tune of Hallelujahs, and that the rest may have as much cause of praising
the the Lord of Host as the North has had, that so God might perfect his own
work of reformation, and put a period to our wars and depopulations.

You know too well, how sad and deplorable was the Condition of this ancient
Corporation, when the common and cruel enemy had plundered your houses, and
laden themselves with your Wealth, which (with much Labor and Sweat) all your
life time you had been gathering for you, and your posterity, and wanting
light to steal away what they had possessed themselves of, therefore their
malice set on fire your habitations, and brought many of them to ashes.

When your Castle was left carelessely by Commanders, that had it not been for
Gods lift-up Hand, that which was left unburnt, had been at their command, and
your selves Slaves to those bloody Towne-Burning Adversaries. Then you became
the subject of many prayers, and object of many tears, so that you might have
said with Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10, 11.
We were pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch that we despaired,
even of Life: but we had the sentence of Death in our selves, that we should
not trust in our selves, but in GOD which raises the dead, who delivered us
from so great a death, and does deliver: in whom we trust that he will yet
deliver us. Yea, also helping together by Prayer for us, that for the gift
bestowed upon us, by the means of many persons, thanks may be given by many on
our behalf.

Has God raised you out of this woeful condition, and do your dead bones
live? Let then the language of your praises be that of DAVID'S, Psalm 18.46,
47, 48, 49. The Lord lives, and blessed be my rock; and let the God of my
salvation be exalted: It is GOD that avengeth me, and subdueth the people
under me; he delivers me from my enemies, yea thou liftest me up, above
those that rise up against me: thou have delivered me from the violent man.
Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the Heathen; and sing
praises unto thy Name, Psalm. 62.18, 19.
and blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who only does wondrous things.

What misery did formerly befall the Town, by the lift-up Hand of GODS
Justice, was for sin; And now GOD seems to smile upon you, and is willing to
be reconciled with you; never return again to your former folly; for
new-provoking Transgressions, or old, unrepented of, will procure new
depopulations. Therefore sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto you. Sin
is the ruin of a Town, nay of a Kingdom; and if that our Enemies did at any
time ruinate our estates, we may thank our selves.

Sin is like a Traitor in our bosoms, that will open the gates of the
strongest Castle to the enemy.

Sin weakens the hands, and makes them unapt to fight; it was not the
strength of AI that overcame the Israelites, but ACHANS sin: The sins of
LANCASTER, were the enemies of LANCASTER; these cursed CANAANITES are always
rising up against us: but it must be our Repentance that must repair our
Ruins, and be our future Fortress, in the days of dangers: The LORD in mercy
destroy our sins, and not our Towns, least our unrepented sins force him
to fire the remainder of our houses, to fire us out of our Formalities, and
manifold iniquities. Let us not provoke GOD any more, lest the next blow be
the last blow, and the everlasting destruction of us. I confess the course you
have lately taken in Reforming the Sabbath, has wrought much good, and the
executing Justice on profane sinners, has been a good work, and may prove the
only means to turn away the wrath of God from us (which was increased by
drunkenness, and profaneness.)

I beseech you go on in the work and way you have begun with courage and
constancy, and be assured the LORD is with you, while you are with him: Your
joining the sword of your power to the word of your Minister, is the highway
to a blessing; your prudent perseverance in the work so well begun, will
procure many praises to GOD, many prayers for you, and much joy in the hearts
of all them who sincerely affect you: Of which number you may reckon him who is

Your most humble Servant, for the good of your souls, NEHE. BARNET.

Gods lift up Hand for LANCASHIRE. OR, A Sermon Preached upon the day of
Thanksgiving, for the clearing of that County in subduing the Enemies thereof.
ISAIAH. 26.11. Lord when thy hand is lifted up they will not see: but they
shall see and be ashamed: for their envy at the people, the fire of thine
enemies shall devour them.


IF you please at your leisure to look back into this Prophecy, you shall
find the promises that God has made to his Church turned into the Churches
Prayers, and the prayers of the Church bring forth many passages of Gods
providence, and the passages of Gods providence to his Church and People, wind
up their hearts to the true tune of praises.

The experience of Gods Providence has ever provoked Primitive Christians to
Gods praises.

When Israel had crossed the Red-seas with dry feet, and the returning waters
had drowned the pursuing enemies, Moses and the people sang a Song of triumph,
and spoke saying, I will sing unto the Lord, Exodus 15. V. 1.
for he has triumphed gloriously, the horse and his rider has he thrown into
the Sea. V. 2.
The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation: he is my
God, and I will prepare him a habitation; my fathers God, and I will exalt him.
V. 3.
The Lord is a man of war: The Lord is his Name.

When Deborah had conquered Sisera, Judges 5.
with his 900 Chariots of Iron, whereby the Land had rest forty years, she
sang this rejoicing Song to the Lord.

Praise ye the Lord, V. 2
for avenging of Israel; when the people willingly offered themselves.

Hear, oh ye Kings, V. 2.
give ear oh ye Princes: I, even I, will sing unto the Lord, I will sing
praises to the Lord God of Israel.

When God restored Judah back again out of Captivity; this Chapter was their
song of triumph, wherein three things are observeable.

First, the place where it was sung, V. 1.
In that day shall this Song be sung in the Land of Judah.

Secondly, the persons rightly fitted and qualified for the singing of this
joyful Song, set down in this Chapter by four Qualifications.

1. They are a righteous Nation, V. 2.
which keep the truth, v. 2. 2. They are such whose mind is staid on God,
because they trust in God. V. 3.
v. 3. 3. They are such who wait for God, V. 8.
and the desire of their souls is to his name. v. 8. 4. They are such who seek
God early, V. 9.
with soul and spirit. v. 9.
These are the persons rightly qualified for singing of this song.

Thirdly, the provoking and inciting causes, for singing of this Song, are
these amongst many.

1. Because they had a strong City, salvation had God appointed for Walls, and
Bulwarks for them. v. 1. 2. Because in the Lord Jehovah they had everlasting
strength. v. 4. 3. Because he brings them down that dwell on high, the
lofty City he lays it low, even to the ground. v. 5. 4. Because he will
ordain peace for his people, and has wrought all their works on them. v. 12.
But I need not go beyond my Text to seek for reasons why Judah does sing this
Song. For,

When Gods hand is lifted up in a way of mercy for a people and in a way of
Justice upon their enemies, and makes them ashamed that envies them, and
destroys them with the fire of his enemies that rises up against them, then
you cannot but grant that there is good ground for singing joyful Songs of
praises.

So that from the course that Gods people here took when they were delivered
out of Captivity, we might by the way draw this Doctrine.



It Is David's argument which he uses to stir up himself and others to extol
and bless and praise his God, because the Lord is good to all, and his tender
mercies are over all his works. Psalm. 145.8.

The Psalmist exhorts the redeemed in praising God to observe his manifold
providence, Psalm. 107.1, 2. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for
his mercy endures for ever: Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he has
redeemed from the hand of the enemy. Which is the only argument why we should
praise him, because he has redeemed us out of the hands of our enemies, by two
Demonstrations.

1. By disappointing their plots. 2. By weakening their power.
First, by disappointing their plots and purposes, while the wicked set their
wits to devise, and their bodies to execute mischief, with all the art and
craft they can. While the wicked are contriving iniquity on their beds, and
when the morning is light they purpose to practice it. Behold, while they
travail with this their iniquity, Mich. 2.1
and have conceived their mischief, God blasts it, and it proves abortive;
They bring forth nothing but a Lie. Psalm. 7.14.


A Lie in regard of expectation.

A Lie in regard of intention. For the mischief they intended for others,
falls on their own heads. For God delights to catch them in the imagination of
their own hearts, and pay them in their own coin.

1. God does this that he might not lose the glory of any of his Attributes,
he will make them know, that he is a God only wise, and knows how to
disappoint the plots of the enemies.

2. In regard of the enemies, whose fierceness turns to Gods praises in
disappointing their plots, he lets them know that there is a God that rules
the earth.

Secondly, breaking the power and strength of the enemies; By the blast of God
they perish; Job 4.9.
and by the breath of his Nostrils are they consumed: therefore with confidence
David says; for lo thy enemies, Psalm. 92.9.
o Lord, for lo thy enemies shall perish, all the workers of iniquity shall be
scattered.

When the Lord our God shall send the rod of his strength out of Sion, Psa.
111.2
and rule in the midst of our enemies, then there is cause of loud praises to
God for this his mercy.

When God expresses his mercies to a people in suppressing the power and pride
of their enemies, this calls for loud praises.

Sanballat and Tobiah of, who were exccedingly grieved, because God out of
respect to the prosperity of his Church, had stirred up Nehemiah and others to
be repairers of her breaches. that

whole Church in general, it is a grievous thing that the more merciful God
is to us, the more undutifull and unthankful we are to him; never was more
mercies requited with less pity, less obedience, less practical praises.

Hallelujah's to the Lord for his deliverances, you must have these
qualifications following.

First, Paul, to be filled with the Spirit, Ephesians. 5.18, 19, 20.
if we will make melody in our hearts to the Lord.

Secondly, David after he had fallen into those four gross sins, which he
calls presumptuous sins, he presses God with arguments to give him
repentance that his mouth may be opened to praise him. Psalm. 51.12, 13.

David with confidence says, Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy
Name: the upright shall dwell in thy presence, Psalm 140.13.

Offer to God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows to the most High, Psalm. 65.1.
Psalm. 50.14.

Those that are adorned with these properties may be fit persons for the
performance of this days duty.

But I fear I have held you too long in the Suburbs of this my unless I could
promise you the sight of a better City, such that were of curious building, and
at unity in it self, at least look upon it, enter into it, and God grant it
may enter into all our hearts.

My Text is a strain of Judah's joyful Song for Gods bringing them back from
Captivity, and we may seasonably make it this day ours; if we apply the next
Verse to the Text, V. 12.
to our times. For, the Lord has ordained peace for us, and has wrought all
our works in us. Therefore my desires are, that the God of heaven would give me
a tongue of praise, and thanksgiving to sing this strain to you; and you
hearing ears to understand it, and all of us thankful hearts to embrace it.

I pray God my Sermon may be as profitable as it is seasonable.

My Text seems to be a complaint of the Prophet against a blind, shamed and
envious enemy, who till the fire of Gods wrath be destroying them, will not
see Gods hand lifted up against them.

Lord when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see; but they shall see, and be
ashamed, for the envy of the people; yea, the fire of the enemies shall
devour them.

The sense, and sum, of my Text is this, among many Expositors, I take this
to be the truest:

Ad percutiendos impios elevare secreto, Oleaster.
ne ipsi eam videant nisi cum percutiuntur. Esa. 6.16.


Gods hand lifted up to smite the wicked secretly, and they perceive it not
till Gods hand is on them, till they feel the very smart of it.

Aut excelsa est manus tua ad elevandos tuos, seu ad benefaciendum illis, sea
melius ad eos liberandos, non videbunt eam nunc inimici eorum, sed postea
videbunt eos liberatos, and invidebunt illis, quia non solum eos eripies, Esa.
66.5.
sed inimicos consumes. Oleaster.

The scope of the Prophet is this, Lord thy hand has been lifted up in much
mercy to thy people, in bestowing many benefits on them in saving and
delivering them. Thy hand has been lifted up in justice upon thy enemies, but
they will not see, i.e. thy hand of rescue, thy hand of revenge, thy hand of
vengeance on them, they do not take notice that it is thy hand, but they shall
see the success of thy lift-up hand, they shall see the hand of thy mercy
toward thy people, they shall see the hand of thy Justice toward themselves,
and be ashamed when they shall perceive thy hand has frustrated their hopes,
and has turned all their designs to naught, they shall be ashamed for the
envy, the malice and bitterness they have expressed in word and deed against any
people, yea the fire of thine enemies shall devour them.

1. There Is a fire of Gods indignation upon his people, but this is a trying
fire, and not a consuming fire; this is a purging fire, and not a destroying
fire; this is to purge Jerusalem with the spirit of Burning, Esa. 4.4.

2. There Is a fire of GOD from HEAVEN which consumes them, which falls upon the
Wicked as upon a Company of Enemies, and this he calls the fire of his
enemies; with this he devoures them up as Stubble, and Briars, and Thorns.
This seems to be the meaning of the words; from which we may gather these
three natural Doctrines.

That there is a time when the Lords hand is lifted up.

That when the Lords hand is lifted up, there are some that will not see it.

That those that will not see Gods hand lifted up at first, shall feel it at
last, with shame and confusion; for the fire of thine enemies shall devour
them.

Ordine quidque suo.

But first, of the former.

That there is a time when the Lords hand is lifted up.

In handling hereof we shall use this Method to show you,

First, How Gods hand is lifted up.

Secondly, When it is lifted up.

Thirdly, Why it is lifted up. And then we shall labor to press the practice
of all by application.

How is Gods hand lifted up? 1. Quomodo.


For the understanding hereof, we must know that hand applied to God,
signifies,

1. Either Gods eternal and effectual purpose of things to be done, Acts
4.28. where the people of Israel are said to be gathered together, for to do
whatsoever Gods hand and his Counsel determined before to be done.

2. Or Gods actual power working all things which be done according to his
purpose. Therefore David says, Ps. 118.16
The right hand of the Lord is exalted, the right hand of the Lord does
valiantly. Solomon blesses the Lord God of Israel, who has with his hands
fulfilled that which he spoke with his mouth to his Father David, 2 Cron. 6.4.
and the like in v. 15.

3. It signifies Gods blessing, protection, and deliverance. Thou openest thy
hand, and fillest them with good; it is the language of the Prophet David in
Psalm 104.28.

4. Likewise Gods heavy displeasure manifested by punishing the wicked and
chastising the godly. Judge. 2.11.15.


When the Children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and served
Baalim, then whenever they went out, the hand of the Lord was against them
for evil.

David in his great strait desires, 2 Samuel 24. v. 14.
rather to fall into the hand of God, then man, into Gods correcting hand, then
man's cruel crushing hand; and gives the reason of it; for Gods mercies are
great.

God has blessing and protecting hands, correcting, and scourging hands, angry
and revenging hands, to fall into these hands it is a fearful thing.

I confess Gods hand is in every work, there is not a Sparrow that falls to
the ground, but he has a hand in it: but Gods lift up had appears not in
every thing; for the lift up hand of God, is some proper, and peculiar work of
God, wherein much of God is seen, and little of man.

1. Which may be either a work of mercy; as when the Lord brought back
Judah's Captivity, was a work of mercy; the subduing our enemies, and freeing
us from their slavery, was a work of Gods mercy, wherein his lift-up hand
appeared.

2. Or Gods lift-up hand may appear in a work of justice, when God thereby
brings down them that dwell on high, as in verse 5. of this Chapter, when God
does drive down his peoples enemies, and manifests his wrath and vengeance on
those that are his adversaries.

When is Gods hand thus lifted up? 2. Quando.


1. When his people are lifted up in praying, then is Gods hand lifted up in
delivering, and protecting them: when we lift up the hands of fervent prayers,
then God lifts up the hands of sweet mercies to his people. When Moses on the
hill lift up his hands, then Gods were lifted up, and Israel prevailed; but
when Moses grew weary, and let them down, Gods were so, and then Amalek
prevailed.

When Gods people make a great noise at heaven gates.

When God can have no rest night nor day for them, Esa. 62.7.
when they will not keep silence.

When with a Jacob-like importunity they wrestle with God, lay violent hands on
him, (if I might say so) and will not let him go, till he have lift up the
hand of favor for them; for God regards the prayers of the destitute, Psalm.
102.17. and not despise their prayer.

When Gods enemies sin with a high hand, 2. Sign.
then it is Gods time to lift up his hand against them.

When they lift up a high hand of finning against God, he lifts up a heavy hand
of vengeance against them, when their sins are come to their full height, and
come to their growth, and full ripeness and maturity.

When they sin daringly, presumptuously, maliciously: when they commit sins
of blood and blasphemies, as if they would dare the God of Heavens to do his
worst.

Then God can endure no longer, he can suffer no longer this at their hands,
Shall not I visit for these things, says the Lord? Ps. 68.21.
God shall wound the head of his enemies: and the hairy Scalpe of such a one as
goes on still in his trespasses.

Chron. 15.12, 13, 14. when Judah and many of Israel had entered into a Covenant
to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, with all their heart, V. 12.
and with all their soul.

That whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel should be put to death,
V. 13.
whether small or great, whether man or woman. V. 14.
And they swear unto the Lord with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with
Trumpets, and with Cornets.

And all Judah rejoiced at the Oath; V. 15.
for they had sworn with all their heart, and sought him with their whole
desire, and he was found of them, and the Lord gave them rest round about.

Asa and Judah's times were like these of ours, there was no peace to him that
went out, nor to him that came in; for Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City
of City, and God did vex them with all adversity; but other they entered into
Covenant to seek the God of their Fathers, with all their hearts and soul: the
Lords hand was lifted up for them, and gave them rest round about, rest from
fears, rest from troubles, from war, and adversity: For there was no more war
unto the five and thirtieth year of the Reign of Asa. V. 19.


to act his part; what says God, will they plunder, and burn, and destroy all
before them, and thus use my people before my face, and shall I lift not my
hand against them, but sit still and let them alone? When David saw the enemy
in this fury and madness, see what arguments he uses to move God, to lift up
his hand against them, Psalm 74.10. Oh God, how long shall the adversary
reproach, shall the enemy blaspheme thy Name for ever? why withdrawest thou thy
hand? pluck it out of thy bosom.

And when God sees the wrath of wicked men break forth into blasphemies and
cruelties, and hears the importunate arguments of his people, to stretch out
his hand against them; then he cannot let them alone long. The enemy said, Exo.
15. V. 9.
I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, my lust shall be
satisfied upon them: I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.

Thou did blow with thy wind, the Sea covered them, V. 10.
they sank as lead in the mighty waters.

Who is like unto thee, V. 11.
oh Lord, amongst the Gods, who is like thee glorious in holiness, fearful
in praises, doing wonders?

Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, V. 12.
the earth swallowed him.

Why, or wherefore is Gods hand lift up?



He is their God, Father, Husband, Master, Head; they his People, Children,
Spouse, Servants, Members: Now what is done to any of his, he takes it as done
to himself. He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye, Zech. 2.8.
The eye is tender, and will not suffer to be por'd at, and what hurt is done
to the eye is presently at the heart, and the tongue complains. Saul, Saul,
why persecurest thou me? was our Saviors words; Christ was in heaven, and Saul
on earth, yet Saul could not tread on the least Toe of Christ's, he could not
persecute the meanest Member of Christ, but he was sensible of it. Christus
loquitur, Christus patitur, quia in Corpore Christi, Christus est.

He speaks because he suffers; he is in all his Members: so that though he be
free from passion, he is full of compassion, in regard of that affection he
has to his people: in a word, wicked men cannot hate the godly, but God must
needs be sensible of it: They cannot lift up their hands against them, but they
will be found fighters against God, and God has a time to reckon with them;
he will take a time to lift up his hand against them, that lift up their hands
against his people; in regard of that tender affection he bears to his
people, and that near relation that is betwixt him and them: And this is the
first Reason.



They are engaged in Gods quarrels, and interested in Christ's cause. The Lord
usually takes their parts that takes his, and will not suffer the Rod of the
wicked to rest always on the backs of those that are righteous in his eyes,
he beholds their sufferings, and will not suffer them to suffer long. Can God
(who is rich in mercy, full of mercy) see his Servants, his Sons and
Daughters smitten down to the ground, and stand by, and not take their parts,
and right their wrongs, and revenge their quarrel? and if God own us, and
stand for us, we need not fear who comes against us; if we get but him on
our side, we need not fear the fraud and force of the most subtle and
strongest enemies.



Whilst Gods hand lets them alone, they are as thorns in their eyes, and
therefore the fire of his enemies does devour them.

If God should let his hand rest in his bosom still, and seem to sleep
still: then the Jesuits, and Papists, and Atheists, and all the Devils
instruments would make most miserable havoc in the Church of God, how would
they persecute, and destroy, and tear in pieces the people of God, as so many
Bears, and Lions, and Wolves, and Tigers? These wild Boares would speedily
root up the prosperous estate of the Church of God.

But God who loves his Church with his lift up hand breaks their power and
strength, that thereby his Church might have rest, and quietness. When the
host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword, then there was rest round
about, which was good ground for Deborah to sing, So let all thine enemies
perish, oh Lord, Judge. 5. last verse.

Till the Besome of destruction sweeps these Church and State troublers out of
the Land, we must never look for peace.

David's Prayer might seasonably be inserted here, out of Psalm 104.35. Let the
sinner be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more.



Certainly every eye that is not blind may see we have had Gods hand lift up
for us, in the great works and turnings of these times.

Let our reasons speak, and Religion be silent, this last year has been
mirabilis ille annus, the year of Gods wonders; has not the proceedings of
every week, spoke wonder-working God?

1. Was it not the lift-up hand of God that gathered this pious Parliament
together at first, and has preserved them together to this moment of time?

2. Who was it that could discover so many secret, Antichristian, subtle,
Diabolical For they were hatched in hell, before they were acted on earth.
Plots against both Houses of Parliament, since they first began, but the
lift-up hand of God?

3. Who is it that could cause an Army to stand for Englands Parliament,
Englands Laws, Englands Religion, when there was but a handful, but a remnant
in comparison of the whole piece and people of the Land?

4. Who was it that has cleared our County, and driven out our enemies, broken
their power, abated their pride, and put them to shame and confusion that
mocked us, and rose up against us, was it not the lift-up hand of God?

If so much of God has been seen in the work, then the work is Gods: And as
Moses said to Israel, so say I to England, Deuteronomy. 4.32
Ask from the one side of Heaven to the other, whether there has been any
such thing as this great thing is, or has been heard like it.

I shall not now lead you abroad to behold a sight of the lift-up hand of God,
protecting, and prospering our Armies both by Sea and Land; but I shall keep me
within the Confines of this County.

1. Look back into the Infancy of these bloody times by our unnatural wars,
and consider the unskilfulnesse of Commanders and Soldiers, being bread in a
Land of peace, and were ignorant in the policies and stratagems of Wars: but
Gods lift-up hand, which put the work into their hands, put skill into their
hands, and courage into their hearts, at the very first assault of Manchester,
at which time there appeared such mirth and majesty, in our Soldiers, such
valor and courage in their countenances, and all their actions, that it did
speak aloud to me, that God was with them, and his lift-up hand for them.

2. Look upon the number of our Soldiers at that time, not above five hundred
fire-men; against thousands that came against that then naked and unfortfied
Town of Manchester, yet prevailed not, but were driven back with loss and
shame, and would not see Gods lift-up hand against them, though he caused the
heavens at that time to weep for them, who could not weep for themselves.

3. Look upon the little Elbow-roome, we then had in the County; for when Gods
lift-up hand had appeared gloriously in Saltford Hundred, Blackebourne Hundred
was the only other Hundred in the County that was most forward, and next
appeared in the same cause; then our Enemies commanded all the Castles in the
County, had four Garrisons for one, four parts of the County to command two
parts, and could command as many adjacent Counties for their assistance. And
was it not Gods lift-up hand which has driven them out of all?

Look upon their many means; and advantages; they had many roaring,
thundering, terrifying Cannons, we but one small Piece: Mr. Angeer.
one said well of them, theirs did but play, but did no work; whilst the
lift-up hand of the God of the Seas was working with the Winds to bring a
Dunkirke ship, a man of War, that came from Spain, furnished with one and
twenty Pieces of Brass and Iron Ordnance fit to supply our present wants, and
to carry them so Twirefoot.
near our strongest Castle, which had no Cannon at all: was not this Digitus
Dei, pointing at the place where they should be placed?

5. And shall we not remember the hand of GOD, in preserving the Castle of
LANCASTER, after the Cannons were hastily conveyed thither; the envy of our
Enemies was presently increased, and therefore with much fury, and with all
their Forces, came against the Town and Castle, and were so hot that they
quickly fired the Town, and thought thereby to have fired or frighted us out
of the Castle, and so have gained that which Gods hand had lately given unto
us. Yet unwilling to fight with our Forces that came to relieve us, fearing
thereby they should lose their Plunder wherewith they were laden, retreated,
and took the opportunity to prevail against Preston, which successes surprised
the spirits, and discouraged the hearts of the chief Commanders in the Castle,
that they thought the safest way for themselves was to march toward
Manchester, and quit the Castle. And when soldiers were left discontented, and
without Commanders here, yet did Gods hand appear in moving their hearts to
defend that place, and those Canons, which Gods providence had given unto them.
Might I speak out without offense, or without the censure of arrogating any
thing to my self, I am confident, I could cause every Christian present to
confess, that at this time the Lords hand was mightily lifted up for us.

6. Lastly, look upon their persons, as well as their actions, who rose up
against us, (who were weak and an unworthy people of any protection from God)
they were Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of great personage, whose personages
were promoted to great places, whose places were of great power: but now where
are the persons, where are their places, where is their power? all vanished: by
this time they may be ashamed for their envy at us, and for firing our
habitations, the fire of Gods enemies has met with them, and destroyed many of
them. For, Lord, when thy hand was lifted up they would not see: but they shall
see, and be ashamed for their envy of the people, yea, the fire of thine
enemies shall devour them.

Thus much for the first Use, being a Use of examination.

Secondly, suffer a word of Exhortation.

Is Gods hand lifted up for us? has he extended the lift-up hand of mercy to
us?

lex talionis, the Law of taliation, which will require the discharging of our
duties to God, answerable to the measure of mercies received from God. Thus in
general, but that I might not speak confusedly, and unprofitably, I shall
digest this Exhortation into these four branches, for your better remembrance.

The duties are these four, which I urge.

1. Lift up your Confidence in God. 2. Lift up your Courage for God. 3. Lift up
your Prayers to God. 4. Lift up your Praises of God.


We will believe in, and put trust to man, and shall we not fix our faith on
God? we will say of man, he is my old friend, and he never deceived me, I
dare trust to him, he has promised me, and I am sure he will not deceive me:
and tell me, what man can be found, or ever was heard of, that could say, I
have trusted in God, and he deceived me? has God promised thee protection, and
shall he not perform it? has he said it, It is easier for heaven and earth
to pass, Luk 16.17. e
then that one little of his Word should fail. 1 Kings 8.56.
And what the Lord said to his Servant Joshua, he seems to speak to all his
faithful people, Josh. 1.5. I will be with thee, I will not fail thee nor
forsake thee.

It is a sad thing, that though Gods promises have been made good in his
providence to us, he has performed his word in his works; yet our faith is so
weak, that it is not able to carry us from one County to another; nay from one
Town to another, from one miracle to another, his hand is not weakened, nor
arm shortened, but it may, it can, it will help another County as well as this.
Let David's arguments move you to put your confidence in God, Psalm 37.3. Trust
in the Lord and do good; so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily thoushalt
be fed: and look the last Verse, see how he heaps up arguments in few words
to urge and force us to trust in God; for the Lord shall help them and deliver
them: V. 40.
he shall deliver them from the wicked and save them, because they trust in him.

I Will say no more of this, but with the same Prophet, They that know thy Name
will put their trust in thee; for thou Lord have not forsaken them that seek
thee. Psalm 9.10.

Since God has not forsaken us, but, we must confess, has lift up his hand
for us, let us make it appear to the world that we know him, by putting
confidence in him; which is the first duty required of us.



Shall our Spirits be down, when God is up for us? It Is a shame that so great
and mighty a cause, which is prosperously carried on by the high God, should
be managed with such poor low spirited men as we are: a good cause, and a
good courage should always be companions.

1. This is Gods precept. 2. This is his peoples practice.
For the first see Josh. 1.9. Have not I commanded thee, be strong and of a
good courage, be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the Lord thy God is
with thee, whithersoever thou go? Deuteronomy. 31.6
Consider Christians who are our enemies that we should fear them, since we
see Gods hand is against them. Why should one fear them that fear not God?
they have lifted up their hands against God, therefore Gods hand is lifted up
against their power, plots, policies, and all their preparations.

2. This is Gods people practice. Neh. 6.11. When Sanballat and Tobiah, (both
grand enemies to Reformation) practiced by craft, by rumors, by hired
Prophesies to terrify Nehemiah, and hinder his good work of Reformation, yet
lifts up his courage; Shall such a man as I flee? As if he had said; shall such
a man as I, who have so many promises made to me by my God, I that have so many
experiences of Gods providence, I that have seen so often times Gods hand
lifted up for me, shall I flee? I will not.

When the children of Ammon and the Syrians came against Israel, David puts on
courage, and encourages the people; Be of good courage, and let us play the
men for our people, and for the Cities of our God: and the Lord do that which
seems him good, 2 Samuel 10.12.

That Ironicall speech of the Prophet Isaiah is very pregnant to this place,
Isa. 8.9, 10. Associate your selves, o ye people, V. 10.
and ye shall be broken in pieces, and give ear all ye of far Countries;
Gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces: gird your selves, and ye
shall be broken in pieces, take counsel together, and it shall come to naught:
speak the word and it shall not stand, for God is with us. Is it not manifest
God is with us, by his hand lifted up for us? Therefore let our courage be
lifted up for God; which is the second duty required of us.



The praying people in the Land have done best service in the cause of God.

Worthy Commanders, I confess you have done courageously, and deserve much for
your fidelity and magnanimity, but assume nothing to your selves, but ascribe
all to the lift-up hand of God.

Valiant Soldiers, I confess you have played the men for your Country, and the
Cities of our God, but take nothing to yourselves, though you deserve much; but
give all to the lift-up hand of God; and let all our hands and hearts be
lifted up to God in prayers, who has lifted up his hand for us in Providence.

Prayers are powerful with God, able to bring the promises of God into
gracious performances.

Prayers have a power to undermine all the plots, and break in pieces the power
of our enemies; Esth. 4.16.
Esther, Mordecai, and the Jews prayed, and they prayed Hamans Plot to
confusion, Esth. 7.10.
and his person to the Gallows.

Let us therefore with a Jacob-like importunity wrestle with God in Prayer, and
resolve not to let him go, till he bless us with the perfecting of all our
works in us, and for us.

Let us keep no silence; let the Lord have not an hours rest, till he have
given rest to England, and deliverance out of all her troubles.

What the Prophet spoke to Gods Remembrancers, Esa. 62.6.
his Messengers, I speak to all my hearers; Never hold your peace day nor
night, keep not silence, give the Lord no rest till he establish, and till he
make our Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

This is the third Duty required of us.



Let us lift up the voice of praises to God, he has done great things for us,
whereof our hearts this day are glad; let us praise him for it with lift-up
tongues, with lift-up hands, with lift-up hearts.

1. The tongue is made to interpret the meaning of the heart, the lips are the
Trumpet, but it is the heart that gives it breath to sound out Gods praises;
therefore David says, With a loud voice will I praise thee, Psalm. 48.
and with the voice of triumph: let our tongues talk of Gods righteousness
all the day long. Psalm. 89.


2. The hands must play their parts in this days duty, or else our praises are
spoiled: praising God in words is little worth, without we praise him in our
works.

Therefore the Jews when they dedicated days of thankesgiving to God, Est.
9.22.
gave gifts to the poor.

3. Let our hearts be chief in discharging this days duty, make melody in
your hearts to the Lord this day, for if our hearts be not in tune, we shall
make no harmony in Gods ears this day, it must be homo cordis, the man of the
heart, that must make us thankful men: when we are about this duty, let our
resolutions be that of David's, I will praise thee with my whole heart, Psalm.
138.1.

Let us not only this day perform this duty, but let our lives all the days of
our life praise God, which is the life of praises: it is a poor praising of
God with our lips, when our lives dispraise our God. Gods hand is lifted up in
multiplying his mercies upon us. God enable us to multiply our duties to God,
by trusting in him, being courageous for him, praying to him, praising of him.

I have dwelt long on this first Doctrine, but shall therefore be very brief
on the next.

That when the Lords hand is lifted up, there are some that will not see it.
They see by the eye of sense and reason; but not as it is the hand of God, they
may see the work, but they know not it to be the work of God. The Lord
labors by the Prophet Isaiah to convince the people, Esa. 48.6, 7, 8.
of their foreknown obstinacy, in these words.

Thou have heard, see all this: and will not ye declare it? I have showed thee
new things from this time, even hidden things, and thou did not know them.

Yea thou heardest not, V. 8.
yea thou knew not, yea from that time that thine ear was not opened: for I
knew that thou would deal very treacherously, and was called a transgressor
from the womb.

But we shall lay you down briefly some grounds of this Doctrine.

1 Cor. 2. v. 14.
he is blind in things of God. He may be quick sighted in natural things, but
as blind as a beetle in spiritual things; V. 15.
for he that is spiritual discerns all things.



What Moses said of many in Israel, I may say of many in England.

Ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in the Land of Egypt unto
Pharaoh, Deuteronomy. 29.2 4.
and unto all his servants, and unto all his land.

The great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs, and those great
Miracles: yet the Lord has not given you a heart to perceive, and eyes to see,
and ears to hear unto this day.

Because God in his just judgment may give them over to the God of this world,
3. Reas.
that Prince of darkness, to be blinded to their destruction: of such the
Apostle Paul speaks, Ephesians. 2.2.
which were amongst the Ephesians, who walked according to the course of this
world, according to the Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now
works in the children of disobedience. So that they (in a just judgment) are
blinded, that they cannot discern the ways of God. Of all judgments these
spirirituall judgments are heaviest, and this judgment is mentioned by the
Apostle Paul, Romans 9. v. 8. according as it is written, God has given them the
spirit of slumber; eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should
not hear unto this day. The Apostle here has reference to the Prophet Isaiah
his prophecy of the obstinacy of the people unto their desolation. And he
said, Esa. 6.9, 10.
Go and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not: and see ye
indeed, but perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their
ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed.

The Lord open our eyes, and boar our ears, and touch our hearts, with his
gracious Spirit, that we may never fall into these worst of his judgments.

and will not see Gods hand lifted up, that will not take notice what God is
doing in England.

They are a churlish dogged people, that bark and snarle at the works of God,
that speak the language of Sanballat and Tobiah, Neb. 4.2, 3. What do these
feeble Jews do? will they fortify themselves? will they sacrifice? will they
make an end in a day? will they revive the stones out of the heaps of the
rubbish which are burnt? So these say, What will these brainsick Puritanes, and
Roundheads do? will they presently build a new Religion, will they have a new
Discipline? etc.

It Is these our blind Britains, which makes our Parliament Worthies stand in
Nehemiah's posture, working, consulting with the one hand, and holding their
weapons in the other.



Will thou go on to fight against God now his hand is lift up against thee?
thou would be ashamed, if thou did perceive and understand what thou art
doing; thou layest about thee, and know not who thou smitest; thou know
not what thou do. If God in mercy would open thine eyes, thou would see and
plainly perceive, that thou art opposing Gods work, that thou have lifted up
thy hand against God, and buffeted him, and wounded through the sides of his
servants, God himself. Could thou see this, thou would be ashamed. Did
Pharaoh see that none of his devices prospered against Israel, and that he
could not work wisely enough to destroy them: Did he see that the more
violent he was, the more God took their part, and followed him with Plagues,
so that his servants asked him, Exo. 10.7.
If he would see all Egypt destroyed before he would let them go; yet he
would not see, but runs on in mischief, till the fire of Gods enemies had
devoured him.

seen the great things God has done for these parts, how mercifully Gods hand
has been lifted up for this County: You ought now to bless God that you have
eyes, that have seen; oh bless God that you were not blinded to your own
destruction: therefore now learn to fear the Lord, and serve him with all your
hearts, all your days. It Is the lift-up hand of God that has crowned this
poor County with his blessings, in enlarging the borders of our tranquillity;
so that as Moses said of Israel, so may I say of Lancashire, Happy art thou, oh
LANCASHIRE, Deu. 33.29
who is like unto thee, o people, saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help,
and who is the sword of thy excellency? and thine enemies shall be found liars
unto thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places.

We must all of us confess with the Prophet David, Psalm. 40.5.
That many are the wonderful works which God has done for us; and his
thoughts which are to us wards, they cannot be reckoned up in order: If I would
declare and speak of them, they are more then can be numbered. So that I must
conclude this Text at this time with Samuels counsel, 2 Samuel 12.14. Only
fear the Lord, and serve him in truth, with all your heart, for consider how
great things he has done for you: Which counsel (if it please God to give us
grace to follow it) will be a means to move God to lift up the hand of his
Protection over us, and destruction upon our enemies: and bring them to shame
that envy us, and cause the fire of his enemies to devour them.

FINIS.

