THE ROYAL ROBE: OR, A TREATISE OF Meekness. Upon COL. 3. 12. Wholly tending
to PEACEABLENESSE. By James Barker, Minister of Redbourn in Hartfordshire.

BEATI PACIFICI. Matthew. 5. 9. The Meek shall inherit the earth, and shall
delight themselves in the abundance of peace. Psalm. 37. 11. Tranquillus Deus,
tranquillat omnia. S. Bern. super Cant. Sermon. 23. p. 631. Col. 1. LONDON,
Printed by E. M. for Robert Gibbs, at the golden-Ball in Chancery Lane. 1660

To the Honorable Sr HARBOTLE GRIMSTON BARONET, SPEAKER of the House of COMMONS.
SIR,
WEre mine abilities as large as my Will, or could I perform what might
challenge the Applause of all good men; All this from me is a debt to your
Merit. What obligations of duty and thankfulness you have laid upon me, I
every where find: what Acknowledgemenrs I shall make, I am still to seek: but in
the want of better, I humbly offer this Treatise of Meekness: unworthy (I
confess) your judgment or acceptance: yet doubt not you will give it
entertainment for the subjects sake: for in my hearing (from his mouth by whom
the Commons of England speak unto the King) Meeknes has received the
commendation of an excellent subject, Meekness is another thing than it is
commonly taken to be, well known to you, which makes you so eminent in the
practice of it.

And your discreet zeal does speak your courage, no less, than your Christian
(...) your Wisdom (special qualifications in a Magistrate): which seconded
with your great experience, and Piety; who more likely (considering the place
you sustain) to do God, the King, the Church, and his Country better service.

Sir, I send forth this Book to you, with the same blessing that Israel sent
forth his sons unto Joseph (God Almighty give thee mercy in the sight of the
man) the Author and the Work do need the Patronage of a person of note and
eminency, both for Goodness and Power; such an one as your self is: from whom
they may receive countenance and protection. In this what I have performed, I
humbly submit to your Grave Censure, being confident you will not deny it a
favorable perusal; in it I complain not of Wrongs, for complaints are not
pleasing where they are necessary, my project only is to commend Meekness.

This Treatise of Meekness I have entitled (THE ROYAL ROBE) not only because
the Apostle proposes it as a Garment to be put on; and Synesius tells she;
Clemency or Meekness is ((...)) a virtue meet for a Prince: but also because
his sacred Majesty our Sovereign Lord the King (amongst other Princely and
Heroic virtues that beautify his Royal person) has fulfilled the Apostles
rule, in Putting on Meekness, which as a ROYAL ROBE he wears, and appears
conspicuous, illustrious and exemplary in it in the eyes of al his people
Clemency or Meekness has in it a majesty as well as sweetness: a Clement Prince
is an object for love and wonder to stand amazed at; unto whom all men (tanquam
ad clarum ac beneficum sidus certatim advolant.) The Orator praising Caesar
above all commends him for his Clemency, that his fortune had nothing greater
than that he had power, his nature nothing better than that he had will to save
many; and what greater honor can there be, than to be, what Titus Vespasian is
said to be (Deliciae humani Generis) the Darling of the World. And now if the
World be composed to follow their Rulers (Regis ad exemplum totus componitur
orbis) and the disposition of our Nation do incline them to Imitation (apt to
follow the fashion) there is great hopes that Meekness will come into fashion
(being thus commended, by the Apostles Rule; the Kings Example; the practice of
such Worthies as your self; with the wholesome lessons of pious Pastors) and
that such (who were as ravening Wolves scattering the flock, and devouring one
another: frighting the Shepherds (the Magistrates as well as Ministers) from
their Charge, wrought upon, and won by these means,) will be converted, and
become new men: will follow after Meekness, and approve themselves the Lambs of
Christ's flock, harmless, gentle, meek, quiet and peaceable, then shall we live
to see good days; Jerusalem in prosperity all our life long, and peace upon
Israel.

And the God of heaven who has made you honorable, and placed you in the eye
of the Land, a Patron of learning, a sin. cere friend of Religion, an
encourager of virtue, increase in you his graces, direct you in your courses,
prosper you in your honorable undertakings, fill you full of days and
blessings, and at last bring you to his everlasting Kingdom, which is, and
shall be the prayer of

Your Honors in all faithful and humble observance James Barker.
August 7. 1660.
To the truly Religious and right virtuous, The Lady GRIMSTON, Wife to the
Honorable Sir HARBOTLE GRIMSTON Baronet The Master of the ROLLS.
MADAM,
MY written Papers (a few months agon commended to your reading by your
Renowned Husband) you pleased to take the pains, and to have the patience to
read through: and according to your excellent understanding, and sound
judgment, to give your sense, and with much ingenuity to pass your approbation
of them: the same are now again (after some delay in the Press) presented to
your Ladyship in Print; In a fairer Character to return most humble thanks for
that noble favor.

It is an addition to the worth of my poor labors, that they find the Patronage
ana Countenance of such Honorable and Judicious persons, and of so known and
eminent Goodness.

And truly Madam, I cannot but let you know, what satisfaction it is to me,
that my Meditations were directed to a subject so suitable to the quiet temper
of your Religious mind: so agreeable to the constant practice of your virtuous
life, meek and peaceable.

It is your Meekness, Madam, that gives a luster to all your other virtues and
Graces, which beautify your person, and Christian conversation, and render you
an Ornament to your Sex: no plaiting of the Hair, wearing of Gold, putting on
of Apparel, do set forth a Lady, in that high estimation with God and good men,
as her exemplary virtues do; those outward Adornings you do not use them; for
you do not need them; God having abundantly stored you, out of his own Treasury
of nature and Grace.

Good Madam, I know it is unpleasing to you, to read your own Commendation
(though never so well deserved) yet I beseech you give me leave to acknowledge
to the Glory of God, what I have observed to the joy of my heart: and when you
shall be taken into heaven; and I shall be turned into dust, let this be
written for a memorial to the world; of your Merit, and my duty.

In Treating of Meekness, I am not ignorant that (Lupum auribus teneo) Anger
the one extreme is a hot, heady, fierce and fiery passion (like a wild beast)
Meekness is the Mean that tames it. And so! here, through Meekness I have
(with some industry) beaten a plain path for the sober moderate Christian to
walk in.

And now were it not to trespass too far upon a noble patience, I could give
in a Breviat of my Book: but I presume of a candid interpretation from your
Ladyship, (if in a very few words) I humbly offer an Assay of what I have
treated on.

May it please your Ladyship then! I have endeavored! to settle the weak and
wavering mind: to quiet the wilful and unruly spirit: to set the heart in a
right frame and temper both toward God, and also toward man: to suppress
impatience, murmuring, fretting and repining: to show how sufferings are to be
entertained, and afflictions of what kind soever undergone, with a patient and
quiet mind.

I have set forth Meekness as a most rare virtue: and such that brings beauty,
safety, dignity to them that have it: and not only fills the soul and conscience
with tranquillity and serenity: but does fashion the countenance, carriage,
language and outward comportment to amiablenesse and sweetness.

It does pass by indignities, puts up injuries, bears Reproaches, and forbears
Revenge, qualifies the heat of passions, rectifies the disorder of Affections,
appeases Distractions, heals Distempers, reconciles differences both in
judgment and practice. Here is propounded also a means for the stopping of
private quar-rels: a way opened to public peace: directions given for the
ordering of our Civil and Christian conversation: and certain Instructions
about order and Decency in the public duties of Religion; setting down the
nature and use of things indifferent, and how Christian liberty is to be
regulated to peaceablenesse.

And this I shall ever reckon amongst the chiefest blessings of my holy
Calling, to be in any measure Instrumental in promoting the public peace: and
by the Grace of God (so long as I live) next to the Truth of Christ, the peace
of the Church, shall be the Center both of my studies and practice.

And seeing by the Providence of God, and by the great Wisdom, and unwearied
pains of our Rulers, we have attained to that happiness, which of late years
we could rather wish, than hope for: and seeing above hope, and beyond
expectation, God has appeared for our salvation and settlement both in Church
and Commonwealth; it were to be lamented that any should be found so great an
enemy to their own felicity, as to call for new troubles, when the wounds of
the old (though healed with a tender and skilful hand) are yet blew: or so far
in love with their own misery, as to put away from them this precious mercy,
and not rather with heart and both hands to entertain it, to be contented and
thankful.

Most honored Lady, God has given you your hearts desire, to live in peace
under a rightful Government. And the Affections of your most worthy husband and
your self so happily meeting in the love of Truth and Peace: in the dislike of
Error and Schism: your continual practice of Piety, and in the worship and
service of God your cheerful conformity (to the Order of the Church of England
by Law established) does let the world know the most truly Religious, and most
judicious, are most conformable. Long may you both live, (to move like stars,
in your own Sphere) a light and direction in every good way, to all that are
below you. He add no more; after I have begged of your Ladyship to accept of
this my most humble service; and of my most hearty wishes, for a happy New-year.

And I pray God, every Revolution of the year, may bring with it a Renovation
of your health, honor, and outward prosperity, with an increase of all
spiritual Graces, and heavenly blessings, until you come to the exchange of
time for Eternity, for the which I shall not cease to be importunate at the
Throne of Grace whilst

I am BARKER.
Jan. 3. 1660.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 4. for, earthly, read earthy. p. 2. in marg. for, ille secundum,
r. iste secundum, p 3 l. 6 for, cut, r. put, p. 4. in marg. before (...), r.
(...), p. 10. in marg. for vacuatates, r. vacuitates, p. 11. in marg for unde,
r. vide, p. 14. l. 1. for Author, r. Authors, p. 21. for hi, r. his, l. 15.
blot out how, p. 24. in marg. for in unda, r. jucundi, for desernit, r.
deseruit, p. 28. l. 1. for nor, r. our, p. 31. in marg. for abriviet, r.
abripiet, p. 32. l. ult. for sight, r. light. page 38. line 5. before own, read
his, p. 142. l. 11. for excise, r. exercise, p. 45. l. 16. for cause r. case,
l. 23. for their r. there, p. 50. l. 17. for, hec r. he, p* 53. in marg for
sine mors. ^. sine morte, p. 54 l. 9. for them, p. thee, p. 65. l. 1 for our,
r. one, l. 4. for, came r. comes, p. 66. in marg. for (...) r. (...), for
(...), r. (...), p. 66. l. 10. for, would, r will, p 67. l. 8. for, consier, r.
consider, p. 68 l. 10. for aff^cts, r. afflicts, p. 72. in marg. before
unchangable, r. the, l. 13 for staying, r. slaying, p. 85. l. 1 for, pronesse,
r. pronenesse, p. 96 l. 19. for b^utist, r. brutis^, p. 110. l. 2. for, given
rashness r. given with rashn^sse, p. 112. l. 17. for, game, r. gain, p. 111.
in marg. for, priora, r. p^^ora, p. 114. l. 11. for, the bl^ssed, r. those
blessed, 113. (...) for, (...) for (...), r. (...), 116 marg. for, (...), r.
(...), for (...), r. (...), p. 123. l. 6 for, monumen^um, r. munimentum, p.
128. l. 5. blot out the, p. 144 l. 24. for, God, r. good. p. 147. l. 21. for,
platting, r. plaiting, p* 151. l. 2. for, meek, r. weak p 152 l. 9 for, yea, r.
^ou, p. 162 l. 1. place the comma after also. p. 173. l. 13. for, cause, r.
case, p. ^^5. l. 4. for, Symsius, r. Syn^sius, p. 185. l. ult. for r^quest, r.
requ^sting, p. 191. l. 4 for, build, 1. bind. In some Copies p. 190. l. 20.
for, meek, r. m^eknesse will make him, p. 199. in mar. for (...) r. (...). for,
(...), r. (...), p. 223. l. 23. for, Rights, r. Rites, p. 224. in marg for,
^llo, r. ulla, p. ^32. in marg. for, dominus, r. domino, p. 235. l. 4 for,
live, r. lived, p. 238* ^n. marg. pro (...), r. (...), p 145. in marg. for
Radico, r. Radic, p* 136. for, Aug. r. Au^. p. 133. for, perpe^averunt, r.
pe^petraverunt, p. 114. for Trang r. T^anq. for, Caesarum, r. Caesa^em, so
Quaesitissimus, r. Quaesi^ssimis, for, yaenis, r. poenis, labis, r. labes, p.
116. for (...), r. (...), for (...), r (...), for (...) r, (...) d. 117. for,
q^is, r. quid, p. 98 l. 13. for, that, r. the, p. 239. l. 10. for, affim^s, r.
affirms, p. 249. l. 2* for, lenity, r. levit^, l. 15. dele as,

THE ROYAL ROBE: OR, A TREATISE OF MEEKNESS.
COL. 3. 12. Put on -- Meekness.
THere is mention in Scripture of a first, and second. 1 Cor. 15. 47. Nam ut
ille fuit humani generis princeps, secundum carnalem
Adam; the first is of the earth earthly: the second is the Lord from heaven.
These two are the two principles of mankind distinguished into a twofold estate
of Nature and propagationem; sic iste princeps secundum spiritualem
regenerationem; ille princeps secundum esse naturae, ille secundum esse
gratiae, etc. Est. in 1 Cor. 15. 45. Pet. Mar. In 1 Cor. 15. 21. Sunt tanquam
duo principia, vel duae radices generis human^. Calv. apud Marl. in 1 Cor 15.
45. Romans 5. 19. Videtur autem hoc loco duos homines Apostolus ab oculos ponere;
spiritualem and animalem, quorum unus ab Adamo, alter vero a Christo derivatur;
etenim qu^sque nostrum ut naturalit^r vivit, ex radice Adam propagatu; qua vero
spiritualiter, Christo insitus est. Calvin. apud Marl. in 1 Cor. 15. 45.
Grace. The first Adam is the author or principle of our natural life, he being
the Root of all mankind.

The Second is the Author of our Spiritual life, he being the root of the
Elect, the head and Savior of his body Ephesians. 5. 23.
the Church. Now as all men derive their nature from the first ^dam; so also
the Corruption* that Romans 5. 12
it has contracted, being all covered 1 Cor. 15. 22.
over with it, conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity, filled Psa. 51. 5.
with depraved affections and evil Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3.
concupiscence, breaking fort^ into sinful thoughts, words and actions; James
1. 14, 15
altogether defiled and unclean, and this Corruption derived from the first
Adam, wherewith man's nature is tainted, is called the Old man which must Col.
3. 9.
be cut off with his deeds. The new Man grows out of the second Adam, the
effect of his Merit, Grace and spirit; complete in all the parts of
righeousnesse, and true holiness, filled with Romans 15. 13. Col. 3. 10.
all heavenly Gifts in believing; this new man must be put on.

Here the Apostle instructs us in the two fundamentals of Christianity,
Mortification and Renovation; and that his Exhortation may take the better, and
make the deeper impression, he uses the Metaphor of putting on and off, that it
may be known whose we are, and to whom we belong, whose livery we wear, and
whose Colors we bear; if we be Christ's, and belong to the second Adam we must
put on the Garb of Christianity, put on as the Elect of God, holy and beloved,
Bowels of Mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, Long-suffering.

Now of the Graces, virtues, fruits of the Spirit here mentioned, I have
singled out one, a choice one, and it is Meekness, of which I am now purposed
to speak, and to speak of it as it is here propounded as a Garment to be put
on. And indeed Meekness is a Garment Romans 13. 14. Gal. 3. 17. Ephesians. 4 24. Ephesians.
6. 11. (...) Arist. lib. 2. Ethic. c. 6. (...). idem ibid.
meet for a Christians wear; the Apostle has suited it for us, and here
commends it to us, to be put on; Put on meekness. It is a Metaphor wherewith
the Apostle seems to be much delighted, by which he would give us to
understand, that virtues and vices are habits; and Habits to the mind are as
Apparel to the body, to be put on and off. And as a sorbid ragged and filthy
Garment does vilify, disgrace and dishonor the body, so do vioes the soul;
and as a clean and comely Garment does honor and beautify the body, so do
virtues beautify and adorn the soul. And as it is unsightly and unseemely to
appear in public on an high and solemn day in a torn and filthy Garment; so
in the light of the Gospel and in the day of Salvation it is dishonest and
uncomely to be clothed with sin and vice. St. Paul Romans 13. 12
condemns it as a practice unreasonable and absurd, that we who are dead to
sin, should live any longer therein. The father could tell his son Romans 6. 2
now come to perfect years, jamque haec aetas aliam vitam, alios mores
postulat; Teren. in Andr.
before the light of the Gospel, the times of that ignorance God winked Acts
17. 30.
at: now the time of the Gospel requires another course of life; let it suffice
to have misspent the time past; for the time to come, bring forth fruits worthy
of amendment of life, 1 Pet. 4, 3. Mat. 3. 8. Luke 3. 8. Joh. 5. 14.
says John the Baptist. Sin no more (says Christ). Iniquity is a
disparagement to Christianity; and therefore let every one that calls upon
the name of the Lord depart from Iniquity; 2 Timothy 2. 19.
let not him that is filthy be filthy still, but let him cleanse himself Rev.
22. 11
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the 2
Cor. 7. 1
fear of God.

We must strippe our selves of the Rags of Old Adam, (our sins and vices) by
true and unfeigned repentance, and put on the New Man, which according unto God
is Created in righteousness and true holiness; Justification and
Sanctification, which are put on by faith and love, wherewith Col. 3. 10.
the Spouse of Christ is all glorious within, is the ground work: her Psalm. 45.
13, 14.
clothing of Wrought Gold with raiment of needlework, wrought about with
diverse colors, are those several virtues and graces wherewith a Christians
conversation is adorned, wherewith the spouse of Christ is decked, set forth in
the Canticles in the Rose and Cant. 2. 1.
Lilly, the Beril and the Sapphire, rows of Jewels, chains of Gold, Borders
of Cant. 1. 10, 11.
Gold, with studs of Silver, that is, Bowels of Mercies, kindness, humbleness
of mind, Meekness, long suffering, which the Colossians are, and we in them,
here exhorted to put on.

Put on -- Meekness. Meekness, is the subject I am to speak to.

The use we are to make of it; It must be put on.

First of the subject, Meekness.

Meekness is of excellent use in our Christian Conversation; we can better be
without our Apparel then with out it; for we can neither live Contentedly, nor
die Comfortably with out Meekness. The holy Scripture highly commends it:
Christ Crowns it with eternal blessedness: Matthew. 5. 5.
and God he will guide the meek in judgment: and the meek he will Psalm. 25. 9.
teach his way: he will save all the Meek of the earth, he will beautifiie
Psalm. 76. 9.
the meek with Salvation; and therefore put on Meekness. Ps. 149. 4.


And now, about to speak of Meekness, I cannot begin better than to crave a
taste of it in your Attention, in the words of the Apostle, Receive with
Meekness the ingrafted Jam. 1. 21.
word, etc. In speaking of Meekness, I will say somewhat of the nature of it,
and somewhat of the kinds of it.

For the nature of it, it is a moral Arist. lib. 4. Ethic. c. 5.
virtue; and virtue, to speak plainly, is the right use of Reason in the
government of the affections and passions of the soul; for knowledge or reason
being an Act of the soul resulting from the prime faculty the mind or
understanding, by discourse, does work upon the Inferior part of the soul,
the will and affections, informs them in the choice, and rectifies them Nil
sunt virtutes nisiordinatae affectiones. Bern.
in the use of things good and lawful; hence comes passion to be ruled by
reason, and Reason to be guided by Religion, and then is a Christian Man in his
right temper when the Will and Affections with all external actions are ordered
according to the enlightened rule of Rectified Reason.

Affections we cannot be without, for they are natural, implanted in the
Affectiones utiles and a natura ad virtutem datae. Just. Lips. in Manuduc. ad
Stoic. Philo. lib. 3 dissert. 7. 121. b. Affectus velut ubertas est naturalis,
ad quam cum verus cultus accesserit, statim cedentibus vitiis, fruges virtutis
oriuntur. Lact. l. 6. cap. 15. ad Just. Lips. in lib. 3. Manud. ad Sto. Philos.
dis. 7.
soul by the Maker of it, and the operations of them are not in vain; for of
great use they are in Religion; they helps to devotion and to duty; they are
the wings of the soul that carry it up to Heaven in Devotion; and they are the
Wind of the soul that carries it on in Sine iis (i^ affectionibus) languebit
omnis actio, and vis ac vigor animi resolvetur. Sen. lib. 1. de Ira. Consule
Justum Lipsium in lib. 3. Manud. ad Stoicam Philosophiam, dissert. 7. p. 121.
^. Non enim ratio Omnem prorsus evellere perturbationem animi conatur, cum
neque fleri id possit neque expediat: sed proponit finem ei quend^m qui imponit
o^dinem, ingeneratque virtutes mo^ales quoe non sunt vacuatates motuum seu
affectuum animi, sed eorum mediocritates, and concinitates, etc. Plutarch. de
virtute Moral. cap. 10.
duty to God; were there not affections, we should neither fear God, nor love
Goodness, nor hate evil, nor desire happiness, nor rejoice in the Lord, nor
be zealous for his glory; yet the affections when they are in their Elevation,
and grow into excess, they degenerate into passions; and passions are fell and
fierce; qua data porta ruunt; upon any occasion break forth into distemper to
the great disquiet and disturbance of the mind; Now virtue it is that does
Moderate, finds out a mean, sets the affections in a right frame and temper;
brings into the soul a sweet consent, a heavenly harmony, a blessed
tranquillity.

The affections and passions are of themselves unruly, headstrong and Unde
Plutarch. Moral. in lib. de virtute morali. cap. 13. Bruta pars devincitur
rationi, ac contemperatur, mirabili exornata obedientia, ac tranquillitate etc.
Ita vehementes, furi^sos rabidosque motus ralio extinxit, etc. Per tot. cap.
20. lib. Plutarch. de virtute moral.
violent; the Wisdom and Grace which God gives to keep in and under these
brutish affections, and sweetly to temper them, is virtue; it bounds the
affections, and binds up the passions, which like nocent beasts (if they
enjoyed their own liberty) would do much harm and strangely distemper the
world as well as man.

The act of virtue then is to observe (...). Arist lib. 2. Ethic. c. 6.
a golden mean between two extremes; and so we see in temperance, whereof
Meekness is a species, it is liberal without lavishnesse: Frugal without
Covetousness: Civil without sullenness: Stayed without slothfulness: affable
without wantonness: Modest without affectation: Shamefaced without ignorance:
Zealous with out Rashness: devout, and yet not superstitious: precise, but not
scrupulous: severe but not injurios: Austere, but not malicious: strict, but
not Contentious; in a word, it bridles Anger, mitigateth grief, moderateth
joy, that a man is neither over-joyd at the fruition, nor over-griev'd at the
want or loss of things most dear and delightful. It shows, when, and how
far, and for what, we may be angry, or glad, or sorrowful; where we must
love, and what we must hate; and seasons all our Actions with that due time
which is appointed for every thing under the fun. And as for Meekness, it is
chiefly shown in bearing and forbearing.

For he is Meek that being provoked by injuries, does patiently bear, and
having opportunities of Revenge put into his hands, does quietly forbear.

The Meek (says Beza) are the gentle, mild, and courteous, opposed to such as
are wild, fierce and savage.

He is Meek (says Hemingius) that bridles his affections, who is not easily
provokt, and very ready to forgive Mites sunt qui cedunt improbrationibus, et
non resistunt in malo, sed vincunt in bono malum. Aug. in Ser. Domini in monte.
an injury.

He is Meek (says Melanchthon) that possesses his soul in patience, contents
himself, and leaves vengeance unto God.

He is Meek (says Calvin) that resists not evil, but overcomes evil with
good.

He is Meek (says Ambro. Cath.) who bridleth his affections that he is not
Angry; or being Angry, sins not.

He is Meek (says Cassiodorus) that suffers all wrongs, and wrongs none.

He is Meek (says Hierom) who is so far from doing hurt, that he thinks
none.

By these descriptions which these

Author give of the Meek, we easily understand what the nature of Meekness
is. It is a rare virtue, the true Character of a Saint, the proper Garb of
Election, Sanctification, Adoption.

By it we resemble God the Father who is the Father of Mercies, and God of all
Consolation. 2 Cor. 1. 3.


By it we resemble God the Son, whose proper Attribute is to be Meek and
lowely. Mat. 11. 29


By it we resemble God the Holy Ghost the Comforter, who to show the meek and
Gentle properties of his nature, appeared in the shape of a dove. Mat. 3. 16.


It is a Certain sign of heavenly-mindednesse; for as the superior part of
the world, and that which is nearest Pars superior mundi and ordinatior, ac
propinqua sideribus, nec in nubem cogitur, nec in tempestatem impellitur, nec
versatur in turbinem: omni tumultu caret, inferiora fulminant. Seneca lib. 3.
de Ira. cap. 6.
the stars, has neither Clouds nor Storms, nor any Meteors engendered in
it, nor is it subject to perturbation; omni tumultu caret; all is calm and
quiet there: whereas thundering, lightning, storms, and tempests, are
engendered in the lower parts. So the good Christian whose Conversation is in
heaven, whose thoughts are above the Clouds, and is moved with nothing here
below is free from Malice, envy, revenge, hatred, disdain, and is always
Calm, quiet, modest, mild, gentle.

Meekness it is placed between (...). Arist. lib. 2. Ethic. cap. 7.
two extremes.

On the one side is Anger, a hot fierce and fiery passion.

ON the other side Lenitude, or rather dullness and stupidity, a slow, idle,
dull affection.

The formet of these I may compare to fire; the Prophet has done it for me:
shall thy wrath burn like fire? the latter unto water, which of it self
without an higher Principle of Nature, is cold and chill, very hardly either
moved to good, or removed from evil; thus the Meek man is set in the midst of
evil: if he incline to (...). Arist. Eth. l. c 6. (...). Arist. lib. 4. Ethic.
c. 5.
one hand, he is in danger to be scorched with the burning fire of anger: if to
the other hand, to be drowned in the dead: sea of dullness or senseless
stupidity; medio tutissimus, no safety but in a mean between the two, and that
is Meekness.

Thus the meek man must pass through fire and water; so the Psalmist speaking
of the injuries Gods people endured, sets forth how hardly they were put to it,
We went (says he) through fire, and through water: but thou broughtest us out
into a wealthy place. The meek man in the Psalm. 66. 12
midst of mischief has the promise of Gods presence and protection, Isa. 43.
2. When thou passest througb the water, I will be with thee: and Isa. 43. 2.
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through
the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee;
and this for the Nature of Meekness.

For the kinds of Meekness; There is a Meekness toward God, and a Meekness
toward man.

For Meekness respects both God and man; it sets the soul in a right temper
to God, and also to man.

Meekness toward God, is a willing and ready submission of our judgments and
affections to the will and pleasure of God in all things, without fretting,
murmuring or repining.

For as we must not question the the Justice of God in suffering the wicked to
prosper:

So neither must we murmr at the godnesse and providence of God in suffering
the godly to be afflicted. Why God does suffer it to go ill with the good, and
well with the bad; that the worst prosper best, and the best suffer most, is a
secret of divine providence which we must submit unto, not question: knowing
that wicked men, the more happy they are, the more wretched they are; for what
greater Wretchedness can there be then to prosper in evil Courses? Gods
dealing^ ^^ this particular, and his dispensation of outward blessings is both
wise and just. Why God does so or so, he is not bound to give us an account;
secret he may be, unjust he cannot be.

Here then let us acquiesce; the Justice of God herein is not to be accused of
partiality, as if he lightly passed by, and slightly passed over the sins of
some, as an Accepter of persons (when God knows there is nothing in their
persons he should accept) but we must let God alone with his own Work, and
suffer him to take his own way; for though he permit the wicked to prosper, to
proceed and go on in an uninterrupted state of outward felicity and immunity
from dangers; though he seem to order and dispose all occasions and occurents
for their advancement in this present world; and although they be not
unfurnished of pretenses both plausible and pleasing (as a thing Customable and
Common in the world, and therefore the less questionable, and more excusable
in the judgments of corrupt men) entertaining any means, undertaking any
condition, laying hold of any advantage, sticking at nothing that may help or
further their interest, or mount them to the top of their desires; yet that
light, and those notions they labor to quench, and eradicate, breaks in upon
them; and many times in the midst of their confidence they are brought into
straights; and at length those dreadful curses and maledictions, which
continually dog them, will surely overtake them, either at their passage out
of this life, or entrance into another, (though Babylon sit as a Queen, and see
no sorrow, yet God does know her day is coming). So God may connive at them, he
consents not to them: He may seem to pave their way to hell with oil and
butter: suffer them to play with the Waspe and Hornets nest, till they be stung
to death; they have all things they can desire, but as nets and snares, and a
curse withal, as the Israelites had Quails; we see their open pride, we see
not their secret pinches. Envy not therefore the prosperity of wicked men,
fret not thy self because of evil doers, but observe the end of the Lord.
Psalm. 37. 1


Surely their condition is uncertain, they have no sure standing; God has set
them in slippery places, and their foot shall slip in due time, which Psalm. 73.
18. Psalm. 34. 35.
should invite them to repentance, or a greater fall: and therefore that God
does suffer them, and suspend his vengeance, as it does commend his patience
and abundant clemency; so should it silence our murmuring, cause us applaud
his wisdom and justice, to be contented with hi dealings, Job. 21. 7. Psalm. 10.
13. Psalm. 73. 3. etc. Jer. 12. 1.
and put on meekness.

I know how many good men have been strangely affected at Gods doings in this
kind. Job and David, and Asaph and Jeremiah with others. But after a thorough
search and examination of Gods ways, they rested therewith not contented only
but thankful, acknowledging their errors and oversight, and admiring the
justice of heaven, who sooner or later will not suffer the wicked to go Genesis
15. 16.
unpunished. When their iniquity is full, and the harvest of their sins Rev.
14. 15.
ripe, God will put in his sicle, and they shall soon be cut down as the grass,
and wither as the green herb. Psalm. 37. 2
And if they escape free in this life as seldom they do, yet in the life to
come they shall meet with wrath and vengeance in full vials: and therefore
though stout and stubborn sinners do think to bear up themselves against the
justice of heaven, yet know there is placed over them an armed revenger who
will not acquit the wicked of his doings; for Gods patience and silence have
fixed bounds; he will plead his own cause, will right his Saints, and punish
the wicked after their deservings: For the time when he will do it, that we
must leave to God; it is not for us to know the times and seasons, which the
Father has kept in his own power. Acts. 1. 7.
All that we know is, that there is truth in Gods word, and power in his hand.
He is not (as Caecilius in Minutius Felix alleges) invalidus aut iniquus,
unable and cannot, or unjust and will not; but he both can and will make good
his word upon them. For the time when, and the means how he will do it, we must
leave to his ordering: we have seen Meteors blaze by night, and perish the next
morning with the Rising Sun. They have their Heaven here, till Psalm. 55. 23.
Job. 21. 15. Psalm. 37. 9, 10. Psalm. 73. 19 2 Pet. 3. 22. Psalm. 22. 12. 2 Pet.
2. 12. Luke 23. 30. Rev. 6. 16. Isa. 2. 19. Hos. 10. 8.
suddenly the Oracles of God take place, and then in a moment they tumble into
the pit.

Their good is not in their hand; for a moment shall devour them with their
portions. Though they escape for a time, thinking, speaking, doing what they
please, wallowing as Swine in the mire, and fatted as Bulls of Basan for the day
of slaughter; yet when the Heavens shall melt, and the Mountains be moved, what
covert shall hide them from that wrath which they shall not be able to abide
Victima sacra Deo comburitur, abripit offam Hinc Aquila, ad pullos sert que
ineunda suos; Farali igniculus praedae interce^tus adhaesit, Sa^r legaequ^
sacer.
or evade?

No man's misery then being greater then theirs whose impiety is most fortunate,
there is greater cause for them to bewail their own unhappiness, then others to
envy or murmr at their happy estate.

There is a woe for him that increases that which is not his; we read of the
Eagle snatching a morsel from the Altar, carried therewith the Coal that
consumed her nest, and Hab. 2. 6.
burnt up her young ones: means ill Psalm. 27. 14. Psalm. 31. 24. Isa. 28. 16.
Raro antecedentem scelestum deseriut pede poe^a claudo, To. 12. 19.
gotten will one day more torment a man, than ever it did enrich him; and a
succeding age (if not before) shall see them melt to nothing.

In the mean time let us take the Psalmists advice, to tarry the Lords leisure,
and to wait his good pleasure; For they that believe, will not ^^ke have.
Vengeance is Gods, he will repay; if wickedness go before, vengeance is not far
behind: it follows close at the heels of wickedness; though hand go in hand,
yet shall not the Pro. 11. 21.
wicked go unpunished. For God will wound the head of his enemies, and the
Psalm. 68. 21.
hairy scalp of such an one as goes on still in his wickedness.

I know some are too hasty, and would prevent God; will take upon them to
prescribe him ways and means, like the two sons of Zebedie, Luke 9. 54.
fire they must have from heaven: our Savior reproves their rash and Luke 9.
55.
heady Zeal, and tells them they know not of what spirit they are. Christ was
their Master; and it is fit the Disciples should be of their Masters spirit. It
was a prime lesson he would have them learn, Learn of me for I am meek and
lowly: it seems Mat. 11. 29.
St. Paul had well cond this lesson, and therefore commends it to the practice
of his Brethren as the best ornament Gal. 6. 1.
of their profession.

The spirit of Christ is a spirit of meekness; He came not to destroy men's
lives; but to save them. And such a Lu. 9. 56.
spirit best becomes them who call themselves by the name of Christ; they are
much to seek who think Christ will have his cause vindicated with fire and
sword. That the enemies of Christ deserve no better, no man doubts; but if
every one should have his desert, the world would have an end; and therefore
Peter must up with his sword: James and John Mat. 26. 52.
must out with their fire: there will be use of both, but they must stay his
leisure until he call who has the command of both.

But men are impatient, think the time long, which measured by their
distempered appetites, they fly out into passion, and accuse God of slackness,
and think they are wronged, if they be not presently revenged, when their
betters forbear and are still unrevenged: we daily see it; God is provoked
every day, he suffers much, and Psalm. 7. 11.
he suffers long, as a Cart is pressed that Amos 2. 13.
is full of sheaves; He bears the sins of men, and forbears his Judgments, not
this day, and the next, but how Mat. 23. 37. Psalm. ^5. 10. Genesis 6. 3.
often? he bore with the Israelites forty years; with the old world one
hundred and twenty years; and still every day, and all the day long, he
reaches forth the hand of mercy to a Isa 65. 2. To. 10 21.
gainsaying people. God has vengeance in his power, but not in his will; if
he were as impatient as man is, the Idolator in his Sacrifice: the swearer in
his blasphemy: the unclean person in his Adultery: the formalist in his
Hypocrisy: the Epicure in the midst of his drunkenness and gluttony: and
Tyrants in their rage and cruelty had been consumed.

God is wronged, yet he endures if: God suffers, what no man would endure. Nay,
the Son of God, Jesus Christ nor Lord is not yet avenged of the injuries that
have been done unto him, the Indignities that have been cast upon him: the
Blasphemies spoken against his name; the Cruelties done against his servants;
How long Lord holy and true? oh! the meekness, gentleness and patience of a
blessed Savior, to suffer a company of worms Rve. 6. 10.
and vermin upon earth to blaspheme that name, whom all the host of heaven do
adore: He is judged of men: but he judges no man: and although the Father has
committed all judgments Jo. 8. 15.
to the Son; yet the Son suspendeth Joh. 5. 22.
his judgment until the appointed time, to which he has reserved the unjust to
be punished, Act. 17. 31.
when he shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming 2
Pet. 2. 9.
fire, taking vengeance on all them that know not God, and obey 2 These. 1. 7,
8, 9.
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. And the holy Ghost is greived every
day, resisted, despited, blasphemed; Ephesians 4. 1. 3. Act. 7. 50. Heb. 10. 29 Mat.
12. 31. Lu. 12. 10. Act. 18 6. 1 These. 5. 19. Rev. 3. 20. Genesis 6. 3.
his motions quenched: his inspirations smothered: his operations interrupted:
yet still he waits, expects, stands at the door, and knocks: thus he does yet,
but thus he will not always do; the spirit of the Lord will not always strive
with man: for that he is but flesh: he will withdraw, and will at last give
place to that heavy indignation, which shall break forth from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his power. Let us do as 2 These. 1. 9. 1 Cor. 4.
5. Psalm. 14^* 17.
God does, judge not before the time; he is righteous in all his ways, and the
dispensations of his providence are most wise and good. Wherefore let us not
judge amiss in repining or murmuring, either at our own sufferings, or at his
long-suffering those that are not his. But let every one in the Phil. 2. 12.
fear of God, be careful to work out their own Salvation: and as for Gods
enemies and theirs, let them pray for their conversion, and not solicit their
subversion before the appointed time.

Peter was chek'd for his curiosity in demanding concerning John, what shall
this man do? If I will (says Christ) that he stay till I come, what Joh. 21.
21.
is that to thee? follow thou me. What and if it be the will of God both tares
and wheat should grow up together Mat. 13. 30.
to the harvest? What and if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his
power known, endure with much patience the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction? shall man repine To. 9. 22.
at the doings of his Maker? rather in all humility let us submit our selves to
his most just and wise designments, rest contented with his proceedings, and
put on meekness.

Secondly, as we must not call in Question the justice of God in suffering the
wicked to prosper, so neither must we murmr at the goodness and providence of
God in suffering the godly to be afflicted. Jo. 16. 20, 33. Jo. 15. 20. Ps. 34.
19. Act. 14. 22 1 The. 3. 3. 2 Timothy 3. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Job. 14. 1. Eccl. 40.
1. 1 Pe. 4. 12.


For affliction is the Saints lot; the portion of the Righteous; the Legacy
Christ bequeathed his own Disciples: in the world ye shall have trouble; and in
the whole book of God we read of one that sinned not, but not of any one that
suffered not.

Nullus servus Christi, sine tribulatione est; si pu^as te non habere
persecutiones* nondum coepisti esse Christianus, Aug. Si exceptus es passion^
flagellorum, exceptus es a munere si i^^um. Idem de pass. Vide Hieron. ad
Eustoch. And therefore reason should teach us to put on meekness, to suffer
affliction with a quiet and contented mind: for who can think to escape that
which has befaln all? and not to do willingly, what must of necessity be done?

Fer quod sors praesens tibi fert; nam, far recusans te laedes; and te sors
tam^n abriviet Basilius. Proximus Deo plenus est flagillis. Amb. Clem. Alex.
lib. 2. Stromat. And Religion teaches that it is the way of all Saints; no man
ever came to heaven but by it: and if we be no worse used then Gods best
beloved friends, we have no cause of complaint.

See first what they endured: and how they endured it.

They endured sorrows not to be endured: they had trial of cruel mockings and
scourgings: yea moreover of Bonds and imprisonments: they were stoned: they
were sawn asunder: were tempted: were slain Heb. 11. 36, 37, 38.
with the sword: they wandered about in sheepskins, and goat skins; being
destitute, afflicted, tormented. This they suffered.

How suffered they this? They went away rejoicing that they were accounted
worthy to suffer for the Act. 5. 41.
name of Christ. And the Apostle tells us of the Hebrews, that they suffered
Heb. 10 34
with joy the spoiling of their goods. And if we look higher, and take our
direction from a clearer sight, let us look to Jesus the author and finisher
Heb. 12. 2. Lam. 1. 12. Joh. 8. 46. Joh. 10 32 Mat. 9. 36. Mat. 14. 14 Mat. 15*
32 Mat. 4. 23. Joh. 1. 11. Joh. 5. 44, 46. Joh 6. 64. and 12. 37. Mat. 11. 19
Mar. 3. 22. Mat. 17. 17 Joh. 11. 33 Mar. 3. 5. Psalm. 2. 1. Isa. ^3. 7.
of our says: no man's sufferings were ever like his (while he lived upon
earth,) though he walked unblamably, never hurt any, pitied all, helped all
that came unto him, yet he was not believed in his word, he was reproached in
his life, hated in his person, greived in his spirit, the whole way of the
world went against him, yet his meekness was as great as his sufferings. To
suffer what he suffered with patience, was much: but to suffer with silence,
was much more: many times in the midst of their afflictions, men use to relieve
themselves with complaints: But He was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a
sheep is dumb before the shearer, so opened he not his Isa. 42. 23.
mouth. There was no complaint in his lips: no clamor in his tongue: he did
not cry, neither was his voice heard in the streets; and Saint Paul would have
all Christian men to be of the same temper: for hereunto Phil. 2. 5.
are we called (says Saint Peter) to be partakers of his sufferings; for he
suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps.

Not only to suffer what he did: 1 Pet. 2. 21.
but to suffer as he did, with the same quietness of mind, meekness and
humility.

Can there be a stronger inducement to meekness in the midst of afflictions
then the example of Christ? The Author to the Hebrews advises to consider him
that endured such contradiction of sinners lest, ye be wearied and Heb. 12. 3.
faint in your minds. Thus whether we look upon the example, (our Savior
Christ) or the virtue exemplified (meekness) both are worthy out imitation.
Such a virtue were to be imitated in any person: such a person to be followed
in any virtue. So then the more meek a man is, the more like Christ he is, and
consequently the more heavenly and happy he is; and therefore put on meekness.

Our enemy the Devil knows how useful a garment our meekness is, and therefore
would rob us of it.

God suffered him to practice upon Job. 1. 12.
Job; but by all the losses and crosses he brought upon him, he could not
provoke him to murmuring and impatience. Job. 1. 22.
He had thought to have given his meekness the foyl, by laying his hand upon
his body. For he said, put forth thine hand upon his bone, and upon his flesh,
and he will curse thee Job. 2. 5.
to thy face.

But as cunning as the tempter was here, he was deceived: for Job was Job. 2.
10.
resolved nor to curse God though he killed him: he knew the utmost extent Job.
13. 15
of Satan's power was but his body, and if it must be so, he is willing to lay
it down with meekness, in assurance to have it restored: and to receive it
again, complete in all the Job. 19. 25* 26, 27.
parts of it. Though Job could object his innocence against Satan's calumny, he
will not therefore presently murmur and call in question Gods goodness, but
will attend with patience, the further manifestation of his good will and
pleasure; and in the mean time put Ad aliquem usum sanctorum ordinatur omnis
actus impiorum a summo Deo, a qui pro sui regiminis aequitate, been utitur
etiam malis, ut qui suo arbitrio injuste vivunt, illius judicio just
disponantur. Aug. contra Faust. Manic. lib. 16. cap. 21.
his mouth in the dust. Oh then when God threatens, let us meet him on our
knees, and like obedient Children kiss the rod, and give glory to the hand that
guids it, and say with holy Job, Shall we receive good from God: and shall we
not receive evil also? God is the fountain of all goodness, and if he be
pleased to turn our sweetness into a little bitterness, shall we repine at the
omnipotent wisdom of our Maker? God is so good, that he would suffer none evil
to befall us, except he were so wise, as to know how to extract good out of
evil, and to make the afflictions of his Children (like so many parallel lines)
meet in the center of his glory and their good: making all things work together
for the Romans 8. 28
good of them that are his.

There are diverse cases men frame to themselves, which causes them to entertain
their sufferings with impatience.

First, they are not thoroughly persuaded Amos. 4. 6, 7, 8, 9.
their afflictions are from God, and therefore they fly out and are unquiet,
they blame their stars, they rail on fortune, and after a brutish manner like
unreasonable creatures they let fly at the stone, and never eye the hand that
sent it (Subordinate means, second causes, and such men and things which God
only makes instrumental to his providence) they imputing their sufferings to
any thing rather than God; whereas indeed they should look beyond all things
below unto an hand above that guides all: for what can any thing do, or be,
without him, who is the first Agent Amos. 3. 6.
and original of all being? both producing Job. 5. 6.
and employing subordinate means to his own wise purposes: contriving and
fetching about all things, and acting them according to own will?

This not well considered, but men in their afflictions poring too much upon
immediate Instruments, and second causes, break out into passion and
impatience, fretting and fuming and meditating revenge: but when they consider
they have to do with God, this silences all complaints, makes the sufferer
quietly to submit, and to acknowledge the hand of God, Psa. 39. 9.
and that there is no striving with his Isal. 4. 59.
Maker; when Saint Paul's friends understood the mind of God concerning his
Bonds and Imprisonment, and that no fear of danger could divert him from his
peremptory resolution of going to Jerusalem, they ceased to importune him,
submitting unto the will of the Lord, the disposer and Act. 21. 13 14.
orderer of all events. And David was silent when he was satisfied concerning
his sufferings, that they were from God; he lays his hand upon his mouth, and
says no more, But I became dumb and opened not my mouth, Psalm. 39 9
for it was thy doing.

Yea, in our blessed Saviors sufferings See all the Gospels, Mat. 26. 27. Mar.
14. 15 Luke 22. 23 Joh. 18. 19 Joh 19. 11
the gates of hell, and powers of darkness, the Jews and Judas, Pilate and
Caiphas, the Priests and the Soldiers, active instruments all of them, but
their power was derived from God, their malice limited by God; and they did
that, and no Joh. 19 36
more could they do, but what the hand of God and his Counsel determined before
to be done: and all that Act. 2. 23
was done unto him, and all that was suffered by him, he acknowledges to be
Gods doing, not theirs, the sorrow wherewith the Lord afflicted him. Could we
take this course in Lam. 1. 12
our private and public calamities, to Rev. 3. 19. 2 Pet. 2. 9. Psalm. 119. 75.
Mat. 10. 29. Luke 12 6. 7.
take them as from God, the effects of his love, wisdom and faithfulness,
without whose providence a sparrow falls not to the ground, nor a hair from our
heads: that these things are done unto us in singular wisdom, and special love
to our souls: so David took them; I know (says he) O Lord, that thy Judgments
are right: and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me. This will quiet our
hearts, and sustain our spirits in the Ps. 119. 75
midst of afflictions: Be still and know that I am God. When Mauritius the Psa.
46. 10
Emperor his wife and five sons were taken, his wife and five sons put to death
before his eyes, and himself waiting for the like fatal blow, Psalm 119 137.
Secreta ^sse possunt juditia Dei, injusta esse noa possunt. Aug.
concluded thus, Righteous art thou O Lord, and right are thy Judgments. let
our thoughts quietly rest here: the cause of Gods Judgments may be secret, and
unknown to us, they cannot be unjust; how unjust soever Consule de hac re
Philip. Melan. locis communibus Theologicis decalamitatibus and de c^uce, ubi
tractat de quatuor generibus afflictionum; (...) Non v^nit sine merito quia
Deus est justus; n^c erit sine co^modo, quia Deus est bonus. Aug. (...). Basil.
Hom il. 21.
the Agents be, by which the just God scourges his own, who despightfully do
their own wills, whilst they unwittingly do Gods.

Consider not how unjust the Agent is that gives the blow, as how just God is
that guides it.

And this would be our meditation in all cases to think whose hand strikes:
whether in Epidemical visitations, of famine, pestilence, or the sword; or
personal, as sickness, poverty, sorrow, loss or cross; and to conclude the blow
is Gods, whosoever or whatsoever is used as the weapon. Yea, it comes not
without desert, because God is just: nor shall be without profit, because God
is good.

It is to be considered likewise that God who sends afflictions, orders
them to very good ends, as namely, to conform men to the Image of Christ Heb.
2. 10 Luke 24. 26. Isa. 53. 3. Heb 5. 8.
, who was a man of sorrows and learned perience by the things he Don is suis
Deus flagella permiseet, ut nob is omne quod nos in secu'o delectabit,
amareseat: etc. Greg. super Ezec. vide Sanctum Hieronymum Tom. 9. ep. 20. Anne
est aliquid tam durum, etc. ut misericordiam exigamus? Aug. in Psa. 39. ad
gratiam commendandam. Aug. de verb is Domini. Omnis divina percussio purgatio
in nobis vitoe praesent is est. Greg. moral. lib. 18. cap. 13.

Adversitas provatio virtut is est, non indicium reprobationis. Greg. in Regist.

1 Pet. 1. 7. Romans 5, 3 4. Patien^^ae in prosperis nullus est us^s

Greg. moral. lib. 11. cap. 19. in malis quae quisque paetit ur, non in bonis
quibus fruitur, opus est patientia. Aug. in Joh. 12. 4. vide Tert. de paenit
cap. 10. ad explorandum, deplorandum, im^lorandum. Alsted. System. Theol. Aug.
in Ps. 49. idem lib. 2. confess opus enim est ad sui notitiam experimento, etc.
Sen. lib. de Pro. Deus utique qui quem corripit diligit quando corripit ad hoc
corripit ut emendet. Cyp. lib. 4. ep. 4.


suffered; To wean them from the love of this world: to make them fit for
mercies: to make his mercies more choice and dear unto them: to soften and melt
their hearts; to purge out their corruptions: to kindle their zeal: to inflame
their devotion: to strengthen their faith: to excise their hope: to beget in
them charity and compassion toward others: to make trial of their patience: to
break the pride of their spirits, that they may search and try their ways: to
teach them to deny themselves, and cast off their carnal confidence: to amend
whatsoever he finds Deus corruptelam nostram non patitur longius procedere, sed
plagis ac verberibus ^mendat. Lact. div. Inst. lib. 3. c. 27 Aug. in Ps. 21. in
Psa. 60. ^n s^^m. ad Lippium. Salvian. de provid. Dei. Greg. lib. 11. moral.
Quos amat emendat, scele^ique impon^t habenas. Bapt. Man. de fortun^ Genzagae
Cavendum est vulnus quod cum dolor curatur. Adversa corporis, remedia sunt
animae. I sidorus de summo bono, lib. 3. Ad virtutes spectat tribulation^s
fo^titer sustinere. Bern. super Cant. sermon. 85. In Deo certa est siducia,
quando pro bono opere adversitas additur, in hoc mundo recipitur, ut pulchrior
merces in r^tributione oeterna servetur. Greg. in R^gistro. vide etiam Greg.
mor. lib. 26. cap. 18.
amiss: making them more wary of their steps: and to have their conversation in
the world more humble and void of offense: with a greater hatred and
detestation of sin: and with a more fervent desire and care to serve and please
God: yea, God orders their afflictions for the exercise of the graces he has
bestowed upon them in this life: and for the further increase of the glory he
has prepared for them in the life to come.

Men therefore being once persuaded of this, that all afflictions are from God,
of his sending, and of his ordering, they should take up the resolution of old
Ely, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good; for 1 Samuel 3. 18.
whatsoever seems good to him, is good indeed, howsoever it seem to us.

Thus God chasteneth us for our profit, (says the Author to the Hebrews) Heb.
12. 10.
and therefore we should accept of his corrections, not with meekness only, but
with thankfulness. So David thanks God for his troubles as for a special
favor; It is good for me that I have been in trouble: and Psalm. 119. 71. Psa.
94. 12
pronounces such for blessed, Blessed are they whom thou chastenest. For Gods
love is the ground of all blessedness; and that may consist with affliction,
insomuch that God loves not whom he afflicts not: So that afflictions Heb.
12. 6. Rev. 3. 19. Pro. 3. 11, 12. Heb. 12. 7. Job. 5. 17. Jam. 1. 12.
are tokens of Gods love, marks of Adoption, testimonies of eternal happiness,
and therefore we should prepare our selves patiently to endure them, by putting
on meekness.

But there are some cases especially wherein men are apt to murmr; as first
when their troubles are extreme, very great, and many, and hard to be endured.

Secondly, When they are tedious and of long continuance, when a man can see no
end of his troubles, find no way to get out of them.

Or Thirdly, when they are alone, suffering what no man else, when no man
besides themselves does suffer.

Here are hard cases put: yet such as the best Saints of God have undergone.

This was David's cause; read the 38 and the 88 Psalm, and see into what a sad
and forlorn condition David was brought: what heavy complaints and grieveous
lamentation does he make, that the Arrows of Psalm. 38. 2.
God did stick fast in him, that his hand pressed him sore, that their was 3.
no soundness in his flesh, that he was bowed down greatly, and went 6.
mourning all the day long: that 11. Psalm. 88. 3.
there was none to comfort him; lovers, friends, neighbors, acquaintance stood
a far off, that his soul was full of troubles, that his life drew nigh unto the
grave; that the wrath of God lay heavy upon him: 7.
that he afflicted him with all his waves.

This was Jobs case, for he acknowledges he wants words to Job. 6. 4.
express his grief: for (says he) the Arrows of the Almighty are within me,
the poison whereof drinks up my spirit; the terrors of God set themselves in
array against me. That Months of vanity and wearisome nights were appointed to
him; That he could Job 7. 3.
not rest day nor night; But was full of tossings too and fro; so disquieted 4.
he was, that he cursed the day of his nativity, and wishes that he had been as
an untimely birth: or Job. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10
as infants which never see the light; Job. 3. 16.
yea his distemper grevv to that height that he breaks forth and cries out, O
that it would please God Job. 6. 9. O utinam e nostro secedere corpore possim.
to destroy me, that he would let loose his hand and cut me off. Thus Jobs
sufferings were great, which were the cause of much disquiet to that
good man: his life was full of Job. 14. 1. Job. 1 --. Job. 2. 7. Job. 7. 11.
14, 15.
misery, he suffered loss in his Estate, fear in his children, pain in his
body, horror in his soul, discouragement from his friends. Now to settle the
mind, and Job. 16. 2.
quiet it in the midst of these troubles, when at any time they come thick and
threefold:

It must be considered that God is with his children in their greatest
afflictions, and his presence sweetens Isa. 42. 2. 3.
every condition; for where he is, he is not as an idle spectator of their
miseries: but there is with him help, Isa. 50. 9.
and comfort, and light, and life.

Where he is, no evil can be feared, no greater good desired; he raises Psalm.
23. 4. Psalm 73. 25. Isa. 40. 1, 2 Psalm. 84. 11
the spirit, comforts the heart; he is a Sun to give light unto them, and a
Shield to defend them; when one is brought to that extremity, that not an
Angel, nor any creature can help; when friends, and means, and flesh, and
heart, and life, and all do fail, he stands by and is the strength Psalm. 73.
26.
of the heart, and our portion for ever: where God is, there no true comfort
Psalm. 23. 1. Psalm 37. 16. Pro. 15. 17, and 17. 1. 1 Kin. 17. 14. Exodus 17. 6.
Exodus* 16. 4. 13, 14. Psalm. 46. per totum. Mat. 4. 4. Genesis 22. 14. Micah 7. 8,
9, 10, 11 Haggai 2. 19.
can be wanting.

If means, be little, he can bless it, and make it a sufficiency.

If there be no means, he can create it, and cause a plenty.

And in greatest Exigencies God can so supply that he can make the estate of
his Children as Comfortable as if they had all good things at hand. God will be
seen in the Mount: man's extremity is Gods opportunity: there is no man can be
brought to that desperate state whom he cannot easily and speedily Recover.
Hagga. 2. 19. Psalm. 23. 4. 1 Samuel 30. 6. Act. 12. 6. Acts 26. 25. Dan. 6. 22.
Dan. 3. 25. 27. 2 Cor. 1. 5. Ps. 94. 19.


If God be with him, David will fear none evil, though he walk in the midst of
the valley of the shadow of death, and his own people talk of stoning him.
Peter can sleep securely; and Paul sing sweetly in the Prison, if God be with
them. Daniel in the Lions den, and the three Children in the fiery Furnace, are
safe through the presence of God. He proportions his Consolations to their
afflictions: let Isa. 50. 10.
not then their hearts faint, nor their faith fail, but when they sit in
darkness, and see no light, let them trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay
Jer. 2. 13. Jer. 17. 13. Psalm. 36. 9. Prove. 9. 17. Revel. 22. 17.
themselves upon their God, let them not fly to broken Cisterns, seeing they
have the fountain at hand; and let them not long for stolen waters when they may
drink their fill at the spring or well of Life. Wherefore stands God by them,
but to fill them with his Grace, to support them in times of danger and
difficulty? then hope holds up the heart; and faith assures their hope, that
ease, and rest, Isa. 57. 2.
and peace and deliverance will come: and who ever trusted in God, and was
Psalm. 22. 4. 5.
disappointed? the consideration here of made David to check the disquietnesse
of his own heart, and to put it Psalm. 42 5. 11.
upon Record as one of his experimented Observations, that in all his time he
never saw the Righteous forsaken. Psalm. 37. 25.


Indeed they may find much trouble, feel much sadness, be brought to Assligeris
quidem aliquandiu; sed si ad eum redieris, te ita prosperabit ut vehement^r
gaudeas and prae gaudio inrisum solvaris. Mercerus in Job, cap. 8.
a very low ebb: but God will bring them up again: Isa. 60. 14, 15* 16, etc.
Deuteronomy. 32. 36. 2 Pet. 2. 9. Ps. 51. 8. 12. Psalm. 126. 5, 6, Mark 2. 5. Isa. 61.
3, and 49. 19. Psalm. 30. 5. Isa. 55, 12. Isa. 61. 2. Mat. 5. 4. Joh. 14. 16.
or if he do not, hec has supplies, and supports for them.

Men see their sorrows and sufferings; Habe^t intus q^o gaudeat. Aug. in Ps.
30. Boni latent* quia ^onum ipsorum in occ^lto e^^, and tam merita ^o^um s^n^
in abscondito constituta q^m^^ae^i^. Aug. s^nt 201.

Judg^s 14. 8. 1 Cor. 7. 30 Prove. 14. 10. Joh. 16. ^0. Luke 1. 47. Gal. 6. 24.
Mat. 5. 12. Psalm. 86. 4. 1. Cor. 2. 9 Joh. 16 22. Isa. 31. 1^.


but their Comforts and joys men see not, which are such as the world knows
not of, such as the world cannot deprive them of.

God has a hottle for their tears; Psalm. 56. 8. Psalm. 69. 9. To. 15. 3.
Judges 10. 16 Psalm. 41. 3. Deuteronomy. 33. 27. Psalm. 37. 17. 24. Psalm. 57. 2. 1 Samuel
25. 29.
in all their afflictions he is afflicted; he is about their bed; he puts
under his everlasting Arms, and upholdeth them with his hand from sinking:
their bodies may lie in pain, but their souls shall live at ease; and however
it fare with them in their outward estate, their Soul shall be bound up in the
bundle of life with the Lord their God: Nay, he will so strengthen them with
his Grace, arm them with patience, endue them with Wisdom, protect them with
his power, and cheer them with his Spirit, that neither pains of death, nor
powers of hell, shall be able to prevail against them.

For when the World and the Devil discover their greatest malice, he reveals
his greatest mercies: the comforts of his love, the joy of his presence, the
light of his countenance, the blessing of his assistance, found and felt in the
forgiveness of sins, in the testimony of Conscience, in the supplies of his
Spirit, and assurance of Salvation, are sufficient to convince all accusations
of Men or Devils; to silence all murmurings and impatience of our own hearts,
to heal all distempers of mind, and to establish and settle the Soul in
quietness and meekness.

For the continuance of sorrow: To suffer much, and to suffer long, is a strong
temptation, too strong for flesh to sustain; for one to live many Psalm. 90. 10.
Genesis 49. 7. Job. 5. 7. Job. 9. 25. Ita sit miseris mors, sine mors finis sine
fine, defectus sine defectu, quia and mors vivit, and finis semper incipit, and
deficere defectus n^scit. Greg. Moral lib. 9. cap. 47. Psalm. 88. 5* 14. Psalm.
40. 12. Psalm. 8. 15. Psalm. 77. 8, 9. Isa. 33. 14.
days, and not see one good day, to begin ones life in sorrow, and to see no
end of it, is a sad condition; who can bear it, and not be distracted? it was
David's case, and who of us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? (says the
Prophet Isaiah.)

Yet here is the comfort, when God lengthens the day of Affliction, he enlarges
his consolation, and he will John 2. 5. Psalm. 94. 13 14. Psalm. 27. 1^. Psalm.
37. 28. Isa. 41. 17. Heb. 13. 5. Psalm. 55. 22. Psalm. 40. 1, 2. Psalm. 50. 15.
Nemo potest valde dolere and diu.
never suffer his faithfulness to fail, or his Grace to forsake those who in
their sufferings seek unto him; and this is one comfort in greatest trials,
that if the affliction lie very heavy, it cannot last very long. The Winter
days, they are the sharpest, but they are the shortest days; the day of
Calamity begins sadly. Alas! for that day is great; none has been like it, it
is the day of Jac^bs trouble; Jer. 30. 7.
but abbreviatum est tempus; God in Righteousness will cut it short; for Romans
9. 28 Psalm. 125. 3.
the rod of the Wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the Righteous. God does
limit the times of their sufferings, they shall be but for a little Psalm. 39.
ult.
while, a little little while, In a little wrath I hid my face from them: for a
Isa. 54 8.
small moment have I forsaken thee: for God is faithful, and will not suffer
Pro brevibus lachrymis gaudia longa met^nt. Paulinus Nolan. in Po^m. 1 Cor. 10.
13. 1 Pet. 5. 10.
his Children to be tempted above their strength, but with the temptation will
make a way of Evasion; and after they have suffered awhile, make them perfect;
establish, strengthen, and settle them.

Sometimes God sets down a prefixed time how long the trouble shall last;
the Jews Captivity for seventy years: Nebuchadnezzars humiliation Jer. 2^ 11.
Dan. 4. 25 Genesis 41. 1.
for seven years: Joseph's imprisonment for two years; the Tribulation of some
in the Church of Smyrna for ten days; and when the ^ev. 2. 10. Psalm. 118. 18.
Psalm. 71. 20
appointed time is come, comes ease.

For if God set down a Day, he will Luke ^4 6, 7. Prorsus tanquam aegrotos
reficiens medicus, and quod opus est hoc dat, and quando opus est ^u^c d^t.
A^g. in ^sal. 14^. Psa. 27. 14 and 3^. 35. Heb. 1^. 35, 36, 37. Hab. 2 3. Isa
8. 17. Psa. 2 7. 13. Psalm. 9. 18. Psalm. 77 8. 9.
keep his Word, and his time to a minute; and therefore let our sorrows be
never so great or so grievous, stay Gods leisure, wait upon his will and
pleasure; be not impatient; but with all meekness expect deliverance: and if
the vision stay, wait for it. It was Isaiahs Resolution, Yet will I wait upon
God, though he have hid his face from us. And it was David's Consolation, That
he verily believed to see the goodness of God in the Land of the living; for
the poor shall not always be forgotten; the patient abiding of the meek shall
not perish for ever; but hope deferred makes the heart sick, this made David
think and say that God had quite forgotten him, that he had cast him off for
ever, that he should never see good day more.

But he acknowledges his Error, blames his Infirmity and folly thus Psalm. 77* 10
to question the nature and faithfulness of God.

For God is not forgetful of his promise, nor unmindfull of the sufferings of
his servants, if he delay the actual performance of his promise and come not in
to their help, when (...). La^rt.
and how they would have him, they must not murmr against God, nor accuse him
of slackeness, or account of what he has promised after the manner of Men, as
if it were only a promise (that is a verbal comfort) without any purpose of
performance; for what he promises he purposes, and what he purposes he will
surely perform.

And therefore rest upon his word and faithfulness which will never fail. We
must not Indent with God: we may not prescribe to him: But leave him to his own
liberty: he is free, though we be bound. Let him take his own time, and go his
own way; he will not be limited: he knows his time, and his time is the best
time.

If the mercy of God appear not for Psalm. 123. 2. Judith. 9. 15, 16, 17. (...).
Greg. Naz. adversus Eunom. Psalm. 6. 2. Number. 12.
our Salvation this day or the next, nor perhaps for many days to come, wait
still, and in its time there shall be an accomplishment of all that is promised.

But we are impatient; when we want any good, or feel any pain, then is our
time; but then perhaps is not Gods time: we are not yet fit for mercy, though
he be ever ready to show it when we are, his mercy will appear; Micah 7. 18.
for mercy pleases him.

When men are bettered and amended by afflictions, their vain imaginations cast
down, their rebellious lusts subdued, their minds humbled, their compassions
toward others stirred up, their hard hearts softened, their affections weaned
from the world: when they search and try their ways and turn to the Lord, he
Acts 3. 19. 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.
will then return to them; and if he do not, let them cast themselves down
before him with David, and say with him, If I shall find favor in the eyes of
the Lord, etc. But if he thus say, 2 Samuel 15. 26. Jam. 1. 4. Isa. 30. 18. Psalm.
44. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Tu, inquit, avertis faciem tuam a me; sed ego non sum
aversus a te. Ruffin. in Psalm. 29. Nec iratum colere destitit numen. Sen. ad
Marc. cap. 13.
I have no delight in thee! Behold here am I; let him do to me, as it seems
good unto him.

Patience is a grace that pleases God: let it have its perfect work, and never
think of leaving God, though he may seem to have left us.

God knows our frame and temper, and the metal we are made of: he knows our
hard and stubborn nature that will never work kindly without the fire. Our
hearts are like steel and iron, easy to be wrought any way, in the fire of
affliction. If this be the, way he will work us to his purpose, let us yield
our selves to be wrought upon with meekness; we must be content to endure many
heates and blows until his work be done; for when that is finished, our
sufferings shall have an end; or if they have not, but last as long as life
lasts, Christians must be, Phil. 2. 8.
as Cbrist was, obedient unto death.

Let us not murmr against God, Quid est q^od nos queramur deo, cum Deus magis
queri d^ nobis omnibus poss^t? quae ratio est ut dole^mus nos non audiri a Deo,
cum ipsi Deum non audiamus? and susurremus non respici a D^o t^rras, cum ipsi
non espiciamus ad Caelum; and mol stum sit d^spici a Domino preces nostras, cum
praecepta ejus d^spiciantur a nob^s? q^^d dignius? q^id justius? non audivimus,
non a^dimur: non respeximus, non resp^cimur; quis ergo ex carnalibus dominus
hac cum suis lege agere contentus est ut contemn^^ tantum modo servos s^os,
quia fuerit ab eis ipse contemptus? Salvianus de Gubern. Dei lib. 3. page 85.
86.
though he seem to have left us and to have quite forgotten us: but let us feel
our own pulses, and lay our hands upon our hearts; for does not God deal with
us, as we have dealt with him, and pay us in our own Coin? Hos. 4. 6. 9.
have not we forgotten? have not we neglected? have not we refused? have not we
delayed him? what can be more just and equal, than that he should do by us as
we have done by him? we are too apt to forget God and our selves, when all
things go well with us: therefore God will have it go otherwise, will lay
afflictions upon us, and leave us to struggle under the burden, then we begin
to remember there is a God, and that we our selves are but men; then we admire
no man, and despise no man: but look up to God, and throw down our selves, not
fretting or repining, but with all meekness acknowledging that God is Righteous
in all his ways, and holy in all his works.

But what if a man be alone? What Co^ia tribulationis, inopia consolationis,
quando multifaria quis patitur, and a nemine relevatur. Aug. Isa. 63. 3. Mark
14. 50. Math. 26. 56. 2 Timothy 4. 16.
if he have none to bear a part with him in his sorrows and sufferings? none to
pity him, to help him, to strengthen him, to comfort him? this is a heavy case.
It was our Saviors, for he trod the wine press alone; and when he was ready to
be offered, all his Disciples forsook him and fled.

It was Saint Paul's case, for he complains that no man stood with him, but all
men forsook him in his sorest trials.

It was David's case; I looked (says he) on my right hand, and beheld, but
there was no man that would know Psalm. 142. 4.
me; refuge failed me, no man cared for my soul. Company is a comfort Solamen
miseris socios habuisse doloris. Eccles. 4. 9, 10. Genesis 2. 18.
in calamity, and two are better than one: but woe to him that is alone; man
could not be happy in Paradise without a companion: God savv it was not good
that he should be alone (nullius rei sine socio jucunda est possessio) how
heavy then and discomfortable must it be, in deepest sorrovvs, and greatest
extremities, to have none to pity a man's case? all against him, none for him.
Yet here let this be the Christians Motto, Bear, forbear, for as our Savior
John. 4. 32.
said to his disciples, I have meat to eat that ye know not of; so Christians,
Vobiscum illic in carcere quodammodo and nos sumus: separari dilection^m
spiritus non sinit: vos illic confessio, me affectio includit. Cyp. Ephesians. 16.
though they seem alone in their sufferings, have Comforts and companions the
World knows not of. You shall leave me alone (says Christ to his Disciples)
yet am I not alone, because the Father is with me, so may the afflicted
Christian: he is not alone, God is with him, Christ is with him, and he is
Emanuel God with us. When dearest friends, nearest Relations, stand afar off,
the Lord is at hand; so David, when my Father and my Mother forsake me, then
the Joh. 16. 32.
Lord will take me up. So St. Paul, when no man stood with him, but Psa. 27. 10
all men forsook him, the Lord, says he, stood with me, and strengthened me.
Christ is the Lord, and he is Emanuel, 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17. Mat. 1. 23. Isa. 7. 14.
God with us.

If the trouble be any difficulty, in matter of duty to be done, he puts Da
quod jubes, Domine, and jube quod vis. Aug. Mat. 11. 30. Isa. 53. 4. 7
his neck under the yoke, and draws with us, and it becomes easy.

If it be any danger, any cross to be endun'd, he puts his shoulder under,
helps to bear it, and the burden becomes light.

Let him never murmr at his sufferings, that has God and Christ Heb. 1. 14
Dan. 10. 19. Ps. 34. 7. Rev. 12. 7.
to bear a part with him that has the blessed Angels assisting, supporting,
sustaining, and as blessed Guardians preserving him from all evil; and bearing
him in their arms, that he Psalm. 91. 11, 12.
dash not his foot against a stone; the Angel of the Lord encampeth round about
them that fear him, and delivers Psalm. 34. 7.
them.

Besides, being in the Body every Quod est in corpore nostro anima, id est
spiritus sanctus in corpore Christi qui si ecclesia. Aug. Sermon. 186. de temp.

Oculus solus videt in corpore; sed nunquid soli sibi oculus videt? and manui
videt, and pedi videt, and caeteris membris videt, Aug. Tract. 32. in Johannem.

Si enim tauri cum taurum mortuum invenerunt, plorant, mugiunt, and quasi qui
busdam debitis humanitatis obsequijs fraterna funera prosequuntur: quid debet
homo homini, quem ratio docet, and trahit affectio? sicut ergo sanctis animabus
imitationem. sic mnius sanctis compassionem debemus, etc. Bern. Sermon. de
triplici genesis bonorum. page 382. col. 2. F.


part partakes of the privilege of the whole; and the members should have the
same care one of another; as whether one member suffer, all the members suffer
with it; for we are called and commanded to bear one another burdens; there is
in the body a Sympathy because there is a near Conjunction of members in one
body, and of the body with one head; nor can the distance of place dissolve or
break off that Union which the members have in the body, or the body with the
head, for although the head be in Heaven, and the body upon Earth; although one
member be in England, and another in India, yet the whole body being moved If
we should suppose a body to be as high as the Heavens, that the head thereof
should be where Christ our head is, and the feet where we his members are: no
sooner could that head think of moving one of the toes, but instantly the thing
would be done, without any impediment given by that huge distance of the one
from the other, and why? because the same soul that is in the head, as in the
fountain of sense and motion, is present likewise in the lowest member of the
body. Usher Archiep. Armach. in Sermon. coram Dom. Com. apud West. Feb. 18. 16.
20. in 1 Cor. 10. 17.
by the influence of our In toto universali, quicquid totius est, etiam partis
est. Log. Max. Ecce spinam calcat pes: quid tam long ab oculis quam pes? long
est loco, proxime est charitatis affectu. Lingua dicit, quid me calcas, non
ipsa calcata est, calcas me charitas dicit. Aug. Tract. in 1. Jo. magnum
profecto habituri sunt testimonium quos in coelo pater susceperit tanquam
filios and haeredes, filius asciverit tanquam fratres and cohaeredes, spiritus
sanctus adhaerentes Deo unum spiritum faciat esse cum eo. Est enim spiritus
ipse indissolubile vinculum trinitatis per quem sicut pater and filius unum
sunt, sic and nos unum sumus in ipsis. Bern. mort. Pasch. ser. 1. de tribus
testimoniis in coelo and in terra page 189. Col. 1. in fine* D. E. totius orbis
comunione firmamur. Aug. de unit. Ec. c. 2.
head: animated and acted by one and the same spirit, whereby it came to pass
that the chiefest and noblest part is sensible of the hurt and smart of the
meanest and feeblest part. He then that is in the body cannot complain he is
alone; seeing God himself, and the Son of God; and the spirit of God; and the
Angels of God; and the Churches of God: all the Servants of God stand by him:
and so he has many eyes to see for him: many hands to work for him: many
tongues to intercede for him: all bearing a part with him: enough to quiet him,
to silence his complaints, and to let him know he suffers not alone.

But in another case, meekness is sore assaulted, when one suffers what no man
else does. To be in trouble when all others are quiet: to lie in pain when
others live at ease, to be in want when others have what they can desire. To
see wickedness exalted Psa. 12. 8. Job. 24. 24 Eccl. 7. 7. Deuteronomy. 27. 25. Psalm.
10. 8.
and innocence oppressed: oppression (says Solomon) will make a wise man mad.
But if God would have it so, there is no remedy but meekness.

God deals with his Children as the Embroiderer with his cloth of gold and
other rich stuffes; cuts them into many pieces, lays them confusedly on an
heap, until he resume them to make up his imagery. So God first cuts in pieces
his children (...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 19.
with crosses and afflictions, but sets them together again in excellent forms,
to be looked upon as examples to the world, thus he dealt with Abraham, with
Moses, and with Job; that he might preserve them, and present Genesis 12. Exodus 2.
Job. 1. Job. 2. 7, 8.
them as patterns of obedience, meekness, and patience; to all succeeding ages.
Now if we consier what God does to particulars, we may perhaps Quaeritur
itaque, cum haec ita sint, si totum quod in hoc mundo est, cura and gubernaculo
and judicio Dei agitur; cur melior multo sit Barbarorum conditio quam nostra?
cur inter nos quoque ipsos sors bonorum durior quam malorum: cur probi jaceant,
improbi convalescant? possim quidem rationabiliter and satis constanter dicere:
nescio secretum, and consilium divinitatis ignoro, etc. Sufficiat tibi quod
Deus a se agi ac dispensari cuncta testatur. Quid me interrogas, quare alter
major sit alter minor? alter miser alter beatus? alter fortis, alter infirmus?
qua causa quidem haec Deus faciat non intelligo; sed ad plenissinam rationem
abunde sufficit, quod a Deo agi ista demonstro; sicut enim plus est Deus quam
omnis humana ratio: sic plus mihi debet esse quam ratio, quod a Deo agi cuncta
cognosco. Nihil ergo in hac re opus est, novum aliquid audiri, satis sit pro
universis rationibus author Deus, Salvianus de Guber. Dei lib. 3. ab Initio.
find just matter of complaint, and think there is disorder and injustice in
the works of God, but when^ Genuinus ergo Christi discipulus non sibi praesumit
scrupulo se Deo praescribendi quid and quantum sibi imponere, aut quomodo secum
agere debeat. Neque etiam sub truce constitutus, oculos curiose ad alios
convertit, and cum Petro dicit, quid autem hic? multo minus impatienter,
queritatur quasi Deus aliis breviora sibi autem graviora and difficiliora
portanda imposuerit. Sed in bona Dei voluntate patienter acqui^scit, certus
Deum optime omnium novisse quid ipsi ad refraen^ndam carnem lascivientem sit
maxim conducibile, etc. Kemnitius. Har. Evang. cap. 86. page 1647. col. 1.
we lay them all together we shall find the composition excellent, and of
singular use and benefit to us. And that God does not, nor permits any thing
to be done unto the righteous but only for their good. And therefore to murmr
or repine against God, or to question why he affl^cts one man more than
another, were in effect to question why he loves one man more than another.

But what if the cause of trouble be the consciousness of some known sin with
the apprehension of Gods just anger? when a man sees God set against him, and
his own conscience against him: Gods anger and a wounded spirit who can bear?

When the spirit is overwhelmed with grief and fear, it drives a man out of his
right mind, which in its distemper apprehends nothing but bitterness: the bed
of ease is a torment, Job. 7. 3, 4 Job. 7. 13, 14, 15, 16
where dreams do scare, and visions terrefie, so that the soul chooses
strangling and death rather then life. Job. 7. 14, 15.

This trouble David felt in a great measure: which made him complain there was
no soundness in his Psalm. 38. 3
flesh: no rest in his bones: no quiet in his mind: no comfort in his soul: Ps.
38. 4.
the sight of his sins, and sense of Gods anger, had so distracted him, that he
roared for the very disquietness of Psa. 38. 8.
his heart.

In this case take meekness; and this will bear up and bear out the spirit, and
beware by any means of saying as Cain said, mine iniquity is greater then can
be forgiven; (my Genesis 4. 13
punishment greater then I can bear.)

But pluck up thy heart, and say Jer. 10. 19 M^c. 7. 9. 1 John 1. 7 2 Cor. 12.
9. Mat. 20. 29. 30. 1 John 1. 9 Ephesians. 2. 4. Jo. 3. 16. Psa. 25. 8. Ps. 52. 1.
Psa. 86. 5. To. 11. 22 Psa. 33. 5. Ps. 100. 5. Ps. 145. 9. Psa. 34. 8. Psalm.
103. 8, 9, 13. Romans 2. 4.
with Jeremiah, This is my sorrow and I will bear it. And with the Prophet
Micah, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against
him.

And in this case there is no cause of too much dejection and distemper. For if
we consider,

The excellency of the merits of Christ: the sufficiency of his grace: the
wisdom of Gods providence: the faithfulness of his promises: how rich he is in
mercy: how infinite in love: and that his goodness neither is nor can be
exceeded by any wretchedness or sinfulness of man.

He is so patient, that he is long ere he be provoked; and when he is provoked,
he is so gracious, that he is easy to be appeased: men cannot Isa. 57. 19 17,
18. Number. 14. 18. Exodus 34. 6, 7. Ez. 18. 21, 22, 23. Ez. 18. 31, 32. Mat. 11.
28. 1 Timothy 1. 15. Mat. 1. 21. Isa. 49. 15. Psalm. 3 27, Ps. 89. 30. Ps. 51. Ps.
37. 24. Mat. 24. 24. Romans 5. 20 1 John 5. 9. Jam. 2 17 Romans 11. 1. Mal. 3. 6.
Romans 11. 29. 1 John 4. 4. Jer. 32. 40. 2 Timothy 4. 18. Deus non deserit etiamsi
deserere videatur Aug, in Ps. 44. Delicta non videt vis amoris. Chrysologus
Sermon. 3. de filio prodigo.

By such erroneous sins they greatly off^nd God, incur the guilt of death,
greive the holy spirit, break off the exercise of faith, most grievously wound
the conscience, now and then for a time loose the sense of grace, until upon
their returning into the way by true and earnest repentance Gods Fatherly
countenance shine again upon them. The judgment of the Synod of Dort. d^
quinque Art. controv. in Eccles. Belg. cap. 5. de persev. Sanct. Sect. 5.

As in Peter and David 2 Samuel 12. Luke 22. See it in Origin, and others in
primitive times. Putas hic est, non pot^st non esse, sed later. Hyems est;
intus est viriditas in radice. Aug. in Joh. 9. Habitus non amittitur: actus
intermittitur: gradus remittitur. Vide Aug. in lib. de correp. and gra.


so soon fall out with their sins, though they have grievously offended: but he
falls in with them, and becomes graciously reconciled.

And as a compassionate and an indulgent Father forsakes not his Child when he
is sick, so neither will God leave his Children when they have sinned; He may
take distaste: they may be dejected (but being his) his grace and their faith
shall never fail.

For although the exercise and former comforts of grace may be lessened: Ps.
42. 5. 11 Ps. 38. 6. Mat. 13 4, 5, 6, 7. Rev. 2 4. Ps. 51. 12. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
Romans 11. 5. 1 Jo. 3. 9. Heb. 6. 10. Psa. 55. 22 2 Timothy 2. 13. Psa. 34. 8. Joh.
6. 47. Mal. 3. 6. Ps 10. 2, 27. Heb. 13. 8. Isa. 59. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 12. Jo. 10.
28, 29. Joh 13. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 4, 5. Psa. 89. 35. Luke 22 32. Ephesians 4. 3.

For God who is rich in mercy according to uncha^geable purpose of election,
does not wholly take away his holy spirit from his, no not in their grievous
slips, nor suffers them to wander so far as to fall away from the grace of
adoption and state of justification, or to commit the sin unto death, or against
the holy Ghost, or to be altogether forsaken of him. Judicium. S^n. Dodr. de.
5. Art. Controv. in Eccl. Belg. c. 5. de persev. Sect. 6.


the good motions of the spirit suppressed: the wonted fervor of it abated:
and the sensible operation of it interrupted: yet still it is there, when it is
not felt: they have it though they know not of it. For it cannot be, God should
forget, though man may be forgetful; God cannot deny himself; nor will he deny
his favor to them that come unto him for it: what God has been he is still:
and can do, as much as he has done: He will not leave the claim where he has
taken possession; reject what he has received: nor disclaim what he has once
owned: He will not suffer his truth to fail; nor his spirit to forsake the
heart, into which it has been once admitted.

When doubts are raised concerning things promised let them call to mind what
they have known performed, and let this assure them of receiving more. It were
extreme weakness for men to forsake their own 2 Pet. 3. 17
stedfastness, and overwhelmed with the waves of temptation and corruption, to
leave their hold of that which can only keep them from sinking.

Let the temptations of Satan be never so strong: the corruption of their own
hearts never so great; their sins never so many; yet the mercies of God, and
the merits of Christ applied to the contrite spirit, the humbled soul: the
believing heart by the sovereign and healing hand of divine Grace does
over-povvre all that can be opposed; whose operations cannot either by Satan's
subtlety, or man's frailty be frustrated or hindered, for so long as there is
power in God to make him able: and goodness in God which will make him
willing to help and ease the afflicted (for who is a God like unto him,
forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin) fall they may: utterly fall away
they cannot, for the Mic. 7 18.
Lord upholds them with his hand; Psa. 37. 24
though some be of tender hearts apt to entertain troublesome fears and to have
a hard opinion of themselves: yet let them not Judge amiss of God who has
mercy laid up for all that will seek it. God says not to the humbled sinner
as Christ said to the Jews (you shall dye in your sins) but as he said to the
sisters of Lazarus, of Lazarus sickness, this sickness Joh. 8. 21.
(this sin) is not unto death. Sin is the sickness of the soul, the Soul may
Joh. 11. 4.
be far spent with sin as the body with sickness: but though the humors be
Isa. 66. 2. Isa. 61. 1. Isa. 35. 3. 4. 5. 6. Is. 61. 2. 3. To. 8. 26. Jo. 4. 3.
4. Mat. 12. 20. Isa. 37. 15 Joh. 14. 18 Isa. 42. 3. Isa. 55. 12 Mat. 9. 2. Col.
2. 13. Isa. 53. 1. Isa. 65. 18 Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 19. Ps 51. 12. Ps. 22.
14, 15, 17, 24. 1 Timothy 4. 10 1 Timothy 2. 4. Jo. 11. 25. Act. 3. 19. Joel. 2. 12 2
Pet. 3. 9 Isa. 55. 7 L^^. 24. 49 Ez. 33. 11 Isa. 1. 18. Isa. 43. 25, Jer. 3. 1,
2, 13, 22. 1 Timothy 2. 4. Ps. 103. 10, 11, 12. Kin. ^. 15* etc. Romans 5. 15, 16,
17, etc. Veh^m^nter and supra omnem modum exuperat gratia Dei delictorum
magnitudinem, copiam and gravitatem. Laur. Alex. page 95.
corrupted and the blood distempered: yet if nature be not quite exhausted, and
the spirits of life extinguished, the skillful Physician has hope to cure the
body.

In like manner the soul Physician will bind up the broken heart: quiet the
troubled spirit: cherish the seeds of grace: forgive the sins of the soul; and
restore to a sinner the joy of his salvation. If they have faith to believe the
promises of God, and repentance to bewail their sins: God has mercy to heal
their souls: the medicine and means of recovery is neither weak nor wanting to
him that can apply it.

If Sa^an put a conceit into the head of the sinner, that God will not be
entreated: let it not get the consent of the heart.

To sin is dangerous; but to cast away all hope of forgiveness is desperate,
and therefore give not way to your own corruptions, and Satan's 1 Cor. 15. 56
To. 6. 23. Ez. 18. 20. Lu. 13. 3. Ja. 1. 15. Ephesians. 5. 6. Ps. 31. 22. Job. 33. 10
Omne peccatum grave est. Greg. sup. Ez. li. 2. For every sin must be accounted
for. Mat. 12. 36
temptations: if you be weak, yet in any case be not wilful; and take heed
that a sin of infirmity, become not a fall of Apostasy. It is the Apostles
advice, cast not away your confidence, but keep your hold still: which Job
would not forgo, though God killed him. It is an evil heart, and unfaithful,
that thinks of departing from the living God. Christians in their conflicts
must not do as Plut. in vitae Demosthenis. Merito perit aegrotus qui m^dicum
non vocat, sed ultro qui venientem respuit. Musculus. Heb. 10. 35 Job. 13. 15
Heb. 3. 12 1 The. 5. 8. Dan. 9. 9.
Demosthenes did in the battle, cast away their shield (the hope of salvation,)
for God has not lost the bowels of compassion, if men have not lost all sense
of grace. There is no sin so great: but is pardoned to the penitent: if man
have the power to repent: God has a will to forgive, his hand is never
shortened, but when men's hearts are hardened.

Think of Manasses Idolatry: David's adultery: Noah's drunkenness: Peter's denial,
and Paul's blasphemy, all these sinned greatly but being greatly humbled for
their sins by prayer and true repentance they obtained pardon: they could plead
nothing Hab. 2. 5. Psa. 5. 15. 1 Timothy 6. 7, 8. Nam ideo fines transilimus, quia
ad mill vitas, quas falsa imagine concipimus, solicitud^ nostra se extendit --
unusquisque votis immensa latifundia non secus absorbet, quam si alvum haberet
dimidii mundi ^capacem. Calv. in 1 Timothy 5. 7.
but mercy; and this may any one plead as well as they, and therefore never
murmr at God, or repine at thine own condition: but be contented, and
thankful, and put on meekness: Repent and be converted, and a time of
refreshing will come.

But nature is a great enemy to this excellent grace, for the nature of some is
peevish and tachie, and content in no condition; never well either full or
fasting (as we use to say.)

Some when they have what they can desire, yet enlarge their desires as hell;
and grudge if they be not satisfied: they murmr under plenty, and whereas
necessaries should suffice, they are not content with superfluities. It is not
enough that their covetousness is answered with plenty: but their curiosity
longs after novelty; and if the multiplied devices of a luxurious wanton age,
do not present themselves to their longing appetites: if their diet be not some
choice delicacy; and their apparel of the costliest stuff and newest cut and
fashion: they are sick of the sullens, and out of charity: both with God and
man, such Humorists were the Israelites who murmured Quum alimenta and
vestiarium nominat, delicias and abundantem copiam excludit. Calv. in 1 Timothy 5.
8. Prodiga rerum luxuries nunquam parvo contenta paratu: and quaesitorum terra
pelagoque ciborum ambitio sa^fames, and lautae gloria mensae. Lucan. lib. 4. de
bell. civil.

In Coccino and Tyrio, etc. cedo acum crinibus distinguendis, and pulverem
dentibus elimandis, and bisulcum aliquid ferri vel aeris unguibus
repast^nandis: si quid ficti nitoris, si quid coacti ruboris, in labia aut
genas urgeat, etc. Tert. lib. de Paenit. cap. 11. Psalm. 78. 31. Number. 11. 33.


against God, until he corrected their corrupt humors by staying the
wealthiest of them in the wilderness.

Some again are troubled, and they know not where, nor know not why, but
discontent they are, and out of all patience, conplain of crosses, and losses,
and wants, of disappointments and pains, when they cannot tell where the pain
holds them.

In this case take heed there be not some Canaanite, some Jebusite in the Land,
some secret sin in the soul Jos. 23. 13.
unrepented of; which (as a scourge in the side, and a thorn in the eye) will
suffer a man to take no Rest.

Moreover, some are naturally sad, pensive and melancholy, fall out with
themselves, repine against God, and every man, they abandon all comfort, and
repel all occasions of joy, delighting to nourish grief, and to entertain a
pensive soul, they eat up their own hearts, and drink up their own spirits,
this is a dangerous (I had almost said) a devilish humor (one has said it)
Spiritus melancholicus est spiritus Diabolicus, the Devil loves to fish in
troubled waters, and is the most discontented spirit in the World.

Discontent is often desperate: Satan has a Cord, a knife, etc. Hang: drown:
stab: a violent hand, a virulent tongue are his Instruments to destroy man and
blaspheme God, they are impatient of all pain: the least cross overwhelmes
them; and so affects them; that they know not: they care not what they say or
do, they Quarrel with God, with themselves, and with all men; a sad condition,
and enemy to meekness. But all this while I have not cleared the Saints of that
scandal that is taken against them for their distempered behavior in their
afflictions. Jobs uncharitable friends Job. 11 2. and 8. 2. Job. 15. 2, 3. Job.
35. 16 Act. 14. 15 Jam. 5. 17
in effect tell him to his face (that he raved and talked idly,) That the
Saints have transgressed in their fits, cannot be denied, they were men of like
passions with us, and in their passions sometimes mutin'd against God, and in
the weakness of their spirits did shrink under the cross. Jacob for the loss of
a Son will go down into the grave sorrowing: Genesis 37. 35. Psalm. 106. 33. Jonah
4. 1 1 Kin. 19. 4. Job. 10. 20 Job. 13. 25 26, 27. 1 Cor. 3: 1, 3, 4.
Moses speaks unadvisedly with his lips: Jonas frets, and is angry: Elias is
weary of his life; and Job expostulates and reasons with God, and thinks him
too severe: and in this they were carnal (as St. Paul speaks) walked as men by
sense, and not by faith: but reason corrects sense: and faith rectifies reason:
and when they come to their right reason, they acknowledge with David, it was
their infirmity. Ps. 77. 10.
It is sure the Saints of God have a body of flesh, as well as a spiritual
soul: their flesh is sensible and their souls affectionate; and as the one is
sensible of the pain, so the other is moved with it; indeed to be more affected
than there is cause is sinful: and it is sinful not to be affected, where
cause is given.

And if the Saints have been much affected under the Cross: they are therein
not to be excused only but justified: if from a just ground for sin committed,
and God offended. To ^ob. 7 21. Jona. 3. 8. 10. Joel 2. 12. 17. Isa. 9. 13.
Jer. 2 30. Jer. 5. 3. Jer. 6. 26. 2 Cor. 7. 11. Let Tert. speak the discipline
of Primitive Christians. Nos ver^ jejuniis aridi, et omni continentia expressi,
ab omni vitae fruge dilati, in sacco and cinere volutantes invidia Caelum
t^n^imus, etc. Tert. Apol. advers. gent. cap. 40. in fine p. 71. Psa 51. 17 1
Pet. 5. 6. Gal. 5. 24. Col. 3. 5. Romans 8. 13 1 Cor. 9. 27. Ne frena an^mo
perm^^te calen^i. Stat. 8. Theb. imperat hunc f^enis, hunc tu compesce catena.
Hor. ep. lib. ^ ep. 2. Pon^ irae frena modumque. Horat. Sa^^r* 8. Heb. 13. 33 1
Cor. 4. ^.
apprehend God offended, and angry: and angry he will not be but for sin: and
for this we find the Saints to have been both strangely and strongly affected,
read the Psalms of David, the Lamentations of Hieremy, and see what impression
the effects of Gods anger did make upon their affections; and this God not only
approved: but commanded, and blames them when they were not as was meet
affected at his smiting them.

He lays a Charge on them to rend their hearts, to afflict their souls, to put
on sackcloth: to sit in ashes: to sigh and cry: to weep and mourn: and to make
other deep expressions of troubled affections even to indignation and revenge
(two main parts of Repentance as Saint Paul sets it forth) for God will have
them break their spirits: humble their souls: be angry with, and take revenge
of themselves by the wholesome discipline of spiritual mortification.

Thus to do in dear affection, and true devotion unto God, unfeigned contrition
for their sins: and compassion toward man may well consist with that meekness
which the Apostle requires to be put on.

But here two extremes must be avoided, a mean must be observed: and it is a
blessed thing to hit it, to know both when to be affected and how far.

Affections of themselves are apt enough to run into excess, have more need of
the curb than the spur, Saint Paul speaking of the Apostles and their
sufferings, says, they were made as gazing-stocks, a spectacle to the world
and to Angels and to men, such are the Saints they have many eyes upon them,
and therefore should have a care to comport themselves decently and exemplarily
that no pains or passions discompose or disorder the decency of their thoughts
or duties. It may be, by their sufferings God intends the instruction of
others: and it is a heavenly thing, when others as well as themselves, are
bettered by their afflictions.

To do otherwise were to fall short of their duty, or to exceed it, they fall
short of their duty, that being afflicted are not humbled: not sensible of Gods
anger, nor moved with it.

This some would bear the world in hand is their Patience, Meekness and
Calmeness of spirit: but indeed it is a stoical negligence and carelessness, a
senceless dullness and stupidity.

When Gods hand is lifted up they will not see; they will not grieve, nor fear,
nor be humbled, nor troubled, not Isa. 26. 11.
daunted or dejected: there is no man but would dislike that in his Child, and
repute it stubbornness rather than meekness and so will God, who is greatly
afflicted when he sees affliction has no kindly work upon men.

For men to be affected and passionate to be moved and troubled at the effects
of Gods anger may stand both with Reason and Grace.

To this end God has given man a soft and flexible nature to take impression
of every passion, So that when God is angry he will have us to pour out our
supplications and complaints to lament after him, and to be very Psalm. 14^. 2.
Jer. 4. 8.
much displeased with our selves, that judging of our selves, we may 1 Cor. 11.
31.
not be judged of the Lord.

They exceed their duty that in their afflictions are too much troubled, our
nature urges downwards, and our passions have their self aptness and proness
to that which is evil, men otherwise Gen 6. 5. and 8. 21.
unblameable, herein are worthy to be blamed; that any little or light
affliction does too much disquiet them, and makes them wondrous impatient, yea
many for a small loss do so vex and fret, that like Rachel they refuse to be
comforted, and Jer. 31. 15
become so peevish that no good counsel can charm them to patience, like Jonah
they will defend their frowardness, Jon^. 4. 9.
and with him will tell you they do well to be angry, but as God to him so I
may say to them, do you well to be angry for a trifle? what is this or that
man? or what is any man? that he should be so tender and tachie, there are very
few that can be found better than David, or if than David better than Christ, I
am sure they cannot be, yet David in the person of Christ says of himself (I
am a worm and no man) the best man Psa. 22. 6.
compared with God is but as a worm of the earth.

If then God shall tread upon us shall we turn against him: if he shall set
against us: shall we strive against him! no! rather let us submit unto him, and
humble our selves before him, adoring his wisdom, and admiring the
unsearchableness of his ways who orders all things if against our wills: yet
according to his own.

Yet there are some that shoot their arrows against heaven even bitter words,
fearful execrations, heavy curses, reviling God and Man if they Atque Deos
atque astra vocat crudelia matter. Virg. Ecclog. 5.
be crossed in their designs, and all things answer not their desires, they
break out into exclamations and accusations against God, and in their furious
and frantic fits with great horror they utter such prodigious speeches that
are inconsistent altogether with Christianity or humanity, they forget
themselves to be Christians, to be men, and behave themselves as brutes and
devils, ready to forsake God, to revolt from Religion, full of bitter thoughts,
breaking forth into such horrid expressions, which will make the heart of any
moderate man to quake and tremble for to hear them in the height of their
madness, raging against God and his creatures. Good men under the sense and
pain of some heavy affliction, may be affected, may be moved, but affected or
moved above measure they may not be, railing, and reviling, cursing and
blaspheming is the language of Hell, and that man that uses it, is no better
than an incarnate Devil, a passion to be tamed, and with much caution, as a
dangerous pitfall to be shunned; and beg of God an humble, and a meek spirit,
and thus much for meekness as it relates to God.

The second kind of meekness which relates to man.
Of Meekness toward Man.
Meekness toward men is shown in a kind affection, and in a sweet and gentle
conversation, and is chiefly intended in this place.

And this kind of meekness, which the Apostle here commends to be The Character
of meekness toward men.
put on, is a calmness of spirit, a quietness of mind, a gentle moderation in
all our actions. When as the swelling of anger together with the vexations and
disquietness of heart and mind are suppressed, when as both an internal and
external tranquillity is observed, with modesty of countenance, together with a
sweet and amiable comportment of the whole body, whose tongue is the law of
kindness, with words both few and soft; affable; and courteous: censorious of
none, injurious to none, respective of all; patient, mild, and humble: ever
ready to give a reason of the hope that is in you to any one that shall move the
question, and to give the best construction of every action that charity will
bear. For meekness like charity hops all things: believes all things:
endures all things: and is so far from doing evil, that it thinks none. 1 Cor.
13. 7. Romans 13. 10.


Meekness of all others knows how to make a virtue of necessity, and to put
evil to good use. It cannot be discountenanced, will not be discontent, has
learned to pass by Indignites, to put up injuries: prays for what it cannot
help: laments what it cannot mend: and patiently suffers what it abhorres to
do: bearing wrongs, and Romans 12. 19. Mat. 5. 44.
forbearing revenge: receiving evil, but returning good: good for evil; for
hatred, love: for blows, blessings.

Thus God as the perfection of our meekness requires at our hands not only a
free remission of all injuries that we forgive men their trespasses: Mat. 6. 14.
but also an entire affection to their persons, to love even our enemies. Mat.
5. 44. Romans 12. 17. Luke 6. 27, 28. Romans 12. 21.


To recompense to no man evil for evil is a fair measure of meekness, but to
overcome evil with good is a very high degree of Meekness, and such as well
becomes Christians, who are the followers of that Master who shed his blood for
them that spilt it.

You hear what meekness is the virtue here commended: now will you hear what
use we are to make of it, it must be put on.

Put on meekness. Meekness is a garment or apparel for the soul: and as a man
is seen in his clothes, and known by them: so is a Christian by meekness. This
meekness it comes not by nature; it is a grace of God, a fruit of the spirit.
And a man may as well be said to be born with clothes on his back as with grace
in his heart.

This and all other graces we have not only as the gift of God to us: Jam. 1.
7. 1 Cor. 15. 10. Gal. 2 9. Ephesians. 4. 7. Romans 12. 3. and 15.
but as the work of God in us.

It is a spiritual and heavenly garment, and suited to the soul.

It is a wonder to see what a great deal of care there is to get apparel for
the body; and curiosity to fit it, that it may be comely; what strange attires
Ornemus nosinetipsos spiritualibus ornam^ntis etc. haec sunt vestimenta quib^
placere ^^erim^s Jesu Christo coelesti sponso. Bern. lib de modo been vivendi.
Sermon. 9. de habitu. page 1251.

Ita me Christus been amet, pudere nos hujus nostrae detostandae luxuriae,
intus and in cord nostro debebat; quae indubitatum vanissimae mentis nostrae
est (...). Diatericus. in Analog. Evang. Domini. in Dom in. 1. Trin. par. 1.
doct. 3.


for fashion, and unreasonable for charge, are devised and worn beyond ability.
But the best and seemliest garment (which is meekness) is not regarded.

This Garment the Apostle advises to get, and not to get it only, but to wear
it. It is a fearful thing to think of the great neglect of this Apparel. But
for that of the body Plus gaudeas intus in anima de sanctis virtutibus quam
soris in corpore de pretiosis vestibus. Bern. in lib. de modo been vivendi.
Sermon. 9. de habit. O adolescens cum non possis pingere pulchram, pinxisti
di^^tem. Cl^^ Alex. 3. paeda. car. 10.

Non est sine macula Christi sponsa, si amat vestem pretiosam. Bern. de modo
been vivendi Sermon. 9. de habitu.

Soror in Christo amabilis, divitiae tuae sint boni mores: pulchritudo tua sit
ben^ vita. Bern. in lib. de modo been vivendi. Sermon. 9. de habitu. page 1251.

Vestes enim nostrae virtutes sunt. Bern. Sermon. 2. in c^p. Jejunii. page 111.
col. 1. K.


what a deal of time is taken up (as they say) between the comb and the glass.
What care about the back? what dressing, and tricking, and trimming, and so
many trifles go to the completing of a suit; that a ship is as easily rig'd as
a woman arrai'd. Appelles his Prentice about to draw the face of Hellen,
failing in his skill, painted her rich: much like to those who when they fail
of virtue to beautify their lives, think to be known by their fine clothes. A
many suites for their backs, and never a grace for their hearts: surely those
are best clad that have their hearts clothed with virtue. And therefore put on
meekness. Not on your tongues only, in sweet and sugared words: but on your
hearts in a quiet and meek spirit which before God is a thing much set by. Yea,
in the whole carriage and conversation of your lives.

You must ever put it on, and never put it off, until the soul put off the
body; you must sit in it, lie down in it, walk in it, and work in it.

It is a garment for all times, and for all places.

For all times, in the time of wars, famine, sickness, in the day of trouble
and hour of temptation, when storms and tempests break in upon us, it is as a
safe shelter.

In the time of peace, health, plenty, in good days which no misfortune clouds,
in Halcion days when the Sun of prosperity shines upon us; It is as a pleasant
shadow.

For all places! at home within doors in the family, it is as a precious
ointment to perfume the house.

Abroad amongst neighbors, it is as an excellent virtue to season your
conversation: At the Market about your business: In the fields, amidst your
Cattle: In the City at your vocation: In the Assembly at your devotion: on the
Tribunal, and in the Pulpit, meekness agrees with all places. Wherefore it is
the wholesome advice of a wise Father to his son. My son go on in thy business
with meekness, so shall thou be beloved of him that is approved.

Now meekness as apparel serves for diverse uses.

1 In Indumentum: for clothing. 2 In Munimentum: for defense. 3 In Ornamentum:
for comeliness. 4 In Monumentum: for distinction.
First, Apparel is for clothing to Genesis 3. 7. Genesis 3. 21. Dici^ur vestis a
velando, quod corpus velat aut fegat Var.
hide our nakedness: and to be a comely cover for our more uncomely parts. So
meekness serves as a covering to hide and conceal the brutish rage of our heady
passions: and the filthiness of our disordered affections: which should they be
seen in their own form, would appear so monstrous and misshapen that they would
become odious both to God and Man.

For all affections and passions they are, as man is, conceived in sin: and sin
which has blemished our understanding and defaced our purest mind, has made
much more deformed and ugly, affections and passions which arise from the
bruitist part of the soul.

Of these some are more gentle; relenting and tractable and easily drawn to the
obedience of reason, others more furious s^dden and unruly, hard Vide A^i^t in
Aethic. Intelligentiae lucem tra subtrahit cummen tem permovendo consundit.
Greg. Moral. lib. 5. Assiliunt fluctus imoque a gurgite pontus vertitur, Ovid.
3. Fast. Quippe sonant clamo^e viri st^idore, rudentes undarum incursu gravis
unda, tonitribus ether fluctibus erigitur, caelumqu^ aequare videtur pontus,
-- and n^nc sublimis vel^ti de vertice montis, despicere in valles, imumque
Acheronta videtur: n^m ubi demissam curvam circumstet^t aequor suspicer.
inferno summum de gurgite toetum. Stat.
to be tamed and reduced: such is Anger, which leaves a man naked, and lays
him open to shame, and drives the soul from her seat of judgment, raises such
commotions and perturbations, that like a troubled sea stirred with a violent
tempest, the very foundation is shaken, the bottom is discovered, and the
Channel appears.

The passion of Anger it deals by men as the Jews did by the Egyptians, spoils
them of their jewels and raiment Exodus 3. 22
of Reason and Judgment; or as Aaron did by the Israelites, makes them ^aked to
their shame: thus Anger Exodus 32. 25. Genesis 9. 21
makes a man naked and uncovered, like Noah in his Tent; for Anger Minus sui
compos est ira quam ebrietas. Eras. So the Fathers term it. Hier. ad Ce^antiam.
Dum irascitur insanire credadatur. Hier. ad Demetri. Ira furor brevis est.
Horat. Ep. l. 1. Ep. 2. Greg. calls anger men's furore ^bria. Greg. super Ez.
(...). Menander Iratum ab in sano tantum tempore distare puta. Ca^m.

Ora tum^nt ira, nigrescunt sanguine venae, lumina Gorgoneo saevius angue
micant. Ovid. lib. 3. de ^rt. Am.

Qualia poetae infernalia monstra finxere succincta serpentibus and igne and
flatu, etc. p^rlege cap. 35. Senecae in lib. 2. de ira, ^bi elegantissima
descriptio irati. Genesis 9 23.


is the drunkenness of the soul, it is a short madness by which a man is
carried away from himself with heat and choler unto such unhansome and unmanly
behavior, that he becomes a ruful spectacle, besides the deformity that lurks
within; hence it is that in the whole nature of things there is not a more
prodigious Monster than an angry man. But Reason and Religion like the two
sons of Noah, Sem and Iaphet, take that garment of Meekness to cover him. By
the help of Reason a man may do much, but by the help of Grace and Religion a
man may do much more in order to the quieting and settling the affections, which
when they are unruly must not be ruined, but rectified.

Affections and passions were in the first Adam in the time of his innocence
without preturbation; and in the second Adam in the time of his incarnation
without sin: yea God himself is said to be ((...)) Angry, Kemnitius Harm.
Evang. c. 49. p. 640 col. 2 Luke 13. 27. Psalm. 5. 5. Deuteronomy 9. 28 Exodus 32. 10,
11 Number. 11. 1 and 16. 22.
and to hate not really but Analogically; for in him is no motion or commotion,
neither passion or perturbation, he has said it of himself, and well he might
without tax of pride or injustice ego Deus and non mutor.

Christ also took upon him, our passions with our nature, he was not James 5.
17.
(...) no stupid stoic but (as Saint James said of Elias) he was of like
passions and affections with us: and the Heb. 2. 17 Heb. 4. 15. Heb. 5. 3. In
humana Christi natura duo consideranda sunt, essentia carnis and affectus,
quare Apostolus docet non carnem modo hominis ipsum induisse sed affectus
quoque omnes qui sunt hominum proprii. Calv. Expos. in Heb. cap. 3. ver. 17.
author to the Hebrews tells us he had a fellow-feeling of our infirmities.

There was an Antipathy between our sins and him; he did loath them, Mat. 23.
23. Mark. 3. 5.
and was sorry for them, and angry at them.

But there was a Sympathy between his passions and ours which in him were
punishments, not sins: in us they are both, for the transgression of Adam so
disordered the whole frame of nature, that to this day there is a Schism in the
soul, the inferior faculties rebelling against the superior, Gal 5. 17.
and passion fighting against Reason: for naturally in man since the fall there
is ((...)) a foolish Romans 8. 7.
wilful heart that will not be advised, so over-mastred with passion that it
will not yield to enlightened Reason.

How shall this difference be composed, and this rebellion of the passions
quieted, the Stoics prescribe a Remedy worse than the disease, (to destroy
them) but Saint Hierom likes not this way (which were, says he, hominem de
homine tollere, to unman a Man, seeing the passions are inseparably united to
our human nature, which when it is out of order must be rectified not destroyed.

As therefore in a popular Tumult Tum pietate gravem meritis si forte virum
quem conspexere silent arrectisque auribus astant: ille regit dictis animos and
p^ctora mulcet. Virg. Aeneid. 1. Turbatum caelum tempestatesque serenat. Idem.
ibid. Romans 7. 25. Deuteronomy. 21. 12. Gal. 3 28.
and insurrection, some grave wise man interposes himself, who with the
reverence of his person, sweetness of language, and prudent and discreet
behavior does overawe and persuade them. So Jesus Christ the great Mediator of
peace between God and Man, he so moderates the passions that he makes peace in
man, he subdues the will of the flesh to the Law of the spirit, makes passion
yield to reason, cuts the nails, and hair of the bondwoman, reconciles Sarah
and Hagar, and makes them quietly inhabit under one Roof. Thus Christ Jesus
has showed us a way to cure our passions not to kill them; to qualify their
heat, to rectify their diso^der, to heal their distemper, gently to lead them,
and sweetly to incline them to their proper objects: not to take them away, ne
sint, that they be not at all: for that cannot be without the destruction of
the whole man, so long as the soul dwells in the body, there will be passions in
the soul (whatsoever the stoics say to the contrary: but so to compose them,
ne obsint, that they hurt not.

A Christian must deal with his Humphrey Sydam in his Sermon called the Waters
of Marah and Me^ibah ^n Romans 12. 1.
passions as the Apothecary does with poisons, who to make his confections more
palatesome, and yet more operative, qualifies the malignity of simples by
preparing them; making p^yson not only medicinable, but delightful, and so
both cures and pleases.

The passions thus handled by the discreet Christian, they are wholly
concealed, and nothing of them appears but so seemly clad in the habit of
Meekness that they loose their venom and malignity, and are a help no
hinderance to the soul in the operations of it.

Meekness is a Garment that well suits a Christian man, but in some Cases, upon
some occasions at some tim's, with some persons (Anger) is very seasonable and
seemly, we may be angry, but we must not sin: for Ephesians. 4 26.
there is an anger without sin; and if you will be angry and sin not, be angry
at sin. When you see Gods Name dishonored, his service neglected, his day
profaned, his good spirit despited, here is a fair occasion for the exercise
of anger: the least disgrace in our own persons; or damage in our own estates
touches us near, and for these men will storm, and fret and vex themselves,
and no gentle persuasions can move them to meekness; Discamus exemplo Christi
nostras injurias m^gnanimiter sustinere, Dei autem injurias, ^ec usque ad
auditum sufferre. etc Chrysostom. super illud. Mat. 5. qui dixerit, etc. In
p^opriis injuriis patientem esse laudabile est, injurias autem Dei dissimulare
impium est. Chrysostom. in Jo^ 8. hom 54. Vide Basil. mag. orat de ira. H^c enim
non estemen dar^ me, sed vitio tuo sat is sacere. Hieron ad Rusti cum Mona chum
Gal. 4. 18. Quidam non servent charitatis Spiritu, sed studio vanitatis. Ber.
Sermon. de Nativ. Jo. Bapt. page 216. col. 2. L. Jude 11. 1 John 3. 12. Jonas 4.
1. 2 Kings 10 16. Romans 10. 2. Acts ^2. 3. J^hn 2. 17. situs 2. 14 Rev. 3. 19.
Number. 12. 3. Number. 16.
and shall we be so tender and sensible of that which concerns our selves, and
so careless and senseless of that which concerns God, ill do we deserve to have
so good, and so gracious a God, who gives us all things that pertain to life
and godliness, when we are so cold in his cause, whereas indeed there can be no
surer sign of an upright heart, then to be more sensible of the indignities
offered to God then of our own dangers; for certainly no ingenious disposition
can be so tender of his own disgrace, as the true Christian is of the dishonor
of God.

If our affections were right and kindly that which displeases God should also
displease us, and all excess in our affections should run this way, we may be
passionate for God, and against sin, but we must beware we pretend not
indignation against sin when we intend satisfaction of a self humor. It is
good to be zealous in a good thing always, but all zeal is not good: we must
not take that for a spiritual temper which is but a natural distemper. For some
are zealous out of envy (this was Cains zeal:) some out of choler, (this was
Jonas zeal:) some out of Hypocrisy, (this was Jehues zeal:) Some out of
ignorance, (this was the Jews zeal:) but some for the glory of God, (this is a
true Christian godly zeal:) true zeal cannot stand by, and be silent when it
sees God dishonored; and the soul endangered. Moses was the meekest man alive,
yet will not Moses sit still, and say nothing, when he sees the Congregation
corrupted; the peace of Israel disturbed, the magistracy and the priesthood
questioned, if men will be factious, sacrilegious and unruly, it is then time
for Moses to show himself to be Moses, (Gods minister and their magistrate).
And a greater prophet then Moses yet no less meek (Jesus Christ the righteous)
who had not a word to say for himself: yet in his fathers Mat. 27. 14*
cause when he sees the Temple, the house of God, the house of prayer, made a
house of merchandise, a den of thieves, has a scourge to lash the prophaners
of the Sanctuary, the Lamb Jo. 2. 15, 16 Jo. 1. 29, 36 Virtus siquidem
discretionis absque charitatis f^rvore jacet, and servor vehemens absque
discretionis timperamen to praecipitat, id^oque, laudabilis cuinentrum de est
quatenus and fervor discretionem erigat, and discretio fervorem regat. Bern.
super Cant. Ser. 23. p. 628. est ergo discretio non tam virtus quam moderatrix
and aurig^ vi tutum o^dinatri^que affectuum, and morum doctrix. Bern. super
Cant. Sermon. 49. page 713. D.
of God will sometimes show himself to be the Lion of Judah, thus with Christ
and Moses (when a good cause wants it, and a lawful call warrants it,) we may
put on a just disdain, a zealous anger against the enemies of Religion and
peace, endeavoring by all good means to inform the judgments of such as are
contrary minded; and to reform the practice of such as are ill-manner'd, but in
thus doing we must join discretion with zeal: lest like a blind Archer (who
thinking to have slain a beast, killed a man) instead of mending a friend we
make not a foe wounding him in his name: when we should win him to God. Eme,
eme a Domino moderatam correptionem, quia omnino quoddam bonum and datum
optimum est, and quod habeant pauci. Bern. Sermon. 2. de Resur. Domini. Sunt
quaedam molliss^ma fandi tempora, singula quaeque locum teneant sorlita
decenter. Horat. de art Po^t.

Temporibus medicina valet data tempore prosunt, and data non ap^o tempore vina
nocent. Johannes Herodem quia public peccabat public argu bat. Bonavent. in
cap. 3. Luc.

S^p^ gravius vidi offendere animos auditorum, eos, qui aliena flagitia aperte
dixerunt quam eos qui commiserunt. Cicer. resp. ad Salust.

Eccles. 3. 11. Prove. 25. 11, 12. Isa. 50. 4. Eccles. 3. 1. 1 Timothy 5. 20. Mark
7. 33. Matthew. 18. 15. 2 Samuel 1. 20.




And herein is to be observed both a due time, and a right order.

1. A due time for every thing is beautiful in its season; and what is out of
season is out of reason, there is a time for all things, public offenses must
be openly reproved, but he that offends in private must be privately
admonished. If thy brother offend tell him his fault, between thee and him
alone, lest thou disgrace his person when thou would heal his corruption,
moroever as thou must refrain 1 Samuel 25. 22, 23. 1 Samuel 25. 36, 37. Mat. 23.
24. Mat. 7. 3, 4, 5.
reprehension in the heat of thy passion, so also in the height of his sin.

Abigal is commended for her discretion that she watched her opportunity, and
dealt with Nabal, not in his drunkenness, but when he was sober: then she told
him freely both of his sin, and of his danger.

2. A due order must be observed, Pectora tantis obsessa malis non sunt ictu
ferienda levi. Senec. in Herc. furente.
and as every sin is greater, so must we be more incensed against it. We must
not swallow a Camel and stumble at a straw; be troubled at a moat and pass by
a beam; we must not be more moved at some small offense wherein our selves
are concerned; then at a far greater that concerns us nothing; to be touched
with an injury done against our selves and pass by open blasphemy spoken
against God; were not this to prostitute religion to our own reason, yea to
our own passion, and to set up our own interest, above Gods.

And if in reproving a man would observe a due order, let him begin first with
himself; let him first amend in himself what he would reform in another. Let
him spend his spleen upon his own faults, consume Luke 4. 23.
his anger and take revenge of his own sins, and he will learn to deal more
mildly with his offending Brother; insult Gal. 6. 1.
not over his imperfections, but Carere debet omni vitio qui in alterum paratus
est dicere. Cicer. resp. in Salust. Cum imperio quippe docetur, quod priu^
agitur quam dicatur; nam doctrinae fiduciam subtrahit, quando conscientia
linguam praepedit. Greg. Moral. lib. 2. cap. 7.
lend him an helping hand, and if he err and go astray, reclaim him in love,
and with modesty reduce him into the right way. If in some thing he be
deficient, in some other things he may be a good proficient: be not too severe
against him for the good he wants, but love and honor him for the good he
has.

Reprehensions are not to be given rashness but with good advice; the mind of
man is of a weak and tender constitution, and must not be chafed, when it
should be suppl'd. He that would reclaim his friend, and bring him to a true
and perfect understanding of himself, must do it by strength of reason, not by
heat of passion: least he seem rather to please his own humor then correct
another. Eagerness and harshness of reproof does rather exasperate then
reduce; virulency and bitterness does neither please nor profit: reproves must
be sweetened with gentle words, and pleasing carriage, least they be thought to
proceed rather from spite and spleen then any good meaning or desire to work a
man to goodness, ( Jam. 1. 20 Sunt vitia animi sicut vitia corporis leniter
tractanda. Seneca. Si vis me corrigi delinquentem: apt increpa, tantum ne
occulte mordeas: quid enim mihi prodest, si aliis mala mea refe? ras si me
nesciente, peccatis meis imo detrectationibus tuis alium vulneres and certatim
omnibus narres? sic singulis loquaris quasi nulli dixeris? Hieron. ad Rust.
Monachum.
The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God.)

When we would amend in any what is amiss, it must not be done by Pro. 17. 12.
railing and reviling (raging like a Bear robbed of her whelps) but with
tenderness and discretion, a difference must be put between the sinner and his
sin, and he must so be dealt with that his sin may be killed, and be cured. Let
the righteous smite me friendly: but he is no friend, and will hardly pass for
a Ps. 141. 5.
righteous man that (with bitter invectives) Asperitas odi^m saevaque bella
movet. Ovid. 2. de Art. Crimina non homines nostra Thalia premat. Curando
fieri quaedam priora videmus vulnera q^ae melius non tetig^sse suit. Ovid.
will blast my name, when with wholesome instructions he should amend my life.

Thus is anger to be clothed with meekness. But anger as it is a heady
passion, and is hardly moderated, so is it many times misplaced, and sets
against virtue and goodness. Is thine Mat. 20. 15.
evil because I am good? (says Christ) and am I become your enemy because I
tell you the truth? Gal. 4. 6.
says Saint Paul; Cain was of the Devil and slew his Brother; and wherefore
slew he him? because his 1 Jo. 3. 12.
own works were evil and his Brothers good.

Sore eyes cannot endure to look upon a bright and shining object: the fair
whiteness of innocence, the luster and brightness that is in virtue is an
eyesore to malicious men, who search for privy slanders: and digg the filth
out of lewd tongues, to cast upon the innocent, and think they have made a rich
game of their spite, when they have made themselves most vile and wicked, to
make him seem so.

Anger is never more hot and outrageous Vide Ter. Apol. adversus gentes. cap.
2. page 26.
then when it sets upon innocence, truth and righteousness, when evil men are
incensed against the good, they know not when to take up, and Temeritas quaedam
hominum est quod odio prosequentur meliores, amant pejores. Basil. To. 2. Ep.
87. Luke 23 1^. Mat. 27. 23 Lege Justin. Martyr. in Dial. cum Tryphone J^daeo
page 323. Christianos ad leo^es tantos ad unum, Tert. Apol. adversus gentes
cap. 40. page 70.

(...), etc.

(...). Justin. Martyr. Dialogum cum Tryp^o. Judaeo. page 227. Justin. Martyr.
Apol. 1. pro christianis page 43. ibid page 56, 57.

(...), etc. Just Ma^t. Apol. 2. pro Christianis. page 55.

Bo^us vir Ca^us Sejus, sed malus tantum quod Christianus. Tert. Apol. adversus
gentes. cap. 3. page 27.

Haud poterit autem ullo sermon explicari quae supplicia quosque cruciatus
s^stinuerunt Martyrs, Lege and quae sequntur in Eusebius. Ecol. hist. lib 8. cap.
9.


can never rest but in his ruin. See it in the Jews who so hotly pursue
Christ, that nothing will satisfy them, till he be crucified, if any ask, what
evil has he done? we know their hatred is, because he did none evil.

The same spirit of fury that inflamed the Jews against Christ, set the world
on fire against Christians, which nothing could quench but the blood of those
innocents, it was their Exitiabilis superstitio. Corn. Tacit Annal. lib. 15.
Afflicti suppliciis Christiani, genus hominum superstitionis novae ac
maleficae. Suet. Traug. in Nero. Caesarum. 6. cap. 16.

(...). Justin Mart. Ep 90. Diog. (...). Athenagoras lege pro Christianis. page
34.

Nero Quaesitissimus paenis affecit, quos per flagitia invisos, vulgus
Christianos appellabat. Corn. Tac. annal. lib. 15.

(...). Just. Mart. Ep. ad Diogn. page 497.

Socrat. Eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 24, and 25.

Caeterum, insignis vero and Catholicae Ecclesiae splendour, iisdem virtutum
vestigiis incedens, and pure vivendi rationis institutio sic mirandum in modum
emicuit, ut deformis infamiae labis, simul cum tempore deleta: ut nemo ex illo
tempore turpem aliquam dedecoris maculam, fidei nostrae auderet infer. Eus.
Eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 7.


crime they were Christians, and the world raged against them for no other
reason but their religion, their only fault was their faith in Christ, and for
this they are hated, persecuted, defamed, tormented, and wit and malice set on
work to devise strange and horrid deaths, and hell it self raked for bloody
inventions to take out of the way the blessed witnesses of whom the world was
not worthy; but their meek suffering did conquer the cruelty of their
persecutors, and overcame the world, for at last the splendour of the Christians
lives, and invincible verity of their doctrine, did so prevail and triumph so
victoriously over the lives and tongues of their enemies, that the blood of
Christian Martyrs became the seed of Christ's Church, which did spring and grow
Lege Leonem in Sermon. 1. de Not. Pet. and Pauli. Sanguis Martyrum semen
Ecclesiae. August. in Psalm. 39. Nec quicquam tamen proficit exquisitior quaeque
crudelitas vestra, illecebra est mag is, sectae plures efficimur quoties
metimur a vobis, semen est sanguis Christianorum. Te^t. Apol. adversus Cent.
cap. 50. page 81. Isa. 54. 1.
up with such wonderful increase, that the world stood amazed to see it self so
suddenly become Christian.

Quis furor, O Cives? quae tanta Lucan. phars.
dementia? What hellish fury? what madness in their brains? with what blind
zeal was the ignorant malicious world transported against the Quid rem attinet
nomina^ive reliquorum jacere mentionem aut virorum recens^re multitudinem aut
varia supplicia suspiciendorum Martyrum d^scribere qui p^rtim securibus caesi
sunt sicut contigit in Arabia: partim fractis crucibus p^niti quemadmodum
accidit in Cappadocia. partim ex pedibus in sublime copite dimisso susp^nsi,
ignique remissiore subjecto ardentis materiae fume extinct, qualis cruciatus
fratribus in Mesapotamia illatus est; alicubi etiam naribus, auribus, ac
manibus mutilati, etc. Eus. Eccl. hist. lib. 8. cop. 12.

Isa. 49. 23. Isa. 1. 17. Numb. 11. 12.

Archilus dixit Judicem and Aram idem esse, pariter enim ad utrumque confugiunt
qui injuria afficiuntur. Eral. Apotheg. The Poet calls the Magistrate. (...)
Hom. Iliad. (...). Justin. Martyr. pro Chri. Apol. 2. page 54.

(...). Just. Mart. pro Christianis. Apo. 2. page 59.


truth and the professors of it?

The Rulers of the world, who (as God appointed Moses,) should have carried
these harmless lambs in their bosom, like ravening wolves do wast and devour
the flocks of Christ.

What an evil aspect the malicious world did cast upon religion and
righteousness the histories of all ages sufficiently show. A shadow whereof we
have in Athens, where by the law of Ostracism there was no man of special
eminency permitted to live. It so fell out that Aristides the just came under
the censure of this law, Dum testulis nomina inscribunt dicitur illiteratus
quidam and plane rudis Aristidi uni de plebe testulam tradidisse petiisseque ut
inscribe^et Aristidem: adm^rante eo and rogante, number quis Aristides in eum
admississet? Nihil inquit neque est mihi notus verum stomachor quo^ passim
justum dici audiam: quo audi^o nihil Aristidem ferunt respondisse, sed
inscripsisse testulae nomen suum atque ei illam reddidisse. Plutarch. de vita
Aristidis.
who being requested by a certain man that could not write, (who was to give
his voice for the banishment of Aristides) to write his name on a tile or shell
as the manner was, he questioned the man, whether Aristides at any time had
done him wrong? he answered, no! neither do I know him. But it grieves me
(says the man) to hear every one say Aristides is a just man. Now here is a
plain case (justus quia justus) the righteous persecuted for righteousness Mat.
5. 10.
sake.

But it is no matter of wonder that this malignant humor has so much
prevailed amongst the Jews and Pagans, for we find the Church of God when it
was shut up in one family was not free from it, amongst Brethren of the same
Father, and of the same faith, yet this inveterate passion breaks all bonds of
relation, and innoc^nt Joseph is hated by his Fathers sons Genesis 37. 20. Genesis
37. 23.
(for his coat) for his coat! the pledge of their Fathers love: the Ensign of
their Brothers honor: in both which respects, it should have been unto them
sacred and inviolable; and if there had been in them any (the least) fear of
God, reverence to their Father; or affection to their Brother, they would not
have dared to have touched his coat with a violent hand, but their inveterate
hatred having extinguished in them all that was of God, or good nature, and
blinded with passion, they strip him of his coat, and had rid him of his life
too, had not a special providence restrained Genesis 37. 25.
them. And he that permitted their malice ordered it another way, and yet an
innocent person must suffer for his coats sake.

What usage may Joseph expect from Genesis 37. 28, 35.
Ismaelites and Egyptians, that meets with such hard measure amongst his
Brethren, an evil beast has torn him Genesis 37. 33.
(says the deceived Father) and rightly! for what beast so fierce as
inveterate wrath. But let them palliate their malice with pretenses and hide
their cruelties with a lie, yet the time shall come; when their eyes which were
blinded with an ungoverned passion, shall be opened with an unexpected
affliction: and their sin and their Genesis 42. 21.
Brothers sufferings shall be brought Genesis 42. 22.
to their remembrauce, and so sadly! that what drew tears from his eyes: shall
fetch blood from their hearts.

This was the lot of the righteous in all ages: the best men have been
persecuted Cum it aqu: Valens imperator cum Alexandrinos, tum Aegyptios
persecutionibus adfligi lege praecepisset vastaba^tur subvertebantur omnia and
alii ad Tribu^^^^a trahebantur, alii vero in carc^res con ici^bantur, and alii
aliter ^orqu^bantur: var a siquidem supplicia contra quietis amantes
exerce^an^u^. Socrat^s Eccl. hist. lib. 4. cap. 24. Psa. 109. 2. Jam. 3. 6.
Impedit ira any mum ne possit cer ^ere verum. Cato did.
and reproched. David a man after Gods own heart complains, the mouth of the
wicked, and the mouth of the deceitful are opened against me. They have spoken
against me with a lying tongue. Wrath is the hell that sets on fire a wicked
tongue. Passion blinds reason, darkens the understanding that it cannot discern
the truth; puts out the eyes of the soul: drives a man out of himself: that
like a mad man, or one that is drunk, he says and does he knows not what.

The Wicked (says David) Psalm. 64. 3. Psalm. 64. 3, 4. Psalm. 73. 8, 9.
whet their Tongue like a Sword, they bend their Bow to shoot out their Arrows
even bitter Words, they speak Wickedly and loftily, they set their mouth
against the heavens. But although Dogs bark at the Moon: yet still she keeps
the heavens: and daily runs her constant course in her own sphere. Goodness is
never the less good, because it is maligned, and reproached. Anger is a sire,
let it be rightly placed (on the hearth or in the furnace) and it is of
singular use: but in straw or on the house top, it sets all in a combustion. It
is a passion that is headstrong: meekness is the bridle to check it. And it
must have more of the curb and less of the rain: to Ephesians. 4. 26, 27.
yield to wrath is to yield to the Devil, to be set on fire against goodness is
devilish.

Christian prudence will advisedly consider what is fit for every state and
condition of men, and will deal with them with all meekness: putting a
difference, saving some with Jude 23.
fear, on others having compassion.

Some are unruly, and must be sharply admonished: some are wilful 1 These. 5. 17.
and obstinate and must be terrified: some are weak and must be supported:
others feeble-minded and must be comforted: and some are tractable and Semp^r
been sperandum de co in quo cernimus aliquid Dei. Calvin. in Johan.
must be gently entreated, ever hoping well of those in whom there is any thing
of grace or of God.

And if we meet with any that are froward we must not reject them, but do as
God does; follow them with mercy and new offers of grace, pitying and praying
for them.

We must bear one another burdens, it is sure there is corruption in Gal. 6. 2.
all: every one has some fault or other: some are hasty, some are suspicious,
some are covetous, we must bear one with another, let every one Romans 15. 2.
of us please his neighbor for his Q^icquid in alio reprehenditur id
unusquisque in sinu suo inveniet. S^n. lib. 3. de ira cap. 26. Omnes inconsulti
and improvide sumus omnes incerti, queruli, ambitiosi, quid lenioribus verbis
hulcus publicum abs^^ndo? omnes Mali sumus. idem ibid. Tit. 3. 2.
good to edification, and speak evil of no man, be no brawlers, but gentle,
showing all meekness unto all men.

2. In Monumentum, a second use of Apparel is to defend and protect the body
from cold, heat, and outward harms; so! meekness is a sure defense, and serves
as a wall of brass to protect from danger, that no storms or tempests of
injury, slanders, afflictions can hurt us. It only knows by yielding how to
overcome, and to triumph over the conqueror. Meekness (like Medusa's head)
strangely astonishes all that behold it: for when rage and cruelty meet with an
unexpected meekness and humility, how suddenly many times is fury turned into
mercy. The Lion disdains to prey upon him, who lies prostrate before him: and
we find by experience that no force or outward violence, is of that power as
meekness is: for the one subdues the body, but the other enthrals the heart,
and conquers the most valiant mind. He that knows not to be overcome, and
returns victorious from many a battle, yields himself a captive to meekness;
all his powers fall a shaking, and all his strenght and courage sails him, when
meekness does oppose him. The tongue of the meek wisely guided has as sharp
an edg as the sword of the mighty and more enemies have been vanquished, and
more Countries subdued by courtesy then cruelty. And experience teaches us
that a yielding easiness has been preserved when a resisting stubbornness
has been ruined.

In a violent tempest, the stiff and stubborn Oaks are overturned, when the
pliable and bending reeds and osiers have been safe.

The piercing lightning when it breaks forth, cleaves assunder things hard and
which resist it: but meeting with things soft and giving place; it does easily
penetrate and hurts them not. For when violence meets with Nam iracundia per
iracundiam non compescitur sed amplius irritatur. Chrysostom. Mat. 5. 39. Romans
12. 19.
violence, it threatens the ruin of one or both, when wrath encounters with
wrath, the conflict is or dangerous or desperate.

Wherefore our Saviors precept is a good rule (resist not evil.) And St. Paul
teaches the same lession, avenge not your selves, and this is no new
commandment, but found in the old Testament, Lev. 8. 19. Lev. 8. 19.
Thou stalt not seek reveng, neither shall thou keep in mind the injury of thy
people. (says Solomon) I will do to him as he has done to me, I will reward
him according as he has deserved. Prove. 24. 29. Would Pro. 24. 29
thou live in peace and win thine enemy? Quanto satius est sanari injuriam,
quam ulcisci. Sen. de ira lib. 3. cap 27.
the way to do this is not to vex him, overcome him (if possible) with
kindness, if that will not work: neglect him: forget him: and he will the
sooner remember himself: the end of passion is many times the beginning of
repentance.

Thus must we deal (in meekness) and that in obedience to the word of God,
least we diver the course of Gods justice (which aimed at our enemies) upon our
own heads; for whilst men follow their own lusts, in seeking revenge against
the mind of God: the Judgments of God do follow Nullum tam arctum est Jugum
quod non minus laedat ducentem quam repugnantem. Senec. de ira lib. 3. cap. 16.

Consentiam itaque adversario meo, cedam denique urgenti aculeo ne bis oungat.
Parcetur enim ei qui senserit and dederit locum irae. Bern. Sermon. de verbis
Domini, omnis qui se exaltat humiliabitur. In fine page 392. col. 2. G.




low them, which many times take place, in the ruin of their own famili^s; and
they in wrestling with the hatred and wickedness of other men, to their own
destruction, wast themselves, their friends, their goods, deprive themselves of
all rest, and many times fall into mischief, whereas the meek and patient
(besides the Mat. 5. 5.
hope of future blessedness in heaven) find a recompense here on earth, to live
in peace and quietness: their names continue: their houses stand: their
posterity increase: they keep their leaf and greenesse: and enjoy the fruit of
the promises of this life, and that which is to come.

He therefore that would live in safety, must study to be quiet and live in
peace; for he that lives not in Charity on earth, shall never live in Glory in
heaven; he therefore that forgives an enemy, furthers himself; for in so doing
he heaps coals upon his head, by making his Reckoning Romans 12. 20.
the more, and his own the less.

Now he that would live in quiet, must be careful of two things.

1. To decline all occasions of the quarrel. 2. To inure himself to meekness.
First, he must decline all occasions of Quarrel; for truly it is a great fault
in some (who otherwise may be both wise and good) to be too tender and too
inquisitive.

Too tender, by laying to heart what men say of them.

Too inquisitive, what such an one or such an one says.

Whereas in prudence they should not seem to know, or not seem to mind what is
said, at least not to be too inquisitive after the Author; for by this means, a
man may mend himself and not malice the person.

We know what the Jews said of John and of Jesus: but wisdom is justified of
there Children.

Moreover, too much Jealousy Mat. 1. 19.
may apprehend a wrong when it is none; be sure of proofs that carry in them
weight and conviction, otherwise whilst men seek to revenge an injury, they may
begin one.

Rashuess, ignorance, or a misunderstanding may pass for an excuse with a good
man, whose Constructions are ever with charity and favor.

Secondly, he that would live in quiet, must inure himself to Meekness; for
custom will make a thing easy and familiar.

Milo by bearing a Calf daily, was Magis urgent saeva inexpertos, grave est
tenerae cervici jugum. Senec. lib. cur bonus viris mala fiant. cap. 4.

Nihil miserum est quod in naturam consuetuilo perduxit. Scneca. ibid.


able to bear it, when it was an Ox: how easy will he bear the injuries of
malicious men, that has attained the habit of Meekness; it is nothing to such
an one to be reviled or slandered, Ut quisque contemptissimus, and ut maxim
ludibrio est, ita solutissimae linguae est. Senec. lib. in sap. non cadere
injuriam. cap. 11.
who can pass by evil language with neglect and contempt.

Neglect will sooner kill an injury than Revenge; all the harm a common
slanderer can do with his foul mouth, is but to shame himself; and to seem to
be touched with an injury, is an advantage which an enemy looks for.

Contempt is the best Remedy in a cause-less wrong; for to contemn an enemy
that is full of malice, but wants might, is better than either to fear him, or
answer him: in such a case, contempt of an injury and Courtesy to him that
offers it, puts both out of Countenance. Thus Meekness begets peace and
quietness, by setting a man in a way to pacify an enemy by silence and
softness.

1. By silence: Anger is a short frenzy: what profit is it, nay what folly
were it, to exchange words with Quis enim phrenetico medicus iracitur idem ibid.
one that is frantic. Return not then reviling with reviling; but if an enemy
set fiercely upon us, and open his mouth wide against us, give way, let him
vent his spleen, and the storm will quickly cease: let him alone, and he will
the sooner come to himself: the way to break an enemies spite, is not to meet
him in his fury, to give rebuke for rebuke, but rather give place to wrath:
Anger is the sickness of the mind: he that would cure the sick, must not
administer physic in the fit. So if thy neighbor be angry, forbear him; give
place for the present, deal not with him in the fit, but set upon him when he
is more calm and capable of Counsel.

Outrageous passions are violent and against nature (as a stone forced upward)
strong at the beginning, and the further it passes, the more it weakneth,
until at last it return to the natural course again: therefore a little space
must be given for the passionate to draw back, for the patient to put forward.
Passion prevails on the sudden, but Reason gathers force by leisure. Serpents
when they Primi ejus ictus acres sunt, sicut serp^ntium venen^ a cubili
rep^ntium nocent: innoxii dentes sunt, cum illos f^equens morsus exhausit
Senec. lib. de ira 1. cap. 16. Pro. 15. 1. 1 Cor. 4. 12.
first creep out of their dens, are full of poison, their sting is mortal, it
were madness to abide their bites; but after they have spent their venom with
frequent bitings, you may handle them without harm.

Secondly, By softness is anger pacified; a soft answer turns away wrath,
which Saint Paul and his fellow Apostles knew full well, and therefore they
went a meek way to work with their enemies; being reviled (say they) we bless:
being persecuted, we suffer it: being defamed, we entreat: and this Course must
we take, if ever we look for peace with God, or comfort in our Souls.

And surely there is little safety to him that is hasty, rash, or easily angry;
for Anger makes many enemies, divides friends, turns love into passion, passion
into grievous words, and sometimes words into blows; and then a third Adversary
to both, has a fair Advantage to insult over them. Judah is hot against
Israel, Israel against Judah, and the King of Syria smites them both.

And the common enemy of Mankind, whilst we in heat wound one another, wins
upon us all. If men will be contentions, let them contend as Aristides and
Themistocles, strive to exceed one another in virtue.

We read of the King of Israel, that he commanded to set bread and water before
the host of the King of Syria, when he might have slain them; and he lost
nothing by it, but by his courteous and gentle using them, he did so work upon
them, that he prevented succeeding quarrels, ^ Kin 6. 23.
so that the bands of Aram came no more into the land of Israel.

He that would live securely, must live peaceably; for by Contention comes no
good: to strive with a superior Nam cum pa^e contendere, anceps est: came
superiore fur^osum: cum inferiore sordidum, etc. Senec. lib. 2. de ira. cap.
34. Jam. 3. 5.
is madness: with an equal, doubtful: with an inferior, sordid and base: with
any full of unquietness.

Let every man therefore refrain his spirit; for when men that are hasty and
given to quarrel, do meet, it is as when the flint and steel do clash, the
issue is fire, and how great a matter will a little fire kindle: and when the
fire begins to kindle, who knows where it may end; it may begin in a poor
Cottage, but ends in the ruin of Princes Palaces.

Break off the beginnings of strife; for anger to the mind, is as a coal on the
flesh or garment, cast it off speedily, it does little harm, let it lie, it
frets deeply.

The beginning of strife, is, as when one lets out water, like a breach in
the sea, therefore the Wiseman well advises, Pro. 17. 14 Parva verba multoties
homicidium perpet averant Chris. in Mat. 5. super illud qui dixirit fratri suo
fatue quosdam unius verbi contumelia, non aequo animo latae in exilium
projecit: and qui lovem injuriam silentio far noluerint, gravissimis malis
obruti sunt. Senec. de ira. lib. 2. cap. 14. prope si. nem. Pro. 23. 29.
leave off contention before it be meddled with. How many are there who have
suffered a sword in their bowels, because they would not suffer a lie in their
throats; and a rash word has been sometime the occasion of a world of
bloodshed.

It is a proverb, the hasty man seldom wants woe; for it is with a man given to
wrath: as it is with a man given to wine: who has woe? who has sorrow? who
has wounds without cause? Prove. 23. 29. for a man's hasty spirit hunts him into
snares: whereas of suffering comes ease: ease and quietness is the effect of
quiet suffering; Learn of me (says Mat. 11. 29.
Christ) for I am meek and lowly, and ye shall find rest for your souls; for if
a man observe it, when he can bear injuries, and pass by indignities, and
suffer reproaches quietly he shall find such a tranquillity in his spirit, such
peace and content in his heart, as if he had gained some victory. But a man may
wrong himself in being too gentle and patient; for put up one injury, and you
shall have enough: V^terem ferendo injuriam invites novam. Aug. Gel. nocte
Attic. lib. 18.
to pass by one injury, is to draw on another: the Ass does never want a
burden, because he never refuses to bear one: and he that makes himself a
sheep, shall be sure to be hunted (if not devoured of the Wolf.) Malice
delights to set her foot upon the neck of meekness: and patience makes
presumption insolent.

For some are so wild and hairbrain'd: some so knotty and crossgrain'd, so
dogged and surly; that they are capable only of the Restraint of fear. Meekness
to such had need to be guided with wisdom, lest it prove cruel to it self. It
were madness, not meekness to tender the Etenim si liccat impune ledere, nullus
erit tutus ab improborum violentia. Erasm. in Apotheg.
throat to an unjust stroke, or to give an enemy occasion to insult.

It is discretion so to bear an injury, as not to encourage an enemy: he that
has wronged one without control, threatens many. Lawful Remedies prosecuted
with modesty and gentleness are warranted before God and man.

Christians, though it is their praise, they are meek and patient: yet are they
not stocks and stones, unsensible of wrongs and injuries: do they feel the
smart, and shall they not seek for ease? no question, endeavor to right
themselves they may, revenge themselves they may not.

And because the good nature of the meek lies open to abuse, it will not be
amiss to put in here a Caveat or two.

Let him beware of being too credulous, or too timorous.

The meek is apt to be too Credulous: not considering that the Snake 1 John 4.
1.
lurks in the grass, it is not wisdom to be suspicious without cause: and it
is weakness to be too credulous upon every cause. Believe not every spirit,
all is not gold that glisters: enemies sometimes mask under the vizard of
friends: who have honey in their mouths, but poison in their hearts; their
words smoother than butter, Psalm. 55. 21.
but war in their hearts; like the Be that will sting most when she is fullest
of honey. Of such treachery David complains. It was not an open enemy that
reproached him, but his Psalm. 41. 9.
own familiar friend whom he trusted: and what! Thou my son (says Caesar)
take heed of such that with Joab will salute you kindly, when 2 Kin. 3. 27
they hate you deadly: smile in your face, and stab you at the heart: and Judas
like, will offer a kiss^, when they intend to kill: subtle and hollow-hearted,
Mat. 26. 4^
who will undermine you, and do you a mischief, and you shall never know who
hurt you: pestilent and plaguie fellows that meditate deceit: who like
dangerous Curres, will bite and never bark: or like a slaughterman, that will
clawe the Ox on the back, that he may the better lay the beetle on his head.
These are those white Devils, who when they speak fair, believe them not: for
there are seven abominations Pro. 26. 25
in their heart: a false friend is like Solomon's harlot, whose lips drop as an
Prove. 5. 3.
honeycomb, and her mouth is smoother than oil, but her house is the way to
hell, going down to the chambers of death, who will hunt for the precious life.
Now how much better are the Prove. 6. 26.
lashes of a real friend, than the kisses of a foe. Beware! there are none more
quickly ruined, than those who are most secure; remember what Jael did to
Sisera, and if thou desire Judge. 4. 21
to approve thy self Mee^, yet do not like a ^ame fool, run thy neck into every
noose; our Master would have us to learn of Serpents, but to beware Mat. 10. 16
17
of men.

Secondly, sometimes they are too timorous, take heed of timidity, too much
fear will put a man besides his meekness, fear of a danger sometimes causes a
man to fall into the danger he fears.

Fear not big words, nor a blabbing tongue, which like squibs, fire, crack, and
flame, and vanish in an instant, and leave no remembrance that they have been,
but a smoke and a stink.

A lewd tongue, and a loud mouth when they begin to move and open, as if they
would blast and destroy: fear them not, for the most part, though their will be
great, their power is little. In malice they are Giants and Dragons, in might
dwarfes and flies. Like a kind of Serpent, which being full of poison, yet
being toothlesse, hurts none but it self.

And in their reviling they may perhaps do a man more good than they think for;
like one, who smiting another, thinking to kill him, broke his Impostume, and
perfectly cured him.

But here I take it not to be impertinent to offer in an humble advice about
Meekness, to take heed of Mistakes, Lenitude and Remisness of spirit, may not
pass for meekness: for a man to be so devoted to his private safety, as to
give over himself to ease and rest, without respect unto others; that cares not
(so he may be in quiet, live in peace, and sleep in a whole skin) though others
be vexed, troubled and torn; this is not a temper suitable to those Rules of
Christianity which the Gospel lays before us.

Men that care not what becomes Ne praeponas concordiam veritati, sed generose
persistas ad mor tem usque. Chrysostom. in illud Pauli ad Romans quantum in vobis
pacem cum omnibus habentes.
of Religion, let the Church sink or swim, so they may thrive and live free
from trouble. In such a case to part with truth, to purchase peace. is a hard
bargain; and such an one as never enriched the Chapman with gain; unless they
make account that Gods displeasure, and the ruin of their souls will be
advantage; a dear rate to lose Gods protection, and incur condemnation: let no
man enslave his judgment to orher men's opinions; but take courage for the
truth, and whatsoever trouble or loss it may bring, recede not from it. Sin is
the sting of all troubles; pull out the sting, and deride the malice of the
Serpent.

Though it breed anger, and beget hatred and malice; yet nevertheless 1 John
16. 7.
I tell you the truth.

We must not be so far in love with our own tender ease, as not to vindicate
and free the truth, when it is opposed or oppressed, Suppose there may be
danger in this ingenuity; the good Christian forecasteth it not, or regards
it not, for he so fixes his eye upon Gods glory, that he does not so much as
reflect on his own safety, whose thoughts being wholly taken up with zeal to
the common good: leave no room to think of a private danger.

And although wise, and good men are taught highly to value their lives, where
to die is not to obey: yet the assurance of Gods call and protection (when a
man's actions are warranted by the Word) will take away the fear of death which
can never startle him who has this assurance: that being in Gods way, whilst
he is here, God will protect him: and when he goes hence, God will receive him:
and therefore to lose life to preserve the Truth, there cannot be a more
comfortable death. It is the noblest death that can be, to die accompanied with
virtue. Gracious and good men, what have they not said? What have they not
done? What have they not suffered? to vindicate truth: and for the maintenance
of true Religion and virtue. It is a sign of a poor spirit, and argues a
degenerate mind to grow out of love with a discountenanced truth, and to cleave
to some foul error that is in request. Yet in pleading for truth, a decorum
must be kept; an awful reverence, and dutiful obedience to Superiors, whether
in nature or place; for God who highly commends zeal for his Truth, strictly
commands obedience to higher Powers: a reverential distance must be observed
that God be not evil spoken of.

Zeal must be ever accompanied with discretion, respect must be had to time,
and place, and persons: and the whole business must be carried on, with
meekness and modesty; if we cannot have truth, but we must contend for it, it
is best contending with the sword of the Spirit (which is the Word of God)
whetted with prayers and tears. If God and Man stand in competition, the
Resolution is a ruled case (we ought to obey God rather than man:) Rather, in
respect of Acts 5. 26.
the danger that attends the disobeying of either; for it is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living Heb. 10. 31
God. Men can destroy the body, and after that have no more that they can do.
God can cast both Mar. 10. 2
(body and soul) into hell fire.

The fear of loss, or hope of gain, must not so benum the senses, or corrupt
our reason, as to admit a great evil, for a little good. When we see men bold
and busy for error, even to impudence; it is a shame to be lazy, easy, and
so addicted to the enjoyments of ourward peace, that no care be had what
encroachments are made on truth, the truest peace and safety is that, which is
grounded on verity; which the world* can neither give, nor take away.

Their safety, and their quiet, men do prefer, and justly, yet on these, men
set too high a price, when for them they can swallow down any error, change
their profession, be of any religion, betray the truth, and never look toward
them who loved the truth above their lives.

Men then are brutish, when they seek only to live, whose degenerate thoughts
are all for the present supply of back and belly; surely of such, there can be
no safety to the soul, no quiet in the conscience; when as to avoid the
censures of men, they fall into the heavy Judgment of God.

The Meek man then must have a care he suffer not a vice to steal upon his
good nature; for Remissness by no means may pass for Meekness.

And he that is meek indeed had need to be very heedful: his case being much
like that of Ezechiel (to be Ezekiel. 2. 6. Bern. in tractatu de passione Domini.
cap. 19. de Radico Lilii. page 1194. C.
with briers and thorns, and to dwell among Scorpions) the meek man Bernard
fitly resembles to the Church in the Canticles, which is as the Lilly among
thorns. Now the Lilly is a fair and flourishing plant, smooth, gentle,
tractable, easy to be handled; but the sons of Belial are all of them as
thorns, because they cannot be taken with hands, but the man that shall touch
them, must be fenced with iron, and the staff of a spear.

The meek man thus beset (like the Lilly growing among thorns) with the sons
of Belial (enemies to peace) that at every blast threaten to wound and tear
him, must be vigilant for the preservation of himself.

To this purpose S. Paul studious of the safety of the Christians (who lived
amidst their enemies that were incensed against them) well advises, Romans 12.
19. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place Romans 12. 19.
unto wrath, for by this means enemies are either vanquished, or appeased; for
the meek commending himself and his matters unto God, by patience and
forbearance makes God for him, who beholds mischief and spite to requite it
with his own hand, and therefore says the Psalmist, the poor commits
himself unto Psalm. 10. 14.
God, who is the helper of the fatherless. When they curse, God will bless,
for he shall stand at the right Psalm. 109. 28. 31.
hand of the poor, to save his soul from unrighteous Judges; yea, he will break
the power of the ungodly and malicious: bring the counsel of Psa. 10. 15.
the Heathen to naught, and make the devices of the people of none effect. Thus
God undertakes for Psa. 33. 10.
the meek, and under his protection they rest secure; for none can hurt whom
God will help, but God is the helper of the meek; and therefore put on
Meekness, in Munimentum, Ibi requiem invenit mansuetus and simplex, ubi dolosus
opprimitur vel elatus. Bern. super Cant. Sermon. 62. page 752. K.
as a sure defense.

Thirdly, In Ornamentum, a third use of Apparel, is to beautify and adorn the
body. So meekness is the goodliest ornament of the soul, and is that which
renders a man amiable and lovely in his whole life. For modesty in the
countenance, gentleness of carraige, affability of speech, calmness of spirit,
quietness of mind, are loved and commended in all. No platting of hair, wearing
of Gold, or putting on of apparel, is an ornament comparable to that of a meek
and quiet spirit, this has in it a power and sweetness strangely attractive,
and commands all hearts and eyes in the Judgment of Saint Peter. Meekness 1
Pet. 3. 3, 4.
is an excellent grace, which in the heart is tenderness, in the disposition
softness, in the affections temper, in the mind calmnesse, in the carraige
sweetness. Doctor Featley in Clavi Mystica, Sermon. 3. in Matthew. 12. 19. page 35.


The excellence of Meekness is rarely set forth by Tertullian in his book of
Patience in these words.

It strengthens faith, governs peace, helps love, trains up humility, waits for
repentance, seals up confession, rules the flesh, preserves the spirit, bridles
the tongue, contains the hand, suppresses temptations, puts away scandals,
consummates Martyrdom, comforts the Fidem munit: pacem gubernat; dilectionem
adjuvat, humilitatem instruit: poenetentiam expectat, exomologesin adsignat,
carnem regit, spiritum servat linguam fraenat, manum continet, tentationes
inculcat scandala pellit, Martyria consummat, pauperem consolatur, divitem
temperat: infirmum non extendit, valentem non consumit fidelem delectat,
gentilem invitat, servum Domino Dominum Deo commendat, faeminam exornat, virum
approbat: amatur in puero, laudatur in juvene; suspicitur in seen, in omni
sexu, in omni aetate formosa est. Age jam si effigiem habitumque ejus
comprehendamus.
poor, guides the rich, prolongs not sickness, nor destroys health: refreshes
him that believes, invites him that believes not, commends the servant to his
Master, the Master to God: it beautifies the woman, it commends the man: it is
loved in a child, it is praised in a young man, honored in an old: in every
sex, in every age it is lovely. The effigies of meekness by the same Author is
thus set forth.

Her countenance calm and pleasing, her forehead smooth, contracted or drawn
together with no wrincles of grief or anger, her brows not frowning or sullen,
but tempered to a cheerful modesty, with eyes cast down not for any misfortue,
but in Vultus illi tranqu^llus and placidus, frons pura nulla moeroris aut irae
rugositate contracta; remissa aeque in ^aetum modum supercilia, oculis
humilitate, non infoelicitate dejectis. Os taciturn^tatis honor signatum,
color qualis securis and innoxiis: Motus frequens cap^t is in Diabo^^m, and
minax risus. Caeterum am^ctus circum pectora candidus, and co^pori impressus:
ut qui nec instatur, nec inquietatur. Sedet enim in throno spiritus ejus
mitissimi and mansuetissimi qui non turbine glomeratur, non nubilo livet, sed
est tenerae serenitatis, apertus and simplex, etc. Tert. lib. de Patientia.
cap. 15. page 203.
humility; her mouth sealed with the honor of silence, her color and complexion
bewrais her innocence, as one that is secure and fears nothing: she often
shakes her head against the Devil, and her smiles are threatenings.

But her Apparel about her breast is white and close to her body, which no wind
can blow up, nor any motion shake, for she sits in the throne of that most mild
and gentle spirit, which no boistrous storm can shake, nor clouds obscure, for
with her it is ever fair weather, she is simple and plain, thus far Tertullian.

It greatly matters not what some are pleased to speak of Meekness, that it is
for Fools and Cowards, and a note of a poor and meek mind, that it is childish
and effeminate, and no masculine or manlike virtue: And if this were so, then
were Meekness rather a disparagement than an ornament, But that it is not so,
but a virtue well becoming the most wise and valiant is apparent.

First, It is an ornament to the wise, for if Meekness, quietness and
peaceableness had not well become the wise, the wisest man's name should not
have been Solomon (that is pacificus, peaceable;) and the wisdom that is from
above is pure and peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, and full of mercy
says Saint James. and the same Apostle, James 3. 13. Jam. 3. 17.
sets it down as a special note to know a wise man by. Who is a wise man Jam.
3. 13.
and endued with knowledge among you* let him show out of a good conversation
his works with meekness of wisdom. And however the world may account men wise
that know how to fish in troubled waters, and by keeping up a schism in the
Church, or maintaining a faction in the State, do make a party; and weaken a
common Force by dividing it; or that in private affairs knows how to
overreach or over-bear their neighbor, yea may call this wisdom, but not from
above, it is earthly, says Saint James, and which is worse, carnal, sensual
and devilish. So that it is plain, the peaceable, meek and patient man, is the
Jam. 3. 15.
wise man, when all is said; for the less patient or meek a man is, the less
wise he is; anger rests in the bosom of fools, says the Preacher, and in the
24 of his Proverbs at the 29th verse he teaches, that he that is slow Eccle.
7. 9.
to anger is of great understanding; but he that is hasty of spirit exalts
folly. Meekness then is a virtue well-becoming Pro. 14. 29.
a wise man.

Secondly, It is an ornament to the valiant, for rashness and fury, and
revenge, do rather become a fiend of Hell, than a man who is a creature fitted
for society. The Heathens could say it was the mark of a poor spirit to be
touched with injuries: Magni autem animi est proprium, placidum esse
tranquillumque atque injureas atque offensiones semper despicere. Sen. de Chapter
lib. 1. cap. 5. Magni animi est injurias despicere. Sen. de irae lib. 2. 32.
Pro. 16. 32
but a generous and noble mind did trample and contemn them. And therefore let
no man say that Meekness is a want of courage, indeed the Philosopher says,
that anger is the spur of valor, the whetstone of courage. But the greatest
Philosopher that ever was, and best seen in morals in the 16. of his Proverbs
thus sets down. He that is slow to anger, is better than the mighty: and he
that rules his spirit than he that takes a City.

No man, I dare say: will say that David was a coward: he was a sword-man with
a witness; a braver Champion, a stouter man of his hands, and of a more valiant
courage did never tread on Gods earth: for he fought when all Israel feared;
yet David was a Meek and tenderhearted man. My heart is like wax (says he) it
is Psa. 22. 14
melted in the midst of my bowels, yea when that foul-mouthed Shemei reviled
and cursed David to his face: yet 2 Samuel 16 7. Ibid. 11. 12.
he forbad to touch him: let him alone; and let him curse; It may be that the
Lord will look upon mine affliction: and that the Lord will requite good for
his cursing this day. And when Saul who sought after his life, and would be
appeased by none of his good services, when nothing would satisfy the Tyrant
but the blood of that innocent; and when God had delivered him into David's
hand; and his friends and followers persuaded to kill him, yet David would not
consent any violence should be offered 1 Samuel 24. 6.
him. Yea he was so loath at any time to take offense, and so unwilling to give
any, that his heart smote him because he had cut 1 Samuel 24. 5.
off Saul's skirt, surely then! it does not bewray a want of courage to forbear
revenge: Potuisse nocere and nolle magna est gloria. It is the greatest honor
that can be to a man, to let pass occasions of revenge, and every good man will
account it his glory to pass by offenses, and not like many in our Pro. 19. 11
days, who will not suffer the least injury to pass unrevenged, and for mere
trifles, grow out of measure so Quorum praecordia nullis interdum aut levibus
videas flagrantia causis
offended, that the tedious trouble and charge of many years suit can hardly
reconcile them.

And others will redeem the least disgrace with a stream of blood, and cannot
rest, but like men out of their wits take on, until they see their enemy
weltering in his gore. Corpore trunco invidiosa dabit minimus solatia sanguis.
Yea moreover to some, all company is loathsome, all places irksome, and their
own life becomes cumbersome, except they A^ vindicta bonum vita jucundius ipsa.
can be avenged of their enemy.

For being wronged in their reputation they take themselves bound in point of
honor to repair their credit with the life of their Adversary.

How this will hold with the rules of Scripture and of Christian Religion, let
any man who is thoroughly acquainted with either, judge; whereas indeed in the
judgment of the more civil Heathen: this practice is reputed barbarous: there
are other ways for men to right themselves, and repair their honor allowable
both by the laws of God and Man, this of duel and single combat is not. No Man
should dare in such a Case to be his own Carver, and to usurp Gods office; who
by himself or his Ministers does undertake to right all such as suffer wrong.
He that draws his sword in a private quarrel: unless it be to defend himself,
and to secure his own life; Is a Rebel against heaven; and no color or pretense
whatsoever can quit him from bloodguiltiness. I shall need to say no more to
this purpose, seeing it so clearly appears that Meekness may well consist
with Wisdom and Valor, and he is neither wise nor valiant that is not meek.
It is a seemly ornament for all persons, and all professions. And therefore put
on Meekness in Ornamentum as the fairest ornament of a Christian.

Fourthly, in Monumentum, a fourth use of Apparel it serves for distinction,
not of Sexes only, but of callings. So Meekness is the badg of our profession,
the Livery or cognizance of our Christian Religion: by this (says Christ,)
shall all men know that you are my Disciples if you love Joh. 13. 35
one another. And therefore Christ calls his followers sheep, which is a Joh.
10.
gentle, quiet and harmless Creature, and Doves which is an innocent, Mat. 10.
16
Meek and gaule-less Creature. And Mat. 18. 3.
little Children simple without all drifts or aims. And Saint Paul to Mat. 19.
13, 14.
the Romans affirms that he that has not the spirit of Christ is none of his,
Joh. 21. 5.
now no disgrace does touch a man so nere as to say he is none of Christ's, Romans
8. 9.
no Christian; and no Christian he is (St. Paul tells us) that has not the
spirit of Christ, now Christ's spirit is a spirit of Meekness, Matthew. 11. 29.
Learn Mat. 11. 29.
of me (says he) for I am meek, so! Meek a man must be, or a Christian he
cannot be: or if in name yet not in deed: for a Christian Man is a Meek Man.

Those unquiet and turbulent spirits, that like Cadmus Brethren are so enraged
against one another, that they cannot rest whilst they can see one alive, do
show of what generation they are, the seed of the Serpent; by their malicious
cruelty they do declare from whence they are descended; as the Thistle is known
by its pricks, having nothing notable, either beauty or sweetness to commend
it; it would be trod upon without notice but that it discovers it self by
vexing those that touch it.

It is nothing to see Creatures of a savage nature to tear one another: how ill
would it become sheep of the same fold; Doves of the same house, to put on
cruelty and devour one another. And will it not hold as well for Christians of
the same profession, the resemblance is Christ's own; those men are like wolves
and Tigers and snarling Dogs, (not Doves and Lambs) that are clothed with
immanity.

Wrath and Cruelty and Quarrelling is a blemish to the profession of
Christianity: for he that professes the Christian Religion (says Socrates in
the seventh Book and fifteenth Chapter of his Ecclesiastical history) ought to
be a stranger altogether, Etiam omnino ab his qui quae Christi sunt sapiunt,
aliena sunt caedes, pugnae, and quae alia sunt hujusmodi. Socrat. Eccl. hist.
lib. 7. cap. 15.
(that is clearly free) from fighting and quarrelling, and all of the like sort.

And Ambrose in his second Tome the fifth Book of his Orations in the 32.
Epistle, does thus purge himself of his pretended rebellion against the
Emperor, when I am compelled unto it, I am yet to learn what kind of resistance
I shall make. I have learned to sorrow, I can weep, I can sigh against armed
enemies, Soldiers Coactus r^p^gnare non novi, dolere potero, potero flere,
potero gemere adve, sus arma, milites Gothos quoque lacrymae m^ae arma sunt,
talia enim munimenta sunt Sacerdotis, aliter nec debeo, nec possum resistere.
Ambr. Tom. 2. lib. 5. orat. in Ep. 32. page 123.
ers and Goths, also my tears are my weapons: It is meet that such should be
the fortification of one of my profession, otherwise I ought not, I cannot
resist. The Christian (says Tertullian,) is no man's foe, we render Christianus
nullius est hosti^. Tert. ad Scapu. cap. 2. page 130. ibid c^p 4. page 131.
Nulli malum pro malo reddimus, male enim velle, male sac^re, male dicere, male
cogitare de quoquam ex aequo vetamur. Tert. Apol. advers. Gentes. cap. 36. page
66. Si malum malo dispungi penes no^ liceret, etc. Tert. Apol. adversus Gentes.
cap. 37. per totum.
to no man evil for evil. We are forbidden to wish evil, to do evil, to speak
evil, to think evil of any one without exception.

For if it were lawful to return evil for evil, or to wipe out one injury with
another, they were abundantly furnished with all necessaries, both to defend
themselves, and offend their enemies, they wanted neither Men nor Arms, number
nor force sufficient: but that they were restrained by the conscience of their
Religion which taught magis occidi liceret quam occidere. We must lay down the
sword, and take up the Cross and follow Christ. I have somewhere read of a
Bishop of France taken (in the wars) a prisoner by the King, unto whom the Pope
directed a threatening letter, commanding to set him at liberty, and withal,
expostulating how he durst violently detain a son of the Church, unto whom the
King returned a modest Answer, and withal, sent him the Armor the Bishop was
taken in, with this Inscription, Anne haec est tunica filii tui? does the
Church give such liveries to her Children?

The Liverie of the Church of Christ is Meekness: and the good Christian is far
from brables, and will rather suffer evil than do any. Accipere quam faccre
praestat injuriam. M. T. C. T^sc. quaest. lib. 5. (...). Arist. Ethic. lib. 5.
cap. 11.
And it is more comfort to a Christian and honor too to suffer wrong, than in
preventing it or removing it to do wrong. A care therefore should be had that
in seeking ease from the evil of punishment, men burden not themselves with the
evil of sin. For the lightest sin is a greater evil than the heaviest
punishment in the judgment of the Apostle, He that does evil Rom 3. 8.
that good may come of it, his damnation is just. Now to sin to avoid a
punishment, is to do a great evil for a little good: much like to him, who
troubled with a pinching shoe, does pare his foot.

Christian men must bear the reproaches and injuries of the men of the world,
their hearts must not rise, nor their tongues rail, nor their hands violently
attempt any thing against their enemies: but they must fairly and gently lay
their faults before them, that they may see their error and repent of it: and
if they will not be reformed, lawful remedies when they can be had, may be
used; and in the mean time they are to be pityed and prayed for, till they can
be brought to a sober reckoning; and this is the Meek man's way, and by this he
is known to be what indeed he is, an honest man, and a good Christian.

But can any man think, or will any man say the sour faces, the disfigured
countenances, the rude behavior, uncivil carraige, and railing speeches,
choleric fumes, resisting 2 Timothy 3. 8
the truth, men of corrupt minds, no judgment, little honesty, whose folly is
manifest to all men, are these the marks whereby Christ's sheep are known? or
must such fellows as these carry away the note of perfection, whilst all sober
men, and all others besides themselves, must lie under the rubbish of a sinful
condition?

These kindle the coals of contention, throw about their firebrarnds, fly in
the faces of all that contradict them, clamor against Magistracy and Ministry
with open mouth, as Jannes 2 Timothy 3. 8
and Jambres resisted Moses, so do they; they despise dominion, speak evil of
dignities, raging waves of the sea, foming out their own shame, murmurers, Jude
8. Jud 8. 13, 16.
complainers, crying down Ministers, Sabbaths, Sacraments, Churches, all Order
and Government (as the Edomites did Jerusalem) raze it, raze it even to the
foundation thereof. And of these men there Ps. 137. 7.
are different sects, but although they have their heads turned diverse ways,
and be divided in their judgments and opinions, yet like Samsons foxes, they
are tied together by the tails, Judge. 15. 4.
and in their ends and aims they all agree.

Is this the effect and fruit of that Third Testament, that law of love, that
eternal Gospel (as they are pleased to call it) the product of the holy Ghost
in these last days? as these Phanaticks dream, but I leave these vain men.

It is a sad thing to consider what stirs and broils there have been in the
Christian world for very trifles: unto what height and heat the contention has
grown amongst persons of note and eminency for learning and piety about things
of little moment, which would never have been, had there been Meekness: for
where Meekness is, there will be a quietness of heart, a calmness of spirit,
a teachablenesse, a tractablenesse, an easiness to be persuaded, there will be
patience, humility, and a fear and tenderness of offending.

For want of Meekness what lamentable rents have been in the Church of Christ
in former times: not only about things indifferent, (the Eastern Church
following one custom Read Eus. and So^. their Ecclesiastical histories.
and the Western another, opposing each other with greatbitterness).

But also about things merely mistaken, the contention has grown so hot between
the Greek and Latin Churches, that the Christian world was like to be torn in
pieces for a mistake of words: the Greeks judging the Latins Sabellians: and
the Latins the Greeks Arrians: had not this difference been seasonably composed
by Athanasius.

In latter times what contentions have arisen in the Churches of Germany,
Sweden, Denmark, France, Helvetia, about the ubiquitarie presence,
predestination, losing and not losing of grace, etc. Which were much increased
by writing and disputing, that might have happily been ended by a friendly
Mediation, if in a meek way the meaning of both parties had been thoroughly
sifted.

And in these latter days what fearful rents have been, and are still amongst
us, he has no mind that considers not: no heart that condoles not: Quis talia
fando temperet a lacrymis? who can keep the Rivers of tears within the banks of
their eyes? whose heart does not bleed, whose spirit is not broken, (and who in
the anguish of his soul, could not wish each pore of his body, an eye; that
every eye might weep, for brinish bloody tears) when he seriously thinks of the
miserable distractions that are amongst us? the land is divided, Lord heal the
sores of it, for Psa. 60. 2.
it shakes. Oh could we but rightly lay to heart the mischiefs of our
divisions, how odious to God; how pernicious to Religion. Alas that the Church
of Christ should be so rent about certain accidentals, immaterials,
unnecessaries: when there is agreement in fundamentals and such points as are
essential to salvation; away with those contentions that occasion shame and
loss to both sides. And let us endeavor to quench those flames which have
already burnt down so many and so worthy parts of the house of God.

When Meekness has been laid aside, and cruelty put on, what lamentable
combustions have been in the Christian World? what fury did Satan send up, to
animate Nation? against Nation: and in the same Nation one man against another;
the mischiefs of an intestine War (occasioned for want of Meekness) the
Ruins of Germany evidently speak, and I would I might have sought an instance
at so great a distance, and not found one nearer home, even in the bowels of
this Kingdom, What divisions have there been? What seditions have been moved?
What fractions have been raised? The glistering sword, whose face flashes forth
lighting of terror, has passed through the land, wasting and destroying: the
sad Calamities of a Civil War are better known than that I should spend time
to repeat them.

Alas! what has any Kingdom gained at any time by this way, besides spilling
the blood, and spoiling the goods of the unhappy people. And it terrifieth me
to Remember how many flourishing Empires and Kingdoms, have been by means of
such Contentions, either torn in pieces with intestine division, or subdued to
foreign Princes, under pretense of assistance and aid! And our own Chronicles
make mention how sore this Kingdom has been shaken with these dangerous evils.
The Barons wars, and the wars between the Houses of York and Lancaster.
And yet neither the examples of other Countries, nor miseries of their own are
sufficient to make men beware; and you shall ever observe it of any Nation,
that then it begins to be miserable, when it ceases to be obedient. Rebellion
puts an end to the prosperity, and gives beginning to the misery of any people.

(...). Theophilact. Com. in Ep. ad Romans 13. 1. Let us then beseech the God of
mercy that he would send down from Heaven a spirit of Meekness, and raise up
on earth able and fit Instruments to make up the breaches, and to quiet the
distractions that are amongst us, to cure the wounds and heal the hurt of the
Daughter of his Jer. 6. 14.
People.

For let me tell the World, tedious suites and bloody Wars are a scandal to
the Christian Riligion. It were a great deal more comely (thinks our Apostle)
to put on Meekness, to suffer wrong, and to sustain harm. Yet I would not be 1
Cor. 6. 7.
mistaken, as if my meaning were to deprive men of the benefit of that means
which God has ordained to right such as are wronged, for the Romans 13. 2
Magistrate is the Minister of Gods ordinance.

For the preservation of men's lives, honors and estates: as well by force of
Arms, as suites of law.

Yet no suite of law must be commenced but with Meekness, in love and charity:
no wars begun but by the Command of a lawful Authority. And in both, in suits
of law and feats of Arms, justice, not malice must bear the sway: and not the
fury of unruly passion, but the wholesome direction of rectified reason should
govern our affairs. The Lord of Hoasts is the God of peace, and thither should
suites and war tend, to gain a more safe, honorable and settled peace.

A Christian man should study to be quiet, his desire and his endeavor both
should be for quietness and peace, If it be possible as much as in you lies,
live peaceable with all men: Romans 12. 18.
But if men will be so quarrelsome, so froward and contentious, that nothing
will persuade them to peaceableness: and that our cause is much like that of
David's, to dwell amongst those that are enemies to peace, that when we speak of
peace they are for war. If we do what in us lies, and what is Ps. 120 7.
possible for us to do, and yet they will not be quiet, nor abate any thing of
their savage nature, we may implore the aid of heaven, and pray the God of
peace to assist us against the Enemies of peace, and then let God arise and let
his enemies Psa. 68. 1.
be scattered; let them also that hate him, flee before him.

In persuading to Meekness then, the Apostle never meant to deprive men of
lawful remedies against wrongs and injuries, when in a fair way with moderation
and Meekness men seek to right themselves. But only to let men know how well
it becomes Christian men to be gentle and mild, and to prosecute their
affairs not with rigor and severity, but with Meekness, by such proceedings
giving men to understand that reformation, not revenge is aimed at.

And as this is the proper garb of a Christian, so amongst Christians it best
becomes

Magistrates and Ministers.
Mildness does well become a Chritian Magistrate, who should order his actions
according to Reason, not after his Passion. Clemency (says Symsius) is (...),
a virtue meet for a Prince, whose royal disposition is better known by gracious
remissions, than rigotous exactions. The Orator praising Caesar, above all,
commends Nihil est tam p^pulare quam bonitas: nulla de virtutibus tuis plurimis
n^c gratior nec admirabilior miserecordia, nihil habet fortuna tua majus qam ut
possis: n^c natura tua melius quam ut velis conservare quam plurimos. Cicero
Orat. vol. 3. in Orat. p^o Q* Ligario in fine.

Invitus invito cum chartamprotulisset traderetque exclamasti vellem nescire
literas. Sen. in lib. 2. de Clem. c. 1.


him for his Clemency, that his fortune had nothing greater than that he had
power, his nature nothing better, than that he had will to save many; and the
Philosopher does not only commend, but even admire the rare temper of that
Prince, who importumed by one of his Officers to subscribe a Bill against
certain malefactors, after some delays, being urged to sign the writing, he
much against his will, took the paper, and cried out, I would I knew not how to
write. And Theodosius the younger, when it was demanded of him why he would not
punish utinam mihi liceret, and mortuos ad vitam revocan^.
some capital offenses, made answer, I would it were in my power to restore
life to the dead.

And the clemency of those Magistrates is worthy to be remembered, who deferred
the execution of such persons (that by their Laws were condemned to die) for
certain days, that in the interim enquiry might be made, whether any thing
could be found in favor of them, that they might be spared.

Moses the best Magistrate that ever was, was the meekest man that ever Number.
12. 3.
was; and it is written of the Kings of Israel, that they were merciful 1 Kin.
20. 3
Kings. Magistrates are Gods upon Hsal. 82. 6.
earth, and it cannot be denied but they are the best Magistrates that come
nearest to the example of God; now God is loving to every one, and his tender
mercies are over all his works. The Bees (it is said) Psa. 14. 9
amongst themselves do exercise a certain discipline, and have the form of a
Commonwealth, and amongst Insignis Regis forma, dissimilisque caeteris tum
magnitudine, tum intore hoc tamen maxim distinguitur iracundissimae and pro
corporis capt^^ pagnasissimae sunt apes, and acculeos in vuln^re relinquunt:
Rex ipse sine aculeo est noluit illum natura nec sae^um esse, nec ultionem
magno constitutam petere: telamque detraxit, and iram ejus in ermem reliquit.
Sen. de Clem. lib. 1. cap. 19.
them there is a Master Be, whom all the rest do follow as their King, yet
this Be is without a sting; even nature teaches the chief Magistrate to be
gentle and gracious, and it will turn much to his advantage, for in being such,
he shall be more safe, more honored, and better obeyed.

1. More safe he shall be, the peoples Regibus certior est ex Mansuetudine
securitas. Sen. de Clem. lib. cap. 8. Unum est inexpugnabile munimentum amor
civium. Sen. de Cle. lib. 1. cap. 19.
love is the Princes greatest safety, and this is procured, and maintained with
gentleness and humanity, the wisest and the greatest Princes have left to the
world many notable examples Qui Clementes suere maxima ex part usque, ad seros
annos tuto vixeerunt. Bapt. Campoful. in lib. 5. exempl. Illius magn^tudo
stabilis, fundataque est, qu^m omnes tam supra se esse quam prose sciunt. Sen.
de Clem. lib. 1. cap. 3
of their Clemency, whereby they have established their throne, and made their
Empires more firm and lasting, illius magnitudo stabilis fundataque est, his
Majesty is sure and permanent whom men are persuaded is for them as well as
above them, who watches for their welfare, whose presence begets in his
subjects a love as well as reverence, not flying from him, but running to him
as to an Asylum or Sanctuary; such an one they ought to esteem as the breath of
their nostrils, worth ten thousand of themselves.

2. He shall be more honored for his Clemency, it is the most precious Jewel
in the Crowns of Princes, an addition to their greatness, has in it a majesty
as well as sweetness, which not allures only, but awes. A Clement Prince is an
object for love and wonder to stand amazed at, unto whom all men tanquam ad
Clarum a^ beneficum sidus certatim advolant, Titus cognomine paterno amor ac
deliciae humani generis. C. Suetoni. Tran. de vita Ti^i. vesp. 12. Caesar. quid
pulchrius quam viv^re optantibus cunctis. Sen. de Clem. lib. 1. c. 19.
can there be a greater honor than was that of Titus, to be the darling of the
world? What can be more honorable, than to live with the good liking of all?
whose life is tendered as a common benefit of mankind, whose death is the fear
of al, the hope of none, whose presence is desired as some Celestial
influence, and whose person is beheld with almost a divine veneration, for he
that comes nearest to God in his clemency and moderation, why should he not be
next to God in our love and estimation?

3. He shall be better obeyed: Rigor and severity is an unsafe and an
unpleasant way to keep the people in their obedience. Man is a sociable
creature, and is easilyer led, than drawn. The will of man is sooner tamed with
advised following, than rash resisting. Besides the clemency of the Magistrate
makes the subject Verecundiam peccandi, facit ipsa Clementia regentis. Sen. de
Clem. lib. 1. c. 22. Remissius imperanti melius paretur. Sen. de Clem. lib. 1.
c. 24.
a shamed to offend, for he must needs be accounted extremely bad, whom a
Magistrate inclined to pity, does punish. Therefore the saying of the
Philosopher is to be approved, who says, The people will be best ruled, when
they are mildly governed. Yet a care must be had that the Magistrate be not too
remiss in punishing, for some if they shall perceive the reins of government to
be stackened like a mettal'd horse, they will overthrow the Rider. It is better
to live under a rigid government where no man dare do any thing, than in an
Anarchie, where any man dare do all things. It is likely to go ill with the
good, when bad men Principis erga sccleratos len^tas, est in bonos crudelitas.
Cic. 3. offic.
may do what they will; clemency to the bad, is cruelty to the good: it is the
duty of a good Magistrate to stop the mouth of wickedness, and to vindicate a
wronged innocence. The discreet Magistrate will wisely distinstuish, he will
make a difference, that honest me^ be not discouraged, and the hands of the
wicked strengthened.

When wickedness is grown exemplary, and wickd men incorrigible, the
Magistrate must deal with them as the Chyrurgeon with an unsound Immedicabile
vulnus ense recidendum ne pars sincera trabatur Quia melius est paucorum
supplicio universos eximi quam, in omnes vindicari. Ambros.
member, cut it off lest it endanger the whole body; for it is better that one
member perish, than that the whole body should be ruined, the safety of many is
to be preferred before the pleasure of one: seasonable justice prevents many
mischiefs, which after knows no remedy but patience; lenity in some cases is
cruelty.

But as the Chyrurgeon in cutting off a member, or searching of a wound, is
deaf to the complaints of his patient, and heeds not his tears nor his cries,
till he have done his work. So the good Magistrate, though never so meek, does
stop his ears to the cries Anus and mulierculae sunt, quae lachrimis
nocentissimorummoventur. Senec. de Clem. lib. 2. cap. 5 Aut ut eum quempunit,
emendet: aut ut paena ejus coeteros melio^sreddat: aut ut sublatis malis
securiores coeteri vivant. Sen. de Clem. lib. 1. cap. 22. C^udeles sunt qui
puni^ndi causam haben^, mo^um, non hab^nt. Sen. de Clem. lib. 2. c. p. 4.
of the guilty: It is for women and children to be moved with the tears and
sufferings of desperate and incorrigible offenders.

The Magistrate then is meek and merciful, not, that punishes not at all; but
with justice and due moderation, and that having just cause to punish, has
respect both to the measure, and to the end. Respect must be had to the
measure, for some there are who having cause to punish, know no mean in
punishing, but proceed to that height that man's nature is dishonored in a
personal suffering.

2. Respect must be had to the end, and that is, first the reformation, not
destruction of the delinquent: for a difference must be made between the sin
and the sinner, the person and his fault; let the fault be corrected, butlet
the person be spared, and so punish, that the sin may be destroyed, and the
sinner saved.

A second end of punishing the guilty, is for the example of others, that they
may fear and beware lest they fall into the same condemnation, jungantur in
culpa non separentur in poena. It is the rule of justice, that they who are
guilty of the same offense, should partake of the same punishment.

A third end of punishing, is that the evil being removed and take out of the
way, the rest may live the more securely; for when the wicked perish, the
righteous increase, Prove. Pro. (...)
28. 28.

For as the painful husbandman does gather out the weeds that the Corn may
grow the better, and cuts off the superfluous and dead branches of his trees
and vines, that they may bear fruit the better; so does the good Magistrate
deal with such men, whom he shall find to be pernicious Glementia sua
severi^atem sententiae temperavit. Hieron, in Lacam. 18. 27. Vt fulmina
paucorum periculo cadunt, omnium metu; sic animadversiones magna um potestatum
terrent latius quam nocent. Sen de Clem. lib. 1. c. 8. Su^^ma par. simonia
etiam vilissimi sanguinis. Sen. de Clem. lib. 1. cap. 1.
and unprofitable to the Commonwealth.

And thus as Justice has respect unto the cause, so has Clemency regard unto
the measure, and to the end; for the Magistrate, like the Surgeon, should have
an Eagles eye, a Lions heart, but a Ladies hand; skill and courage, but withal
tenderness and gentleness.

For the threats of the Magistrate should be like thunder, which afrights many
with the noise, hurts few with the stroke, and therefore the Magistrare has
the sword carried before him in the sheath (ferrum vagina reconditum) and is
not to be drawn but upon weighty occasion, they must be sparing of blood, even
of the most vile. And now you have heard that meekness is a garment meet for
the Magistrates wear.

Secondly, mildness does well become the Minister; the Prophet says of God,
Thou Lord art good and gracious, and of great kindness to all Psalm. 86. 5.
that call upon thee. Rigor and severity will ill become the servant when his
Lord is gentle and f^ll of courtesy; the Ministers of the Gospel are to be
followers of Christ, and he was a Lamb for meekness: for were a Minister never
so well gifted, and had the tongue of men and Angels, if he have not meekness
and charity, all is nothing; and therefore 1 Cor. 13. 1
Saint Paul's advice is, let all things be 1 Cor. 16 14.
done in love: and his practice was the same: for them with whom he had to
deal, the people under his charge, how gently did he handle them! how kindly
did he entreat 2 Cor. 10. 2 2 Cor. 2. 8 2 Cor. 6. 1.
them: request them: praying them: exhorting them with all earnestness, 2 Cor.
10. 1
beseeching them; and so often as he speaks unto them, it is in all
tenderdernesse as a father to his children; 2 Cor. 6. 13
in all things so behaving himself, that his care toward them in the 2 Cor. 7.
12
sight of God might appear.

When a point of doctrine is to be delivered, he will have that done with a
kind affection, follow the truth in love: when sin is to be reproved, Ephesians. 4.
15.
that must be done in tender compassion. I have often told you, and now tell
Phil. 3. 18.
you weeping.

When any abuse is to be reformed, he will have it done with a gentle
moderation; If any man be overtaken with a fault, ye which are spiritual
restore such an one with the spirit of meekness: And we were gentle amongst
Gal. 6. 1.
you (says the Apostle) even as a nurse cherishes her children; for a nurse
to quiet her infant, cum dabit 1 These. 2. 7
verbera, ostendit ubera, shows the breasts, when she shakes the rod. Saint
Paul to the Corinthians, the first Ep. 1 Cor. 4. ult.
the fourth Chapter, at the last verse, Shall I come unto you (says he) with
the rod, or in love, and in the Spirit of meekness; for the good Minist^r,
like David's shepherd, has a rod as well as a staff. A rod of correction,
Psalm. 23.
as well as a staff of consolation; A staff to uphold the weak, a rod to beat
down the wicked. For the Minister, if occasion be, may, and ought to use
sharpness, according to the power which the Lord has given to edification,
and not to destruction. 2 Cor. 13. 10.


When Christ was transfigured on the mount, there appeared with him Moses and
Elias. Moses the giver of the Law, the meekest man alive. Elias a revealer of
the Gospel, a man full of zeal and fervencie. The severity of the Law required
a gracious dispencer, and therefore it was given in the hand of a Mediator; but
the Grace of the Gospel requires a zealous Minister.

The Word of God is a precious treasure, but the Ministers of this Word are but
earthen vessels, men of like infirmities and passions with your selves (as
Saint Paul said) we have this treasure in earthen vessels, and as the liquor
relishes of the vessel, so amidst the divine graces of the holy Spirit, aliquid
humani intervenit, there is some relish of humane passions and affections;
hence we see some of Gods ablest servants, his best Ministers, sometimes too
passionate and hasty, and sometimes too remiss and slow: and therefore as the
slow are to be excited and quickened, so are the hasty to qualify their
natural sharpness with gentleness and moderation. Peter was a mild man,
filius Jonae, the son of a Dove, and therefore had James and John joined with
him who were Boanerges, sons of thunder.

Paul on the other side was of a ta^t and sharp nature, and had for his
companion, Barnabas, a son of consolation.

The Minister of the Word, has a word of terror for the obstinate and
stubborn, a word of comfort for such as are poor and penitent; to the one he
comes like Elias in a whirlwind Natura con tumax est humanus animus and
incontrarium atque arduum intens: scquitur que facilius quam ducitur. Sen. de
Clem. lib. 1. c. 2. 4 2 Pet. 3. 9. 1 Timothy 24. ^ Ez. 33. 11. Ez. 18. 23. Joel.
2. 13. Mat. 5. 48. 1 Pet. 5. 10.
to beat him down; to the other he comes like Noah's Dove, with the Olive branch
of peace in his mouth to raise him up: to the one he is the savor of death
unto death: to the other of life unto life.

Yet what ever their condition be, the Ministar of the Gospel is to preach
Repentance, and to offer Grace to all that will accept it, and this is to be
done with all gentleness, for the will of man is naturally stubborn, and
therefore sweetly to incline it, and gently to move it, is the best means
effectually to persuade it, which otherwise will become invincible by any
terrors or threats of death or judgment, there is no more ready way to snatch a
man out of the hand of sin, and to make him willing to run the way of Gods
Commandments, then to preach the Word in meekness, for is not God the Father,
the Father of mercy? not willing that any should perish, but that all should
come to repentance, who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the
knowledge of the truth: He desires not the death of a sinner, but is gracious
and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, forgiving sins and
iniquities; and are we not called to the imitation of our heavenly Father, to
be like him in this particular, in patience and meekness, and tenderness of
compassion? God the Son is the God of all grace, the very character of
meekness, who would not break the bruised reed, nor quench the Mat. 12. 20
smoking flax. Who came not to destroy men's lives but to save them. Not Luke
9. 56.
to beat down, but to build up the brokenhearted, when he comes it is like
Isa. 61. 1.
dew upon a fleece of wool, or like rain Psa. 72 6.
upon the mown grass. And the same mind Saint Paul would have in us all, Phil.
2. 5.
that was in him.

God the holy Ghost he is the Comforter, the God of all consolation that
breaths inward comfort into the soul, whose working is very secret and
insensible, but with great efficacy, powerful, sweet and unspeakable. The God
of love and unity he is, and delights to be where men live in peace and amity,
appeared to Christ in the shape of a Dove, and Mat. 3.
works in all that are Christ's the properties of a Dove: meekness,
gentleness, simplicity and innocence; and if there were no more, this is
sufficient; the united examples of the three persons, Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, to work us to this gracious practice of meekness in our callings, and
Saint Paul shows that the servant of the Lord must be no striker, but gentle
toward all men, apt to teach, suffering the evil men patiently, Instructing
them with meekness that are contrary minded, if God at any time will give them
repentance that they may know the truth. It 2 Timothy 2. 25.
is sure our Tribe has met with many discouragements, strong oppositions, what
dealings they have found, let Saint Luke speak Acts 13. 45. where Act. 13. 45,
46.
he brings in the Jews speaking against Saint Paul, contradicting and
blaspheming, putting from them the word of God, and judging themseves unworthy
of everlasting life. Of such the Apostle has passed his sentence, he that
troubles you shall bear his judgment, whosoever he be. Wherefore (...). 10.
let Ministers, who suffer according to the will of God patiently wait upon the
Lord, and commit themselves to him in well doing, meekly attending the
manifestation of that mercy which God will in due time reveal, Pro. 22. 23
will plead their cause, and spoil the soul of them that spoiled them. And now
you have heard Meekness is a garment meet for the Ministers wear.

^astly, It is a Garment for every man's wear, of what condition soever he be;
if he be poor, meekness will make him patient and content with his poverty; if
he be rich, meekness will make him humble, and thankful to God for his wealth;
if he be wise and learned, meekness will make him sober and moderate; and if he
be given to be angry, meekness will make him discreet and temperate, if a man
have offended, meekness will make him penitent, and if he be innocent, meekness
will make him peaceable and quiet. If a man be reviled, injured, persecuted,
afflicted, meekness will make him silent, or speaking to pity, or to pray for
the slanderous and injurious. And if he be praised, or honored, meekness will
make him modest, gentle, not proud nor puffed up.

You percieve how much it concerns every man, in whatsoever condition he is
in, to get meekness; which, that he may do

somewhat he must labor for. somewhat he must beware of.
Of those things he must labor for.

The First is humility: For where humility is, there will be meekness; an
humble heart is the proper habitation of a meek spirit. He that is humble will
look into himself, and understanding upon enquiry what a poor thing himself is;
will learn to deny himself and acknowledge his defects, imperfections,
sinfulness, the dangers and miseries he is liable unto, will have a mean
opinion of himself.

Will not despise or envy men.

Will not murmr or repine against God.

But will account the meanest of Gods mercies too great, and too good for him,
and will be contented with that portion, God in his providence shall deal out
unto him whatsoever it be.

The Second thing he must labor for; is love and charity, for where these are,
there will be meekness.

If there be any thing said. If there be any thing done.
that is capable of a good construction; Charity will give it.

Where there is Peace and Unity; Charity will seek to maintain them.

Where there are differences and distractions, Charity will labor to compose
them.

Where any thing is amiss, Charity will seek to amend it; for want of which
Charity, what woeful rents and breaches have there been, even amongst Brethren.
Witness the falling out between Paul and Barnabas, Act. 15. 39
Chrysostom and Epiphanius, between Hierome and Russinus, Eustathius Zozom.
Eccl. his. lib. 8. ca^. 15. Socrat. Eccl. hist. lib. 6. cap. 14. H^i mihi qui
vos alicub^, simul inveuire non possum, forte ut nunc moveor -- ne ^de vob^^ ea
scribendo spargat is, quae quando^^e concordes d^l^re non poteritis. Aug. Ep.
15. Zozom. hist. Ecc'es. lio. 2. cap. 18. Socrat. Eccl. hist. lib. 1. cap. 24.
and Eusebius.

And those hot contentions between the Lutherans and Calvenists, the
Remonstrants and Contraremonstrants. How have these contentitons been heightened
and aggravated which might have been happily reconciled, if each side would
have laid aside all prejudice, and met together in charity with Meekness.

Thirdly, Labor for a good conscience, not scrupulous to take offense, but
tender to give offense.

A Conscience misinformed is a blind guide, such, like the Ponticks in the Moon
light, will fight with Per errorem long cadentes u^bras suas quasi hostium
corpora petebant. Luc. ^^o. de Bell. Pontico. Isa. 5. 20.
their own shadows: troublesome they are and unsatisfied; and will be
contented with no Religion: except such as is after the module they have set up
in their addle-heads. With some (all unlawful both opinions and practices shall
go for Conscience.) Affection and the stiffness and unflexibleness of their own
wills: conjectures and opinions how are men carried away with, and Conscience
must bear out all. Men who never made Conscience of any thing, yet if it come
to be questioned, wherein they are concerned or interested, they will evade a
duty so far as the pretense of Conscience will serve their turn.

Now let any man judge what effects the granting liberty of conscience is likely
to produce. Isa. 5. 20.


Rashness shall go for resolution, faction for zeal, good for evil, and evil
for good; and grossest absurdities shall be palliated under Conscience.

To instance in some particulars the conscience of truth, take truth for
religion. Then the truth of religion there is nothing more to be laid to
Conscience.

Yet that may not pass for truth of Religion, which some men will take up and
stand upon, if it be fundamen^^^ admit not the variation of a letter ^^ hold
fast to it, recede not from it, contend earnestly for it.

But if it be otherwise, a circumstantial truth only, of little moment, some
logomachia, some trifle Modicis ac valde minut is causis inter vos contenditis,
Eus. de vita Constan. lib. 2. in Ep. Constable. ad Alex. and Arium Number aequum sit
ut propter modicas quasdam ac vanas verborum inter nos contentationes frater
fratri, etc. ibid. Tam ^xilibus and nullo modo necessariis d^ causis int^r nos
dim c^mus. ibid. aliqua de re lepicula. Romans 1. 18.
of small concernment, lay not this to conscience: better an unnecessary truth
be lost, than the unity of the Church, detain not the truth of God in
unrighteousness.

Repute not that zeal which is passion, in matters of lesser moment, it is
Christian prudence to prefer peace, and far better it is for the glory of God,
and edification of the Church to be quiet than contend. A man to act according
to conscience at all times is not warrantable; for truth, though it must never
be denied, is not always to be declared.

Besides God is above conscience, and God has set us Rules to act by, and if
we leave Gods Rule to follow our own humor, this some will call conscience,
but such an one as must first be mortified, then Reformed.

And what is more usual than to pretend conscience, when other matters are
intended. Hypocrisy is a painted Sepulcher; what is more usual then to paint
over a rotten heart with a zealous mouth, Absolons vow See D^. Hal.
is his Mask for his Conspiracy against David, and Jezabels fast is hers for
destroying Ahab. The Hypocrite under pretense of Religion has other aims than
Gods service, and only makes Religion for which he seems so hot, a
Stalking-horse to his own ends.

The greatest villainies that ever the Sun saw, have been committed under
pretense of Religion and Conscience: What will men be ashamed? What will men be
afraid to do? that in a bad cause dare appeal to God and Conscience; to say
nothing of the waiwardness of a scrupulous and misinformed conscience; all that
I shall say, is to wish all men by all means to labor to inform their
consciences aright, which will lead them in their way with calmness and
quietness, get a good conscience and that is the way to Meekness.

Fourthly, Labor for Unity, for where that is, there will be meekness; this
Unity is spiritual, (so St. Paul calls it) the unity of the spirit. For if one
spirit do animate all, and act in all; All will be as the primitive Christians
were, and as Saint Paul would have all Christians to be, Act. 2. 1.
of one mind and of one heart.

Where men are divided in their minds, there is, dissension.

They think otherwise, and as they think, so they teach, and teach so because
they consent not.

Where men are divided in their 1 Timothy 6. 3.
hearts, they are estranged in their affections, and there is discord.

So where there is division, there is dissension and disoord.

And what meekness can there be where these are?

Whereas being one in mind and heart; there will be Kindness and Gentleness to
teach other, for thus united they will conspire together for the welfare of
each other; and will help one another, and forbear one another, and bear with
one another, and be kindly affectionated one toward another, will love one
another, and do good to one another, for where is unity, every one partakes of
the benefit of any one.

This spiritual unity is of two kinds:

An unity of faith; and, An unity of order.
For thus all joined together in one by a spiritual bond a religious knot; (for
Religion they say comes a Religando) because it fastens and ties all in one:
the body to the head, and the members one to another, so the Dictam esse
Religionem quod quasi in fascem Domini vincti and religati sumus. Hicron.
Diximus Religionis nomen a vinculo pietatis esse deductum; quod hominem sibi
Deus religaverit and pietate constrinxerit. Lact. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 28.

Hoc vinculo pietatis obstricti Deo and religati sumus, unde ipsa religio nomen
accepit. idem ibid.

Religio dicta est, eo quod per eam uni soli Deo religamus animas nostras, ad
cultum divinum animo serviendi. Isidor. lib. 8. Etym.

Religio est, qua si anima uni Deo unde se peccato seperaverat reconciliatione
ligat. August. lib. de quantitate animae.

Romans 12. 5. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. Ephesians. 4. 5.


Apostle, we being many are one body in Christ. Now of these two unities we
shall first enquire how the unity of faith tends to meekness. That faith is
one Saint Paul puts it out of Question, there is but one faith.

For as there is but one common Jude 3. Tit. 1. 4. 2 Pet. 1. 1.
salvation that any man can hope for. So is there but one common faith which
every man must profess alike Joh. 2. 22. Mar. 1. 15. 2 These. 2. 12, 13. 1 Timothy
4. 3.
precious in all.

This faith is one, as having one divine truth for the general obj^ct of Act.
20. 21. Gal. 2 16. Gal. 3. 26. Ephesians. 3. 12, 17. Rev. 14. 12. Joh. 11. 27 and 14.
1. Act. 8 37. and 16 31. Joh. 1. 11. Romans 3. 26. 1 John 5. 1, 5, 10.
it.

And one Lord Jesus Christ for the special object of it.

The general object of faith which is the Gospel is a Doctrine of meekness.

The special object of faith (which is Christ) is an example of meekness.

So, that where true faith is, there must necessarily be meekness.

For as faith unites the soul unto God by the band and conscience of Religion;
so does it unite one to another by the band of love.

But where men are divided in their faith, and one takes this for truth,
another that, and a third denies both, for many men many minds, Jer. 2. 28.
Jer. 11. 13
who multiply their faiths, as Judah her Gods.

And whilst every one strives to make good his opinion to the prejudice of
another, they heap all the contumelies and reproaches, upon their adversary
they can devise, and for want of better Arguments, will disparage his Doctrine
by disgracing his person; this is the usual course men take when they divide
themselves from the truth, and want Reason and Scripture to support their
error: and no marvail though their foul mouths be opened against the Orthodox,
(whom like Beagles they pursue with opon cry) when they open their mouths
against God, his case is the same with Gods; because God and he maintain the
same cause; and therefore the Psalmist prayed, Arise O God, plead thine own
cause, remember how the foolish man Psa. 74. 22
reproaches thee daily. Who knows not that Heresies make men insolent, proud
and stubborn, speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after them, by whom
the way of truth is evil spoken of. It has ever been the fate of truth to meet
with opposition, (veritas odium) am I become your enemy because I tell you the
truth, says our Apostle, truth is fallen in the street, and Christ when Isa 59.
14.
he comes* shall be find faith upon earth? many false faiths, but true faith
is but one.

It is a sure rule, to set up a multitude of Gods, is to destroy the true one;
for he is not if he be not one, Faith is, as God is, but one, yet although it
be unica, it is to be lamented it should be sold.

Great contention there is on all hands, some for the truth, and some against
it; yet there is none so far carried away with a liking of error, but pretends
truth, they so cloak and conceal their error, that there may be a show, some
appearance and probabilities of truth, their doctrine is the doctrine of
Devils, and therefore had need of sophistication to make it either plausible or
passible.

For lying in wait to deceive, all their engines are set on work, to work men
to a belief of that which is false. They speak lies in hypocrisy 2 These. 1. 11
(says the Apostle). Knowing that the simple never put it to the question,
swallows all, takes upon trust, and with Salomons fool believes Pro. 14. 15.
every word.

And some that would be accounted wise, (whether for private interest, or
personal engagements, or what other particular concernment I enquire not) are
infatuated with the spirit of error: for not receiving the love of the truth,
that they might be saved.

God sends them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie; they 2 These.
2. 11.
dote on error, and will be miserable in despite of pity. We read in Saint
Austin, in the first of his meditations, what he speaks of the Quam vehementi
and acri dolor indignabar manichaeis, and miserebar eos rursus, quod essa
sacramenta and illa medicamenta rejicerent and insani essent adversus
Antidotumqua sani esse potuissent.
Manichies raging against the Sacraments, in this case the Meekness of one side
must cure the madness of the other.

Could they err with sobriety, keep themselves within the bounds of
moderation; and be ready to lay aside their error, when they are convinced of
it, somewhat might be said in favor of them; but when that which with great
peremptorinesse they have rashly taken up, with much pertinacie and
stubbornness they will obstinately maintain, and desperately with bitterness
fly in the faces of such as contradict them, admonish them, or would reduce
them; when by their indefatigable and unwearied wiles they corrupt and ensnare
the minds of the simple; and compass sea and land to make a Proselite; it is
high time that such be dealt with, as Seducers, and destroyers of silly souls.
Toward unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, Saint Paul directs Titus how
to behave himself, to rebuke them sharply; and in the Acts Saint Luke tells us
how Saint Paul handled Tit. 1. 10. Acts 13. 10
Elimas the Sorcerer; for he that is an Heretic, if he will not be reclaimed,
must be rejected; when they become intolerable, cast them off; if Tit. 3. 10.
they will not be brought to the unity of the faith, but desperately seek to
destroy it, and seduce men from the right way, they are enemies to meekness:
whom no fair means can reclaim, rigor and extremest severity is fittest for
them: this for Seducers.

But such as are seduced through weakness or ignorance, must be pitied, not
insulted over: in this way to be profitable, is to be pleasing.

Anger and indignation must be suppressed, Meekness and Charity must shine
forth, tears in the eyes, grief in the heart, compassion in the bowels,
tenderness of affections must witness the desire to help them out of their
error. Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him,
let him know that he that converts a sinner from the error of James 5. 19, 20
his way, shall save a soul from death. Overcome them with kindness, though
they have erred from the truth in great measure, bring them back, and shut not
that Gate of Grace against them, which God has set open for all; nor with
precipitate have, be not righteous overmuch; Is he a persecutor of the truth?
such was Saint Paul: an idolater, an adulterer? such were some of you.

Deal in meekness with him, and if he fail in judgment only, be not too rigid
in judging such failings, if from infirmity.

It were harsh to condemn every error for heresy, about truths of lesser
moment, and remote from the foundation; all that dissent from us, or think
otherwise than we do, are not to pass under so hard a censure. It cannot be
expected in a world of such variety of men and minds, that all should agree in
all points, and therefore let the modesty of the Apostle in this case be our
rule, if in any thing Phil. 3. 15, 16.
ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal this unto you.

Better instruction from good men, and further revelation from a gracious God,
may bring them into the right way, who for the present are in the wrong.
Besides, truths (we know) as they are not all of one size, so are they not all
revealed at one time, later times have manifested some truths which formerly
were infolded in generalities; which being thoroughly scanned, a more full,
distinct, and express knowledge is attained: and unto such to whom they are
still veiled, if they come not up in every particular to our sense, they are
with meekness gently to be entreated, not rashly to be rep^ehended; so many as
build upon the same foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 12
though the superstructure differ.

The fiery trial shall manifest every man's work, of what sort it is, and
according to his work shall his reward be; let us not therefore judge one
another any more; when God sees his time, he will judge uprightly: and then, if
we would stand before God with comfort: let us be sure our work be good, our
doctrine sound, and labor for an unity of faith, which until we can have, we
can never have quiet. United in affection we cannot be so long as we are
divided in our faith, be one there, and a calm will quickly follow.

The next, we must labor for an unity of order, that of faith respects
Doctrine, this of Order, Discipline; the Doctrine of Faith is upheld and
maintained by Order of Discipline, and what Order can there be, where there is
not unity? but where all decently and in a seemly order are united under one
Discipline, there will be quiet; the Apostle does often tell us, the Church is
but one Body, consisting of many members, so distinguished for their uses and
offices, yet so compacted for their places and order, that there might be no
schism in the body; for where schism and faction is, there will be animosities,
which many times rises to a greater height, to biting and devouring Gal. 5. 15
Monstrum borrendum inform, etc. Virg. Aeneid 3. Chaos rudis indigestaque
moles. Ovid. Met. 1. Pythagoras d^o suprema prineipia constituit memerorum:
finitum all erum quod est ^nitas, alt^rum infinitum qui est binatius; alterum
bonorum, alterum malorum principium. Vnitatis enim natura si aeri thst, bon^m
temperiem: si animu virtutem: si ^orpor^ sanitat^m, si civ^tati^us and
familiis, pacem and coacordiam piaestat, etc. Plut. moral. lib. de Homero.
one enother. The Church without order, is as a monstrous body without shape,
or as the first Chaos, without form, a rueful spectacle, a burden to it self,
and a prey to others. Now Unity ever attends Order, and these are followed with
meekness and tranquillity, but where disorder is, there is division, there is
confusion, (...). Lyranus, Hieron. Tremel. Tertul. Oecumen Estius. Bib Reg.
(...). Constit. Apost. lib. 8. cap. 31.
there is dissension, there is tumult, great disturbance, and things turned
up-side down; for so that word of Saint Paul is by several Authors thus
variously renderd: by which we are given to understand the beauty of order and
unity, which God in a special manner is pleased to own, as very much conducing
to the peace and quietness of the Church, without which there is nothing but
jarres, and broiles, and rents, heart-burnings, and spleen against one
another, to the decay and overthrow of meekness, which by order and unity is
brought in, upheld, and maintained. But there are not a few that say (for what
ends I will not, I cannot say) that the best way to peace and quietness, is to
give every man leave to Quamobrem quicunque vel sublatam disciplinam cupiunt,
vel ejus impediunt restitutionem, sive hoc faciant data opera sive per
incogitantiam, Ecclesiae certe extremam dissipationem quaerunt; quid enim
futurum est ut unicique liceat quod libuerit. Calv. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 12.
para. 1. (...). Chrysoft. in Ephesians. hom. 11. Quantarum rixa^um futura sit earum
rerum confusio, si prout cuique libitum sit, mutare liceat quae iad communem
statum perti^nt? Calv. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 11. parag. 31.
serve God as he will. How dangerous and destructive this is to Christian
Religion, let Saint Paul speak, for where there are schisms, (and one serves
God in this fashion, another in that, and a third in a form differing from
both; where there is this diversity of worship, division about Discipline, take
heed of corruption in Doctrine) Heresies are not far off.

How great an enemy to peace and quietness, and consequently to meekness, let
experience speak; our enemies could wish no greater mischief amongst us, than
to set us at odds, where we should be most at one (in the worship of God) hoc
Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur Atridae.

In the worship of God Liberty may not be granted to men to do what they will,
for if it should, what confusion would it bring into the public worship of
God? and God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all the
Churches of the Saints. And seeing I am fallen upon this point, which rightly
stated and resolved, would much conduce to the preservation of meekness, let
it not seem an impertinent digression if I take leave not largely to discource
upon it, but briefly to touch it.

The Question is not about things that are of absolute necessity, things that
are simply good, which may not be omitted; nor simply evil, which by no means
may be admitted; for as no man has liberty to refuse the doing of that which
is simply good, when it is in his power.

So no man has prwer to impose that which is simply evil, when it is in his
will.

If in the worship of God I be commanded to do that which is simply evil, I may
withdraw my self with modesty, and make profession, that it is better to obey
God than man.

The Question then is about things of a middle nature, such as we call
indifferent, and are left to our liberty, which liberty about things
indifferent, we are wondrous apt to abuse; and therefore there is required a
great deal of godly discretion in the use of it, which must be with all
sobriety, and without offense; not making it an occasion to the flesh to the
breach of ^al. 5. 13.
Chrtstian charity, which Saint Paul forbids.

Nor a cloak of maliciousness to the contempt of a lawful authority, 1 Pet. 2.
16
which Saint Peter dislikes.

These two in the judgment of these two great Apostles should regulate our
Christian liberty about things indifferent. It is well men know their liberty,
but not fit always to use it; not at all to be insisted; on to the breach of
Christian charity, or to the contempt of a lawful authority.

The nature and use of that which is indifferent, are two distinct things: It
is not the intervening of either of these (Authority or Charity) that can alter
or change the nature of that which is indifferent, which still remains the same
in the judgment and conscience, free and arbitrary: but only determines the
use, and so it becomes to that particular (to whom it is so determined)
necessary.

For that which in it self, and of its own nature was determinable to either
part, and so left free to the party concerned to do or not to do it: upon the
access of a moral, or legal injunction, (by the rule of honesty or justice,
the party concerned is obliged to one part, according to the rule, or precept
negative or affirmative.

Let the instance be matter of order in the external worship of God; which
order suppose to be reckoned amongst things indifferent, and still arbitrary
and undetermined: whilst it so remains, one may not condemn another, for using
such or such an order; nor is the other to be censured for forbearing the use:
but deal in meekness one with another; and every one please his neighbor for
his good unto edification.

But whilst either party will please themselves, they provoke one another, and
incense one another: they judge one another, and despise one another; and grow
so hot, that they cast off all meekness, and burn in anger, and break out into
contention one against another.

Herein both parties are too blame; the one in finding fault, and being
offended at that which they pretend they can, but soundly cannot prove to be
unlawful by the Word of God; judging uncharitably of their brethren, censuring
them for superstitious for doing such things, which upon false grounds they
condemn as unlawful The misperswasion of the unlawfulness of a thing is no
obligation to bind to abstain from it.

The other when they impose or require the doing of that by others, which as
yet remains undetermined: and are apt to fall foul upon every one that joins
not with them in their practice (whereas another practice about things
indifferent cannot determine me.)

Seeing there is the same liberty left to one to abstain, as there is to the
other to act, in this case let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind;
and let us all behave our selves in all meekness, with discr^tion, not
unseasonably, Romans 14. 5
or disorderly, not lightly, or rashly out of due time and place, doing our
selves, or pressing others to do such actions, which as yet remain
undetermined; but rather follow after the things that make for peace, and
things wherewith one may edify another.

If what is to be done be lawful: if there be not in Scripture any command, or
counsel, or example to contradict it (if yet it be not expedient) it may not be
done though lawful: for what is in it self, and in a general respect lawful,
may not be lawful (hic and nunc;) for the time, and the place, and persons with
whom we converse does vary the case much.

Men are not to follow their own impetuous wills in doing at all times to the
utmost of that they may do: a discreet Christian will suspend for a time the
doing of that (which is lawful and allowed, and which he may do) when it is
found to be inconvenient. The public good should control the fancies of a
private humor: that Christians should be humo^ists, Saint ^aul dislikes;
Christ pleased not himself, nor should we, lest our Rom 15. 3.
good be evil spoken of.

Believers should behave themselves so warily toward them which Col. 4 5.
are without, that they may be won by their honest conversation; and therefore
the Apostle forbids to give any offense either to the Jew, or to the Gentile,
or to the Church of Christ.

It is to me, and should be to any man a thing indifferent whether many things
be done or not done; provided that offense be not given by the doing of them to
my neighbor, nor exception taken for leaving them undone by the Magistrate.

For as Christian charity forbids a man to give just cause of offense to his
neighbor.

So the conscience of his obedience should be a strong restraint from breaking
the laws and ordinances of the Magistrate civil or ecclesiastical, who has
power to determine of Christian liberty, and to judge and appoint what orders
are most decent in the external worship of God.

In matters of this nature the Churches of God according to the example of the
Apostles, have ever taken upon them by virtue of that rule prescribed by the
Apostle, to command all things to be done decently and in order: and to see
that things so commanded be duly observed. For were it left arbitrary to every
man to do what himself lists in the external worship of God, nothing would be
more absurd and unreasonable. And if every society of Hocprimum habeamus si in
omni hom^num societate n^cessariam effe politiam aliquam videmus, quae ad
alendam communem pacem, and retinendam concordiam valeat si in rebus agendis
vigere semper aliquem ritum, quem (...) spui publicae honestatis interest,
atque adeo humanitatis ipsius. Id in ecclesiis presertim observandum esse, quae
cum been composit^ rerum omnium constitutio^e optime sustinentur, tum vero fine
concordia nullae suat pro^su^. Calvin. l^b. 4. Inst. cap. ^0. de externis
mediis, etc. parag. 27.
men be distinguished by their several Rights and Customs, all being united in
one civil policy, for the maintenance of their common peace and preserving of
amity. If in mannaging civil affairs, men ever observe some order, which
cannot be avoided as consisting with common honesty and humanity, and every
action is naked that is not clad with due circumstances, should we think
disorder and confusion to be priviledg'd in the holy congregation, which is not
permitted in any civil Assembly? grant this and how deformed will the face of
public Religion appear.

And therefore because amongst men there are such diversity of manners, At quum
inhominum moribus tanta insit diversitas, tanta in judiciis ingeniisque pugna
neque politia ullo satis firma est nisi certis legibus constituta: nec sine
stata quadam forma s^rv^^i ritus qu^spiam potest. Galvin. Instit. ^ib. 4. cap.
10. parag.
such variety of minds, and so great repugnancy in their Judgments and
dispositions, that no order or discipline can keep them in, that is not fenced
by some certain laws: nor can any beauty or comeliness appear in the duties of
Religion where there is not some set order which is by all inviolably to be
observed.

In this: Men are not to be left to their own liberty, to do what they think
fit; but what the Governors of the Church (licenced by supreme Authority) shall
ordain as fittest and most convenient.

For as in every Church multitude of unsignificant, and unlawful Ceremonies
should be declined to avoid superstition: so it will be very fit (to avoid
ccafusion and profaneness) a certain and set form should be used, unto which
all should be bound that by such means Devotion may be excited; and true zeal
kindled; when we see men go about holy duties with that Gravity, Reverence,
Piety and Modesty, that betokens the Majesty of God, becomes the dignity of
Religion, and concurs with the Celestial impressions See Hooker his
Ecclesiastical Polity.
in the minds of men.

Now for order and decency for ceremonies and circumstances in the public
duties of Religion our Lord Jesus Christ in his holy Gospel has no where
prescribed any Rule, nor set down any set form, to which he Quod ad perfectam
been vivendi regulam peritnebat, id totum comp^exus est dominus l^ge sua, etc.
CJlv. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 10. parag.
would have all persons at all times to be necessarily bound. For in his divine
wisdom he thought fit to set down Fundamental and Essential truths with all
things necessary to salvation.

But for external discipline and ceremonies we have nothing from him specified
and expres'd: because he foresaw them to be various and changeable according to
the exigencies of times and occasions.

What he has set down in general terms we must content our selves with,
looking to the practice of primitive Churches, and to the example of the
Apostles and holy Fathers with the Counsels (sequentes igitur and nos per omnia
sanctorum vestigia) their example in this case is to be our Rule.

It is certain in the general, Saint Paul commands in the first to the Cor. 1
Cor. 16. 14
cap. 16. at the 14th. verse; and in 14th. Chapter of the same Epistle, 1 Cor.
14. 40.
at the 40th. verse.

And gives direction too about some particulars, in the first to the Cor. the
16th. Chapter, at the first 1 Cor. 16. 1.
verse: and in the 7th. Chapter of 1 Cor. 7.
the same Epistle, at the 10th. verse; and in the eleventh Chapter of the 1
Cor. 11.
same Epistle, and in some other places; But not he nor any of the rest, have
taken upon them to set down any form of public worship which should
perpetually bind all persons. Nor do we find any one of the Apostles in this
case peremptorily to command any thing. Indeed we have Saint Paul about things
indifferent, giving his advice, and speaking by way of Counsel, not Command.

But neither Christ, nor He, nor any of the Apostles have peremptorily
determined any thing about this matter; Nor prescribed any particular Rule,
which all men are inviolably to observe, they have only laid down some general
Rules, according to which the Governors of the Church are to resolve
particulars: whose discretion with Christian charity, is the best Interpreter
of those general Rules which in the particular circumstances of Gods public
worship are to be followed. Now then for the manner of Gods outward worship, we
are to take our directions from the Governors of the Church, whose
constitutions and ordinances are to be obei'd, not as necessary to salvation,
but accidental, containing not the substance of Religion, but matter of
circumstance Quibus tametsi non indigemus omnes tamen omnes utimur quia alii
aliis ad fovendam inter nos charitatem, etc. Calv. lib. 4. Inst. cap. 10 parag.
31.
only, comely and convenient, not necessary; and though not necessary yet
useful: for all are to use them: though all do not need them: and even those
that need them not; by the Rule of Charity, and common bond of obedience, are
necessarily to use them.

It matters not greatly what some contentious persons allege: every man knows
how easy it is for such as are given to quarrel, to cavil at a Ceremony. Saint
Paul would have such that single out themselves, to be noted and avoided. For
if every fancy should be followed, we should be led into strange mazes.

In the body natural if any vicious humors be obnoxious to the health of it, a
care is taken that by fitting medicines they be expelled: so in the mystical
body, when any humourists disturb the peace and quiet of it, a timely course is
to be taken for the suppressing of them.

The weak are to be borne with till they may be better informed: but no way to
be given to the wilful: Schismatics like Satan seem modest in their
beginnings, and content with a little, but yielding to them in a little, does
encourage them to ask a great deal, (as the Proverb is) (give them an inch and
they will take an ell) for where impudence meets with a yielding nature it
knows no mean; like the waters of the sanctuary, they rise and grow upon you
unmeasurably. Ezekiel. 47. Verse* 3, 4, 5.
First shallow to the Ancles; straight to the knees: anon to the loins, and at
last to a River that could not be passed over.

So let them have their will with the discipline and they will venture upon the
doctrine; and if they can cry down the Ceremonies, have at the Sacraments: for
contentious spirits know not where to rest, till they have Quando nunquam
futurum est ut om tibus idem placeat, etc. Calv. Inst. lib. 4. c. 10. parag. 31.
ruind all.

I will say no more at present to this purpose, but only this: that no Church
at any time could ever frame a discipline so exact, nor ordain Ceremonies so
innocent, comely and useful that could please all. True it is, good men and
godly Christians will be pleased so long as they see no hurt. But Charity (you will
say) seeks to satisfy all: It does so! Nevertheless if Respice tot doctos
viros, and consid^ra quale sit his aliud dice^e nec erroris v^r^e ^ndiam
formidare. Cassiod. lib. 5. ep. 3.
men will not hearken to reason; nor be satisfied with that which men of great
wisdom and holiness, upon grave advice, and mature deliberation, (following the
steps of the blessed Apostles, and warranted by the examples of the ancient
Fathers, and continual practice of all precedent ages) have according to the
general Rule of Gods word determined. If men will be froward, and peevish, and
wise beyond that which is meet. If they will take upon them to see Quod si quis
obstrepat and plus sapere h^c velit quam obortet, viderit ipse qua morositatem
suam ratione Dominus approbet: n^bis tamen istud Pauli satisfacere debet, nos
contendexdi morem no^ habere, etc. Calv. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 11. parag. 31.
better and further than others, then all that have been before them: how God
will approve their presumption I know not.

Sure I am, their contention, all good Christian men, and all true Christian
Churches do dislike. (so S. Paul) If any man list to be contentious we have no
such custom, neither the Churches of God. The Customs of 1 Cor. 11. 16.
the Church that consist with decency, order and edification are to be observed
without scruple or contention.

Some are so scrupulous, nice and waiward, peevish and unsatisfied, that they
are ever whining, they are never Super transversam festucam incedere. Call Inst.
lib. 3. c. 10. par. 7.
pleased or content with any order, they question all, doubt of all, search for
a knot in a r^sh, and dare not go over a straw if it lie in their way, for fear
of breaking their shins.

Others are contentious about all Proinde modus ut retineatur, illam in numero
paucitatem in observatione facilitatem: in significatione dignitatem, etc.
Calv. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 23. par. 14. Dominus no ster Christus Sacramentis
numero paucissimis, significatione praestantiss^mis, observatione facillimis
novi populi ^ocietatem colligavit. Ep. 18. ad Ianuarium.
Church orders, censuring all harmless Ceromonies for superstitious, Popish,
Antichristian, Idolatrous, they clamor against them, railing and reviling,
although they have all the qualifications requirable in Ceremonies, lawful and
laudable,) that is to say,

In numbor few: In substance grave: In choice descreet: In ^ight comely: In
observation easy: In signification proper and correspondent: Which Cere * Quod
neque con^ra fidem, neque contra bonos mores injungitur observandum. Aug. ep.
118. cap. 2. Calv. ep. ad protectorem Angliae 87. Quod ad formulam precum and
Rituum Ecclesiasticorum valde probo, ut certa illa extet a qua pastoribus in
sua functione discodere non liceat. Calv. ibid. Calvin. ep. 200. Anglis.
Francofordiens.

Legitimae Ceremoniae Senatu Ecclefiastico institutae, etc. Etsi non per^se;
tamen lege charitatis observandae sunt adeo ut qui eas contemnit, and
contumaciter cum scandalo negligi^ sit reus violati ordinis and rupti
charitatis vinculi coram Deo Bucan. loc. Com. 33. de liberate Christana. Sect.
15.

Zanchius de externo cultu quaest. 4.

Pet. Martyr. in ep. ad Hooperum.

In descriptione communionis and quotidianarum precum nihil video in libro ^sse
descriptum quod non sit ex divinis literis desumptum, si non ad verbum ut
Psalmi and lectiones tamen sensu ut Collectae Bucer. ep. Scrip. Anglic. cap. 1.
page 456. Religione igitur summa retinenda erit, and vindicanda haec Ceremonia.
Idem ibid. C^remoniae sunt externa bumanae infirmitatis rudimenta. Calv. Inst.
lib. 4. cap. 10. parag. 31. Talibus adminiculis ad pietatem excitemur. Calv.
Inst. lib. 4. cap. 10. parag. 28. Omn^no enim utile illis esse sentio hoc genus
Adminiculi. Ibid. par. 24. Sunt quidem and nobis hodie externa quaedam pietatis
exercitia, quibus ruditas nostra indiget. Calv. in. Joh. ver. 4. Vide Calv. in
epist. 379. Adiophora quando praecipiuntur sunt quodam modo necessaria, the
Princes imposition and Churches determination does causea kind of necessity.
Beza Ep. 24.

David Paraeus in Romans 14, 15. *Melanc. loc. com. de liberate Christiana.
Libera est Ecclesia vel retinere hoc genus traditionum, vel abrogare and
quiequid communi consensu in hoc genere statuit Ecclesia, and piorum doctorum
au^horitas, in co non est pertinaciter resistendum, sic bona conscientia
retinemus in ecclesia certos Ritus ex veteribus, etc. qui vero simpliciter
omnia put ant abolenda esse quae accepimus, non solum per se impia, verum etiam
indifferentia, and per se non mala, cum possint retineri sine peccato, in bono
usu and non violata charitate Ecclesiae consentientis: ii nihilo sunt meliores,
quam illi qui affingunt n^cessitatem in hoc genere traditionum servando: sicut
enim illi qui contendunt hujusmodi traditiones necessario servandas esse,
constringunt conscientias and tollunt libertatem Christianam, ita and isti qui
affingunt necessitatem in iisdem traditionibus abolendis, in ^odem sunt vitio,
and inimici libertatis Christianae sine qua ^salvari nemo potest.

(Melanchthon has excellently written to this purpose in his Common Place of
Ceremonies, where he advises juniors to beware that they be not Phanaticks,
etc.)

Steckelius Annot. in loc. com. M^l. de liber. Chris. page 125 prope finem.


moneys so composed to decency order and edification, have the approbation of
the most eminent reformed Divines that live beyond the seas, as Calvin, Beza,
Bucer, Melanchthon, Steckelius, Peter Martyr, Zanchius, Bucanus, Paraeus, and
others.

By which it appears what little reason there is; there should be such swelling
against the practice and use of things indifferent, (the observation of order
and decency in the worship of God.) Whereas in all things, order and decency is
commendable it comes from God, is seen in every Creature. Look on Heaven and
Earth, we see comeliness in their fabric; order in their site, beauty in all:
without which the World were Tohu and Bohu.

How much more excellent is it in the Church, which is the School Schola
Decori Clem. Romans lib. 8. cap. 31. (...) Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in ^ ad Cor. Cant 6. 4.
10.
of comeliness and of order, and is a name not of Separation and division, but
of concord and union: the Church is compared to a well-ordered Army; now an
Army of all Assemblies can least bear Disorder; disorder it, and ruin it: by
which is intimated unto us, the necessity of order in the Church

What a monster will a Christian assembly be, without order, let Saint Bernard
Da unum, and pop^lus est, toll unum and turba est Eras. Paraphr. in Acts 1 ubi
sin^ foedere pacis, sine observan^ia legis, sine Discipl^n^ and Regim^n^,
acephala mult^tudo congregata f^erit, non ^o^u^u^ sed turba vocatur; non est
civitas sed confasio; Babylonem exhibet, de Jerusalem n^bil habet. Bern. in
Ded. Eccl. Sermon. 5. col. 2. page 349. D.
speak? not a people, but a rabble; a Babel, not Jerusalem; not a place of
peace and order, but confusion.

The Church, I have told you, is compared to a body; a body consists of many
Members or limbs, these by nerves or sinews and joints are knit together, are
acted and moved. Qu^madmodum salvifica Christi Doctrina anima est Ecclesiae, it
a illic disciplina pro nervis est, qua fit ut membra corporis, suo quodque loco
inter se cohaereant. Calv. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 12. parag. 1.
Calvin tells us, the nerves or sinews of this mystical body are Discipline.

Saint Paul says the joints are order Ephesians. 4. 16. Col. 2. 19.
and unity.

If the sinevvs be broken, or if there be a Contortion, a Contraction or
Convulsion of them; a Luxation (solutio continui) a dislocation of the Joints,
by which the parts of the body are kept and held in their Contiguity and
continuity; though the body may live, it is deprived of action and motion: at
least its motion is both uncomely and painful. Thus Schism and Division puts
the body out of frame, out of Joint (so Saint Paul implies) when noting the
Schisms in the Church of Corinth, he declares they were disjoynted: exhorting
them to beset again or perfectly joined together, for so the word imports. To
take Unity and order from the Church, is as much as to take sinews and joints
from the body, by which it is renderd incapable of action, unable and unfit for
motion; no (...), Gal. 6. 1 (...) 1 Cor. 1. 10. Sancta ecclesia sic consistit
in unitate fidelium, sicut corpus nostrum unitum est compage membrorum. Greg.
Moral. lib. 19, cap. 14.
limb is able to help it self, or to be useful or serviceable to the body,
but is a trouble and grief to it self, a vexation and torment to the whole
body.

This is the present state of this Church, it is quite out of frame, miserably
disjoynted, disordered; distracted and dismembered, torn into pitiful rents and
Schisms and factions, how bitterly and satyrically does one inveigh against
another, what rude contentions and uncivil contestations? how stout and stiff
one against another, how is discipline and order neglected and vil^fied by
every selfe-wild peevish silly creature who yet has spleen enough to disturb
our peace and disorder our unity. It is with this Church as the Psalmist
complains it was with the Church of the Jews; read Psalm. 90. 1. 2, 3. and as
the Apostle affims it was with the Church of Corinth. Read. 1 Cor. 1. 21. and 1
Cor. 11. 18. miserably torn into pieces: and no mervail! when there are so
many wolves to scatter the flock. But let us be followers of that our good
shepherd, whom God set up to gather together in one, the children of God that
John 11. 52.
were scattered abroad: there is no better way in the world to settle us in
peace, and quietness, that we may live meekly and lovingly one with another then
to labor for unity. An unity of order as well as faith.

Secondly, as these are the things that we must labor for that we may have
meekness; so other things there are we must beware of, or else we cannot have
it: of the which the first is pride.

Beware of Pride, it is a great enemy to meekness; if you would know from what
corrupt root Contentions spring, Saint James will resolve you; even from your
lusts, James 4. 1
and whereas there is among you envyings, and strife, and divisions, are ye not
carnal, and walk as men? 1 Cor. 3. 3
and only by pride comes contention, says Solomon. Prove. 13. 10.


For when men think too highly of themselves, better than others do, or than is
reason any should do, undervaluing and accounting too meanly of others; hence
arises great heart-burnings, grudgings and murmurings amongst men, which many
times like a concealed fire, breaks forth into such a flame that consumes all
about it. One man is worthier, another man is holier, a third is wiser; such
they know they are, and such they must be accounted, any the least abatement in
point of reputation, is harsh and unpleasing. Diotrephes must 3 John. 9.
have the pre-eminence, he must be honored before the people, and if the
people will not do it, he is lifted up in his own conceit, like Simon Magus,
giving out himself is Act. 8. 9.
some great one.

It is not the truth, but their reputation they labor to maintain, and when
they err, they think it a disparagement to confess their error, and therefore
put themselves to poor shifts to maintain it. I will not say but some of these
men that think so well of themselves, had some cause so to do, could they have
kept themselves within measure, but they must conjure up unruly spirits, who
taken with their parts, and for worser ends, help to maintain the faction, cry
up their Leaders, who gotten into the midst of a crowd, the silly people that
are carried away with Hobubs, (like cattle that follow the steps of those that
go before them) for companies sake will busle, and busy themselves to do they
know not, they care not what.

Secondly, beware of coveteousnesse, another enemy to meekness, the love of
money is the root of all 1 Timothy 6. 10.
evil; this is a furious lust, and where it is obeyed, it rages, robs and
deprives a man of all quiet.

What quarrels have been raised in Church and State about this golden Ball?
From whence comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, 1 Timothy 6. 4, 5.
perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth? From
whence all this unquiet? but from this Satanical delusion (that Gain is
godliness.) It is evident, and he that will not shut his eyes must see it;
That the greedy desire of the Churches means, has created unto her, her
greatest troubles. What scufling is there to keep by greedy dogs that can
never have enough, looking to their own way, every one for his gain from his
quarter; not Isa 56. 11.
caring what becomes of Church or State, so they may thrive, tumble all into a
confusion, what care they.

What scratching to get that morsel that must again be vomited up? Prove. 23. 8
Interdum fortuna p^o culp^ est. Sen. de Clem. lib. 1. cap. 2.
How many men have been ruined for no other cause, but that they had somewhat
to lose? somewhat that might stop the mouths of devouring harpies? he that is
greedy of gain (says Solomon) troubles his own house: but if he be a man in
place and power, he troubles a whole Kingdom. He that hastes to be rich,
cannot be innocent; when men's desires are too immoderate, and too eagerly set
upon the world; how unquiet are they in themselves, and what troubles do they
bring upon others; so, if you would have meekness, beware of coveteousnesse.

Thirdly, Beware of envy and malice, for these are great enemies to meekness,
where these are, there can be no quiet, every one will be some body; and he
that has no sufficiency to raise himself will make a ladder of any mischief.
Who can stand before Envy? (says Solomon) Prove. 27. 4.
Abel could not, nor Joseph, nor David, Moses and Aaron must be brought down,
though the Conspirators sink to hell. What supplanting and undermining, like
Lisander peecing out the Lions skin with the Foxes tail; what malicious and
envious men cannot do by force, they will attempt by fraud. What strong
oppositions, what deadly contestations these devilish lusts have raised? let
Athanasius speak, what slanders, calumnies, and odious aspersions have men
thrown upon their competitors; and si non aliqua nocuisset mortuus esset, Envy
and Malice will rake Hell Iavidia Siculi non invenere Tyranni Majustormentum.
for mischievous devises; and such is the nature of these passions, whilst they
vex others, they torment themselves. Beware of Malice and Envy a third enemy
to Meekness.

Fourthly, Beware of Ignorance, it is a blind enemy, but a bold one, stubborn,
rude, boisterous, an untractable and unteachable humor, especially if it be
affected: When a wiseman (says Solomon) contendeth with a foolish man, whether
he rage or laugh; there is no rest. Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a
man, rather than a fool in his folly. Bray a fool in a mortar, use all means,
do what you can, say what you will, He will be, He still.

But such as are not wilfully ignorant, but ignorant through weakness, time and
experience may work them to a better temper; if they have erred, their error
discovered must Pro. 17. 1^ Pro. 27. 22 Cu^usvis est hominis erra^e, ^ullius
nisi iasi^^entis p^rseverare in errore. Ciro Phil. 12 Est en^m humanum peccaee,
sed belluinum in e^ore perseverare. Cicero. Orat. in Valinium.
be retracted; if they have gone ast^ay, they must yield themselves to be
reduced. If God do open their eyes, whereas they were blind, let them not be
shut against the known truth. Frowardness, waiwardnesse, pettish, and
peevishness, are the individual companions of ignorance; it is trouble some to
deal with, wherefore if thou would retain meekness, beware of ignorance.

Fifthly, Beware of suspicion, an enemy also to meekness.

Men that are conscious to themselves of any naughtiness, upon any occasion are
apt to judge others as naught as themselves, especially if they shall perceive
worth in a person they hate, they will labor to eclipse it all they can: will
greedily entertain any suspicion, and cunningly foment the same: what will they
not do that are base, that others may be thought as base as they; they will lie,
and slander, and say and do any thing to bring into an Odium the man they hate.

To let go particulars, this cursed humor, what mischief has it not done?
what jealousies have been raised by the wicked fomentors of our unnatural
distractions? which set on work by the Devil, what have they not devised to
blast and blurre the persons to whom they stand ill-affected?

This is the Cancker of the soul that eats into it, and will eat out all grace
and goodness. It is not goodness nor innocence that can privilege a man
from suspicion: yea, the better and more innocent a man is, the more he shall
be suspected of wicked men, who if by all their prying they cannot find him
faulty, they will be sure by their wicked and false imputations to make him
seem so.

A good disposition will be ever ready to give a good construction, but hatred
does hatch Cockatrice eggs, and what prodigious monsters has it not brought
forth? whereas they that have the fear of God, will not rashly judge others;
but what does not nealice and spite utter against the most innocent? the man
is faultless, but they are self-willed, nor is innocence a shelter against
eviltongues, malice never regards how true any accusation is, but how spightful.

Sixthly, Beware of Novelty and Lenity, great enemies to meekness; It is a
disease that many are sick of our Epidemical disease; we are naturally
unconstant and long for Novelties, which no sooner had and enjoyed, but we grow
weary of them, and are only constant in unconstancie; that which pleases to
day, Quod voluit speruit repetit quod nuper omisit. Horat. Inconstantia
fastidic amicos. Plut. Mor. Aliud stans aliud sedens cogitat. Salust. Orat. in
Cicer. Genesis 49. 5. James 1. 6
to morrow is cast aside, and after some certain days, with great content
resumed, which yet in the midst of the delight it brings, and in its best
liking is loathed.

Look upon Reuben, unstable as as water (and read his doom) he shall not
excel. Wavering men like waves of the sea, whom every blast of vain doctrine
does toss up and down (weak as water) restless as wind, no man knows where to
have them, altering their opinion (I had almost said Religion) as the Almanac
does the Dominical-letter every year; we know what they believe this year, we
know not what they will believe the next. Let but an African gale blow,
sounding some novelty, and how quickly are they puffed up! The frothy Chamele
on mutare totus nec aliud valet, nam, cum illi coloris prop^et as una fit, quid
accessit inde suffand^^r Teri lib. de Pallio. c. 3. Chameleo^ colorem red di^
semper quemcunque pro^ime attige^ it prae t^: Ruhrum candid ^mque. Plin.
natural. hist. l. 8. c. 33. de Chamelcon^e.
agitations of unquiet heads, and windy inventions of unsettled brains do carry
them up and down as they please; these men's persons they have in admiration,
violently contending for them, and are refractary, obstinate, perverse and
wilful; and like children, at the sight of some new toy, let go all the
gewgayes in their hands, and there is no quiet until they be filled with it.

Yea, some like the Camelion (which turns it self into every color he cleaves
unto, save red and white) will be any thing but just and innocent.

And would you think it? there are that would do by their Religion as they do
by their clothes, change Hyaena, si annalis est, marem and seminam alternat.
Tert. lib. de Pallio. c. 3. Bonum est patribus obedire, and detrahere proprias
novitates Justinian. ^p. Siciliae ad Pe^^um Antloch. in Council. Constinapol. 2.
the fashion every summer. Not unlike the Hyaena that changes his sex every
year.

Oh how good were it could we shake off our Novelties, and follow the Rules of
reverend, learned, wise, godly and innocent Antiquity, that we would not too
much dote on the degenerate child of our own fancy, but modestly submit our
selves to better and abler judgments, which until we can do, we can never live
in quiet.

The enemies of meekness (you have heard) are Pride, Coveteousness, Envy,
Malice, Ignorance, Suspicion and Levity, which (if we would have Meekness) we
must beware of, for these wonderfully disturb the heart, and marveilously fill
it with perturbations. How quickly does passion overcome us? how stiff are our
wills? and how restless and unquiet our affections? which would not be, would
we put on Meekness.

We should therefore labor for Charity, unity, humility; and a good
Conscience, that we may get this Royal Robe and wear it, to the Glory of God
and honor of our Christian profession.

That so! God may own us and accept us, and make good his precious word unto us.

To guide us in judgment.
To teach us his way.
To beautify us with salvation.
For he will save all the meek upon earth.
Crowning their days with peace here, and with eternal blessedness hereafter.
AMEN.

FINIS.

