FIFTY QUERIES, Seriously Propounded To those that QUESTION, Or deny Infants
Right TO BAPTISM.

By J. B. an hearty well-wisher to their Souls, and to the Churches Peace.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Symonds at the Princes Arms, and Jonathan Robinson
at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Church Yard, 1675.

Men and Brethren:
THough many of you are exceeding zealous, and confident in your Way; yet I
hope you do not think your selves infallible, or to be as sure that you are in
the right here, as you are that there is a God, or that the Holy Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament are the Word of God: Now granting that it is
possible, you may be under a Mistake in denying our Childrens Interest in the
Covenant and Right to Baptism, methinks, it concerns you to enquire and examine
again and again, whether you be not indeed mistaken; seeing, if the Truth lies
in the Affirmative, that Children have such a Right, which you oppose, then you
must needs be found very ungrateful unto God, in denying so much of his Grace
and Favor, injurious to our poor Infants, in depriviving them (what in you
lies) of their Birthright, and of the Blessing, and very troublesome to the
Church of Christ, in raising so great a busle there, and making so great a
Breach. And therefore I cannot but earnestly request this of all of you that
have any seriousness, and tenderness of Spirit, that you would not take up your
Opinion upon Trust; but make some further Search and enquiry after the Truth.
It may be safe for you, let it not be grievous to you, to view over these
Queries: Of which yet I must say, as the Young Prophet said of the Axe (2 Kings
6.5.) They are but borrowed being collected out of a seasonable and useful
Piece of a Worthy Author, Entitled, [more Proofs of Infants Church
membership, and consequently of their Right to Baptism] I would hope that these
Lines will lead and direct you to the Book it self, being as an Index to it.
Some of the Questions put here I am sure are such as you should be prepared to
answer unto God, and Conscience; Consider of these things, and the Lord give
you Understanding. Farewell.

Reader,
IF thou would have fuller Satisfaction, that it is the undoubled Will of
God, that Infants be Members of his Visible Church, as verily as they are
Members of Kingdoms, Cities, and Families, and that they are as capable of it,
and that Christ was in his Infancy the Chief Member of the Church, even the
Head, its Prophet, Priest, and King, though yet he did not Teach, Sacrifice,
Rule or Intercede actually, and that God never had a Church on Earth since
there were Infants in the World, of which Infants were not Members, (except any
did congregate that had no Infants, or a few singular Persons in the end of the
World have upon mistake refused the Privilege) and that the Gospel has
clearly acquainted us that Christ has not deprived Infants of this Benefit,
but more fully given and confirmed it; and that he has instituted Baptism to
be the initiating Sacrament, and Solemn Investiture of Visible Church Members;
And yet that we may hold Loving and Comfortable Communion with those that by
unwilling Error do think that Infants should not be baptized, if they will but
profess that they heartily consent that their Children be Christ's as far as he
will accept them, and with them that to satisfy their doubting or mistaking
Consciences are rebaptized, and when they have done will live in Love and
Communion with others; And that those few of the Ancients that were for the
delaying of the Baptism of Infants a while, did not dream of denying or
delaying their Covenant Interest and Church Membership according to their
Infant Capacity, but only the Baptismal Solemnization and Investiture, that it
might be more powerfully obligatory: (as Kings are often crowned long after they
are Kings) All this and much more, you may see fully proved in the Book from
which these Queries are collected, lately Printed, and in the Authors former
Treatise of Infants Church Membership and Baptism. These Queries more are here
further offered to every conscientious Doubter, Whether it be at all credible
that those Jews that were so quarrelsome with Christ, and tenacious of their
Legal Rights, would never have quarrelled with Christ or his Apostles, for
shutting all Infants out of the Visible Church, if he or they had done it? And
whether those Jewish Christians that were so loath to let go Circumcision,
would have let go even their Infant-Membership and Covenant-right, without one
Word of Exception? What considerate Person can believe this? 2. Yea when Christ
offered to gather all Jerusalem and her Children, as a Hen gathers her
Chickins, and the Jews were broken off but by Unbelief, whether the Children of
the Believing Jews then were broken off? 3. And when the Kingdoms of the World
becomes Christ's Kingdoms; are Infants no part of the Kingdoms?

Some Sober Queries gathered out of Mr. Baxters [more Proofs of Infants
Church Membership, and consequently their Right to Baptism] seriously offered
to such as are taken with the unthankful Error of denying and rejecting of
their Infants Rights, and Blessings.
Q. I. WHether under the Covenant of Works, V. p. 77, 79, 112.
if Adam had not sinned, Infants should not have been holy to God, and so
Members of the Innocent Church or Kingdom of God?

Q. II. V. p. 112.
Whether God was any more obliged to order it so, that the Children of
Righteous Parents should have been born with all the perfections of their
Parents, and enjoyed the same privileges, than he was obliged in making the
Covenant of Grace to grant that Infants should be of the same Society with
their Parents, and have the Immunities of that Society?

Q. III. V. ibid.
Whether we have any reason, when the design of Redemption is the magnifying of
Love and Grace, to think that Love and Grace are so much less under the Gospel
to the Members of Christ, than under the Law to the Members or Seed of Adam, as
that then all the Seed should have partaken of the same Blessings with their
righteous Parents, and now they shall all be turned out of the Society whereof
the Parents are Members?

Q. IV. V. p. 79, 80.
Whether though our Innocence be lost, parents be not parents still, and have
not as much Interest in children, and whether God have ever reversed this
natural Order? and if God change not his order therein, whether parents be not
as capable of consenting to Grace for their children, as they were of being
innocent for them?

Q. V. V. p. 81, 83.
Whether Infants be not included in the first Edition of the Covenant of Grace
made with Adam? ( Genesis 3.15.) Whether unless it can be proved that Insants are
none of the Woman's Seed, we must not take that Fundamental promise to extend to
Infants? V. p. 96.
And was she not thereby obliged to list her self, and all her Infant-progeny
in the Redeemer's Army, against the proclaimed Enemy, and to teach her
posterity to do the like? V. p. 94.
And did they not continue visible Members of Christ's Army and Kingdom, till
such time as they violated that Fundamental Obligation, and as the Seed of the
Serpent fought against Christ and his Kingdom, V. p. 95.
for Satan and his Kingdom?

Q. VI. V. p. 82, 83.
Whether in that first Proclamation of Grace to fallen man, or in the first
promise of Redemption to sinners, Genesis 3.15. An Infant of the Woman be not
promised to be General, and Head of the Church? And whether the promise of an
Infant Head, does not declare God's mind that he will have Infants Members,
because the Head is the principal Member? Whether God does not assure us
hereby, that he does not exclude the Infant-state, or Age from the redeemed
Church, which he admitted into the Church by the Laws of Creation? Would he
have made the Head first an Infant; if he had excluded the Infant-state from
the visible Church? Is not the Head a Member, even the principal Member? And
are not Infants hereby clearly warranted to he Members of a lower Nature? If an
Infant may be Sovereign, then may not Infants be Subjects? If an Infant may be
the chief Prophet of the Church, then may not Infants be Disciples? if it be
said, they are no Disciples that learn not; may it not as well be said, he is
no Prophet that teaches not? If it be granted, that Christ in Infancy was the
Prophet of his Church by designation, V. p. 86.
(though not in actu exercito?) Why may not Infants be Disciples too by
Designation, or Separation (though not yet actual Learners?)

How does their Infancy incapacitate them to be in Covenant with God, V. p. 84.
to be Church Members, etc. when Christ in Infancy bare all the
Connter-relations, and was in the Covenant of God as Mediator; and that (as far
as we can judge) only by a virtual, and not actual consent (in his Infancy and
Humane Nature) to the Covenant of Mediation?

If an Infant qua talis, V. p. 88.
as such be excluded from Church Membership, then will it not hold ad omnes
universally, and then had not Christ himself been excluded?

Q. VII. V. p. 118, 119.
Why are those two Titles put on those two distinct Generations, ( scil. the
Posterity of Cain, and the Posterity of Seth) calling one the Sons of God, and
the others the Daughters of men, Genesis 6.2. But that the one was a Generation
separated from the Church from their Birth (their Progenitors being cast out
before them) when the other was the Seed of Saints not cast out, but Members of
the Church, or the Sons of those who were devoted to God, and so devoted to him
themselves, a separated Generation belonging to God as his visible Church? Were
these called the Sons of God in regard of their godliness (who were so wicked
that God repented that he had made them, and destroyed them in the Flood) or
for their Relation, Church State, and visible Separation from open unchurched
Idolaters? like those Deuteronomy. 14.1, 2.

Does it not hence appear that the Generation of the righteous then even from
the Womb, V. p. 119, 120.
were numbered among God's people, in that they are not mentioned as a people
called out here and there, and initiated at Age? (there is no mention, or hint,
of any such thing) but as a Stock or Generation opposed to the Daughters of
men, or of the unchurched, who were such from their Infancy, as all will grant?
were they the same men that were Parents of those here called the Daughters of
men, and of those called the Sons of God?

Q. VIII. V. p. 122.
Whether it was not the same Church before, and after Abraham's time, that was
called the Tents of Sem? Genesis 19.27. Was not the Jewish Church denominated the
Tents of Sem? And does it not hence appear, that the Church Priviledges of that
people did not begin with or from Abraham, but that they were before? And how
was it the same Church that was of Sem, and of Abraham, if it had not the same
sort of Members, or materials; if Infants were not Members before Abraham's
days, as well as after? And if Japhet's Children must dwell in Sem's Tents, V.
p. 123.
then will it not follow, that as Sem's Infants were Church Members, so
Japhet's (or the converted Gentiles) Seed are not cast, or left out?

Q. IX. V. p. 7^.
Whether if we could show no written Law or promise at first constituting the
Duty, or granting the privilege of Church Membership, it were the least
disparagement to our Cause, as long as we can show those following Laws which
presuppose this? If Moses at the end of that 2000 years the Church of God had
been without any written Law, found all the Infants of Church Members in
possession of this benefit; what need was there of a new Law about it? Or why
should God promise it as a new thing?

Q. X. V. p. 115.
Whether there being certain proof in Scripture of Infants Church Membership,
but none except that before alleged from Genesis 3. that makes any mention of the
beginning of it, but all speaking of it as no new thing; we have not great
reason to assign its beginning which from Genesis 3. is before spoken of?

Q. XI. V. p. 97, 98.
Is it not unquestionable, that the Covenant of Grace made to Abraham the
Father of the faithful, comprehended Infants for Church Members? And was it not
the same with that Genesis 3.15. But in some things clearlier opened? Were not
both these the Covenant of Grace and free Justification by Faith in the
Redeemer? And did not the Covenant made to Abraham and his Seed, comprehend
Infants? And should not the same promise expressed more concisely be expounded
by the same expressed more fully?

Q. XII. V. p. 115.
Whether (though the Hebrews had their peculiarities) it be at all credible,
that the Infants of that one small Country only should be so differently dealt
with by God, from all the World else, even Enoch's, Noah's, Sem's, and all from
Adam to the end of the World, that these Infants only should be Church Members,
and no others?

Q. XIII. What can be more absurd, than to maintain a Transient Fact (as Mr. T.
has done) making Infants Church Members, without any Law, Promise, or Covenant
Grant of God giving them Right? Whether a Gift that was never given be not a
contradiction? ( V. p. 32, 35, 39, 44, 45, 151.) And if there was any such
Promise, or Covenant-grant of Infants Church Membership, when, or where was it
revoked?

Q. XIV. V. p. 19.
Was it only the Infants of the Hebrews, or of those that were at their
absolute dispose, that were Church Members? Were not the Infants of free
Proselytes Church Members too?

Q. XV. V. p. 21.
Was it not then the Duty of all the Nations round about, that could have
information of the Jewish Religion, to engage themselves, and their children to
God by Circumcision?

And did not many of the people in Hester's time become Jews, V. p. 24.
Hest. 8.17. who yet were not under their Government? And is it not well known,
that this was to be circumcised, they and their little ones (as the Proselytes
were) and so to keep the Law of Moses?

And whether the circumcised Servants of Israel sold away to another Nation, V.
p. 145.
and so separated from the Civil State of Israel, did eo nomine cease to be
Church Members, though they forsook not God? And so of the Infants, if they
were sold in Infancy? And so whether Infants might not be Church Members, that
were not of the Jews Commonwealth?

Q. XVI. V. p. 26.
Were not the Israelites Children Members of the universal visible Church, as
well as of the Congregation of Israel?

As he that is a Member of the City is a Member of the Kingdom, V. p. 146.
and a part of a part is a part of the whole; so was not every Member of the
Jews Church also a Member of God's Universal Church?

Q. XVII. V. p. 27.
Was there ever any true Church, or Ecclesiastical worshipping Society
appointed by God in all the World since the Fall, but the Church of Christ?
Were not Infants therefore either Members of Christ's Church, or of no Church
of God's Institution? Was not Moses Christ's Usher, and Moses Church and
Christ's Church one, according to God's Institution?

Q. XVIII. V. p. 124, 125.
Whether was Abraham made a Member of the Church by Circumcision, or
circumcised because a Member of the Church? The like of Infants born in his
House?

And how can the ceasing of Circumcision prove Infants Church Membership
ceased, V. p. 127, 128.
any more than it can prove their Church Membership began with Circumcision; or
that Women were not Church Members, because not circumcised; or that all Israel
was unchurched in the Wilderness, when they were uncircumcised for forty years?

Q. XIX. V. p. 126,
Whether the blessing of Abraham consists not chiefly in this, that God
promised to be a God in Covenant with him, and his Seed? And how are the
Believing Gentiles blessed with faithful Abraham, and Heirs of the same
Promise, if their Infants are not also comprehended in the same Covenant?

Q. XX. Whether in that great Promise, V. p. 126, 127.
Genesis 12.3. Tribes, Kindreds, Families, do not most certainly comprehend
Infants? As it was to such Families that the promise was made before Christ, as
to the Jewish Church? What warrant have we to understand Families or Tribes
otherwise, when the same promise is made to the Gentiles?

Q. XXI. Whether the second Commandment, V. p. 135.
Exodus 20.5, 6. does not contain a standing promise, and discovery of God's
Resolution, concerning the children of all that love him, whether Jews or
Gentiles, to whom this Commandment belongs? V. p. 136.
Whether God means not that his Retribution to Parents that love or hate him,
shall extend to their children as such; unless they interrupt it at Age by
their own Acts; and if to their children qua tales, then whether not to
Infants? And when God has recorded this, decreed, granted, V. p. 137.
distinguishing mercy to the children of the faithful as such in Tables of
Stone, whether it be not a visible notification, which will make them visible
Favorites and Church Members as soon as they visibly exist?

Q. XXII. V. p. 138.
Whether any without the Church are secured of God's mercy by promise? And
whether mercy be not promised to the Children of the Faithful as such? (See
Psalm. 102.28. and 103.17. Prove. 20.7. Isai. 61.8, 9. and 65.23. etc.)

Q. XXIII. V. p. 143.
Whether these Promises in the making of them were limited to a certain time
when they were to cease? Or whether they have been since revoked?

Q. XXIV. V. p. 146.
If it was on the Jews rejection of Christ that they were broken off from being
God's people, were those thousands of Jews that believed in Christ so broken
off? If not, then whether were not the Children of all believing Jews
Church Members in Infancy? Or otherwise, was it not somewhat else than Unbelief
that brake them off?

Q. XXV. V. p. 146, 147.
Were not the Infants of the Christian Jews the day before their conversion
Members of the Jewish Church, and of Gods universal Church (of which the Jews
were but a part? and does it not sound strangely, that such Infants as were the
day before Members of the Jewish Church, and of God's universal Church, should
be put out of the Jewish and the whole visible Church by the Faith of their
Parents, or without Unbelief? Either it was a mercy to be a Member of the
Church, or not: If it was no mercy, then will it not follow, that the
unbelieving Jews lost nothing by being broken off? If it was a mercy, how did
the Christians Children forfeit it?

Q. XXVI. V. p. 147.
Whether it be credible that he who came not to cast out Jews, but to bring in
Gentiles, breaking down the partition wall, and making of two one Church, would
have a Church of so different form and constitution, that the Church at
Jerusalem should have Infant-members, and the Church at Rome should have none?
That the Jews Infants should be Members, and not Gentiles?

If the Jews were broken off by unbelief, V. p. 147.
should they not be graffed in again upon their Repentance of Faith? And so
should not every repenting believing Jews Infants be Church Members? Or
otherwise how would their graffing in answer to their breaking off? Should they
be but in part graffed in?

Q. XXVII. Was not Christ's Church, V. p. 148.
Spiritual before his Incarnation (when it took in Infants) and gathered in a
spiritual way? was not the visible frame of the Jewish Church set up and
erected by the Father of Spirits, and were not Spiritual Duties commanded then,
upon promises of Spiritual Blessings, even life eternal?

How will any prove that it was a Blemish to the old frame; V. p. 148.
that Infants were Members? What was the Church the worse for Infants Rights?
If it be no blemish, why must it be done away?

Q. XXVIII. V, p, 149.
In what regard were the new frame better, supposing the casting out of
Infants, which were in the old? How does Infants relation detract from its
Spirituality? Do not the adult come in by the same kind of consent for
themselves, as they make for their Infants? And do not the Adult blemish the
Church with more carnal sins than Infants do? Would any Kingdom be more
excellent, if all Infants were disfranchised? Does not Nature teach all
Kingdoms on Earth to take them for Members, though but Infant-members?

Q. XXIX. V. p. 149, 150.
Whether any Jew at age was a Member of the old Church without professing Faith
(in the Articles then necessary to Salvation) Repentance and Obedience? And
wherein the supposed new call and frame does in this differ from the old; save
only that a more full and express Revelation of Christ requires a more full
express Faith? Is it not evident, that they were to profess consent to God's
Covenant, which whosoever denied Asa would put to death? v. p. 4^.
And was not circumcision a covenanting Act? And did they not thereby profess
to take God for their God? Or would God else have taken them for his people?
And would not renouncing God have cut them off? V. p. 78.


Q. XXX Whether God's Law obliges not persons to devote themselves, and their
Infants to God, by consenting to God's Covenant for themselves and them? V. p.
50.
Whether it was not the Duty of the Israelites to engage and devote their
children to God in Covenant? Whether this be not evident from the penalty (even
to be cut off from his People) annexed for the nonperformance? (And whether
this be not as much our Duty still?) V. p. 105.
Does not the Law of Nature bind us to give to every one his own due? And are
not Infants God's own due? Does not the Law of Nature bind Parents to give them
up to God, by acknowledging his right, with a free resignation and dedication
of the Infant to God, as his own; for his use and service, when he is capable
thereof? If Infants are not capable of doing (present) Service; yet are they
not capable at present of a legal Obligation to future Duty, as also of the
relation following the Obligation? V. p. 49.
And is it not the very nature of our own holy Covenant, that in it we give up
to God, our selves, and all that is ours according to the capacity of the all?
Are not Infants capable of Infant-relation, Obligation, and Right? What is it
that a sanctified man must not devote to God that is his? V. p. 308.
Are we allowed to except children? Should not Infants therefore be devoted
according to their capacity, which God himself has expounded? And if Parents
may and must devote them privately by heart-consent, V. p. 106.
will it not follow they must do it publicly in the instituted way?

Q. XXXI. V. p. 198, 199.
Whether Anabaptists themselves, all of them that are truly pious do not
vertually (though not actually) devote their children to God, and consent to
their Covenant Relation, while they vehemently plead against it?

Q. XXXII. V. p. 152.
Is it not a desperate undertaking, and dare any adventure on it, to justify
all the World before Christ's Incarnation, except the Jews, from the guilt of
not dedicating their children to God? And do not they that say there is no Law
in this case, V. p. 153.
say there is no Transgression? And dare any in like manner undertake to
justify at the Bar of God all the World since Christ's Incarnation from the
guilt of sin, in not dedicating their children to Christ, and entering them into
his Covenant as Members of his Church? Dare any maintain that all the World is
sinless in this respect?

Q. XXXIII. V. p. 34, 35.
Is it not a great Benefit, and Privilege to be a visible Churchmember of
Christ as Head of the Church, and of his Church as visible? Is it not a benefit
in it self (besides the consequents) to be visibly united and related to Christ
and his Body? Is not such a Relation to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
and to the Church, an honor? And how great is the misery of the contrary state?

And if Infant Church Membership were no benefit, V. p. 33.
then how were they that had i^^ (when they came to age, or their Parents in
the mean time) obliged to any thankfulness for it? Will any say, that neither
they nor their Parents were obliged to thankfulness upon this account?

Q XXXIV. Is it not certain, V. p. 111, 112.
that Infants are capable of this benefit, if God deny it not, but will give it
them as well as the aged? And is it not certain that they are actually Members
of all the Commonwealths in the World? (perfect, sed imperfecta membra) And
does not nature seem actually to have taught most people on Earth, to repute
their Infants in the same Religious Society with themselves, as well as in the
same civil Society?

Q. XXXV. V. p. 113, 114.
Whether according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, God will not
vouchsafe to be their God, and take them for his people, that are (in a
natural, or Law-sence) willing to be his people, and to take him for their God?
And whether the Infants of believing Parents are not thus willing? When Infants
cannot be actually willing themselves in a natural sense, must not the reason,
and will of another be theirs in Law-sence, that is, of the Parents, who have
the full dispose of them, and are warranted by the Law of nature to choose for
them (for their good) till they come to the use of reason themselves?

Whether in God's acceptance the child does not thus truly consent by the
believing Parents, and does not covenant with God, V. p. 286, 287.
as a child covenanteth and consents reputatively among men, who by his
Parents is made a party in a contract, as in a lease for his life, or the like?

And so granting the Relation of Church Membership to be founded in a mutual
contract, covenant, V. p. 68, 69, 169, 171.
or consent betwixt God and us, yet must not this consent on our part differ
according to the different age and capacity of Infants, and the adult? Were not
the Israelites Infants Church Members, who consented not actually in their own
persons, but virtually, and reputatively?

Q. XXXVI. V. p. 110, 111.
Whether it be not the duty of Parents by the Law of nature, to accept of any
allowed or offered benefit for their children? The Infant being not sui Juris,
but at his Parents dispose in all things that are for his good, have not the
Parents power to oblige their children to any future duty or suffering, that is
certainly for their own good? And so may they not enter them into Covenants
accordingly? And is it not unnaturally sinful for a Parent to refuse to do such
a thing, when it is to the great benefit of his own child? And does it not
deserve to be called, the unthankful Error, that opposes childrens Rights, and
Blessings? ( V. p. 339.)

Q. XXXVII. V. p. 100.
Whether it may be thought, or any dare maintain, that the Covenant of Grace
gives no conditional Right to any Infant in the World? Are they all excluded?
And why? Are they worse than their Parents? If it give any Right to Infants
conditionally, as it does to Parents, must it not be on a condition to be
performed by the Parents, or such as are so far entrusted?

Or can this be called a Covenant, V. p. 10^.
for God only to say [I will save all such Infants as I elect] and yet offer
Salvation to none of them in the World on any condition, nor give a title to
any person that can be known by themselves or others? Would it not be to
confound the Decree of God with his Covenant? And what Right or hope does this
give to Christians for their children, more than to Pagans?

Whether they that will lay all the Right of Infants to the pardon of sin, V.
p. 209, 205.
and salvation upon secret election only; as if all that we knew of Infants
salvation were, that God would save some whom he has elected: but that there
is no promise of Grace or Salvation to any particular Infant in the World, as
under any condition, or qualification? Whether they must not say, that no
Infant has any Right to Pardon, Grace and Salvation, given him by the Covenant
of Grace; no more than any elect person at age has before Faith and
Regeneration? And must they not say too, that we have no assurance that God
will save ten or three Infants in all the World? For he has not told us
whether he has elected so many? Or that they may all, or almost all be saved,
while the number of the Elect is unrevealed? Or can they say, that any more of
the children of the faithful are saved, than of the Heathens or Infidels; of
those that love God and keep his Commandment, than of those that hate him? Yea,
how can they have any proper hope upon Covenant-right, that God will save any
one Individual Infant in the World? For how can we hope (in this proper sense)
of any thing but what we do believe? And how can we believe what is not
promised, or revealed? And so must not Parents thus far be left hopeless?

And if God will save more (yea, V. p. 205, 206.
so great numbers as we hope are saved in Infancy) than ever he promised to
save, and gave any Antecedent Right to Salvation to, whether will it not open
such a gap to the hopes of presumptuous Heathens and Infidels this way, as will
cross our common Doctrine? As some will say, why may he not do so also by
Parents, at least renewing them in transitu?

And further, V. p. 1^2.
if God has given no condition or character Antecedent, as a differencing
qualification of those that he will save from those that he will not, but only
told us that he will save whom he lists, whether this makes not Infants to
be no Subjects of his Kingdom, under no Law, and so liable to no Judgment, nor
to stand in judgment with the rest of the World, but only to be used as Beasts
or Stones, by Divine natural motion as he will? And then if there be no Law
that gives Right to pardon and salvation to any one Infant in the World, and
yet many are saved, will it not follow, that God is (as the profane say)
better than his word, and will save many to whom he never gave right to it by
promise?

Q. XXXVIII. Though all that are saved, V. p. 203, 204.
are saved for the meritorious righteousness of Christ, by way of free gift;
yet whether the condition be not a suitable acceptance? And why may not a Parent
accept a Donation for his child, who has no will to accept it for himself?
Shall he be certainly shut out unto damnation? Or shall he have that gift
absolutely which is conditional to all others? Or is he not concerned in the
Donation at all? And have not Infants guilt and misery from their Parents? And
though life and pardon be by Christ only, yet is it not congruous, that the
mere condition of acceptance may be performed by the Parents (while they cannot
accept for themselves?)

Q. XXXIX. V. p. 106, 107.
(Whether it be no advantage for children to be under an early engagement to
God, and Jesus Christ?) Whether to dedicate them betimes to God, does not tend
to secure God's right and childrens good, and to prevent their sin and misery;
they being thus under a double Obligation, which they may be minded of betimes,
and which may hold them more strongly to their duty, and disadvantage the
Tempter that would draw them off from God?

And may it not do much to awe the minds of children; yea, V. p. 107.
and cause them to love that Christ which has received them, and that Society
to which they belong? And, is Infant-covenanting any hinderance in Nature, or
Reason from personal serious covenanting with God at age? Do we not tell our
children and all the adult, that their Infant-covenanting by Parents, will
serve them but till they have Reason and will of their own to choose for
themselves?

If it were deferred till ripeness of age would not one part neglect it and
continue Infidels; V. p. 222, 223.
and another part do all formally, as we see they do now at the other
Sacrament, where the same Covenant is to be renewed? Is there not a better
remedy, that all that are baptized in Infancy should as understandingly, and as
seriously, and (if it may be conveniently) as solemnly, own and make that
Covenant with God when they come to age, as if they had never been baptized (if
not more, as being more obliged?)

Is it not much liker to tend to the good of Souls, V. p. 109.
and the propagating Christianity, and the strength of the Church for to have
both the obligation and comfort of our Infant-covenant, and Church State, and
as serious a covenanting also at age, when we pass into the Church State of the
Adult; than to be without the former, and left only to the expectation of the
latter?

Whether to be seriously devoted to God by our Parents first, V. p. 223.
and to be brought at age as seriously to devote our selves to him, as any
Anabaptist can do, be not a much likelier way to fill the Church with serious
Christians, than to leave all men without an early Infant-obligation?

Q. XL. V. p. 156, 157.
Whether it can be proved that ever there was one Age, or Church (particular)
on Earth since Adam till about 200. years ago, that the Anabaptists rose,
wherein Infants were not de facto taken for Members of the Church?

Q. XLI. Whether it can be proved, V. p. 157, 104.
that ever there was any one Infant of true Church Members, that was not
rightfully a Churchmember himself from the Creation till Christ's days? Or
from the Creation till this day; except the Anabaptists, who reject the
benefit, whose case we will not presume to determine?

Q. XLII. V. p. 157, 158.
Seeing that Infants have been de facto, Church Members from the Creation to
this day (as far as any Records can lead us) Is it likely that the Lord, and
Head and all sufficient Governor of his Church, would have permitted his
Church till now to be actually made up of such Subjects, as in regard of age be
disallowed, and suffered his Church to be wrong framed till now? Or is it a
reasonable, modest, and lawful undertaking, to go about now in the end of the
World to make God a new framed Church, as to the age of the Subjects? And is it
not more modest and safe to live quietly in a Church of that frame, as all the
Saints of Heaven lived in, till the other day, as a few Anabaptists did attempt
an Alteration?

Q. XLIII. V. p. 160.
Whether considering Christ's own Infant-membership, and his kind reception of
Infants, and his chiding those that would have kept them off, and his offers of
taking in all the Jewish Nation, ( Matthew. 23.37.) and that they were broken off
by unbelief, V. p. 143.
and consequently the Seed of Believers not broken off from the Church
Universal, and that whole Households are often said to be baptized, and that Paul
pronounces Believers children holy, and that Christ expressly ( Matthew. 28.)
commands his Ministers, as much as in them lies to disciple all Nations
baptizing them, and that it is prophesied that the Kingdoms of the World shall
be made the Kingdoms of Christ, and there is no Nation or Kingdom on Earth that
Infants are not Members of; whether in all this, and much more, there be not a
plain notification of God's will, that as he never had a Church which excluded
Infants; so neither does he now exclude them?

And if any will take him for Antichrist that takes Infants into the visible
Church, V. p. 305.
whether it will not prove to be Christ himself?

Q. XLIV. V. p. 209,
In sum, whether 1. God would not have Parents devote their children to him,
and enter them according to their capacity in his Covenant? 2. Whether also he
does not accept into his Covenant all that are faithfully thus devoted to him,
and be not peculiarly their God, that such children are holy? 3. Whether they
are not as certainly Members, according to an Infant capacity, of the visible
Church, as they are of all Kingdoms under Heaven? 4. Whether there be not far
more hope of their Salvation, than of those without? 5. Whether the Covenant
does not make their Salvation certain, if they so die? 6. Whether the
Investiture and Solemnization of their Covenant with Christ should not be made
in Infancy?

Whether ever it can be proved, V. p. 233.
that granting Infants visible Church Membership, yet they are not to be
baptized, and that Baptism was appointed for initiating none but adult Members?
Whether Baptism be not the common entrance into the Church, and the plain Law
of Christ, Matthew. 28.19. and the Exposition of the Universal Church does not
stand on Record to confute such an Opinion?

Q. XLV. Preface p. 4.
How inconsiderable a part of the Universal Church do the Anabaptists hold
Communion with? And do they not unchurch almost all the Churches on Earth? (may
we not think, that they rob Christ of more than nine parts of ten of his
Kingdom, or Church Universal? V. p. 305.)

Q. XLVI. Preface ib.
Whether they can possibly hope that ever the Church on Earth will unite upon
their terms, of rejecting all their Infants from the visible Church, and
renouncing all our Infant Rights and Benefits conferred by the Baptismal
Covenant of Grace?

Q. XLVII. Preface ib.
And whether if they continue to the World's end to separate from almost all
the Churches and unchurch them, their employment will not be still to serve the
great Enemy of Love and Concord, against the Lord of Love and Peace, and
against the Prosperity of Faith and Godliness, and against the welfare of the
Church and Souls, and to the scandal and hardening of the ungodly?

Q. XLVIII. V. p. 189.
Whether too many well-meaning, but weak Christians are not disaffected to
lawful and warrantable things in the Worship of God, merely because they see
such as are ungodly use and own them? And whether if God should but let us have
a King and other Rulers that were against Infant Baptism, and singing of
Psalms, etc. and would make Laws for their own way, and impose it on others, so
that the ungodly multitude should fall in with them, it would not presently
cure many that are now for such Opinions?

Q. XLIX. Whether Mr. Baxter in the second and third part of that his second
Defense of our Infants Rights, have not sufficiently detected the great and
notorious Untruths in Fact and History, wherewith Mr. H. D. Treatise of
Baptism, and Reply to Mr. Wills is fully stuffed?

Q. L. V. p. 228, 229.
Whether the Anabaptists Schism, or Separation from Communion with our Churches
be not worse (yet) than their simple Opinion? And whether it be not desirable,
and possible, that some way be found out, and terms laid down in which good and
sober men on both sides would agree and hold Communion? As v. g. If the
Anabaptists would consent to, and profess as follows, or to this sense:
Though we judge Infant Baptism dssonant from Christ's instituted Order, yet
finding that God has made many Promises to the Seed of the Faithful above
others, and that Christ expressed his readiness to receive little Children when
they were brought to him for his Blessing, and knowing that all Christian
Parents should earnestly desire that their Children may be the Children of God
through Christ, and should devote them to him, as far as is in their power, and
knowing that there are difficulties about the extent of this Power, and
Christ's Promises; we do here solemnly profess, that we thankfully desire all
those Mercies for this Child which God has promised to such in his Word; and
that we heartily offer, devote and dedicate this Child to God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, as far as he has given us power to do it, beseeching him
accordingly to accept him: And we promise faithfully to endeavor to educate
him in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, and as we are able to persuade
him when he is capable, to believe in Christ, and solemnly devote himself to
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost in Baptism. If thus much were done in the
Church, or so openly as may satisfy the Church, that they are not despisers of
God's mercies, nor of their Childrens Souls: And much more, if those that
profess that they cannot satisfy their Consciences in their Infant Baptism, V.
p. 230. 231.
would but do as the Liturgy does by those whose Baptism is uncertain, [If thou
be not baptized, I baptize thee,] and so would say, [Being uncertain whether my
Infant Baptism be valid, if it be not I now receive that which is.] And when
they have satisfied their Consciences, would live quietly in the Love and
Communion of the Church, who would not receive them, though we approve not of
their way?

And should not we be willing to give satisfaction by such an answerable
profession as this? Though it be our Judgment that Infants have ever been
Members of God's visible Church, since he had a Church and there were Infants
in the World, and do believe that Christ has signified in the Gospel that it
is his gracious will, that they should still be so, and that he has made
Baptism the regular orderly way of solemn entrance into a visible Church State;
and therefore we devote this Child to God in the Baptismal Covenant: yet we do
also hold, that when he comes to age, it will be his duty as seriously and
devoutly to make this Covenant with God understandingly himself, and to
dedicate himself to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as those must do that
never were baptized in Infancy: And we promise to endeavor faithfully as we
have opportunity, to instruct and persuade him so to do, hoping that this his
early Baptismal Dedication and Obligation to God, will rather much prepare him
for it, than hinder it.

Whether might not some such Professions put off the chief matter of Offense
and Exception against each other, as to the ill consequents of our Opinions?
and would not sober good men by such a mutual approach, be more disposed to
live together in Love and Holy Peace (which we should all pray for, and what in
us lies, as far as possibly we can, promote?)

FINIS.

