PRAEDESTINATION, As before privately, so now at last openly defended against
Post-DESTINATION.

In a Correptorie Correction, Given in by way of answer to, A (so called)
CORRECT COPY of some notes concerning GODS DECREES, Especially of REPROBATION;

Published the last summer, by Mr T. P In which CORRECT COPY of his, he left so
much of Pelagianisme, Massilianisme, Arminianisme uncorrected, as Scripture,
Antiquity, the Church of England, Schoolmen, and all orthodox Neotericks will
exclaim against to his shame, as is manifestly evinced,

By William Barlee, Rector of Brock-hole in Northampton shire.

To which are prefixed the Epistles of Dr Edward Reynolds, and Mr Daniel
Cawdrey.

Augustine. Epist. 107. ad Vital, Carthaginens. Quomodo dicuntur negare liberum
arbitrium voluntatis, qui confitentu^ omnem hominem, quisquis suo cord credit
in Deum, non nisi sua libera credere voluntate? cum potius illi oppugnant
arbitrium liberum, qui oppugnant Dei gratia^, qua vere ad bona eligenda and
agend^ fit lib^ru^.

London, Printed by W. H. for George Sawbridge, and are to be sold at the sign
of the Bible on Ludgate Hill, near Fleet Bridge, 16^^.

To the very Reverend, and his most worthy Sym-presbyters, the Ministers of
Christ, ordinarily meeting at the Lectures in Northampton and Dayntrey,
particularly to those Seniors amongst them, who having long since subscribed to
the nine and thirty Articles of the Church of England, do yet firmly adhere to
the dogmaticall part of them.
Brethren,
WHEN I could any ways impetrate Section 1.
from my self, some leisure from other studies, not having any great affinity
with these which I now offer to you, and to which of late years I have been
much addicted, since some heterodox disowned, and at last owned papers of Mr T.
P's, have in a clandestine, and in an open way, fluttered about our Country; I
think it not fit to tell you, with what expedition and cheerfulness, I did draw
up an answer to them, satisfactory to my self, and to some others much better
able to judge betwixt things that differ: Yet now that I am forced to
entertain sad and serious thoughts of publishing my conceptions, my witness
is on high, that I am not able to express to you, how various and great the
anxieties of my tumultuating spirits are; and that not only for those more
personal reasons long since, and of late given in to my Antagonist, for which
I am sure he owes me thanks, not scorns, the only returns which yet I have
had from him; (Ingratum si quando dixeris, omnia dixeris) but much more for
those of a higher altitude and contemplation. Alas for my dear mother, the
Church of God amongst us, after so many worse then Scyllan or Marian, civil,
uncivil contests, which lately, yea still do abound in her sacred and
spiritual republicke; is it not high time for her to take her Supersedeas from
contention, and to use the Historians phrase, quasi aegrae sauciaeque
requiescere quomodocu^que, B. Florm, lib. 3. cap. 23.
ne vulnera curatione ipsa rescinderentur? Knows not all the Reformed
Christian world by this time, to the grief and sorrow of it, that we are long
since grown sick of our remedies, as of our diseases? Lord Christ, is Nec
morbe^ nec remedia f^rre possunt, Tacit.
this a time, when pens, hands, tongues, to speak of no sharper things now, are
up and busy, not only against Ministers, but contra Presbyterium ipsum, the
very ordained ministry of Christ it self, lately blessed be God, vindicated
by your selves, for Ministers one against another, as it were in a hostile way,
to be breaking their spears and lances, and to stand,

Tela pares acies, and pila minantia pilis, See the preface to the reader, p.
55. of Jus divinum Ministerii Evangelici, with Mr T. Bal's Pasterum
propugnaculu^.
as if the Devil in this last of ages had not conjured up enemies enough to
destroy them all, and that by their own divisions? Hitherto I thank my God for
it, both in foreign parts, and in my sweeter home, as to all my Protestant
Brethren in the Ministry, in whom there has but appeared the least glimpse of
true piety, what is observed to have been the happiness of Myconius, has T.
Fuller Abel Redivivus in the life of Myconius, p. 139.
been mine, we together, cucurrimus, certavimus, laboravimus, pugnavimus,
vicimus, and viximus semper convinctissime, etc. with all such, even when in
all things, conscience would not suffer me to colere unitatem opinionis, I did
colere unitatem ordinis, and so did maintain the union of the spirit in the
bond of peace. This faelicity my (as he calls himself Protestant, p. 4.) *
Antagonist should not have envied me, by Bullinger upon occasion of Bolsec his
disquieting the Church of Geneva, by his opposing the doctrine of Calvin
touching election, returned this answer; that he which did teach that Gods
eternal election did depend on foreseen faith, did maliciously abuse the
doctrine of the Church of Tigurum.
interrupting my peace. Can there be at this time a day, after that so many
invincible Heroes have subdued all Pelagian and Arminian monsters, who
heretofore have corrupted Gods truth, and disquieted his Church, any great use
or honor (if that were any way to be heeded by modest Divines) in open field to
appear against slain and conquered enemies? Who so great a stranger in the
Israel of our God amongst us, but knows that more famous Writers have
anticipated all that can be said according to Scripture, Right reason,
antiquity upon these arguments, then ever wrote the History of the Marathonian
fight? and yet G. I. Vossius, tells me in his observations upon I. Sleidan, p.
17. de quatuor summis Imperiis; pugnam Marathoniam fere a trecentis historicis
esse descriptam. And truly to say nothing of others, I must confess I know
little use of, and less honor in writing more upon these arguments, till the
adversaries bring new ones, for the supporting of their graceless cause, which
have not long since been confuted (if I may so speak) by those Herculesses or
Sampsons in Divinity, Austin, Bradwardin, and out of them, Dr Twisse. For my
part upon these and other grounds, I could most willingly have given my
adversary leave to have reviewed his arguments, and have compared them with the
answers of most renowned authors, and so to have allowed See T. Fullers Abel
Redivivus, p. 336.
him yet longer space to have come to his Retractations, the second or the
third time, (for he has been at them several times already, p. 24.) and to
keep touch with us, in what he puts us in hopes of, p. 72. that how
dogmatically soever he may seem to have spoken in many places of his discourse,
that he will submit to those of deeper and profounder reach, and my self
could have rejoiced to have betaken my self to the wonted crypts of my
silence, though I were to be jeered for it by him, p. 4. There he jeers me with
my very great leisure.
then thus to appear upon an open Theater.

But when pious, prudent, and by me studied Section 2.
delays shall, and that by no beggars, be interpreted to be a scrinking in
the maine cause, that noble and brave cause of grace, defended by me the
meanest of its votaries; when not only my count, smooth, polite adversary
shall disdain (as I know he does) to to think how low and mean qualified an
enemy he has in me met withal to deal against him.

Rusticus (says he) es corydon, nec quicquam curat Alexis. But when by some,
even of Christ's friends, it shall be thought that he has the better of the
cause, because he of a long time has had the last words, it is high time for
me to arowse my self, and to cease from that which the most call
sloathfulnesse, whatever I may call it In causa haerese^s neminem op^rtet esse
patientem, Hier.
myself. And now I trow if you will not be angry with me, (as I hope you will
not) for bringing my labors in this Dedicatory to your doors, I am sure no
body else will be able to give any reason why they should be so, for calling
upon you upon this occasion. Have I, or am I solicitous to have any more
knowing, able, more proper or competent patrons, yea, Ecclesiastical,
Ministerial Judges of my work and cause then your selves? who have ever with
L. Capella, judged it unreasonable, L. Capellae Epist. Dedic. ad Spicilegium.
illis (be they Lords or Ladies, or whoever they will be) mea inscribere, qui
vix libri titulum adspicere dignantur, quique inscriptam sibi Epistolam, saepe
vix legere, multo minus intelligere possunt, ne dum ut de operis pretio and
merito, vel ejusdem demerito recte judicare valiant I cannot doubt but you have
been grieved at the very heart, for the pleasing poison in a golden cup of
Oratory in the papers answered, propined against your judgments and liking
unto many of your incautelous auditors, and may a little be refreshed by a
sound, though homely antidote, now at last come forth against them. None of
you, as you know, are the Fathers of your poor Sympresbyters papers, (as Mr T.
P. is not ashamed somewhere in his Epistles to me, to suggest that you were to
be). Would to God you could have stooped so low, as to have been so, or at
least to have appointed those three most Reverend Praefacers, (whom I have, as
was most fitting, set in the forefront, seeing they have been pleased like
themselves, doctorally to speak to the maine Questions controverted) Dr
Reynolds, Mr Thomas Whitfield, Mr D. Cawdrey, to have been so, my adversary
would have felt any one of their little fingers to have fallen heavier upon his
cause, then all my loins: but you know I have been long deeply engaged to you
for your pious and learned society, and for your constant good affections not
so much to my cause, as to our Lord Christ's, our common Lord and Master. To
such friends as I owe much, so I would gladly out of my poor treasury, pay out
by public acknowledgement, some mites of gratitude; the rather because I fear
before this now begun contention in our parts be ended, you with your more
robustious arms, must come in Ecclesiastically to decide it; I fear me, pray
God in this I prove a false Prophet, the late Correct Copy, though for the
present taken up, and examined by a fratrum minimus of your order, yet in the
issue, as most probably in the intention of our Duellist, must be taken up by
some Majorite of your company, before he will cease from displaying his
banners of defiance against the truth and grace of God.

I believe every body will think I should Section 3.
rather make some Apology for the length, lightness, or pleasantness, and for
the tartness of my style in the work, then for beseeching you to patronize it.
For the two latter, let me crave leave to begin a posteriori, I list to say
little, because most, even of you may judge me faulty, and I will think so, and
say so too, yea, and most willingly come to an open penance for it, also with a
peccavi fate or from my heart and mouth, veniam peto, si unquam posthac.
Defendam ego non passiones meas, sed veritatem Christi, if any of your society
shall, convince me of scurrility in the former, or Calumny in the latter; else
I must humbly crave leave to think, that if the conditions of my adversary were
but as to all matters as well known to others, as I am made continually to
know them, feel them, and understand them, I should have enough to plead an
excuse for that which otherwise might sound ill in my way of sometimes play
fullness, and anon sharpness with him: Every one can tell how to tame a shrew,
but he that has her. As for the length, I can safely say, It was not projected
by me at the first; and now I perceive how much it is beyond my first designs,
I am much displeased with it; yet I must crave leave to say in my own behalf,
that whilst, 1. I labor to draw out my Adversary out of his ambiguous lurking
holes. 2. whilst I study to avoid obscurity in deep matters. 3. whilst I state
questions all allong left unstated, after a careless fashion by Mr T. P. 4.
Whilst I pull away ancient Authors from him. 5. Vindicate the modernes. 6. My
self being a mere pigmee, Zacchaeus-like, get upon the shoulders of many
ancient and modern tall writers. 7. Whilst I am somewhat loath to leave any
thing which has but the very physiognomy of an Argument wholly unanswered 8.
Whilst I study to prevent the adversaries pelting of me with oratoriall
Triobulary Pamphlets, which but for the logs which I throw in his way, he has
a genius to do from month to month. I say, whilst I do all this, lo, before
I am aware of it, I swell into a kind of a volume, which to some I doubt not,
will neither be unprofitable, nor unpleasant toward their Anti-Pelagian, and
Anti-Arminian studies: and as for others of less leisure, if they will but be
pleased seriously to per-use my answer to the two Portals of Mr T. P's book; in
which, for the gratifying of some, I was purposely the longer, and but let the
margin alone to professed Students and Divines, they will not find the work
overbulky, and yet I trust have enough, by Gods grace, to settle them in the
truth, and to take off the edge of objections.

To conclude; the work, such as it is, is now Section 4.
exposed to open view, for every one to pass what censure upon it, he shall
judge most fitting. I shall but beg of all, that neither I, and less Gods
truth by me maintained, may be condemned before it be heard to speak for it
self. If Mr T. P. who as yet stands ad oppositum, will take upon him that
which he calls, p. 20. the drudgery of a Reply, let him do it heartily, not so
much against the more lighter parts of my book, wherein after some work, I
took a little leave to play; as against that, wherein every judicious person
will say the strength of it lies: If he do otherwise, he shall henceforth sibi
and Musis canere, take all the sport to himself; as for me, I will be as a
deaf man, who will never dance at any such music. As for you my dear and
Reverend Brethren, as I have had, so I humbly beg the continuance of your
prayers upon my Ministry, labors, person, for the afflicted Church and people
of God amongst us, that it may at length enjoy truth, peace, righteousness, in
a settled way, according to Christ's mind, that we may all speak and mind those
things, whereby both we, and those who hear us, may be saved.

In Christ I continue your indebted Brother and Fellow Laborer, William Barlee.
Brockhole Febr. 6. 1655/6
A Postscript to be subjoined to the DEDICAT.
Reverend Brethren,
Four full months after the winding up of my first Dedicat. to you, and the
dispatching of it away from me to the Printers, it has been my happy
unhappiness to light upon a third piece of Mr T. P's, which he seems not to be
very unwilling in his Epist. Dedicat. we should call his monumentall OBELISK
for the eternizing of his memory; and which some in intuition of many passages
in it, might think reasonable enough, to call the REPROBATES PLEA for sinning,
drawn up by his fair spoken and last Advocate; rather then as he, or some
friend for him, does entitle it, The sinner impleaded in his own COURT. In
this tract it is most certain, that there be many bona mixta malis, and
almost as many mala mixta bonis; as if he had been ambitious to make it known
to the world, that where he does well, none can do Vbi been nemo melius, ubi
maele nemo pejus.
better, and where he does ill, none shall or will do worse. I doubt not but
that as many of you as have had leisure or opportunity to peruse it in any or
all the obnoxious passages of it, will with me conclude, that I may be very
well allowed to call in my Apology in my first address to you, f^r my
appearing at last in the world against a Minister nunc dierum, in a polemicall
way, for my not intended prolixity for the Acrimony of my style. As to the
first; I think I am rather now bound upon the bended knees of my soul and
body, to ask God, and you his Ministers, together with our dear Country,
pardon for deferring the publication of my writing so long. Had that been forth
presently after it was in September last finished by me, possibly the author of
this last Pamphlet, might have thought it reasonable to have abated much of his
scornful insolency in many things which he has again belched out now this
third time against Gods absolute Decrees and Counsels, from p. 241. usque ad
250. and else where up and down. The best is, (and its that wherein I am bound
not only to observe, but even to adore the Divine overruling Providence) my
plea for my otherwise, as might be thought, unexcusable prolixity, is become
very easy, and it is this: That my one book gives a full answer to all
material passages of no less then three of my Antagonists, viz. To his first
Cryptick one, which as yet is so to most of the world: To his CORRECT published
Copy, which I use to call his Demon Meridianum: And now to his third piece,
which was altogether in Cryptis to me when I wrote mine. If this by any
rational body, can be proved to be otherwise, I shall be content to be by
you put to the penance of writing a third volume for answering all; but I know
you will not judge it needful. As for the third thing, the tartness and
acrimony of my style, which some before out of love to me, and undeserved
respects to Mr T. P. weresomewhat stumbled at. (who yet from many acts and deed
public and private, was then as well known to me, as he is now: Sic mihi notus
Ulysses) I do now fear, since in his last he has to the open view of the
world so fully displaied himself in his unconscionable, wilful, and not weak
or childish misrepresenting of the opinions of his adversaries, for the making
of them odious, so as a Bellarmin from Rome, or a Stapleton from Doway, would
hardly have done, as you will easily see, if you do but peruse what he, like
another slanderous Dragon, Rev. 12. 15. casts out of his mouth, p. 320, 321,
332, 333, 334. 368, circa finem, 383. and alibi passim. I say I do now fear
that against so stomachfull and railing an Adversary, I shall rather be judged
too soft and playfull, rather then too sharp and serious against one who in
many things behaves himself but too like Elymas, in drawing away the Deputy
from the faith, and may seem to deserve as cutting a reproof, as he received
from Paul, Acts 13. 10. sed reprimam me.

Oh my worthy dear brethren, what now remains, but that we should be, First,
deeply humbled before the Lord, and if it were possible, with floods of tears
be wail it, that from among our selves, and our own sacred order, there is one
arisen furnished with the greatest advantages of wit, Art, Oratory, Applause of
no beggars, to speak such perverse things, to draw no mean Disciples after
him. Secondly, That with all possible Alacrity and Vigor, we should go on
with what we seem some way to be beginning, to unite into an Ecclesiastical
and spiritual association, that to use Cyprians phrase, we may Deificam
confaederare disciplinam, that by word, tongue and pen, and Christian
censures, we may what lies in u^, suppress the growing up of such errors,
which threat our Churches with as much mischief, as ever F. Socinus and his
followers brought upon the Polonian, or since Arminius and Vorstius brought
upon the Batavian: verbum sapienti sat est; principiis obsta, etc. within the
mere orb of an Ecclesiastical sphere, you shall find me as truly yours, as I
am or desire to be my own, Dum meus ipse mihi, dum spiritus hos regit artus.

W. B.
Brockhole, June 30. 1656.
For his Reverend and worthy Friend, Mr William Barlee, Minister of the Word at
Brockhole in Northamptonshire.
SIR,
I Return you many thanks, for communicating unto me, your elaborate and
learned answer to an Anonymous book lately published concerning Gods decrees,
reported to be written by one, whom, for his polite parts of wit and learning,
I have, and do respect; but have been long since taught a very good rule by
Aristotle, (...). Arist. Ethic. lib. 1. cap. 4.


I was sorry to see this controversy revived amongst us, which caused anciently
so much trouble to the Church of God, and in our memory so much danger and
distemper to the Belgic Nation; whereof King James was so sensible, that in a
Letter to the States, King James his Declarat. against Vorstius in his works in
English, p. 350. and 355.
he calls Arminius an enemy of God, and charge Bertius with grossly lying
against the Church of England, in avowing that the Heresies contained in his
blasphemous book of the Apostacy of the Saints (they are the Kings own words)
were agreeable with the Religion and profession of this Church. And he did
solemnlie desire the Ambassadors of that State, to forewarn them from him, to
beware of the disciples of Arminius, of whom, though himself lately dead, he
had left too many behind him.

When you first acquainted me with your purpose to answer that tract (which was
before I had seen it, it being then but manuscript, and had only heard from
you the drift of it) you well remember what my judgment was, that in
polemicall writings, it was best to forbear the persons of men, and to hold
close to the Argument. I learned it of Tertullian, a grave writer, Tertul.
advers. Hermog. c. 1.
viderit persona, cum doctrina mihi quaestio est. And it was the speech of an
aged holy divine of this Country, now with God, that in disputes, soft words
and hard arguments, were best. Yet I deny not but the case may so be, that in
writings of this nature, there may be a necessity as well of sharp rebukes, as
of strong refutations, Tit. 1. 13.

And truly it was matter of much trouble to me, to find in that Treatise, a
distinction of Modest Blasphemers, and others who are for Ligonem, Ligonem: And
to find so eminent servants of Christ, as Calvin, Dr Twisse, and others, to
be ranged under one of those members, as men that tell the world (though such
words are no where found in them, but the quite contrary) that the evil of
sin in man proceeds from God only as the author, and from man only as the
instrument; yea, to be worse then the Manichees and Marcionites of old, as to
this particular blasphemy. Vide Aug. cont. Julian. lib. 1. cap. 2.
For though the names of the authors are not, as is said, in civilitie cited,
yet the references in the margin of the book (which surely were not set there
to bear no signification) make me think of Tacitus his observation Tacit.
Annal. lib. 3. verbis ultim^is.
touching the Effigies of Brutus and Cassius in the funeral of Junia,
praefulgebant Brutus and Cassius eo ipso quod effigies eorum non visebantur. It
had been much to be wished, that imputations of such a strain, had been left
by men professing modesty and ingenuitie, unto Bolsec and others of his
complexion. But by whomsoever used, they are but as the Confectioners beating
of his spices, which does not at all hinder, but strengthen the fragrancie of
them. I do not jurare in verba, either of Calvin, or any other man. But I
cannot but with grief be sensible of so high a charge as blasphemy, to be
laid upon persons so deeply acquainted with the mind of God in his word, as
they were. The vindicating of them I leave to you* and shall only say, that
their Lord and their Brethren before them, have met with the same measure Mar.
2. 7. Mat. 26 65. Acts 6. 13. And that there have been men of great learning,
and not wholly devoted to the judgment B. Andrews opuscul. p. 115
of Calvin, who have taught even dissenters thus to speak of him, Calvino,
illustri viro, nec unquam sine summi honoris praefatione nominando, non
assentior.

But it is no new thing to draw invidious consequents from such opinions as we
have a mind to render odious unto the world. A fate which has ever Vide etiam
contra Julian. 6. 2. cap. 1. and l. 3. cap. 24 and lib. 4. cap. 3.
followed these controversies from the beginning of them. Nine or ten Pelagian
calumnies, Austin, that renowned Champion of grace, is put to remove in his
second and third books, contra duas Epistolas Pelagianorum.

In the Epistles of Prosper and Hilary unto him, we find many heavy
consequents charged by the Massilienses, upon his doctrine, de vocatione
secundum propositum and de praedestionatione, that it gives occasion of
sinning, makes men careless of standing, careless after lapses, of rising
again, takes away all industry and regard of virtue, induces a fatal
necessity, weakneth vigor of preaching, is contrary to the edification of
hearers, renders fruitless all Christian correption, and drives men unto
despair. Yea, that holy man, or Prosper his follower, (for the work goes
under both In respons. ad Articulos si by falso impositos in edit. Basil.
Prosper ad capitula object. Vicentian. Histor. Gotschalc. cap. 2, 3. Amica
Collatio. p. 294.
names) was feign to conflict with these very objections of Gods making men to
destroy them, and of his being the author of sin. And after that, the same
objections were made against the same doctrine of Austin, under the odious name
of Haeresis praedestinatiana, as the renowned Bp Usher, and learned Camero have
observed. And the same we find revived in handling the same controversies in
our days, rendering those opinions, which please us not, as fore impedidiments
unto true piety, by the Author of the book, called Gods love to mankind, and
others. From which charge they have been sufficiently vindicated, Prosper ad
capitul. Gallor. Histor. Gotschalc. cap. 5.
as of old by Prosper, Aquitanicus, Rhemigius, Lugdunensis, and others, so of
late by those learned men who have answered the forenamed book. But this being
a taking medium, I find used also by the Socinians. Jonas Schlingius has
written a disputation against Meisner a Lutheran divine, in defense of Socinus
to this very effect.

But how ill it beseems sons of the reformed Church of England, to take up
that charge Bolsec. in vita Calvini. cap. 23. Bellarmin, de Amiss. great. and
statu peccat. lib. 2. cap. 4, 5, 6 Becan, opuscul. to. 1. opusc. 3. and 11.
Kellisous Survay. lib. 5. cap. 1, 2, 3. Fitz Simon Britannomach. lib. 1. cap.
12. Stapleton. de justific. lib. 11. Fevardent. dialog. to. 2. p. 155-195.
Maldonat. in Mat. 26. 14. 24. Pineda in Job 1. 21. Horontius loc catholic. lib.
3. cap. 2, 3, 4. Possevin. select. biblioth. l. 8. cap. 32.
which Bolsec, Bellarmine, Becanus, Kellison, Fitz Simon, Stapleton,
Fevardentius, and others of that party, have unjustly cast upon the worthy
instruments of God, in the reformation of the Church, and which have been so
expressly disavowed, and so fully wiped off by a whole cloud of learned
Writers, (some Calvin. instit. lib. 1. cap. 17. 3. and cap. 18. Sect. 4 and lib
2. cap. 4. Sect. 1, 2. in Psalm. 105. 25. in Hos. 13. 11. and cont. Libertinos.
cont. calumnias adversus doctrinam ejus de occulta Dei providentia. opusc. p.
850. 870. Epist. ad ministros Helvetic. in Dan. 4, 35 Beza abstertio
calumniarum Tilmanni Heshusii calum. 1. opusc, part. 1 p. 313. 324. and contra
calumnias Sebastiani Cast^llionis advers. doctrinam Calvini. p. 339. 424.
Muscul. loc. com. de lapsu. Hominis. Sect. 4 and de provident. p. 493. 496.
Pet. Martyr loc. com. class. 1 cap. 14. Zanc. de not. Dei, lib. 3. cap. 4 and
To. 4. lib. 1. cap. 3. thesi 4. Hyperii opusc. to 2. p. 143 Geo. Sohnius operum
to. 2. p. 708 723. 744. Fulk and Carthwright ans. to the Rhem. Test. on Mat. 6.
13. Junius operum to. 1. col. 1851. 1855. Perkins Treatise of praedestination,
p. 613. 621. and on the Crecd, p 156 161. Paraeus in Romans 1. dub. 19. and Romans
3. dub. 4. and respons. ad. Bellarminde amiss. gra. and statu peccat. lib. 2.
cap. 4 8. Chamier controvers. tom. 2. l. 3. cap. 1, 2, 9, 10, 11. Bp Morton
Apolog. Cathol. lib. 1. cap. 25. Whit^ker contra Duraeum. lib. 8. Dr Field of
the Church, lib. 3 cap. 23. Bp Abbot R^formed Cathol. part. 3. p. 60. 90. and
Antilog. advers. Apolog. Eudemon Joannis, cap. 5. Sect. 5. Vrsin. Explicat.
catechet, de peccato. qu. 7. Sect. 4. de provident. qu. 27. Dr John Whites way,
digress. 41. Sect. 51. Dr Franc. Whites Orthodox Faith, cap. 8. Sect. 1. p.
218. 230. Dr Crackenthorp. contra Spalatens. cap. 36. Ames: Bellarmin, enervat.
tom. 4. de causae peccati. Bp Davenant's answer to Hoord. p. 108. 146. Dr
Twisse vindic. great. lib. 2. digress. 2, Walaeus loc. com. de primo peccato and
de actuali Dei provident. Dr H. Alting. loc. com. part. 2. p. 421. and theol.
problemat. part. 1. Problem. 29, 30. and exeges. confess. Augustan. art: 19.
and denique theolog. elenctic. nova, p. 287 319. Rivet Catholic Orthodox.
Tract. 4. qu 6 7. Spanheim dub. Evangel. part. 3. dub. 51. Sect. 5. Maccov.
loc. com. cap. 48. Cloppenburg. loco de gubernatione contingentium. Pelargus
compend. theolog. loc. 10. qu. 10. 13. and loc. de peccato. 11. qu. 19.
few of whom I have e mea tenui supellectile, in the margin pointed unto) I
leave unto you to show.

Sure we are, that upon a candid examination, it will appear, that in this
argument, Protestant Divines have intended no more then V. Aug. Epist. edit.
Colon. 48. p. 58. 9. and Epist 59. p. 103. D. De Genesis ad lit. lib. 11. cap. 3.
12. de spirit and lit. cap. 31. enchirid. cap. 11. 27. 95. 96, 97, 98, 99, 100,
101, 104. octoginta trium quaestionum, qu. 27. contra Julian. Pelag. lib. 5.
cap. 3, 4. de great. and lib. arbit. cap. 20, 21. de praedestinat. sanctorum,
cap. 10. 16. 20. Augustini sententiae pii omnes. and modesti acquiescent.
Calvin. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 18. Sect. 3. Modestis ingeniis semper haec
Augustini responsio sufficit ibid. Sect. 4. Vide Chamier. to. 2. lib. 3. cap. 8.
Austin before them did say, whom none will by name accuse, for making God the
Author of sin, though some as Baronius observes, dum in nova^ores (so he
calls our divines) insurgunt, a sancti Augustini sententia de
praedestinatione recedunt. Nor have they intended any more then by multitudes
of Genesis 45. 5, 6, 7, 8. Exodus 7. 3. 13. ^0. 1. 20, 27. 11. 9. D^ut. 2. 30.
Josh. 11. 20. 1. Sam. 2. 25. 2 Samuel 12. 11, 12. 2 Samuel 16. 10, 11. 1 Reg. 12,
15. 1 Reg. 16. 3. 11, 12. 1 Reg. 22. 2^, 23. 2 Reg 24. 2, 3. 20. 1 Chronicles. 5.
26. 2 Chronicles. 25. 20. 2 Chronicles. 36 17. Psalm. 69. 27 Psalm. 105. 25. Psalm. 109. 6.
11. Prove 16. 4. Prove. 22. 14. Isa. 6. 9, 10. Isa. 10. 5, 6, 7. Isa. 13. 3, 4
17, 18. Isa. 19 2. 14. Isa. 23. 11. Isa. 62. 17 Ier. 47. 7. Ier. 50. 21. Ier.
51. 2, 3. 11, 12. Ezekiel. 14. 9. Amos. 7. 17. Mat. 13. 1^* 15* John 9. 39. Acts
2. 23. Acts 4. 27, 28. Romans 1. 24. 28. Romans 9. 17. 22. Romans 11. 8, 9, ^0. 32. 1
Cor. ^^. 19. 2 These. 2. 11, 12.
places of Scripture they were led unto, which places as we read with adoration
and trembling, at the unsearchable judgments of God, so we cannot but with all
submission acknowledge the holiness and authority of them.

For my part I thus judge, That if men would heartily carry this controversy
to its native and proper issue, it would amount to this. 1. Whether the graces
of faith, perseverance, and the glory following, be not Gods own? 2. Whether
being so, he may not do what he will with his own? 3. If so, whether he might
not, ab aeterno, absolutely purpose in himself, on whom to bestow them, from
whom to withold them, without any injury unto any? 4. Whether it imply a
contradiction, for God by his power so to determine the will of the creature,
hic and nunc ad unum, as that it shall retain its own nature, and yet shall
not de facto, fully and victoriously resist divine grace, but shall invincibly
and most certainly, as to Gods determination, and yet most sweetly and
willingly, as to its own manner of working, make choice of that good, in the
choice whereof, it is demonstratively convinced, that its felicity does stand?
If this imply not a contradiction, (as I believe it will be difficult for him
to prove, who shall undertake it, for why may not God determine the will, as
easily as the will can determine it self?) then sure I am, that that
omnipotency which could say, let there be light, and there was light, can say,
let there be a will unto conversion, and there shall be such a will: That
Omnipotency which could give a creature a Being out of nothing, can by an
invincible persuasion or traction (the radical indifferency of the will
remaining still the same) suspend the actual praevalent reluctance thereof,
and work it determinately unto such an action, as is rationally most
convenient and behoovefull for a rational appetite, as the will is, viz. to
choose its own bl^ssedness: for that is it which every convert in his
effectual vocation, by the power of grace really does. 5. Whether the Lord
has not been pleased so to reveal in the Scripture the doctrine of his
decrees touching his purpose, of glorifying himself in a way of mercy and
justice, as that there shall be an (...) for the creature to stop at, and to
adore, that he will not have his counsels fathomable by the shallow line of
humane reason, but when he does with his creature, as the Potter with his clay,
of the same common and equal lump, choose one part unto honor, and leave
another unto dishonor, his purpose be not, that we should acknowledge and
adore his Sovereignty, and lay our hands on our mouth, as amazed at the
unsearchablenesse of his judgments? Now, certainly in all this there is no
blasphemy. God does permit sin, and whatever he does, he does by the counsel
of his own will, therefore he did ab aeterno decree to permit it; for otherwise
he could by confirming grace, have hindered and prevented the committing of it,
as well in all Angels, as in some, as well in Adam, as in Angels, and that
without any violence offered to their nature at all, Genesis 20. 5. Genesis 31. 7. 1
Cor. 10. 13. neither can there be given any cause out of God himself, and the
counsel of his own will, leading and inducing him rather to permit, then
hinder it. He did decree to permit it in order to his own glory, which is the
supreme end, and therefore by him absolutely willed, because the being thereof
by his unsearchable wisdom and power was ordinable thereunto. He may out of
that common and equal mass, wherein he did decree to permit it, decree in
some in whom he did permit it, to pardon it, and on them to show free mercy, in
others to punish it, and in them to show due and deserved justice, the one
having nothing to boast of, because the grace which saves them, was Gods, the
other nothing to complain of, because the sin which ruins them is their
own. He may by this huge discrimination of persons, who were in their lump and
mass equal, and in themselves indiscriminated, show the absolute sovereignty
which he has over them, as the Potter over his clay. He may by his most sweet,
and yet most powerful efficacy, work the graces of faith, repentance, new
obedience, and perseverance in the wills and hearts of those on whom he will
show mercy, giving them efficaciously, both to will and to do of his own good
pleasure, and leave others to their own pride and stubburnness, his grace being
his own to do what he will withal. And I say once again, in all this there is
neither modest nor immodest blasphemy.

1. Gods glory is dearer to him then all the things in the world besides are,
or can be.

2. Every attribute of God, is infinitely and absolutely glorious, and the
glory of every one of them, infinitely dear unto him.

3. Whatever is infinitely and absolutely glorious in God, he may by an
absolute will and purpose, decree to show forth the glory thereof in his works,
without fetching an antecedent Reason ab extra, from without himself, leading
and inducing him to make such a decree.

4. The subject on which God is absolutely pleased to manifest the glory of his
mercy and justice as to mankind, is massa perdita.

5. Out of this mass of lost or lapsed mankind, he has ex mero beneplacito,
chosen some unto glory and salvation, for the manifestation of his free and
undeserved mercy, and passed by others leaving them under deserved wrath, for
the manifestation of his justice.

6. That such and such particular persons out of the same equally corrupted
mass are chosen, and others are rejected, belongs unto the deep and hidden
counsel of God, whose judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past finding
out, to whose sovereignty it appertains to form out of the same lump, one
vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor, to show mercy on whom he will
show mercy, and to pass by whom he will pass by.

7. God does so absolutely will and decree ab aeterno, the manifestation of the
glory of his attributes in his works, as that withal he purposes that the
temporary execution of those eternal and absolute decrees shall finally be in
materia apta and disposita for such a manifestation.

8. All those intermediate dispositions between the decree and the execution
thereof, whereby the subject is fitted for such manifestation of Gods glory, if
they be gracious, they are by Gods eternal will, decreed to be wrought, and
accordingly are in time effectually wrought by himself and his grace, in and
with the will of the creature. If they be evil and sinful, they are in his
eternal purpose permitted to be wrought, and are in time actually wrought by
the deficient and corrupt will of the creature, and being so wrought, are
powerfully ordered by the wise and holy will of the Creator to his glory.

1. So then, God did ab aeterno, most absolutely will and decree his own glory,
as the supreme end of all, consulting therein the counsel of his own will,
and not the wills of any of his creatures.

2. In order unto that supreme end, he did freely elect some Angels, and some
lapsed men unto blessedness; for he might do with his own gifts, what he
would himself.

3. In order to the same supreme end, he did leave some Angels, and some lapsed
men to themselves, to their own mutability and corruption, not being a debtor
unto any of them.

4. But he did not ordain any creature to absolute damnation but to damniaton
for sin; into which they fall (as they themselves know) by their own wills and
whereof they are themselves the alone causes and authors; Gods work about sin
being only a willing permission, and a wise, powerful and holy Gubernation,
but no actual efficiency unto the formal being and obliquity thereof. I am
sorry I am led on by mine own thoughts thus far into your proper work. But
here I stop.

I was glad to see two Orthodox and sound Axioms, stand before the book of your
Author, as the basis of his superstructure. Two men of quite different
judgments in these very arguments I find to have done so Prosper cont Collat.
c. 14.
before. The one Cassianus the Collator, of whom Prosper has these words,
Catholicarum tibi aurium judicia conciliare voluisti, quibus de praemissae
professionis front securis, facile sequentia irreperent, si prima Live. decad.
3. lib. 8.
placuissent. Which words of his, bring into my mind a saying of the Historian,
fraus fidem in parvis sibi praestruit, Ang, de great. Chr^sti, cap. 39.
ut cum operae pretium sit, cum magna mercede fallat; and the censure of Austin
upon Pelagius, Gratiae Vid. Savilii praefat. ad lectorem and Andr. Rivet.
Grotian. discuss (...), Sect. 8. Sect. 11. and Voss. Hist. Pelag lib. 1. cap.
26.
vocabulo frangit invidiam, and offensionem declinat. The other, the famous
Archbishop Bradwardine, (whom learned and good men will honor,
notwithstanding the hard censure passed by Hugo Grotius upon him) who premiseth
two Hypotheses as the ground of that profound work of his, de causa Dei. I will
have so fair and just an opinion of your Author, as to believe that he did
this in candor and integrity, following therein rather the learned example of
Bradwardin, then (if Prospers censure may be taken) the artifice and cunning of
Cassianus; yet because this is a course, which may by the credit of true
principles, draw the less cautelous and circumspect Readers, to consent to
deductions not naturally consequent upon them; It is requisite, as for writers,
as Pliny advises, saepius respicere titulum so for Readers to follow the
Apostles counsel, to prove all things, and hold fast that which is good.

I observe in your author, much credit given to a paper published under the
name of Bp Andrews. If controversies were to borrow their credit from the
names of men, you could easily oppose the great Bp of Hippo, and a cloud of
many other learned men, unto that great name. But I know not whether the ipse
dixit of an Anonymous publisher, be attestation enough to prove the
authenticalnesse of that paper. Dr Sanderson, a learned writer, who once drew
the diverse opinions touching these controversies into Tables, speaks of Dr
Overals judgment, but makes no mention of this. And the two Prelates, unto
whom the publication of his opuscula, was by special order referred, do not
give any account of this paper to the world, but (that which seems to induce
the contrary) they diligently satisfy the Reader, cur haec and non alia
(speaking of the things by them published) sibi ad scribendum delegerit.
Therefore it is probable, that either they owned not this as his, or willingly
suppressed it; for something they did suppress, as they intimate in these
words, illud quidem nobis curae fuit, ne quicquam prodiret, cujus occasion
sancti manes queri jure possent, famae suae apud posteros male consultum a
nobis esse. Therefore till I come to have a better assurance of it, then the
testimony of the two letters, F. G. and the company of Fur Praedestinatus, I
shall take the liberty of an (...) in this particular.

I now conclude with answering your desire, which was, that upon reading your
book, I would give you my opinion of it. I have read it so well as I could, a
Copy not in all places alike plainly transcribed: And truly, so far as my
weakness is able to judge, for the theological and argumentative parts of it,
it is so solid and substantial, as that I assure my self, it will be very
acceptable to many learned men, and very useful to the Church of God. You have
therein given a good account to the world, that you did converse with that
second Bradwardine, Dr Twisse, unto very good purpose. I heartily with that
there may be no further reciprocation of the law of contention between you, but
that truth may so prevail, as that you may become both one, both in opinion
and affection. It will be a happy time with the Church of God, when swords
shall be beaten into plow-shares, and spears into pruning hooks, when the earth
shall be so filled with the knowledge of the Lord, as that all polemicall
writing shall be out of date; when the Lord shall be one, and his name one, and
we shall all serve him with one shoulder: Unto this let all our writings tend,
for this let all our prayers contend. I commend your person and labors unto
Gods blessing, and remain

Your most loving Friend, and Fellow Laborer, Ed. Reynolds.

For the Reverend, my very good friend, Mr William Barlee, Preacher of the word
at Brockhole
Reverend Sir,
I Return you many thanks, that you were pleased to gratify me with a sight
of, and liberty to peruse, your elaborate correction of a Correct (so called)
and Uncorrect Copy; wherein to my apprehension, you have done your self, and
the Truth it self, much right, 1. In your dextrous discoveries of the
ambiguities. wherein that sort of men do use to hide themselves, and their
poisonous doctrine. 2. In your solid rescuing the Augustinian and English
Church, from his interpolations. 3. In battering his flourishing but weak
Arguments, borrowed from the Pelagian and Arminian Schools: And lastly, in a
right stating of the Questions between you and your adversary (which he
altogether neglected, or willingly mistated) for his next undertaking; which if
he do, I believe he will discover himself far worse, then yet he appears. I
perceive you are sometimes pleasant with him; ridentem Convenit veritati
ridere. quia tuta est. Tertul.
dicere verum quid vetat? and sometimes you are sharp enough, but you could
hardly otherwise do the Truth and Grace of God right, seeing nature and error
ready to insult and tyrannize over them. And he has little Grace or Truth,
whose heart rises not with indignation against the oppugners and opressors
thereof. Go on, Sir, to improve your Learning and Parts, in vindication of
those, which alone can make you free. You shall, I verily persuade my self,
much honor God, his Grace, his Truth, the true Church, and your self.
Commending you and your labors to the blessing of the God of all Grace and
Truth; and wishing those your papers and pains, good success upon the hearts
of all those that love the Lord Jesus Christ, and his free Grace, I am, Sir,

Your Brother and Fellow-laborer in the work of the Lord, Dan. Cawdrey.
December. 8. 1655.
Some general observations upon the Vncorrect Copy.
SIR,
THE Author of this Copy, (for the sight whereof I thank you) as he discovers
himself to be a man of an insolent spirit, slighting his adversaries, under
the notion of the half witted rabble of absolute praedestinarians, so he seems
to be some Novitius in these controversies, being either grossly ignorant of the
answers given long since to his Arguments, or scornfully negligent to take any
notice of them. The mischief which these notions may do, upon weak and
unstable judgments, justly calls for your best endeavors to antidote and
prevent it. For as they say, poison given in strongest wines, is most deadly;
so is error tempered or administered by men of Parts and Wit; whereof this
author is supposed to have his portion. Had he (which I wish) but as much
grace, he would not exercise his Parts of Nature, against the free grace of
God. To speak to each particular, is your undertaking; I shall only make some
general Animadversions, and leave them to you to improve them, to the best
advantage of the truth.

1. He takes no notice of the usual distinction, betwixt Gods decree, and the
execution of it, but jumbles these both together. It is granted, that
conditions go before the execution, but not the decree. Choosing of good goes
before salvation, but not before the decree to salvation. All conditions are
means tending to an end, and appointed for the sake of the end; therefore the
end is first intended and appointed: so far as they are means, they have an
efficacy in producing the end, and so are causes of it. Gods decree is actus ad
intra, ergo, eternal, ergo, has nothing going before it. It is actus
independens, ergo, without causes or conditions. All those whom God chooses to
salvation, he brings them to it by fit means, as primarily, by making them of
an unwilling will, to have a willing will, and therefore willingly to choose
good, and refuse the contrary. Himself grants so much, if he mean clearly and
heartily, when he says, that the power to choose good, is given us merely of
Gods grace. But I doubt that here, latet anguis in herba, that by this power,
he means not any new created habit, or gracious quality, which God infuseth
into man's soul, whereby the natural motion of man's will is changed, though
the l^berty of it be not taken away; but only some externum auxilium, by
precepts, promises, threatenings, etc. whereby the natural power that is in it
to good, is excited and stirred up. His similitude of the bladders plainly
intimate so much; which can yield no help to a dead man, but to one that has a
principle within to set them on work.

2. He takes no notice of that usual distinction, of voluntas decreti, and
voluntas praecepti. For from that saying, that God wills not the death of a
sinner, he concludes that God decrees not the death of a sinner, nor the
salvation of a believer but conditionally: for (says he) Gods will and decree
are both one; whereas the will of his decree, and the will of his praecept, are
really distinct, for

1. The will of his decree cannot be resisted, who has resisted his will? but
the will of his command is daily resisted by wicked men.

2. The will of his decree is eternal, (being actus ad intra) but his commands
are given forth in time, one after another.

3. The will of his decree is immutable (being all one with himself) the will
of his command is mutable, as in Abraham's case.

4. The will of his decree, is always fulfilled; he does what soever he will;
the will of his command is seldom fulfilled by wicked men, and not always by
good men.

5. The will of his decree, is within himself, the will of his command, is
that which he puts forth from himself, and therefore as much differing, as the
creature and the Creator.

3. He takes no notice betwixt an absolute, and a conditional necessity: or,
which is the same, a causall and consequentiall necessity. The first of these
arising from the necessary connection of causes, and their effects, the other
from Gods decree: Hence he infers, that if God has decreed, a man should do
good, then he does it not freely, but forcedly against his will, which is
altogether false. For Gods decree does not infringe the liberty of the second
causes, but rather establish it. 1. That it does not infringe it, appears,

1. Because Christ's death was decreed, yet he dyed voluntarily and freely,
otherwise it had not been meritorious.

2. The Angels in Heaven obey freely and voluntarily, yet is this decreed, for
they are called elect Angels.

3. When the faithful believe, they do it freely, yet they are elected to do
this. 2 These. 2. 18.

4. If all our free actions and motions are not determined, we shall exclude
God from a great part of that his providence, which he exercises in governing
the world.

2. The decrees of God dee stablish the liberty of the creatures, because he
has decreed not only rem ipsam, which comes to pass, but modum rei, the
manner of them. Why do some things come to pass necessarily, but because God
has decreed they shall come to pass by necessary causes? Why do other things
come to pass contingenuly, but because he has decreed they shall so come to
pass, by contingent causes? and the certainty of his knowledge, does as much
hinder the liberty of the creature, as the certainety of his decree. For as he
cannot be frustrated in his purpose and decree so he cannot be deceived in his
knowledge; therefore what he knows, must necessarily come to pass by this
consequentiall necessity: yet none will say this takes away the liberty of the
creature. Had this Objector been pleased to take notice of these distinctions,
and thoroughly digested them, he might easily have seen, that they would have
utterly enervated those his paralogismes, which he calls demonstrations, and
holds forth with such confidence. He grants afterward, that God foreknowes all
things, and that his certain foreknowledge does not hinder the liberty of man's
will. And upon the same ground he must grant it of his decree also, for they
are both actus ad intra, of which the rule is, that they do nihil ponere in
objecto. The decree of God being an act within himself, whiles he puts it forth
in some outward act, tending to execution, works nothing upon the creature. Now
let him show if he can, in what outward acts upon the creature, tending to the
execution of his decree, he does any way necessitate man's will. For outwardly
he works upon him only by moral suasion, and inwardly by infusing gracious
habits, which sweetly incline, and dispose him freely to choose what is good,
in good actions. In evil actions he works not inwardly at all, by infusion of
any ill quality, or principles, but only by leaving him to the liberty and
free motion of his wicked will, (which he is not bound to restrain) and
outwardly by propounding such outward objects, as are in themselves good. By
which it is apparent, that Gods decree does not at all necessitate man's will.
Yet upon this false foundation, that the will is necessitated by Gods decree,
he goes on usque ad nauseam, to infer most absurdly, irrationally, and
contrary to all Logical principles, that if the end be certain, the means
are needless. If man's salvation be certainly determined, then no need of
faith, and repentance, obedience and the like: then all praecepts, threatenings,
etc. are to no purpose: Whereas he cannot be ignorant, that media sunt propter
finem, and that finis intentionis est causa mediorum, and media sunt causae
executionis. And whereas the Apostle uses this as an argument, to make us
careful, to be sober, and to put on the breast plate of faith and love, and
the helmet of hope, 1 These. 5. 8. (is parts of that spiritual armor, whereby
we must mainte^ne the spiritual combat) because God has not appoi^ted us unto
wrath but to obtain salvation by Jesus Christ, ver. 9. He argues the quite
contrary way that if we be appointed to salvation, these things are needless.
And whereas the Apostle says, that we are chosen to alvation, through the
sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth, 2 These. 2. 15. and so
makes sanctification and faith, as certain and necessary, as salvation it
self, we being chosen to both, by one act of Gods decree, which is both
eternal and unchangeable, he says no: if we be chosen to salvation by any
unchangeable decree, then neither sanctification nor faith are needful; and so
severs the end and means, which God has inseparably joined together. He might
as well argue; that because God had determined that Hezekiah should live
fifteen years after his sickness, therefore he need no longer make any use
either of food or physic: yet this is his manner of arguing all along his
discourse.

4. His conditional decree draws after it these absurdities.

1. He takes away all difference between election and reprobation betwixt love
and hatred. For by this, Esau is loved, as well as Jacob, if he chooses good;
and Jacob hated as well as Esau, if he chooses evil, and both these lef^
merely to the liberty of their own will, whereas it is said, that God loved
Jacob, and hated Esau, before they had done good or evil.

2. He makes the decree of God to be uncerteine, because it has no certain
object, neither salvation nor damnation is the certain object, it being
equ^lly disposed to both these, and both these cannot consist together, being
contraries.

3. It makes Gods decree to have a beginning and an end: his conditional
decree has an end, and his absolute decree a beginning; for this takes no
place, till the other be expired. M^n is not absolutely elected, till the
condition be fulfill^d, ^^l he has persevered in bel^eving.

Obj. God foresees from all eternity, who will do thus, and on that decr^es.

Ans. If he foresees this, it is either without or within himself; he cannot
foresee it without himself, till the thing have a being, non entis non est
conside^a^io. If he foresee it within himself, it is in his own will and
decree (which is the only cause of futurition) which they deny.

4. It makes its to choose God before he chooses us; for his election is upon
the foresight of choosing of good; contrary to that which is said we love him,
because he loved us first, 1 John 4. 19.

5. He makes us to make the difference betwixt our selves, and those that are
lost: for upon our choosing good, God chooses us, and so puts a difference,
contrary to that, who made thee to differ? 1. Cor. 4. 7.

6. He gives us a better part in our conversion, than God; for he only gives
power to believe, we put forth this power into act; and actus is more
excellent then potentia. It is in our power to frustrate what God does in our
conversion; and so the chief honor is ours. It makes Gods will to wait upon
ours, in all things tending to salvation.

7 It makes the d^fference of vessels of honor and dish nour, to arise from
the quality of the matter, not from the will of the Potter, Romans 9. 21. cont.

Neither can he quit himself from Pelagianisme, by saying, that the Pelagians
held, that there was a power in man's will, to do the will of God, without his
grace: for the latter Pelagians, with whom Prosper had to do, denied not the
work of grace in our believing, but held that this grace is give to us,
according to our merit. Aug. de praedest. sanct. l. 2. And how does this differ
from that doctrine which teaches, that we are chosen to salvation, from the
foresight of the right use of our free will, in choosing that which is good, and
refusing the contrary; and makes grace only an help in doing this, when a man
sets it on work, as he that swims does his bladders.

Yours and the Truths, Thomas Whitfield.

Animadversions upon the Title Page.
CORREct.] As yet uncorrected of most of the Pelagian, Semipelagian and
Arminian tenants, faulted in the disowned Copy. SOME NOTES.] A just voluminous
Tract, by an unusual Catachresis, styled, some notes; among which there appears
scarce any of any good note. CONCERNING GODS DECREES.] More truly it might have
bin said against Gods Decrees. You leave to God all along many commands,
promises, threats, etc. but no Decrees, save what are dependent on, and
subsequent to man's will. The worst kind of Independency, is this. REPROBATION]
Rather DAMNATION as you should have said, most solemnly in this your owned, and
in your other disowned Treatise (and that upon design) confounded with
Praeterition, or Negative REPROBATION, for the private use of a friend,
possibly for the use of the man of honor and integrity in your Dedicat. who it
seems stood in need of a matter of 600 Copies, which within less then two
months were almost sold in this very Country, as says W. C. Test is idoneus.
CALUMNY] i. e. truth; for no other matters can I learn you yet to be
slandered with. When writings coming from your faction take not, the usual
Apology of old, received from your dogmaticall Sires, is, vel inemendata
fuisse surrepta (in your English uncorrected Copies) vel omnino August. de
Great. Christi. cap. 2. and sic ferme Armin. ad artic. sibi objectos.
negant sua, or none of theirs; as the former writing in my hands, scil. is
either not yours, or was not fine enough to be owned by superlatively fine Mr
T. P.

Out of a Lettter of Dr George Kendall, directed to me, Aug. 30. 1655.
YOU may please to know, that I much rejoice to hear you have an answer ready
to Mr P's Pamphlet, which I was requested by a most Reverend old Bishop, to
take into consideration, and bestow some correction on it; but hearing that a
Minister of Northamptonshire had prevented me, I was willing to save my pains,
though I could not learn who the Minister was. The Pamphlet is well worded,
but slight enough I wis, and is only stuffed out with passages of Calvin, and
others, which I have construed in another sense, in my answer to fur
praedestinatus, which has lain a good while in Dr Owens hand, etc. Sir, I
wish you the assistance of Gods spirit in the finishing of your work. Dr
Twisses memory will be beholding to you. Mr P. is to me unknown, otherwise then
by his book, of which I was full, as soon as I tasted it, and the farther I
went on, the more I disgusted it, etc.

Answer to the Dedicatory Epistle.
SIR, I can be content to leave you in your proper Element of Courting your
Noble patron (as you say) of honor and integrity, of erudition too, above his
fortune or blood; and if so, you are to blame in concealing his name, and not
saluting of him with a Mace^as Atavis edite Regibus,

Or a.

Tuque ades, inceptumque una decurre laborem, Vi^g.
O decus, O famae (merito) pars maxima nostrae, Macenas, pelagoque volans da
vela patenti: The rather because you put an ominous task upon him of defending
of you and your Arminianisme, which by a great Dr of it, even when it was more
courted at Court, was thought somewhat dangerous. Dr Iackson in his Dedicat.
Epistle to the Earl of Pembroke.
But methinks you should not be so supercilious, as in your Epistles, to check
me for going to some of my Sympresbyters with my private papers drawn up
against yours, whilst you take the liberty about yours to consult with Lords
and Ladies: But possibly it becomes you as well as it did Pelagius and Arminius
before you, to shun Ecclesiastical Tribunals, and fly to Secular, as the first
did to the Lady Demetrias, and the other to the Lords the States of Holland,
passing by all Synods and Classes, etc.

2. I cannot blame you to provide for the safety of your person, and the
vineyard and budget you talk of in an Epistle you wot of; and well could I
wish all safety, hail and happiness to these, provided the licentiousness of
the age did not make it so safe for you, to divend your poisonous heterodoxall
grace-blasting doctrines: A liberty which now adays you have in common, and of
course with some Weavers in the West, See Mr Whitefields Refutation of loose
opinions. And Mr Wetherhall his discovery of false, betwixt Bridge and Lincoln.
and Blacksmiths See Mr Whitefields Refutation of loose opinions. And Mr
Wetherhall his discovery of false, betwixt Bridge and Lincoln.
in the North. Jam est is ergo Pares.

3. Next to the continual feast of a good conscience, if it be any way
haveable in the way you be in, you do well not to be indifferent to the good
opinion of good men; Sufficit mibi consci^ntia mea, necessaria est aliis fama
mea. Augustine.
but then, sithence the great coil which has been kept against Monopolies of all
sorts, you do not so well to monopolize in your first and second papers, the
opinion of good men to Cassandrians (p. 11. of the first papers) Lutherans (p.
16. of these) admirable Grotians, whom you prefer above Austin himself, in the
matters to be debated (p. 28.) altogether excluding those good men,
Allobrogenses, by most called Calvinists, Genevenses, in England Puritans,
Presbyterians, or any such like goodish things; these as you know, I cannot,
since your Endoctrinating of me by your private Epistles to the contrary,
according to you, reckon amongst the good men, you would be well thought of.
Yea, all these kinds of good men of the first or second Reformation, must be
ranked amongst modest or immodest blasphemers, with Manichees, Marcionites,
Carpocratians, Turks, in that p 11. 35, 55. and passim alibi
very writing which you do offer to the view and reading of Quicunque vult.

4. You may too, as the times are, be well enough allowed to betake your
self to your crypts, to bury your self amongst your books. Eas tu mi frater
in sellam and dic miserere. I my self in my time, even in these times, have
not a little been wonted to that. Ier. 9 1. Montes and sylvae mihi tutiores,
quam concursus hominum. Hilary somewhere to that purpose.
But would to God you were not so much in your Muses, for poring upon or
believing in the points controverted, Molina, Bellarmine, Lessius, rather then
Cornelius Jansenius, for Hugo Grotius the admirable man with you, and who
indeed to you is in all things, (...), rather then L. J. Bogerman, or J.
Latius, for the Remonstrants, rather then the Contra-Remonstrants, though p. 4.
most disingenuously you are loath to own either of them; you then would not
have put me to a hard study of the latter, in opposition to the former, whom
you like better.

Similes labra lactuc as. 5. But though with some grains of allowance, you
may be very well borne with in the former, yet that why you, who would be
thought to be so much against all wilful and premeditated lies, p. 1. should,
I cannot say vveakely, Under my hand and seal, Feb. 25. 1655. he had this. Say
and write in a way that you dare to own, and as just occasion shall be give^: I
will not be afraid nor ashamed, to give you and the Church of God, some account
of what I have been doing against a trifling pamphlet, savouring of your
Genius, and said and believed to be yours. If it be not, no man in the world
should more rejoice then my self, if you would renounce the Pelagiana and
Semipelagiana dogmata, contained in it. If you be wronged in the transcribing,
you will exceedingly gratify me, and right your self, if you would pleasure me
with a copy which you will avouch, Feb. 27. in answer to a terrible long-winded
pasquil he had thus much more from me. You may then know how much I understand
of Pelagianisme, and how well I can prove you to be one, when your insolency
shall have provoked me to make more public use of an answer to your pamphlet,
then in all likelihood it might otherwise have been put unto by the author of
it, etc.
turn what you had under my hand and seal, in Hypothesi of your insolency,
into an absolute saying, that I intended to make your first papers public (p.
2. Dedic.) I cannot divine; unless perhaps your mistaken charity take all my
wills to be absolute, who will to the Almighty himself, allow no other then
an Hypotheticall one; or that, having fulfilled the condition of insolency
against Gods truth, as well as my ministry, flock, name, etc. You your self,
did even think it fitting, that my otherwise Hypotheticall will, should, to
use your Nic. Grevinchovius his phrase, transire in absolutam: Truly else, had
you been but as wise, as your friendly DANIEL would have had you to have
been, as since your threatening you have lived long unanswered; so sure as for
me you might have stayed til St Neverstide, unto which there is a long day. 2.
I can less give any honest reasons (though some others I think I can give)
why you should so peremptorily deny the former papers to have been yours,
which I must think, say, and write to be yours. If either I must believe
your self, who up and down oppose this your correct, smooth, fair Copy,
to your other uncorrect one. An uncorrect one of yours, is some way yours,
though a thousand times over you should repeat that of the Poets unto me,
which you do in your Epist. 4.

Meus est quem recit as O fidentine Libellus
Ast male dum recitas incipit esse tuus.
Thus I must think, until you tell me by whom, in what, cur quomodo, quando,
you have been wronged. 2. If against your ipse dixit in your own cause, I may
but be allowed to give credit to the testimony of two Reverend Divines, who
have professed to me, to have seen one, and one to have transcribed one from
under your hand, which is as like to that first one which fell into my hand, as
face answers to face, ovum ovo non similius, some politic omissions only
excepted. 3. To say nothing of a third grave ancient Reverend Divine, from whom
I had mine, who has oftentimes told me, that when you would have had the
papers out of his hand, which he put into mine, you did not deny them to be
yours, nay, but confessed them so to be; and against him endeavored to
maintain the Materia substrata contained in them. Another very honest man, who
by the Gentleman you mention, p. 4. was put upon the transcribing of your first
papers, upon the sight of your hand, which I showed him, told me, that he
wondered you should deny the first papers to be yours, or against him (who had
an extraordinary care in transcribing of them, and from whose copy mine came
under the hand of a very Reverend and Learned Divine) give out that in
transcription you had been wronged. 4 The consanguinity of matter, style, very
words, sparkling wit, when compared with your public owned copy, proclaim them
to be yours, though now you call your child bastard, and force it after a sort
to say,

Est mihi namque domi durus pater, etc. 5. If some who love you but too well,
out of hopes, as I trust, of gaining you and your truly gallant parts, to be
servants to Gods truth and grace; (which hopes of theirs pray God they may
never give up the Ghost) would but speak what they know in these matters (and
truly it concerns them, since in your Epistles, as well as in your public
writing, you accuse them of ignorance, malice, forgery, etc.) I should not need
to cast about me for Topicall arguments, to prove you to be the father of the
first papers, what they can produce, would be as demonstrative as any in
Euclides Elements. They are of years and discretion, let them plead for
themselves upon a high charge; and let this what I have here said, serve for
answer to what you have p. 4. and else where. As to the (...) and Erysipelas
objected to me, I confess I was never half so good as your self, either at
Copiam or Elegantiam verborum, who in these things to give you but your due,
are a very Magister Artis. I know too, and feel full well, that the parrhesia
which I use in speaking, when as near as I can, I do but call things by their
proper names, procures me small favor in the world. Obsequium (you know)
amicos, v^ritas odium parit. 2. But in the terms which I gave you, I reckon it
to have been foelix infortunium to me, that no other dropped from my pen, then
were usual to Austin against Pelagius, and to learned orthodox King James
against Arminius, your true doctrinall proparents, as I hope my book will
evidence: And I trow you will not think it reasonable to provide a napkin to
wipe their foul mouths. 3. And if perchance I had been out in the broadnesse
of my expressions, when sub sigillo I as another Cynthius did aurem tibi
vellere, by rounding of something into your ear, of which you might have made
good use; yet why will you in your open Correct Copy, be so strangely revenged
upon me, as to proclaim to all the Christian orthodox world wherever your book
shall come, that I told you but the truth, and quod semper licuit, did but
mordaci rodere vero. 4. The Erysipelas, as I understand by a profounder
Physician then your self, is a disease rather hot Doctor Fernelius.
then hurtful, and is sometimes the indicium of a Recovery from some great
sickness, possibly from a dangerous fever, nay phrensy, or from the
spiritual Nitnia, which you my charitable physician, thought me your poor
patient to be sick of. And truly but for your quaking Epist. secunda a me
Publicata
terms which you use in print, as before in private, I might have spelt the
two letters T. P. after another guesse-fashion then now I shall do, who take
them to be the true initials of the name and surname of Mr Quondam grave
physician; who yet methinks when in Divinity he talks of high matters, does
rather talk like a Drs Pharmacopaeus then like the Dr himself. 7. But that
neither the old or young Trojan, whom you compare to Pausanias or Nicostratus,
have half of your spite, against any thing of yours, which you have manifested
against Gods truth and Gods way which they walk in, you might have had such a
retortion from them, as you would have been loath to have heard of; but because
they owe nothing but good will to your person, in hopes of amendment for
aftertimes, they will spare you for this time.

Sed parcius ista viris, tamen objicienda memento. 8. If by what follows in
the 3. and 4. pages of this Dedicat. you would not slilie (which I much fear,
who have some more then ordinary reasons to be jealous over you that way)
insinuate first, that simple heresies not obstinately maintained in matters of
Religion, are no fruits of the flesh or evil works, whilst you say, that God
Gal. 5.
will render to every man according to his works, not according to his
opinions; but that as your Batavicke brethren, the Remonstrants talk, that they
are pura put a Ap^log. Contra Censuram.
innocentia nullo modo suo proprio nomine noxia. Or 2. That you are endowed in
your way of teaching, with I cannot tell what peculiar, rare, mystical
faculty of making your proselytes sincere ones, before in the very
fundamentals of the Covenant of grace, you make them so much as orthodox ones.
3. Or that you and the pious men of your way (of the most of whom to be sure
that is true, that we may Illis dare eloquentiam and eruditionem, fidem and
religionem nunquam coluerunt) because you are great admirers and followers of a
Practical Catechism you wot of, published the sixth time, are the only
nonesuches, and peerless patterns of true piety, with whom none of ours
recommended to the world for piety, prudence, moderation, by Mr T. Fuller, in
his late Abel Redivivus, or by Mr* William Clarke in the Lives and deaths of
some later Divines, who have much contended against your way, and yet not lost
the practice or purity of religion, but rather exercised both in so doing. 4.
Or that you will not pin upon my credulity that the press was your fear,
rather then your itch, which I know and can prove to be quite contrary; I say
were it not fear that in your ambiguous general expressions, you would
intimate all these things, I could have been willing to have forborne all
further criticismes upon the fair text of your Dedicat. I can be content to
injoine my self silence from telling any Tales out of your pious practical
School, and I shall with expedition address my self to a more down right
schuffle with you, about what you have in your second portall or Paraenesis.

Nunquam bella piis, nunquam certamina desunt,
Et quocum certet men's piasemper habet.
My mind much misgives me, or upon search we shall find, that

Gramine sub hoc viridi latet anguis. Tit. Paranesis p. 1.
THE necessity which you suggest of publication, was a selfe-created necessity,
and yet I am sure no ways opposite to your Liberum Arbitrium, or free will.
Else pray good Sir, what made you as it were per saltum, to fly from the fair
hopes which your first alarming Letter put me into, of having (to use your own
words) a true copy, and such a one, as you would own not only in the night,
but if need be at noon too: Which hopes with much civility and respect, were
entertained by me, as may be seen p. 3, 4. in marg. Of this Answer, I say what
Epist. prima a me publicata.
made you fly so unexpectedlie to the press, as unto your only sanctuary,
with a Copy, which to my knowledge had been in some men's hands six months
before. Unto which, when I perceived you hastening, I was willing enough to will
you good speed, and that your beloved press might but prove as beneficial to
Hieronym. Epist. ad Ctesiphont. Ecclefiae victoria est vos aperte dicere quod
sentitis. Idem, semper docent and semsemper negant. Quicquid vident displicere,
non suum, sed alienum esse contendunt. The Carthag. fathers complain to
Austin, that, etiamsi Pelagius Celestiusque correcti siut vel se ista numquam
sensisse dicunt, and quaecunque scripta contra eos prolata fuerint, sua esse
negabunt, n^c est quemad modum de menda cio convin cantur.
you, as the poenitentiall stool (at which you jeere, Epist. 2.) had been to
many a Northern Scotick wild blade; for as some diseases do better when they
break out, then when they are kept in; So it has been more beneficial to the
Church ever, for Pelagiam and Arminian errors by the Authors of them, to have
been published, then for them hatching of them in their bosoms, to communicate
them only to their confidentiaries, (a) in cryptis.

. 1. Ibid.
I Am too conscious of my own frailties, which are great and many, then for to
cast stones at you for not being infallible. Cic. humanum est errare, labi,
decipi. Homo sum, humani nihil a me alienum puta. Horat. Quisque suos patitur
manes, optimus ille est qui minimis urgetur.
In many things we offend all, Jam. 3. 2. or Greek (...), we trip all. And had
all your Errata's been only slight ordinary trippings or stumblings, or but
which used to be said of Cyprians errors, tantum naevi in candido pectore, I
trust by Gods grace, I should either not at all have taken notice of them, or
at most only have proceeded against them in the Spirit of meekness. But many
of your faults are of such a complexion, as that I am forced to come against
you with the rod, 2 Cor. Iniquity is bound up in the heart, even of your
Correct Child, Copy I mean, and the rod of correction must drive it far from
you, Prove.

1. It is well you will not allow that Abaddon or Apollyon, or accuser of the
brethren to be upon the bench of your Censors, when your cause comes to be
tried. Yet I am, Sir, pretty well assured, that neither in City or Country,
you shall well find any better affected to your cause and way of management of
it, then himself. He likes of your fair beginnings, I can assure you;

Hoc Ithacus velit and magno mercentur Atridae. 2. I cannot well phancie how
you should expect the God of heaven to speak for you, whom upon supposition of
an absolute decree, you are not ashamed, horresco scribens, p. 24, etc. to make
an (...), nay, to be worse then the devil himself, p. 41. and p. 13. 3. Nor
can I well tell how any of the brethren who are faithful, chosen and true,
Rev. should vote on your side; whom as it is well enough known, you seldom use
to name, but in the Accusative case. I cannot well tell who you would have to
be your Judges, or allow to be of your Jury. 4. As for the cause I maintain
against you, were the Ecclesiastical Laws and Courts as they have been, ever
since the Reformation of the Church of England from Popery, I durst commit my
self to be tried by God and my Country. Nay, yet still I am content for my
writings of all sorts, which upon this occasion I have drawn up against you, to
leave my self to the judicial ministerial censure of any 10. noted Senior
Sympresbyters of worth, for learning, piety, constant painfulness in the work
of the Ministry, and who since the times have been most upon their Tropicks,
have been least Tropicall. These of all others I think fittest to determine
matters betwixt us, as our proper Judges; if at the time of trial, they will
but renounce all Francisco-Clarian glosses upon the 39 Articles of the Church
of England.

. 2. p. 1, 2.
FIrst, But that possibly you may think it a huge credit for to be publicly
pointed at, as the Autesignanus, and the very Captain General of all the
Arminian route (a thing formerlie only known to some of your near neighbors)
most wise men would think; and to my knowledge, some who love you very well do
think, that by thus appearing upon a public Theater, before you were in that
way challenged by an open enemy, has been so far from stanching the
bleeding of your name, as that it has but made it bleed more mortallie and
dangerously then before. Such a wound indeed you have given it, as is not to
be healed again but by a Recanting tongue or pen of yours; so that now your
name says to you,

Ovid. Namque ille, aut nemo, vel qui mihi vulnera fecit, Solus Achilleo
tollere more potest. 2. Unless it may be judged fitting, that (whilst you and
your party are sharpening your tongues and pens against Gods soveraigntie,
grace, counsels, servants) the Ministers of God, whom the Prophet would not
have to be dumb dogs, should be mere edentuli; there is a necessity for them
not to be toothlesse at their tongues end or pens end, and yet your faction
will not have reason enough to give out, that they do valere canina eloquentia.
It is within their commission to be cutting, Tit. 1. 13.

3. I wish not only that you were for a retreat, but also for a serious
Retractation, that now would to you be most honorable, even as Austin's was to
him. That would to you be quasi tabula post naufragium, and make some amends,
and possibly gain you some thanks from the Reformed Church of England, yea,
from all the Protestant Churches in Christendom, who do in doctrinals,
maintain correspondence with her. You ought not so much to stand upon
punctilio's of honor, unless your arguments which you draw forth into the
field, had been more for pugnam, and less for pompam, and not long since, been
beaten before you brought them forth.

4. As for me, who from your pasquilling Epistles, have a little more reason
then other people, to know how stiff you are in the instep, I much fear, that
notwithstanding your profession of a kind of willingness to blot out your
writing (Oh that there were a deleatur for the whole, under your grave
venerable hand!) we shall rather find you as peremptory, as he who cried out,
quod scripsi scripsi, sed Deus meliora: definam ego male ominari.

5. Your defensive buckler (as you call it) I am sure, which no buckler should
be, is offensive enough, when you make it to fall on those, whom your first
papers call the half witted rabble of absolute praedestinarians, and these
your owned polite ones, absolute reprobatarians, p. 13. whom you deal withal,
as the persecutors did of old with good Christians, who by them were put into
bears skins, and then they set dogs upon them; so you transform the holiest
and ablest of your adversaries, into modest or immodest blasphemers, who are
for the Ligonem, Ligonem of Gods being the author of sin, and then you set the
bandogs of your rhetoric upon them. But how sharp soever your shield, I trust
the two edged sword of Gods word, will be able to cut it all in pieces, Heb. 4.
12.

Sect. 3. p. 2.
AS for your private conference, I had thought that you had not been at all for
private divine Conventicles, and not having been at it, I cannot guess much,
how much or how little it was for edification: but since the breaking of it up,
from the report which here you make of it, and I have otherwise heard of it, me
thinks I may gather these notes. 1. That because you thought your first draught
containing the sum of your conference to be so inconsiderable, as not so much
as to vouchsafe it a reading over, before you did part with it out of your
hands. You have made it impossible for your self with reason, to make such
invectives as every where you do against the Transcribers of your scrible; for
how can you now tell that some did not honestly write according to what they
found you to have written before them, without any of the least adding to, or
detracting from your first Copy. 2. It is somewhat strange, that you who are a
public Preacher, and provided of a public place, to divulge any wholesome
sound doctrine in which it cannot be gainsaid (and what have you to do with any
other?) should yet in a time wherein Liberty enough in all Conscience is given
and taken to, and by those, who do but pretend to Liberty of Conscience, be so
shie to own what you teach, should in mere points of Religion, be so much for
Conjurations of greatest secrecy (p. 3.) for whispers and murmurs, nay for a
readiness of going with your own hands to the fire with your papers, rather
then to the Light, p. 4. as if your own conscience did tell you, that they
were very fit to be burnt for heretics. Aliquid (in this sure) latet quod non
patet, veritas est temporis filia, and dies diem docebit See how like the
Pelagians you are in this, apud August. Epist. 104 and 105. Sunt qui occultius
penetrant domos and quod in aperto jam clamare metuunt, in secreto seminare non
quiescunt, etc.
. 3. That by what I know and have heard, and could tell further, if need were,
you were in the way of gaining close proselytes to you, not so happy in that
other Gentleman you mention, as you were in tripping up of the heels of the
first, whom you felled to the ground, as the report goes by a strange
long-winded syllogism, with which you begin your first papers. If ever you get
beyond sea again, you must not cry victoria for gaining all you ever conferred
with, unless you will do it with as little verity, as Dr Weston at St See Dr
Featlies Praeface to the Protestant Relation. Nostra damus cum verba damus,
quia fallere nostrum est.
Omars, did glory that the Bishop of Calcedon, had made the Earl of Warwick
to become a good Roman Catholic.

Sect. 4. p. 3, 4.
1. IF you did not after your wonted fashion, feed us with empty spoons, put us
off with mere words, and bare pretensions of your inability to fathom, the
(...) of the Apostle, or the Abyss of the Psalmist, you would Calvin. instit.
lib. 3. c. 23. 7.
not p. 24. so tartly and sarcastically have gibed at Calvin, for calling the
decree about the permission of Adams fall, and the consequents of it, horribile
decretum, in no other sense as its evident, then because upon the consideration
of it, it did affect him with some awful horror, that would in very deed have
well becommed you, were your head of a thousand times deeper reach then it is,
to have been stricken with a reverentiall and amazing silencing pause, at the
mysterious gulf of divine predestination, seeing both the Apostle, and the
Psalmist, and all humble modest Divines with them, and Austin August. ad
Laurent, c. 99. ad Romans 9. Hoc loco quidam stulti putant apostolum in
responsione defecisse, and inopia reddendae rationis repressisse contradictoris
audaciam. Sed magnum habet pondus quod dictum est, O homo tu quis es? Et in
talibus quaestionibus ad suae capacitatis considerationem revocat hominem.
Verbo quidem brevi, sed reipsa magna est reddita ratio. Idem eodem lib. cap.
98. Nunquid iniquitas apud Deum? absit, iniquum enim videtur ut sine ullis
honorum malorumve operum meritis unum Deus diligat, oderitque alterum. Qua in
re si futura opera vel bona hujus vel mala illius, quae Deus utique presciebat
vellet intelligi, nequaquam diceret, non ex operibus, sed diceret ex futuris
operibus; eoque modo istam solveret quaestionem, immo nullam quam solvi opus
est faceret quaestionem.
willingly confess themselves to be at a stand about the several mysterious
ways of executing those decrees, which the ever holy wise God takes, in the
course of his providence. 2. But he that runs, if he be but reading of your
book in his hand, may easily perceive, that in your doctrines about this
matter, you are but too n^er allied to that proud, haughty, and daring
generation, I mean now of the Jesuits, Arminians, and Socinians, who think it
high scorn, that any thing about this mystery, should baffle or give check to
that which they take to be the Lydius Lapis for the trying of all doctrines,
viz. their Recta Ratio. And pray, according both to you and them, what depth
according to mere natural reason, is there in it, for to allow God the sole
assignment of the conditions upon which he will Elect and Reprobate? 2. Or for
to maintain that it was fitting for him to make final faith or infidelity, the
conditions of those decrees, as final legal obedience or disobedience; and
yet this is the ne plus ultra of the deepest Bathos of your predestination, by
which have you not turned it into a fordable shallow, for any child to wade
through? 3. And why, seeing you do in these trim public papers of yours, give
out faith and infidelity to be the causes of Election and Reprobation, p. 70.
do you so much as seem to deny, p. 56. what you had strenuouslie asserted in
your uncorrected Copy, p. 11. that when two are equally called, whereof the one
converts himself, the other miscarries, it is not God but man that puts the
difference? August. in Johan. 6. Quem trahat and quem non trahat, quare illum
trahat, and illum non trahat, noli velle judicare, si non vis errare.
Can you assign a cause of the cause of Election and Reprobation, and can you
assign none of the Effects and Consequents of the one and the other? In your
divinity belike (unless it be where in Traditionals you doat upon the
authority of the Mother Church; for then ignorantia est matter devotionis, and
your Rationale Ceremoniale, consuetudo sine veritate, est vetust as erroris,
Cypr.) You never think, that nihil scire jucundissima vita est, you be the
happy knowing men, all wisdom must dye with you, Job 12. 1.

Virg. Foelix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas. Yet remember, that Plinius
for pyring to near into the causes of the Vesuvian fires, was consumed by the
flames thereof; Scrutator Majestatis opprimetur a gloria, Aug. 4. As for us
poor orthodoxe Ignaro's, we think it the highest perfection of our sober
wisdom, not to be wise above what is written Aug. de correp. and great. c. 8.
Quantum itaque nobis sua judicia manifestare dignatur, gratias agamus: quantum
vero abscondere, non adversus ejus consilium murmuremus, sed hoc quoque nobis
saluberrimum esse credamus.
and so we give no other causes of predestination, then what the Scriptures do,
Mat. 11. 25, 26. Romans 9. 11. Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. and we judge with Austin Jam si ad
illam profunditatem scrutandam quisquam nos coarctet: Cur illi ita suadeatur ut
persuadeatur, illi autem ita, duo solum occurrunt interim, quae respondere mihi
placeat. Oalti tudo divitiarum! and nunquid iniquitas apud Deum? Cui responsio
ista displicet, quaeret doctiores, sed caveat ne inveniat praesumptiores de
spirit. and liter^, c. 34. Idem alibi. Cur autem illum poti us liberet aut non
liberet, scrutetur qui potest judiciorum e^us tam magnum profundum, verumtamen
caveat praecipitium. Idem de verbis Apostoli. Sermon. 20. O altitudo! Petrus
negat, la^ro credit! O altitudo! Quaeris rationem, ego expavescam altitudinem:
Tu ratio^inare, ego mirer, tu disputa ego credam. Altitudinem video, ad
profunditatem non pervenio. Paulus dicit inscrutabilia sunt judicia ejus and tu
scrutari venisti; hic dicit, investigabiles sunt viae ejus, and tu investigare
venisti. Si inscrutabilia scrutari, and investigabilia vestigare venisti, creed
jam venisti.
that you by your dar^ng to the contrary, have not avoided a precipice, but
split your self upon it; you have not run from the wolf, but have run just
into his mouth; and pray God that ever hereafter in our Church, you become not
Lupus in fabula for it. 1. You be too stately an Orator for to state any old
Questions at all, either in a new found way, or in an old, that would but have
shackled your luxuriant rhetoric; and therefore as a thing much beneath you
(Aquila non captat muscas) you wholly leave al stating of Questions to your
less elegant, and more rugged neighbors. 2. But if it be as you say, that you
do not novam semitam in veteri via quaerere, state an old Question in a new
found way, then belike we may take it for granted, that without any further
ado, you be for old Arminianisme, scil. a thing which sure concerned Gods
Church much at this time, for to be acquainted with, under your own hand,
habemus confitentem reum. 3. Only pretend you what you list to the contrary in
what follows next. 1. I am so well acquainted with the altitude of your
spirit, and my self and others are so well acquainted with your
Cassandro-Grotian streine, wherein as you are, so you affect to be accounted
eminent, to be indeed Dux caput ipse gregis, as that I doubt not but you aspire
to a Moderatorship betwixt the contending parties which you mention: And in
this kind some others might, have expected some great feats of pe^formance from
you. 2. But as for my self, I find you so wholly wedded to the latter parties
against the former, as that I find you to have the hard hap of most modern
Reconciliators, So Huge Grotius was early, when he wrote his D^fensio Pietatis
ordinum Hollandiae, under the pretense of a moderator, the known advocate of
State, for the Arminians and Vorstians. Vide I. Bogermani notas. His
Cassand^ian vo^um pro pace, ended, as is plain by his last book, viz. his
Discussor, in a down right plea for Popery, vide ipsum, page penultima and
ultima. Et Andraei Riveti Dialysin contra discussorem per totum. The design of
the Cassandro Germane Interimists, ended at last in a bold ex^i^pation of
Protestan: is^^e, to the uttermost that was in them. Ioh. Sl^idan, An. 1549.
page 374 and passim. The Gallican moderators do but bla^n^h over Arminianism.
Vide D. D Davenan^^i append^cem ad ^ractat. 2. de reprobat. and sat^sfact.
Ch^isti. Sic mu^^er formosa superne D^sinit in piscem.
who in words fawn sometimes upon two different parties, but indeed fall most
fowlie upon, and do most hostilely pursue that which they are most resolved to
hate, and withal their might to beat down. I should therefore have been
extremely satisfied, if in this your Press Copy, you had not openly and only
appeared for the Remonstrants opinions against those of the Anti-Remonstrants:
For not so much the ancient fathers before St Austin (from whom as I hope
elsewhere, to show, Austin differed in no material things.) As for Austin
Junior against Austin Senior, for Austin the Presbyter, against Austin the
Bishop; when as yet the good old Bishop did cry peccavi, and did some kind of
honest penance for some of the errata calami, which fell from him by over-lavish
expressions, in the commendation of Nature and free will in his younger times:
Aug. De perseverant. c. 3. 11, and 12. In prioribus illis scrip^^^ Augustinus
^o^ s^r bend^. sed sine praejudicio al^^rum cau^a^um quas prud^ntes p^ssunt
inv^stigare, de quorum vetu^late frustra ipsi praescribitur quia Laicus quaedam
Romae Caep^^, and ^a A^^rica Presbyter explicavit, quo tempore si de rebus
istis dub^^av^^, n^mo ut op^nor est tam in^ustus atque invidus qui cum
proficere prohiberet, atque in hac dubitatione ipsi remanendum esse judica^^^.
Unto which emendations of his, the African, Ephesin, Milevitan, Arausican
Councils, did all consent; for not so much the Synod of Augusta, (which never
that I could learn, or I think you will ever be able to show, did differ from
that of Dort, in the matters debated and determined there; unless perhaps in
some more laxe phrases, wherein, as is used to be said of the Fathers, that
ante exortum Pelagium, they did securius loqui, so those might speak somewhat
more broadlie, before Pelagius Junior, alias your beloved Jac. Arminius
appeared upon the stage) as in a down right way against the Synod of Dort, and
so by an inevitable consequence against the very orthodox Protestant Church of
England (whose very genuine son, you would in this very page, have us to take
you to be.) Know you not, that by the then Learned Supreme Political Governor
of the Church of England, British Divines were sent thither with Orders from
him, to suppress Armini^nisme? that they had the first vote and suffrage given
them, in that almost oecumenicall Protestant Synod (Cui nunquam similem vel
secundam vidit Protestantium orbis Christianus.) Have you the forehead, which
yet I know to be sometimes sufficiently steeled, to maintain, that your
opinions do not diametrically clash with the determinations of that Synod, and
our own Divines there? were they not the visible lawful Representers of our
Mother English Church there? or must we be so wickedly uncharitable against
them, as to look upon them as upon so many Ignaroes, of what the doctrine of
their own Mother Church was? or so wretchedly pharisaicall, as that when a
motion did but seem to be made somewhat prejudicial, to the Hierarchick flaunt
of the English Church, they would unanimously enter their Joint Attestation
against it; and See the Joint Attestation published by them, Anno 1646.
that yet those very venerable Fathers of our Church, would vote down, concur
in anathematizing the very doctrine of our Mother, the Church of England?
Pardon me, Sir, for not believing them to have been such unnatural execrable
Chams, Genesis 9. 21. I am cordially troubled, for to hear you say, that you are
a very orthodox Protestant of the Church of England, whilst you do openly
appear for Arminius his opinions, against those of Mr Perkins: for Bellarmines
against those of Twisse: for a forreiners, and at last a fugitive Baro's, and
recanting, praevaricating Barrets opinions, against those of learned Whitakers;
and at the same time of the whole Universities of Cambridge, as well as of Dr
Estius, Dr Somes, Tindals, Chattertons, Willets, and a number more; nay,
against those of both the then Archbishops, John Whitegift Cantu^riensis,
Matthew. Eborac. the Compilers of the 9. Lambeth Articles; of all which things
Vide A. Thysi. qui horum opera latin transtulit and edidit Amstelodami, 1613.
Ioh. Vogerman Nota, 107. and 107. in Grotium.
I rejoice even forreiners with much content and honor to our Church, to have
taken notice, and grieve to see you to be so great a stranger in your own
Israel, as not to have seen, yea, to oppose, Quis talia fando, etc. For my own
part in what you set down here, I cannot tell what most to admire, whether, 1.
In so great a Politician, as I take you to be, your improvident mentioning of
Contra-Remonstrants, Dort, Whitaker, Perkins, etc. toward the rowsing up of my
memory, and that of other men's, unto the consideration of the grand Heroes of
the Protestant Church, opposed by you, you discover who you side withal
somewhat of the soonest. 2. Or else your disingenuity, if you have but read any
of the Remonstrants writings, in that here you mention them so slightingly, who
have (as you must needs think, if you have but seen them) deserved so well of
you. Ingenuum est agnoscere per quos profeceris. 3. Or else whether or not that
supercilious scornfulnesse, upon the confidence, which you have of your own
great natural wit, in adventuring to maintain Remonstrant opinions, and yet
not vouchsafe to look so much as upon any Remonstrant author. But perhaps I
commit an error against the aptness of your (...), and the Euphues of the pia
matter of your brains, which does Bishop Carleton against Montague.
teach you Arminianisme without book as fast, as once Bishop Montague learned
it, and as fast as Bidle of late learned Arrianisme without a Raccovian
Catechism. 4. Or if not at any of these, yet then at what is worse. (pardon
sweet Sir, a bugs-word from me) Your bold impudence in making a show of being
no Arminian Remonstrant, when as your book a Capite ad Calcem, abounds with it,
as much as any ulcerous body does with botches. In tanto corpore non est mica
salis. 4. Much may be excused, from such prelates as Out all and Davenant,
etc.] 1. Diminutively spoken of Praelates, by such an admirer of Praelates, and
that Qua tales, as your self. Is excuse instead of Laurels of commendation,
all that you will allow them, especially Davenant, for their great pains in
clearing the controverted points? Perchance it is as much as they do deserve
for their over-masculine opposing of Arminianisme, and so of your great Diana.
2. But how do you prove, that either of these Prelates did only moderate
betwixt the contending parties, the Remonstrants, and Contra-Remonstrants, and
their Accomplices; and that they did not both adhere to the latter, and stoutly
oppose the former. It is well known what side Doctor Davenant took in the
Synod, and after it. Bishop Hall and Bishop Davenant, in their Letters annexed
to Bishop H^ls Reconciler, p. 75. 84, 85. aver, that the Arminian errors
cond^mned at Dort, are cont^^ry to the English Church. Animadversions against
Mr H^rd his Gods love to mankind, p. 10.
And 3. As for Bishop Outall, I shall in as fitting a place, tell you more of
him; in the mean while content your self with what his fellow Bishop Davenant
says of him, that he did, together with the Church of England, Conjoine the
particular absolute decree of God, not depending upon the praeicience of humane
faith or will, but upon the purpose of Gods will and grace toward those whom
God in Christ has chosen to deliver, with the general and conditionarie will,
or general promise; which every body now may know, is none of the way which
you take. 5. Amongst the Clergy and amongst the Laity] This contemning of the
Clergy too yo^ have learned from Pelagius, or at least took out the lesson
without book. Aug. l. 2. cont. Iul. c. ver. Quos, inquit, (Clericos) urbana
exagitatos dica^itate, vel potius vanitate contemnis, quia non possunt secun
dum Categories Aristotelis de dogmatibusjudicare, quasi tu qui maxim qu^reris
examen vobis and Ep scopate judicium denegari, peripateticorum possis invenire
concilium; ubi de subjecto and de his quae sunt in subjecto contra originale
peccatum, dialectica sententia proseratur. Aug. l. 2. operis imperfecti: hoc
dixerim ut ostenderem quam sis acutus, qui me obtusiore dicis esse pistillo.
Indeed, if our Country as to the clerical or ministerial part of it, did yet
abound with such Ministers, as were only fit to supplere locum idiotae, with
such poor rats, such lasie Hierarchick, non residentiall, non preaching
Lubbers, as it has, by the report of honest knowing people, abounded with in
former times, you might speak thus (after your wonted manner) scornfully and
diminutively of your neighbor Clergy men. 2. You sure take your self, as a
(...), to be one of those hundreds fit to speak of these mysteries, when at
Daintrey, you came out with that which you have, p. 26. about Gods preparing
torments for the Devil and his Angels, but not for any wicked men. And when at
Northampton (contrary to your promise as some say) you vented that goodly
argument, which you set down, p. 72. about the universalitie of Christ's death.
2. For my part I dare not be so uncharitable, but to assure my self and
others, that not one of the hundred of your despised Presbyterian brethren, but
would have handled those matters, even ex tempore, better, i. e. more solidlie
and orthodoxlie, then you the trim finicall bean-cleric. of the Country, did
after all your artificial preparations. 3. As you, and your Pelagian and
Arminian faction, by debasing of them, handle these mysteries, who make
election to be nothing else, p. 2. but a consequent reward upon persevering in
the faith, and well doing, and reprobation to be nothing else, save a
punishment to the contrary. Either every Preacher is fit to divulge these, not
operta, but aperta, or he is fit to be no preacher at all. 4. Not one in a
thousand of the scorned Laity (if but competentlie instructed and catechized)
but would even instruct and teach you, (otherwise a Great Rabbi in our Israel)
that vocation, faith, repentance, and all graces, are subsequent genuine fruits
of election, and not antecedents to it, as you speak of them, even when you
strive in your own defense, to speak best of them, p. 56, 68, 69. something
else therefore, besides what you do in the next lines so demurely pretend to,
which though I can tell what it was, yet for to spare you, I will not at this
time blab out, was the cause of that silence, and afterward secrecy which you
talk of in the way of venting of your notions: Which now they be out, are not
vera, but placentia, writ just as heedid qui

Terent. Hoc. sibi negoti credidit solum dari
Populo ut placerent quas fecisset fabulas.
6. Forced to be more publick] viz. By the fierce impetus of your own (...) and
(...), but by no other force that I wot of, whose preparations to the press,
had you not appeared in it, I am much assured, would have been none at all, and
that for reasons wherein I can satisfy my self, are like to be slow enough.
7. One of the falsest] A thing which you by what you confess, of not so much
as reading over your own first Copy, have (as has been showed) made impossible
for you to prove. And I am well assured it is but the second, taken from your
own first, I say not best; for neither of them are so much as good. 8. Great
leisure] In your second Epistle to me, you seem to call it Lasinesse, whilst
you tell me of taking less pains with a lesser, then with a greater
Congregation; though I bless God for it, and pray let me crave leave to speak
it without boasting; I do by one half take with those few who are under me,
more pains, then you your self do with your more numerous flock. And I am
some what confident through Christ who strengthens me, that my Sermons be
more wholesome, though not so handsome as yours. But well it is for me, that
this lasinesse, which I think in me was ever like unto Dr Jacksons vigorous
rest, is, you your self being judge, turned into great leisure. I like it the
better, because I am sure you are none of the procurers or promoters of it.
Deus, Deus, nobis haec otia fecit; and for that as God will have it at this
time to be, it may be of some use unto the Church of God, for me at some
leisure to observe your Snake-like motions, and to return some answers, to your
mischievous poisonous papers. 9. Not from any ambition to be followed] 1.
Believe that whosoever will and can, that knows you. For my own part I cofess my
faith as to this point, to be at a loss. 2. But good worthy Gentlemen of our
Country, for whom the snare in these papers is laid, let me crave the boldness
to beseech you to take for once, this Gentleman on his word, satisfy his
desire, and do not you follow him. Not only I, who am unknown to the most of
you, and who were I better known to you, might not seem to deserve to be heeded
by you; but all those Reverend Bishops and Doctors, who have been already
mentioned, and those who may yet farther be mentioned, together with your own
sacred mother the Church of England, cry and call with loud voice to you, not
to follow him, because he leads you amiss; and who with himself may bring you
(which God avert) into bogs and praecipices. 10. Humble desire to be rightly
understood] 1. The English world was never so full of pride, as since it has
abounded with proud actions, and humble phrases. But the best is, I have at
last brought my self to it, to understand these expressions, when they came
from mere Complements the clean contrary way. 2. It is little for your credit,
or the Churches ease, that now at last she understands, and that under the
hand of T. P. that he is guilty of Pelagianisme and Arminianisme, though he
have the audacity to deny both: Yet vox populi, vox Dei, do you what you can
to the contrary, you will henceforward be reputed to be, what reallie you are.

Convenient rebus nomina saepe suis. 11. An Apology and an Appeale] 1.
Apologies should be modest, and be made use of only for wiping off dirt from
our selves, but not for the flinging of dirt in the faces of all we meet with,
as this of yours does, as often as in your way, you meet with any Reformers you
like not of, or even with the whole Nation of Reformers, in the first
Reformation. 2. Yours begins with Calumnies, that men in the world of no small
name, do make God the author of sin, p 8. Goes on with Jirkes and squibs, and
ends with Complements. In hac Apologia multum inest turpitudinis. 3. An appeal
Either for you we must erect a Court of Cassandro-Grotians, or you had need as
Pelagius of old, to appeal to an Auditorium Philosophicum. Aug. lib. 6. contra
Iul. c. 20. Ad hoc redacta est haere sis vestra, ut gemant sectatores vestri,
non inveniri dialecticos judices in Ecclesia, de scholis Peripateticorum, sive
Stoicorum, a quibus possitis absolvi.
to those you scorn to be censured by, as I am confident you would be by all
the present Clergy of the Country, clerically to be convened about the matter,
or by all the Christian orthodox Laity in these parts. 12. Such a secret might
be communicated to one] If it had been any part of the mystery of Godliness,
spoken of, 1 Timothy 3. 16. you had leave enough from God and the Church, to have
communicated it to many; but since the secret is now come forth, and appears
to belong to the depths of Satan, Rev 2. 24. great pity it is, that by so fine
and elegant a tongue, it should have been communicated to any one. Poisons
sometimes go down glib Ruffinus predecessor to Pelagius did propone his first
poison in a book, composed by Sixtus a Pythagorean Philosopher, under the name
of Siatus a M^rtyr, and Bishop of Rome, vide Hieron Epist. ad Ctesiph and in c.
23. Hierem. l. 4. Comment. Hoc enim (says my author Jansenius for it) ideireo
eum s^cisse existimandum est, ut venenum aureo martyris poculo biberetur.
when presented in a golden cup, and commended by noted Physicians. 13. Which
belonged only to the fire] 1. Sure you may be thought to suspect your papers to
be guilty of some heresy, because you would thus with your own secular arm,
have cast them into the fire. 2. And yet in so doing, you would neither have
dealt worse with with them, then they deserved. (K. James at the first sight of
P. Bertii his book, entitled Apostasia sanctorum, professed that ob solum
Titulum, it was liber dignus igne) 3. Nor worse then, as the report goes, your
admired G. Vossius, to whom you are much beholding, did to a basket full of his
writings, for fear of the approaching Synod of Dort, and that he might stand
firm in his Praesidentship in Collegio Belgico D. D. ordinum Hollandiae. It Is
well for you, that his Historia Pelagiana, did escape his fierce fingers; for
else what would you have done for a Warehouse to fetch quotations out of? 14.
So much as a Massilian] That sure you are, as the minimum quod sic, for the
opinions of the Molinists. It Is plain, that our own British Divines in their
suffrage given in at the Synod of Dort Synod Dordrac. p. 2. p. 256. in 410.
Inter Massiliensium errores, refertur quod n^gaverint dari cuiquam talem
perseverantiam, a qua non permittitur praevaricari. Quem errore^ refellit,
August. de bono perseverant. c. 6
relate it out of a letter of Hilaries to Austin, that it was reckoned amongst
the Massilian tenants, that they did deny there was given unto any such a
perseverance, from which they were not permitted to prevaricate. And it is as
plain, that you maintain many to fall off, and to praevaricate totally and
finally from Grace, even the grace of Regeneration and Justification. p. 67.
15. A very orthodox Protestant of the Church of England] So indeed you would be
reputed to be, yea, even so very a genuine son to the Protestant Church of
England, as if for many miles about you, our good mother had never such
another. And all this in despite of many Articles of the Church in King Edward
the 6. his Reign. Of the 17. Article in Queen Elizabeth's Reign. Of the 9.
Lambeth Articles toward the latter end of her Reign. Of the explanatorie
Articles of the Church of Ireland, in King James his Reign. Nor so much as to
dare to mention the Confession of faith, Catechismes, etc. of the late
Westmonasterian Assembly, though highly commended by the Reverend and
incomparable Primate of Armagh. For my own part, I have in fidelity, though
with much weakness served my mother the Church of England, now above these
twenty years, in the work of the Ministry, and if I be not able to prove,
that the Doctrines which I have taught all along, contrary to what you deliver
in this book, are most agreeable to her faith, and that yours are as opposite
to it, as heaven and hell, light and darkness, the Articke is from the
Antarticke pole, I shall be content to be cursed by my mother, even with
Anathema Maranatha. But of this more, if need be, when I shall come to what
you say, p. 16. Only let all the true Christian sons and daughters of the
Church of England, tell me what true sons to her at any time she has found
Arminian clericall ceremonialists to be? The rod and reproof give wisdom:
but a child left to himself, brings his mother to shame, Prove. 29. 15, 16.
Managed discourse, etc. not from the hidden mysteries of Gods secret will, but
from the clearest expressions, etc] This trim flimflam will then Apologize for
your methodus procedendi, when as you shall have proved, that Romans 9. 11, 13,
16, 18, 21, 22. Ephesians. 1. 4, 11. Act. 15. Romans 8. 25, 29. 1 Timothy 2. 19. Rev. 13.
8. 20. 15. and other Scriptures more, which do professedly handle the matter of
Predestination, and accquaint us with what God has fully determined shall be,
and how he does (if I may so say) make up his decree, to be no part of his
revealed will or word, concerning his secret will conceived in himself, Of
which will manifested in the word, Dr Whitaker in his Cygnea Cantio, writes
excellently well, conformable to Scriptures. And Austin, Romans 11. O altitudo!
ultima illa Apostoli exclamatio, hanc sententiam confirmat. Neque enim tantae
allitudinis est ut penetrari inequeat, Deum od^sse homines propter peccatum,
etiam antequam nati sunt, immo rationi convenientissimum est, ut Deus serre
nequeat, quod est naturae suae contrarium. Ibi demum infinitum (...) and
Abyssus est divinae discreti^nis, quando sine peccati ratione quidam
reprobantur, and alii qui nihilo erant amore digniores ad vitam and
foecilitatem praedest^nantur. I^iquum videtur (ait Augustinus) ut sine ullis
bonorum malorumque operum meritis unum Deus diligat, odiatque alterum. Deus
igitur hunc dil^git, illumque odit sine meri^is ^llis operum aut b^norum aut
malorum. Hoc videri p^ssit al^cui iniquum, sed est aequ^ssimum, quia sic Deo
visum est, neque Augustinus affirmare veritus est, eos Apostoli verbum evacuare
qui judicium divinae discretionis ad opera reducunt praevisa aut praeterita,
etc.
or that those Scriptures are placed in Gods book, (as a Doctor once openly
did deliver it in my hearing, in a sermon at Christ's Church, (which had been
better delive'rd extraaedem Christi) as the forbidden tree was in the Garden of
Eden, not to be meddled with, or that as Adolphus Venator once had it; The
Apostle might have found him some other work, then to have wrote those
Scriptures. Till you shall have made some attempts toward the proving of some
of these matters, you must pardon us, though we continue believing the
forementioned Scriptures, to be as true and clear Scriptures for what we prove
out of them for absolute praedestination, as any promises, commands, threats,
etc. frequently quoted by you, do signify what God likes or dislikes, will
reward or punish, when believed, done, or left undone. The former signify,
whom, why, how he does praedestinate (the main things disputed.) The latter,
tell after what fashion, and upon whom that praedestination is to be executed,
of whom there is no question or difficulty. And would God be pleased, which I
pray for in your behalf, to give you some of the Collyrium, spoken of Rev. 3.
you would quickly see this with me too. 17. Of diverse interpretations unto the
Analogy of faith] 1. Texts I find you, (p. 13, 17, 34, and passim) as it were,
to be casting in by dozens, as if Baker-like you were bound to throw in so many
fine Manchets into a Buttery hatch: But when by Interterpretations you crumble
them out, either they fall into your own crude dictates. or else they be
turned into sippets, fit for none but Pelagian, Massilian or Arminian Palats.
This if it has been done knowingly by you, upon reading of their writings,
your falsehood and impudence is to be detested, who protest against any the
least inclinations unto Pelagianisme, p. 55, 56. But if ignorantly, some may
think the felicity of your symbolizing, jumping wit with them, to be much
commendable, who still without conferring notes with any of them, do hit upon
the same Texts, Interpretations, Illustrations, etc. As for me, I must needs
say that it is natural for you and every body else to be a Pelagian, etc. That
is an excellent observation of Jansen. in his Aug lib. 7. Tom. 1. cap 4 That if
Austin did not at first avoid Semipelagian, tam proclive est corruptae naturae.
(quae velut mortem ipsam horret, omni fiducia libertatis f^nditus exui) in
sententiam Semipelagianam labi, tenu^ssimasque fibras illius erroris retinere,
then can no other look to be free from it, etc.
I cannot but give my vote for it; that whenever the harmony of the
Confessions of their faith, shall be brought together into some one Syntagma,
or Corpse le Grand, that your first and second Tome, come to shut up the
harmony, as being most agreeable to the Analogy of their faith,
perfidiousnesse rather, but to no other wholesome, sound form of Doctrine, that
I wot of, as yet entertained by any Catholic Christian, Reformed, Protestant
Church. 2. In our Interpretations of Scripture, I believe we are not so much to
attend what is congruous to safety, (by which I doubt not but you, and many
wanton wits more Castallio praefat. ad suos Dialogos de praedestinatione,
electione and libera voluntate vulgus merum (nisi qui sunt a literatis
corrupti) melius and sanius sentit quam quidam literati. S^quuntur enim
illiterati homines rationis and sensuum judiciu^, quod in his rebus integrum
est, quae sub rationem subque sensus cadunt: a^que utinam hac in part
hominibus relinquer^tur naturae judicium.
understand nothing but security to your mother wit) which you in your first
Comment, (give me leave to be yet so foolish, as not to understand you sine
Commentario, or the domestique Interpreter of your meaning) call right reason,
as what is congruous to verity, and the series of the Text and Context. Bonus
textuarius est bonus Theologus. But this I am sure of, is little heeded by you,
or any of your party, who all along rob God of his sovereign determining power,
and leave him nothing but a Legislative and Judiciary power, to give out
sentence secundum allegata, and probata, of the merits or demerits of men. 18.
Who am a babe and an Idiot, etc.] I hungely fear not yet so much as a babe in
grace, unless it be such a one as you say, p. 67. may fall from it, and
outlive their innocence; I know you to be no babe in malice, Malitia supplet
aetatem. Certain it is, you take your self to be wiser then Austin, whose
senior or manlike writings, you confute ever and anon by his more infantile,
junior babe-like writings, as to your shame shall be seen when we come to p.
44. of this your second scrible. 2. As babe-like as you would be accounted to
be, in your very next words, you like some Archi-Thalassus get to the rudder of
Christ's Ship, and profess to be a steeres-man of it, to keep it off from
fatal shelves, and to guide it through, as anon after, the dangerous
Archi-Pelago. Truly for this I would not blame you, who by your place and
office in Christ's Ship, are, though not an Admiral, yet to be sure some what
more in it, then a common Sailer, even a Pilot, a Steers-man. And heartily I
can wish, that you would not steer the ship you are one of the guides of, per
Archipelagum, through the maine ocean unto Rome again. Unto this place do most
of your doctrines direct us; and it is true, if the present Pope be but of his
last praedecessors mind, you and your wares, your doctrines I mean, would be
much more welcome there, as the Bull of the H. Father Innocentius decimus
published, An. 1653. Contra Augustinum Cornelii Jansenii does assure you, then
any of ours would do, with the Grand Turk, if according to your charitable
wish, p. 35. they should in the next Reformation, be shipped over for Turkey. Sed
naviges tu potius Anticyras. My small vessel soundly dashed, and many others
much greater shipwrackt] Believe it who list, there is belike no safety but in
a Semipelagian or Arminian Barque; all the reformed who have followed
Scripture, Austin; Calvin, etc. they all as lead, are sunk into the Gulf,
only your late modest Jesuits, your cooler Lutherans, in that I am sure, in
this no Martin Lutherans, as I shall show elsewhere, your polite and politic
Grotians, (in these Controversies, though no Cassandrians) are the only men
who hold their head above water, and are kept from sinking into the deep.
Whereas yet blessed be God in all ages, the Pelagians, Semipelagians of old See
this proved at large by Cornel. Iansen. ^om. 1. l. 6. c. 20, 21 and inde.
Arminians of late, witness P. Bertius, Tilenus, Slatius, Thomson, and a
number more of the Transmarines, together with the profane spawne of the
English Arminians, from Montacutius to this day down ward, have shipwrackt
more in few years upon the rocks of Atheism Vide D* Nic. Vedelii Arcan.
A^minianismi.
superstition, Socinianisme, profaneness, then any of their opposites of any
considerable note, have done at any time: And you my good brother consider with
your self, whether since your sailing off from us in the points of the
Absolute Decree, p. 24. and the Resistibility (as you call it) of grace, you
have not wel-nigh, if not altogether, made shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience. Nolo ego ulterius Camerinam hanc movere. This sea will cast up
nothing but mire and dirt; those are most like to be not only dashed, but
drowned, who for the liberty of their wills, dispute against Gods
praedestination. Aug. de bono perseverant. c. 18. Hoc unum scio, neminem contra
istam praedestinationem, quam secundum scripturam sanctam defendimus, nisi
errando disputare posse.
And if Abulensis may be believed, no such way to a breake-neck in all
Religion, then to err in the great mysteries of praedestination. Tostat. in
G^nes. c. 19. In nulla ma^^ria periculo sius erratur quam in hac de
praedestinatione, Eligerem enim mag is contra totius si dei v^r^tatem perverse
sentire, and in hac non ^rrare, quam in omnibus recte judicando in hac sola
de^^are. (...). in Thom. p. 1 q. 22 (...) ^^^^ster, non evidentia veritatis
inspecta, sed altitudine inaccessibili veritatis occultae. and hoc ingeniolo
meo satis rationabile videtur. Minus de Deo sensit, qui hoc tantum de illo
credit, quod suo ingenio metiri potest. Similiter idem in Romans 9. Quum objicies
conjunge haec vera simul, viz. infallibilitatem decreti and liberum arbitrium;
respondebo me scire, quod verum vero non est contrarium, sed nescire haec
jungere, sicut nescio alia mysteria fidei quae credo. Haec ignorantia quietat
intellectum meum.
19. Hovered a long time betwixt the absoluteness of a decree, and the liberty
of a will, etc] But 1. How could you be said to hover all that while that you
were, as you say, p. 24. for the absolute decree, till Calvin's expression about
it, frighted you into your wits, p. 24. were you then when you stood, as well
as since you have tumbled, a man unstable in all your ways? 2. If your great
wit would not serve you to reconcile the absoluteness of Gods decree with the
liberty of man's will; yet 1. Why would you not think them reconcilable by some
other, better seen in these secrets then your self. 2. Or why would you not
with Cardinal Cajetan See the like testimony about Ph. Melancton, producedby
Walaeus de provid. div. cap 3. p. 84 Edit. in 410.
be so modest as to acquiesce in your ignorance without disputing against God?
3. Why were you not so pious and so provident; even for the safety of your own
soul Aug. Tutiores vivimus, si totum Deo damus: Non autem nos illi ex part
committimus. Idem lib. de perseverant. sanctorum, cap. 11. sanc cum Apostolus
dicat, ideo ex fide ut secundum gratiam firma sit prom ssio: Miror homines
infirmitati suae se malle committere quam firmitati promissimis Dei* sed
in^^r^a est mihi, inquit, de me volun as Dei. Quid ergo? Tua ne tibi voluntas
de te ipso c^rta est n^c times? Qui videtur stare, videat ne cadat. Cum igitur
utraqve incenta sit, cur non homo firmiori, quam infirmiori fidem suam
charitatemque commi^ti^?
that when as to you there seemed to be a necessity, that either Gods
absoluteness, or your freedom and absoluteness; should be aloft, to sit
down your self by the loss, then that Gods power, grace, decrees, should be
losers? Have you not heard of a good proverb among the Jews, that praestat
demere de profano and addere ad sacrum, quam e contra? and will you hating
sacrilege, not think your own will and freedom to be a profane thing in
comparison to Gods will? The Lord deliver you from your miserable (...) This
(...) and (...) of yours, makes you so like the Massillians, though you would
not be thought any, of whom Prosper. thus Epist. ad Ruffin de lib. arbitr. Ab
hac autem confessione gratiae Dei ideo quidam resil^^nt, ut cum eam talem
confessi fuerint, qualis divino cloqui^ praedicatur, and qualis opere
potestatis suae agnoscitur, etiam hoc necesse habeant confiteri, quod ex omni
numero hominum per saecula cunctanatorum certus apud Deum definitusque sit
numerus praedestinati in vitam aeler^am populi, and secundum propositum Dei
vocantis El^cti. Quod quidem tam impium est negare, quam ipsi gratiae contr^ire.
love God more, and your self less. 22. Walking upon a rope] I perceive you
be excellently good at turning from what you were but just now, and will
become presently again a Sayler; you are here a funambulo, a rope dancer: And
perchance in all the feats of activity which you show upon your cord, you
little think that you do but continue walking upon Semi-pelagian or
Massililian It will be w^rth the while for those who have skill and leisure to
see how these Massilian cable^^opes, are drawn out at Length by Cornelius
Jansenius, whom as to the matter, no man can commend enough for his
incomparable pains; his words are most remarkable. Aug. Tom. 1. lib. 8 cap.
1. Massilienses tanquam Catholicae fidei sectatores Christum naturae perditae
salvatorem omnibus modis sibi retinendum esse duxerunt, ^u^ndamque^gratiam
ejus, ut quemadmodum Augustinus dicit, nobiseum pro Catholica side perniciem
Pelagiani erroris impugnarent, lib. de praedestinatione. Sect. cap. 14. Sed cum
istud praedestinationis and electionis propositum, quo quidam, pro solo Dei
beneplacito, nulla prorsus habita consideratione voluntatis, a perditionis
massa quam peccatum f^cerat, aliis in eadem causa praetermissis, discerni
debere dicebantur, and consequenter omnes voluntatis actus, quibus ex illa
massa perditionis eripiuntur, a prima credendi voluntate usque ad ipsam Gloriae
coronam accipere, durissimum ipsis esse ac desperationis causa videretur,
adeoque Catholicae veritati and antiquiori patrum sensui repugnare, aliam viam
salva Dei gratia and praedestinatione sibi aperiendam esse duxerunt, qua
mitigata illa divini propositi fatalitate, unusquisque si vellet, per gratiam
ab illa perditione posset liberari. Itaque scalas quasdam sibi machinati sunt,
(let Mr T. P. conceive these ladders to have been made of the rope he speaks
of) quibus a naturae bonitate, quae non prorsus peccato deleta fuerat, tanquam
prima and initiali quadam gratia ad salva^ricem Christi gratiam, quis quis
vellet sine ullo Pelagii errore vel gratuitae gratiae laesione conscenderet.
Thus Mr T. P. may perceive he is not the only funambulo. Sic scilicet itur ad
Astra, alias ad inferos.
cords, they, as their genuine successors the Jesuits, the Arminians, and your
self, in the lucky device (as you all think) of scientia media are still
devising new Chimaerical shifts, and that under prete^dency of reconciling Gods
infallible decrees, and man's most fallible free will; but which really set up
the rotten dagon, and proud Idol of man's will, against the certain, never
missing determinations of God, which are as the brazen mountains, spoken of
Lev. 6. 1. which are never moved. I should not wonder though the cords of your
will, and those too of Antecedent and Consequent, and a number more reckoned
up. 27. by which you would (if it were in you) limit and bind the Almighty,
break all together with your self, and give you a desperate fall; but as for
the counsel of God, that shall stand, Prove. 19. 21. In the Lord is no
mutability or shadow of turning. 23. Bold as the Pelagians] This Epithete of
boldness, you put twice upon the Pelagians, once in your former papers, and
now here; and I think de industria, as a select term picked out by you; for
that possibly in your more polite Massilian, Semipelagian, and politic
judgment, you take them living among Christians, as they did, to have been too
bold and too daring, when sub Christiano nomine (to use Tertullians Tertullian.
Apologet.
phrase) they did gentes agere, when the first (...), if you will, face of
their haeresie, was merely Ethnic, all See praedestination maintained against
postdestination.
the while that by grace they understood nothing else but nature, which they
did confound with grace. This I Will believe you take too have been somewhat to
bold and gross, and even Pelagius himself, dissembled at least to be of this
mind before the diospolitan Fathers Vide J. Lai. ex August-Epist. 106. Damnatus
exis. set, nisi objecta sibi contra gratiam Dei dicta, quae obscurare non
potuit, ipse damnasset. Praeter enim illa quae quomodo potuit, ausus est
qualicunque ratione defendere, objecta quaedam sun quae nisi remota omni
Tergiversatione anathematizesset, ipse anathematizatus esset.
2. You do not any where call their errors haereticall, unless perhaps, p 55,
56. in a mollified sense, (es tu inter Pelagianos molliores) whereas you can
find in your heart to stigmatize the doctrine of special redemption with
pestilent haeresie. It is most likely you think Pelagians to have been more
bold then false or untrue in their sayings; but their enemies to have been both
bold, yea, bloody and false too. 3. When the Pelagians were most bold, (as they
were in their first edition, before they met with opposition from their
Catholic adversaries) they were hardly more bold and adventurous then your
self were in your first papers, where you tell us, p. 1. that that is a
praeposterous saying, that God does not elect us, because we choose the good,
but we choose the good because he elects us. That p. 14. when two are equally
called, whereof the one converts himself, the other miscarries, it is not God
but man that puts the difference August. Epist. 106. Quis te ab illa
perditionis massa discernit? Vnde Apostolus interrogat dice^s, Quis enim, te
discernit? Vbi si dixerit homo, fides mea, voluntas mea, bonum opus meum:
Respo^detur ei, quid enim habes quod non accepisti? si autem and accepisti,
quid gloriaris quod non acceper is? etc.
nay, then you are in this very Correct Copy of yours, wherein you would feign
have us believe, that you are multum mutatus, from what you were in your first
Uncorrected Copy: witness for this what you have up and down, chap. ^. and
what you set down expressly, chap. 4. p. 70. That because such man as are in
Christ by faith, are better then such as are out of Christ by infidelity,
therefore those are taken, and these are left. An assertion as diametrically
Antiapostolicall, as any can be, Romans 9. 11. and (as shall be showed in its
proper place) as purely Pelagian, as ever bold Pelagius uttered any. Sic
convenient ultima primis. 31. Nor so bloody as the Manichees] 1. We need not be
August. lib. ad Bonifac. cap. 18. Hominem Dei opus defendimus: nec ex illius
potentia vel in malum vel in bonum invi^um aliquem cogi. Prosper. ad Ruffin.
Adjiciunt etiam (accusatores Augustini) duas illum humani generis massas and
duas cred^ velle naturas, ut scilicet tantae pietatis v^o Paganorum and
Manichaeorum adscribatur imp^tas. Et in Epistola ad August. Massilienses;
dieunt, sub hoc praedestinationis nomine fatalem quandam induci nec^ssi^a^em,
aut diversarum naturarum dici dominum conditorem, si nemo al^ud possi^ esse
quam factus s^i.
troubled at the objection of Manichaeisme, it having been so protrite a
stallion, or threadbare objection of the Pelagians against the Catholics: and
for that many hundred years ago it was, upon the like pretenses objected by
the Papists, to our old suffering and late bleeding brethren, the Waldenses
Philip. Morne's mystery of iniquity, progression. 49. and 48. p. 355, 331.
edit. Anglic. ad A. p 63. and 64. vide Aug. lib. 1. cont. Jul. c. 1. lib. 2 de
nupt. c. 3. and 29. and alibi saepissime apud August. lib 1. operis imperfecti.
Haec semper fuit maximum inter Manichaeos (seu Catholicos) Catholicosque (id
est Pelagianos) discrimen, and limes quidam latissimus, quo a se mutuo piorum
and impiorum dogmata separantur, imo magna moles, quasi coeli a terra
profunditate disjungens, quod nos omne peccatum voluntati malae, illi vero malo
eoru^ naturae (tribuunt) qui cum diversos errores, sed veluti de capite sontis
istius effluentes consequenter ad sacrilegia flagitia perveniunt.
2. But da Quintiliane colorem for any such objection, for do any of ours
maintain, that there be two paramount uncontroleable, unsubordinate principles;
whereof the one is principium boni, the other principium mali? Or do we maintain
that the only true and good God, the author of every good gift, James 1. 17. is
at all proprij nominis author, of that which is sinfully evil, as such? This
latter though you be so impudent, as every where to object, or to take for
granted that your adversaries hold, you shall never be able any more to prove
against them, then I shall be able to evince against you (who was never so mad
as to make any show of attempting it) that you are a wity Epist. or a bare
Epist, etc. 25. Robbing God of his efficiency in any one act, which is
naturally good] 1. But what if you do not rob God as he is the author of nature
and of all natural good actions, if you do rob him of all first efficiency,
and of every thing which in propriety of speech, may be called efficiency,
about the great works of grace and conversion (as has been and
Praedestination defended against Postdestination, by W. B. against T. P. M. S.
shall be abundantly proved) are you for that any thing the smaller thief, and
not for that very reason so much the more sacrilegious? Romans 2. 22. Thou who
abhorrest Idols, committest thou sacrilege? 2. If your time were but come for
the venting of all your Pelagian and Arminian secrets (you being a close Votary
to them, though yet loath openly to own your best friends) you would be found
to rob the God of nature, as well as the God of all grace, by maintaining in
the point of Gods providence, that God has no influx upon any voluntary act of
the creature, any otherwise then per modum concursus in suppositum, not per
modum operationis in voluntatem Dr Twisse against Mr Hoard, p. 25, 26. Arminius
will have Gods concourse to an evil act, to be every way as much as his
concourse to a good, and that he concurs to the working of a good act, no more
then to the working of an evil act, which we utterly deny, etc. Arminians
hold, that God works in man (...) velle, modo velit as absurd an assertion, as
ever any man breathed. Dr Twisse, lib. 2. pr. 1. p. 142. Edit in 4^0. Col. 2.
but veritas est temporis filia, time will unmaske what you hold in these
points. 26. Aspersing his holiness in any one act, which is morally evill] 1.
This, though you have malice enough to charge your adversaries with the holding
of (si accusasse suffecerit: quis erit innocens?) Yet they will clear
themselves to hold more then your self, that God is no author of sin, Psalm.
5. 4. Hab. 1. 13. nor can be; for that if (I may so speak) the very Augustine
passim.
esse of sin is merely privativum, and nullam habet causam efficientem, sed
deficientem tantum. 2. But how you will do to clear your own doctrine about
free will, which you do all along place as to the very Essence and being of it,
and so as it is a creature of Gods making, in a Cylindricall (...), or
turne-pin indifferency, not only ad contradictoria sed and ad contraria Vide D.
Anton. Walae. cont. Corvin. c. 6. Si liberum arbitrium primi hominis
consistebat in illo aequilibrio affect us and inclinationis ad malum and bonum,
tum sane homo ante lapsum, non tantum Dei imaginem, sed quod impium auditu est,
etiam sa^anae imaginem retul^t; Cum Christus concupiscentias ad malum, satanae
concupiscentias vocet, Joh. 8. 44. Aug. in Adamo voluntas cupiditatem, non
voluntatem cupiditas, duxit Contra est in lapsis hominibus.
of good as well as evil, and evil as well as good, p. 64. I say how you will
clear your self from aspersing God with the unholinesse of all moral
actions, flowing from your fountain of free will, so according to you, made by
himself, I think as great a Master in our Israel as you be, you will never be
able to explain: Turpe est doctori dum culpa redarguit ipsum. Dum vitant
stulti vitia, in contraria currunt. Others unhappily kept and fed in a place
where superstition and profaneness makes matches. Vota loquor, And the people
who are caused to err by your means. 27. Rock of presumption] 1. This indeed
with some color might be objected against our doctrine, if what you and your
Accomplices, would feign make the world believe we hold, you could prove, viz.
that we teach men about Election to divide the decree about the end, the
salvation of men's souls, from the decree of the means, as if these were like
German's lips, which are said to have been nine miles asunder. These decrees,
which though we are forced because of our weak apprehensions, to distinguish,
not to distract, yet we all agree, to make up in the Almighty, who is purus
putus actus, but only one single decree of praedestination. And all the
Reformed Churches assert the same, which those Divines have in the Synod of
Dort, p. 3. p. 44. Adeo ut hoc unico decreto, quod a justificatione
distinguunt, sentiant Deum singularibus illis personis, non tantum gloriam, sed
etiam gratiam suam, per quam certo and efficaciter ad gloriam perducantur,
destinasse ac praeparasse: seu cos non tantum ad finem, qui est vita aeterna,
sed simid etiam ad omnia media ad hunc finem consequendum necessaria,
destinasse, eaque suo tempore certo atque efficaciter iis administrare. Ac
proinde destinationem ad gratiam aeque late se extendere, at que destinationem
ad gloriam and vice versa.
Or that we do maintain; that though men of years should never believe at
all, repent at all, be converted at all, be holy at all, that their absolute
praedestination, without any of these, would bring them to Heaven, contrary to
2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Things which methinks the very Devil himself might even blush
to object against our tenants. The most that we teach men to presume upon, is,
and this is pia praesumptio, August lib. 2. cont. Jul. cap. 8. prorsus quantum
sancti de misericordia Dei tantum vos de vestra quae nulla est virtute
praesumitis.
that the same God, who by his grace of election and vocation, according to
purpose, Romans 8. 28. 1 Timothy 9. was the author of their faith and salvation,
will by virtue of that very same election, in the use of the very same means,
by which he did at first regenerate them unto newness of life, be also the
finisher of their faith and salvation, Heb. 12. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 5. that for this
they may presume upon the unvariablenesse of Gods decrees, 2 Timothy 2. 19. the
faithfulness of his promises, 1 These. 5. 24. 2 Cor. 7. 1. the strength of his
manutenency, the never failing successefulnesse of Christ's meritorious
intercession, Joh. 11. 42. 2. But you indeed and your party, are the
praesumptuous teachers, whilst you cry up I cannot tell what occult quality in
men's free will (the very same thing which Austin, as he confesses of
himself, when he spoke as a child; for afterward he did most solemnly retract
it, calls occultissimu^ meritum) For when Aug. lib. 83. Quaest. 968. upon Romans 9
18. he had affirmed much the same which you quote out of him, p. 71. Velut de
occultissimis meritis, etc. praecedit ergo aliquid in peccatoribus quo quamvis
nondum sint just^fi^ati, digni eff^^iantur justificatione, etc. He does most
solemnly retract all such sayings, and gives his reason from 1. Cor. 4. 7. de
praedest. sanct. lib. 1. cap. 3. Quo praecipue testimonio etiam convictus sum,
cum similiter errarem, putans fidem qua in Deum creditur non esse donum Dei,
sed a nobis esse in nobis, etc. and lib. retractat. cap. 60.
qualifying you not only for your temporal vocation, but even for your
eternal election, p. 69. upon which broken reed you teach men to lean, that
they might be called, nay chosen. So far you teach men to presume upon their
own wills, as that for Grace and glory, they are more beholding to them then to
Gods August. de pec. merit. and remis. lib. 2. cap. 18. Si nobis l^b^ra quaedam
voluntas ex Deo est, quae adhuc potest esse vel bona vel mala; bona vero
voluntas ex nobis sit, melius est id quod a nobis, quam quod ab illo quod non
nisi absurd ssime dici potest.
. High presumption this sure! But 3. You must still be allowed to Pelagianize
Prosper ad August. Hoc propositu^ vocationis and lapsus curam risuigendi
adimere and sanctis occasione^ teporis afferre. Causam addunt eo quod utraque
part superfluus laber sit, si neque rejectus ulla industria possit in-^^are,
neque electus nulla negtigentia possit excidere. Quoque enim modo se egerint,
no^ posse aliud erga eos qua^ Deus definivit accidere, and sub incerta spe
cursum non posse esse constantem. Cum si aliud habeat pnaedestinantis electio,
cassa fit annitentis intentio. Removeri itaque industriam tollique virtutes si
Dei constitu^io humanas praeveniat voluntates.
even whilst you declaime against it, as Arminius is said to have done in his
declamation against Pelagianisme, and Semipelagianisme. 28. Gulf of despaire]
1. Into this indeed would our doctrine sink men, if we did teach, that though
men did knock never so hard, Heaven gates should never be opened unto them,
Mat. 7. though they did seek never so much and so well, they should never find,
though they did believe and repent, etc. never so soundly, yet for want of
praedestination, they could never be saved. This you will prove against us ad
calendas graecas. 2. But you sure, p. 67. drive some babes of grace to
despair, whilst you tell us, that they may outlive their innocence, so as to
be transformed into vessels of wrath. The precious gold of your sanctuary may
become dross, or reprobate silver, Lam. Their hopes of glory may make them
ashamed, and like that of the hypocrites Job 20. 5. last for a moment, and then
give up the ghost. They may, to use the words of that eminent and sweet Dr D^
Reynolds in his late Sermon before the Lord Mayor, p. 21.
be as Adams forbidden fruit, seconded by a flaming sword; as B^lshazars
dainties with an handwriting against the wall; in the midst of all such joy,
the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness, Prove. 14. 12.
Like a flame of stubble, or a flash of gunpowder, claro strepitu, largo
fulgore, cito incremento: sed enim materia levi, ^^duco incendio, nullis
reliquiis. A sudden and flaming blaze which ends in smoke and stink. Like
the Roman Saturnalia, wherein the servants feasted for two or three days, and
then returned to their low condition again. Desperate doctrine this, unless
with J. G. any man be so far enchanted, as to believe the doctrine of the
Saints apostasy, to be more comfortable, then that of the Saints perseverance.
Miserable merciless comforters are you all, Job. 3. But you must be allowed in
words to renounce Pelagianisme, yet still reason so against us, as if you were
spit out of their mouths Against all such kind of Massilian and Pelagian
quarrellings, taken either from their common Topics of despair or
praesumption, See Austins solid answer, lib. 2. de bo^o persev. cap 15. Sed
aiunt, ut scrib^tis, n^minem posse correptionis stimulis excuari. Si dicatur in
conventu Ecclesiae audientibus multis, ita se habet de praedestinatione
definita sententia Dei, ut alii ex v^bis de infidelitate, accepta obediendi
voluntate v^neritis ad fidem, etc. Ista cum dicunt, it a nos a confitenda Dei
gratia, id est quae non secundum merita nosira datur, sed secundum came
prae^estinationem sanctoru^, non debent deterrere: sicut non deterremu^a
confitenda praescientia Dei, si quis de illa populo sic loquatur, ut dicat,
five nunc recte vivatis, five non recte, tales critis, quales vos Deus futuros
esse praescivit, vel boni si bonos, vel mali si mal^s, etc.
. 29. Nature of Gods will] Which you do altogether nullify, whilst you allow
him none of a decree properly so called, but only of an external promise or
statute, or if you do, it is only consequent to man's will, not antecedent to
it; for to this upshot comes your distinction of voluntas antecedens and
consequens. 30. Condition of mine owne] Which would to God you did know, ever
since the fall, to be lost not indeed as to its essence and nature, but as to
its integrity and goodness, Alicubi Aug. Libertas arbitrii vulnerata est,
prostrata est, imo perdita est: but your opinion about the condition of your
will, is just that of the Massilians. Aust Epist. Quidam vero horum in tantum a
Pelagianis semitis non declinant ut cum ad confitendam eam Christi gratiam,
quae omnia praeveniat humana merita, cogantur, etc. ad conditionem hanc velint
uniuscujusque pertinere* etc and quantum quisque ad malum, tantum habet
facultatis ad bonum, parique momento animum se vel ad vitia vel ad virtutes
movere.
as that now it is only evil, and that continually desperately evil, Jer. 17.
9. were you convinced of this, you would be as much afraid to name your free
will, as once Austin was, yea as Melancthon, Apolog. D. Morto. c. 69. p. 266.
Edit. in 80. Aug. Sermon. 12. de verbis Apost. Ad hoc idonea est volu^tas tua,
quae vocatur libera, and male agendo sit damnabilis ancilla
you would talk less of your humility, but be more really so, Gal. 6. 3. 31.
Confidence] Oh that upon good grounds, you were more in God, and less in your
self, then would your anger expressed in your first papers, cease against your
adversaries, for maintaining that in the matters of salvation, man is not at
all to glory in himself, but in God Aug. Epist. 106. p. 549. Aug. de great. and
l. arbitr. c. 9. Quando subetur, ut operentur, liberum eorum convenitur
arbitrium, sed ideo cum timore and tremore, ne sibi tribuendo quod been
operantur, de bonis, tanquam suis, extollantur operibus. Idem de corrept. great.
c. 9. Innullo gloriantes, quia nostrum nihil: ut qui gloriatur in Domino
glorietur; idem de praedest. ex Cyprian. lib. 1. c. 3.
only, you would not be as another Pyrgo-Polinices, crying out, Quis me
audacior homo, quis me confidentior? 32. Humility] For my part how much soever
you may have of it in your person, (pray God it may be more) I am sure I can
find little or none of it in your doctrine; which storm as much as you will
at me for saying so, I can, shall, and have proved to be stuffed full of
Pelagianisme, and Semipelagianisme, those mountanous and proud errors The late
Belgic Annotations on Rev. 8 8. maintain Pelagianisme to be the mountain
burning with fire, there spoken of, because that it makes the proud will of man
to be mountainously high and lofty. Hinc Aug. lib. 3. ad Bonifa. c. 3.
Impudentiam Pelagianorum and insanam superbiam vocat, and superbissimam
vanitatem lib. 4. c. 7. Hinc Hieronym. Epist ad Ctesiph. Tu per superbia^ ad
astra sustolleris. Et rursum: tu ipse l. 1. Dial. ad Pelag. Tu ipse qui
catoniana nobis inflaris superbia, and Milonis humeris intumescis. Prosper
Epist. ad Demetriad. p. 866. Quibus non potuit diabolus persuadere vitiorum
amorem, immisit laudis cupiditatem, ut inde novissima instrueretur tentatio,
unde nocuit prima deceptio. Nimirum Pelagius haud secus atque Adam atque
diabolus, p. 866. and 875. Non dignabatur dives esse nisi propriis: tanquam hoc
haberetsimile Deo, ut bonorum suorum ipse sibi sit sons, ipse sibi sit copia.
Quae superbia, inquit, omni peccato nocentior, omni herene et elationis
insanior.
hatched by one, who of old was styled the proud devils primogenitus, as like
the father as he could look, and who in his words, doctrine, and deeds, was the
very emblem and paradeigma of pride, from all which the Lord deliver Mr T. P.
33. Unworthy for him to own] With all the speed that may be, renounce your
doctrines divulged in these papers, for most of them are unworthy for him to
own, because they will be found too light in the balance of his sanctuary. 34.
Gods peculiar] Be then content to be elected and determined by Grace, and not
to be an electer and determiner of it, as you attempt to be, p. 70. Be a
servant that you may not be sacrilegious. 35. Settle my judgment upon these
two grounds] We I am sure shall not wish for some Sampson to overturn these
your two pillars, but we shall rather wish that you had been like some Hiram,
to have fastened these in the Temple of God, as Jachin and Boaz were by him in
the Temple of Solomon, and then they would have been to me as Hercules Columns,
beyond which I would never have attempted to have stirred; but because you, as
well as Dr Jackson before you, who had delivered himself in much the like
words, do give us great reason to suspect, that you mean nothing so well as
you speak, and that you stand not at all upon the Terra firma, which you would
seem to lay down, I must crave leave in reference to these your principles as
you call them, p. 7. and as they are set down by you, to tell you, 1. That I
and many more with me, cannot tell to what purpose you should thus set them
down in the forefront, unless it were standerously, to infinuate that any had
blamed you for being the patron of these opinions, and that some ill neighbors
of yours did maintain the contrary; or else at least (as doubtless you do)
craftily under the shield and shelter of these truths, as they are usually
understood, when they are delivered by men of known orthodoxy, to take an
occasion to vent your misshapen conceits, which are contrary to them. You play
the Grecian under a Trojan harness; your voice in these your propositions, is
Jacobs voice, but your hand elsewhere, is Esaus hand. Tuta frequensque via est
sub amici fallere nomen. 2. None of our adversaries, the Remonstrants, until
they grew shameless See this acknowledgement in Collat. Hagiensi.
and excusserant omnem de front ruborem For then though the orthodox in
reference to the first proposition, say as well as you, with A. Rivet. Dissput.
secunda, These. 13. Absit, ut Deum vocemus in societatem cum diabolo, and
peccatum imputemus decretoriae ipsius voluntati, vel dicamus Deum provocasse
diabolum ad seducendum primum hominem aut in terna impulsione cum ad
consentiendum permovisse; yet with the same author they must add, that al those
things, imponuntur nobis a Pelagianis, and semipel^gianis novis.
did ever so much as accuse us, for denying either of them: And therefore sure
you forge your self enemies, but find none. 3. The holding of these
propositions as they lie in the Letter, will never be able to clear you, or
any body else, from Pelagianizing, Semi-pelagianizing, and Arminianizing,
unless you give in up and down such expositions of these Theses, as shall make
it clearer to every one, that your heart and your pen go together, and that
they do not proceed ex labiis dolosis. It is well known what goodly words to
this purpose, we have had from all those three sorts of grace-blasting enemies
Of Pelagius. Sic Augustine. lib. 1. contra Julian. Nisi in eorum co^spectu (viz.
patrum Diaspolitanorum) audituque damnasset cos, quod precatum Adae ipsum solum
laeserit and non genu^ humanum, and quod i^fantes nuper na^^, in eo statu sint
quo s^^t Adam ante peccatum, nullo modo inde nisi damnatus exisset. Idem Pelag.
as to your second proposit. Apud August. c. 35. Legant inquit illam Epistolam
quam ad sanctum virum Paulinum Episcopum ante duodecim ferme annos scripsimus,
quae trecentis forte versibus nihil aliud quam Dei gratiam, and auxilium
confitetur. 2. The Massilians or Semipelagians, were more plain in both.
Prosper Epist. ad Augustine. Haec ipsorum definitio ac professio est, omnem
quidem hominem Adam peccante peccasse. Et expressius: sub quo (peccato
originali) omnes homines similiter in primi hominis damnatione nascuntur. Iidem
fatente Hilario in Epist. ad Augustine. Nec inde quemquam proprio arbitrio
liberari posse consentiunt, sed id conveniens asserunt veritati, vel congruum
praedicationi, ut cum prostratis, and nunquam suis viribus surrectur is
annuntiatur. Idem Hilarious, caeterum ad nullum opus vel incipiendum, nedum
perficiendu^ quemquam sibi sufficere posse consentiunt; and multo inferius;
bominari se and damnare testantur, siquis quicquam virium in aliquo remansisse,
quo ad sanitatem progredi possit, existimet. Imo ipse Augustine, de ill is lib.
de hono perseverant. cap. 16. A Pelagianorum porro haeretica perversitate
tantum isti remoti sunt, ut fateantur quod eorum praeveniat voluntatem quibus
datur haec gratia. 3. As for the Arminians, every one who has but read their
third and fourth Articles of their Remonstrance, will not make any the least
scruple of this.
. Nor do I now repent my self, though once I did very largely elsewhere, to
have cleared this. See my praedestination defended against postdestination. 4.
You will never be able to clear your self, contrary to your first proposition,
from mainteining God to be the author of sin, so long as you place the
essence of man's free will, both before the fall and after it, in an (...)
(importing not only a possibility in Adam to fall, but an inclination to evil,
and so to fall,) unto good or evil as you do, p. 57 That of A. Rivets will
prove most unavoidably true. Disp. secunda These 2. Qui affirmant inclinationem
ad peccandum etiam ante lapsum, in Deum naturae authorem consiciunt omnem
peccati culpam, cum inclmatio talis vitiosa non esse non potuerit, quae tamen
fuerit a Deo necesse est, si detur ante lapsum: Imo consequetur, hominem fuisse
miserum, priusquam in peccatum laberetur: and Deum ab initio non creasse
hominem rectum, qui sine curvitate non esset.
. 5. Both these propositions coming from so crafty and versatile a head as
yours is, may very well without any breach of charity, be suspected to be
stuffed with the usual Pelagian captions and aequivocations, with which that
mystic Of whom S. Hieronym. complained of old. Epist. ad Ctesiph. solam hanc
hae resinesse, quae public loqui erubesceret quod secreto tra^red non timeret.
Id. Ib.
generation have ever been bold to abuse the world. Ex. Gr. In reference to
your first: As among the Romanists there is said to have been a Bonaventura, in
quo Adamus non videretur peccasse, in whom Adam the protoplast you speak of,
may seem not to have sinned, so what if in your own deluded imagination at
least you should ever have been without sin, or at last by your pious
labors, have arrived to a sinnelesse condition here on earth; in what sense
then can you maintain Adam to have been the promoter of your guilt, which
either at first was none at all, or is long since ceased in you? For my own
part, I know him to be a fool which believes every thing, Prove. 14. 15. yet
perchance I should be stupid, if I should absolutely disbelieve what at first,
was by a Reverend Minister told me alone, and afterward by the same man,
delivered before many more Ministers in my hearing, and as heard by him from
your own mouth, viz. that you believe no sin to be in you, that you were
above sin, that by your own power you could abstain from all sin. This
testimony I wrote, as the testator of it did dictate it to me. And how much
less says he openly, p. 56 who professes never to have lain under the least
temptation to any degree of Pelagianisme; which all men know all our sinful
natures to be most inclinable to. 2. I might seem by your terrible threats, of
I cannot tell what statute against Libellers to Epist. prima post Edit. 2.
have been frighted out of my wits, to use your own phrase, p. 24. or at least
to have been braved by you, if I should I say not with you, (for I am sure you
cannot believe it, by what was this very day assured to me, by an
unquestionable witness, who wrote out your first papers out of your own first
Copy) but if I should not believe the first papers to have been a true
transcript of yours, and in them I am certain you say, 1. p. 8, 9. that Adams
sin was none of our own, contrary to the Apostle, Romans 5. 12. In opposition
to that, you say that God had distinctly and largely said, that no man shall
die for the sin of another, but every Ezekiel. 18.
one for his own sin. 2. That Adams sin, which all along you confound in
that writing with original sin, and say, is none of our own, never alone
damned any, for p. 8. none in the world dying infants, are damned. And in this
case I think that of Dr Twiss is very considerable, p. 39. against Mr Hoard. If
none are lost, but all are saved, is it not a pretty guilt of eternal death,
for which not any suffers? And you may guess by this, whether this Authors
pretense of natural corruption (of which our Mr T. P. p. 9. speaks in his
first papers) be not only from the teeth outward. 3. That infants
notwithstanding original sin, are harmless, p. 9. which in this your
Correct Copy, you style babes of grace, p. 67. and for that you had said in
your uncorrected Copy, that they have all universal grace, p. 9. because all
men in the world were once infants. 4. That the harmless infant, as every man
has a free will, cannot continue so, when he comes to use his will without
his will; nor can he cease to be so, viz. harmless without his will. Now I
cannot tell whether you may not think, that since you came ex Ephebis, you have
not used your will so well as not to have sinned, which if so, then you are
free from the guilt of the protoplasts sin, which you mention, and from the
filth of it too, which I think is not for nothing omitted by you, but for
reasons which I have elsewhere opened in my praedestinat. defense. 2. In this
your owned writing, though p. 67. you had just occasion enough to have
mentioned original sin, yet you wave it, and I think heartily and
ingenuouslie, because you thought it not reasonable to own that in a public
Edition, which was contrary to your bosom opinion, among your bosom friends,
sufficiently intimated to them, in your first most genuine papers, however
upon politic reasons disowned now by you, whilst you act your part upon a
public stage. In these respects I think we may, but too justly, apply to
you, what of old was by Austin applied to your dogmaticall praedecessors, the
Pelagians, lib. 2. contra Julian, cap. 8. Initio dolus abundat in ore vestro,
sive peccatores vos esse dicatis, and justos credi velitis, five profiteamini
perfectionem justitiae quam profecto in vobis non esse sentitis. Et expressius
acriusque paulo post. Ubi enim virtus est and tanta jactantia est, hypocrisis
est: and ubi hypocrisis utique dolus. Prorsus quantum sancti de misericordia,
tantum vos de vestra, quae nulla est virtute praesumitis. 3. It would be worth
the while for you to be our Oedipus in unfolding to us, whether you think the
Protoplast to have been the promoter of our guilt, so far, as by virtue of it,
to make us liable to death in the full latitude of it, Romans 6. 23. or only so
far, as to bind us over unto a necessity of temporal death, conformable to
the notions of the Pelagians, Socinians and Arminians. 4. As to your second
principle, it is to me (and many others with whom I have conferred about it)
unexplicable in what sense you say that all the good which you do, comes from
special grace and favor, unless perhaps appretiative and comparative. You put
that style upon something, which you for declining of envy August. cont. Jul.
vocabulo gratiae frangens invidiam.
call grace, when it is compared by you with that which is and is called pure
nature; as we say a Bristol Diamond is a rare jewel, when compared with a
trifling glass; for else it is not evident from both your writings See of the
first at large praedestinat. defense.
1. That you neither do, nor can maintain, any special grace, as derived
unto you by any special, certain, absolute, gracious decree of your heavenly
father, as 2 Timothy 2. 9. Against this you do dispute strenuouslie all along,
and especially, p. 70. 2. Nor any special grace, as particularly and
specially procured for you by Christ's blood, more then for all the world
besides; for this you count, p. 38. a pernicious heresy Just as Faustus
Rhegin. Coryphaeus S^mipelagianorum, lib. 1. de great. and lib. arbitr. c. 17.
Ille vere impius est, qui eam (viz. gratiam) no^ omnibus ingeri, non omnibus
testatur impendi. Omnibus eam off^rt atque ingerit ad salutem omnium cond^^or
and redempior: ad haec illi long a pictatis tramite rec^dentes, (viz.
Catholici) respondere praesumunt; non eam salva or omnibus d^dit, quia nec pro
omnibus mortuus est.
. 3. No special grace, as by which any special habits of grace, viz of
conversion, regeneration, sanctification, etc. are infused into your soul, as
any abiding seed of grace, or life of God; for in both your papers you are
highly silent as to these matters, though ad phalerandum populum, p. 56. you
make some slight mention of grace infused by God, by which (as we shall see
when we come to it, if then and there I can but have leisure for doing it) you
cannot understand any habitual grace, but only some light internal
Coruscations or Irradiations of it. 4. No real efficient, insuperable, and in
that sense irresistible grace, but only of some external, moral, not
physical work of grace, p. 57. but only, p 62. strongly and effectually (as
you talk incongruouslie enough to your own principles, p. 62.) inclining the
will, and that only for a spurt or a season, at such critical opportunities,
and by such congruous means, as by which the will does very certeinlie and
undoubtedlie assent. 5. No special antecedent, determining, absolute,
unconditionate grace, in the susception of which your will is merely passive,
but a mere conditional, consequent grace, which finds your will so busy and
active, as to be not only pragmaticall in your temporal vocation, (but lo what
an active thing T P's will is) but even in your very election. 1. Papers, p.
11. 2 p. 69. J^st like the Massili^ns in Epist. ad Augustine. Tales a^unt perdi
(inquit Prosper) talesque salvari, quales futuros illos in annis majoribus, si
ad activam ser^a rentur aetatem, scientia divina praeviderit.
6. No special, abiding, lasting, continued grace, according to that, Joh. 13.
1. having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end,
but as it may fall out, a grace which may turn into hatred, for as we have had
it already, your babes of grace, p. 67. many of them outlive their innocence,
and fall from grace. A goodly special grace this sure, which has all these
mischievous qualifications; I am sure all the orthodoxe in all ages, have
maintained the contrary, and upon the matter called grace, especial grace in
the same sense, that the Wetteravicks do in these their ingenious verses Synod
Dordrac, 4to, prae. 2. p.


Gratia sola Dei certos elegit ab aevo,
Dat certis Christum gratia sola Dei,
Gratia sola Dei fidei dat munera certis,
Certos stare facit gratia sola Dei:
Gratia sola Dei cum nobis omnia donet,
Omnia nostraregat gloria sola Dei.
Chap. 1. Sect. 5. p. 7.
HAD I not been deterred by what I have met with in your praevaricating
portals, the fulgid illustrious star of B. Fulgentius shining in the margent
of this Section, would have put me in some hopes that you had been resolving in
this Correct Copy of yours, to have made a recantation of what you did solemnly
and openly once deliver at Dayntrie, and which you set down out of Origin, p.
26. and before that time had cast upon your first papers, and tanquam re been
gesta do much more oratorially prosecute now through almost your whole chap.
2. A thing which that very Fulgentius quoted by you, makes his very business
to confute; anon after the recital of the words which you mention, where he
largely proves, that though God do not praedestinate men to sin, yet he does
to their punishment for sin, of which he denies not, but asserts God to be
the author Fulgent. lib. 1. ad Monim. P^aed^st^natos affi^mat Augustinus, non
ad delictum sed ad supplicium; neque ad malum quod injuste admittunt, sed ad
cruciatum, quem justissime patientur; and ad tormentum quod illis propria
iniquitas male parit, and aequitas divina been retribuit; nec ad mortem animae
primam; sed ad mortem secundam quam necesse est patiantur, etc.
. So albeit the Church will ever look upon Fulgentius, as upon a fixed
prosperous Star in the Firmament of it, yet you are like to be looked on as
some of the Planets spoken of, Jude 13. if you repent not the sooner, the
rather, because though you would make us believe, that you have taken a great
deal of care, even your best care, as you say (sed quid dignum tanto tulit hic
promissor hiatu?) that your conclusions might not differ from your true
premises: Yet any of those who have but in the least measure their senses
exercised, to discern betwixt things that differ, Heb. 5. 14. will easily
perceive, that

1. You have a great deal of care of pouring out a world of humane rhetoric,
in the very words which man's wisdom teaches, 1 Cor. 2. 13. but none at all
of any spiritual logic, for you no where exercise any thing of that art,
unless it were in drawing up a cracked syllogism of four terms, as we shall
see when we come to p. 19. and then pinning it upon the Apostle, that mighty
spiritual Logician. 2. Any body that is but furnished with half a good eye,
may easily discern, that though with you in these, as well as in your former
papers, p. 2. tria sunt omnia, three are all with you, Scripture, Tradition,
Right reason (as you and the Socinians have learned to style, carnal men's fond
way of reasoning about the deep matters of God:) Yet you frequently relinquish
the two former, as shall be showed, for the courting of the latter, which as
some of your faction give out, it is even since the fall most incorrupt, and
the most fitting about matters of praedestination, praescience, free will, etc.
to be appealed unto, against the judgment of the whole ancient and modern
Church The words of Schast. Castallio, (the first corrupter, as upon good
ground is believed, even of ^ac. Arminius himself) are very remarkable, in the
praef. ad D^alog^s de praedestinat. Illud adjiciunt fidem veram (^b hoc fides
vera, I^ distinguished from the m^tters following) de qua h^c loquimur v^lgo
igno^am esse: s^d de tribus primis videlic^t praed^stinat^on^, electione, and
libera voluntate vulgus hominum (nisi qui sunt a literatis corrupti) melius and
sanius sentit quam quidam literati. (And who these quidam are, viz. the ancient
Church and the modern Church since Austin, Castellio's praefacer ingeniously
tells us) Sequuntur enim illiterati homines rationis and sensuum judicium, quod
in his rebus integrum est, quae sub rationem subque sensus cadunt: atque utinam
hac in p^rte relinqueretur hominibus natura judicium, nos non laboraremus. Sed
quia multum labor ant li^^rati ut persuadeant hominibus ea non esse, quae
sentiuntur, hoc est ut hominibus oculos effodiant, nos laboremus in hoc errore
r^fellendo.
. Some wittily unreasonable, as you are pleased to style those, whom elsewhere
you call the rabble of half witted praedestinarians, first papers, page 11*
are not like to complie with you in this; for that with the Prophet, they will
be more ready to say, that such logicians are fools, and such spiritual,
rather carnal men (jangling about spiritual matters) are mad men, Hos. 9. 7.
Let the (...) of your reasonings, be more subject unto the Scripture, or else
the shallow judgment you talk of, p. 5. which there you complementally say,
(and would have us cry up to the height, because you the owner of it, decrie
it so low) is the deepest which you have, will be none at all; yea, worse then
none, Mat. 6. 23. And if the light which is in thee, be darkness, how great is
that darkness?

. 6. p. 7, 8.
YOU be terrible long before you can get into your Dialecticall trappings or
geers Jul. Se^lig. Exer. 307. Sect. 20. Rationibus agendum est viro veritatis
studioso, n^n. Tullianis Platonisque pigmentis. Declimationes enim
ambitiosorum, opera etiosorum sibi sunt: naturae divinita^isque negot^is
impedito animo, stud^ndum est brevitoti: quae res aequ^t verbi^. Marlor.
comm^n. in prior Analyt. cap. 8. vocabula artis religiosissime observanda sunt,
ut semper eodem modo explicentur, ut in omnibus propriis vocabulis artium fieri
debet: Varietas enim obscuram his facit disputationem.
. A body would have thought that we had had enough and enough of oratoriall
praefaces faces and out*faces, yet we must be cloied with at least a Section
and half more of the like stuff: In this (that I may give in short the sum
of the whole) we are served in first with a (...), (to use your own phrase, p.
12) against your not only seeming, but your real contradictions; for indeed
in this your book, though you be not at all for Classes, you be much for
clashing, your (...) liberi arbitrii, in which you maintain the creature
indifferently as to good or evil, to have been created, p. 64. agrees not with
your first pretended principle, p. 6. of Gods not being the author of sin.
Your concession in the beginning of chap. 3. that every reprobate is
predetermined to eternal punishment, is directly at daggers drawing with your
almost whole chap. 2. where you strenuouslie dispute, that God determines none
to punishment. The posterior part of your chap. the 4. from p. 56. to the end,
fights directly with the anterior part of it, as to with your second
principle: Mulier formosa superne Desinit in piscem; and sic in caeteris, as
we shall see in the progress; and therefore wise man as you be (and indeed
ever, full of courtesy, full of craft) you do prudentlie provide some kind of
salves, for these kind of sores; but truly none of them will procure any
healing for you, not only is it because your unmercifulness in your dealings
with the names and writings of others, as we shall see, p. 8. may be like
enough to procure some harsh usage of you from others; He that will show no
mercy to others, has small reason to look for it from others, Jam. 2. 13. He
shall have judgment without mercy, who shows no mercy. 2. But for that
secondly, the ingredients, alias the reasons which you put into your salve, are
not contrary to your sores, when as yet such a Medicaster, as you would be
accounted in all your private Epistles to me, know's well enough, that
contraria contrariis tantum curantur. 1. Not that of Austins; you know that
aliquando bonus Vide Cornel. Jansen. Augustine lib 5. cap. 1, 2 and 3. Tomi
primi.
dormitat Homerus. Well might Augustine in such mighty and various volumes as
he wrote against the contrary haeresies of the Manichees and the Pelagians,
and that many years one after another, and when to, that (especially of the
Pelagians) did like the moon in Helvidius his late Seleno-graphia appear in
diverse shapes; sometimes as has been showed, in a mere Ethnic shape,
sometimes in a Semy-ethnicke, sometimes in a Judaicke, sometimes in an half
Christian shape. I say Augustine upon these occasions might seem now and then
to enterfere with himself, and yet be no excuse to your contradictions, which
do abound in two such whisting pamphlets as your printed and unprinted ones
are; wherein (I speak now as to that which appears upon the stage) so careful
a man as your self, used your best care to be a guide in your conveyance, p.
7. 2. Lest that of Bucers, though you say it was the more remarkable because
it was Bucers; indeed it would have been more remarkable then any thing the
fingers in your margent, p. 9. point at, if Bucer who is a known man against
your opinions (q) and for the reformation which you dislike, p. Even a
supralapsarian, as Dr Whitaker takes him to be in his concione ad clerum.
Bucerus per massam intelligit primam humani gener is originem ex qua homo
conditus a Deo, and sabricatus est.
35. should have any thing to say for you. Though I have not the book by me to
turn to, I am pretty and confident, that Bucers saying relates to none but to
the seeming differences betwixt the more ancient and latter Fathers after the
rise of Pelagius (who indeed may as easily be reconciled, as the different
expressions of the Fathers before and after Arrius Vti enim Hieron. ad Rufinum.
Antequam daemonium Nicidianum Arrius nasceretur vel simpliciter erraverunt
patres, vel aliosensu scripserint, vel a librariis imperitis eorum paulatim
scripta corrupta sunt. Innocenter quaedam, and minus caut e locuti sunt. So it
is as old and true an observation, antequam exoriretur Pelagius,
s^curiusloqu^ban tur patres, who yet are reconciled to those who came after
even by a Bell larmine de great. and lib. arbit. 1. c. 14.
. and such Neotericks as Melancthon and Calvin, who may seem to differ, when
as really they do not as shall be shown in due place. 3. Well you might hope,
that that man of Moderation, Cassander (as you call him, papers 1. p. 10.) whom
you so great a Cassandrite, do so highly magnify, for reasons of which I have
elsewhere of my first papers given an account, who yet will not serve your
turn one whit, as to the matters now in debate, wherein it is most plain, he
is as deadly an enemy to you, as any that you can have See his Epistle ad
Johan. a Bauchtim.
. And then least of all will that which you quote out of Dr Twisse, be any way
subservient to you, who by what you say out of him here, does neither
contradict, nor so much as seem to contradict what he delivers elsewhere; for
do not the words which you rehearse out of him, relate to the decree, not of
preterition, but of damnation, not to the moulding and making of it in the
intention, but to the temporal execution of it? and does Dr Twisse any where
else deny these latter to have been without the consideration of sin, and
not rather for the consideration of sin A thousand places out of his Latin and
English books might be produced for this. Let that remarkable one serve, p. 8.
answer to Mr Hoard, wherein consists this harshnes (viz. of Gods decrees) in
intention, depending merely on Gods will. Is it in this that nothing is the
cause of Gods decree? and will nothing temper the harshnesse of it, unless a
thing temporal as sin, be made the cause of God's will which is eternal, and
even God himself? But let us deal plainly, and tell me in truth, whether the
harshnesle does not consist in this, that the mere pleasure of Gods will,
seems to be made the cause not of Gods decree only, but of damnation also, as
if God did damn men not for sin, but of his mere pleasure? And this I
confess is wondrous harsh, and yet no more harsh then it is untrue; though in
this juggling world, things are so carried by some, who will both shuffle and
cut, and deal themselves, as if we made God of mere pleasure to damn men, and
not for sin, which is a thing u^terly impossible, damnation being such a
notion, as has essential reference to sin. But if God damn no man but for
sin, and decreed to damn no man but for sin, what if the mere pleasure of God
be cause of this decree, what harshnesse is this?
? either then you do, which I am sure is common enough with you, abuse the
admirers of Dr Twisse, or else they admired what they understood not, I suppose
they may be of years to answer for themselves.

2. In the next place you serve us in with a promise of a recantation, in case
the unhappiness of your pen, or the unsteadinesse of your brain, has let
fall any thing contrary to the two principles just now laid down. O how well I
should like you, if you would but keep touch, stare promissis! that your
recantation, either Sermon or Epistle, would be ready, both ad clerum and ad
populum, so soon as either my self, or some you would like better of, shall
have proved, that of ten parts of your book, nine at least must be revoked, if
you will allow nothing to stand in it, that is contrary to the true
scripturall, catholic, orthodox sense of your second principle laid down, p 6.
How quickly should we like brethren and neighbors shake hands, rather then in
a way of writing against each other, be like Ishmael, Genesis 16. 12. Amon it a
faxit Deus, that we may agree, and both in the principles you speak of, p 6.

3. Your third is a frank offer to be restored in the spirit of meekness, if
you should be overtaken in a fault, Gal. 6. 1. A gallant resolution if it were
but seriously in you. Errare possum, Hareticus esse nolo, was an excellent
saying; but truly you have given small cause to your fellow brethren
Presbyters in these parts, to believe you to be in good earnest. Did you ever
impart your doctrinall scruples first of all to the most pious and learned of
them, before you vented them among (to say no worse of them) unwary and weak
Gentlemen, when you had made a promise, as I am informed, to some of your best
friends in the Ministry about us, that you would in Pulpit at Lectures, vent
nothing but what was agreeable to their known tenants? Did you keep your
promises any better with them at Northampton or Daintrey, then Jac. Arminius
did his first at Amsterdam, with the Consistory there, or afterward with the
Curatores Academiae Leidensis G. Van Roggen, lib. Belgic. praefat. ad Syn.
Dordracenam.
? Are you ready to refer matters in debate betwixt us, to the ministerial
decision of any ten of the gravest incumbents, known, ancient, stayed,
protestant, preaching Presbyters of our Country, who have least been upon their
tropicks, in these tropicall times, if so, and that they will vote for your
opinions against mine, I Will promise for ever hereafter, as to all writing
against you, to become a Siliturnian, nay to cry peccavi. Pray De Siliturnis,
vide Fred. Wend. praefat. ad Loc. Commun.
you, let it be tried who is most ready to be reclaimed by the Spirit of
meekness.

4. You conclude your Section with excuses for your dissenting from your want
of infallibility, apprehension, company of thousands of thousands, your
invincible ignorance, etc. Unto all which in few words, 1. You know none of
your brethren Ministers, who do maintain, that either conjunctim or divisim,
they be infallible, they leave that to the papal Church, unto which you
approach much nearer, when p. 10. of your first papers, you cry up Cassander so
highly for moderation, and are not ashamed to cry up Hoffmisterus for a choice
Protestant, who was a known Papist Vide A. Rivet. Dialys cont. discurs. H.
Grotii.
, yet they may infalliblie tell you, that it has been a proud and malapert
error in you, to slight their judgments, piety, and learning, so much as you
have done, who every where dissuade whom you can from coming into their
combinations, and yet without arrogance, they think they may tell you, you
might from some of them have learned to have mended your positive, polemical,
and practick Divinity too, had you not scorned to have been more conversant
with them. 2. Your apprehension is well known not to be stupid, but your malice
to be very great against those you like not; and that occasions but too much
your stupefaction, none you know, is so blind, as those who will not see
Periit omne judicium cum res transit in affectum.
. 3. The thousands of thousands you speak of of your side, is feared to be no
other then the crowd of carnal Idiots, mentioned lately out of Castalio, or
those thousands of thousands, who either wittinglie or unwittinglie, suffer
themselves to be befooled by the polite and politic sons of the Devil, the
Jesuits and their followers, or indeed the Devil and his angels, who truly
make a great, but not a creditable company, from all whom good Lord deliver me
and you. As for all good Christian, Apostolical, Ecclesiastical companies of
all sorts, I doubt not but they will be found of the opposite side to you, and
so long we shall not be afraid to glory in it, that there will be more for us
then against us, 2 Kin. 6. 16. 4. The Church (I speak now of the true reformed
Church) of England, as it has stood ever since Queen Mary's days, is like to
have but an unhappy son in you: who whilst as she thinks, and shall be
further cleared, p. 16. you were in the right, for the absolute decree, p. 24.
then you were vincibly knowing, but since you are turned off to the
conditional or respective decree, you are become invincibly ignorant. Pray God
send your mother more grave and stayed sons.

Sect. 7. p. 8, 9, 10, 11,
HEV quantum mutatus ab illo? Are you the man who all along the former Section,
were a puling Petitioner, as it were, sub forma pauperis, praying for mercy,
moderation, deprecating immoderate criticismes, if thorough the unsteadinesse
of your brain, or the unhappiness of your pen, you should be overtaken
with any escapadoes, crying all along as David, gently, gently with Absalom my
son my son, 2 Samuel 18. 5. And do you so quickly in this Section, turn
tyrant against the persons, and (say it be so) unwarie lines of other men: Men,
the Lord knows, and the Church knows by far your betters Unto whom I may
safely enough apply what Romans B p. Abbot, did once against one who upbraided
others with their flight to G^neva. Erant illi homines doctissimi quibus il le
certe haud satis dignus qui Amanuensis esset. Abbat contra Thom. de
intercisgratiae.
, with whom you are not like to compare in have, either for depth of
theological learning, holiness of life, or savourie name, and fame in the
Church: Against these men's blessed works and memories, you rage and rampe it,
and make slaughters among them; Nimrod, or Nero-like, and that more ways then
one. 1. By a palpable Jesuiticall calumny; (whose maxim you follow in this,
calumniare fortiter and aliquid adharebit) I had almost said a loud lie; which
harsh phrase I am sure I may more truly use in this matter, then you in the
same cry out, that some are, p. 23. for Ligonem, Ligonem; that some as you
here call them open, or as there you style them, modestblasphemers, do put you
upon a necessity of proving your principles to be true, when as yet your
conscience could tell you, if you would but consult with it, that all the
adversaries that you have cited, do avowedlie upon all occasions, deny God to
be the author of sin And here again it is not amiss for you to take out
another Episcopal admonition, once directed by the same hand to the fore
mentioned author, and exceedingly befitting you. Abbot ad eundem Thomson, p.
332. Nulla hic libertinorum pestis est, sed pestilentissimus calumniator.
Thomsonus (alias T. P.) qui adversariis suis de illorum nomine invidiam facit,
quos libertinorum hosts and profligatores fuisse novi^.
and so assert your first principle. And that all the question, indeed the
only question betwixt you and your opposites, is, Whether it be possible for
you to adhere to your second principle, if you do but resolve to stick to what
you stickle for, in your first and second mischievous papers. 2. You represent
them as a company of (Jude 16) murmurers, or (...), complainers of their hard
fates, according to what you quote out of Pro 19* 3. when as it is famouslie
known to all the ^hristian world, that that charge belongs to none so
properly, as to your self and faction; unto whom now you undertake to be a
Ringleader, and will needs appear in the van of: Who when you do not or will
not conceit aright of the counsels and decrees of God, then you fret against
the Almighty, and cry out, Fate, Fate You say with Faustus Rhegin
Semipelagianorum Coryphaeus. Intra gratiae vocabulum absconditur fatale
venenum. If praedestination be absolute, Nemo vigilet, nemo sej^ne^, nemo
libidini contradicat.
. You slander the footsteps of the anointed, and Julian-like, throw up days
against Heaven, as if with him you were resolved to breath out your last with a
vicisti Galila^ in your mouth, see p. 24. the Lord be merciful to you. 3.
Thorough the fine and thin aulicall complementall lawne of your civility,
which with a gentle hand, you would seem to lay upon no other then the ever
blessed names of reverend Calvin, and my never to be forgotten Dr Twisse; you
make your hypocrisy to be very conspicuous: so have I known Joab and Judas to
have given a kiss, when they meant a stab, as you with good words in your
mouth, mean to pierce thorough and thorough those men's works and books, which
have been Left any should think a whit the worse of Calvin's institutions, for
your bespattering him and them, I shall think it worth the while to transcribe
what I find in reverend R. B^lton, quoted out of judicious Mr Hooker, as you
style him, p. 14. Instruct. for afflicted consciences, p. 25. For my own part,
I think Calvin incomparably the wisest man, that ever the French Church did
enjoy, since the hour it enjoied him. In his praeface, p. 3. Though thousands
were debtors to him as touching divine knowledge; yet he to none but only to
God the author of that most blessed fountain, the book of life, and of the
admirable dexterity of wit, together with the helps of other learning which
were his guides. Ibid. We should be injurious to virtue it self, if we did
derogate from them, whom their industry has made great. Two things of
principal moment there are, which have deservedly procured him honor
throughout the world. The one, his exceeding pains in composing the
institutions of Christian Religion. The other, his no less industrious travels
for exposition of holy Scripture. In which two things, who ever they were, that
after him bestowed their labors, he gained the advantage of prejudice against
them, if they gainsaied, and of glory above them, if they consented. Ibid. p.
9. The more learned and holy any Divine is, the more heartily he subscribes to
Paulus Thureus, his true censure of his institution. Praeter Apostolicas post
Christi tempora chartas, Huic peperere libro saeculanulla parem. No marvel
then, that a learned Bishop of London in Queen Elizabeth's time, began his
speech thus against a lewd fellow which had railed against Calvin. Quod dixisti
in virum Dei Calvinum tuo sanguine non potes redimere, etc. I poor Presbyter
durst not have let such words have fallen from my pen, lest I should have
been suspected by him (as I perceive he is apt to do, Epist. 2. post.
publicat,) for a design of taking away his life, or as he there, of burning of
him, which was the judgment and practice of Mr Calvin. And that I may not be
wanting neither to my own old friend, and fathers friend, I think I may
subjoine the testimony which famous and learned Dr Rivet gives of his writings,
unto which I doubt not, but most ingenious Protestants will subscribe. Praef ad
Dr Twissum, cont. Armin. and Corvin. De auctore, ejus methodo scholastica,
disputandi forma, acumine, and accuratione, judicium lectoribus relinquo,
quibus praeiverunt doctissimi ex toto orb Christiano viri, etiam ex iis qui in
contraria sunt part fatentes, nihil accuratius, nihil exactius and before in
hoc argumento hactenus proditum fuisse. Hoc saltem (idem ibid,) omnibus piis
placere debit, quod usque and ubique in bonam causam fuerit intentus, camque si
quisquam aliu^ ab absurdis objectis, and adversariorum calumniis ita
vindicavit, ut ex illius labor habeant non docti tantum sed etiam minus
exercitati quo se possint extricare laqueis adversantium:
and will be valued by learned and good men in the Church, when the memory of
yours shall rot, and serve for nothing but wast paper among those, who do
vendere thus and odores. Alas for your civilitie, you do not so much as name
those men, who yet blush not to be named; for they were men of renown in the
congregation, very Masters of the Assembly, and whom up and down this your
last Pamphlet, you do whip and strip, and whom you do as good as name to any
attentive reader when you do very particularly quote them presently, as to
book, Section, page, and almost line; whom to name by their proper and well
sounding names, you were inhibited not by your courtesy and civility to them,
but by some inward secret fear and shame, openly to fling dirt in the faces
of those, whose labors God has honored, and I doubt not, will honor as long
as Sun and Moon shall endure in the firmament, whom (I speak now chiefly of the
latter Dr Twisse) I and others have seen and heard, to have acted more,
written more, preached more, prayed more, against sin in some few weeks, then
I fear you will do in all your days. The naming therefore of him, and his
like, as those who have told the world out of the Pulpit, and from the Press,
that God is the only author of sin, and man only the instrument: Things
which slanderous Arminians have endeavored in terminis, to fasten upon the
writings of P^scator, Maccovius, Ricardus Acronius, etc. But I never met with
any before your impudent self, to be so fool-hardie, as to fix upon Dr Twisse
his writings; I say the naming of him, and their writings for this, would have
only purchased a black brand, a mark of infamy for your slurring those most
noble works, which you will never be able to imitate, and care not to
understand, but only now and then by the by look into, as spiders suck
flowers for to gather poison out of them, and not as profitable B^es, to gather
honey from them, (...). 4. You draw up a malicious scattered inventory or
Catalogue of broken expressions, gathered here and there out of their writings,
without any due regard to the scope of the words, or the authors explained
meanings; upon which because you do lay the stresse of all your invectives
against them and others, to make them and their doctrines a grateful
sacrifice, to men of weak heads, and carnal minds; I must needs crave some
patience from that very reader you appeal to, that as he has any candor,
conscience, piety, and true christianity left him, he would be pleased
favorably to heed me whilst I deliver in, 1. Some general observations
relating to your behavior, in this Section, and elsewhere up and down. 2.
Whilst I clear all or the most signal obnoxious passages fingered out for
such by your notes in the margent, from the horrid crime of blasphemy laid to
their charge. 3. Whilst I in a word or two affix something to the oratoriall
peroration annexed to this Section. 1. For my part I am clearly defeated by you
of my expectation: You did promise (Epist. 3.) before you were of any public
note (so as that with the finger you could be pointed at for some (...)) that I
should receive a copy of your Horat. digito monstrarier, and dicier, ^ic est.
Creed in the particulars which I did intimate, and the very worst of what you
writ in your former trifling papers from such a Copy as you would own very
shortly from the Press; but in this I am sure, I and others are made rather to
hear what Calvin's, Dr Twisse, and others men Creed is, in your distempered
head taken to be, then what is your own Creed; your Creed it seems consists
rather of Negatives then Affirmatives; would it not have concerned you, and
that in the first place, if you would have kept your word with me positively
and dogmatically, to have delivered, in what your own opinion concerning Gods
voluntary, unconstreined, and in that sense efficacious premission of sin had
bin rather then what you think others to hold about it? Facilius est destruere
aliena quam astruere sua: You are not then the most valiantest man which I have
met with 2. This bespattering of others names, to which you do, most solemnly
addict your self in this Section Just as Massilian Gennadius had before
bespattered Austins writings. Vid. His^. council. Triden. edit. lat. in 4to.
Augu. peccatum non effug^sse, ac dum errorem illius sermon multo contractum,
l^cta hostium exaggeratum, nec dum Haeresis dedisse quaestionem periculo
haeresis Augustinum non cartre manifest significat.
, is contrary to that reverence which in the very entrance into your work, p 1.
you say you bear to that punctual Register within you so as not to affront it
with a wilful and premeditated lie so as to unsheath your pen to wound the
reputation of any man living, unles percha^ce of the same (...), mentioned in
your Dedicat. which cannot be, unless you think the reputation of no man
living concerned to uphold the reputation of those, who being dead, yet speak
in their works; and I hope yet live in the hearts of most Christianly disposed
people. Must you revere not to wound the reputation of any living man, who has
power at his tongues end or pens end, to answer for himself? And must you in
your profession, be understood to have at all none to those living-dead men,
who yet live with God, and live in the Church, but must de futuro answer for
themselves by other men's tongues and pens, or else their names as well as their
bodies, must lie under the clods and dust of infamy, which you cast upon them?
3. Suppose many unjustifiable phrases had dropped either from Mr Calvin's, or Dr
Twisses praeproperous pens, whilst they open the obstrule point of Gods
efficacious permission of sin; yet how much the nearer would that have been
toward the determining the dispute, which your conscience cannot but tell you,
was raised (as is plain by your first and most genuine papers) betwixt you and
the Gentleman spoken of, p. 2. about absolute election and praedestination;
might not predestination be absolute, though Calvin and Twisse should foulely
have been mistaken in some of the expressions, which out of them, p. 9, 10. you
make a representation of? 2. Or how much the nearer should we have been for the
Copy of your own, expected and promised Creed in these matters? For truly, if
what you have (p. 14) about an equitable sense, be all that you hold about Gods
providence in the ordering of sin, it will be easier before the Christian
world to convince you of Atheism, which takes away the very subject of a
Deity, then to convince Calvin and Twisse of blasphemy, for maintaining the
true God to be the author of sin. 4. Had you had but t^^ least dram of that
moderation, which you do so highly every where pretend to, would you not have
conformed your self to the very first element and rudiment of all moderation
and pacification? viz. See J. Duraeus, Daven. Morton. etc. de pacif. Evan.
Read Calvin's full discourse against the Libertins, especially co^sult him in
his Epist. ad Rhotomagenses, ad versus Fransiscanum illum Libertina illius
pestilentiae propugnatorem. Vid. vindic. Gra. and providd^vin. D. D^is Twisse
praecipue per c. 5. l. 11. p 5. p. 53. and inde in 4to. In this cause you might
well have said of Calvin, of Ph. Melanc. of Luther, sciebam horridius
scripturum Lutherum quam senti^.
That that only must be taken to be the express positive opinion of any which
he holds forth every where to be so in the most significant terms he can
express himself in, when he makes it his business to declare himself, and not
that which either a malicious adversary lying upon the catch, will adventure to
prove to follow from his words and expressions of his opinion, nay, nor which a
loving adversary does know and can prove very well to follow from his opinion:
Every man must be allowed to be the best interpreter of his own mind. Direct
positions must be produced to prove what other men's judgments are in any
matter: Consequences may only be produced to show men the absurdities of their
assertions: And if this be true, as it is most true, are you so great a
stranger in Israel, as not to know that the men you speak of, and all of their
way, do a thousand times over, up and down in their works, deny God to be
the author of sin, whilst they repeat it at every turn, that sin has no
efficient cause How often have you this repeated by Dr Twiss, as if decies
repetita placeret? (...). Aug. de civitate Dei l. 11.
? And must a few broken abrupt expressions, by a man full of gall and spleen
against them and their way, torn off from the scope and series of their
discourse, be produced against their avowed, full and open declarations every
where to the contrary? If you allow of the measuring out of such mea^ures unto
others, then whenever Vid. Jo. Videl. arcana Arminian.
Vedelius and others shall have proved, that most of the Arminian, and so most
of your opinions, have an unhappy tendency, first to a fine spun, and then to a
gross Atheism; we may (according to the method of your proceedings used here)
charge you with the greater and lesser Atheismes, and say not only that your
opinions tend to it, but that you are absolutely for Atheism major and minor
And at this rate of proceeding it will be easy to abuse any party, Dr Twisse
had it well against Bellarmine whom you imitate in these slanders, l. 2. crim.
3. sect. 1. p. 52. Cum nobis probe constitit qua conscientia versatus fue^i^ in
superioribus consequentiis informandis jux^a veritatem ipsam praesentem tuam
ratiocinationem in hunc modum procedere aequum est, quandoquidem ita
blasphemum, and Christianis auribus intollerandum videtur, ut sane videri
debet, Deum and peccati esse auctorem and solum ipsum vere peccare, atque istas
blasphemias ex adversariorum dogmatis consequi per qualescu^que consequ^ntias.
sed praeter omnem ver ecundiam confictas demonstravi, quippe qui perinde
potuissem easdem blasphemias partim ipsis Jesuiti nostris, vel maxim
Dominicanis per consequen^ias nihilo minus legitimas exprobare, etc.
. 2. When you had met with any harsh sounding expressions in any who (before
your eyes were open) had been graced with being parents in Christ to many a
Christian soul, would it not have concerned you not Cham-like as you do, to
uncover your fathers nakedness, but rather dutifully to have gone back into
their writings, and out of them to have taken the mantles of their own
interpretations, and have thrown upon it; Synod Dordrac. session. 132.
Examinata fuit concepta rejectionis calumniarum formula qui addendam quoque
existimabant non nulli rejectionum duriorum quarundam and in commodarum
loqutionum, quae in non nullis reformatorum doctoru^ scriptis reperirentur,
quae infirmioribus offensionem, adversariis calumniandi ansam praeberent. Quem
in finem rations quaedam in utramque partem a Theolog is magnae Britanniae
Hassiacis and Bremensibus, aliisque propositae sunt. Quibus utrinque diligenter
expensis, visum fuit potioribus suffragiis rejectionem incommodarum locutionum
esse omittendam: ne calumniari possent adversarii, etiam doctrinam orthodoxam
quam professi essent illi qui in ejus explicatione ejusmodi phrasibus durius,
aut imprudentius usi videntur, pariter damnari; cum praesertim manifestum esset
non nullos ex iis loquendi modos esse, quibus ipse spiritus sanctus usus esset,
nonnullos quoque quos sano sensu ipsi Remonstrantes admisissent: long autem
plurimos, qui dextre, ac commode, modo charitas adhiberetur, explicari possent.
as well then you would have found, first, That you might have taken Ex. gr.
these, Isa. 6. 9. Isa. 29. 11. Mark 13. 14. Mark 4. 12. Luke 8. 10. Acts 28.
28. Romans 11. 8. Jer. 20. 7. 2 Samuel ^4. 1. compared with 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. Ezekiel.
14. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 King. 22. 22. Acts 2. 23. Romans 9. 18. 2 These. 2. 11, 12. 1
Pet. 2. 8. Jude 4. Rev. 17. 17. and God knows how many scriptures more, and
tragically have cried out against them, that they make God the author of sin,
that they made Gods hand weary, your heart tremble, both your ears tingle, (p.
11) For pray if we be allowed to shape our interpretations any thing
congruouslie to the words, and what they must signify, do they fall any thing
short? nay, do they not go beyond the highest expressions of your bold or
moderate blasphemers, as you call them? p. 23. Quis talia fando temperet a
lacrymis? 3. That they seldom enter upon the treating of these high arguments
of reprobation, desertion, etc. punishing of sin with sin, or the like, but
with some profession of amazement at the height of these mysteries Twisse lib.
2. prae 2. crim. 4. edit. 40. p. 341. Locum hunc de permissione cujus
executionem, sibi proponit Arminius (fateor quod res est) non semel a me
tentatum gravibus subinde difficultatibus obsitum and circum septum expertus
sum, adeo ut ad extremum vix ac ne vix quidem mihi per omnia satisfecerim, etc.
Vide and Calvin. lib. 3. cap. 23 sect. 5.
and some fearfulness of their being enforced to express themselves, in the
language they cannot but do. 4. That when the wiser sort of them, such as
Calvin and Twisse, in their expressions rise highest, they seldom rise higher,
if so high, as all sorts of parties have done, when they have spoken to these
arguments. Witness Austin August. in lib. de predistinatione and gratia c. 16.
Si humanum genus quod creatum primitus constat ex nihilo, non cum debita mortis
and peccati origin nasceretur, and tamen ex e^s creator omnipotens in aeternum
nonnullos damnare vellet interitum, quis omnipotenti creatori diceret, quare
fecisti sic? qui enim cum non essent esse donarat, quo sine non essent, habuit
potestatem, etc.
the Pontificians Similia citantur ex scholasticis, Greg. Armin. in 1 sent.
did. 1. dub. 1 Deum non injustum futurum si pro arbitrio absque peccati
interventu B. Virginem addiceret aeternis suppliciis, Gab. B^el. in eadem
distin. Si justus aliquis sic immerito esset condemnatus* gratias Deo ageret,
quod esset objectum divinae justitiae Pet. Alliacens. in 1. 4* 12. artic 3.
fol. 185. nullam injustitiam and crudelitatem esse, etiamsi aliquam creaturam
Deus aeternitate puniret vel affligeret, sine ullo peccato, Occam in 4. 9 3. ad
dub. 2. Deum post opera dilectionis, posse non dare vitam aeternam sine
injuria. Holcum de imput. peccati ad 2. priuc. artic. 1. ad 12. Deum sicut
posset infigere poenam sine merito poenae si vellet, it a p^sse punire peccatum
poena majore, quam sibi condigna.
whether Jesuits Medina in 1, 2. 9. ^9. a. 2. confitetur Ocham and Gabriel
affirmare, quod Deus in rigore, and in proprietate locutionis est causa
peccati. An expression I am sure you shall not find in any Calvinist of note,
unless perchance in a book which the Assembly of Divines judged worthy of the
fire (unto which the Parliament did condemn it) whom you would be ready enough
to call a rabble of half witted Praedestinarians, p. 10. first papers.
Catechismus Triden. in explicat. primi articuli symbol. Bellarm. cap. 13. lib.
2. de peccato. Deus dicitur per quendam tropum imperare atque excitare ad
malum, praesidet ipsis voluntatibus malis, easque regit, gubernat, torquet and
flectit.
or Dominicans Alvares disp. sect. 7. Deus aeterno suo decreto, atque absoluta
and efficaci voluntate, praedeterminavit omnes actus nostros ^n particu^ari,
ante little praevisionem, and independenter ab omni scientiae media liberae
creat^onis futurae ex Hypothesi: Haec est sententia Thomae and omnium
Thomistarum, Scoti Vegae and sanctorum patrum. De utrisque Jesuitis, v^z. and
Dominicanis, notentur illa quae habet D. D. Twisse, lib. 2. p. 1. crim. 3.
sect. 1. p. 52. Negari non potest Aquinatem jamolim docuisse ipsum actum
peccatiesse a Deo, Idem docent hodie Jesuitae, ex quibus quam facile quaeso
fuit viris istis indoctis, quales erant Libertini, colligere Deum auctorem
fuisse omnium scelerum, quae ab hominibus perpetrantur: Addunt Dominicani Deum
determinare voluntatem creaturae ad omne actumm suum, etiam ad actum peccati:
Nunquam tam formaliter and diserte sententiam suam expressisse hactenus reperti
sunt Calviniani.
the very Batavian Remonstrants.

Belike Dr Twisse may not do what every body else of all parties may do. 5.
It is easy to be discerned why in these your last, and in this respect your
worst papers, you have not perchance altered your mind, but I am sure most
odiouslie and enviouslie you have altered your method. In your first you began
with Election, and so with an affirmation; in these you begin with matters
belonging to reprobation and damnation, and so with a negation before you
assert any thing. A way most unscripturall, Romans 9. 11, 18. unscholasticall,
and illogicall a course taken up by none, but by a company of wrangling
sophisters, who strive not for truth, but for victory, not so much for the
credit of their own opinions, as for the discrediting the opinions of their
Antagonists. It is easy to discern throughout all your papers, you are as
fell and fierce upon this way, and that for the very same reasons, as ever the
Batavian Remonstrants were in the Synod of Dort, who rather then not to begin
at the wrong end, and not to reserve unto themselves a liberty perpetually to
nibble at, Calvin's, Beza's, and other reformers expressions, shamefully
deserted their own cause, and were his^ed out of the Synod together See Synod.
Dodrac^n a Session. 25. ad 63. inclusive.
like will to like, you be birds of a feather. 6. Whosoever they be that shall
deny to use such expressions and interpretations, or their like in sense as
Calvin and Twisse have done, they must, as we shall see in the progress, 1.
Deny most plain and palpable scriptures. 2. They must exclude God from the
rectory of by far the major part of the actions which are acted in the world,
they must turn him (as we shall see p. 14.) into a mere speculator, and deny
his sovereignty and working providence. Qui tollit providentiam tollit Deum.
And thus have I done with the first thing propounded. I proceed to the second,
viz. To the wiping off of the aspersion of blasphemy, from Mr Calvin and Dr
Twisse (good Lord what kind of men when compared with this upstart Mr T. P.)
their fair names endeavored to be dawbed on by the foul fingers of our
Gentleman in the margent. And now truly having spoken so much to this in the
first thing proposed, I might wholly decline this second task, but that I
greatly fear, that few of your admirers, who are flattered by you, and for it
flatter you again, either can or will, so much as look into the several
Sections in Calvin or Twisse, unto which you direct them. They like enough will
take all upon your public faith, and from the shell of their words
represented by you, conclude without more ado, that the kernel of their
meaning, is just that which you would feign persuade the world, that it is:
pomum erit quicquid in vasinium conjeceris. I must therefore go on to say
something to this Libell or Decacorde of slanders; (for no better can I take
them to be, whilst by the wresting of their true words, you wring out a meaning
never dreamt of, nay opposed by them, as Doeg against David, Psalm. 120. 3. and
the false witnesses against Christ.) And here for the first (as well as the
second) quoted out of Calvin's Institutions, lib. 3. cap. 23. Sect. 6. It is
somewhat that by your reverend marginall fingers, they be not marked out as
grand delinquents; it seems to you they be modest blasphemies, p. 23. and then
indeed will the assertion which you have in the five first lines of your p. 9.
be blasphemy, when as that you shall have confuted the former part of it, by
Ephesians. 6. 11. Isa, 46. 10. and diverse other places; and the latter part of it by
Romans 9. 11. or from Pro. 16. 4. the very place produced by Calvin for the
proof of it, and that just before the words which you carp at, which therefore
you prudentlie decline to quote, as you do all along all the proofs, brought
by the authors, abused by you for the confirmation of their positions. 2. When
contrary to all Scripture, Ephesians. 1. 4. and antiquity Prosper Epi. ad Ruffin. Ab
hac confessione gratiae Dei ideo quidam resistunt, ne cum came talem confessi
fuerunt, qualis divino eloquio praedicitur, and qualis opere suae potrstatis
agnoscitur, etia^ hoc necesse habeant confiteri, quod ex omni numero hominum
per saecula cuncta natorum, certus apud deum definitusque sit numerus
praedestinati in vitam aeternam populi, and secundum propositum Dei vocantis
electi, quod quidem tam impium est negare, quam ipsi gratiae contra-ire; and
rursum lib. de vocatione gentium, in qua electione quicquid hominum in Christo
praecegnitum non est, nulla eidem ratione sociabitur, omnes enim qui in Dei
regnum de c^j^^sl^bet temporis vocatione v^nturi sunt, in ista quae saeculae
cuncta praecessit adoptione signati sunt. Cui accedat Fulgentius adversus
semipelag, hujus praedestinationis ita manet aeterna sirmitas and firma
aeternitas, non solum in dispositione operum, sed etiam in numero personarum,
ut nec de illius numeri plenitudine quispiam salutis aeternae gratiam perdat,
nec extra illius numeri quantitatem ad donum salutis aeternae perventat. Deo
enim, qui scit omnia antequam fiant, sic non est incertus praedestinatorum
numerus, sicut dispositorum operum dubious apud cum non invenitur effectus.
you shall have proved Gods decrees to be temporal and not ^ternall. That any
thing falls out in time, not decreed by God before all time, a thing denied you
even by a very brother of yours in diverse of your wild opinions, J. Goodw. see
Redemption redeemed. 3. When you shall have put it past all question, that
there be no personal absolute decrees of election and reprohation, a thing
denied you by Jac. Arminius in his fourth decree Armin. in declar. sentent.
Where it is remarkable, that he calls his the three first decrees praecise and
absolute, and of the fourth he says, that by it decrevit singulares and certas
quasdam personas salvare and damn^re, and all these ibid. he grants to be
eternal. And the Remonstrants in the Hague-conference, we find quarrelling
with their adversaries for saying, that they hold Gods decrees not to be
personal, Colla. Hag. p. or to be conditional. And in their second Remonst.
p. 7. An. 1617. p. 2. they appeal to the 16. Article of the Belgicke
confession, where there is express mention of eternal election and reprobation
and by his disciples after him in the Hague-conference. 4. When as it shall be
unlawful for Calvin to use much the same expressions, which the very
Pontifician Tridentines are forced to take up, when they speak of the decrees
of God Catechismus Tridentinus in exposit. primi articuli symboli. Non solum
Deus universa quae sunt, providentia sua tuetur and administrat, verumetiam
quae moventur and agunt aliquid, intima virtute ad motum and actionem ita
impellit: ut quamvis secundarum causarum efficientiam non impediat, praeveniat
tamen, cum ejus occullissima vis ad singula pertineat. And I hope all this is
somewhat more then prescience, even as much as an express order and decree.
. 2. Nor is your second volley of shot discharged against Calvin out of his
institutions, l. 3. c. 24. like to wound him, until you shall, Sir, have
overthrown those Scriptures, which in that very place, viz. Exodus 4. 21. Ephesians.
2. 3. and 2. 12. Jer. 1. 10. Isa 6. 9. John 12. 39. Mat. 13. 11. are brought
for the backing of it. 3. Until you shall have cleared it, that Calvin
understands not that assertion of Gods judicial proceeding against unbeleeving
obstinate sinners, unto whom the word is and will be a killing letter, a savor
of death to death, and so shall have confuted his words by his meaning given of
them, in the upshot of the Section; what say you (says he) means God to teach
them, by whom he cares not to be understood? Consider whence the fault is,
and thou will cease to ask: for whatsoever obscurity be in the word, there is
always light enough in it for the convincing of wicked men's consciences. 4.
Until your demonstrations shall have made it past all question, that God never
punishes sin with sin, contrary to Romans 1. 20. 2 These. 2. 12, 13. and so
among others the wilful contempt of the word by giving men up to their
scornful dispositions, Hos. 4. 13. Acts. 13. 41. Rev. 22. 11. they that will
be filthy, etc. 5. When as you shall have made it evident, that whilst in anger
you did let fly against Calvin, you have not hit Austin Austin de bono
perseveran. lib. 2. cap. 14. In eadem perditionis massa relicti sunt etiam
Judaei, qui non potuerunt credere factis in conspectu suo tam magnis clasque
virtutibus. Cur enim non potuerunt credere, non tacuit Evangelium dicens, Joh.
12. Cum autem tanta signa fecisse^ coram eis non crediderunt in eum, ut Sermo
Isaiae Prophetae impleretur quem dixit, Isa. 53. Domine quis credidit auditui
nostro, and brachium Domini cui revelatum est? and ideo non poterant credere,
quia iterum dixit Isaias, Is. 6. Excaecavit oculos eorum, and induravit cor
illorum, ne videant oculis nec intelligant cord, and convertantur, and sanem
illos. Paulo post, vobis inquit, Mat. 13. datum est nosse mysterium regni
coelorum, illis autem non est datum. Quorum alterum ad misericordiam, alterum
ad judicium pertinet: and circa finem ejusmodi capitis, exhortamur ergo atque
praedicamus, sed qui habent aures audiendi obedienter nos audiunt: audientes
videlicet corporis sensu non audiunt cordis assensu, etc.
. Thus ever are you besides the mark, p. 15. and miss of your aim. 3. Much
less is your third like to pierce any thing deep, though pointed out to the
slaughter, by your digit in the margent, you speak by your fingers, Prove. 6.
13. and yet say nothing from cap. 18. sect. 4. for your what truth more
protrite, and more readily of old received in the Christian Church, Austin
lib. 2. de gratia and lib. arbitrii, cap. 20. probatur Deum uti cordibus
then that God does often most justly stir up wicked men to acts as acts, which
yet to the actors are and will be unjust: God is no more blameable in so doing,
then you are when you set spurs to a dull jade, or then the pure Sun when it
draws out noisome evapours out of a nasty impure dunghill; the very simile used
by Calvin (and over-lookt by you) for the illustrating of this matter. 2. And
how irrefragablie does Calvin in the very Section, under your evil finger, and
once under your evil eye, by variety of scripture, and Scripture-cases, prove
this, as from 2 Samuel 16. 22. 2 Samuel 16. 10. 1 Kin. 12. 20. Hos. 8. 4. Hos. 13.
11. 1 King. 12. 2 King. 10. 7. But these forsooth, p. 11. are too literally
expounded by Calvin etiam malorum ad laudem atque adjumentum bonorum. Sic usus
est Juda tradente Christum, sic usus est Judaeis cruci figentibus Christum, and
quanta inde bona praestitit populis credituris, qui and diabolo utitur pessimo,
sed optime ad exercendam and probandam fidem bonorum, non sibi qui omnia scit
antequam fiant, sed nobis quibus erat necessarium, ut eo modo ageretur
nobiscum: plura in hujus rei probationem vide passim per totum illud caput: and
as literally by Sr Austin, throughout cap. 20. and 21. lib de gratia and libero
arbitrio, who draws up the conclusion of those chapters, thus: His and talibus
testimoniis divinorum eloquiorum, quae omnia commemorare nimis longum est,
satis quantum existimo manifestatur, operum Dei cordibus hominum ad inclinandas
little voluntates quocunque voluerit, sive ad mala pro meritis little, judicio
utique suo aliquando aperto, aliquando occulto, semper autem justo.
. 4. As for the fourth quoted by you out of cap. 11. 17. sect. 12. which yet I
cannot find there, something to that purpose I find quoted by one who calls
himself the praedestinated thief Fur praedest. p. 27. Impii occulta Dei manu
and vi sive potentia, tanquam laqueo latente nescientes diriguntur ad scopum
ipsis ignotum, etc. (p. 110.) Austin Enchirid. ad Laurent. Omnis natura etiam
si vitiosa est, in quantum natura est, bona est, in quantum vitiosa est, mala
est, mala omnino fine bonis and nisi in bonis esse non possunt, quamvis bona
sine malis esse possint.
a book I doubt you as much or more delight in, because it makes you more
sport, then that which you commend of Bp Wintons, p. 11. unto which I suppose
you found it annexed, and which is under your second digit, it makes something
a higher sound, but no harsher sense in any Christian ear or heart, if so be
the more rough phrase of a command (as it may seem to be to dainty ears) be
but dexterouslie expounded, as it is by Calvin, lib. 1. Institut. cap. 18.
sect. 1. and cap. 17. Austin lib. de gra. and l. arbitr. cap. 20. Dum disserit
de exemplo Shimei unctum Dei improbe male dicentis sis inquit. Quo modo dixerit
Dominus huic homini maledicere David, quis sapiens and intelliget? non enim
jubendo dixerit, ubi obedientia laudaretur: sed quod ejus voluntatem proprio
vit^o suo malam in hoc peccatum judicio suo justo and occul^o inclinavit, ideo
dictum est dixit ei Dominus. Nam si jubenti obtemperasset Deo, ^audandus potius
quam puniendus esset, sicut ex hoc peccato postea novimus esse punitu^, nec
causa tacita est, cur ei Dominus isto modo dixerat maledicere David, hoc est
cor ejus malum miserit vel dimiserit, ut videat inquit Dominus humilitatem
meam, and retribuat mihi bona pro maledicto ejus in die isto.
Austin and others, not of a command given out by God, for any man to yield
obedience to, which would be contrary to Deuteronomy. 29. 29. but of that occult law
of Gods stupendous workings, even whilst men sin, which God has appointed
to be the law of his providence, and so of his outgoings, but not of our
conversation, Isa. 8. 20 2. And truly, woe, woe, would it be to all Christians,
if the Devil and all his Angels, together with all his agents, which are acted
by him, even when they are committing the worst feats of their wicked activity,
were not ruled and overruled; and in this sense, as it were, in a compulsorie
bridle, like the Devil in a chain, Jude 6. Rev. 20. 2. So that when as they do
cast up the mire and the dirt of their outrageous sins, Isa. 57. 20. -- God all
this while should not order them, as well as he does the wild ocean, when he
says, Job. 38. 11. Hitherto shall thou come, but no farther; and here shall
thy proud waves be stayed. Deus est author nullorum, sed ordinator and rector
omnium peccatoru^, rector omnium peccatorum and peccantium Of whose actings
that of Austines is most true, l. de gra. and lib. arbit. cap. 21. Nunquid sine
sua voluntate venerunt, aut sic venerunt sua voluntate, ut mendaciter scriptum
sit, quod Dominus ad hoc faciendum eorum spiritum suscitavit; immo utrumque
verum est, quia and sua voluntate venerunt, and tamen spiritum eorum Dominus
suscitavit. Agit enim Omnipotens in cordibus hominum etiam motum voluntatis
eorum, ut per eos agat quod per eos agere ipse voluerit, qui omnino injuste
aliquid velle non novi^. Idem. lib. 5. cap. 3. adversus Julian. Pelagian. Haec
Deus miris and ineffabilibus modis, qui novit justa judicia sua non solum in
corporibus hominum, sed in ipsis cordibus operari, qui non facit voluntates
malas, sed utitur eis ut v^luerit, cum aliquid inique velle non possit, and
cap. 12. Quis non ista judicia contremiscat, quibus agit Deus in cordibus
ma^orum hominum quicquid vult, reddens tamen eis secundum merita eorum.
. 5. Your fifth place quoted out of him, from which yet you keep your
threatening finger, or marginall fist, lib. 1. cap. 17. sect. 5. is like unto
the former, and therefore may be served with the answer which was given in to
the last. And truly it may as truly be charged with blasphemy by you, as
David for calling wicked men Gods sword, Psalm. 17. 13. or Isaiah, for calling
Ashur the rod of Gods anger B. Fulgent. l. 1. ad Anoni^^u^, Licet Deus author
no^ sit malarum cogitationu^, ordinator tamen est malarum ^oluntatum.
and the staff of his indignation, Isa. 10. 5. Item, for stiling
Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 50. 23. the hammer of the whole earth, the fierce nation
stirred up by God himself, to break down the whole earth; confute the
Prophets, (turn Helvidianus, p. 17. if you dare) when they tell us Isa. 7. 18.
of hissing for the flies, of lifting up an ensign to the nations, Isa. 5. 26.
to fall upon Isreal's spoil, the very works of God, Isa. 42. 24. or prove that
men when they are so stirred up, do not wickedlie sin for the most part, or
else when in Calvin, or such like honest men, you meet with such kind of
passages, keep off your censorious fingers from them, 6. Though you were got
off from Calvin, by your second assault made toward the foot of page 9. upon
Dr Twisse, yet that same wicked Calvin sticks so much in your stomach
indigestible, as that twice more you disgorge your self upon him, p. 10. out
of l. 1. c. 18. 5. from which place, or any others of the like stamp, you will
only be able to prove that he opposes such an idle speculative permission, as
you, and the worst of your associats plead for, p. 14. (about which I hope we
shall ere long come to some sober reckoning together) a permission which makes
evil things to fall out, though not without his praescience, yet against his
determination, and all kind of will, viz. such as whereby they be suffered to
fall out by the sinful will of the wicked. It is plain (though a man should run,
yet he might read it) and therefore turn to your book, and the section of
Calvin's again, that he pleads not for Gods agency in sin, as it is sin,
Calvin in these and such like places, will be understood as he explains
himself, l. 2. Institut. c. 4. sect. 2. Proprie agere dicitur Satan in
reprobis in quibus regnum suum, hoc est, nequitiae exercet, dicitur and Deus
suo modo agere, quod Satan ipse (instrumentum cum sit irae ejus) pro ejus nutu
ac imperio huc atque illuc se inflectit ad exequenda ejus judicia justa. Omitto
hic universalem Dei motionem, unde creaturae omnes ut sustinentur, ita
efficacia^ quidvis agendi ducunt. De illa speciali action tantum loquor quae
in unoquoque facinore apparet. Idem ergo facinus Deo, Satanae, homini assignari
videmus non esse absurdum: sed varietas in fine and modo facit ut illic
inculpata Dei justitia reluceat, Satana hominisque nequitia cum suo opprobrio
se prodat.
which he stoutly every where opposes. But for 1. Gods sovereign judiciary
ordering and ruling of sin, and over it, according to his aeternall wise
counsels. 2. And so much the very instance of a Judge in his words produced by
you, do evidence, that God is the author of the punishing of a sinful Ahab, by
his i. e. Ahabs sin, but that he, i. e. God, is no author of his sin. 2.
You fall fiercely upon him, with a passage which you quote out of his book, de
providen. c. 5. and 6. and sic citatur, lib. 2. de provid. part. 11. p. 36. And
this again you note with your severe malignant finger; and because in it you
show as much vi^ulencie and spleen against Calvin, as his enemies who had
quoted it against him before you, I think it deserves that zealous answer which
Calvin upon the place makes to it, and which for the belief of the English
reader, I translate thus. Calvin de occulta D^i provident. p 736. In quinto
a^ticulo, non sine providentia Dei quam oppugnas factum est, ut locum notares,
ill^c videbunt lectores, quae soleant adversarii o^j^cere contra meam
doctrinam, me v^lut in ^orum persona recitare. Tu mutilum illud dictum
arripiens, nonne dignus es in cujus faciem omnes conspuant? In sexto tamet si
locum non designas, longius prosilit tua impudentia. Egone, qui tam reverenter
ubique praedico, quoties peccati fit mentio, procul removendum esse Dei nomen,
usquam d^xerim maleficia non tantum eo volente, sed etiam authore perpetrari?
certe ut quidvis contra tam pr^digiosa^ blasphemiam dicatur, libenter patiar,
modo ne immerito immisceatur nomen meum. Quantum ad stultos fallendos proficias
nescio, sed non timeo, si quis figmenta tua cum scriptis meis confer volet,
ne tua improbitas te execrabilem, ut dignus es reddat. Whenever therefore
henceforward Mr T. P. or any of his associats, shall charge Calvin, or any
holding with him, to maintain God to be the author of sin, we may with
confidence enough, appeal to all ingenious readers, as he did of old. Varius
Scuronensis, M. Aemiliu^ Scaurum, regia merce decorruptum, imperium prodidisse
ait. M. Aemilius Scaurus huic se affinem esse ^ulpae negat, viri creditis?
[In the 5 Article it fell out not without Gods providence, which you oppose,
that you did note the places, there the readers will see, that what things the
adversaries do use to object against my doctrine, are recited by me as in
their person. Thou snatching that mutilated saying, art thou not worthy in
whose face all should spit? In the 6. though thou do not mark out the place,
yet thy impudence leaps out further. Do I, who reverently every where preach,
whersoever there is any mention of sin, that then Gods name must be moved far
from it; I say, that I should have said any where, that wicked actions are not
only committed, he willing, but he also being the author of them, certeinlie I
can willingly suffer that any thing should be said against so prodigious a
blasphemy, provided that my name be not undeservedlie intermingled. How much
you may prevail in deceiving of fools, I know not, but I do not fear, but if
any will compare your forgeries with my writings, that your wickedness will
render you, as you do deserve, to be execrable.] Read on good Sir, for your
learning, and the showing in what sense, that some phrases stumbled at by you,
are understood by him. 7. Now I am come to answer for what you quote out of my
reverend and worthy friend, Dr Twiss, by which Paul (let me so speak now) I
had once the happiness to be beloved as another Timothy; Oh how do I bewail
it that he is not alive to answer for himself; verily, I think that his very
grave, stern, scholasticall look, would have frighted such a finicall
rhetorician as your self, out of that parcel of little wit, p. 24. which is
left you, out of that shallow judgment, which yet is the deepest that you
have, p. 5. and of which I am sure you are sufficiently proud. You the very
great (...), and formidable Zan zummim (as you take it) inter fraterculos
classiarios Rusticanos, would for fear have betaken your self to your heels,
I fear me and have been in Dr Lopes his condition, by reason of breaking, you
would have purified your self. For my part I am glad you have, as they did
deserve, joined Calvin and Twisse together, as a nobile par fratrum, the rather
because the less will need to be said for Twisse, so much having been said
for Calvin, upon the like light suggestions, and wild inferences of yours; and
for that to Dr Twisse, having been as a very Eagle for the sublimity of school
Divinity, and yet for elegancy well styled Sam. Rutherford in his
Exercitationibus Apologet. pro div. great.
by a learned Scot, flos ingeniorum scholasticorum, and for perspicuity (if a
man may so speak, for take this cum grano salis) as another Bonaventure, in
quo non videretur Adamus peccasse, certe non multum delirasse. I question not
but that I shall prevail with all ingenious Scholars, to turn to the passages
which you do so point at with your marginall fingers, to turn them by
perverting his words, out of the way of his candid orthodox meaning. Yet let me
subjoine some few words for my old friend, and fathers friend, the remembrance
of whom shall be precious to me

Dum meus ipse mihi, dum spiritus hos regit artus. And first for what you have
out of him, lib. 1. part. 1. digress. 10. cap. 1. sect. 4. p. 125. I will only
first, beseech the Reader, to hear how he explains himself, both in the place
alleged by you, and cap. 3. in princip. for (says he) speaking of the
internal decree, or will of God; The mind of his manifesting justice, seems
not to proceed from justice: For as it is not from omnipotency that he would
have a monument of his omnipotency, so it is neither of justice that he would
afford a document of his justice, and chap. 3. p. 127. As for reprobation, the
last act of it remains to be considered, and the will or intention of
condemning for sin: Condemnation it self for sin, is an act of Gods
avenging justice, and it does presuppose sin; but the will of condemning, or
the decree by which a man is destined to condemnation for sin, seems not to
be (he speaks you hear modestly, yet not fit to be called, p. 23. a modest
blasphemer) an act of justice, and without any obscuri^ie, it may be
demonstrated, that it cannot presuppose sin. How he proves this, consult
further on the very place anon after that which is under your digit, and is the
worse for your thumbing of it, as also in his answer to Mr Hoard, presently
upon the stating of the question: How gallantly he illustrates this, see in his
answer to D. H. statim a principio. Confute him if you can; It is enough for
his discharge, that he maintains, 1. No internal or exernall act of Gods
sovereignty to be against his justice. 2. Are you so intoxicated in your
passions against Dr Twisse, (a man I am confident who never wronged you in
thought, word or deed) as not to see that Gods internal and eternal decrees
(if you grant but any such, which I am sure Arminius and the Arminians did, but
what you do, I am by your discourses much to seek) cannot, to speak properly,
be acts of justice; (yet they are not against justice.) Acts of justice are ad
alterum, and presuppose an object actual and not potentiall only;
predestinatio nihil ponit in objecto, nec egreditur extra se See bef. re p. 108
de Collat. Hag. passi. Dr Twisse lib. digr. 6. 5. 4 c. 3. p. 96. Nihil
vulgatius in scholis quam praedistinationem and reprobationem nihil pon^re in
praedestinato and reprabato quod and evidens ratio confirmat: sunt enim actus
Dei immanentes non transeun tes, omnis autem paena est actionis transeuntis in
creaturam effectus, etc.
. 2. As for the second place quoted against him, in your line ult. p. 9. out of
sect. 12. p. 140 about the distinction of voluntas signi, and been placiti,
which you nibble at here, p. 12 and in diverse other places. 1. That I shall
else where show, that you by denying of it, rob God of all sovereignty and
deity, and make him to be a mere legislator to appoint what should be as to
duty or to give out orders, not to determine what shall be, as to particular
events. 2. It had been more valiant for you, to have confuted the instance,
which Dr Twisse brings from Gods willing or commanding, not willing or not
determining the offering up of Isaae, Genesis 22. then vainly to cavil at the
distinction, which that is brought to prove. 3. Dr Twisse in the very place
has taught me and you, if you have but a mind to learn with me, (as you say
you have, p. 8. if you may but be taught in the spirit of meekness) that
these two wills are not contradictorie, as being not ad idem, nor secundum idem,
as belonging to different objects and different ways of working, he thus
concludes the Section, (somewhat otherwise then you translate him, who foist in
several words of your own, to make him the more odious.) Nor yet is there any
contradiction betwixt these two divine wills; for voluntas signi, or the sign
of Gods will, is improperlie called will, for it only signifies what men ought
to do, or what will please God, if it be done. But voluntas beneplaciti, or the
will of liking, is properly and simply his will, whereby namely he has
decreed what shall be, either God effecting it, or God permitting it. 3. As for
the last and largest passage quoted out of l. 2. part. 1. p. 142, 143, 147,
148. which contains a most elaborate, succinct, learned, and useful
discourse; out of which certain scraps and bits of his words, are
incoherentlie hudled together; I must needs beseech the Reader, who can, so far
to gratify me and himself, as to turn to the places quoted, and then I doubt
not, but perceiving how egregiously that indefatigably painful Dr is abused by
mis-representing his sense, they will of their own accord, be ready a second
time, to read over that tart lecture of Calvin's to Mr T. P. for abusing so
gallant a man as Dr Twisse: In the interim let it be remembered, that when the
Dr says, that Gods will is no less efficacious in the permission of evil,
then, etc. That the same Dr finds a wide difference betwixt Gods efficient
will, and his efficacious will. The first relates to what God will do
himself, the latter, to what shall be done by the sinful will of others,
lib. 1. sect. 10. p. 140. the place quoted by T. P. but just now. We grant
says he, there Dr Twisse disputes against Jac. Armin. his text.
speaking of the latter, even that will to be efficacious, but the last
consequence, if by an efficacious will, ergo by an efficient, we totally deny
as in consequent; and then succeed the words mentioned by you, p. 10. line 21.
and inde. In both Gods will is efficacious, but in the one it is only
permissive, but in the other effective. 2. As for the prostitution unto sin
required, which you speak of, doubtless he speaks of some judiciary acts of
God upon impenitent sinners, as the Prophet Hosea 3. 13, 14. when your
daughters, etc. the Apostle 2 These. 2. 3. You may as well deny God to put
forth any providence in governing of the world, as deny God to administer
occasions of sinning unto wicked men Be content for once, to learn something
that is good from your beloved Jac. Armin. Disput. 9. de ^ffic. prob. Dei in
mullo, These. 20. propter incitamentorum and occasionum oblationem, directionem
and determinationem Dei, permissioni peccati additam, dicitur Deus, quae ab
hominibus malis and Satana perpetrantur, mala ipsa facere, quod probat ex Genesis
45. 8. and 37 25. 28. and 4^. 12. 12. and 41. 19. Job 1. and 2. 2 Samuel 12. 13.
12. 2 Sa 15 and 16. Sic Deus fecisse dicitur, quod Absolon fecit: quia
potissimae parts, in actionibus isti apotelesmati producendo adhibitis, Dei
fuerunt. Accedit huc, quod cum sapientia Dei norit, si per talem
incitamentorum, and occasionu^ oblationem, directionem and determinationem, rem
totam administret, certo and infallibiliter ^xisturum, quod a creatura sine
scelere perpetrari nequit; and cum voluntas ipsius decernat administrationem
istam, liquidius patet cur Deo factum hujusmodi tribuatur. Fidei humanae potest
subesse falsum.
, and that those occasions (not Gods sinning in offering them, accursed be such
a blasphemy) do really affect the imaginations, according to all those degrees,
whether that of profit or pleasure represented in them. See this largely proved
by our good and great Doctor, past all fear of being confuted, in his answer
to Mr Hoard, p. 26. and inde. And thus I hope I have in reference to the second
thing proposed, set Mr Calvin and Dr Twisse, and all that hold with them, into
their proper honorable stations of sound and able Divines again, by wiping
off the aspersion of modest or immodest blasphemy from their names. But I shall
be forced to leave Mr T. P. amongst the accusers of the brethren, and of his
own mothers sons, Psa. 50. 20. were he at least but a genuine son, a member of
any true Protestant Church. In this I have been the longer, not only to
testify my respects to two such great luminaries of the Church, but because by
so doing, I have quite overturned one great rotten pillar, upon which all this
book does rest, which now as we shall see more briefly in what follows, will
be Psalm. 62 3. as a bowing wall, and a tottering fence. And now thirdly, in
reference to the third thing proposed for the finishing of this Section, I have
but a few words to say to your quaking, trembling, oratoriall peroration, with
which you wind up this Section. 1. I must profess it to be some part of my
faith (pray God I may be out in it) to believe that you will rather turn
Quaker, and with them get into your trembling and shivering fits, when you are
big with no spirit of prophecy, then you will not upon any or no occasion
given, take liberty by abusing such as Mr Calvin and Dr Twisse, make the hearts
of Gods people sad, whom he has not made sad, Ezekiel. 13. 22. make their very
ears to tingle, and hearts to tremble. 2. Now I can upon certain knowledge,
tell how little conscience you have used in reading or representing authors; I
may justly fear you do rather act the Tragaedian part of a Stageplaier, for
the making your adversaries odious, then that you greatly fear even real
blasphemies; if you did so, you would not upon suppositio^ of the absolutenes
of Gods decrees (which cannot possibly be otherwise, unless as I have elsewhere
showed, we resolve to be madly Atheistical) to call in Poets, p. 13. if not
Devils, p. 24. to help you to blaspheme. 3. But though, since Mountebanck like,
you have thrust your self upon a stage, and find it necessary for the
carrying on of your design, to have in readiness the very pages and lines of
those several authors whom you design, (if you can do it) shall be offered up
as victimes to the popular Jury of ignavo's, or ill affected persons: And that
rather then this shall not be done, you will rif^le the well furnished Cabinet
of the Batavian Remonstrant writings, Scripta Synodalia Remonstrantium. Fur
praedestinatus, tied to the tail of the book quoted by Mr T. P. as to Andrews
his book
or not stick to be beholding to very thieves, viz. such roguish pamphlets, as
fur praedestinatus, and others are, rather then you will want materials for
invectives against Calvin, Beza, Twisse, etc. Yet pray, Sir, why should you
express your sense of indignation, against, as you say, too litterall
expositions of some Texts of scripture, of those (vid.) or the like enumerated
by me, p. 103? Know you not that bonus textuarius est bonus Theologus? and that
sensus scripturae est Vide Dr Ames. in Psalm. secundum.
tantum unicus, isque grammaticus, where the letter is not plainly
metaphorical, typical, or contrary to other more plain places, and the clear
analogy of faith? But belike when all your Socinio-Grotio-Percian glosses and
Annotations shall be compiled together, and be published, for the clearing of
the forequoted places and the putting of milkie, mild Socino-Arminian glosses
upon them; the plumbeus cerebrofities of the now Protestant reformed world,
will be better indoctrinated, and recede further from the words of those
Scriptures, but approach nearer to the genuine sense of them. Credat Judaeus
Apella, non ego. And thus have I done with this your seventh Section, and I
might say too, with all this your first Chapter, wherein I have and shall at
every turn be forced to meet and scuffle with the Don Quixot you mention,
Epist. 2. ante publicam edit. and of which you may read in my last abused
friend, Dr Twisse, upon the very like occasion writing against Jesuit
Bellarmine Dr Twisse lib 2. div. gr. 2. cap. 5. p. 53. quasi vero operosa
demonstratione opus esset ad illud confirmandum de quo ne libertini quidem
dubitant, nempe in hac palestra dominab^tur Bellarmin (una cum socio suo T. P.)
and egregiam laudem referet de triumphatis prodigiosis quibusdam host bus and
chimericis, quales for sitan ne Hercules quidem unquam aggressus est, quales
etiam unica tantum in terris regio suppeditat, quae dici solet utopia, quales
denique parturit and parit imagination Interea for sitan his artibus hoc tandem
lucrabitur, ut non pauci talibus insidiis and dolis capti, ad injusta^ qua^
Bellarminus ingerere cupit, suspicionem de nobis concipiendam eo facilius
inducantur, quasi nos minime puderet, Deum peccati insimulare, adeoque omnia
flagitia Deo autore fieri palam profiteremur: sed note^tur imprimis seque^tia ^
D. T. P. nostro Sed non ipsi Pontificii Bellarmino modestiores, quotquot non
omnem excusserunt front pudorem, haec nobis exprobare, quae solet Bellarminus,
unquam ausi fuerant. Sed contra potius pronobis ab istis criminibus absolvendis
pronuntiant. Sic enim nos excusat Gabriel Vasquius, quamvis and ipse Jesuita in
1. disp. 99. cap. 4. Caeterum observandum est, non omnes haereticos nostri
temporis docuisse Deum esse autorem peccati, ut peccatum est, sunt enim qui
plane dicunt, peccatum ut peccatum, non esse in Deum, ut in causam referendum,
sed tantum Deum esse causam operis peccati, eo modo quo supra explicuimus ex
mente ipsorum. Ita docet Beza aphorismo illo 33. Calvin l. 3. Instit. cap 23.
sect. 9. Zwinglius in Sermon. de providentia, cap. 6. Similia producit ex
Suarefio, etc. Idem ergo de indiculo a T. P. exarato contra D. Calvinum and
Twissum possumus pronuntiare, quod simili occasion protulit D. Prosper contra
Augustini adversarios. Prosper in Resp. ad objectionem vicent. contexunt, and
qualibus possunt sententiis comprehendu^t in aptissimarum quarundam
blasphemiarum prodigiosa mendacia, eaque ostendenda and ingerenda multis
public privatimque circumserunt, asserentes talia in nostro esse sensu qualia
diabolico continentur Indiculo.
for my life I cannot light upon the fair L. Helena (...) you talk of to me
in the same letter, unless (as I think) to you it be the slurring of all the
fair names of all the men of renown, who have been active in the first or
second reformation; p. 35. And the enjoiment of this your Helena by you, haud
equidem invideo, sed miror magis, how have you dared so publicly to do it,
after such great protestations of affection, both to the first and latest
reformers. But of this, verbum sapienti sat est; verbum hand amplius addam, (p.
121.)

Falleris aeternam qui suspicis ebrius arcem
Subruta succensis mox corruet ima tigillis. Answer to sect. 8. p. 11. etc.
usque ad finem capitis primi

You have from hence to the end of the first Chapter, an excellent cause to
maintain against Sir Nicolas nemo, asserting God to be the author of sin,
and therefore I could heartily wish your arguments, from Scripture, reason, and
authority against him, were somewhat stronger then they be. However I will not
show you the flawes of them, not only lest my book out-swel the printers mind
to commit it to the press, but lest another day you should as well give it out
against me, as you have done against my betters, that you have not the better
of the cause, whilst against Sir N. N. you plead God not to be the author of
sin. I Will therefore rather take you off from your dispute with a plaudit, and
with an egregie Dom. magister, haec tibi sufficient. Egregia tibi laus, and
spolia ampla debentur. By my consent, because omnia leviae tendunt sursum, for
your great conquests obtained against that formidable Knight, by Scripture,
reason, and authority: So soon as ever a new Capitol shall be erected to
Jupiter Hammon, you shall enter the citadel, tanquam victor ovans, with the
acclamations of the people following you, veni, vidi, vici. But yet I must
needs say that Calvin and Twisse, and their copartners, who maintain God to
will sin, in no other sense then that of Austins Augustine. ad Laurent. cap.
95. Non fit aliquid nisi Omnipotens fieri velit, vel sinendo ut fiat, vel ipse
faciendo. Nec dubitandum est Deum facere been, etiam sinendo fieri quaecunque
fiunt male.
that nothing falls out but what God wills shall be, either by his real
effecting of it, or his voluntary permission of it for his own glory; who
maintain this determining of sin, just after the rate that my most reverend
friend Dr Ames unto whose memory I owe much. Thus then he in his disceptat.
scholast, cum Grevencho^. edit in 4 to, p. 50, 51. opponis obsoletum de peccati
praescientia and praedeterminatione. Cui ego respondebo, parcius multo in
scripturis declaratum esse, quid Deus de malo quam quid de bono apud se
decrevit, satis igitur esse, si de bonis nobis constet, licet malorum origo
intellectum nostrum fugiat: deinde, non est eadem ratio futuroru^ bonorum and
malorum; bona enim sunt ex virtute positiva, quae semper cum sui^ effectis ab
efficaci Dei voluntate fluit, sed mala ex defectu sunt oriunda, atque adeo qua
talia non pendent ab efficaci aliquo decreto: quicquid habet entis positivi, ab
efficaci decreto pendet; quicquid purae negationis, ex ejusdem decreti
negatione sequitur; quicquid vero privationis and pravitatis in sese continet,
peccatoribus ipsis debetur in Solidum. Dico igitur ipsa peccata cognosci in
decreto Dei, absolute definiente illud quod iis inest boni, and ipsius mali
permissionem. Ipsum etiam peccatum, quamvis non qua peccatum, a Deo
praefinitur, in ipsa etiam praefinitione certo videtur, and aliquo modo dici
potest decreti illius consequens, effectus autem nullo modo. Vult Deus actus
bonos, and qua actus and qua bonos, malos qua actus non qua malos. Sic
Augustinus hanc objectionem solvere solebat semper. Saepius etiam a Pelagianis
eadem occinebatur ipsi cantilena ut videre est contra Julian. 3. 9. and 5. 2
and de lib. arbitr. lib. 2. 19, 20.
most pithilie, and yet fully expressed their sense: (whose words I do the rather
give in the margent, because that book is not easily to be had, or in many
scholars hands) I say I must needs believe, that they, and such as they take
themselves to be nothing concerned in any of the Scriptures, reasons, or
authorities, which you bring against them; and were they alive, I doubt not but
they would deny that which you say, p. 15. that you shot somewhat further then
you aimed, (which certainly was but to calumniate them, and to asperse their
writings) though they would be agreed upon the Question, that by many furlongs,
you never came near the question debated between you and them. I may therefore
be allowed to afford you some orthodoxy (who have elsewhere but little of it)
in your flourishing fears against Sir N. N. and shall not find my self
necessitated any further to quarrel at the text of your 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Sections, then I can discern a quarrelsome Spirit working in you, against the
sound tenants of the Christian orthodox party of the first or second reformers,
whom you like not as appears, p. 35. and therefore in reference to your Sect. 8.
p. 11. give me leave to say, 1. That I like your text better as it lies in your
letter, then I like your marginall gloss, either out of your admirable Grotius
as you call him, Epist. 2. about the commending of whom, and your design in
it, you will give us a more fitting opportunity to speak else where, in answer
to p. 28. of yours, or your Saint-like Andrews, of which something too must be
said, because of of the epithet imposed upon him by you, p. 47. The former
speaks indeed, as to the forepart of his saying, conformable to the most usual
phrasiologie of the scripture and the ancients, August. Enchirid. In sua quae
falli mutarique non potest praescientia, opera futura sua disponere, illud
omnino nec aliud quicquam est praedesti. nare.
which say not much or often, that God does praedestinate men unto sin; the
phrase of praedestination mostly both in scriptures and the fathers, denotes
only such things as God will effect and do, and that in reference to man's
eternal condition, and not such things as God determines to permit: But for
the other part of his saying, that God does not praedestinate or praedetermine
men unto punishments, is both contrary to manifest Scripture, Romans 9. 12. Jude
4. etc and to pious antiquity Augustine. ad Dulcitium, Epist. 61. Deus occulta
satis dispositione, sed tantum justa, nonnullos coru^ poenis praedestinavit
extremis etc. and Tract 48. in Joh. Quomodo dixit vos non est is ex ovibus
meis? Quiae videbat cos ad sempiternum interitum praedestinatos, Tract. 107
filius perditionis dict us est traditor.
and the later Joh. Scot. in Hist. Go^teshalci. Edit. a D Vsserio, p. 128.
praedestinatio semper in bonis, ^emper in operibus suis, etc. Sic Synod.
Valentina. ib. p. 180.
Valentine Council, who understood the opinions of the ancients in this
matter, as well as the admirable Grotius; they stick not to affirm, that God
did praedestinate wicked men to punishments for their sins. 2. Your second
Saint-like Andrews is out, when he will needs have Romans 11. 33. only
applicable to praedestion or election, when as by the series of the discourse,
unto which the words are a conclusory Epiphonema they are as well applicable to
reprobation as to election, if not more, as appears by ver. 32. to reprobation
then to election. 2. None of your opposites quoted by you, had used the phrase
of praedestinating unto sin, nay, in the sense of the Arausican Council
quoted by you, p. 16. condemn it, and therefore you might here very well have
forborne your verbal criticismes. 3. Your conclusion here, God is no where
said to praedestine to sin, ergo, he does only in your speculative aequitable
sense, p. 14, 15. permit sin, and not voluntarily decree, that it shall fall
out, and that he will have the ordering of it, is as valid a conclusion, and
yet thus you must draw your ergo, if you will conclude any thing against Calvin
or Twisse, as that Baculus stat in angulo, ergo Sacerdotes non debent nubere,
and look you to that formidable ergo, who are said to be against all second
marriages of ministers, sect. 12. p. 12, 13. I might as quickly glide off from
your sect. 9 p. 12. and turn it off as I did the former, as being nihil ad
Rombum, because your premises and conclusions, notwithstanding your best care
promised, p. 7. that they should be fast twisted together, hang together like
ropes of sand, and if I may use your hated Calvin's phrase, are desultationes a
gallo ad Asinum Calvinus contra Libertinos.
. If I may but suspect, that you intended a dispute against forsooth your
blasphemous catalogue, set down, p. 10, 11. Meus est quem recitas, (you know,
Epist. 3.) o Fidentine libellus; Ast male dum recitas incipit esse tuus, for
there against Calvin and Twisse. God every where professes that he wills not
sin, commands it not, approves it not, punishes it, expostulates against it,
etc. ergo he does not so much as determine or will, that sin should by his
permission fall out by the voluntary wilful wills of wicked men, is a
conclusion which makes me cry out, utinam me nemore Pelei. 2. I have elsewhere
answered to the scriptures which you produce here out of Psalm. 81. 13. Isa. 5.
3, 4. Ezekiel. 18. 2. 29. when as you brought them forth in your first papers,
more strongly for the carrying on the design, which there you were upon, and
yet so mistook the Texts, and expounded them worse, then either a Jewish Rabbi
Kimchi on Isa. 5. or the Batavian Remonstrants in their Synodick writings, I
list not (as much leisure as you may take me to have) eandem serram
reciprocare. Those writings may in due time see the light, if it shall be
judged sitting. 3. From your 19. line of p. 12. almost to the end of your 10.
sect. p. 13. you set upon such a desperate way of railing, ranting, nay, of
diabolical blaspheming of the footsteps of the anointed, I mean of the
counsels and unknown footsteps, Romans 11. 13. Psalm. 77. 19. of the high
almighty holy one (upon a wilful mistake and misrepresentation of your
adversaries tenants about them) as that you seem to me, to have taken up a
resolution, to blaspheme down all the rail^ng Rabshaka's, who some say was an
Apostate from the true religion R. D. Kimchi in Isaiah.
; and you confess you were once in Calvin's way, p. 24. and so in some sense
you be an Apostate, optimi vini pessimum acetum, none likely such stomackfull
opposers of Gods truth, as those who have forsaken the way of his righteous
word and commandments. All the scoffing, Atheistical Lucians, the wanton
Satyrists, the furious Bolsers, the wild Rogu^sh praedestinated thief Fur
praedestinationi^, s^^ 23. B^nae^fiae voluntates De^ in cereb^o meo perpetuo
moluerunt, son^n^que veluti mola asinaria. etc.
or any whosoever at any time, may, as it were for a fee As one said well, in
the Synod of Dort upon the like occasion, that the Remonstrants did behave
them^e^ves tanquam conductitii R^proborum patroni, so does T. P. a new advocate
to those kind of Clients.
have set their tongues to lale in the behalf of the Devil, and the
reprobates, for the prompting them with arguments (as if of their own accord
they could not find them fast enough) to dispute against his just, but
unconceivable Soveraigntie; unto all which diabolical rhetoric, I might
justly answer (and the Apostle and other holy and wise men would bear me out
in it) with silence Aug. Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 99. Hoc autem qui eo modo
audit ut dicat, quid adhuc conqueritur? Nam voluntati ejus quis resistit,
tanquam propterea malus non videatur esse culpandus, quia Deus cujus vult
miscretur, and quem vult obdurat. Absit ut pudeat nos respondere quod
respondisse videmus Apostolum. O homo tu quis es qui responde as Deo? Nunquid
dicit figmentum etc. Hoc enim loco quidam stulti putant Apostolum in
responsione defecisse and inopia reddendae rationis repressisse contradictoris
audaciam, sed magnam habet rationem quod dictum est, O homo tu quis es? and in
talibus quaestionibus ad suae capacitatis considerationem revocat hominem,
verbo quidem brevi. sed reipsa magna est redditio rationis. Si autem non capit
haec, quis est qui respondeat Deo? Si autem capit magis, non inveniet quod
respondeat
or at least with O homo quis tu^es qui responde as Deo? which of all other
answers would be the solidest and the fittest G. Voctius in respons. Belgica
contra Tilem. Ames praefat. ad rescript. scholast. Si cum Diabolo mihi
Altereandum esse^ (non auderem ego non ausus est Michael Archangelus ille Jud.
9.) in istoc g^nere par pari reponere: Divino praesertim nomini; tam soedos
titulos, imaginesve sub quocunque praetex^u, vel verbis, obducere, and
applicare. Spiritum and reverentiam Jehovae non sapiunt, non o^ent haec ^um
prophana, quae ne nominari quidem inter nos dibent, sicut decet sanctos:
Judicis illius refer videntur mores, qui Deum non timebat, nec hominem
reverebatur, Luke 18. 2. And thus according to this staring hairebraine
Divinity of yours, the rule of a man's acting must be given him after the act is
done, and not before he is to go about it.
scrutator majestatis opprimetur a gloria. Snailes (unto which one well
compares these foul blasphemous slimie injections) are better trampled upon,
then leisurelie drawn out of their impure nastie cottages, which they carry
upon their backs: Yet lest you, and the infernal black guard at your heels,
should vapor as if you had champion Goliath-like routed all the host of
reformed Israel, by your invincible arguments I think it not amiss to return
some Answer, howbeit a^ briefly as possibly, I can; And that for fear of
defiling my self with the pollutions of your execrable lines; he that touches
pitch; you know cannot but be somewhat bepitched; and ergo, 1. Though you seem
to have a mavelous good mind to deny that God has a secret will, as well as
a revealed will, and therefore here and elsewhere, p. 24. and p. 33. are still
nibling, Serpent like, Genesis 3. 15. at the heels of that received distinction,
of voluntas signi, and voluntas beneplaciti; or, as it is by others expressed,
voluntas praecepti, and decreti; yet whenever you shall (...), downright
deny this distinction, as it is by orthodox divines used and applied, I hope
as I have done in answer to your first papers; so shall I elsewhere, more in
answer to these, prove you must fall upon gross and flat Atheism. But of this
when we come to examine your p. 24. 2. When, where, or how will you, or any of
your broken faction, prove that the two wills, you mention, of secret or
revealed will, are not only diverse and distinct from each other, but contrary
to each other about the same acts. Whereas the object of the revealed will (for
example) is, that this or that shall be the duty of the creature to do, or to
leave undone by sin, the object of the secret will, that this or that shall come
to pass. What show of contradiction is here betwixt those two wills? Are the
objects of the one or the other the same? or is the manner of Gods acting
toward the fulfilling of what he commands to be done, by his grace, giving to
will and to do, and that merely according to his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 12.
the same with his manner of working in those who keep not his commandments, and
by him are left to walk, not in his, but their own ways? For shame cease to
wrangle rather then reason after this order. 3. But then how much less will you
be able to prove that monstrous and hideous assertion of yours, that the
positive will of God, viz. that which is so (for of that is the dispute) in
Gods counsel and mind, ought to be done, viz. by way of duty by the
creature? for so you must understand it, or else you object nothing. A thing
both 1. Unlawful for any creature to do, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Isa. 8. 20. 2. And an
impossible thing for him to know, but by the event, and that is after it is
done: For no other way can he know what Gods secret will is concerning future
events, unless by an immediate revelation given him before hand, or a spirit of
prophecy, which I suppose you will grant me, reprobates have not, though you
will here needs suppose that reprobates do certainly know themselves to be
so; and that they are so well acquainted with Gods secret will, and so obedient
to it, as that they know, and do the evils which they must do. Well may
enraged Massilians of old Faustus lib. 2. cap. 6. sub pietatis front
Gentilitatis fatum, and inter gratiae vocabulum absconditum eri^ fatale
decretum.
and a wicked, roguish, wild fur praedestinatus, condemned to the Gallows, as
is said, reason of late Fur praedestinatus, p. 24. Tutissimum arbitratus sum
semper efficacem Dei voluntatem sequi, ne frustraneum laborem capesserem.
. But it becomes not him to reason so, who pretends to have outwitted all the
rabble of half-witted praedestinarians, page 10. of your first papers; and by
the consideration of Calvin's Decretum horribile, p. 24. to be frighted into his
once lost wits again. A frightfull wit of your own you have. 4. As for the
Atheologicall sport you make, and others use to make with the distinction of
Gods antecedent and consequent will; to that I have spoken somewhat largely
elsewhere in my first papers, and may perchance add somewhat more, if need
shall be, when I come to your p. 27. where we are troubled with it again,
and me thinks you should not so unhandsomely have forced it in, in this place,
unless you had been disposed to have cuffed your own objection, about
contrariant wills, which will be found no where to be so, but in your
distinction of Antecedent and Consequent will. We know and teach Jam. 1. 17.
That in God there is no variableness or shadow of changing. 5. What therefore
is now become of your objecting, either in your first scrible, or your last
Gnosticisme, Marcionisme, Manichaisme, or elsewhere of Stoicisme, and Turcisme,
p. 55. unto the reformed. (O how you love them!) when as your own reasonings
here, and elsewhere, are just the cavellings of your own objected Marcionites
mentioned by your own Tertullian against the Catholics, and are nothing else
but the expuitions of the Semi-pelagian Massilians Canes ait Tertullianus
adversus Marcionem, lib. 2. cap. 5. quos for as Apostolus expellit, latrantes
Deum veritatis, haec sunt argumentationum ^ssa, quae obroditis, si Deus bonus
and praescius futuri, (And as well may we say, as we shall hear anon out of
Austin, praedeterminans futurum) and avertendi mali potens, cur hominem and
quidem imaginem and similitudinem suam etc. Passus est labi de obse quio legis
in mortem, circumventum a Diabolo? Si enim bonus qui evenire tale quid nollet,
and potens qui depellere valeret, nullo mode evenisset, quod sub his tribus
conditionibus divinae majestatis evenire non posset. Quod si evenit, absolutum
est e contrario Deum neque bonum credendum, neque praescium, neque potentem
(J.) Vinc. Object. 4. apud Prosp. Quod major pars generis humani ad hoc cretur
a Deo, ut non Dei, sed Diaboli faciat voluntatem. Object. 5. Quod peccatorum
nostrorum author sit Deus, eo quod malam faciat voluntatem hominum; plasmet
substantiam quae naturali motu non possit nisi peccare. Object. 6. Quod Deus
tale in hominibus plasm^t arbitrium quale est Daemonum, quod proprio motu nihil
aliud possit vel velit nisi peccare. cap. 14. Qui Evangelicae praedicationi non
credunt, ex Dei praedestinatione non credunt, and quod ita Deus definierit, ut
quicunque non credunt ex ipsius constitutione non credunt.
against Austin and his party, which once more you take up, to spit them out
upon the Protestants? But I pray you, before you object, as you do, p. 12, 13.
absolute Reprobatarianisme to any, have you so much as any where attempted to
state in what sense your Adversaries whom you oppose, p. 9, 10. maintain
absolute Reprobation? As I bless God I have taken some honest pains about
stating the Question about absolute Election, in my first papers, by which this
other about reprobation, will be the more easily determined, and which Dr
Rivet, according to the mind of the most, does very pithily and succinctly set
down In disputationibus 13. It Is a saucy way of reasoning, (yet none of
Tertullians, as is plain by that of your own in the margent, Quis iste Deus
tam bonus ut ab illo malus fiat?) to tattle what is better or worse for God to
have done, when once it shall from Scripture be made evident what God will, as
it is plain enough that God wills that sin should fall out.
. 2. Is not this a French trick of yours, learned perchance from your French
Massilian Monsieurs, who in like sort upbraided the Catholics with an heresy
of their own forging, which they called absolute praedestinarianisme: As may
be seen in Histor. Gotteshalci. 3. Why stick you not to the first fine
epithet given to your adversaries, whom you call the halfe-witted rabble of
absolute praedestinarians, p. 10. of your first papers? 4. Your odious
reasoning out of Tertullian a minore ad majus, that it had been better and more
reasonable, etc. Will, 1. Be of some force against us, when you shall have
proved, that Gods voluntary decree of permitting sin to be done, which is
terminus diminuens, makes him to be the principle or author of evil; which
because that he does not will to do or effect it, but only determine that sin
shall be done, Non facere, sed in bonum finem ut fiat permittere. Quo sensu
secundum Augustine. and veritatem ipsam, bonum est malum esse. Magna opera Dei
and exquisita in omnes voluntates ejus, ut miro, and ineffabili modo non fiat
praeter ejus voluntatem, quod etiam fit contra ejus voluntatem, quia non fi^ret
si non sineret: nec utique nolens sinit, sed volens, nec sineret bonus fieri
male, nisi omnipotens etiam de malo facere posset been.
not as a duty, but as a fact that shall fall out by the sinful will of the
creature, which makes only the sinning creature the sole efficient cause of his
sin (if there can be an efficient of that, whose very being is consisting in
a deficiency) makes God only to be the cause of its permission and regulation.
5. Of Gods decreeing of punishments without all respect to sin, and of his
necessitating of his creature to sin, terms of your own coining, which you
would make the world believe, you took for the owned current coin of your
Adversaries; we shall be forced to speak to this often enough in the sequel,
ad Sect. 10. p. 13. For all the leisure which you conceive me to abound with,
p. 4. I am sure I am not at leisure in reference to James 1. 13, 14. fully to
open in what sense God may some way be said to tempt unto sin, and yet not be
the author of sin: He that has a mind to see that fully and satisfactorilie
done, let him consult with Dr Twisse against Mr Hoard, from p. 17. usque ad 28.
S^c interpreters reconciling those two places 2 Samuel 24. 1. 1 Chronicles. 21.
2. In transcurs^, I can run and yet read, that you have a months mind, that
Calvin and Twisse should be jumbled together with the modern Ranters; but
sooner will you and the modern Jesuits agree, and in una sede morari. 3* I
cannot conceive to what purpose you quote, 1 Cor. 10. 3. Is that promise made
at random to every man, or to the elect and believers only? but I forget,
that according to your first and second papers, all are or may be elect? My
wonderment is, if this may pass for truth, why any are damned, or be overcome
by temptations. 4. I cannot find, but your wicked wanton reasonings out of
Terence in Eunuch. and upon that account too, of what you have out of Cornel.
Agrip. makes full out as much against the praescience of evil, before it fall
out, as against the praedetermination of it; and Austin has been full out as
stupid as my self in thinking so Augustine. l. 2. de persev. sanctor: cap 15.
Ayunt^ viz. Semipelag^ani) neminem posse correptionis stimulis excitari, si
dicatur in con ventu Ecclesiae, etc. Ita se habet de praedestinatione, d^finita
sententia voluntatis Dei, etc. ista dum dicunt it^ nos a confitenda Dei gratia,
id est, quae non secundu^ merita nostra dat^r, and a confitenda secundum eam
praedestinationem sanctorum, deterrere non debent. Sicut non deterremur a
co^fitenda praescientia Dei. S^ quis de illo populo sit loquatur, ut di^at,
sive nunc recte vivatis, sive non recte, tales vos eritis postea, quales vos
Deus futuros esse praescivit, vel boni si bonos, vel mali si malos. A notable
place confuting many of your perverse wranglings, unless you have a mind
transilire in Castalii, and Socini Castra.
. 5. Whilst per charientismum (as your word is Epist* 1. before publicat.) you
say you dare not say, and yet you do say by the m^uth of a wanton whisling
Yonker, whom you bring upon the stage, Quid si haec voluit Deus? You give me
just occasion to say, that I have reason to believe your mind to be worse in
the objection, then the very mind of that lewd Atheisticke lad, whose
spokesman you will needs be. It is a thousand to one, but that Ethnic lad, for
the excusing of himself in his frolicks (as he calls them) conceived that he
might apologize for himself and his debaucheries, from the examples of such
gods, whom he was bid to worship, and who yet willed to approve of the worst of
sinners, by their own acting of them: Witness Jupiter, Mars, Vulcan, etc. of
whom your own good author, Terence, explaining himself, has it thus, it is no
matter for Englishing such passages; if any reverence of divine Majesty were
left in you, you would tremble to make such parallels, Terent* in Eunuch. Dum
apparatur virgo, in conclavi sedet suspectans tabulam pictam, ubi inerat
pictura haec, Jovem quo pacto Danaem misisse quondam aiunt in gremium imbrem
aureum: egomet quoque id spectare caepi, and quia consimilem luserat jam olim
ille lusum, impendio magis animus gaudebat mihi, Deum se in hominem
convertisse, atque per alienas tegulas venisse clanculum per impluvium, fucum
factum mulieri. At quem Deum? qui templa caelisumma sonitu concutit. Ego
homuncio hoc non facerem? Ego illud vero ita feci ac lubens. Hactenus verba
illius in Eunucho. 2. Will not the workings of the very consciences of such
sons of Belial, Romans 2. 15. whom you abett in their sportings against Gods
councels and decrees, tell them one day that you are to be abhorred for putting
such Sophismes and Paralogismes into their heads, whereas their hearts tell
them, that notwithstanding all that Divines have delivered about Gods
praedetermining of sin, they were free and unconstreined enough in committing
of it, and in running out to those excesses of riot? 1 Pet. 4. 4. Et tamen illa
libertas non tam erat libertas, quam contumacia dicenda. So Austin. Did not
those very heathens, who acknowledged fate in a higher degree then ever
Christians have, or need to do Prosp. ad objection^ primam Gallorum.
Praed^stinationem Dei nullus Cathol^cus negat: ^atalem au^em necessita^em multi
etiam non Christiani resutant, proinde qui praedestinationis nomine fatum
praedicat, tam non est probandu^, quam qui fati nomine veritatem
praedestinationis infamat: viderit noster, T. P.
, yet from the convictions of their own consciences, blame themselves for
their sins. Witness for this Queen Jocastas in Sen^ca, who anon after she had
complained of her hard fates, yet withal professes, that if God the Creator
of all, should make his wrath break forth against her, and strike her with a
thunderbolt from heaven, yet this were no sufficient punishment for her sins.

Non si ipse mundum concitans divum sator
Corusca Saeva tela jaculetur manu,
Unquam rependam sceleribus poenas pares.
6. Did not Austin long ago against his way, meet with such blasphemous,
scurrilous ways of reasoning, and reject them with highest indignation and
scorn In Psalm. 31. he blames those, who, when they are found in their sins,
say fatum mihi fecit, stellae malae fec^ru^, but says he* Quid est fatum,
quae ^u^ st^llae? Certe istae quas^ Caelo conspicimus, and qui eas f^cit? Deus:
qu^s ea^ o^ dinavit? Deus: erg^ vid^s quod volui^ti dicere, De^^ fecit ut
p^ccarem Mars sec^^ homicidam; Venus adui^trum.
. 7. What more mysterious piece of iniquity was there ever committed in the
world? or can there possibly be committed, then the killing of him who is, and
is truly called, the Lord of glory? 1 Cor. 2. 8. and yet says not the
Scripture expressly, Acts 2. 23. that though he was crucified by wicked hands,
yet he was delivered up, by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God?
Acts 4. 27. Herod and Pontius Pilate* with the Gentiles and people of Israel,
were gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel
determined before to be done August Epist. 48. ad Vincent. and de great. and
l^b. arbitr. ad Valent. cap. 20. Quum pater tradider^t filium, and Christus
Corpus suum and ^^das Dominum, cur in hac tradi^^one Deus est justus, and ho^o
reus, ^^isi^n re una quam fecerunt, causae non una est ^b quam fecerunt
. But perchance by the help of some, not too litterall exposition, of which,
p. 11. you will make a shift to get off something more handsomely then ever
Arminius did, who is forced to grant, that Gods counsel, not withstanding, it
might so have fallen out, as that Pontius Pilate and the Jews, should never
have crucified Christ ^ac, Armin. Respons. ad Artic. 31. Nego ossa Christi
resp^ct^^ decreti d^v^^ con^ring* non potuisse, etc.
. 4. As concerning the discomposednesse of your mind, and your fearfulness to
have so much as repeated these bold expressions, but to good purpose; I shall
then have cause to believe you, (Siquidem novi ego Simonem and Simon me) when
as that good purpose of yours shall not appear to be the defaming of those
men's names and writings, who will live in the hearts of all Gods people, when
the memory of all your wicked cavillings and scriblings against them shall rot,
and your name be written in the dust. 2. When as you shall have proved your
self to be a more dutiful son to your mother the Church of England (whom
Spaniell like you fawn upon for your own ends, and so far as serves, your
own turn) even whilst you oppose the Articles of her faith, as we have seen,
and shall see, p. 16. then contrary to her advise in her 17. Article, to put
curious and carnal persons, (such as are sure the wantons you conjured up to
reason against praedestination, p. 13.) upon the continual having before their
eyes, the sentence of Gods predestination, whereby the Devil does thrust them
into desperation, or into wretchlessnesse of unclean living, no less perilous
then desperation.

Sect. 11, 12. p. 14, 15.
FRom Scripture, which had as well left you, as you it, whilst you were
slandering of your graver brethren, and upon that occasion launching out into
depthes to high for you, and lashing of truths which you did not, or would not
understand, you come to reason (or as I who endeavor after my plain and blunt
fashion, to call things by their proper names Scapham Scapham, and ficum ficum
appellare.
to Treason) against the Majesty and Sovereignty of the Almighty, and his holy
workings, not of sin (to hell let that blasphemy go, from whence it came)
but in, about, and over it, sin (as used to be said of old) habitat in alieno
fundo, is (if you will give me leave so to translate it) a very bad tenant to a
good Landlord.

In the two next Sections, viz. 11, 12. you do only three things, which any
way concern me to take notice of. 1. You do set down and explain, that
monstrous opinion, which you have about Gods providence in the evil of the
creatures sin. 2. You bring in, as to your purpose, an impertinent
observation out of Mr Hooker. 3. You are for some pretended concurrence with
Beza, a man otherwise as little liked by you, as his colleague, Mr Calvin.
About the first which you adventure to set down, p. 14. in these words. You
hope to make it appear, that God almighty is so far from being accessory to
sin, and does so many things to hinder it, that he does not permit it but in
an equitable sense. And then further to explain and amplify in these, p. 15,
so far from that, that God Almighty does not permit sin, as permission
signifies connivence or consent; but he permits it, as it signifies not to
hinder it by maine force. And p. 15, 16. [In like manner all that is done by
God Almighty by way of permission, is his suffering us to live and have that
nature of the will, with which he made us. This is all that I am able to
apprehend or pronounce, that God permits our sins in this sense only, and
that he disposes and orders them to the best advantage.] Now about this full
and equitable declaration of yours, give me leave that I may a little keep
touch in my promise made with you. 1. Note somethings more generally. 2. Then
something more particularly. For the first, Though elsewhere up and down in
your book, because of your amphibolicall double dealing, I find you to be
(...), a kind of two souled man, your meaning uses to be somewhat like the
Mass, Mysterious; yet in what you let fall here, you are apertus homo, do
openly unbosome your self. 2. That in what you say about your aequitable
sense, you do verbatim transcribe out of your first papers, both as to your
Position, and your subjoined illustration, p. 15. If I see a man stealing, and
say nothing to him, etc. A shrewd Topicall Argument to me tantamount almost to
a Demonstration, that the first papers were before your eye, as well as in your
memory, whilst you wrote these second, and yet p. 2 and 3. you will at no hand
be known of any such matter. 3. That you will never be persuaded to forbear
an odious representing of your real adversaries opinions, (for by what law am
I bound to take notice of any of your chimaericall ones?) as if they made God
accessory to sin, p. 14* or a conniver at it, or consenter to it, p. 15. in
the usual acceptance of those phrases (and you know, loquendum cum vulgo) as
such expressions implie, a love-liking or approbation of the things permitted
Qui silet consentire videtur.
. Here as much as you, I am sure more cordially then you, they say, Psalm. 5. 4.
Thou art not a God that have pleasure in w^ckednesse, neither shall evil dwell
with thee. Hab. 1. 13. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil and can
not look on iniquity. They conclude as willingly as you, p. 14. though not so
thrasonically against Sir N. N. whom you soundly cuffe In your (...) or
Andabatarum pugna, you talk of, Epist. 3 ante 2 publicat.
Dan. 9. 7. O Lord righteousness belongs unto thee, etc. All that they say
is, that God does not (...), volens nolens, but willingly decree that sin
shall be permitted to fall out, and in that sense be acted by the wicked wills
of men, for the advancement of the glory of his justice, Pro. ^6* 4. Romans 9.
22, 23. 2. As for any more particular confutation of your first dear, and
clear, Article of your unchristian Creed, which we had from you, since we have
had the unhappiness to see this your last Pamphlet, amongst understanding
Christians, recitasse, refutasse est. I have somewhat largely done it
elsewhere, in my first answer to your first scribble, by Scripture, Fathers,
Reasons, and even Batavian Remonstrants. Here let it therefore suffice you and
the Reader, to receive summa capitula rerum, that if this be your All that you
allow to God's efficacious providence in evil (I will now use no other then Jac.
Arminius his phrase Jac. Armin. Disp. pub. 9. de justitia and ^fficaci
provivid^ntia Dei in malo.
. Then 1. You will limit the Almighty in these matters to the same boundaries
which he has set to the children of men, so that if they can, they must to
their ultimum posse, hinder sin, or they be gui^tie. Qui non prohibet cum
potest jubet. A thing most monstrouslie erroneous as applied to God, as Aug.
lib. 5. adversus Jul. Pelag Nos cert^ eos in quos nobu potestas est, ^i an^e
oculos nostros perpetrare sce^era permittamus, rei cum ipsis erimus; Quam vero
innumerabilia ille permittit fieri ^nte ocu^os suos, quae utique sivoluisset,
nulla ratione permitteret, and tamen justus and bonus est.
Austin, reason and experience show. 2. You take the Almighty off from all kind
of praedetermination and ruling of perchance more then the thousandth part of
the actions which are done in the world, which, the whole world lying in sin (1
John 5. 19.) are rather evil then good. You allow him only an after game,
when cursed men have played out their play to make the best (you force me now
so to speak) of a bad b^rgaine; for say you he disposes and and orders them to
the best advantage (viz.) when they are done, as is plain according to you,
not before they be done: And then welfare Castalianisme Vide Felic^s Turpionis
praef. in Dialog. Sebast. Castellionis, p. 12. edit* in 120. Aresdorfi^i, An.
1578.
and Socinianisme. 3. Then clearelie (which you say you will not do p. 5.)
^ourob God of his efficiency in many acts which are naturally good. For then,
1. God in whom we live and move and have our being (Acts 17.) who give us
(...), is not the sole supreme cause of any of these things, if once by the
fault of the creature per accidens, sin do but cleave to them. 2. God may not
nor does at any time punish sin with sin, contrary to Romans 1. 24. 1. These.
2. 9, 10. or do any of those many things, which even by Arminius, Arminius and
others, I have elsewhere transcribed at large, look after them, Armin. Disp.
9. pub. Tilenus in no less then 8 positions in Collat. cum camerone. The
Remonstrants in script is Synodal^bus, who as they do all confute the
aequitable sense, so let Austin shut up the rear in proving Gods punishing
sin with sin, and pleading for other acts of Gods providence about sin,
lib. 5* contra Julian. Pelag. cap. 3. Per totum fer me caput. Nec tacetur de
coecitate Israel. Quar^? donec plenitudo gentium, inquit Romans 11. intraret,
nisi sortiter istam poenam negabis esse, quam si lucis internae amator* esses,
non solum aliquam, sed valde magnam poenam esse clamares. A^ ista caecitas suit
judae is grande incredulitatis malu^, and grandis causa peccati, ut occiderent
Christum. Jam istam caecitat^m, si poena fuisse negaveris, simil^m te perpeti
etiam non confitens indica^is. Similia habe^us passim al^bi.
Tilenus and others, are granted for the avoiding of Atheism in the denial of
Gods sovereign providence to belong to him. 4. You would make us believe that
God has no other ways of withholding us from sin, but by destroying us,
robbing us of our free will, turning us into stocks, uncreating his creature:
Which if so, pray what becomes 1. Of al Gods diverting ways, by common and
special providence? 2. Of all his restraining ways by Laws, inward fears?
etc. his ways of conviction by common graces? Heb. 6. Besides, what is done by
arts and civilities, didicisse fideliter arts? etc. 4. What of his converting
ways of the worst of sinners, when ex nolentibus, he makes them volen^es? 5.
Of his preservatives of the good Angels, who per magis auxilium, by the
super-addition of greater grace preserved in their first station, which surely
if it had pleased God, he could have given unto man also for the preventing of
his fall? 6. Of his timely taking men out of the world, or translating them to
glory, lest as the ancients were used to say our of Ecclesiastic. Malitia
mutaret in^ellctum ejus? If any of these ways of hindering sin, tend to the
destruction of free will, I beseech God demolish that Idol as much in me, as
ever Moses did the Golden Calfe, when he beat it to powder, Exodus 32. 20. 2. As
for what you in the second place quote out of Mr Hooker, I am sure enough of
it, were it not that you were a Platonic lover (you see I borrow a fine phrase
from you, p. 24. (rather of his Ecclesiastical policy, then of his Divinity,
you would not have made him your spokesman, who says nothing to God's mere
speculative permission of evil. I think you would rather have snibbed him for
his so profuse commendation of Calvin, as you know we have had out of him. 2.
All that he says, has been most readily consented unto by men, because in
another Class of Church-policie, less liked by you Let one, who has been
long an Advocate for Protestants, speak in his w^y for the rest, D^ Ames.
Rescript. schol. ad Grevinch^. cap. 3. D^^o igitur quod and antea dixi, recte a
scholasticis haec ita exponi, ut non sit assignanda causa divinae voluntatis ex
part actus volend^, quamvis potest ^ssignari ratio ex part vol^torum in
quantum scilicet Deus vult esse aliquid propter aliud, Th. 1. q 23. a. 5. Quo
sensu recte etiam dicunt, Deus vult hoc esse propter hoc, sed non propter hoc
vult hoc. q. 19. a. 15. illud ordinationem unius rei ut causae ad aliam
affectam notat, hoc vero motum ipsius voluntatis divinae ab externo medio, quod
jure dixi indignum Deo and (...)
: For what says he in effect but this? 1. That though considering all
inferior causes and things, as they stand in subordination to God, his
absolute will is the cause of them; yet as they stand in relation to each
other, so they have many other causes and laws besides God's absolute will. In
a word, God's absolute will is the sole cause of the making of his decrees;
(and it is Atheistical to say otherwise, even Arminius himself being judge
Armin. Disp. publ. 4. These. 51. Non movetur a causa externa ut velit, non ab
^fficiente alio, non a fine, qui extra ipsum sit, ne ab objecto quidem quod non
sit ipse Etrecte Augustinus (apud Lombard. l. 1. d 45.) Qui causam quaerit
voluntatis divinae, aliquid majus ^a quaerit, cum nihil ea majus sit. Et si
habeat causam voluntas, est aliquid quod antecedit voluntatem Dei, quod ne^as
est credere.
but there be many causes besides of the execution of his decrees. If to this
true and undeniable assertion, you would but take in what all your adversaries
will as willingly yield unto you; that God in his absolute decrees, the results
of his will and wisdom and praescience, does not only determine all things
and actions, but their several modalities too, as to the manner of their
being, whether as necessary, contingent or voluntary, (and so that his decrees
are the supreme cause not only of all necessity, but of all contingencie and
voluntarinesse too (q). I know, you Deus ordinat omnia ut proprios motus
exercere sinat. August. Tho. Aquin. Ordo praedestinationis est certus, and
tamen libertas arbitrii non tollitur ex qua contingenter provenit
praedestinationis effectus. Idem Aquinas ad object. ad art. 4. de provident. In
hoc est immutabilitas and certus divinae providentiae ordo, quod ^a quae ab
ipso providentur cuncta eveniunt eo modo quo ipse providet, sive necessario
sive contingenter.
out of your Jac. Arm^n. would not keep such a pudder as you do, about
necessity and freedom, as if it were impossible they should proceed out of the
womb of one and the same decree, caderent omnes de crinibus hydrae, but of this
when I come to your, p. 47, 48. 3. As for what you say, p. 14. that no other
reason is known to us of Gods works, besides his absolute will, and that he
works all things according to the counsel of his will. 1. The latter part of
this saying is most true, and strenuouslie pleaded for by your enemies,
especially by Calvin Vide Calvinum fuse l. de praedestin. p. 700. and 728.
who was not so mad, as all along you would have the Christian world believe
he was, as to hold that Gods wills and decrees were absolute from all true and
right reason known to God, though from all known to us, or any other creatures
beyond what he is pleased to reveal unto us about them. 2. The former part of
your saying too, that no other is known to us, is a most rare and precious
truth. But as falling from your pen, I may well say,

(...). For it does directly overthrow all that you have in all your four
following Chapters, about the conditions (you might as well say causes) of
Reprobation, chap. 2. and of election, vocation, etc. Unto which purpose I
trust we shall make some good use of your own concession here. 4. That of
yours too is reallie true, that if he be pleased to set himself a law or rule,
not to reprobate any, but upon praescience of sin, that this can be no
prejudice to the perfection of his being. But 1. If he no where says so, but
the contrary rather, Mal. 1. 2. Romans 9. 11. or if by Reprobation, you do as
you should understand the mere denial of, or not electing to grace or glory;
you must not be so bold, as to say that he has made such a law Aug. compescat
se humana temeritas, and id quod est non quaerat, ne id quod est non inveniat.
and so give (O horrid!) your Maker the lie, because you phancie such a law
would have been most conformable to his goodness, from what you imagine fit,
to what ab aeterno was concluded by God. I am sure non valet consequentia, 2.
Nor is it probable. possible, or by rational men Imaginable, that what no
under-soveraignes will do here on earth (so far as it is in their power to
prevent it) the God of Heaven should condescend to do, viz. to be on^^^ a
mere Legislator of conditional decrees, laws, and statutes, but no absolute
Determiner in a sovereign way, and yet without sin, which it is impossible
for him to be capable of, of the several acts of obedience or disobedience in
relation to them. God belike did decree what should be de jure, but not at all
determine what should fall out de facto, a vastum and non Christianum
postulatum this sure. 3. As for your seeming concourse and compliance with most
reverend Beza, and for what you have any where else up and down your 15. p.
take all in short thus. 1. Had your agreement with him, not only in that
orthodoxe saying which you quote out of him, but also in other substantial
matters of your Creed been more and more cordial, you would by much have been
the better man, more useful to the Church, and your name would sound better in
all Christian Reformed Churches. 2. You are of the youngest, to say as once
Bellarmine of Calvin, utinam Calvinus sic semper errasset, as you wish of Beza,
that he had never spoke otherwise, unless you had invincible arguments to
prove, that very often he has spoken otherwise and worse. But perchance you
have out of him too, as well as out of his honored Colleague Mr Calvin, many
frightfull sayings quoted to the very page and line 11. of which you may one
day in your terrible contentions, make as good use as you have done of the
former, out of Calvin and Twisse, against your dreadful enemy, Sir N. N. 3.
If Beza (unto whom you may as well add the Synod of Dort All these do but upon
the matter, say what the Synod of Dort in their Judic. c^rca 3. and 4. Artic
Can. 16. S^cuti per lapsum homo ^on d^s^t esse homo, intellectu and voluntate
praeditus, nec peccatum quod universum genus humanum pervasi^, naturam generis
humani ^ustulit, sed depravav^^. and spiritualiter occidit, ita etiam haec
d^vina regenerationis gratia, non agit in homin^bus tanquam truncis and
s^ipitibus, nec voluntatem ejusque pro^rie^ates tollit, aut invitum violentex
cogit, sed spirituali^er vivificat, sanat, corrigit, suaviter ^imu^ ac poten^er
sl^ctit: ut ubi antea plene ^ominabatur carnis rebellio and resistentia, nunc
regnare incipiat prompia ac sincera spiritus obedientia; in quo vera and
spiritualis nostra vo^untatis instauratio and libertas consistit. And thus
before spoke our Articles, Edw. 6. Art. 10. Gall^c. Art. 1623 Chap 3. 22. Irish
of the year 1615. Art 28.
the Gallican Articles, the English and Irish Articles, besides many more of
the rest of Reformed Churches) were for no compulsion of the will, no turning
it into a wooden Engine, etc. then you deal most unworthily with Beza
elsewhere, and with your neighboring Sympresbyters, who neither have, or are
known to have any other opinions about these matters, then Beza had, when you
compare them to Marcionites, Stoics, Manichees, Turks, etc. p 55. 4. In what
sense you, first, Hold praedestination to be in Christ, I shall speak when I
come to your p. 56. 2. And how impossible it is for you in any true Christian
sense, to maintain what here you say and approve of, that in our conversion,
God of willing makes us willing, I shall then and there (God whling) make plain
too. You must find a deleatur for the greatest part of your fourth and fifth
Chapters, or betake your self to some Pelagian or Neophotinian glosses, in the
expounding of these phrases Viz. Some such trim one as Pelagius was wont to
give when he was hard put to it. Aug. lib. 1. de great. Christi contra Pelag. c.
7. a. 41. Quam gratiam nos non ut tu putas, in lege tantum modo, sed and in Dei
esse adjutorio confitemur. Adjuvat enim nos Deus per doctrinam and Revelationem
suam, dum cord^s nostri oculos aperit, dum nobis ne proesentibus occupemur
futura demonstrat, dum Diaboli pandit insidias, dum nos mult^formi and
ineffab^li dono gratiae coelestis illuminat. Qui haec dicit (and happily T. P.
will hardly say so much) gratiam tibi videtur negare. An and liberum hominis
arbitrium and Dei gratiam confitetur?
. 3. Though the means in order to Reprobation (you speak most absurdlie,
Condemnation you should say; for Reprobation is an eternal immanent act of
God, and to speak properly, has no means in order to it) are none but evil,
as wicked men choose and pick them out, who are said to love death, Prove. 8.
36. yet in the Almighty, the voluntary permission of those means to fall out,
is not evil, unless you will say it is evil in God to give men up to strong
delusions, 2 These. 2. 11, 12. that they should believe a lie, that they all
might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.

Ad Sect. 13. p. 16. Answer to S. 13. p. 16.
AFter a mighty conquest obtained against your frightful chimaericall
adversary, the often mentioned Sir Nicolas Nemo, by Scripture and Reason; for
not so much as the very Libertines (against whom your rea^l adversary, Mr
Calvin, with much gallant theological animosity, made up himself in several
books, for maintaining as they did, sin to consist in a mere negation, not
(as indeed it does) in a privation, and so to have neither (as is impossible)
an efficient, but not so much as a deficient cause, the defic^ent wicked will
of man) did offer to maintain God to be the Author of sin, but that Sir N.
N. was the doer of all, you fling your last killing stones at him, from the
authorities of Christians, of Jews, and Gentiles: Oh triumphant Mr T. P. the
mighty conqueror! But not to detract any thing from your valiant achievements
against your phantasticke adversary, give a poor suppliant leave to ask so
great a conqueror, 1. What reason you had to express so much reverence to the
Augustan Confession, when as one of the chief compilers of it, Ph. Melancthon,
of whom you and your party use to boast much, when you have small reason for
it, as we shall see when we come to your, p. 29. acknowledged the imperfection
of it? See Contra Remonstrantia secunda Lugduni Batavorum, 1617. p. 20. etc. Et
denuo multa huc ref^rentia lectu dignissi^a, and ad modum rara quae hic i^serta
fuissent ni marginis angustia prohibuisset a. p. 69. ad 71. All the Latter
Lutherans, and you with them, have reason to follow tha^ good counsel which
Reverend Bp Morton gives them. Sentent. D. Morton de pace Evangelica; eos
eba^xe ^r^ precorque (inquit ille) primum ut in hac causa ^n gratiam redire
v^lint cum suo Luthero, qui (prout decuit filium gratiae) gratiam D^^ omnimodo
gratuitam esse semper arcte ten^bat, accurateque d^fendebat D^inde ne patiantur
se ab ipsis Papistis etiam Jesuit^cae sectae doctoribus primarii* Bellarmino,
Toleto, Sua^zio, Salme rono, Maldonat^, in gratiae d^vinae patrocinio and
propugnatione superari, a quibus doctrina d^ praedestinatione ex praevisione
fidei aut ope^u^ tanquam purus putus Pel^ gianismus explosa est: post^emo non
ultima prudentiae laus est ex host utilitatem capere. Prodiit duobus abhinc
annis Liber Guil. de Gibiensse Ordinis Oratorii Presb. and doct. Sorb^nici
hodierno Papae Vrbano dicatus: in quo inseruntur verba Clementis octavi de aux
iliu gratiae Summa est, ^otam came doctrinam ad no^mam doct^inae sancti
Augustini de gratia astringi debere, eundem Augustinum ducem agnoscendum esse
atque sequendum.
when as not only, the four Imperial Cities of Argentorat, Constance,
Memming, and Lindow, but the Protestant party in the Kingdom of Bohemia,
Moravia, the Marquesdome of Baden, the Earldom of Emden, and East Friezland,
did do the like, and did declare their mind in the Controversall points, to
be just the same with that of the Contra-Remonstrants in Belgia, with whom did
join the Churches of the principality of Bipont, the Lantgrave of Hassia, of
the Republique of Bremen, and of the Electorate of Brandeburg, and especially
the Churches under Fredericus Pius, who in the public Imperial Diet, held at
Augusta in the year 1566. did declare that he did indeed continue in the faith
of the Augustane confession, but as a fuller and exacter explanation of it, did
add the Catechism of Heidelberg. 3. When as the Protestant Churches of
Palatinate, in the Newstad Admonition (p 18.) did complain that it was plain
by the History of the Augustane Confession, and by many of Luther and
Melancthon's Epistles, that there were many Articles which should have been
expressed in that confession, but were omitted, because they were accounted
odious by some, and might have cast in some impediment to the whole business
of Religion, amongst which yet verily there be some, concerning which, it were
necessary to have the Churches Declaration, as (viz.) of Providence, of
Freewill, of the Politic Domination of Bishops, with the causes of Divine
election, etc. And from thence it is evident that the perfection of the
Augustane Confession, was not so great as some Divines took it to be, and that
therefore the Church would be ill provided for, if she were alone to depend
upon it, as the sole Rule of all Ecclesiastical Doctrine. 4. Though your very
good friends (whom yet disingenuously enough, p. 4. you have no mind to own)
the Low Country Remonstrants, when they were picking out of that Confession as
much for themselves, as possibly they could gather; yet poor men, they bring in
but this sorry crop as making for them, that the Augustane Confession did not
forsooth in this matter, teach the Contra-Remonstrants opinion Remonstr.
secunda Lug. Bat. p 17. Quae (viz Augusta^a Confessio) in hac materia Contra
Remonstra^tium confessi^nem non docer.
. And sure enough it is that it taught not the Remonstrants. 5. That when as
your self in your first papers, p. 9, 10. upon another occasion had commended
the Ratisbone Synod, and the Augustane Confession, and yet as I have there
largely showed, are forced to recede from them both. See my first Answer, p. 4.
But as Mr Hoard, Mr Mason* See Dr Twisse against them. p. 87. and give reverend
Bp D^venant, in his Animadversions p. 61. leave, gravely to read you a
Ca^o^icall check for this. If you embrace the Lutherans opinion, and bring
within the compass of the P^aedest^nary Pestilence, the Doctrine of
praedestination, which they disallow, you mani^estly brand the Church of
England with this note of infamy, and might as well charge us with the
Sacramentary P^stilence, for denying their feigned Consubstantiation, as with
the praed^stinary pest^lence, for denying their conditional praedestination
upon foresight of men's belief in Christ.
and all of the English Arminian faction before you, had against all good
Conscience and Reason, asserted much like the same with you, that the 39
Articles of the English Church, have the greatest regard and conformity to that
Confession, which is so untrue, as that (blessed be God) the Articles of our
Church fill up the vacuities of that Confession, in the matters complained of
by the Palatines, and were drawn up (as says Bp Carleton) against Mont.
Ex^minat. of appeal, chapter 2. a principio.
by men adhering in those matters, more to the principles of the first
Lutherans, then to the principles of the latter: So you in a special manner
out of love to the Mass of Ceremonies, left in the Lutheran Churches (and alas
as you cry out now with much ado, cast out of our Mother English Church!)
thought it reasonable out of love to that Ceremonious litter, rather then out
of any real compliance with the doctrines of the first and best Lutheran
Reformers, to express your reverentiall consent to the Augustane Confession.
2. As for the greater reverence which I am sure you owe, and here express to
bear to our own 39. Articles of the Protestant Reformed Church of England, I
were easily able to prove it (were it not for over-glutting my Reader) that you
are no better friend in the points under debate, to the Articles of the Church
of England, then once your great but unsuccessfull friends, Barnaveld, your
admirable Grotius were to the Articles of their Belgicke Confession, who being
the politic Leaders of their true followers, the Remonstrant faction, they
put them fiercely upon stickling for a Revision of their Confession and
Catechism, etc. Vide praefationem ad Synod. Dordrac.
I say I must needs beseech you, how troublesome soever it might prove to you,
to crave your proofs of this your veneratio^ of the doctrine of our own English
mother Church. Whether hope you to prove this (as certain it is you may
easily do it the clean contrary way) by your consent to the Articles of the
Church, published in King Edward the 6. days, An. 1551? 2. Or by your
Approbation of a writing in the fiery bloody days of Queen Mary, signed by
the blessed Martyrs, Bradford, Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, in opposition to
one Henry Heart, who with opinions, the very same with yours now, troubled the
consciences of poor imprisoned Martyrs? 3. Or not helping your self with any
Francisco-Clarian gloss, by giving the true sense of the 39. Articles,
published by the Convocation in 1562. Art 9, 10, 13. Art. 17. etc? 4. Or by
demonstrating of your allowance of the 9. Articles of Lambeth, agreed on,
November 20. 1595? 5. Your concurrence with the Articles of the Church of
Ireland, 1615. especially with their 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Articles? 6. Or by
gliding along with the stream of the Authors of the greatest note and renown
in our Church, opposing Barret and Baro, and since with all the eminent
Authors, Bishops, Bp Carletons examination of the Appeal, p. 8, 9. When our
Church was disquieted by Barret and Baro (as now by T. P.) the Bishops that
then were in our Church, examined the new Doctrine of these men, and utterly
disliked and rejected it. And in the point of Predestination confirmed that
which they understood to be the Doctrine of the Church of England against
Barret and Baro, who oppugned that Doctrine. This was fully declared by both
the Archbishops, Whitgift of Canterbury, and Hutton of York, with the other
Bishops and Learned men of both Provinces, who repressed Barret and Baro,
refuted their Doctrine, and justified the contrary, as appears by that book,
which both the Archbishops then co^piled. Good Mr T. P. read on to the end of
that Bishops Chapter, upon my honest word it may b^e much for your edification;
and others, in our Church, appearing against the late Arminian Montacutian
faction? Truly, Sir, if your book can be by you maintained to agree with all
these, (who certeinelie very well understood the doctrine of their own Church,
and bore as great a reverence to it, as your self, or any of your party) then
eris tu mihi magnus Apollo, I will lay down the bucklers, with a profession
too, that when the Commons assembled in Parliament, Jan. 29, An. Dom 1628.
entered this following Remonstrance into their journall book, they meant to
testify their agreement with you and your party. We the Commons now in
Parliament assembled, do claim, profess, and avow for true, that sense of
the Articles of Religion (which were established by Parliament, in the 13.
year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth) which by the public Acts of the
Church of England, and by the general and current exposition of the Writers of
our Church, has been delivered to us, and do reject the sense of the
Jesuits, and Arminians, and all others wherein they differ from us. But all
this will be done by you, as soon as an Eagle will swim, or a Dolphin fly.

Virg. A me leves ergo volitabunt in aethere Cervi. Well may you be able to
show your front in the undertaking Aug. centra Jul. lib. 1. Mirum si in facie
homin^s tantum intervallum sit inter frontem and linguam, (...) hac causa s^^ns
non compr^ma^ lingua^*
, but you will show no force in the Conquest. 3. I even skip for joy, at your
referring your Reader to the citations which follow your first inference, Sect.
18. whereby you sufficiently intimate, that they are but brought in there as
fresh Auxiliaries, coming in toward another fierce Battalio, which you wage
with your once conquered enemy, Sir, N. N. in this Chapter, from thence all
along (though you do foulie asperse your real enemies, but the Churches, and
my real friends) I may safely conclude, I may forbear all over-anxious pains
about those authors, which the necessity of the cause by me defended against
you, will not require, however something may be said to stop the mouth of your
importunity: You your self give me a supersedeas (when here you tell me to
what purpose you produce them) from troubling of my self much about them, who
with them from my sold, detest your hatred against Sir N. N. assertion, but
have no mind to be employed in the resolving of the Question, An chimaera
bombinans in vacuo comedat secundas intentiones?

To chap. 2. and especially to the front and rear of the chapt. sect. 14. and
20. p. 17. and 31. with chap. 3. sect. 35. p. 46.

YOU had so valiantly with Scripture, Reason and Authority, beaten Sir N. N.
out of the field, for maintaining God to be the Author of sin, in your first
chapt. as that in this and up and down in your third, taking spirits to your
self, after your victorious achievements, you adventure against God, against
the Ancients, against Reason, against Arminius, against your very self, to
start up another proposition, viz. That man himself is the sole ^fficient
cause of his eternal punishment. This it seems you resolve in the two next
following Chapters, to defend contraomnes gentes sive Ethnicas sive
Christianas, and that by Scripture, Reason, and Authority. In this, certainly
Hortensius noster sufflaminandus est. And ergo that your courage may be a
little cooled, I crave leave before I clear it, that in this undertaking you
fight against God, good men, and even your self. 1. To ^u^ up your memory
with the old observation, that Qui been distinguit been docet, He who
distinguishes well, teaches well, which had you minded, you would not all
alongin these two Chapters, have confounded the Efficient, or as I may say, the
making cause of all punishment, cujus vi res est, with the meritorious or
procuring cause, ob quam res est, of all punishment, whether temporal or
eternal, The first is the Almighty himself; for that must needs hold true,
Amos the 3. 6. shall there be evil in the City and the Lord has not done it?
2. The second is only the sinful will of man and Devils; for that in another
Prophet will hold as firmly, Hos. 13. 5. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy
self, but in me is thy help. 2. I beg leave to tell you, that p 46. sect. 35.
even there where you are giving in the Summa totalis of al your conquests,
obtained in these two Chapters, your gallant spirit seems to sink into your
heels; for whereas you begin with saying, p. 17. sect. 14. that man himself is
the sole efficieut cause of eternal punishment, you only conclude, sect. 35.
p. 46. Conclus. 2. That sin is properly the cause of its punishment, which may
full out as well be understood of a meritorious or procuring cause, as a
properly efficient or working cause. 2. Nay you your self in your next
Conclus. 3. Ibid. do seem to allow a man leave so to interpret it, when you
say, p. 46. that man is the procurer of his own misery, which if so, are you
not then again at cuffes with your Chimaericall Sir N. N. And do not you who
complain, sect 16. p. 20. of odd fashions and modes of speech, speak out of
all fashion your self, whilst you interpret an efficient cause, by a procuring
or meritorious cause? 3. Are you any thing mindful (O my good friend, and Mr
T. P.) of putting (according to your promise, p. 7. sect. 5.) your care, your
very best care to it, of connecting your praemises and conclusions aright
together? For surely (to use a phrase of some of your very doctrinall friends)
non Remonstrantes in praef. Apol.
sapiunt haec demorsus augues. 1. God all along throughout chap. 1. has been
proved not to be the Author of sin, ergo, it may be concluded all along in
this 2 and 3 Chapters, that he is not, or cannot be the author and determiner
of punishments for sins. Or 2. p. 46. Man is the procurer of his own misery,
(viz.) in time, for miserable he could not be, nor procure misery before all
time. Non ens nullas habet affectiones veloperationes. Ergo, 2. Reprobation (an
internal, eternal, immanent act in God, if you do but allow of any aeternall
Reprobation, and if not, speak out, Loquere ut intelligamus) is a conditional
thing before all time. Take you (who begin this Chapter something
Mathematicallie, p. 17.) these Ergo's to be as firm as any Mathematical
demonstrations in Euclide; surely if his be no more conclusive, scholars will
never give him leave with one for joy to cry out, (...), or with another to
boast, Da ubi constem and terram movebo Rami praef. in scholas Mathemat.
. These observations will be of use to us, to save us a great deal of pains
throughout the Chapters, and therefore here I thought fit to premise them. And
now I come as briefly as may be to clear it, that your assertion as it lies
in the head and tail of your second Chapter, p. 17. and 31. and as all along
it seems to be explained by you, fights against God, Scripture, etc. 1. Against
God. 1. You having dared by the by, and that by virtue of that mere
speculative providence, the all which your equitable sense, p. 14, 15. will
allow to God about the evil of sin, to deprive God of his soveraigntie, you
do here like some Orlando Furioso deprive him of his judiciary or justitiary
power too. For if he be not so much as the efficient cause of man's eternal
punishment, which he justly determines to inflict upon reprobate sinners, how
does he judge the world in righteousness? Romans 3. 6. shall not the judge of
all the world do right? Genesis 18. 25. Quae (to assert) non sani esse hominis,
non sanus juret Orestes. 2. Why may you not as well say, that God is not the
author of any temporal punishments, of famine, pestilence, or the sword, or
wild beasts, etc. as say, that Tophet or hell torments are not prepared by him,
or wrought by him? Isa. 30. 33. Romans 1. 18. and 2. 5. 6. 9. Is he author of the
smaller punishments, and not of the greater? 2. Upon Scripture-grounds it falls
out most irrational. 1. To make reprobated, condemned creatures not only
meritors of their hell and unexpressible torments, but makers, creators,
efficients of them also: If so, sure their very Hell if of their own making,
would be cool enough, nothing so hot as Popish purgatory, which some say, does
only in Bellarmine.
duration differ from hell torments. But we know otherwise, Romans 2. 9. 2 These.
1. 9. 2. Do the Judges of the earth or parents in the world leave it to
malefactors or to their children, so much as to choose, and then less to be the
efficients of their gibbets, racks, rods? etc. and must man now be the sole
efficient cause of his eternal punishment? This (to speak with an
Anticalvinisticall friend of yours, upon that score, dear to you, with whom
you jumpe much in your railing rhetoric, p. 12, 13, 24.) is absurdorum
absurdissimum. Albertus Graveru^ libro cui Titulus, Calvino. Turcismus.
3. This is as much against all Authority, both, 1. See this Answer before, in
answer to your Sect. 8. and (if you can get him) reverend Mat. Eborac. de
electione and reprob. Histor Gott^shal. edit. Vsserian. passim. B. Fulgen. ad
Monim. lib. 1. After that he had paraphrased upon that place which you abuse
(p. 21.) out of Wisd. Quod ante Gehennam mali pereunt, non est divini operis;
sed humani, qood autem in Gehenna perituri sunt hoc facit Dei aequita^, cu^
nulla placet peccantis iniquitas. Non ergo praedest^n^^^ sunt mali ad hoc,
(...) operantur, a (...) sua abstract^ and (...) sed ad hoc, qu^d j^s^e
^^^untur inviti.
That of the Ancients, as we have seen before from Austin, the Valentinian
Council; unto which, if need were, might be joined multitudes of sayings out
of Fulgentius, Prosper, and others, all conjunctim and divisim, agreeing God to
be the efficient of no man's sin, but of every man's punishment for sin,
whether temporal or eternal. 2. So also even of the latter, of your very
Arminius, and his good followers, who as I remember somewhere, is so frank in
the maintaining God to be the author or the efficient of all punishment, even
then when as he punishes sin with sin, as that (which I know you yet
wonder at) his good friend and yours, Dr Twisse, is forced somewhat to check
him for his too free offerings. 4. Nay, in this, you who should best understand
your self (and want not for high conceits of your own quick apprehension) do
not once or twice, but very often, in this and the next Chapter contradict your
self, and your own proposition, set down by you, p. 17. 1. Whilst in Terminis
you diverse times say, that God inflicts eternal punishment, p. 21. Is he who
has the supreme power of life and death, in the inflicting of that punishment,
deputy to any? Apage blasphemia^? Does he inflict that punishment, of which
some body else was the maker, and he only the executioner? 2. Whilst by your
distinction of antecedent and consequent will, (for which you quote
Chrysostom, Theodoret, and Damascene, p. 26, 27, 69*) you grant often, p 20.
That God will have every man perish that is impenitent, and will he not do
that of which he is the willer and determiner? You then cross your self, who
diverse times grant God to be the doer of all that which he wills and determines
to be done (h). 3. Whilst you do most nobly grant, p. 23. that unto God,
Romans 12. 19. belongs vengeance, and he repaies it, gives it wages, which as
you say, sinners have dearly earned; and does he pay this out of a treasury of
his own making or filling, or out of that which was made to his hand? All
these Escapadoes of yours, I can according to your request, be content to put
up, and ascribe, p. 8. to the unhappiness of your pen, or the unsteadinesse of
your brain; Siquidem nemo sapit omnibus horis, always provided, you will not
think it necessary for me to be long in the confutation of what you produce
from the beginning to the end of the Chapter, toward the support of that wild
Thesis of yours, set up in the front of it, p. 17. 2. And if the reader will be
but of the same opinion and faith with you; (as truly he may well be) for why
should I be largely elaborate in the beating down of that which falls by its
own absurdity, so soon as ever it is mentioned, which the very author and
father of it, ownes and disownes, says and unsaies? As Saturn of old,
begetting, and then devouring of his own children Vide L. Vivem. Aug. de
civitate Dei.
. I trust then both parties will be agreed, that I may without any prejudice
to my cause, quickly skip over the rest of the Ecstatick extravagant lines and
leaves, which follow in this Chapter. The thing in it to be defended, was, p.
17. that man himself is the sole efficient cause of his eternal punishment;
but for all his complaining upon another occasion indeed on no occasion of
skipping from the first Question to the second, p. 66. instead of fighting for
that, he does so fly, and that praeter casam too, or to use his own phrase,
he shoots, p. 15. so far beyond what he aims at, that he loses his mark
quite, and starts up I cannot tell how many impertinent questions besides,
about Gods universal will to save all, p. 17. Christ's universal will to dye
for all, p. 18, 19. Gods not intending to damn any, or actually damning any but
for sin (a thing readily granted him by the crabbedest among all the rabble
of halfe-witted praedestinarians, as he calls them, 1. Papers, p. 10.) See Dr
Twisse's Answer to Mr Hoard, p. 8 and centies alibi per vindicias gratiae, etc.
.

I for my part, love not, like not, Sectari cor vos testa lutoque, to follow my
gentleman Starter to the utmost bounds of all his roving and wandering
vagaries. Yet lest he should give out, that I have handsomely swallowed all
which he brings in (though praeter propositum) in this Chapter; take all in
short thus, to the several Sections of the Chapter, as they follow in order,
Respons. ad Sect. 1. p. 17.
from p. 17. to 32. and so to the end of the Chapter. 1. It is plain, that
Sect, 1. p. 17. your Greek Ammonius, in Joh. 8. neither our English Hooker, 1.
5. Sect. 72. speak any thing for your purpose; for whosoever casts but any
careful eyes upon their words in your margent, will quickly see that they will
be understood of what men by their ill manners procure for themselves, as, so a
fools back calls for stripes, Magister Sentent. lib. 3. did. 4. Dicuntur filii
Gehennae non ex illa nati sed in illam praeparati.
and not of what they are the efficient of by the workmanship of their own
hands. 2. You speak first impertinently, when you say that the devil only
incites, proposes objects, and persuades unto sin; for now the question is,
not what he does about sin, but what kind of actour he is in the punishment
of sin. 2. You speak falsely, when in reference to punishment, you deny the
Devil to be an efficient, when both his will and hand is in it, as an
instrument under God, in inflicting of punishment, Heb. 2. 14. Isntrumental
causes, as is known, use to be reckoned among secondarie efficient causes.

. 15. p. 17, 18, 19.
THE Scriptures belike out of Ezekiel. 33. 11. Ezekiel. 18. 32. 2 Pet. 3. 9. 1 Timothy
2. 4. 1, 2, 6. Romans 2. 4, 5. 1. Tim. 4. 10. 2 Cor. 6. 14. 2 Pet. 2. 1. did
meet-your pen so quickly, perchance came so fast tumbling in to you (if I may
so speak) as that you hardly considered whence they came, or what you would
have them to speak for you: I must therefore needs say, that they say not one
word for you, that God is not, or may not be the sole efficient cause of
eternal punishment; if by them (as you should do) you do understand a sole
supreme sovereign cause, according to whose determination and arbitriment,
that punishment is inflicted; for will it follow even amongst men? The judge
likes not simply that men should perish; a father takes no delight to whip a
child. Ergo, The Judge is not the efficient cause of the hanging of a
malefactor, or the father is not the efficient of the child's whipping. To small
purpose therefore did these Scriptures so quickly meet your pen, and make
their appearance before you. 2. If you would rifle your Concordance and memory
never so much, you, nor any of your Semi-pelagian, or Arminian fraternity, are
able to bring in stronger for the proving of Gods universal saving love,
Christ's universal redemption of all mankind, for which they seem to say
something, but indeed say nothing; and that has so oftentimes been cleared by
an innumerable company of valiant champions of Jesus Christ against Pelagians
Pel. g Vult inquit omnes ad agnitionem veritatis venire: sic citato C. Jansenio
in suo Aug. lib. 19. cap. 15. Tom. secundum Agust. cont. Julianum c. 8. Prosp.
Carmin. de ingratis, c. 8. Cum sine delectu, seu lex seu gratia Christi omnem
hominem servare velit, Dominique vocantis sic sit propositum, ut nullus non
possit ad illud liberate proprioque vigore venire, sitque salus dignis salvari
ex font volendi.
Massilians Massilians Prosper in Epistola ad Augustine. Deus vult omnes homines
salvos fieri, etc. Quantum ad Deum pertinet omnibus paratam vitam aeternam. And
thus he explaines their meaning. Carmin de ingratis, ut cunctos vocet, ille
^uidem, invitetque, nec ullum praeteriens studeat communem offe^re salutem
omnibus and totum peccato absolvere mundum.
Arminians, and also somewhat by my self, in answer to your first writing,
(for most of them use to be their great fortresses and bulwarks) as that I am
even almost ashamed, as well as weary of delivering in the old and sound
answers often given to them. Yet 4. Seeing it must needs be to stop the mouth
of your importunity, take for answer, a little to each scripture. 1. That out
of Ezekiel. 33. 11. with 18. 32. should not have been produced by you, who
oftentimes grant, that God, by his consequent will, wills the eternal
punishment of sinners, who stand it out against his antecedent will, as you
call it. 2. You ought not so lightly to prefer the vulgar Translation of the
Romish Church, before our better English translation of our own mother Church,
when as the Hebrew word (...) is as indifferent, for being translated by
pleasure, as by will. 2. For that in the place, Ezekiel. 18. 32. (...) is far
better translated by non cupio, then by nolo, by I have no pleasure, then by I
will not. For that in the words (and the like is too in those of Ezekiel. 33. 11.)
there seems to be a manifest comparison, non tam quam, God professing that he
does more delight in the conversion of a sinner, Luke 15. 7. then in the
destruction of an impenitent. 3. It appears by the series and scope of both
texts, that the utmost that will be wrung out of them, is but what the Belgicke
Annotations have excellently well upon Ezekiel. 33. 11. have I any pleasure, as
you do think and complain, that I am inamoured with your death, though you
should repent your selves of your wickedness: As if it were all one with me,
whether you did repent or no, whatsoever you do, whither well or ill, you must
however be dispatched, as ungodly murmurers and hypocrites use to speak And as
those who devised the heresy of the praedestinatians as they call it, and
charged it upon Austins followers. Genebrard in Chronico sub loc. mihi (inquit
ille) dicebant, quod nec pie viventibus prosit bonorum operum labor, Si a Deo
ad mortem praedestinati fuerint: nec impiis obsit quod improbe vivant, si a Deo
praedestinati fuerint ad vitam. Quae assertio and bonos a bonis avocabat, and
malos ad mala provocabat.
. Compare above Chap. 18. 23. with the Annotation. This true explication of
these places, you belike will not down with; for if you did, what would become
of those impious invectives which you put, p. 12, 13. into the mouth of such
kind of clients of yours, or of that worse then diabolical wittily wicked
comparison, p. 24. of Gods platonic loving of so excellent a creatures
everlasting misery, of his being an (...), ibid. worse then the very Devil
himself, avaunt, avaunt, depart from me O thou satanicall blasphemer, qui
diabolum ipsum blasphemando superas, Mat. 16. 23. thou art an offense unto me;
for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men. 2.
Nor makes any thing for the proving that God loves all men alike to salvation,
2 Pet. 3. 9. (for that sure is the business which now you are upon, or else
neither can I, nor you, neither tell what you are about) when as it is plain,
1. By the very words of the place, that that speaks of believers, of pure
minds, ver. 1. of the beloved and elect of God, ver. 8. God is long suffering
to such, to usward. 2. And if God did alike will the repentance of all, if that
do but hold true, that Psalm. 135. Quicquid voluit fecit, surely he would give
them all repentance unto life, Acts 11. 1. 3. Though the Pelagians, Massilians,
and Arminians, swagger a great deal more with 1 Timothy 2. 4, 6. urged by you, as
well as by them, for the former purpose; yet it does you no service at all, for
that the letter it self says no more, but that God will have all men (...),
to be saved, salvos fieri, which implies the duty which in the use of means
God would have them to be employed about, and which when effected, he is well
pleased with Mat. 10. and Mar. 15. in sacris literis (...) est aeternam salutem
consequi.
not (...), salvos facere, which implies what he will effect and do. 2. By
the scope of the Apostle and his own explication, ver. 1. the words are most
pertinently expounded of some, of all sorts of men, whether Rulers or Subjects;
the rather for that we know that we are not without some kind of limitation,
always to pray for all, 2 Timothy 4. 14. Gal. 5. 12. Rev. 6. 10. 1 John 5. 16 3.
Your Fryarlike put-off, of this latter exposition, though true enough, and
ancient enough Qui omnes homines vult salvos fieri, etc. non quod nullus
hominum esset quem salvum esse nollet, sed ut omnes homines, omne genus humanum
intelligamus, per quascunque differentias distributum, Reges, privatos,
nobiles, ignobiles, etc. Aug. Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 3.
I am very apt to believe you are the more tickled with, for that it is so
opposite to that odious opinion of your adversary, Calvin, which is as you say
(in your first papers, but which as I am sure you will never prove) that all
the Caesar's are in hell. 4. If it had pleased you, and the Comicall Friar
together, you might as well have concluded with Chrysostom. That few Kings go to
Heaven, because in all there be but few, and of those, but few that know what
belongs to their place, or discharge a good conscience in it. Insomuch, that
the same Chrysostom. used to say, That all the Kings which are saved, may be
written within the compass of a ring. But this is harsh doctrine for Aulicall
ears; that of the Friar (you speak of) will go down much better. 5. You know,
(as appears by your p. 28.) that of old, there were no less then four
Expositions of this place, none of all which fits you, but that, which though
Austin seems disputandi causa, to be for, yet concludes against, before he
leaves it. 6. As for the emphasis, which you and others would put upon the
(...), v. 6. let no less then an Archbishop some hundred years ago, (for by
them more then by any, you love to have your mouth stopped) take off the edge
by the true exposition which he makes of it Hist. Gotteschal. Vsseri. p. 89.
Quod autem Dominum nostrum etiam pro impiis in sua impietate perituris mortuum,
uno similiter Apostoli testimonio confirmare videtur, quo ait, qui dedit
semet-ipsu^ redemptionem pro omnibus, profecto non recoluit, nec diligenter
co^sideravit, ita haec Apostoli verba esse accipienda, ut consonent Domini
verbis, quibus se in Evangelio ad boc venisse dicit, ut animam suam daret
redemptionem pro multis. Et de pretio sui sanguinis similiter ait, Qui pro
vobis and pro multis effunditur in remissionem peccatorum, etc. Quae porro
confirmantur ex Luc. 22. 20. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Heb. 9. 28. Romans 5. 18, 19.
from Mat. 20. 28. and 26. 28. Heb. 9. 28. Romans 5. 18. with 19. From Romans 2. 4,
5. produced p. 18. you can infer nothing, but that the works of Gods common
goodness and long-suffering, have in their nature a tendency to provoke men to
repentance, (...), and that God will take it well, if they be made use of to
this end. But they say not, that God has peremptorily decreed, that all men
shall make use of them to that end. You know, alius est finis operis, alius
operantis. Here to help you out, if you will make some kind of use of the
Antecedent and consequent will, which you talk of often, neither will I hinder
nor force wiser men then I A. Rivet. disp. 7. de great. universali, These. 26.
Nec tamen distinctionem illam rejicimus, si vere explicetur, vel ut Deus
dicatur id velle voluntate antecedente, quod apparet per se bonum and
expetendum secundum suam naruram absolute consideratam; consequente autem, quod
non per se, and secundum suam naturam tantum, sed and secundum omnes adjunctas
circumstantias, objectum bonum and expe^endum appareat, atque ita omnibus
consideratis simpli citer and proprie in divinam voluntatem cadit; vel ut
dicatur voluntas Dei antecedens, ordinatio causae ad effectum aliquem, licet
effectus, seu finis non sequatur; consequens autem, cum non solum Deus vult, id
est, ordinat and probat talia media ad finem consequendum, sed ea etiam vult
efficere.
. It is pretty, that in the drawing up of these first testimonies, by which
you think to have proved Gods equal and universal love to all men, you
someway slurre and disparage your own evidences; and yet in the gathering of
them together, though you used no concordance, yet that eloquent learned man,
Vossius (a man not very stable in the Arminian faith, as I shall show when I
come to your p. 25.) who 26. years ago, tied my ears to his most fluent
oratoriall tongue, was your concordance, or as you say, Expositor, from the
authority of the Ancients; but where I cannot tell; sure I am, not as your
margent directs, (whether by your own, or Printers mistake, I will not
dispute) lib. 6. These. 2. where I find no such matter; but in lib. 6. These.
10. I find he starts up a Thesis out of Austin, about absolute praedestination,
and preferring one by his grace, above another, which quite undoes all your
chapt. 5. Vossius lib. 6. these. 10. Caeterum Augustinus ut fortins premeret
Pelagium, communi patrum, and a se jam Episcopo defensae sententiae, appendicem
hanc annexuit, quod gratia uni prae alio offeratur, inque uno magis quam alio
efficax sit, id ab absoluto Dei decreto provenire. Hoc enim, cum deficere non
possit, eos omnes ac solos salvari, quibus Deus gratiam conversionis and
perseverantiam, absoluta salvandi voluntate destinavit.
By 1 Timothy 4. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 14. Romans 11. 32. 2 Pet. 2. 1. you seem to be upon
confuting of the haeresie (as you are pleased to call it, p. 38.) of Christ's
dying only for the elect; yet you never declare, whether you believe that
Christ dyed equally for the elect and reprobate; nor do you any where
enucleate what kind of benefits Christ by his death, has procured for
reprobates, as well as for the elect; (and yet you should know, that the hinge
of the controversy turns upon these matters) nor can you without monstrous
wronging your own conscience, and abominable slandring of your brethren, put
Helvidianisme upon them, as p. 19. for giving the lie to the very words of the
Text, as you have a good mind to asperse them with; who honest men and true as
they be, would only have you and others, interpret them aright, and not play
with the word (All) where ever you meet with it in Scripture; as he did, who
as some where I long since read of, standing on the port, booked down in his
Table book, all the ships as his, though not one of them belonged to him. Your
first out of 1 Timothy 4. 10. (in which note, that there is not one word of
Christ's death) belongs not to you, 1. Unless you can prove, that the former
part of your text, which has the word (...) in it, will not, as well as the
Greek verb (...) in the Septuagint, or the verb (...) in the Hebrew, be
understood as it is, Psalm. 56. 6. of a common providentiall salvation, by
virtue of Christ's mere divine power, as God, blessed for ever. In which sense,
if you please, you may be allowed to call him a general Savior, even of those
who are unbeleevers; and for this you may cite Heb. 1. 3. and many more places,
rather than of a mediatory salvation, as a daies-man or propitiator Job 9. 33.
procured only for the elect, and his mystical body, Acts 20. 28. 2. Unless
you can evince, contrary to the streine of other places, Gal. 6. 10. Phil. 4.
11. 1 Timothy 5. 17. and 4. 13. that the Adverb (...) in the latter part of the
Text, implies not such a distribution, as carries away all that, which is,
proprii nominis salvation, purchased by Christ to another sort of people, even
believers, when as those mentioned before, are to content themselves with a
common temporal salvation, common both to men and beasts, the evil and the
good, Psalm. 36. 6, 7. Mat. 5. 45. 3. Until you shall have taken into your
Creed, with your Copartners the Remonstrants Corvin. cont. Molin. c. 27
pronuntiat ad sect. 4. Se omnino credere futuru^ fuisse ut finis mortis Christi
constaret, etiamsi nemo cred. disset Exam. censur. p. 59. objecerant
Professores Letdenses, si hoc tantum meritus ^st Christus tum nobis non est
meritus fid^m nec regenerationem; respondent Remonstrantes, sane ita ^st; nihil
ineptius nihil vanius est quam hoc Christi merito tribuere: Sin, dicatur
meritus nobis fide^ and regenerationem, tum fides condi^io esse non poterat,
quam a peccatoribus Deus, sub comminatione mortis aeternae exigeret; imo tum
patet ex vi meriti istius obligatus fuisse dicatur necesse ad conferendum nobis
fidem.
and have proved it too, That it was no part of Christ's purchase by dying, for
to procure as well for his people, faith and repentance from dead works, by
which they are made good or gracious, Tit. 2. 13. as to procure a place for
them in heaven, when they shall cease to be obstinate unbeleevers, or upon
condition they will repent and believe, as you have it, p. 18 and so
consequently that it did wholly depend upon man's believing or unbeleeving, his
will to the one, or the other, whether Christ should not be an head without a
body, a King without subjects, a Shepherd without sheep, etc. Episcop. censur.
censurae: Neque vero necesse esse credit (ut ipse loquitur) ad hoc ut Christus
Rex sit, and caput maneat in terris, Ecclesiam al^quam veram semper esse, cum
regnum Christi, non subditorum voluntate, sed regnantis potestate definiri
debeat; and ea Ecclesia quae necessitate quadam, ecclesia est Christi,
spiritualis ecclesia esse nequeat, quippe quam obedientia sola, quae liberrima
esse debeat, constitu^re potest.
, For the by-blow which p. 19. you give unto Dr Twisse, (a man whose writings
you only peep into) And so deal with his writings, as some did with Austins,
against whom Jansenius inveighs in suo Augustino, Tom. 2. l. 1. That they
behave themselves as Hares insulting over a dead lion. Cujus libros nec cum
illa sedulitat^ qua oportebat, scire studuerunt, nec ullo modo little fundamenta
penetrarunt.
as it is plain, for to cavil at, and to snatch if it were possible, at some
advantageous passages, who had that Samson been alive, would more easily have
broken the strongest Cables of your Arguments, than ever Samson did break the
green withs; it hits him not at all, for that 1. He does not contradict (as is
plain by the following words) Vid^ R^spons ad Armin. praesat. 16. col. a.
that which he had said about the difficulty of answering the arguments
proposed by you, p. 19. l. 1. but he says, that the argument proposed by him,
according to such Arminian principles as we also do in part admit of, is
easily answered. 2. Because it would have been most improper for him, in an
answer to a Praeface of Bertius, to have there forestalled himself, in what
often in the body of the book, he makes his work, as he does in all his
writings, unto which yet, never so much as an essay has been made, having so
much as the face of a solid answer, returned by any of the great valiant
Herculean Leaders of your noble faction. 3. He was not such an Ignaro, as not
to have known, who as he tells you, in the very place which you quote (after a
misshapen fashion, as you do almost every thing, which you bring out of him
and others) before even Arminius was heard of, had heard that Argument usually
brought and answered in the Schools; and who knew well enough, that the first
thing that every sinner, to whom the Gospel is preached, is bound to believe,
is not that Christ died for him in particular, but that there is salvation in
no other, Acts 4. 12. and that Christ is the true Messiah, the son of the
ever living God. He as well as any body else Vide Collat. Hag. edit. Brand. p.
153.
could have told how to have retorted that Argument upon the adversaries; but
you must have leave to have a pluck at dead men's beards Dr Twisse his Apology
might all along be the same with Austins against Julian, the Pelag. l. 4 cap.
8. Tu autem vir honestus and verax, abstulisti verba quae dixi, and dixisti
quod ipse finxisti, read verba mea, and vanescet calumnia ^ua, etc.
. Your second Text, 2 Cor. 5. 14. from whence you draw up your formidable
Argument, (the only one in all your book, unless perchance that of p. 69.
may be thought to be such another) and which whether you have borrowed from the
Coryphaeus, the great leader of the Semipelagians Faustus Regius l. 1. de gra.
and lib. a* b. c. 16.
or from your much honored D. H. or from the great Universalist, Huberus Hub.
These. 48. Snecanus de praed. p. 486. 492. 494. c^^ante D. Willet, de great.
univers. p. 136. Ambros. de vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 3. populus Dei, suam habet
plenitudinem and in electis and praescitis sua quaedam censetur universitas
etc. August. cont. Jul. lib. 6. cap. 12. Dictum est omnes justificari per
Christum, non quia omnes justificantur in Christo, sed qui justificantur, non
aliter justificantur, quam in Christo. Sicut dicimus omnes homines intrare in
domum per unam januam, quia non intrant nisi per ipsam, vid. Aug. de Not, and
great. c. 40.
I will not stand to discuss. But 1. Sure enough I am, that it is a cracked
syllogism of four terms, and therefore will not pass in any Logical, or
Theological School. For the major of that hypotheticall syllogism, both in
the sacred canonical text, (and in your Apocryphal too) must, as it is plain,
for these words, one dyed for all, be understood of an (all) of a certain
kind, as is frequent in Scripture and antiquity, Genesis 7. 14. Joel 2. 29. Mat.
4. 23, 24. and be expounded by the (All) in the words following: who are dead,
not in trespasses and sins, but unto sin: who henceforth live not to
themselves, but unto him, which dyed for them and rose again; of such, who
ver. 14. are constrained by the love of Christ. The place is well paralleled
with Romans 6. 6. Heb. 9. 28. And if you otherwise understand the term (all) in
your minor, you must take the impuritie of Helvidius to your self; or not
allow the Apostle to be his own interpreter, in ver. 14, 15. utrum mavis
accipe. 3. Nor will the sound of the word (all) do you any more pleasure,
which you think rings well in your ears, Romans 11. 30, 31, 32. which 1. If
either the Apostle interpreting of this place, Gal. 3. 23. only of believers,
or of such Jews and Gentiles, who in after times should through mercy, and
mercy only obtain salvation; just so as the believing Jews and Gentiles, who
by grace were in part possessed of it already, ver. 30. Ephesians. 2. Or if Austin In
Rom: 11. 32. de Civ. Dei, lib. 21. c. 18. and 24. Intelligitur, de Judaeis and
Gentib. praedestinatis: Conclusit Deus omnes in infidelitate, ut omnibus
misereatur; non deo dictum est, qued neminem sit damnaturus, sed superius
apparet unde sit dictum. Nam quum de Judae is postea credituris, Apostolus
loqueretur ad Gentes, ad quas utique jam credentes, conscribebat epistolas,
sicut^n. vos (inquit) non credidistis Deo, nunc autem misericordiam consecuti
estis, in illorum incredulitate; sic and hi, non crediderunt in vestra
misericordia, ut and ipsi. misericordiam consequantur. Deinde subjecit, unde
isti sibi errando blandiuntur, atque ait, conclusit Deus omnes in infidelitate,
etc. Quos omnes, nisi de quibus loquebatur, tanquam dicens, and vos and illos?
Deus ergo and Gentiles, and Judaeos quos praescivit, and praedestinavit
conformes fieri imaginis filii sui, omnes in infidelitate conclusit, etc.
omnium miseretur vasorum, misericordiae: Quid est on nium? and eorum scil. quos
ex gentibus, and little quos ex Judaeis praedestinavit, vocavit, glorificavit,
non omnium hominum, sed istorum omnium, etc.
on the place, as well as upon such others, may but pass with you, for a fit
Commentator of this text; if this (I say) can be but gained from you, a man may
peremptorily conclude against you, that it is no absurdity to say, that none
but the elect and believers were so, that is, with that intention concluded
under unbelief, as to obtain mercy, as the believing Jews and Gentiles had.
These latter, as well as the former, in Gods own time, should find, that the
gifts and calling of God, of which the Apostle there speaks, were without
repentance, ver. 29. Neither 4. will 2 Pet. 2. 1. produced by you, p. 18.
afford you one crumbe of comfort, unless you can prove, that according to an
usual way of speaking, those may not be said to be bought by the Lord, who
were so sacramento tenus, as Austin In Psalm. 47. p^pulus Dei censentur, qui
sacramenta ejus portant etc. Joh. 6. 66. multi discipulorum abierunt ret^o,
etc. Nunquid non and isti discipuli appellati sunt, loquente Evangelio, and
tamen non ^rant very discipuli, secundum id quod ait, si manseritis in verbo
meo, ve ri discipuli mei estis.
who had once professed and did themselves believe that of themselves, that
they were such, and according to the judgment of the Churches charity, were
taken for such, whilst they did militate under Christ's standard.

I will not at this time trouble my self at all, with what you assert about
the absoluteness of Gods decrees, the sufficiency of Christ's merits, etc.
because I shall have a more opportune place for the first, when I come to your
3. Chapter, and for the 2. when to p. 25. But because, as the fashion of you
and all your accomplices (pray own your own phrase, Epist. ult.) is, under very
saucy and course phrases, of Christ's begrudging the extent of his death, to
the major part, but of one world, p. 20. Thus odiously representing it as a
doctrine illiberall to the merits of Christ, when as we should wonder, that
Christ would die so much as for any, rather then grumble that he did not die
for all. All those he died for, were his enemies, and uncomfortable to
Christian souls; it is not amiss against the second time of the drudgery you
speak of, p. 20. to request that you would resolve us, how much more
honorable to Christ, or comfortable to true Christians, these following known
propositions of the Arminians are These or the like sayings in words or sense,
are so frequent in the writings of all sorts of Arminians, as that I will not
abuse my own, or readers leisure, by transcribing them.
. 1. That Christ by his death has not purchased actual salvation for any, but
a possibility of salvation for all. 2. That he did rather redeem the Father,
that it might be possible for him to show mercy, without violation to his
justice, then that actually he intended the redemption of all or any. 3. That
he has merited by his death, as much for Cain, Judas, and all the damned in
hell, as for Paul, Peter, the Virgin Mary, or any glorified Saints. 4. That
Christ's death notwithstanding the conditions of the old covenant of works,
might have been put upon us. 5. That Christ never merited faith or repentance
for us, for the fulfilling of the conditions of the new covenant. 6. That we
are not justified by faith alone in his death, but by Gods accepting of I
cannot tell what, Evangelicall righteousness of faith, wrought by our selves,
in stead of legal perfect righteousness Yea Arminii his liberi orphani novem,
assert it to have been the opinion of their father, Epist, quadam dedicat that
we are justified by works, as well as by faith.
. 7. That it is disputable, whether any of the Fathers were saved by the death
of Christ? 8. And that it is past all dispute, that the Infants of Christians,
dying in infancy, are not at all saved by the virtue of Christ's merits: for
they have not any sin of their own to damn them; original sin never damned
any. So your first papers, etc. I pray God send you and me other comforts,
against the time that we shall most stand in need of them. As for what you
quote, p. 20. out of your Saint-like Dr Andrews, (as you style him, p. 47.
where you may look to hear more from me about him) when you shall have proved
him to have been as very a Saint, as every body knows he was a learned Dr, I
shall then be more troubled that I find him so much an Arminian. I am not
scared at what he dictates, rather then proves, in your margin; for that he
says nothing but what Faustus the Father of the Semipelagians did Faust. lib
3. de great. and lib. arbit. c. 7. Quis tam im. memor salutis suae sit, qui
attrahentis misericordiam negare praesumat: Sed ille vere impius est, qui eam
non omnibus ingeri, non omnibus testatur impendi, etc.
, and what has been answered a thousand times, or been warily expounded. And
if any such expression did unwarily fall from Bernard, in a Sermon, knowing
what a declining age he lived in, we may well say, Bernardus non vidit omnia;
but wonder he spoke so well elsewhere, Bern. de lib. arbit. and gratia. Quid
agit liberum arbitrium? Salvatur. Opus hoc sine duobus effici non potest, uno a
quo sit, altero in quo sit. Deus author est salatis, liberum arbitrium tantum
est ejus capax. p. 20.
by which he has made amends, for any thing he may have let fall amiss here.
In Popery it used to be said,

Si sint sancti, orent pro nobis; si doctores, respondeant ad argumenta. As for
the Apology which you make for the less convincing nature of evidences brought
by you, for the present, I much wonder, that having perfected even this your
perfect Copy, at least a full half year before the printing of it (which I
know by one, in whose hand it was, so long before) I much muse that so neat a
disputant, as you pretend to be in this your Meridian, (a phrase of your own
in an Epistle to me) Correct, polite Copy, should not have amended all
imperfections, and in stead of Topics, have given us demonstrations. As for
your threatenings of making all sure, against all common shifts and subterfuges,
I wonder not much at them, when I consider the altitude of your spirit; Aquila
non captat muscas. You put us in fear, that you will kill all in your next.
For my part, I am not yet turned Quaker, as over much affrighted at what you
denounce; yet I can assure you, if you do not at your second coming forth,
argue much more strongly against the common shifts, etc. alias, against the
true common sound faith once delivered to the Saints, then as yet you have
done, or than your often beaten Associates have done before you, I will here
once for all, give it under my hand, that you shall have leave to reckon me
free among the dead, you shall glory if you will, in the head of your party,
that you have quite rowted me, and that I will appear no more in the field.
The counsel which in scorn you give me, of slighting your papers whether
Correct or Uncorrect (in an Epistle) shall be in good earnest followed by me: I
shall once again retire to my beloved rest, (leisure you call it. p. 4.
laziness you could have been content to have called it) However I am somewhat
to seek, how this holding up a threatening fist for a second blow, consists
with-that modesty you pretend to all along, and the protestation which you
make to the man of Honor and Integrity, in the winding up of your Dedicatorie,
That the temptation must be greater, and the necessity more urgent, then I
hope it will be, if you draw at either end of the saw of strife. Totus orbis
exercet Historiam. And I know you are as good an actor, as ever Sosia in
Plautus. I cannot expect you should agree with me, who agree not much with your
self: Only before you appear upon the stage again, let me beseech you to
remember that, which once you had in the close of a letter from me out of
Cyprian, pingues hostias litat Diabolo, qui contristat Ecclesiam. Wound not the
Church more by your second, then you have by your first writing; study to make
up, not to make sores.

Sect. 16. p. 20, 21.
I Find nothing in all this Section, unto which you have not had enough, and
enough already, by way of Reply, if but enough may serve your turn. 1. You
have a complaint of Modes and Fashions of speech, and yet yours all along is in
the Al^a mode de Pelagian, Massilian, Arminian, etc. Indeed modo quo prius,
with the not over old Montacutian, late the Francisco-Clarian frye. 2. You are
constant in nothing, but in the confounding the meritorious cause with that,
which you truly call, p. 21. f. the energeticall efficient cause; as appears
by your quoting Hos. 13. 6. with Jam. 1. 15. 3. You are very daring, in
charging that with blasphemy, which must needs be a very truth, that, Romans 6.
23. death, so far forth as under the notion of punishment, there is any thing
in that privation positive, is from God, as the author of it. In that sense did
not he threaten it before it was? Genesis 2. 17. Did he not bring it in, when his
threatening was not dreaded? Romans 5. 12. Are not from him the issues of death?
Psalm. 68. 20. 4. You would feign prove an Apocryphal opinion, by an
Apocryphal text, out of Wisdom 1. 13. etc. (as Joh. Scot, cap. 17. had done
before you, Hist. Gottesch.) which yet, good thing as it is, will be
understood of no other then a meritorious cause: And this you have been told
already by Fulg, ad Monim. quoted before. I have no more therefore to say to
it, save that you leave me in my muses, why you should so solemnlie, in the
front in your Epist. Dedicat. in the corpse le grand, as here toward the rear,
p. 64. quote Apocrypha, especially if these passages should be found
transcribed out of Cardinal Bellarmine. It may be toward my resolution, you
would have me read over the Motto about the tie of the Knights of the Garter,
Honi soit qui male pense; Add this also, that when at any time the Fathers
say, that God made not death or hell, or the like August l. de Gestis Pelag.
cap. 3.
, they mean it in opposition to Pelagius, who maintained that Adam was made
mortal, whether he sinned or not, he should have died. Hence the Carthaginian
Council, pronounced an * Can. 1. Placeat omnib. Episcop. etc.
Anathema on such as said, Adam was created mortal; that is, not by the merit
of sin, but necessity of nature. Otherwise (as was said above) it were
strange, that he to whom belong the issues of death, who threatens it, inflicts
it, should not be the author of it, so far forth, as there is any thing
paenall in it.

Sect. 17. p. 21, 22, etc.
I Might also as quickly, for my own, Christians, and the Printers ease, (now
I have in my poor measure, rescued the sacred Scriptures from their
ravishments) bowl off from this 17. Section of yours, wherein you turn to
Reason. I could never yet find any of the carnal reasonings of Pelagians and
Arminians, bear weight in the scales of the Sanctuary, and therefore I might
justly neglect them, how much soever they call for a Philosophical Austin. de
quant. Animae. cap. 7. Authoritati credere magnum compendium est, and nullus
labor. Nam imperitiores si ratione velint verum comprehendere, similitudinib.
rationum facillime decipiuntur, etc.
rather then a Theological School, to have them tried in. But that I may not
altogether let you alone in your stumblings, in the forepart of your Section,
or in the wicked railings (I speak diminutively of what you have, p. 24.) in
the posterne of it, I must crave leave, 1. To put in a few Theses, which will
overthrow the Dagon of this Section, and undo many, most parts of your book
besides. 2. To affix very briefly a few Animadversions to the very text of this
Section. For the Theses. If you were not ignorant of them, you continue to be
hatefullie malicious; if you were (which is hardly possible, considering how
often you quote Calvin and Twisse) you were shamefullie to blame in these
Arguments, to set your pen, either to an Uncorrect or Correct Copy. The Theses
are these. 1. That all sublapsarians, as well as supralapsarians (may I crave
leave without offense to either party, to use these distinguishing titles, who
am a good friend to both, Dr Twisse vindic. lib. 3. digress 1. They all meet in
this. Quod homines a Deo in praedestinatione considerantur tanquam pares, ante
praedestinationem horum, and reprobationem aliorum.
which my adversary is not, when p. 2. of first papers, he takes up the
bucklers against both) are agreed, that there is no absolute predetermination
of sins permission, going before that which they use scholasticallie to call
visionem simplicis intelligentiae, or of the possibility of sins falling
out. 2. That all sublapsarians (amongst whom Calvin See the testimony presently
cited out of him.
must ever be ranked as none of the meanest) premise the consideration of
original sin, indeed of that only before the Act of praeterition or
negative reprobation; And that both these, and the supralapsarians with them,
premise the consideration of all actual sins, to the decree of positive
reprobation; usually called damnation. 3. Indeed they are neither of them so
simple as to apprehend these objective considerations, to be at all any causes
of Gods decree D. Rivet. disput. 3 These. 14. Non solum quaestio haec (de
objecto praedestinationis) abstrusa est, ac in penitiori Dei sanctuarii adyto
condita, sed quia otiosa curiositas alenda non est, cujus illa nimis alta
speculatio alumna est, and nutrix: He adds the other part. Quod ex damnata
Adae sobole, Deus quos visum est elegit, quos v^^t reprobat; quae sicuit ad
fidem exercendam long aptior est, ita majore cum fructu tractatur. In hac
igitur doctrina, quae humanae naturae corruptionem and reatum in se continet;
libentius insistit, quia non solum adpietatem propius conducit, sed magis
etiam, videtur Theologica: He had said a little before: Paulum docuisse Deum ex
perdita massa, eligere and reprobare quos ipsi visum est.
as that in him is an internal, eternal act, though they be the proper causes
of his temporal transient acts, and of the execution of those decrees. They be
loath to incur that censure of madness from Aquinas, (as above) or so much
as to receive a gentle check from your self, when as p. 51. you acknowledge
that these kind of considerations must only be ascribed to Gods will,
secundum res volitas, not according to the act of Gods will, considered in its
simplicity. A better speech then which, you never uttered any in all your
book, and which rightly understood and applied, overthrowes all that you say
against absolute praedestination. 4. That all these considerations of sub or
supra, are only some honest, ingenious, necessary devices, which some
therefore well call, ingenii nostri figmenta, for the helping of us poor
creatures, crasie mortals, (who cannot approach to that light which inhabiteth
eternity) to understand some little something of all that which Scripture
reveals concerning Gods decrees, but that God ab aeterno decreeing, did both
will and foresee all things, unico intuitu, unico actu. All things are, as I
may say, (...), in the very twinkling of an eye, open and naked before him,
Heb. 4. 13. What we distinguish by our signa rationis, and moments of time, he
wills and foresees all at once, end and means together. It is therefore extreme
childish to wrangle overmuch with one another, about the different conceits,
which all we crazie people may have, about the mere ordering or marshalling of
Gods decrees, according to first, or second; when as the very purblind Jewish
Rabbines can assent to it, that in God there is neither first nor last. An
unworthy thing then it is, for any praetending to Divinity, fowly to be
spatter one another about mere methodicall mistakes. (which I am persuaded the
very Angels in Heaven are not exactlie acquainted with) Oh what horrid
uncharitableness must it argue (in you) upon a mere dislike of Calvin's
ordering of Gods decrees, to fling and flounce, and to pour out damnable
blasphemies, and then when you have done, to say, p. 24. that you do it for
edification? 5. That when upon the consideration of Gods being a free and
judicious agent, it is by all Christian mortals agreed, nemine contradicente,
(unless perhaps by one giddie headed Nich. Grevinchovius) Who yet could say,
cont. Ames. p. 113. Gradus hosce, seu momenta varia quae fingi solent, in
decretis Det, infirmitatem nostram posse sub^^vare, sed in ipso Deo, unum and
idem esse. Yet alibi contra, Nego simpliciter decretum hoc, esse decretum
finis, and medioorum; medium cum fine in ipso decreto quod ais conjungi, nemo
sanus dabit.
that in Gods one decree, we must needs distinguish betwixt the decree of the
end, and the decree of the means; and that we must needs place the decree of
the end, in so wise an agent as God is, before the decree of the means,
according to that well grounded Rule, dictated by nature it self; that, Quod
prius est in intention, ultimum est in executione; that is last executed,
which is first intended; it must needs follow, for all your jerking toyish
gybes, p. 2^, 23. that of punishment (for example) be last executed after
sin, as all the world knows it is; and if that may be looked upon in any
consideration, as an end intended by God, as Prove. 16. 4. seems to make for
it, then as to our manner of apprehending things, it must needs be most
evident, that punishment must be decreed before the permission of sin; or
else sin in execution must be punished eternally, before it be permitted or
acted; which if you cannot like of, you will easily perceive to whom the (...)
in Divinity, (with which, p. 23. you make your self so merty) will of right
belong. 6. But seeing the supreme ultimate or sole end of God, (as Calvin and
all the orthodox agree Calvin. de praedest. p. 728. etc.
was not, is not, nor ever will be, the mere destruction or tormenting of his
creature, animi gratia, as Nero set Rome on fire, or as you against your
conscience, would have us to hold, for recreation to cut up animals alive, like
the Spanish Prince: (most odious and for ever to be Ananathematiz'd
comparisons) but the just tormenting of him, for the just manifestation of the
glory of his justice, Romans 9. 22. 2 These. 1. 6. after much long-suffering and
patience. Dr Twisse Epist. dedic. ad Reg. Bohem. Ego vero sic instituo, Deum
neminem destinasse ad damnationem nisi propter peccatum. Nec ullo vel naturae
momento priorem esse judico destinationem ad damnationem, quam sit consideratio
peccati, secundum quam fiat ista praedestinatio, etc.
has nobly and irrefragablie, strongly proved an hundred times over in all his
writings, That because man's destruction and torment is not an end of it self
intended, but only a means tending to a further end, and not willed for its
own sake, but propter aliud, and that in Gods decrees, all means are to be
coordinated, not subordinated* none are before or after another in divine
consideration, as not in order of nature or time to him, he makes it evident,
that your suggestion, That God intended the eternal destruction and misery of
his so noble and excellent a creature, before he intended to permit his sin,
the only true meritorious cause of all his misery, is so far from being
true, that never any rational creature, noble or ignoble, did ever in time,
suffer so much, as to the cutting of his finger, but for his sin. Nor did God
ever entertain any thoughts that he should suffer for any thing else. 2. By
what has been said, I trust you will say your self (I am pretty confident
that every honest body, will say, not wilfully prepossessed and blinded by the
dust of your flaunting rhetoric) that I have an easy task in the second
thing proposed, viz. Animadversions upon the text of this Section: Take
therefore briefly this. 1. That you are at your hot fierce scuffle with your
old over vanquished Adversary, Sir N. N. whilst you do so tediously plead
for that, which no honest body will deny you, viz. That God did not make hell,
p. 24 by an absolute purpose, merely because he would that some should suffer
it, and not in a previous intuition of their sin. But there-hence it follows
not, that sin is the cause of Gods decree, but only of the execution of it.
Belike you will not believe that you have killed your Adversary, till with the
coward in Sir Philip Sydneys Arcadia, you look upon him twenty times dead at
your feet. Can you believe that what you say in this, either 1. Makes for Gods
not being the author, and that ab aterno too, as to intention of man's eternal
punishment for sin, the thing offered to proof, p. 17. Sect. 14? 2. Or to
what you fell upon afterward, Gods equal love to mankind, or Christ's equal
redemption of al mankind, Sect. 15. 2. If you will needs have it granted you,
which you plead for next, (as I see no great absurdity in it, why it should
not be yielded you) that sin and punishment are relata secundum esse, and
simul natura; I cannot conceive how this makes for you, but rather against you:
For if Relata qua talia, are simul natura, then sin and punishment, according
to what I have pleaded for, at least in Gods decree, are not one after another,
but rather together. But I would not wish you hence to infer, as you seem to
do, (your discourse here and every where else seems to have a wishlie look
that way) 1. That God did not at all from eternity, for sin intend to damn any
men, but took up that resolution in time, when men have actually merited it by
their sins. 2. Or to think that Gods intention to kill men for sin, before
they were born, makes him (a man might tremble again, to write it over) an
(...), p. 24* to slay men before they were borne; when as you should know, that
praedestinatio ab aeterno non egreditur extra se, and so is no more a real
punishment, then Gods resolving to create us rich and noble, makes us actually
so. And this Dr Twisse, if you be but willing to learn any thing from him,
will fully instruct you in Vindic. l. 1. c. 3. in 4^0 col. 1. Nil Vulgatius in
scholis quam praedestinationem and reprobationem, nihil ponere in
praedistinato, etc. Quod and evidens ratio confirmat: Sunt enim actus Dei
immanentes, non transcuntes: omnis autem poena est actionis transeuntis in
creaturam effectus.
. 3. Or to believe that you had just cause in both your margins, p. 22, 23. to
bring Calvin again to your whipping post, (nay, upon that occasion, p. 24. to
break out (as you wretchedly speak, for edification sake) into horrid
blasphemies against the Almighty himself) for saying nothing, but what first,
he proves by Scripture, reason, and authority, out of Austin, which you do not
so much as offer to put away; for saying nothing but what multitudes of
Schoolmen, some hundred of years before Calvin was born, had said, with a most
unanimous consent, Scot. l. 1. did. 41. and l. 3. did. 19. Suarez in 3. disp.
5. p. 103. Probabiliorem existimo communem sententiam Theologorum, asserentium
electionem hominum praedestinatorum, antecessisse permissionem originalis
peccati. Contra-Remonstr. secunda p. 90. Agnoscimus and docemus Deum non
decrevisse quenquam damnare, nisi ^ustissime propter sua ipsius peccata: atque
hoc respectu decretum hoc non posse it a absolutum vocari, ut Deus sine ullo
peccatorum respectu decreverit quenquam damnare, etc.
viz. Scotus with the whole Army of Scotists, and which all the supralapsarians
in the Church of Rome do say, which Suarez himself being witness, are by
far the greater number. Yea, for saying nothing but what Bellarmine himself
is forced to bear him witness, he has Austin for: Nay, for saying nothing,
but what (as we shall have occasion against your 3. Chapter to prove) must be
granted, if we have no mind to turn Atheists. As for what you have out of him
concerning the horribile decretum, p. 24. which as you say did fright you into
your wits, and upon that occasion belch out of your mouth slanders against
heaven, oftentimes confuted, as fast and as full, as the Apocalypticall Red
Dragon, Rev. 12. against the woman to drown her. 1. That is by Calvin upon the
place, understood no otherwise, then as that decree is of such a nature, as
that it cannot but incutere ho^ror^m, as it did make the Apostle cry out, O the
depth, Romans 11. 33. Not that it is to be abominated, as you do now; for
which, the Lord, if it be his blessed pleasure, give you repentance. 2. Your
former little wit (now much better as you think, since you have left Calvin's
horribile decretum) is neither much for the prior or posterior part of it, to
be heeded, unless you had grace to make better use of it, than here you do;
who use it in this place, just so as that Wilding in Prove. 26. 18. who easts
firebrands, arrows, and death, and says, am I not in sport? Belike this way
you will have it verified of you, that nullum magnum Ingenium est sine mixtura
dementiae. 3. The true and just cause (give me leave to speak plainly what I
think, In repub. libera, liberas oportet habere linguas) is not so much your
amazement at any thing Calvin delivers, about the absolute decree, as the
extreme pride of your own heart, and the deep love you are fallen into, with
your over-gallant parts. (which I beseech God, they may not do your precious
soul as deadly a displeasure, as ever Absolons brave hair did to his body)
What of old made many a man a Massilian Prosp. Epist. ad Ruffin. Ab hac
confessione Gratiae Dei, ideo quidam resiliunt ne cum eam talem confessi
fuerint, qualis divino eloquio praed^catur, and qualis opere suae potestalis
agnoscitur, etiam hoc necesse habeant confiteri, quod ex omni numero hominum
per saecula cuncta natorum, certus apud Deum, definitusque numerus sit,
praedestinati in vitam aeternam populi, secundum propositum Dei vocantis,
electi. Quod quidem tam impium est negare, quam ipsi gratiae contraire.
has made you an Arminian: Good brother return, return, whilst there is or
may be any hopes of you. As for your girding at the excuses, which you say,
though falsely, we make to excuse God. 1. We were never so wicked as to
attempt that; we praise God we need not do it, who know him to be holiness it
self, holy, harmless, separate from sin and sinners, Heb. 7. 26. Jer. 12. 1.
Hab. 1. 13. even when he willingly permits them. Only we are forced often to
stop such wranglers mouths, as yours are here, when they be wide open against
truth, which they do not or will not understand. 2. If you will needs have it
so now, we excuse God no otherwise, by the distinction you so scornfully jeer
at, then Jac. Armin. himself, your great Master had taught Dr Twisse, as may
be seen in that very place Textus Arminii citatus ^a D. Twisse, sect. 13.
Tertia distinctio qua Deus dicitur velle peccatum, non qua peccatum est, sed
qua est medium illustrandae gloriae ipsiu^ etc. Caeterum ut istam distinctionem
recte usurpemus, ut aliquis sane aliquis est usus; dicendum est, Deum
permittere peccatum, non qua tale, sed ea de causa quia novit and potest illud
facere medium. Imo potius uti tanquam medio ad gloriam suam illustrandam: Ita
ut peccati ratio qua tale objiciatur permissioni Dei; causante interim
permissionem ipsam, tum consideratione, quod istud peccatum medium esse potest
gloriae divinae illustrandae, tum ordinatione ut peccatum permissum medium sit,
reipsa, illustrandae gloriae ejusdem.
, for the repeating of which, you so fiercely oppose him. I say,
notwithstanding those salt stinging jeeres, and the have you pretend to be in,
to gain some refreshment from your next 18. Section; You will find one day,
that it would have been much better, that leaving your (...) to Homer, you had
orderly put your bridle upon your horse, and with it rid upon a slow pace, ad
Garamantas usque and Indos, then thus to play the Lucian, and elsewhere the
Carpocratian, p. 42. against Heaven; lest (which God avert) you with
Achi^ophel, one day saddle your Ass, and speed no better then he did. If you
judge me now (as once you did, Epist. 2. upon a slight occasion) to be in a
high frenzy, you must pardon me: Your rage against Heaven, has put me out of
all patience with you. Severum medicum intemperans aeger facit: And now it is
fallen to my turn, at least to endeavor to be your Physician, who have been
long a physicking of me to no purpose.

. 18. from p. 24, to 32.
AND now we are come to this Section, I am glad I shall have some refreshment
as well as your self, p. 24. Eja age, tripudiemus: Arcum non semper tendit
Apollo. You have gladded me much by what you have told me you aimed at, in the
drawing up of this Catalogue, p. 16. sect. 13. what p. 17. sect. 14. you tell
me, they must say for you, viz. as to the first, That God is not the author of
sin, let that same wicked Sir N. N. errant villain as he is, look to that:
As to the second, That God is not the efficient cause of eternal punishment,
most of them will be testes muti, as to that, and those who speak any thing,
speak the quite contrary way; as Basil, p. 26. Chrysostom. ibid. Damascen. p.
27. Oh how much more propitious is this list to me, then that of your 7.
Section? p. 10, 11. But lest you should vapor among your associates, that I
bring in a nihil dicit, to what they seem to speak, for Gods aequall love to
all mankind; Christ's as aequally diffusive Redemption, your much beloved Helena
(...), (in one of your Epistles) you do still so valiantly appear for, I
must say something. 1. To the Praeface prefixed to the second Catalogue, or
Jurie (if you will) impannelled for your self, as your first was, p. 10, 11.
drawn up in terrorem Calvinistarum. 2. Something in general, and but in
general I have to say to the Authors you would have to bring in verdict for
you, For the first, I hope before I have done with you, if there be any front
left in you to blush, to make you change color, for abusing of Austins almost
sacred name, as if he had any thing to say on your side, who does so perfectly
appear against you every where: Yet if he and all the Greek and Latin
Fathers to boot, before Pelagius, or upon Pelagius his first appearing to the
world, in a mere Ethnic garb Vid. Cornel. Jansen. Augustinum tom. 1. l. 5. c.
1. p. 130. Hunc statum haeresis ista, in ipsis suis habuit incunabulis, quando
primo a Pelagio proferri and praedicari caepit. Tunc^n puram putamque naturam,
sicut a Deo conditur, and ex utero matris prodit, nullo externo sive scientiae,
sive potentiae praesidio, sed solo liberae voluntatis arbitrio, and naturali
illa possibilitate ad omnia omnino quae ad bonam beatamque vitam magna
facilitate consequendam pertinent, abunde sufficere docuerint.
, as a denier of all Grace, and a mere champion of Nature, should seem some way
to plead for you, (when as a diminutive grace maintained by them, was enough to
overthrow the first (...) wherein Pelagianisme appeared) it would be very
little for your credit, only thus far to concur with the former Fathe^s,
or St Austin himself, and then afterward to leave Austin, when the necessity
of the cause against Pelagius, drew him out to a more ample declaration and
vindication of grace. This will at least argue, (which yet you deny, p. 4.)
that you stick in Massilianisme; that you are willing to begin, but not to end
with St Austin. 2. You here and every where confounding the decree of
Reprobation negative, with that of positive condemnation, I know not one,
either of the ancient, or modern orthodoxe Writers, who will not readily
yield, That God did not absolutely decree the reprobation (positive) of any
creature, but upon praescience and supposition of wilful rebellion and
impenitence. You must still be allowed to skirmish with your implacable enemy,
Sir N. N. You have small reason to be over-confident of your great Collector,
Vossius. 1. For that before the Synod of Dort, he was known merely to be of
the Arminian party, for which too, he was put by his Regency of the Belgic
College in Leyden, and therefore is at best but testis ex sin^. 2. For that he
was not over-stedfast in his faith, who upon all occasions of turnings,
discovered much levitie, and by facing about, recovered some kind of station
among the orthodoxe at Leyden, as Historiarum professor there. 3. He may well
be suspected, not to deal so heartily in other matters, as were to be wished,
when as he is not afraid against the credit of all the orthodoxe, to rank
Faustus Rheginensis, and Lucidus the Pelagian, who were the known Leaders of
Pelagians and Semipelagians See Dr Twisse against Mr Hoard, p 56. where he
quotes a saying out of Isidore, de viris illustribus Would you but compare
Vossii Hist. Pelag. with the collections of Reverend Jac. Armach. in his
primord. Eccles. Britan; or with those of that stupendous Jansen. in his
August. or of L^tii comm^n^^^. l. 2. de P^l^g etc. you would be less enamoured
with Vossius; or with your admirable Grotius.
among Catholics. 4. He has utterlie spoiled your market, whilst from him
you learned it (and I wish he had never taught you a worse lesson) to apply
the distincton of voluntas antecedens and consequens, not to actum volendi in
Deo, but to res volitas, p. 51. which application alone, overthrowes all what
you say about Gods conditional or respective decrees; and declares, that with
your Scriptures, Reasons, and Fathers, you still fight against Sir N. N. or
your self, but against no other wise body. 5. You have not yet persuaded me,
that (...), is to you (...), whereas without any other necessity, save what
you have created, of bespattering of Mr Calvin, Twisse, etc. you have made your
former less than three sheets of paper, to swell up into eleven almost in this
your Correct Copy; yet have not retracted any one error, but rather committed
more. 2. As for what need to be said to the particular Authors brought in your
Muster-role, from p. 25. to 32. besides what has been said already, give me
leave to vent my self in some few general propositions. And here first,
Because I affect to be somewhat Classical, I shall tanke all the Authors
quoted by you into three Clastes. 1. Of the Ancients before any Pelagian
questions were started up. 2. If you will but give me leave to coin a word,
the Augustinian Classis, during Pelagius his time, or anon after. 3. The Modern
Classis, either of Pontificians, or of Protestants, foreign, or of our own
Church. I say first in general, in reference to Position 1.
all those, unless it were Origin, p. 26. I find they speak nothing, if they
be candidlie interpreted, which makes for Gods equal universal love to all
mankind, the only end for which you bring them, or else they are brought in
for no end, and are disquieted in vain. 2. More particularly, all those of the
first Position 2.
Classis, whether Greek or Latin, which you bring, might all very well have
been spared. 1. because they cannot be presumed to be, fit determiners of
those controverses, which did arise in the Church, after they were dead and
gone You have surely heard, that Ante exortum Pelagium, securius loquebantur
patres. August. de praedest. sanct. c. 14. and cont. Jul. l. 1. c. 2.
Disputantes in Catholica Ecclesia, non se aliter inrelligi arbitrabantur; tali
quaestione nullus pulsabatur, etc.
. 2. We cannot but allow such, (especially in Sermons, Epistles, popular
Catechismes, discourses against known heretics of another strain then the
Pelagians) a greater neglect of their style and phrase, then it were any way
fit should be yielded them, when known heretics risen, watch the advantages of
all unwary expressions. 3. Most of the Graecians, especially those who came
from the Philosophic schools, to be Doctors in the Christian, brought so much
of their Philosophy with them, into the Church, as that Divinity was far the
worse for them Corn. Jan. in Aug. ^. 2. proem. Inter graecos, etc. Theologicae
doctrinae princeps olim Origenes, post illum Chrysostomus fuit, unde sua
derivarunt Theodoretus, Oecumenius, Theophylactus ac Damascenus, sed ita, etc.
. 4. Yet none of them all was such an Erra pater in Divinity, as Origin, who
abounds almost with as many errors as lines; and who, as our reverend Bishop
Hall said of him wittily, desinebat esse vir, (for he would need understand
that place, Mat. 19. 12. about castration, literallie) sed non malus interpres.
This very man, who also has learnedly been proved, many years before Pelagius
was born, to have laid the grossest foundations of Pelagianisme Jansen. August.
Tom. ult. p. 1136. Origenes in Epistolam ad Romans and in libris p^riarch.
errorem d^ praedestinatione secundum praescientiam, omnesque caeteros
Pelagianorum, and Massiliensium, tanta copia and accuratione praecudit, ut post
Pelagii aetatem vixisse videatur. vid. and lib. 6. c. 13, 14, 15, etc.
. He I say, and he alone is brought by you contrary to scripture, Romans 9. 22.
Jude 4. and some of that very antiquity appearing in your Catalogue, (as any
body may see, who will but overlook it) for to father a notion for you, which
also you had the boldness to communicate to your auditors, in a Lecture at
Daintrey, viz. That God made hell only for wicked Devils, but not for wicked
men, full out as bad as Devils. 5. Not only learned orthodox Protestants See at
large for this, Dr Whitaker, de peccato origin, l. 2. c. 2. D. Morton Apolog.
1. part. p. 267. Bogerman cont. Annotat. H. Grotii
but even the learneder sort of Papists Cont. Discuss. H. Grotii.
have warned us against the overlavish expressions of Theophylact, Euthimius,
Chrysostom. Oecumenius, Macarius, etc. which yet are in very great state produced
by you, as in this your list, so up and down your book, without taking notice
of any such Advisoes given in: But it will not be amiss to remember, that
abundans cautela non nocet. 6. Most, if not all these Authors, were, before
ever Vossius booked them down, collected to his hand, by your admirable H.
Grotius, in his ordinum Hollandiae, etc. Westfrisiae pietas, who also had
borrowed them out of several parts of Bellarmines writings Bogerm. ubi supra
part secunda.
, and that same unconquerable Grotius of yours, has from Joh. Bogermans,
received a particular answer to most of them, where you shall do well to fetch
yours also. 7. Damascene, though of much later standing, than the former of the
first Classis, yet he as a Grecian, may be ranked among them, as living in the
Grecian Churches, nothing near so much pestered with Pelagianisme as the
Latin. As for the distinction of Gods Antecedent and Consequent will alleged
by you and others, sometimes out of him, and out of Chrysostom. (as indeed as
yet, sub judice lis est, who was the father of that invention) I have already
in this writing of mine, showed, that possibly there may be some good use of
it, if wise men may but have the management of it; and I have elsewhere (in my
first writing) made it evident, that ever since the first minting of it, it
has been a very apple of contention in the Church, especially among the
Schoolmen; none of all which, if we may believe a great Schoolman, Dr Twisse,
one only excepted That is Gregor. Ariminens. D. Twisse vindic. l. 2. digr. 8.
p. 455. Sciendum quod quaecunque Deus vult nobis, aut facit in nobis, vel
habent in nobis causam meritoriam, and talia dicit Damasc. Deum velle
consequenter, sicut poenam quamlibet, quam propterea vul^ nobis, quia peccamus;
ita quod peccatum est causa meritoria poenae quam nobis infligit. Aut non
habent in nobis talem causam meritoriam, saltem primam, sed ex sua gratia, and
sua voluntate, illa nobis concedit, and talia sunt omnia bona quae habemus; and
hoc dicit ip sum Deum velle nobis voluntate antecedente, quoniam nulla in nobis
causa antecedit, nec propter aliud in nobis, vel ex nobis vult prim^ aliqua
bona nob is, sed ex sua bonitate primo; unde and merita nostra dona sunt ejus,
ut August. 13. de Trin. Non ergo talis-voluntas consequitur causaliter vel
meritorie aliquid in nobis; and ideo non excausa nostra, sicut voluntas
punitionis, sed ex seipso, Et ideo vocat illam consequentem, hanc antecedentem;
and hanc manifest patet, intuenti diligenter, esse intentionem ejus, etc.
had ever the happiness to explain it any thing handsomely. 3. Damascene the
great pretended Author of it, 1. Seems not to be constant to himself; for here
as you quote him, p. 27. out of lib. 2. c. 29. orthod. fidei, whilst he
distinguishes in God, his antecedent from his consequent will, he must needs
(at least as the words sound) ascribe deliberation properly so called, in
counsel and mutations, of counsel also to God, which else where he does deny;
for says he, ib. c. 22. 29. (...), (...). To advise, or to take counsel, is
an argument of ignorance. 2. In this his device, he seems but to jump with much
such another, as before him was taken up by the Massilians for the same end and
purpose Quia non omnes salvos fieri certum est, hinc illud propositum generale,
non absolutum, sed ineffieax and quasi conditionatum statuunt, viz. Si homines
ipsi velint, and consentiant. Dilucidis verbis eorum sensum Prosp. ad Aug.
promit. Itaque quantum ad Deum pertinet omnib. paratam vitam aeternam, quantum
autem ad arbitrii libertatem, ab his eam apprehendi, qui Deo sponte
crediderunt, and quxilium gratiae merito credulitatis acceperint. And this to
be your meaning, the same with theirs and their Leaders, Faust. Rheg. l. 1. de
great. and lib. arb. is plain throughout your book, but especially by what you
have out of Dr Andrews p. 20. and out of Hilar. p. 260. and Anselme, p. 27. And
yet you would make us believe you are much for Prosper.
. 4. The Arminians, (and yet it seems to be most proper Lettice for their lips,
the very Helena they are enamoured withal) could never yet, by it commend or
divend any of their Arminian wares, any thing the better, for that at no hand
they agree in opening the mystical meaning of it. And you amongst all the rest
of that generation, are the most unhappy in the management of it, for that you
are, not only as your great Vossius, and your domestique Dr Jackson (to whom
you are much beholden for abusing the world with your two first principles, p.
6. which you took from him, and which you understand full out as equivocally as
he) driven to confess, p. 51. that you understand this distinction not in
respect of Gods will simply, in which there can be neither prius nor posterius,
but in respect of the things which are the objects of his will, but also
because, p. 40. you do, it seems, even in propriety of speech, ascribe such
velleities, would bees, yea, such an (...) to the Almighty, as is most contrary
to his nature. In the first way of explaining the distinction, you are unhappy,
however it be foelix infortunium to the Church, in that with your own hands,
you overthrow most part of your book; to be sure all your third Chapter, as I
shall show when I come to it. In the latter, if you do but stand to it, you
will become Atheistical And say with Vorstiu^ de Deo, p. 195. Non satis
circumspecte loquuntur, qui Deum ut essentia, sic voluntate prorsus immutabilem
esse affirmant. Voluntas Dei ad extra, non minus in Deo, quam in Angelis and
hominib. ad opposita vertibilis. Id p. 371. Nihil absurdi inde sequitur, quod
Deus in tempore quaedam praecise velle, vel nolle dicatur, quae fortasse non
antea it a praecise voluit vel noluit, p. 486. poenitentia Deo recte convenit,
quatenus ipse opera sua propter supervenientem aliquam causam, insperatam vere
improbat, deseri^, aut mutat.
. And this for the Authors of the first Classis. 2. As for the Authors of the
second Classis, Austin and his genuine followers, I make not the least doubt of
it, but you would as gladly have them all unclassed, as you could wish that
Calvin and Beza, had never at Geneva, appeared for Classes and Synodi; a thing
which I am sure you are as angry at, as the fellow that wrote the
Clerico-classicum of late. And this I gather, 1. In that in the matters
debated, bordering upon Pelagianisme, (against which, if in any thing he was
his craftsmaster) you would have Austin turned off from the Bench of your Jury,
p. 28. and that upon some shadow of reason, which one, and but one Grotius
delivers in, in a book of his, wherein (beyond Cassander) the Text which he was
to defend, he carrries on his cruel Popish design against all Protestants,
Riv. Dyalis. in Discuss, Grot^i, p. 595 etc. The discussor being the last book
that ever Grotius wrote. Grotium nobis been volu isse, nec suisse quantum
potu^t, in nostrus, persecutionum incentorem and incendiarium, nemo credet
sanus; qui postrema ejus scripta legerit, in qu bus, omnibus pacem offert, ut
nobis solis bellum indicatur, etc. And what the goodly design was, which
Grotius before his death traveled with, he thus tells us himself, in the last
leaf save one of that his last book, p. 255. as if he were making of his last
Will and Testament. Restitutionem christianorum in unum idemque corpus, semper
optatum a Grotio sciunt, qui ipsum norunt. Existimavit autem aliquando incipi
posse a protestantium inter se conjunctione. Postea vidit id plane fieri
nequire, quia praeterquam Calvinistarum ingenia ferme omnium, ab omni pace sunt
alienissima, Protestants nullo inter se communi Ecclesiastico Regimine
sociantur. Quae causa est, cur parts aliae, and aliae sint exsurrecturae.
Quare nunc plane ita sentit Grotius, and multi cum eo, non posse protestants
inter se jungi, nisi simul jungantur cum iis, qui sedi Romanae (N. B.)
cohaerent, sine qua nullum sperari potest, in Ecclesia commune Regimen.
but especially against all Calvinists; and wherein, as to Pelagianisme, he
outstrides the most of the very Jesuits in his compliance with it.
Questionless it is monstrous, that any man pretending to learning (upon the
bare authority of such a prodigiouslie
Erastio-Arminio-Socino-Pontificio-politick headpiece, as those who know him at
all in his writings, and in his designs, know him to be) should contrary to the
judgment of all Catholic Doctors, who were his contemporals, of whole
Councils, who did transcribe his writings, verbatim, and turn them into
Church-Canons As it is famously known, of the Ephesine, Carthaginian,
Milevitan, Arausican, yea, Roman Councils. Vid. Jansenium, Aug. cap. 14, 15,
16. And in slighting Austin, you comply with Gennad. Hist. Council. Trident. who
used to say of him, what Solomon has of bablers, Pro. 10. 19. Hist. Gotesch.
p. 20. Nay with far worse men, not only all the old Massilians, but with the
worst of Jesuits, Molina, ^essius, Vasquez, etc. vid. Jans. Aug. T. 2. lib.
proem. c. 16.
, of several Roman Pontifes, (who upon another score, were desperately angry
with him, as with all the African Fathers) be so far infatuated, as upon any
reason, to believe him to be an unfit judge, who was the fittest (so far forth
as any man may be looked upon, as a fit ministerial judge of controversies) to
judge of any question bordering on Pelagianisme, as sure the question is,
Whether God antecedently love all alike? whether Christ died for all alike? If
one reason from Grotius, can weigh down so much reason from his and your
betters, I know you care not for Austin, save that you must scaenae inservire.
2. I collect this from the supercilious pif, which you somewhere make at the
modern orthodox, having only one Austin alone, by whom they would be tried, p.
31. which were it so, (as it is most false) yet 1. It were much more rational,
next to Scripture, to stick to one Austin, who for twenty years together
Prosp. lib. cont. Collat. Viginti amplius annis, contra inimicos gratiae Dei,
Catholica acies, hujus viri ductu, pugnat and vincit. De quo idem suaviter
carmine de ingratis sic canit. Nam quocunque gradum convertit calidus hostis,
quaque per ambages anceps iter egit opertus; hujus ab occursu est praeventus etc
most studied these controversies, and successefully contended about them, as
Graces Champion, against Pelagian nature, and Massilian diminutive grace, then
to heed others, who perchance never studied these matters so many hours, as he
did years. 2. That one Austin to the worlds end, will by all the learned
gracious world of Christians, be thought to weigh down a thousand such as
Molina, Lessius, etc. or Arminius his second H. Grotius, with myriads of such
as Episcopius, Tilenus, Corvinus, Bertius, Grevinchovius; yea, even though T.
P. should bring up the rear D. Ward Conc. ad Cler. degra. discrimine ad finem.
Illud etiam vere adj^cere possum plus uni Augustino tam veterano, and in ista
causa versatissimo tribuendum, quam centum Grotiis, Corvinis, Vorstiis,
Bertiis, and id genus recentiorib. dogmatistis. Accedit and illud coronidis
loco, Augustino semper adhaesisse hac ex part, ecclesiam universalem, ab ejus
temporibus, Ecclesiam item Anglicanam, ab initio Reformationis, and
celeberrimam hanc nostram Academiam, etc.
. 3. This is easily concluded, from your intolerable abusing of Austin, when
you quote him, as if you did almost as much hate him, as Calvin and Beza, Dr
Twisse and the rest of the first or second Reformation, p. 52. witness for a
taste (for fowler matters we shall have, when we be arrived to your p. 44.) that
in this place, p. 28. what you quote out of his lib. de sp. and litera ad
Marcell. cap. 33. you produce something from his dispute, where he ventilates
matters pro and con, against his express conclusion and determination of the
question The question proposed to Austin, you rightly propose as he does, in
the beginning of cap. 33. but before the resolution which Austin stands to,
comes in, which is not till cap. 34. you snatch something for you from his
dispute, which is continued throughout the whole c. 33. and not ended in the
beginning of the 34. chap. as is plain by these words, Haec disputatio, si
quaestioni illi solvenaae sufficiat, sufficiat; but then falls to dispute
again, and concludes quite contrary to what you represent, thus: Attendat and
videat, non ideo tantum, istam voluntatem divino muneri tribuendam, quia ex
libero arbitrio est, quod nobis naturaliter concreatum est, verum-etiam, quod
visionum suasionib. agit Deus ut velimus, and ut credamus: And then coming to
the critical point; Si ad illam profunditatem scrutandam, quisaquam nos
coercet, cur illi ita suadetur, ut persuadeatur, etc. He shuts up all with an,
O altitudo divitiarum, etc. and a check to such as Mr T. P. Cui responsio isia
displicet, quaerat doctiores, sed caveat, ne inveniat presumptiores.
, both in that place, and in other writings of his. It had therefore been
honester and safer for you with Arminius, to have cried out, non stamus
Augustino; or with your Oracle H. Grotius, out of the very book which you cite,
to say, multa retractavit Augustinus, sed in pejus. And dealing thus with the
Master, we need not wonder if you use his scholar Prosper no better, in what by
pieces snatched from several parts of his works, you huddle altogether, p. 29.
Indeed I see nothing but what with a prosperous gloss of Prospers own making,
in several other parts of his writings, will down with me very well; so that
I shall not need to fly to that, aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus, that
Prosper might Massilianize a little, as being tired with the perpetual
calumnies of Massilians and Semipelagians Yet so Bogerm. a man who deserves no
small commendation out of Paraeus disp. de lib arb. p. 253. Apparet (inquit) de
Mossiliensium faecibus eum (Prosperum) aliquid hausisse, and p. scq. Inter
defersores liberi arbitrii, and praedicatores gratiae, mediatorem se
profitetur, in quaestione quomodo Deus velit omnes homines salvari. And yet he
concludes against T. P. that he does not, illico facere cum part altera, etc.
Nec decet frustulis hinc inde corrasis, sententiam authoris, alias public
notam elevare, quemadmodum hodie scriptis non tantum veterum, sed and
recentiorum, Calvini, Musculi, etc. in rem suam abuti solent Novatores; quibus
interim in votis est, ut sententia Prosperi, Calvini, etc. Passim quam ut
impiam and blasphemam, traducunt, evertatur, and exterminetur.
. Yet I have reason enough to suspect, that you value not Prospers judgment,
more then Austins, and make not here so fair a representation of it, as you
might do, as shall be somewhat more cleared in my next position.

3. As for the Authors of the third or lowest Classis, we should be agreed in
it, that they are no farther to be valued, than as they agree with Scripture,
pure antiquity, and the harmony of the Protestant Confessions. (as indeed, no
mere humane authorities, are to be set up higher, Isa. 8. 20.) You quote but
one Anselme, p. 27. who yet, 1. Says nothing of Gods intention equally to save
all, but rather the contrary, in the very words cited by you: His words must
needs be understood de voluntate signi, of what his dispensations import, and
not de voluntate (...), of what he has decreed to bring to pass. 2. It is
famously known, that Anselme, as well as a number of Pontificians more, are
against you, in the matter of praedestination Anselm. de Concord. cap. 2.
Necesse est fieri quae praesciuntur, and quae praedestinantur.
, and also in their magnifying of the distinction of the sufficiency of Christ's
death in reference to Reprobates Ansel. in Elucidario, Innocent 3. l. 2. de
officio missae, c. 4. sanguis Christi pro solis praedestinatis effusus est,
quantum ad efficientiam; sed procunctis hominibus quantum ^d sufficientiam.
Sic. Th. Aquin. super Rev. 5. De passione loqui est dupliciter, aut secundum
sufficientiam, and sic passio redemit omnes; omnibus n. redimendis and
salvandis sufficiens est, etiamsi plures essent mundi, ut dicit Anselm. lib. 2.
Cur Deus homo, cap. 14. Aut secundum efficientiam, and sic non omnes redempti
sunt, per passionem: Sic Stapulens. ad Romans 5. Tapper Artic. 6. Sonnius lib. 3.
Relig. Christianae. cap. 19.
and of the efficiency of it only to the Elect. The Protestants you call on
your side, 1. Phil. Melancth. p. 29. but quote nothing out of him advantageous
to you; if by reprobation, he mean but positive reprobation or damnation; the
meritorious cause whereof, no man denies to be sin. Melancthon was a man,
who because he ever had a name in the Church, and that deservedly, for depth of
learning, for calmnesse, prudence, and moderation, your vapouring party use
much to glory in, upon a pretense that he is one of theirs; when as the
contrary is most evident. 1. From his intin acie, which to the last he
maintained with Calvin; who also dedicated his book against Pighius (such
another wrangler as your self) unto him, as to a Patron and chief Vindex of
the doctrine contained therein. 2. From a testimony under Melancthons own
hand, and that toward the time of his death, Anno 1543. that he Calvin Epist
48.
agreed with Calvin in the doctrine of praedestination, free will, etc. save
that Calvin's way was the more profound, but that his ways were (to use his
own words) simpliciora, and (...), and usui accommodatiora. 3. Indeed his
scholar Christoph. Pezelius See Pezelius, and Joh. Bogerm. contra Grotium, a.
p. 160. ad 179. and concludes with a strong syllogism, p. 179. thus. Qui
sententiam Lutheri and Calvini in quibusdam scriptis ^radidit plene and aperte
a priori, in nonnullis prolixe came inculcat a posteriori; is, etc.
who was to Melancthon, what Timothy to Paul, or Prosper to Austin, has so
abundantly made it evident, that there was no other difference betwixt their
doctrine of praedestination, save in the manner of delivering; Melancth.
beginning a posteriori, from vocation wrought in the heart, etc. Calvin
speaking of it often a priori, as conceived in the bosom of the Almighty; as
that to all the Arminian party, who boast of Melancthon, he has left nothing
but falsehood joined with impudence, as often as they make him of their party.
2. Next you produce P. Moulin, a man in all the five Articles controverted, in
that very Anatome by you cited, against you, and your great Dr Arminius, that a
man would wonder what was become of your forehead, when you call for help from
him. For what though in some one odd notion of yours, about the object of
reprobation, he may seem to be yours, should that embolden you to produce him
as if he were completely yours? If you had the spirit of valor in you, you
should take up the bucklers for him against Dr Twisse, who has made it evident
in the point you quote him for, that Non tenetur Magister sententiarum in hoc
Articulo. 3. The last man you quote for you, with a superlative encomium given
him, p. 29 etc. is our own Dr Overall. (though some As they who subjoined it to
his dissert. de praedest. and repr.
ascribe that treatise to Dr Davenant) As for him, 1. If he will in the laxe
general phra^es, be no otherwise understood, then as Dr Davenant expounds
them, of a sufficiency in the death of Christ for all, together with an
intention, that Christ's death should be a general remedy, not actuallie to be
applied to all, but applicable to all upon condition of faith and repentance
Though reverend B^sh^p Davenant in his dissert. seem to g^e a way by himself,
yet the sum of all he would have, himself being judge, p. 23. is but this,
Non est al^enum a divina sapientia, statuere and ordinare media ad finem
aliquem appl^cabil^a, licet intelligat, interveniente aliquo obstac^lo, quod
ipse removere non d^crevit, ipsam application^m fieri impediendam. Huc of ferri
potest illud Aquinatis de vest. disp. de praed^st. ubi discrimen ponit, inter
providentiam communit^r sumptam and praedestinationem, quae est specialis pars
providentiae: providentia (inquit) ordinem and finem respicit tantum,
praed^stinatio respicit exitum vel eventum ordinis Quae per providentiam illam
communiorem ad si nem ordinantur non semper finem consequuntur; at quae per
praedestinationem singularem ordinantur, semper consequuntur, etc.
. When I shall understand this to be all which you plead for in this point, I
shall be willing that whatsoever difference about this may remain betwixt us,
may be determined in a cool conference. 2. I doubt not but therefore Dr
Overall is so high in your favor, not so much because he symbolizeth with you
in opinion, as because you are tickled at the very heart, that he as well as
you, plays upon Calvin, as elsewhere he does traduce the Puritans also (who
have been cleared of the crimes, by as wise, learned, and more moderate a
Bishop Usher in his Sermon before the Commons 1620. Bishop Carleton against
Montague, quo supra, etc.
Bishop then himself) for heterodoxie about praedestination; yet what both you
and he bring out of Calvin, does you not the least service. For 1. If in both
places Calvin, as he does understand the (all) for all of a certain sort, viz.
for all so belonging to Christ mystical, their spiritual head, as all without
exception do belong to Adam their natural head: Calvin upon the place has it
well, waving the very question, which you would have him determine for you, De
nihilo agitaretur illa quaestio, quia non disputat Apostolus quam paucis, vel
quam multis prosit mors Christi, sed intelligit simpliciter, aliis, non sibi
mortuum esse. 2. What though he say and truly, that men are hindered from being
saved by their own incredulity, does he any where say, 1. That God by the
virtue of the death of Christ, has resolved to take away that incredulity
from every body? 2. Or does he say any where, that God intended Christ's death
should save all, whether they did believe or not? But you cannot forbear
lashing of Calvin, no otherwise then as if you were afraid that his severe
ghost, per (...) might arise one day in England, to scourge you soundly with
some Presbyterian rods, for your Interimisticall-Cassandrio-Arminio-Grotian
designs: But fear not my good brother, old Cynick Calvin is dead, and some
Erastian Politicians of the times, will it seems, have a pious care of you, that
you shall never smart under any such discipline. Oh happy time for Mr T. P!
Though none were so full of Helvidianisme, (as you have a mind to upbraid some,
p. 19.) as to deny any general words of the Scripture, which they would have
rightly interpreted, not expunged; yet it is most plain, that the Church in
all ages, has been for special Redemption, against general Redemption of all
at random. And this appears, 1. By the four several interpretations of 1 Timothy 2. 4. which your self acknowledge; all which carried it off from the
general Redemption, which you maintain of all, both Elect and Reprobate H^st,
Gotesch. p^ssim.
. 2. By the frequent objections of the Pelagians, and Semipelagians, where with
they upbraided the Catholics Faust. l. 1. de gra and l. arb. Dominium Nostrum
Jesum a^unt humanam carnem, non pro omnium salute sumpsisse, nec pro omn^bus
mort^um esse. Hoc omnimodis Ca^hol^ca detestatur Eccl^si^. H^l^r. Epist. ad
Augustinum. Inde est, quod ^lius sententiae expositionem, inquiunt
M^ssilienses, non came quae art deprompta ^st, suspiciant, id est, ut non nisi
omnes homines salvos fieri vult, and non eos tantum, qui ad sanctorum numerum
pertin^bant, sed omnes omni^o, ut nullus habeatur exceptus.
, for denying that universalitie of Redemption, which they, and they only did
maintain. 3. By the express, full, and distinct confessions of the first
Primitive Churches, delivered by the Church of Smyrna Eusebius. lib. 4, cap. 15.
in Epist. de Polycarpo, (...).
. Which tells us, that Christ did suffer for the world of those who are to be
saved, conformable to the expression, Rev. 21. 24. delivered in by Ambrose
Ambr. de vocat Gent. l. 2. c. 3. In ^lectis and praescitis and ab omni
generalitate discretis, specialis quaedam censetur universitas, ut de toto
mundo, totus mu^dus liberatus ^st, and de omnib. hominib. omnes homines
videantur redempti. In eundem sensum, quem postea expressit Augustine. in Joh.
15. mundus redemptionis, unus, ex perditionis al^ero electus, qui and Epist.
102. asserit non pe^^isse u^um ex illis, pro quibus Christus mortuus est.
, who tells us, that out of the whole world, the whole world was delivered; and
out of all men, all men, viz. all the special universalitie, who were elected
and foreknowne, and dissevered from all generality. 4. As for the second
Primitive Churches though you, and your Grotius, p. 28. think none so unfit to
speak as Austin; yet I hope every body else will think none so fit to be heard
as he (ut supra). And both he and the Valentinian Council after him, speak out
as distinctly, what the judgment of the Church was in this point, as if you
were to have it from Geneva or Dort. Nor should any be so foolishlie
suspicious, as to surmise, that Austin brought a new opinion into the Church,
the contrary whereunto, he himself from all sorts of Authors, proves at large
against the quarrelsome Pelagiant, whilst he does demonstrativelie ad oculum
clear it August. l. 1. c. 2. con^ra Julian. and Respons. ad Artic sibi impos.
art. 1. Quod ad magnitudinem and potentiam pr^tii, and quod ad unam pertinet
causam generis humani, sanguis Chr^^^. redemptio est totius mundi. sed qui hoc
saeculum sine side Christ^, and sine r^genera tionis sacramento p^rt^anseunt,
redemptionis alien^ sunt. Cum itoque, per unam omnium naturam, omnium causam a
Domino nost^o in veritate susceptam, ^edempti omnes recte dicantur, non tamen
omnes captivitat^ sunt eruti, redemptionis proprietas, haud dubium, penes illos
est, de quibus princeps bujus mundi, missus est for as, and j am non vasa Dia
boli, sed membra sunt Christi: Cujus mors non impensa est humano generi, ut ad
redemptionem ejus, etiam qui regenerandi non erant, pertinerent: Sed ita qa^d
per unicum exemplum gestum est pro universis, per singular sacramentum
celebra^^tur in singulis. Poculum quippe immortalitatis, quod consectum est de
infirmitate nostra, and virtute divina, habet quidem in se, ut omnibus profit,
sed si non bibitur, non proficit.
, that in the foundation of all he wrote about Redemption, or efficacious
grace, he was one with all the Greek and Latin Fathers, and his truth in
this, is witnessed, even by a Bellarmine. And in truth, it is monstrous to
conceive Austins opinions to have been so new, as the Pelagians and Massilians
of old, and our Arminian Neopelagians would have a foolish credulous world, now
to believe: For it can hardly sink into any sound man's head, that all the
Affrican and Western Churches and Councils, should be so fondly enamoured
with one Austin of Hippo, as to adhaere to him novellizing, and to turn his
writings into Canons, against their Catholic received tene^s. And then much
less is it credible, that the Church of Rome, who in her Pontifes, begun to
take unreasonable state upon her, and held Austin and the Africans under an
excommunication Phil. Morn. mist. iniqu. progr. 9. etc.
upon another account, who watched for advantage of Appeals; and upon that
score, was long before she assented to the condemnation of Pelagius and his
followers; I say it is no way credible, that the Roman Church, should against
her own interest, have suffered her self to be swaied by poor African
Austin. 5. All this is most evident from the black brand of infamy, wherewith
Austin stigmatizeth the Pelagians, for mainteining, as now the Arminians do,
That men are redeemed, but not delivered from the power of the Devil Aust. lib
3. cont. Julian. cap. 3. redimuntur, sed non liberantur, lavantur, sed non
abluuntur; Haec sunt sententiarum portenta vestrarum. Haec paradoxa
Pelagianorum Haereticorum etc. Caeterum rogo te, quomodo potest intelligi ista
redemptio, nisi a malo redimente illo, qui redimit Israel ab omnib.
iniquitatibus suis: Vbi enim redemptio sonat, intelligitur and pretium; and
quod est hoc, nisi pretiosus sanguis agni imm^culati Jesu Christi? De hoc autem
pretio quare sit fusum respondeat ipseredemptor, ipse mercator, Hic est
(inquit) sanguis meus qui pro multis effunditur. in remissionem peccatorum.
Pergite adhuc, pergite, and ficut dicitis, in sacramento salvatoris
baptizantur, sed non salvantur, redimuntur, sed non liber antur, etc. Mirasunt
quae dicitis; nova, falsa sunt quae dicitis; mira stupemus, nova cavemus, falsa
convincimus.
. These opinions he calls portentous, new, Pelagian, Haereticall paradoxes, more
wonderful than those of the Stoicall Philosophers: And though it be true (as
the late Bishop of Salisbury has learnedly observed) that that place in the
letter, speaks only of children; yet who sees not, that by just analogy, it
may be extended to others? And elsewhere the Church is as peremptory in
censuring those, who maintained, that Christ died as well, and as much for
unbeleeving impenitents, as for believing penitents Council. Valent. celebratum
Anno 855. cap. 4. Quidam sunt, qui sanguinem Christi, etiam pro illis impiis,
qui a mundi exordio, usque ad passionem Domini, in sua impietate, and aeterna
damnatione puniti sunt, effusum definiunt, contra illud Propheticum, ero mors
tua, O mors, etc. Illud nobis simpliciter and fideliter tenendum, ac docendum
placet, juxta Apostolicam and evangelicam veritatem, quod pro illis, hoc datum
pretium teneamus, de quibus ipse Dominus noster dicit: Sicut Moses exaltavit in
deserto, etc. and Apostolus, Christus semel oblatus est, ad multorum
exhaurienda peccata. Add to this the sharp censure of the Church of Lions, at
large set down in Hist. Ga^teshalci, p. 79, 8^, 81.
. By all that has been said, I doubt not, but every ingenuous Reader will
easily grant me, that you have small reason to brag of your Gettings, either
in your Latin, p. 29. or your English Summarie, p. 31. That you are most
ridiculous, in making so much of your notion out of Origin, p. 26. about
everlasting fire not being prepared for wicked men, but for the Devil and his
Angels, as to repeat it again, p. 29. I confess somewhat faintlie, whilst
now, as it were upon second thoughts, you shuffle in the term (especially) and
not by a peremptory irrespective decree: But still by your eagerness to defend
Origin, you 1. Leave some kind of suspicion behind you, as if in process of
time, you would go on with him, to maintain redemption from hell it self,
yea, salvation of Devils. 2. You quite forget your own reasoning, p. 21. where
against Gods being the author of man's death, you say, if death be that monster,
of which sin is the dam that brings it forth, how foul a thing must be the
Sire? And can there be any greater blasphemy, then to bring Gods providence
into the pedigree of death? And is it less blasphemous to make God the author
of preparing eternal torments, for those who were once the Lords more noble
creatures, Angels, though now Devils, then to prepare the like torments for as
great, if not greater sinners, wicked men, and that for the punishment of their
sins? But I will leave you at your leisure to unriddle this, and take my
leave of you at this time, from this your second Chapter. I will presume, my
Reader will much thank me, if I shall affect more brevity in the Replies which
I make upon the three following Chapters; which therefore I will most solemnly
promise him to do, and for that purpose resolve to give in mostly my marginall
quotations in more short references, and not at large, as hitherto I have done.
I will in the beginning of each Chapter, deliver in such generals, as shall
quite overthrow all his wild Asiatick discourses, in the several Sections, and
then content my self with some brief Strictura's upon his niblings at sound
doctrine; and give him leave to please himself and foolish people, with his
gaudy rhetoric. I may the rather take this course, for that, what follows,
has been much confuted in what has been said; his whole design opened; and
because with not many material variations, unless in what he has out of
Roetius, and in his distinctions, about necessity and contingency. I find that
from this chap. 3. p. 32. even unto the very end, his book is almost verbatim
the same, with his first renounced papers; unto which I hope every body will
say, I have answered enough, if not too much. These papers may one day see the
light, if the Church be any way pleased with any of my poor endeavors, in the
defense of her truth and grace.

Chap. 3. from p. 32. to 54.
SIR,
THE method of your proceedings in these three Chapters, seems to me somewhat
mystical; In the first you plead strangely against Sir N. N. (whom because, as
you would have us believe, p. 10, 11. your affrighted fancy mistakes to be a
Calvinist, you lay the harder at) That God is not the author of sin. In the
second and this third, That he is not so much as the author of punishment,
whether temporal or eternal; and yet (whether soberly or no, as you talk of
Calvin, p. 30. I know not, but surely enough) you begin this Chapter, p. 32.
with a palpable contradiction to your self, when you say, That every reprobate
is praedetermined to eternal punishment, sure then, God is the author or
efficient cause of that punishment; unless he be not the author of all that he
determines to do or inflicts; the conditionality or absoluteness of it,
alters not the case. It had been somewhat hard for me to have divined, what you
aimed at in these eccentrick Chapters and Sections, unless you had
indoctrinated my plumbeous cerebrofity, by a kind dilucidary, which you set
down, p. 46. ^in four several propositions; whereof the first is, without
more ado, allowed you; and if you please, you may understand it of the sole
efficient, or rather deficient cause. The 2. and 3. are easily granted you, if
by cause you will but understand the sole meritorious cause, not the sole
efficient cause; nay, that you may perceive how kind hearted I am, now I am on
the giving hand, I will grant you the fourth also, which is the great thing you
do strenuouslie fight for, tanquam pro aris and focis: Provided always, that
1. By reprobation, you understand (as no where you seem to do otherwise)
positive poenall reprobation, or praedamnation; which none of your fiercest
adversaries maintain to be decreed or inflicted but for sin So Dr Twisse
often, Calvin in 2 These. 2. Reprobi suo delicto morti devoti sunt, non pereunt,
nisi qui digni sunt. Zanc. de not. Dei. l. 5. p. 712. peccatum non est causa
rejectionis, sed est causa damnationis.
. 2. That by condition, you do not understand the condition of Gods eternal,
internal, immanent act of willing, but of the thing willed, or the damnation
to be inflicted D* Riv. de reprob. 12. Decrevit eos quos reprobavit, propter
peccatum damnare; neque tamen propterea sequitur, peccatum esse causam decreti,
quam^is est causa rei decretae: quia potuisset Deus, etiam considerato peccati
merito, homines illos revocare ad meliorem viam, quod aliis accidit, qui non
minus in se habeba^t causam damnationis. Sed tamen non decrevit Deus absolute
eis infligere poenam, sine condition peccati, et si condition posita,
potuisset non infligore.
. 3. That by condition you do not understand such a causall condition, as was
in no sort arbitrary unto God, to have taken, or not have taken the advantage
of; for if so, we must all have been damned; for God saw sin enough in all. And
now we seem to have made up the composition you put in for, p. 47. I might
allow my self an holy day with my Mr T. P's good leave, as finding little
work for me to do about this Chapter: But that you may know, how much better
I like to keep at my work, then to play, I will adventure to do two things.
1. Without all craft and deceit, (as much of it lurks in generals) to put in
some generals, which to any intelligent attentive Reader, shall quite overthrow
all or most of the particulars of this Chapter, until, p. 47. 2 Out of my free
heartedness toward you, I shall affixe some Animadversions to your text,
where you are jeering, railing at, or nibling at doctrine, that cannot, must
not be gainsaid. In reference to the first, I have (as briefly as the matter
will bear) these four things to say. 1. In what sense our Divines say or say
not, that Gods decree of election or reprobation is absolute. 2. That in the
sense to be opened, that of irrefragable Archbishop Bradwardine, must needs be
true, that all Gods decrees or wills are absolute. 3. That reverend Mr T. P. in
this very Chapter, says as much in effect. 4. I shall show what be Mr T. P's
chief mistakes and grand sophismes, throughout the body of this Chapter. As to
the first, I might justly refer to the very first thing, which I have done in
my first papers, wherein I have at large handled this, the rather, because I
may hope, that that which relates to the stating of the questions belonging to
these 3, 4, 5. Chapters, may come to light not long after this. Yet lest any
disaster should fall out, take the very abstract of all, thus. 1. As for the
terms, absolute, necessary, irrespective, fatal, irresistible, etc. they are
not chosen by us Bp Carletons Exam. p. 14. We use not these terms; we reject
them, we need them not, we have enough in Scripture to maintain this doctrine.
, who have others more scripturall (as these are not) to express our meaning,
about Gods decrees; but rather imposed upon us by our adversaries; who also in
that imposition, usually understand them not in that sense, which we sometimes
have when we are forced to make use of some of them; but in the sense they are
pleased to give them, for the making of us and our doctrine odious. But as for
the terms of irrespective, conditional, incomplete, indefinite, not
peremptory, they are terms of our adversaries own coining, though far
less scripturall than most of the former, and therefore ought not by them to
be disowned. When we say then (e. gr.) at any time, That Gods decree is
absolute, we mean not that it is, 1. Irrational, that were an abhorred
blasphemy against the God of all reason: As he can do no unrighteous thing,
so, nor irrational; how little soever men or Angels may be able to give a
reason of that justice See Calvin at large before, citing Scripture, and Austin
for his de praedest. 700. and 728. voluntati ejus quis resistit, nunquid
responsum est ab Apostolo, O homo, falsum est quod dixisti. Non; sed responsum
est, O homo, quis tu es, qui responsas Deo?
. 2. Or that it is devoid of, and has no respect to an efficient, material,
formal, or final cause, ab interno movens, moving from within; though we
deny all cause moving from without, causam procatarcticam, and all distinctive
conditions formal, in or from an external object Riv. disp. 5 These. 3 and 4
D* Dav. in prolegom. de Rep.
moving from without. It will be an aeternall truth, that praedestinatio non
egreditur extra se. 3. Or that it is without all science or praescience of what
shall be, or shall not be future, as to different conditions and qualifications
in the object, (this were horribile dictu, to throw dust in the Almighties eyes
V^de Walaeum cap. 3. de provid. cont. Corvin. p. 71. Licet verum sit quod
decretum ejus antecedat scientiam visionis; quia alioqui (...), aut temeraria
existentia induceretur; tamen and boc verum est, scientiam and sapientiam Dei
hic esse divinae voluntatis quasi norma, and (...).
,) though we say not, dare not say, cannot prove it when we have said it, that
God does from aeternity discern this or that upon the praescience of, or for
the sake of those different qualifications. 4. Less, by an absolute decree,
do we understand (as Mr T. P. and all the Jesuiticall, Anticalvinisticall,
etc. associates with him, would feign make the world believe, that we hold)
such a decree, which for salvation or damnation, was intended to be executed,
without all consideration of the different wills and behaviors of men That
would be decretum horribile indeed, even a very cyclopick one; monstrum
horrendum, etc. Vide Apol. Remonstr.
, so as that, though men had believed or repented never so much from their
whole heart, yet by virtue of an absolute decree, they should be designed to
eternal torments, and dragged to them; and others again (whom Episcopius, in
scorn, speaking of the Elect, calls albae gallinae filios) by virtue of their
election, should be as certain for heaven, whatever their lives and faiths
had been; As that fur praedestinatus (a book which extremely all the Batavian
and English Arminian party, are taken with, nota loquor) would have the world
believe, that upon our principles, he was after his horrid debaucheries, and
his impenitence in them all See fur praedest. ad finem, when he comes to his Te
Deum, p. 64, 65, etc. where he does most wickedly misrepresent and misapply
some undeniable truths.
These wild phancies are no other then the slanderous expuitions of malicious
inveterate enemies of us and the Church; for the venting of which pray God
forgive them, and make the Church as really to shun them, as the woman upon
Eagles wings, did fly from the red Dragon, when he cast a flood of water
after her, etc. Rev. 12. 15. All that we mean, when we say that Gods decrees
are absolute, is, that, 1. They be sovereign, free, unforced, Ephesians. 1. 11. not
dependent, praedestinatio non est in potestate praedestinati, sed
praedestinantis Anselm. Si vis omnium, quae fecit Christus and passus est,
scire necessitatem; scito, quia ipse voluit.
. 2. Eternal, not temporal. 3. Unchangeable, not alterable. 4. Infallible,
certain, by virtue of Gods counsel (not doubtful) and in this sense
necessary. 5. Definite and personal: not general and indefinite, relating
rather to general conditions, then having respect to particular persons, or
events. 6. Praeconstituent, and in time effecting every thing any way conducing
to salvation, in the way of causes, means, qualifications, etc. So that every
thing which is accompanying salvation, is a proper fruit of the decree of
election; only permissive, and governing of every sinful thing, which tends
to the chambers of death In malis est antecessio ordinis, non causalitatis.
, which are not fruits of reprobation, but merely consequents; yet all
punishments, whether temporal or eternal, are prepared by God. In a word (for
many more things might be profitably added) even whatsoever this Author, and
the less profligate sort of Batavian Remonstrants would seem to ascribe to
praescience, we do as much ascribe to praedetermination, the ground of all that which they call scientiam visionis: And by so doing, we do as little
introduce Manichism, Stojcism, etc. as themselves See Dr Davenants
Animadversions, p 36, 37.
. Now 2. That all decrees in God, properly so called, in the sense declared,
must needs be absolute, I prove especially, 1. By Bradwardines Argument, as Dr
Twisse relates it Dr Twisse, Synod of Dort, and Arles, p. 68.
, unto which he subjoines another of his own. 2. By the direct tendency, which
the contrary opinion has to Atheism it self, and that the grossest also. For
the first, He first proves out of Bradwardine, that if we yield not to the
absoluteness of Gods decree, we must like wicked men, ambulare in circulo,
walk the rounds till our heads run round. His argument is thus: If there be
any conditional will in God, (I mean this quoad actum volentis, or
decernentis) the condition of that will of God, is either willed by God, or
not: If not willed by him, then that must be acknowledged to come to pass in
the world, without the will of God, which he holds to be a great absurdity:
But if that condition be also in some sort willed by God, then either
absolutely or conditionally: If absolutely, then also the thing conditionated,
shall be absolutely willed by God. But if it be said, that the condition spoken
of, is willed conditionally, then a way is open to a progress in infinitum,
which all disclaim; for it would make us all run round, run round,

In montibus inquit, erant, and erant in montibus illis. That which he
subjoines of his own, is no less strong, and therefore he has challenged all
the Arminians in the world to answer it, many years ago, yet no Reply is
made. That Achillean Argument of his in the same place, he sets down thus. If
any will of God be not absolute, but conditional, then surely the decrees of
damnation and salvation are conditional, even to the very Acts of Gods
decrees: But (says he) I will evidently demonstrate, that in Christian reason,
this cannot be: For if any thing be a condition of the decree of salvation,
then either by the necessity of Nature, or by the constitution of God; Not by
the necessity of Nature, as is evident of it self, and all confess; but
neither by the constitution of God; for then God did constitute, that is,
ordeine, that upon the position of such a condition, to wit, faith, etc. he
would ordeine man to salvation. Mark, I pray, the notorious absurdity hereof,
God did ordeine, that he would ordeine, or God did decree, that he would
decree; where the eternal acts of Gods decree and ordination, is made the
object of his decree or ordination; whereas it is well known, that the objects
of Gods decrees are only things temporal, and not eternal. Thus far he,
whom we may style our English Austin, or our Bradwardinus redivivus; who, as I
have heard him say often, when he was but a young scholar in New College,
transcribed all Bradwardine with his own hand. A man more fit to be heard in
these matters, then Grotius the Great. 2. As for the direct tendency of the
contrary opinion about the respectivenesse and conditionality of Gods decrees,
to gross Atheism; to say nothing of the great In his Arcan. Arminianism. lib.
2. in octa. and eorum defensio in 410.
undertakings of D. Nich. Vedelius, (a man, as I am well assured, my good
friend Mr T. P. can no way brook, as little I think as he can answer him) I
prove by these following arguments, which I shall presently set down, Dr Twisse
had some reason to ask Against Mr Mason, p. 37.
why it should not be possible for an Infidel to turn Manichee, and an
Arminian to turn Atheist, if he be not one already. And possibly, that author
of whom the same Doctor speaks, and who in his time, was a known oracle to all
the English Arminian party, had some sense of this, who because (as the late B.
of Salisbury observed against Vorstius Animadvers. p. 520.
he was loath to admit of such a praedestination as agrees with Gods nature,
he shaped out a nature for God, suitable to that praedestination which he
dreamed of, when he was not ashamed to protest, That he thought it less
dishonorable to the blessed Trinity, to say with the Atheist, there is no God,
then to feign such a God, as the decree maintained by the Contra-Remonstrants
makes him to be.

Now the chief Arguments to prove the tendency of the respective conditional
decree to Atheism, are these which I shall now give in short, but which I
shall, God giving me life, health, and opportunity, be willing to draw out
more largely, whenever I shall be called forth thereunto, or dared out by any
of the great Grandees of the contrary faction.

1. Respectiveness in Gods decrees ab aeterno, as to the internal act of
willing in himself, introduces a chief cause before the chief and first
cause; and by this means nullifieth a Deity, as even Arminius himself
confesses Armin. disput. de Deo These. 51. Austin de Genes. contra Manich. l.
1. c. 2. voluntas Dei, omnium quae sunt, ipsa est causa: Sin. habet causam
voluntas Dei, est aliquid. quod antecedit voluntasem Dei, quod nefas est
credere. Vide Walaeum contra Corvin. cap. 3. de provid. p. 98, 99.
. And truly what more essential to God, as such, then to be the first and
chief of all things, which are or shall be? This once denied, overturnes all
Deity, and so I think introduces a worse mischief then the most hurtful
evil, which even the praedominancie of splendida bilis in Mr T. P. durst
object against us, when p. 55. he charge us with Manichisme, which as cursed
as it is, is some what better then Atheism, by how much better it is to have
one God too much, then none at all.

2. It introduces a most fatal fatality, worse then any of the Stoics
feigning, with which also, in the same place he does upbraid us, viz. such a
fate as does not only bind the creatures, according to the decree and
appointment of the great God, but which does bind the supremum numen it self,
according to the vertible cylindricall will of a vain creature, turning upon
his tropicks, contrary to the will and determination of God.

3. It introduces an eternal futurtion of all contingent voluntary things
before any decree, either of God, or of man, has passed upon them. No decree
of God, say our great patrons every where, has passed upon them; for that
would bring in praedetermination, before praescience, a thing which to their
soul, is more hateful, then the lame and the blind were to David's, 2 Samuel 5.
6. No decree of man could, who certainly ab aeterno, could not determine
himself, this or the other way; Non ens non habet affectiones.

4. It divorceth, yea, nullifieth aeternall praescience in God, and it was
Austins saying many hundred years ago, Qui tollit praescientiam, tollit Deum.
It divorceth praescience from praedetermination; for according to our Mr T. P.
and the rest of the upholders of the respective decree, all future contingent
things are only foreknowne, but not determined; See Mr T. P. throughout all his
Boethian discourse, a. p. 48. to the end of the Chapter. And thus we have an
absolute praescience, and but a conditional praedetermination; so that whereas
in men, it is yet an undetermined question in the schools Dr Riv. Synops
purior. Theolog. and disp. de lib. arb. cap. 8. These. 5.
, whether man's rational judgment, and his rational will, make two distinct
faculties really, rather then notionally only, distinct; in God, praescience
and praedetermination, must be both in nature, and in time distinct; nay it
nullifieth all eternal praescience; for never yet have the Arminians, though
provoked by their adversaries to do it a thousand times, been able or willing
to show, how all mere contingent things, (as for example) in themselves, as the
foreseen faith of Paul Austin. de bon. perseverant. Haec dona Dei quae dantur
electis, secundum Dei propositum, quibus datum est, and incipere credere, and
in fide usque ad vitae hujus terminum perseverare, sicut tanta rationum atque
authoritatum contestatione probavimus; haec inquam, Dei dona, si nulla est
praedestinatio quam defendimus, non praesciuntur a Deo, praesciuntur autem.
Haec est igitur praedestinatio quam defendimus. Vnde aliquando eadem
praedestinatio significatur etiam nomine praescientiae.
, and the infidelity of Judas, should from eternity pass from the condition of
mere possibility or contingency, into a condition to be certainly foreseen as
future, before all divine praedetermination. He that among the Arminians can
unriddle this, erit mihi magnus Apollo; which because the wisest of them could
never do, therefore Episcopius leaves it questionable, whether there be any
such matter Episcop. These. private.
, and the rest, though otherwise vocal enough, are Mutes about it, throughout
their Synodalia Scripta.

5. It is most praejudiciall to Gods wisdom and power, as well as to diverse
other attributes, which I will not now mention. 1. To his wisdom; God and
Nature we use to say, make nothing in vain; But according to the opinion (if a
man may so speak in imitation of our Mr T. P. p. 13.) of the conditional
praedestinarians and reprobatarians, God has made all rational creatures, men
and Angels, in vain, contrary to Prove. 16. 14. before he could foretell, or
had determined their temporal or eternal conditions, what should become of
them, for good or evil. 2. To his power, in bringing to pass whatsoever he
will, in heaven, or in earth, Psalm. 135. 6. Aust. Enchirid. cap. 90. Nisi hoc
credamus, periclitatur ipsum confessionis initium, quia in Deum patrem
omnipotentem credere confitemur, neque enim ob aliud veraciter omnipotens
diceretur, nisi quia quicquid vult, potest, nec voluntate cujusquam creaturae
voluntatis omnipotentis impeditur effectus.
What man is there, who if it lay in his power, would not make all his purposes
absolute? and shall not this be in the power of God, yea effected by him?

6. According to this Divinity, we are not to pray, Mat. 6. Thy will be done on
earth, as it is in heaven, but contra, Thy will be done in heaven, as men shall
conclude upon it on earth.

7. It introduces a number of uncerteine velleities, and wouldbees, in the
Almighty, in propriety of speech, an (...), the which belike our Mr T. P. p.
40. is not afraid to ascribe to him, though his Arminius Armin. disput. 4. de
Deo.
think, and that truly, that it is most unbecomming the divine Majesty. By
these, and I cannot tell how many myriads more of absurdities, it is easy to
see, whither conditional decrees would carry us, even to put it into our creed,

Deum non curare mortalia quenquam. 3. (For that was the third thing proposed
by me) Reverend Mr T. P. himself, our ipse dixit himself, (for I am sure we
have in this Pamphlet, a world of dictates, rather then Arguments from him) is
forced to yield to the substance of all that has been said, for the
absoluteness of Gods decrees, in the sense declared, when he tells us, p. 51.
That the distinction of voluntas antecedens and consequens, (and he explaines
the Antecedent will of God, by conditional upon the place) is not made in
respect of Gods will simply (in which there cannot be either prius or
posterius) but in respect of the things which are the objects of his will. And
good Sir, ought you not to have known, that all the dispute betwixt you and
your adversaries, is about the internal simple act of Gods will, and not about
the external object, or thing willed by him? Do you not then perceive, as
yet, how handsomely and soberly by this concession, you do quite and clean
overthrow all that you labor to build up, throughout your whole book, and
especially this Chapter? Truly as the wisest are observed, not to be wise at
all times, nemo sapit omnibus horis: So neither are the wildest always out,
they have their dilucida intervalla; est and olitor aliquando opportuna
loquutus. In the odnesse of the look and mean of your book (to phrasifie a
little with you) you are all for the conditionality of Gods decrees, and
staringly against all absoluteness; but here all upon a sudden in this your
saying, you are as much for an absolute decree, as any of your Calvinisticall
Adversaries would have you. You belike are one of the modern Politicians, you
do loqui cum vulgo, but sentire cum sapientibus. If so, Sir, let wise men have
more of your meaning and fools more of your gaping. But if yet you do not
understand, how fairly by this grant, you have broken the back of your
finically fine Corrected Copy, learn it from Doctor Twisse, for once, whom you
have so often wrested and abused; who though he never thought of you when he
wrote it, yet now speaks very pertinently to you thus Dr Twisse against Mr
Hoard, p. 49.
. I would not have any think, that I reject any of those ancient Fathers, that
seem to be most opposite to Austins opinion, in the point of praedestination.
I think they may be fairly and scholastically reconciled, without
acknowledging of so much difference betwixt them, as Vossias makes, and tha^
by such an interpretation, as sometimes is admitted by Vossius himself of his
own phrase, of his own distinction, though he dreams not of the applicable
nature of the same to the will of God, in praedestination Hist. Pelag. lib. 7.
. His distinction is, of voluntas Dei antecedens and consequens, and this he
makes aequivalent to that other distinction of the will of God, absolute and
conditional. Now this conditional will of God, he interprets, not quoad actum
volentis, but quoad res volitas. Like as Dr Jackson professes in express
terms, that the former distinction of voluntas antecedens and consequens, is
to be interpreted, namely, quoad res volitas, and not quoad actum volentis. Now
according to this construction, there is no difference between them and Austin,
nor the least impediment to the making of the will of God, both in
praedestination and reprobation, to be most absolute. For though sin be
acknowledged to be the cause of the will of God in reprobation, quoad res
volitas, in respect of the punishment willed thereby, this hinders not the
absoluteness of reprobation, quoad actum reprobantis. And unless we
understand the Fathers thus, we must necessarily charge them with such an
opinion, whereof Aquinas Aquinas affirmat, nem nem esse, tam insanae mentis, ut
diceret, merita esse causas praedestinationis, ex part actus praedestinantis,
lib. 1. q. 23. a. 5.
is bold to profess, that never any man was so mad as to affirm; to wit, That
any merits should be the cause of praedestination, quoad actum
praedestinantis. And why so? because praedestination is the act of Gods will,
and there can be no cause of Gods will, quoad actum volentis. Now, who sees
not, that by the same reason, there can be no cause of divine reprobation,
quoad actum reprobantis; for even reprobation is the act of Gods will, as well
as praedestination; and every way it must be as mad a thing to devise a cause
of reprobation, quod actum reprobantis. Thus far that learned Dr, all which
if it be true, quite overthrowes your book; and if not, pray confute it, and
your own grant too. 4. As for the grand sophisms, and numerous mistakes, they
be especially these, relating to this Chapter, as to what for arguments sake,
must be reduced to it, out of others. 1. We have a parcel of wild
consequences, so extremely remote from the premises, as if at the same time you
had sent a bill of divorce to Calvinisme, p. 24, and 48. You had with it also
manumitted all natural and artificial Logic, ex. gr. p. 33. God has a true
will, which is usually called voluntas signi, a commanding, threatening,
promising will; ergo, That is all the will he has; he has no other above it or
besides it; for no body mainteins he has any contrary to it. 2. Upon the
perpetual confusion of election and salvation, as if they were one and the
same, throughout Chapter 3. and 5. Salvation is actually bestowed upon none
(viz. of years, for other wise it is false) but upon faith and repentance, and
perseverance in it. p. 69. None were elected to them, but upon foresight of
them: they be the conditions of election, as well as of salvation. 3. Upon a
like mistake, that there is the same reason for the making of Gods decree, that
there is in the intended execution thereof, p. 39. The falsehood whereof Doctor
Ames Rescrip. scholast. ad. N. Grevinch cap. 5. and Doctor Twiss also, have
confuted by many instances. In his answer to Mr Hoard, p. ^89. The decree of
showing mercy in pardoning of sin does no more pre^uppose sin, then the
decree of showing the power of balm, in curing a green wound, does presuppose
the wound: or the decree of showing the power of a cordial against poison,
does presuppose the poisoning of a man's body; or the decree of advancing a
subject by way of reward, does presuppose his service; or the decree of a
patron to prefer his son to a benefice, does presuppose his fitness for it;
or the decree of Solomon to bring Shimei his gray hairs to the grave in blood,
did presuppose the offense for which this was brought to pass; but rather from
these decrees and intentions, each author in his kind, proceeds to bring to
pass every thing that is required to the accomplishment of the end which he
intends, etc.
You conclude with a sure, but not surely; that which is the reason of their
condemnation, was the condition upon which they were determined to be damned.
If you dispute concerning the cause of Gods internal will, quoad actum
volentis, as you must, or else you pinch no body with it, but Sir N. N. 4.
Promises of rewards, threatenings of punishment; some covenants evangelicall,
are proposed and published with conditions; p. 33. A blessing if ye obey, and
a curse if ye obey not, etc. ergo, God takes up his eternal decrees
concerning events and persons, upon the same conditions. And in this latter way
of arguing, you do so please your self, (as your brother Arminian Mr Hoard,
had done before you) as that from p. 33. to 36. you make 4. or 5. Arguments of
one, (and that a very lame and inconsequent one) as if the punishments,
rewards, promises, threats, exhortations, etc. would afford you different
mediums, for different arguments. Just as we might conceive, that that Herald,
who by command of his Master, in opposition to the long catalogue of Kingdoms,
enumerated in the title of the King of Spain, cried out, The King of France,
the King of France, had reckoned up several Kingdoms belonging to the King of
France. How well you may be satisfied with such sequels, I cannot tell, but most
acquainted with the ways of arguing, will fear, that neither Scripture, nor
your best care (which you promised to use, p. 7.) were your best guides in the
conveyance of them. 2. As for pure Theological Sphalmata, I cannot tell how
many they be; but I am sure, these be some of the chief of them. 1. Though I
cannot tell in what good fit upon him (sure he was in some good mood when he
did it) he grants, that there can be no prius nor posterius, and so no
conditionality in Gods will simply, p. 51. Yet he does all along throughout the
Chapter, most simply shall I say, nay, most confidently plead for a
conditional decree, and for a conditional decree only of election and
reprobation. Whereas the very Remonstrants were once angry with their
adversaries, laying it to their charge, that they did in Terminis maintain,
Gods decrees to be conditional Collat. Hag. in Statu. controv. ad cap. 1. p.
124. Nos nusquam diximus electionem esse conditionalem.
. Its a wanton creature which overturnes the vessel, into which it had poured
forth good milk. 2. He overturns all Gods decrees properly so called, and
instead thereof, p. 33, 34. etc. substitutes mere mandates, promises,
exhortations, statutes about personal qualifications, etc. These with him and
all his party, are the decrees of praedestination. As if when Princes put forth
Proclamations, Statutes, Orders, etc. for ship-mony, taxes, excise, etc. they
did praedestinate us to the payment of them. 3. Clearly instead of a
scripturall praedestination going before a praedetermination of man's will, he
introduces a post-destination of Gods will, as his own phrase is, p. 53.
dependent upon man's will. And here indeed we find the (...) he talks of, p.
23. of putting the child before the parent, etc. There we have the hypallage of
the horse upon the bridle. 4. As pleasing a man, as he would be thought to
be, yet in this Chapter, and throughout all the forefront of his book, contrary
to the more rational and Theological way which he had taken in his first
papers, he loves to be dealing chiefly, in the more harsh and less explicable
or comfortable point of reprobation, than in that more comfortable, and in the
Scriptures oftener mentioned point of election Ames Rescript. ad Grevinch. cap.
5. he has his answer. Calumniandi animum ab iis prodi, qui ab electione ad
reprobationem, a gratia ad peccatum, i^ disputationibus hisce tam avide solent,
and praecipitanter ferri. 2. Vt sui dogmatis consectariis omnibus urgeantur
ipsi, non iniquum esse; quippe qui consilii divini, totiusque decreti quod
electionem attingit, rationem se reddere posse dicunt: a nobis vero non aeque
requiri posse, ut consequentias omnes calumniose colligatas cuique praestemus,
qui mysteriu^ hoc, mortalem omnem superare mentem u^ credimus, sic and ubique
docemus. 3. Non eam esse reprobationis rationem, quae est electionis, id est,
ut scitissime dixit Augustinus, nec ita reprobationem esse causam mali, ut
praedestinatio, est causa boni: Nec obdurationem ita facere hominem malum, ut
misericordia facit bonum. 4. Hanc eandem dicam, and Augustino Pelagianos and
Apostolo Paulo veritatis hujus hosts impegisse, quam ipsi cum papistis, nobis
nunc impingunt.
; For which I can assign no other good reason, but that having taken in a
liberal Dosis of Arminian Divinity, he thought it as requisite for the making
of his adversaries odious, to adhaere as well to their method, as to their
matter. 5. Yea, as little compliance as he would seem to have with his good
friends, the Arminians, p. 4 and 5. he does in this Chapter all along,
out-stride them. They at least at first (as may be seen in stating the
Question in the Hague-Conference) would be thought only to presuppose faiths
praevision before election unto life; whereas our Mr T. P. most valiantly
presupposes not only faith, but all sorts of good works and perseverance in
them to the last gasp before election, p. 36. as the performance of faith and
obedience, is that important condition, without which, as the former will not
be had, so the latter, viz. reprobation or damnation, be avoided, so p. 69. 6.
In the way of objections against orthodox protestant doctrines, we have
nothing, but what many hundred years ago, was against Austin and his
followers, spit out of Pelagian and Massilian mouths; we have nothing but their
old crambe, as I had thought at large in the particulars, to have represented
in my margin, but shall be forced to do it in short references. All those
four things which I promised, being now fully dispatched, I scarce know any
child but might run and read, and then censure all which you have in your
several sections, until p. 47. where you put in for some Articles of
composition. But because all are not of a like quickness, for the use of very
babes in Christ, I will, as I promised above, in the second place, affix some
few short animadversions to the words of your text, where any the least need
shall seem to require. And here the most that will need to be said, will be to
your 22. Section, p. 33, 34. where first you seem to have a months mind to
maintain, that God has no other then a revealed will, that is, such a one as
is made known by commandments, promises, threats, exhortations; for you say,
that we must guess at his secret will, by what we know of his revealed will;
and yet more plainly, We must only judge of his aeternall and impervestigable
decrees, by what we find in his word, concerning his promises and his threats;
all which is nothing but a remonstranticall petitio principii: For the question
betwixt you and your adversaries, is not, whether yea or no, God has made such
decrees, as you represent; viz. That every believing soul shall be saved, and
every final impenitent one be damned; but whether these be all the decrees
which God has made, or whether to speak properly, this be any decree of
praedestination at all, wherein no body is either praedestinated or reprobated
See what Dr Davenant has in his animadv. even out of your much valued Dr
Overall, p. 10. and 256.
? 2. It does seem to hold forth, that you be as well able from Scripture to
open to us what be the conditions, upon which God does elect or reprobate, as
you can show the conditions upon which God either saves or damns men Ibid. p.
6. He should have showed us, with whom God conditioned, upon what terms, and
where the conditions stand upon record: and p. 38. conditional decrees of
salvation and damnation have been published in the Gospel, and are
acknowledged by all Divines, but conditional decrees of eternal
praedestination and praeterition, are not found in Scripture, nor allowed of by
the Church of England. Every man knows where to find these conditional
decrees. If any man believe and repent he shall be saved, and contra, but it
will be hard for any Remonstrant to show those other, If any man believe he
shall be praedestinated; if not, he shall be reprobated.
: And this you will do when the Greek Calends come in. 3. You would insinuate,
that you and your accomplices (your own phrase to me in an Epist.) are the only
meek, modest, lamb-like people, who confess, that you were not of Gods
counsel, and therefore dare not forsooth pry into the secrets of Gods
counsel; but that your adversaries are as bold as ever Pliny was, when he
would be peering into Mount Vesuvius; whereas it is all the Christian world
over, most famously known, that one of the grand questions betwixt you and
your adversaries, upon the hinge of which all the rest do turn, is, Whether
there can be any reason by men assigned, why God would praedestinate some men
to life, and leave others? which you adversaries hold in the negative, but you
in the affirmative. Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas: Only the
mischief is, you put non causam pro causa. it is as famously known by this
time, as your work is any where famous or infamous, that upon a praesumption
which particular persons may have, that they be absolutely reprobated, you
would according to our principles, have them conclude, p. 41. That it is a
reprobates duty to be damned; that it is a duty in the greatest part of men, to
go industriously to hell: That when a reprobate says his Paternoster, he
vehemently prays for his own damnation. In none of all which grand mysteries
of iniquity, do any Calvinists that I know, understand themselves from any
principles of their Creed to be instructed in, any more then those ignorant
Papists understand their Creed, who, as Dr White tells me (o) in some parts of
Lancashire, Way to the Church.
use to say their creed thus,

Creezum tuum patrem onitentem, creatorem, ejus amicum chrixus fixus poncho
pilati; and besides, for vitam aeternam, Amen, say, Bitehum and turnehum again.

But you belike, quick witted man, as you be, understand better what follows
from Calvinisticall principles, then the most quicksented men among themselves;
Laurea tu dignus! But if it may be possible for the rectifying of your self,
at least for the antidoting of docible Readers, it will not be amiss in few
words, to show, 1. What we mean by asecret will. 2. In what sense we call it
secret. 3. That God has such a one. 4. That it is no way clashing with his
revealed will. For the first, by a secret will, we understand nothing but the
will of Gods counsels, concerning persons, and the event of all things from all
aeternity, known perfectly only to himself, and so locked up in scrinio
pectoris omnipotentis, Ephesians. 1. 9. 2. We call this will secret, not as if at
all, neither in his word or works, he had made so much as in general, any
discovery that he has such a will; for that were contrary to many places of
Scripture, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Psalm. 135. 6. Prove. 16. 4. Isa. 46. 10. Romans 9. 11.
Acts 15. and Acts 21. 14. 2 Timothy 2. 19. but because he has only revealed it
in general, and not in particular; what it is before it is acted, in reference
to Titius or Sempronius, etc. 2. Because he no where gives any mortals Prosp.
l. 1. de vocat. Gent. Latet discretionis istius ratio, sed non latet ipsa
discretio. Upon this score, that the doctrine of praedestination was altogether
secret, as the Massilians supposed, they would have it wholly rejected, as Mr
T. P. does. Idem Prosp. in Epist. ad August. Eo postremo pervicacia tota
discendit, ut fidem nostram aedificationi audientium contrariam esse definiant,
ac si etiam vera sit, tacendam; quia and perniciose non recipienda traduntur,
ut and nullo periculo quae intelligi nequeant, reticcantur.
any particular account, why and upon what reasons he would take up such a
will, otherwise then that by so doing, he would glorify himself in time, Pro.
16. 4. Romans 9. 22. 3. That God has such a will some way distinct, and above
that of his praecepts, which is usually called voluntas signi, is most clear,
1. From many Scriptures oftentimes quoted already; unto which we may add, Psalm.
115. 3. Mat. 26. 42. Romans 9. 19. Ephesians. 1. 11, etc. 2. From multitudes of
Prophesies of all sorts, concerning things divine and humane, in their own
nature merely contingent and free, foretold many hundreds of years before they
came to pass, and therefore were not only foreseen, but praedetermined,
before all humane praevision, and praedeterminations: For surely, he that
shall say, that these things were not absolutely willed by God (in the sense
often explained) but with Dr Jackson, shall acknowledge no decree of God,
concerning humane actions, good or bad, no not of those which God promised to
effect, concerning his mercy in Christ and Christians, or concerning his
judgments to be effected by the wicked, but only disjunctive* that is, by his
own instances, Part. 2. Sect. 2. cap. 17, etc. Aut erit, aut non erit, either
it shall rain all day to morrow, or be fair all day, (in which example of a
false disjunction, he may seem to teach, that Gods decrees may also be false
See Praef. of Dr Ames, (for that to be his, I know from his own mouth, before
Dr Twisse his book, called the discove^y of Dr Jacksons vanities.
.) The sun will either shine or not shine this day at twelve of the clock: I
say, he that shall say so, had need, not only (as Dr Jackson has the phrase,
Epist. Dedic. to the Earl of Pemb.) be in an error or ignorant; but I dare
say, he had need to turn Atheist, and believe the Scripture no more, then he
would the Sibylline Oracles,

Aio te Aeacide, Romanos vincere posse, etc. 3: From the daily and hourly
events, which fall out, many whereof are far enough from being agreeable to
Gods commands. 4. That this no way clasheth with Gods revealed or praeceptive
will (so as to make two really contrary wills in God, though they may seem so to
us) has been in part showed before, unto which I refer; and do but add that
known Maxim, that subordinata non pugnant, that pars non opponitur toti. That
part of Gods will which is manifested in his praecepts, threats, promises,
exhortations, etc. is not contradictory to the other part of his will of
decrees, or secret will; neither as it relates to the elect or reprobate: Not,
to be sure, as it relates to the elect, for so Gods voluntas signi, is also
voluntas beneplaciti; God not only thereby declaring what is the duty of the
elect to perform, if they will be saved, but what he, who makes them his
workmanship, created unto all manner of good works, Ephesians. 2. 10. intends first
or last to work in them: so that in reference to them, there is neither
contradiction, nor so much as a show of it, betwixt these two wills: nor are
they contradictory, in reference to the reprobates; for they only in the
letter of them, and divulgation of them, declare what is every bodies duty to
perform; what is in it self, holy, just and good, Phil. 4. 8. and e contra,
and so pleasing or displeasing unto God, what, when performed or neglected, he
will reward or punish, which certainly he wills, and shall be; and therefore,
that which says nothing of Gods secret will (otherwise then what by just
consequence is inferred from other places, and relates to the elect, as I said
just now) that can contradict nothing of Gods secret will: Qui nihil dicit,
nihil opponit. If about this reconciliation of the secret and revealed will of
God, you would be pleased to consult learned Zanchius Zanch. de Nature. Dei, l.
3. cap. 4 and 10. Voluntas arcana and revelata, non duae sunt voluntates, neque
unquam contrariae, sed una eademque, semperque secum consentiens Dei voluntas.
Voluntas enim revelata, cum impletur (quod cer^e tandem efficitur in omnibus
electis) eadem si, necesse est cum arcana; quia ea tantum fiunt, quae dominus
vult, arc^na voluntate sieri, Lege autem sua, Deus non solum docet nos electos
quid nostri sit officii, and illud, ut praestemus mandat, sed etiam significat
and revelat quid omnino decreverit, and simpliciter atque absolute velit a
nobis fieri; imo potius quid ipse velit in nobis operari. Quum vero non
impletur, totum hoc non est illa Dei voluntas, quae proprie voluntas
appellatur. Vt in Abrahami and Pharaonis exemplis manifestum est: and est tamen
mandatum declarans quid Deus probat
, or peruse the 5. Chapter of succinct and acute Amesius, in his scholasticall
Rescript. sent to Nich. Grevinch. I dare promise you, if you mind it but
attentively, it will by Gods blessing, do you much more good, then not only
the 5. book, with which you swagger so much, p. 48. etc. of your much commended
Boethius, but than indeed all his 5. de consolatione Philosophiae; in all which
I can hardly pick up five crumbs of true Christian Comfort. These things thus
premised, which are of use against the whole Chapter, I can be content you
rhetoricate it, along from p. 33. to the beginning of p. 35. to as small
purpose, as to any advantage to your cause, as if with some Sir Don Quixot,
(mentioned Epist. 2.) you were strenuously beating the air, about some fair
chimaericall Lady (...), which you would have, or die for her: Only in your
winding out of this Sect, p. 35. you seem afresh to set up another ranting note
against the Calvinists, when you say, That no man is infinitely punished for an
unavoidable necessity, but for not doing his duty, etc. As if any orthodoxe
body had ever said or wrote otherwise. I am sure, those whom you will account
to be fierce Calvinists, the Contra Remonstrants in the Hague-conference, do as
peremptorily affirm this, as your self So Calvin himself, de occult. Dei
provid. Resp. ad 1. Totum illud, de nudo puroque Dei arb^trio, ex malitiae
^fficina productum est. Sic cont. Remonst. passim per totum Colloq.
. Good Sir, what wrong has that same saucy fellow, Sir N. N. done you, that if
my life lay on it, I cannot get you to forbear quarrelling with him? Could I
but guess what hurt he had done to my good Mr T. P. I would join my forces
with yours, and labor to be as certainly the death of him, as that same King
in our English story, who with his Poniard, swore he would stab all the
Frenchmen. Impossibility (say you) is not a sin, and therefore no man is
punished, etc. True, where the thing commanded, is, and was ever impossible
August. l. 3. de lib. arb. cap. 16. Ex ^o quod non accepit (Adam) nullus reus
est; ex eo vero quod non facit quod debet, just reus est: Debet autem, si
accepit voluntatem liberam, and sufficientissimam facultatem.
, and where the impossibility is absolute, as in a brute or a stone, to believe
and repent; not where men since the fall, and by their voluntary fall, have
made it impossible to themselves Aquin. p. 1. q. 23* art. 3. Cum dicitur quod
repro^atus non potest gratiam adipisci, non est hoc intelligendum secundum
imp^ssi^ilitatem absolutam, sed conditionatam, quae non toll it libertatem.
, for else, 1. Natural men, who live and dye in the state of nature, should
not sin in violating the covenant of works, under which they are, nor be
justly damned for it, because it is impossible for them to keep that covenant.
2. It would be no sin in the obdurate to continue impenitent, though
Arminius himself* Disp. publ. say as well as the Scripture, that it is
impossible for such to repent, Heb. 6. 4. 3. It would be no sin in the
regenerate children of God, not to love God with all their heart, power,
strength, etc. because in statu viatorum, it is impossible for them to do so.
2* This objection of Impossibility comes out of the Pelagian school, among whom
for the destroying of original sin, there was none so great a maxim, as one
which they snatched out of Austin Julian apud August. l. ^. oper. imperf. cont.
Julian. Nihil esse peccati in homine, si nihi^ est propriae voluntatis, vel
assentionis, hoc mi^i hominum genus, quod vel leviter sapit, sine dubitatione
consentit. Idem. ibid. Nec semper fuit maximum inter Manichaeos catholicosque
discrimen, and limes quidem latissimus, quo a se mutuo pi^rum, and impiorum
dogmata separantur: ^mo magna moles, ^uasi c^li and terrae pro^unditate
disjungens. q^od nos omne peccatum voluntati, illi vero malae ^orum* naturae
tribuunt Qui cum diversos s^qu^ntur errores, sed veluti de capite fon^is istius
eff^uentes, consequenter, ad sacrilegia ^lagi^iaque perveniunt. Aug. lib. de
vera Relig. usque adeo peccatum est voluntarium malum, ut nullo modo sit
peccatum, si non sit voluntarium.
, That all sin is voluntary: With whom, how much our good friend Mr T. P. (a
great hater of Pelagianisme, as he says)* in making the same use of it,
concurs, I have showed elsewhere (in first papers) and possibly may again,
when I come to p. 65* It was the cruelty of Adonibezek to cut off men's thumbs,
etc. a greater in Pharaoh, to require bricks, and deny straw. 1. This would
pinch hard, if you could prove, God did forcibly bind men's hands from working,
and then require work; that men were very willing to perform the uttermost of
that little which they can do, since the fall, but God would not suffer them:
that he requires any thing from them, more then what once they were able to
perform, Eccl. 7. 29. and cease not yet to be due: that his fatal decree of
reprobation (as you use to style it) deprives them of any natural or moral
powers to work, which are left in them since the fall Prosp. ad object. resp.
15. Nemini D^us correctionis adimit viam, n^^ que^quam boni possibilitate
dispoliat. Non est autem co^sequens, sicut putant, qui talia objiciunt, Deus
quibus poenitentiam non dederit, res^piscentiam ab^^ulerit; and quos non
levaverit, alliserit. Cum ^liud ^it insontem in crimen egisse, quod alien^ est
a Deo, aliud criminoso veniam non dedisse, quod de peccatoris est merito: and
August. Deo reprobante non irrogatur aliquid quo homo ^it deterior, sed tantum
non irrogatur quo fiat melior.
2. You should rather say, that men by sinning cut off their own thumbs, and
scatter their own straw, make away all their own powers, like wicked
prodigals, and that therefore they are justly punished for not working, though
they have disinabled themselves from doing any thing that is savingly good. 3.
How many painted words, and pargited speeches soever you give us, p. 56. (as
you are excellently good at laying on paint upon rotten posts, witness the
Praefacers paint, in the Dialogue betwixt the two Ladies, mentioned before,) by
which you would engender in us a conceit, that you much under value the power
of nature, and magnify the power of Christ's special grace; yet by what you say
here and elsewhere its plain, that you feed us there, upon design, with empty
spoones, whereas your bosom opinion is clearly, That a mere natural man
without the special grace of Christ, has a moral possibility in him to be
without sin; yea, to fulfill all the law of God, by which he may avoid all
punishment: For else if man have not this power, God is as cruel as
Adonibezek, as Pharaoh, if he require any work at his hands. And if this be
not Pelagianisme, nothing ever was. 4. You do not or will not see, that all
these objections, of injustice, cru^lty, etc. which you do so much joy to cast
up, fall as foul upon divine praes^tence, as divine praedeterminati^n; as even
a Jesuiticall Molina is forced in effect to grant B. Davenants Animad. p. 386.
cites his words, de conc. p. 368. Punctum ve^o praedestinationis, and abys^us
inscrut^bilis d^vini con^i^ii, in eo sunt posita, quod cum Deus infinitas alias
providendi non praed^stinatis ration^s nov^rit, qu^bus pro ^adem ipsorum
liberate, in vitam d^v^niss^nt aeternam, fui^^entque proinde pr^d^stinati:
^^emque infinitas alias noverit rat^^nes providendi praed^stinatis, quibus sua
liberate bea^i udinem amitterent, fu^ssentque reprobi, pro sua tantum
liberate* and n^^ pro qualitate usus liberi arbitr^ praevisi, ne ut condition
quidem sin^ qua non, ^um providendi modum* utrisque elegeri^, p^r qu^m
p^aevidit ill^ sin vitam ^^^nam, pro s^^ liberate (...) perve^^u^^*
. But we go on with what you say more: An opinion, brought among other
merchandise out of Turkey into Christendom, and would be rooted out in the
next reformation. 1. I am not so well skilled in Turcisme, (as never having
read the Turkish Alcoran) as exactly to know what their opinion is concerning
absolute praedestination; but I am so competently versed in Popery, and so well
acquainted with your affections, both to first and second Reformation, p. 5.
who will never like of any but a Cassandrian, Interimisticall, Grotian
Reformation, as that you will (as I have told you heretofore) sooner put in for
Rome, than we for Constantinople, or you for Geneva; there, as neither in other
Protestant well reformed Coasts, your wa^es of conditional election and
reprobation, are not like to go off at all; though they will at Rome, where
they will be good chaffer, as Pope Innocent the tenth, and last Pope save one,
assures you in his Bull published, 1653. against Jansenius. 2. My wonder is,
that living in a climate as you do, where you know there has no small stir
been made of late about Reformation; and whereas you know, the very life,
breath, and being of all your liberty, must come under God, from those who are
deeply enough engaged to defend Christ's Religion, and the Religion of their own
Country, which in the point controverted (as has been proved) is d^ametrically
opposite to yours, you should dare to be so bold, as to object Turcisme to it.
But this objection of Turcisme is but a stale one of the Batavian Remonstrants
Vide cont. Remonst. 2. p. 57 Remonstrantes existimarunt se populum and membra
Ecclesiarum a nob^ ave^ suros, and ad suas parts pertracturos esse, si
doctrinam nostram odiose proponerent: esse illam horrendam, blasphemam,
Stoicam, Manichaeam. and Turcicam, etc. nos docere Deum esse authorem peccati,
etc.
.

From Sect. 23. p. 35. to Sect. 32. p. 43.
BY the Independency, or incoherence of your Ergo's upon your premises, you
seem to me to be an huge Independent. Your Deca^chorde of Arguments drawn out
at length, and not in figures, hangs all upon the cord which I have broken
before, viz. That there is the same reason for the conceiving of a decree, that
there is for the executing of it, which is never true in Gods decrees, and not
very often true so much as in man's. 2. And then by your so frequent repeating
of one and the same argument, taken from punishments, commands, etc. as if
appearing in several shapes, it were diverse; and by frequent rolling over, it
did multiply: You* to me look like some Pharisaicall Battalogi^t; who because
he has many the same words, concludes, he does as often vary his matter, as he
does his expressions. There will then be a necessity, to give in a more
particular and elaborate answer, to what you h^ddle together here in these
several Sections; when you shall have proved. 1. That you have not mistaken
your self, in stating of the question about absolute election and reprobation,
and so shoot all your Arguments at Rovers. 2. That what you bring has not
abundantly been answered already. 3. That you, who no more then your Master D.
H. will be counted a Socinian, (Epist. ult.) have many answers in readiness
against Socinians, objecting most of the same, to be sure, very like arguments
against eternal praescience Vid. Socini praelect. c. 8, 9, 10, etc. and
Castal. Dialog.
, which you would make us believe, p. 48. etc. You yet hold, which here you
bring forth against eternal and absolute praedestination. Yet lest you should
crow and strut like a Peacock, that I decline to answer you, because it is not
possible to be done, let me in few words say something to what you bring. And
here to that, Sect. 23. from punishment, which you repeat again, Sect. 26.
Reas. 4. For what are greater degrees of damnation, but punishments? And
again, Reas. 5. From death, which what is it but a punishment, whereby men are
deprived of life? Sect. 27. p. 38. Reas. 10. From hell, Sect. 31. unto which
Dives, p. 41. was sent, which what was it but a place of torment, or
punishment? Unto all which I shall not need to say any more (if I do it will
be a work of supererogation, and I ought to merit something by it at your
hands,) then than first, You ought to be punished (though I confess, not
burnt) as you are angry Servetus was, (as you say by Mr Calvin. Epist. ult.)
for repeating one argument so often, which I have answered already, against
what you have, p. 24. and will not punish my self or the Reader, with
repeating of it. 2. That you will never prove out of Calvin, or any good
author, that God ever does, or intended to punish any one with temporal, and
then less with eternal death, but for sin. To what you have about the Bear,
the Peacocke, the Fox, and the Tower of Siloam Its grounded upon the most
unscholasticall mistake, That all praedetermination of the first cause, takes
away all causality in the second; whereas e contra; Rectius Cumel, quiae Deus
concurrit cum causis secundis juxta naturam and exigentiam ipsarum, et si
concurs^ praevio, ideo dici solet influxum causae primae modificari in secunda,
and ex secunda, Et Gregor. de Valent. Quia Deus concurrit cum causa secunda,
sic aut sic disposita, ideo libertas per hunc concursum non tollitur; modo
addatur (ut probe mo^^t. D Walaeus) in actionib. bonis, hanc dispositionem non
esse a voluntate, sed a gratia praeveniente, aut auxilio speciali.
. 1. I have answered largely elsewhere, by way of return to your first papers,
where you have verbatim, the very same words, as here, p. 35. And truly me
thinks in your first papers, I had all along to deal with the Peacocke, Bear,
etc. or the strongest arguments which you have to produce for your cause; and
in these your second, I have only to deal with the fair plumes of the
Peacock, and the long tail of the Fox, and sometimes with the raging of the
Bear, in his cruelty against Mr Calvin. 2. You will then prove these
instances, to have been pertinently produced by you, when you shall from any of
our principles, as understood and explained by us, have cleared it, 1. That the
weakness and wickedness of lapsed man's will, annuls the will, or the freedom
of it August. de great. and lib. arbit. Semper est voluntas libera, sed non
semper est bona. Aut enim a justitia libera est, quando servil peccato, and
tunc est mala; aut contra, etc.
, though indeed it annuls the goodness of it. 2. That a wicked man sins not
much more freely, deliberately, ex consilio, (wherein the liberty of the will
consists) then, I do not say a Peacock is proud, or a Bear is cruel, etc.
but then a very regenerate man, set free by the son of man, John 8. 36. in the
day of Christ's power upon him, Psalm. 110. 3. performs in this world any one
act of grace or devotion, Romans 7. 21. Gal. 5. 17. 3. That the liberty of man's
will since the fall, is not preserved by a liberty of a contrariety, as they
call it, which is to a velle or nolle, a willing or nilling, quoad exercitium,
unless over and above we grant him still to have a liberty as they call it, of
contradiction to good, as well as evil alike; to gracious, as to ungracious
works It is remarkable what Jansen in his August, has about this distinction,
lib. de great. primi homin. c. 6. Tom. 2. p. 101. Ad rationem libertatis, illam
indifferentiam, and quasi ab utroque extremo undependentiam postulant, ut viz.
semper agere possi^, and been, and male, vel certe agere and non agere, Sed qui
secundum istud, ad rationem libertatis postulant, forte tolerandi sunt; qui
primu^, (ut passim T. P. facit) in ipsam impingunt Catholicam fidem.
, the great Diana the Pelagians so much contended for. 4. That the reason of
the moral impotency of man to any thing which is spiritually good, to be
performed after a spiritual manner, is not as much, if not more, to be taken
from his will, than from any thing else: He wills not, because he cannot; he
cannot because he will not. I say, until such time, as you shall have
demonstratively proved all these matters, well I may believe, that you have the
cruelty of a Bear, against Calvin, and those who hold with him. But I shall
not think you do in this Section argue like an Animal rationale: Well you may
have the Theevery of the Fox, when out of Fur Praedestinatus, and such like
pleasing authors, you filch out matters against Calvin; but I shall hardly
believe, that you have so much as the subtilty of a Fox left to you, in your
arguments Fur praedest. and Castal. Dial. reasons like you, that according to
our doctrine Homo ex Dei creatione ac praedestinatione, habet ad malum
propensionem, sieut lupus ad homicidium, etc. forgetting as well as you, that
we out of Austin, say, l 7. de Civ. Dei. Deus it a ordinat omnia, ut ipse
proprios motus exercere sinat. vid. conses. Remonstr. cap. 9, 10, 11.
.

2. To your second reason, taken from the nature of a covenant, which ever
implies a condition, as you say S. 24. p. 36. 1. You and the Arminian
Remonstrants, do rightly jump together, whilst you change the coveant of grace,
into a covenant of works; whilst you make faith and obedience important
necessary conditions, not only for the obteining of salvation, or eternal
life, but for the obteining of eternal election: For this argument is brought
in by you, for the proving of conditional election, as well as conditional
salvation. I do now the less wonder at the Liberi orphani novem; in Epist.
Dedicat. ad c. 7. ad Romanos.
Orphans of Arminius, who speaking their fathers mind, say, that we are
justified by works as well as faith; at Poppius, or Grevinchov for saying,
eadem est electionis and justificationis ratio; or at your self for
recommending to me your admirable Grotius, de justific. peccatoris ad vitam;
who as Dr Rivet tells me, (for I never saw any book of Grotius with that title)
maintains in it, that it is most absurd to grant, that there is any such thing,
as imputativa justitia, imputed righteousness. 2. You should know, that God
enters not into an everlasting covenant with his people for the electing of
them, but because he has elected them to the obteinment of faith and
obedience, Genesis 15. 1. Deuteronomy. 15. 11. 2 These. 2. 13. 3. That the covenant of
grace, is first and chiefly made with Christ, as the Head and Mediator of the
Church, Isa. 53. 10, 11. 2 Cor. 1. 20. Gal. 3. 16. before it is made with
Christ's people, and in him it is more absolute then conditional; or belike, as
Austin observed of old against the Pelagians Aug. l. de praedest. Sanct. c. 10.
Promiserat quod ipse facturus est, non quod homines: quia et si faciunt homines
bona, quae pertinent ad colendum Deum, ipse facit, ut illi faciant quae
praecepit, non illi faciunt, ut ipse faciat quod promisit. Alioquin ut Dei
promissa compleantur, non in Dei, sed in hominum est potestate; and quod a
Domino promissum est, ab ipsis redditur, etc. Idem lib. de gra and lib. arb. c.
16 Magnum al^quid Pelagiani se scire putant, quando dicunt, non juberet Deus
quod sciret ab homine fieri non posse. Quis hoc nesciat? Certum est nos velle
cum volumus, sed ille facit ut velimus, de quo dictum est; quod praeparatur
voluntas a Domino.
, it depends more upon men then God, that the Lords promises are fulfilled or
that Christ has any flock at all. 4. If all covenants divine, as well as
humane, are conditional, you nullify all the absolute promises, which in
scriptures are made to the elect of giving them Christ, of giving them vocation
the circumcision of the heart, faith, illumination, repentance, etc. which sure
are absolute promises, or else assign you us the condition of them, without
falling into absolute Pelagianisme, and stumbling upon the first stone of the
most hateful point of it, That the grace of Christ is given according to the
works of nature. 5. If the Covenant of grace be as inindifferently made with
all mankind, in the second Adam, Jesus Christ, (the great thing which for the
introducing of universal grace, the Pelagians did most stoutly plead for Aug.
lib. de gest. Pelag. Gratiam Dei, secundum merita nostra dari. Prosp. epist. ad
Aug. Quantum ad Deum pertinet, omnib. paratum esse vitam aetarna^, etc. Armin.
Resp. ad Art. 31. Art. 13. 19. Deus universum genus humanum, in
reconciliationis gratiam assumpsit, and cum Adamo omnibusque ejus posteris in
eo foedus gratiae inivit, etc.
,) as the first covenant of works, was in the first Adam before his fall; then,
1. All the Rakehels in the earth, nay in hell, are as truly Christ's
confederates and members of his body, as any of the elect of God, given to him
of the father, or any of the Saints in Heaven. 2. Then, if God in Christ has
made a covenant of grace promiscuously with all, he would not certainly
divulge it to so few in all ages, Psalm. 147. 19. 6. If the covenant of grace
be still as conditional, as that of works made with Adam, was, which runs
thus; Do this and thou shall live, and that still this is all the covenant
which God under the Gospel has made with his people; Believe and obey, and
thou shall be saved, then, under the Gospel man's yoke is not made lighter, but
heavier. Christ is not as one that takes off the yoke, Hos. 11. 4. but as one
who ties it on faster. 1. By how much two conditions are harder then one. 2. By
how much less any light of nature suggests any thing tending toward the
belief of that great mystery of Godliness, recommended to us in the Gospel,
1 Timothy 3. 16. then it does toward the believing that God as our chief good,
is to be loved with all our hearts, etc. Mat. 22. 37. and that we are to be
justified by an inherent righteousness of our own, rather then an imputed
one, of a crucified Savior. 7. As for your criticisme about the (...), in the
Title of our Gospel, al know, that there it only signifies the books of the New
Testament: but if we attend the Apostles explication of the Hebrew word (...),
and the Greek (...), Heb. 9. 15, 16, 17. we must take the Gospel covenant of
grace, to be rather a Testament then a covenant strictly so called, which on
both sides is conditional. By virtue of the former, our Testator procures
grace for us, for the fulfilling of the conditions of the covenant, which
therefore is said to be established upon better promises, Heb. 8. 6. and 9, 10,
11. By virtue of the latter, both parties are left to their liberty, upon
nonperformance of conditions: As for your third, taken from the unlimited
generality of promises and threats, etc. 1. None of them all are proposed, that
we might obtain election, or avoid reprobation, but that by them, our
salvation might be promoted, and our condemnation avoided. 2. Even these are
not so much as divulged (at least not ordinarily) unto all, but only to such,
as some way or other are in the Church. 3. According to this Divinity, election
unto life is made as common, as the proposal of promises, exhortations, etc.
4. The sequel of it, is all along but this; preaching would be vain,
exhortations deceitful, etc. Vain toward the elect. 1. Though by them, as by
external means, God intends to bring such to salvation, Romans 1. 16. 2. Though
he intend to work with them and in them, what he exhorts them to Aug. l. de
gra. and lib. arb. cap. 15. Facite vobis cor novum, etc. Qui dicit, dabo vobis
cor novum, Quomodo ergo dicit facite vobis? ^ur jubet, si ipse est daturus?
Quare dat, si homo facturus est, nisi quia dat quod jubet, and adjuvat ut
faciat, cui jubet. Vid. plura. l. de persev. 2. c. 14. Dominus ipse hominibus
praecepit, ut crederent, nec tamen, ideo falsa est sententia nec vana
definitio, ubi ait, nemo venit ad me, nisi datum fuerit a patre meo.
. 3. Though they, as well as any, stand in need to be acquainted with their
duties, and to be excited to the performance of them. Deceitful words to the
reprobate. 1. Though by them they come to be acquainted with their duties,
which though without special grace, they cannot perform, yet they do not
cease to owe to God. 2. All fig leaves of excuse are taken away from them,
because it is their course to brag, as Austin observed of old, that if they
might but have known Gods will, they would have done it. 3. They are oftentimes
by heeding of them, made much better by attaining to some common graces,
shunning some sins, procuring an easier hell, ut mitius puniantur, was
Austins phrase. 4. If they had heeded them, as they should have done, they
would certainly have been saved; they refused them not without their wills. 5.
This objection is nothing but an old Pelagian, Massilian, Arminian, protrite
Stallion, answered in the Christian Church a thousand times over. 6. If these
promises, exhortations, etc. were not in the Church, promiscuously proposed to
all, they could not come at all to the ears of the elect of God, for whose
benefit they be primarily intended 1 Cor. 12. 28. Aug. lib. de dono. persev.
and de corrept. and gra. cap. 15. Nescientes enim quis pertineat ad
praedestinatorum numerum, quis non, sic offi^i debemus charitatis aff^ctu, ut
omnes velimus salvos fieri. Vide and lib. 22. de Civ. Dei, cap. 2.
.

Your 4. reason, Sect. 26. p. 36, 37. is nothing but your old crambe, with
which you do both cram and torment your readers. Magis and minus, non variant
speciem. I hope you will think your self to have been punished enough, by what
has been said to you about punishments, against your poenall arguments. I pray
God what has been said, may rather heal you, then hurt you. Me thinks I find
by this and many other of your arguments, that when your power of hurting your
adversaries by hard arguments fails you, that then you call in your never
failing rhetoric, to the hurting your own soul. As in this Section your
behavior against Gods decrees, and against Gods servant, Mr Calvin defending
them, is much like that of the persecutors of old, who first did put Christians
into Bears skins, and then ^et dogs upon them; As you first misshape Gods
decrees and servants, unto your misguided fancy, and then you let out your
bandog of your Oratorie upon them; and by so doing, you rather wrong your own
soul and name, than those you fight against. For good brother, assure your
self, that you may play and sport, but (...); play with any thing rather then
with such edged tools. For what you quote out of Mat. 10. 15. I have heard it
often quoted by the Batavian Arminians, to prove the third Article of the fifth
Article controverted, about the way of Gods working upon the soul, per solam
suasionem, and to prove their Jesuiticall scientia media, but before you, I
never saw any bring it to prove, that God has not absolutely resolved to damn
men for sins. You bring it, and diverse other Scriptures with it, in your
margin, as so many ciphers, signifying nothing. 2. For what you say, Mat. 11.
20. that it was not impossible for the Cities to have repented, whom our
Savior upbraids with impenitence. We say so too in a sober sense, who know of
no decree of reprobation, necessitating impenitence in any, unto which it is a
mere Antecedent, but no positive cause. God makes not repentance by his decree,
impossible to men Aquin. Quaest, de volunt. Dei ar. 5. Divina voluntas in
contingentibus non tollit potentiam ad oppositum voluntatis sed actum: and part
1. Quaest. 23. a. 3. ad 2. Aliter se habet reprobatin in causando quam
praedestinatio. Reprobatio non est causa ejus, quod est in praesenti, scil,
culpae, etc. Est tamen causa ejus quod reddit^r in sutu^o, scil. poenae
aelernae: Sed culpa provenit exlib arbit ^jus qui reprobatur, and a gratia
deseritur.
, but they make it so by their own hard and impenitent hearts, Romans 28. which
cannot yield. All men even naturally, have potentiam remotam resipiscendi; As
Adam when he stood had potentiam remotam, for posse est naturae; but no men
have potentiam proximam resipiscendi, without the special grace of Christ,
John 15. 5, for velle est gratiae. 3 For what you (immoderately given to your
jests and jeers, rather then to any serious matters) scumme up, as so much miro
and dirt, Isa. 57. 20. about jeering a poor creature, most incongruous to our
Savi^urs pitiful nature, about a salt sarcasme, or bitter jest. Answ. 1. It is
no other stuff for substance, then what has been answered often, and what
your heart is full of, and out of the fullness of your heart, your mouth
speaks; every vessel will empty it self. 2. If any ingenuous front had been
left you, (vales certe ingenio (and cadendi indulges genio) sed non vales
ingenuitate) you would never have upbraided us with this. For 1. Those are
only properly j^ered and gulled, who are put in hopes of such things by
promises, etc. which they do not only want, but which with all their hearts
and souls, they would most willingly have, by any possible means if they might
be put into a way, how to come by them That jeere of yours, come to are and I
will lift thee up, is an old Pelagian ro^ten objection, H^^ron. ad C^esiph^nt.
So^eti^ and hoc decere; aut possib^l^^ esse mandata, and recte a Deo data, aut
impossi^^^ia and non in his esse culpam, qui accepere m^ndata. sed in eo qui
dedit impossib^lia.
. And will you, or dare you say, this is the case of reprobates, who most
willingly refuse the offers of grace, as having no mind to them. 2. By what
revelation can you clear it, that all those whom our Savior spoke of, Mat.
11. 20. were reprebates; and that some of them by his upbraiding of them, might
not be brought unto repentance, never to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10. as well
as that lwed son I have heard the story of, who was never wrought upon, till a
most tender compassionate mother, had most earnestly and fiercely denounced an
Anathema against him? 3. Would not the jeering and sarcasme from Christ,
(horresco referens) have been real, if your Arminian doctrine (the very basis
upon which your sarcasms rest) about universal grace, had been true? for then
Christ should not only have invited them to belief, have called upon them for
their duty, have upbraided them with their willing and wilful neglect of it,
but also have told them, That by a general grace, he did really design to
bring them to heaven, though by virtue of it alone, never any had, or ever
should come thither. 4. How are those jeered, who never use to complain of
that, which you call jeeringly, their fatal or natural infirmity? for then
they would seek after a Physician to heal them, who then would be welcome to
them: but who feel the stirrings of a wicked will in them, in the opposing of
all the offers of grace, made in the means of grace. 5. How are those jeered
(I speak now of them, whom the text, Mat. 11. 20. speaks of) who have means
external, abundantly sufficient, in the way of such means, and which in Gods
children are efficient, upon whom God often bestows as much grace, as before
conversion he bestows upon any, and more then Christ is bound to bestow upon
any, and as much as your Arminian principles, will allow God to bestow upon any
at all, of the elect of God, toward their conversion? I say, how are such
jeered by Christ or any of his Ministers? 6. Are not you the only sarcastick
merry blade, who would feign make the world and Church believe, in this very
page, that you at no hand like it, that any should shelter themselves under the
haere sie of Pelagius, by denying original sin, and man's natural impotency,
and in that sense, impossibility to any saving good without Gods grace, and yet
in this very place flout at it, under the notion of a natural and fatal
infirmity, with which God made him, as really as he makes a stammerer or a
blind man? Whereas I think you cannot but know, that 1. Both against the
Jesuits and you too, as I conceive, we all maintain, that man at first was
created in true righteousness and holiness, Eccl. 7. 29. Ephesians. 4. 24. 2. That
then he needed not so much as the golden bridle of original righteousness,
which your Camerades the Jesuits, so much speak of, for the repressing of his
natural concupiscence. 3. That it may be lawful to upbraid those, with their
impotencies, who have lamed or blinded themselves, or bound their own feet; to
such we may say out of our just indignation, come hither to me, and I will lift
thee up, as well as the Lord did play upon Adam, presently after his fall, Genesis
3. 22. or as he did long after upon the Israelites when they had forsaken him,
Judge. 10. 14. Will you say, that God cannot be in good earnest with such,
unless he set their feet at liberty, though he never did tie them, nor is
bound to loose them, nor they in the case they are in, do care to have them
loosed, yea, would think it the only bondage to be freed from their sins? If
we do this, do you think your self able to avoid that Pelagianisme Let any
wise man tell me, how much your opinion about free wills conjunction with grace,
set down c. 4. differs from that of Pelagius. in his Epist, ad Innocent. Quum
liberi arbitrii potestatem dioimus in omnibus esse generaliter, etc. in omnibus
est liberum arb. aequaliter per naturam, sed in solis Christianis adjuvatur
gratia, etc. illi ideo judicandi and damnandi sunt, quia cum habeant liber.
arb. per quod ad fidem venire possent, etc. male utuntur liberate concessa,
etc.
which you would feign fasten upon Calvin, p. 37. and which will stick upon him
as a dart in a rock, but cleaves as fast to your opinions as your skin to
your self? To show what great affections you have to protestantisme, you do
once more enter your protest against a great Leader of Protestants. The first
you take out of lib. 3. institut. c. 23. 7. You have been told diverse times,
how these expressions of his and others, must be taken, viz. of a will of
efficacious permission or ordering of the fall, (and say you, if you dare, that
when Adam fell, and all mankind in him, God stood by as a mere speculator, or
gazer on) not of real effection, or working of it, by any force or violence.
2. How harsh soever in this place his words may sound in your delicate tender
ears, yet 1. When on the place he quotes Austin for what he says, out of his
Enchirid. ad Laurent. 2. When as elsewhere he declaimes most strenuously
against those, who are for Gods absolute power or will, as it is separated from
his justice Calvin de divin. praedest. p. 7. 28. Sorbonicum illud d^gma, in quo
sibi plaudunt papales theolegast^i, detestor, quod potentiam absolutam Deo
affingit, etc.
, and makes lapsed man only, the object of reprobation Inde constanter
exordiendum esse semper docui, a^que hodie doceo jure in morle relinqui omnes
reprobos, qui in Adamo, mortui sunt a^que damnati, de aeter. Dei praedest.
, when as he says nothing but what the Schoolmen of old were wont to say,
without any control Vid D Dav. animadver. p. 245. etc.
. All these things might have abated your rage against poor Calvin. 3. You
belike have a world of other just reasons, besides the just will of God (for if
it be once proved to be Gods will, it must needs be just, he can neither do
nor will any unrighteous thing Carthus. in 4 dis. 46. a^. 1. Totus ordo
justuiae o^ig^nallter, ad div^nam voluntatem reducitur, etc.
to bring in why God would permit the fall of Adam: Yet Arminius himself, a
wiser and warier man then you* would ever confess this point too hot for his
fingers Vid. Cameron cap. d^fens. sent.
2. The next place against Calvin you take out of Ezekiel. 18. 23. with which text
you say he was pinched; but how ^a^d he was pinched, I will not now determine,
because I have not the book by me; only let me say, 1. As to the gloss which
you make upon his words, That God wills wicked men's conversion, so as to command
it, but he does not will it so, as to leave it possible, that is, he wills it
in show, but not in reality. You have been often told, that wicked men's
conversion would be possible enough, if their own wicked wills did not make it
impossible Austin. de Genesis ad lit. 11, 12. Posset Deus horum voluntates
convi^c^re, quoniam omnipotens est. Cur ergo non secit? quia noluit. Cur
noluerit p^nes ipsum est.
. And yet that no man's conversion shall ever be actual without Gods special
grace, giving him repentance, Acts 15. Yea, that God really would like or
approve the conversion of any sinner, though he neither here, nor any where
else say, that he will effect, or work all men to repentance. 2. As to the
inference which you make, of the impossibility of Calvin's avoiding ugly
sequels, I suppose you mean the ugly sequels of jeering, or opposing the
secret will These two may well stand together. Ruiz. d^ volunt. Disp. 20. p.
215. etc. Deus vult ut omnes credant and salvi siant. Deus vult and d^crevit
permittere, ut qui dam increduli maneant, and pertant volunt are absolu^a.
to the revealea, (or else I cannot tell what you mean by sequels) unless he
will fall upon the haeresie of Pelagius, in maintaining that a sinner may
repent by the strength and force of nature. I suppose not any the least child
but can see, how to clear Calvin from the accusation of Pelagianisme, by
saying, that it is in God by his special grace to remove any man's impenitencie
when he pleases, (as was said before) but I fear, the most Epidaurian Lyncian
eyes of the Aust. Epist. ad Sixtum. 105. Cum ab istis quaeritur quam gratiam
cogitarent sine ullis praecedentib. merit is dari, respondent, sine ull is
praecedentib meritis gratiam ipsam esse humanam naturam, in qua conditi sumus.
wisest men who see best, will never be able to discern how Mr T. P. can be
freed from this charge, who maintains no other grace, for the touching of a
man's heart, (as we have seen, and shall see more, p. 55, 56.) but what is the
very same with the much cried up Pelagian universal grace, the same indeed
with proud nature. Turpe est doctori, etc. Solomon indeed, was wise enough,
when he set down, Prove. 1. 26, 27. but he is no wiser then sapientum octavus,
who shall bring it in, as clashing with any thing, which Mr Calvin or any solid
Divine says.

Sect. 27. p. 38.
IT appears by your fifth reason, taken from the nature of death, as that does
signify privation, and as privation supposes a former habit, that you have
more poison in your pa^e, to poison or choke, if it were possible, all your
adversaries, the prophetical Calvinists, (as you may be apt enough to call
them) and yet they will be most ready to take all that you propine in this
Section, down at a draught, and never fear dying Aug. l. de not. and gra. c.
51. Si iste, inquit, qui hunc librum scripsit, de ill a hominis natura
loqueretur, quae primo, in culpata condita est, utcunque acceptaretur hoc
dictum.
, were you but pleased to understand this privation of grace, you talk of, of
what Adam once had, and we all in him, in the state of our integrity; but
seeing it may be very strongly suspected, that you understand it, of man, even
since the fall, that by universal grace given to him in the second Adam, he
has some seeds of that which the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 18. calls the l^fe of God,
remaining in him, they are so^ry that you should so often deny your self to be
a Pelagian, when as yet, by what you say here, it does most manifestly appear,
that according to your divinity, not only Semipelagismus, (as once Arminius
said) might be verus Christianismus, but the highest degree of Pelagianisme,
when it first set forth, and did deny all original sin, and hurt to any, but
to Adam himself, by the fall, must needs be most orthodox divinity Aust. l. 2.
de peccat. orig. cont. Caelestinum. Quod peccatum Adae ipsum solum laeserit,
and non genus humanum.
. So that now you may do well to join in with Molina the Jesuit, in
stomacking at Austin for keeping such a foul coile against the Pelagians
Molina's words as I find them cited by Jansen. in August. l. 8. cap 9. because
they be very remarkable, I thought worth the while to transcribe. Quae si data
explanataque fuissent, forte neque Pelagiana haeresis fuisset exorta, neque
Lutherani tam impudenter arbitrii nostri libertatem fuissent ausi negare,
obtendentes, cum divina gratia, praescientia, and praedestinatione cohaerere
non posse; neque ex Augustini opinione, concertationibusque cum Pelagianis tot
fideles fuissent turbati, etc.
. You for any thing I know, say more then ever he durst say, That a man may be
dead born, but he cannot possibly be dead begotten; deprived of life he cannot
be, in the very act of his conception, understanding this of a spiritual death
in sin, since the fall, as for any thing I can find to the contrary you do;
you do nullify all original sin, and contradict the Psalmist to the very
mouth, Psalm. 51. 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, (and that sure is in a
spiritual death, 1 Timothy 5. 6.) and in sin did my mother conceive me, or as
the word is in the Hebrew, make me warm. 2. As to the sequel; If yet
perchance (which I think not) you understand it in the first and orthodox
sense, it is none at all, God once made all men upright, ergo, none were
absolutely reprobated, or appointed to be left to the sin and misery which
they should bring upon themselves; and yet this is the goodly argument a fine
operis ad finem operantis and internam ejus intntionem, in which Castallio
first p. 265. S. Castalion Dialogi.
, and all the Arminians his followers, have ever since so triumphed.

There is nothing in your sixth Reason, or 28. Section, p. 38. which has not
had its full, if not overflowing answer. Therefore here I resolve upon nothing,
but 1. To observe your pelagianizing, 1. In what you have in this, as well as
your first papers, when you oppose Adams sin to ours, as if in different
respects, that which was Adams, was not ours also Halensis, part. 2. q. 105.
memb. 1. p. 296. Secundum Augustinum concedimus quod non punitur parvulus pro
culpa patris, sed pro culpa sua proprie loquendo Adamo cadente a justitia
originale cecidit etiam quaelibet voluntas posterorum. Sic Cajetan, Bellarmine,
Malderus.
. 2. In quoting and triumphing in John 1. 9. as if it would prove universal
redemption hand over head, whereas it will only prove, that Christ as God in a
common way, enlightens every body. The Pelagians and Massilians of old, would
have had it prove more, but invita Minerva. 3. Your intolerable impudence and
uncharitableness, in branding not only most, if not all your neighbor
Ministers, but also all the Churches formerly mentioned, if not the whole
Catholic Church, whilst you belie the whole stream of fathers, p. 39. with
the brand of heresy, even pernicious heresy, as you would have it thought, by
wresting 2 Pet. 2. 1. to that purpose It seems with you good man, this heresy
is a heresy (...), but Pelagianisme is the milder heresy, p 55. simil^s labra
lactucas, like will to like, I must be a little quick with you, in causis
haereseos neminem oportet esse patientem. Hieronym.
. A likely matter, that by the Church, (Epiphanius, Austin, or any body else in
its behalf, giving in an inventory of heresy, in their several Catalogues)
that should pass for one, that Christ died for any but whom he at last saves,
who is a Savior (...), heb. to the utmost, who deny him to have laid out his
blood upon those, unto whom he denied his prayers, John 17. 9. who were not his
friends, John 15. 13. not of his body, Acts 20. 28. who many of them were
obdurate, persecuting, sinning against the Holy Ghost, and for so sinning to be
packed to hell afterward. I grant indeed, that many a gallant, noble Divine,
(amongst whom I hope ever to reckon, Bishop Davenant, Dr Ward, and many more)
extend the phrase of Christ's dying for all, and such like phrases as you quote
out of the third Article (which ought in all reason to be explained by the 17.)
unto singula generum, as well as genera singulorum; but then when they came to
explain themselves, they first peremptorily deny that Christ by his death
brought all into a state of peace and reconciliation. 2. They maintain the
propriety of Christ's redemption, as to the (...), Romans 11. 29. to be only
peculiar to the elect. 3. They have so many handsome orthodoxe put-offs, of all
Arminian glosses, as that I will sue out a writ of melius inquirendum, before I
pass any damnatory censure upon them, who I am sure, make not for your
purpose, who hint not the least discrimination in Christ's dying for the elect,
or the reprobate; but who reject the distinction of the sufficiency and
efficiency of Christ's death, which the Authors mentioned plead so much for, and
do most amply explain, that which you quote out of 2 John 2. 2. helps you
nothing at all, though we should allow your gloss of Christ's dying for
infidels and impenitents to be true; for so he might do, and yet those
infidels and impenitents be no other then such, who for the present were so,
but were not to continue so, and that by virtue of Christ's death. No question,
Christ died for all people, tongues, and languages, Rev. 5. 9. who either
actually did, or for after times, should believe in his name, John 17. 20. And
you my good friend, who are so tender as you say, p 72. as that you dare not
tell your people, that any crucifying wretches, (though Paul, for any thing is
known to the contrary, and other elect vessels of God, were at that time among
them, Acts 19. 15. who afterward were brought to the faith) were precious
vessels of election. Yet here you dare say, without the least limitation, that
Christ died for all sorts of infidels and impenitents: your hardness and
tenderness goes by the placet of your interest, as kissing uses to go by
favor, Sect. 29. You are a most deadly man; for here a fourth or fifth time,
we must be all struck dead, become Ala-mort, by your seventh deadly reason
taken from the condition of temporal death, and other temporal punishments;
and this will kill just as many as your former, p. 24 and up and down
elsewhere, did even all those who against all rational warning, with you, are
weakly or wilfully resolved to confound the absolute eternal decree, with the
temporal conditional execution of it. And pray you, what wise body ever yet
denied the execution of Gods absolute decrees to be conditional, and the
causes of that execution, though not of the decree it self? I will not be so
adventurous, as to say to your followers,

Quando quidem hic populus vult decipi, decipiatur. But I would charitably by
this time hope, that they perceive how your immoderate eagerness to get in to
your beloved vein of rhetoricating with a matter of twelve quibling
interrogations (which need to be answered by no body, but by your deadly enemy,
Sr N. N) betraies you to the forgetting of all sound distinctions in divinity,
and well couched forms of logical argumentation, for what you have about
Hezekiah and Nineveh, 1. I have elsewhere given a large return to it, in
answer to your first papers, where you bring in these instances, almost in the
same words for the same purpose. 2. Gods decrees in both these cases, might be
absolute and peremptory enough in themselves, and in him, and yet he not at
first dash reveal all his mind to his Prophets, concerning what he had
resolved on, that Hezekiah and Nineveh might be put upon prayers, not to
reverse his decrees, but the absolute seeming damnation of them, when as they
were only to be understood conditionally, as the event did declare afterward
Jac. Crucius in Beverovicia, in vitae ^ermino, p 10. explain, it well thus.
Sub hoc nuntio tacitam contineti conditionem, ut in ill a conciene Jonae, ad
Ninivitas e^cidio perituros nisi resipuerint: Sic moriturum Regem, nisi seria
poenitudine so ad Deum convertat, etc.
. Deus saepe sententiam mutat, concilium nunquam. Sic Gregor. N. You should not
take upon you to teach the Almighty, how for the trial of his people, to
propose his denuntiations; Neither should you comment upon them otherwise, then
God himself does by his after-works: But I had forgot, that you love not
(Epist. 2. ante publicat.) sapere cum commentario, which makes you so unhappie
in those which you make upon his decrees. 3. As for your saying, that Gods
decrees are conditional, if you understand them as they be in God, (or else
you say nothing to the purpose) it both opposes what you grant, p. 5. in Gods
will simply considered, there can be neither prius nor posterius, and does
induce such uncertain velleitios, and depending wills, and wouldbees, as that
the very popish Schoolmen do chide you for them Ruiz. de vol. disp. 10. Sect.
1 Velitiones pure conditionales sunt alienae a sapientia and prudentia Dei.
V^sques, disp. 83 p. 511. Voluntas Dei conditionat^ dici potest, non quia actu
feratur in objectum sub condition, sed quia ex ill^ volu^tate quae praesens
est, etc.
2. As to what you say concerning Romans 9. and the quaeties you put about it, p.
40. 1. I cannot but smile to see how cowardly you come to it, even tanquam
canis ad Nilum lambit and abit, Indeed it has put all your valiant party so
terribly to their shifts, for the warding of the blows which it gives to your
cause, as that I cannot greatly wonder, though in this your public
theatricall corrected piece, you do seem to me laborare (...) to tremble at
the very mention of it, yet in your uncorrected as you call it, indeed your
truly domestique and genuine firstborn, you had spent no less then one, by
far the longest Sections in whiffling of it off, as you could. But alas, as I
trust I have made it in my answer copiously evident, that place does and ever
will stick in the heart of your cause,

Tanquam lateri laethal is arundo. I have there showed, 1. I hat how
troublesome soever the matter of the Chapter is, to obstreperous flesh and
blood, especially in carnal men, yet it speaks out its mind as fully and
clearlie, as words can deliver it, both in Thesi, Romans 9, 11, 18. 2. and in
Antithesi, v. 19. 2. That it is a most shameful ridiculous subterfuge to
interpret texts, speaking plainly concerning what God has decreed to do, or
shall be done, by texts from promises, commands, exhortations, etc. declaring
what ought to be done, believed, or avoided. 3. That to speak properly and
theologically, no one text has any more then one sense Vide Dr Am^s in Psa. 2
though the parts of that one sense, may be made up of several ingredients. 4.
That the two senses, which like some Janus bifrons, looking (...), which you in
your first papers, and your accomplices in theirs, give of it, are too plain and
easy to be true, and leave us no (...) to wonder at, about the whole matter of
praedestination, unless it were at your daring impudency, who every where cry
up your superlative affections to christianity, and yet seem resolved upon it,
to believe nothing but what you can fathom with your brains, and mother wit,
making indeed your brains your Bible August. de verb. Apost. sermon. 20. Quis
Deus est, and quis tu sis attend, ille Deus est, tu homo, etc. Tu homo a me
expectas responsum; and ego sum homo; itaque ambo audiamus dicentem, O homo tu
quis es? melior est fidelis ignorantia, quam temeraria scientia, etc.
. 3. For what you say about Ahab, p. 40. that God did not absolutely damn him
before the foundations of the world were laid, nor does any body say so, as
you have been often told by Dr Twisse, and others, but none so deaf, as those
who will not hear. But say you, and prove you if you can, that Gods decree
about Ahabs damnation, (which actuallie could not be, may I with fear and
reverence to divine Majesty so speak, so much as by divine power, before
Ahabs real and actual existence) was not eternal, and that he did not
absolutely resolve to deny him grace and glory, or to number him among the
elect. 4. For what you and the Arminians use to scrape together out of Lament.
3. 33. Hos. 11. 8, 9. Exodus 32. 14. Plaier-like for the exciting of peoples
passions, when you should by strong arguments, be informing of their
judgments, as young as you profess your self to be, p. 5. yet, 1. You have
gone long enough to school, to have learned that symbolicall divinity, is not
argumentative, unless reduced to proper expressions, that those things, which
as the very Rabbis have it, (...) or (...), after the manner R. David Kimchi.
R. Maymon, etc.
of men are ascribed unto God, (as these expressio^s are) must be interpreted
(...), so as is most suitable to the Majesty of God, in whom there is no
mutability nor shadow of turning, no parts nor passions, which Deo convenient
non secundum affectus sed effectus. Misericordia in Deo, etc. and sic analogice
in caeteris est actio sublevantis, non passio condolentis. Then may God be said
to be stirred with Passions, when these things are done by him, which nor men
or Angels can do without passions and commotion. 2. If you yield not to this,
you are less ingenuous then the fiercest Arminians in their Synodall writings
Acta Synod. Remonstrant artic. 3. and 4. De expectatione fatendum est, eodem
plane modo Deo spem tribui non posse, quo homines dicuntur a se mutuo aliquid
expectare, sed analogice tantu^.
. By what you belch out in your eighth and tenth reasons, Sect. 30. p. 41. and
Sect. 31. p. 42, 43. taken from the little flock which belongs to God, and that
numerous herd, which belongs to Beliall, and the absurdities which must follow,
if Gods decrees be absolute. You do not I bless God, shake me one whit in my
faith, about absolute election or reprobation; but you do almost absolutely
persuade me, that when you blurred that paper with such diabolical stuff, you
were almost in the mood, that that desperado was in, when he cried out,

Flectere si nequeam superos Acheronta movebo, Rather then want arguments
against Gods absolute decrees, and against Calvinisme, you will rake hell for
them, and persuade the world, that by our principles, we make for the profaner
sort of reprobates, a new decalogue, p. 42. and for the demurer sort of them, a
new diabolical Pater noster, p. 43. I profess unto you, Sir, and that in the
presence of God, whom I serve in the ministry of the Gospel, I much fear,
that no man could write thus, but one well-nigh in the same condition with
Simon Magus, who was in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity; I for my
part can beseech you as a Minister of God, to repent, and pray God the thoughts
of your heart be forgiven you; for if this be not open blaspheming against
plain Scripture, I know not what is; For is it not as plain as Scripture can
speak any thing, that Christ's flock is (...), a little flockling, that many
are called, but few are chosen, that the elect only obtain, when the rest are
hardened, Romans 11. 7. that the elect only enter into the Kingdom prepared for
them, when the rest go unto their own proper place, Acts 1. unto which they
are designed, and before appointed, (...), written down in Jude? Those things
which can as well be gainsaied, as the Bible be overturned, and looked on as a
(...), and a (...), because they are not digestible with profane wanton wits,
must they therefore be flouted at? will it become you, who, as you say, p. 33.
meekly confess, that you were none of Gods counsel, to call Gods wisdom in
question, for not choosing more, which in your fine, filthy-language rather, is
to yield the major part unto his Rival Rebel, the black Prince of darkness,
that the major part of men go to hell, though condemned thither for their sins?
will you say that it was by mere fortune, or by man's mere procurement, without
any eternal decree of God? Do you think the Devil plucked them out of Gods
hands, whether he would or no? For a conditional decree depending on man's
will, is rather man's will and decree, not Gods at all. If God content himself
with a little flock, why should you grumble that it is no bigger? was it not
free for him, absolutely to resolve in whom he would glorify the riches of
his grace? may he not do with his own what seems him good? must your eye be
evil because his is good, in a special way of goodness to some, and not to
all? was it not in him to resolve what attributes he would be most glorified
in? the less diffusive and extensive his special mercies are, are they not the
more miraculousie intensive to those who are freely made pertakers of them?
since the fall for original sin alone, might it not have been just with God
to have sent us all to hell when we were but children of a span long? Vid.
Austin ad Laurent, cap. 27. Et fiquidem in melius hominum Reformationem nullam
prorsus esse voluisset. Sicut impiorum nulla est Angelorum, nonne merito fieret?
In a word, if our Divinity hold about absolute election and reprobation, God
is absolutely certain to have a flock, though but a little one, whereas if
yours, which is conditional, should hold, it might fall out, that the Devil
might have all; and God none; for it might more easily fall out, that none
should believe, than that any should, man's nature being so opposite to
Christian faith, and universal grace alone, having never brought any to
heaven. 2. God is as truly and really glorified in the way of his justice
vindicative, in those that perish, Romans 9. 22. Prove, 16. 4. as he is in the way
of his mercy, mixed with justice in those who are saved, nor tends it all to the
honor of the Rival Rebel, or black Prince as you call him, that he has so
many under him By this passage it appears, that though you object Manichaisme,
p. 51. to others, here is none so Manichaicall as your self, who do maintain
the Prince of darkness to have obtained his principalities (such as it is) God
not so much as decreeing to suffer it, i. c. invito Deo, which what is it but
to set up (oh most hor^ible) the power of the Devil above Gods, and this is
something worse then Manichaisme it self.
, not as under a Prince, but as under a base general executioner, Heb. 4. 14.
or tormentor, who also for the honor of God, and not his, is kept under
chains of darkness, until the judgment of the great day, and in the mean
while he is tormented as well as a tormentour, for the Devils believe and
tremble, Jam. 2. 19. 2. As for that which you put into a Parenthesis, * about
the sufficiency of every drop of Christ's blood for ten thousand worlds, I
think will not easily be proved, nor do such assertions so much tend to the
magnifying of the precious nature of Christ's sufferings, of which there can never
be too much said, as they might tend to the disparagement of the wisdom and
love of God, and lover of his blessed only innocent Son, in being so prodigal
of so much blood, as his Son shed, for the bringing Heb. 2. 10. of many
sons only unto glory, who were taken out but of one world Joh. Sleid. Ep.
21. lib. ult. post. edit.
. I find none of note to speak so, unless P. Clement, when he makes it a
foundation for indulgences, unto that which Mr T. P. has, p. 41. about the
sufficiency of one drop of blood, for purchasing redemption of ten thousand
Adams, and ten thousand worlds of his posterity; and I find no orthodox Divine
of note, to speak after this lavish and adventurous rate: only I find in Joh.
Sleydan, Commentar. lib. 1. de statu Relig. fol. 12. that when Cardinal
Cajetan thought to choke Luther with a Popes Bull, he quotes against him for a
foundation of indulgencies these words out of one of P. Clements extravagants.
Belike even in the Church of Rome, these expressions are placed inter
Extravagantes. Ibi Clemens Pontifex tempus illud, uti vocant Jubilaeae
centesimo quo que anno praefinitum a Bonifacio octavo, redigit ad quinquage
simum, and de Christi servatoris beneficio locutus, una guttula sanguinis
ipsius liberari potuisse genus humanum demonstrat: quum vero tantum sanguinis
copiam profuderit, ut toto corpore, nihil esset in eo sani, nihil aspectu
miserabilius, omne illud quod super fluum fuit, maxim thesauri loco reliquisse
dicit, in usum Ecclesiae: ac Divo Petro, qui fit caeli claviger, ut eum
thesaurum in homines vere paenitentes atqu^e peccata sua confessos diffundant,
and tanquam Oeconomi distribuant, etc. In your ninth reason, set down, p. 41.
though you love not to be counted a Dictator, you do nothing but dictate, when
as you say, 1. That the reprobation of Angels was not irrespective, contrary to
the credit of the most part of the Schoolmen Jansen. lib. 8. de Haeresi Pelag.
cap. 10. V^d River. ex Aquin. disp. 3. sect. 3. And how this doubtful point
was even to eagle-eyed Austin, may be seen by his doubtful discourses about
it, in several parts of his works, Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 12 cap 9 and lib.
11. cap. 13. lib de correp. and great. cap. 1^. where all along he disputes,
that some Angels ^ad more grace fre^ly given them, then others, who afterward
fell, because some knew that they should never fall from their happine^se,
others did not.
. If by reprobation you understand Gods decree of permitting them to fall, or
of not bestowing the grace of confirmation upon them, by which the good Angels
were preserved from falling. 2. When you say that the sublapsarians, who place
the object of praedestination in massa corrupta, must needs grant, etc. the
Scriptures being more vocal about man's reprobation, and less about Angels.
And so, they be much more busy in directing how men may get out of the misery
into which wicked Angels have helped to bring them, then sub quo signo formali,
Angels were considered in their reprobation. 3. Like a stout Champion for the
sublapsarians and your self, who are gone beyond Massa corrupta, as touching
original sin only, (the way of the otherwise orthodox sublapsarians) to the
presupposing of perseverance in all sorts of actual sins to the last gasp,
before all peremptory reprobation; you should have tried your strength in
answering the two arguments, with which Dr Twisse shuts up the Chapter which
you quote, and by which he proves, that it is both impossible and absurd, that
the praevision of Apostacy in the Angels, should be the cause of their
reprobation, the very pillar of your argument, which you prove not but beg: But
had you attempted this, you would have found how much easier it is for you to
laugh at, or nibble at Dr Twisse, then in plain field to have put him to the
foil. Your tenth reason from absurdity, p. 41, 42. Sect. 31. has nothing in
it from the instance of Dives, which I have not else where answered fully in my
first papers, yea, in these, and without prejudice to any thing I do or have
maintained; your whole Argument about Dives might be granted, and yet you be
never the nearer to the proof of conditional reprobation; for what you say
about Gods end in damnation, you have been told that Gods end is not the
creatures damnation, but his own glory in his just condemnation: As for your
diabolical and unhallowed inference, with which you are so perverse, the best
answer would be silence August. d^ bono perseveranti^, lib. 2. cap. 14. Tu quis
es homo qui responde^^ Deo. Nunquid ideo negand^m est, quod ape^tum est, and
quia comprchendi non potest quod o^culium est, nunquid inquam dicturi su^us
quod ita esse perspiciamus, non ita esse quoniam cur ita sit non possumus
invenire, cui sub^ectere placet instar commentarii in locum illum Augustine. D.
D. Rivet. disp. 5 de reprobat. These. 29. Cum in scripturis certum habeamus
discrimen electorum and reprobatorum ab ipso Deo ab aeterno d^spositum, si
nihil aliud adversus blasphemas hasce, ^o^s^quentias nobis suppeteret, quod
repom remus nec solvi illa possent quae sunt obscura, non p^opterea neganda
sunt, quia sunt perspicua, sed Deo judiciis suis relictis quae adversus
obtrectatores omnes suo tempore facile^ d^f^nsurus est. Suffic^et nobis illud,
Romans 9. Sic Castalio Dialog. lib. 1.
or that of the Apostle, O man, who art thou who reply against God; yet the
answer will be easy enough, 1 When you shall have produced your dispensation,
for waving the rule of obedience set by God himself, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. which su^e
is by a practitioner to be known, not after his work is done, but before he
goes about it, Isa. 8. 20. 2 When you shall be able to show how any one
particular person can know himself without all doubt to be a reprobate. 3.
When you shall have cleared it, that it is no sin in the Devils and the very
damned in hell, who certainly know that they be absolutely reprobated, to
curse God and their King and to look upwards, Isa* 8. 21. until this time, I
think you have a thousand times more need to repent, for your Atheistical
Lucianizing, and Castalionizing, (unto whom you are beholding for these flowers
of your rhetoric) then we so much as to think what answer for to return to
your sporting with Carpocrates against us. Every thing may well enough be
absolutely ordained by God, (in the sense often explained) and yet not effected
by him, forasmuch as sin has only a privative not a positive entity, and so
has a deficient, and not an efficient cause. God can ordain nothing but good,
and ergo, it is good in God to permit sin, though it is not good for any
sinner to commit it Aug. Ench^rid. ad Laurent. cap. 27. Melius judicavit de
malis b^n^facere, quam mala nulla esse permittere.
, sin and hell must be exceeding good. Sin and hell are exceeding ill
coupled together by you. It is good Judges should set up Gallowses for thieves,
and in that sense gibbets and halters are good Your own Boethius teaches you
this, lib. 4. Habent impii, cum pumuntur, boni aliquid annexum paenae.
, but felony in a thief is naught, by which those good things are procured for
him. To your second, p. 43 you have been showed before, that there is no
contradiction betwixt Gods revealed will that all should repent, it belongs to
them in duty to do so, and his secret will, that very few shall, i. e. that as
faith and repentance are not performed by all, so it was not Gods will or
determinate counsel to give it to all, but only to his Israel repentance unto
life, Acts 5. 31. Romans 9. 18. The inference which you make, that then, p. 43.
It is his will, that his will should not be done, is no such great absurdity
in the judgment of a far more learned* wise, holy man, then your self, even
St Austin Enchirid. 95. Non aliquid fit nisi omnipotens siert velit, vel
sincado ut fiat, vel ipse saciendo, your own Boeth. lib. 4. p. ^15. edit. 8.
, if it be but warily explained, viz. of a voluntary permissive will, that
his commandments be neglected, which is contrary to his preceptive will,
though not contrary to his permissive will, which God never made the rule of
any man's actings. And if your spirit and stomach serve you to deny this, then
deny too, that our blessed Savior, Acts 2. 23. was delivered up to death, by
the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, and yet that those hands
were wicked hands which did crucify and slay him. Say that Shimei's tongue was
no wicked tongue, when he cursed the Lords anointed; or that David did tell a
lie to show his humility under the cross, when he had said, the Lord did bid
him curse David: And though much of what has been said, may take off what you
say next, that then God has one will which is the same with Devils, (for which
diabolical argument, you are much beholding to your Sebast. Castalio, whose
smooth Latin with some inversion, you have turned into smoother English S.
Cast. Dialog. primo.
, or if not so, one and the same malus genius did dictate one and the same
thing to you both) and yet would the Devil be not a whit the less excusable,
any more then that wicked son, (qui ante diem patrios inquirit in annos,
Ovid:) is commendable, for desiring of the Fathers death, just at the same time
when it falls out, and when God willed it Psalm. 31. 15. Job 14. 5. 2. With all
the wit and craft which you have, you will never be able to prove Gods will,
and the Devils (according to us) to be one and the same, when as our Divines
can easily assign many differences betwixt them in the matter willed, in the
end of the will, in the manner of executing that will, unto all which
particulars, I thought to have set down something, but am forced to delay it
till some other time. Augustine, ad Laurent. cap. 10^. Fieri potest, ut hoc
velit homo voluntate mala, quod Deus vult bona: velut si malus filius velit
mori patrem, velit hoc etiam Deus, tantum inter est quid velle homini quid Deo
congruat, and ad quem finem quisque referat voluntatem. And so by these wild*
and mad diabolical consequences, you bring me to that, which authore and
presidente diabolo, you will maintain to follow from our opinions, and it is
taken from the Devils Pater noster, p. 43. that when a reprobate says his
Pater noster (thy will be done) he vehemently prays for his own damnation.
Wherein I shall beseech the Reader to observe, that this is but the very same
objection, which was objected against the doctrine of Austin, and therefore may
be contented with the same answer which Prosper gives to it, viz. that those
who are not to do the will of God, and yet pray that they may do the will of
God, are heard in that which is to be done by the will of God, that the
imitators of the Devil may be judged with the Devil, for those who have
despised his inviting will, shall feel his revenging will P^o^per ad ^bject.
Vincent. 16. p 345. (...) L^van. in oct Unto what I have engl^shed, mark that
to the L^tine, which ushers it in. Illud (n 8) con^^a se petunt quod divinae
v^^u^at^s esse n^n dubium est, u^ scilic^t cum ven^rit sil^us hominis in
m^jesta^^ s^^ and s^derit super thronum gloriae suae, corgregentur ^nt^ cum
omnes gentes, and s^p^ret eos ab invicem, abos ad d^xtram, alios sta^^ens ad
s^nist^am, and audiant eu^ dextri dicentem, venite ^en^d^c^i; patr^s mei, p^ssi
dete regnum vobis paratum a constitutione mundi, audientes sinistri. d^sced^^e
a me maledicti in ignem aeurnum, etc.
. 2. You are a mavelous ignaro in the opinions of your adversaries, if you
believe that they can think any other prayers would be well pleasing to God,
then such as are agreeable to his word, then such as are put up in faith by the
spirit, etc. If you think otherwise, you will as soon prove it from their
writings, as Dr Jackson shall, from any true Philosophy, prove his vigorous
rest, or Dr Hammond the great, that (...), or superstition in scripture, is
taken in a good sense. 3. Whether, if according to our principles, any
individual person here in this life, could be certain that he were an
absolute reprobate by Gods praedeterminati^n, or according to you, absolutely
foreknowne by God to be a reprobate? (unless you maintein Gods p^aescience to
be as well conditional, as his praedetermination) he were bound to say the
Lords prayer, or no, I will not dispute; but I may say that Austin some where
has it, that if the Church were but as certain who are reprobate, as it is
certain that Judas is gone to his own place, Act. tam pro illis non oraret,
quam non pro Juda vel damnat is ipsis. 4. You tell me news, that when
reprobates say their Pater noster, they pray vehemently; I would hope that
those whom you do commend unto me for the power of Godliness, without any
affected form, say their Pater noster I believe indeed, in them it i^ a
formless thing, even rudis indigestaque moles, Jam 5. 16.
after another guess-fashion. Sure I know, that true vehemence or zeal of
spirit, is a fruit of faith, and of the Spirit, and so not belonging to
reprobates, Tit. 1. 1. 5. How falsely and wickedly soever you object the Devils
Pater noster, whereby a man is bound to pray for his own damnation, I am sure
that Austin of old against the Pelagians, who denied the special grace of God,
by which it is given the elect to do, and to will according to Gods own will
and pleasure, tells them that they do but flout God in their prayers, when they
pray to God to bestow that upon them, which is in their own power to bestow
upon themselves Augustinum de natura and great. cap. 18. Quid stultius quam
orare ut facias quod in potestate habeas? Idem ad Vitalem, Epist. 17. 107.
P^orsus non oramus Deum; sed orare nos fingimus, si nos ipsos non illum
credimus facere quod oramus. Rursus Labia dolosa si in hominum quibuscunque
sermo^ibus sunt, saltem in orationibus non sunt; Absit, ut quod facere Deum
rogamus, oribus and vocibus nostris, eum facere negamus cordibus nostris, and
quod est gravius ad al us etiam decipiendos non laceamus, disputationibus
nostris and dum volumus apud homines defendere liberum arbitrium, apud Deum
perdamus orationis auxilium.
. And the like may be said of your prayers, though as one of your first
Uncorrected Copies tells me, you say them in a Chapel, p. 11. And I doubt not,
but you judge too, the prayers to be the holier for the Chapels sake, or else
you hold not with your St Andrews, commended for such, by your p. 41. A man so
deeply in love with templ^ry Relative holiness of material Churches, even in
the d^ies of the Gospel, as that Reverend Mr Meed told me above 20. years
since, that the sight of the Chapels of Bp Andrews and his devotion about
them, put him first upon the study of the holiness of Churches, which
afterward little to the cred^t of his other opinions, he wrote so much for.
, for there is nothing so manifest, as that by what you there say, p. 11. about
man's concurrence in his first conversion, (for about that you should know, that
the dispute lies betwixt you and your adversaries, the Anti-arminians) and by
the bright simile, by which in this Correct Copy taken from the e^elid, p. 63.
where with you illustrate your assertion, that you must hold, that it is more
from man then God, that any is illuminated or converted; this then forces me
to conclude with that excellent Poet, Buchanan.

Psalm. 36. 1. Vt extra flammis mill sacrificiis cremes,
Oscula des saxis ingemicesque pr^ces,
Arasque donis largus aceumules tuis,
Non facies tamen, ut te rear esse pium,
As for what you close up this wordy Section withal, that Prosper in behalf
of himself and Master, calls the sequels of that opinion which he disowns,
most sottish blasphemies, and not only prodigious, but divelish lies; you have
very finely passed a censure upon most of your Pamphlet, to be sure upon all
the ugly sequels which you would fasten upon Calvin's doctrine, or those who
follow him. For he and they, do as strenuously as ever Austin or Prosper,
disallow all such sequels as you would fasten upon them, any way to follow from
absolute praedestination, as they state it in their own writings, and not as
you to make them odious, have all along represented them in this your Pamphlet;
wherein you deal as disingenuouslie with them, as the worst of Papists (your
good friends in the doctrines vented in this your book) did with John Huss at
Constance, when they set upon him an hatfull of painted Devils, to signify how
diabolical his opinions were. For although in the diabolical Index which you
draw up, p. 11. there be some of their words snatched from their meaning, as
the Massilian Vincentius did snatch many from the very text of Austin. (as is
most plain) Your Index may justly be styled the Devils Inventory, Qui colit,
Deos ille facit.

Meus est quem recitas O fidentine libellus;
Ast male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus.
They no more maintain God to be author of sin, nor to damn men without any
intuition of sin, (as you lay to their charge, most petulantlie and
slanderouslie) then Austin did the most of things objected by Vincentius.

Sect. 32. p. 43, 44. etc.
IF that be true which you say, that these latter citations are but to the same
purpose with your former, for the proof of that second inference, which is, p.
46. That sin is properly the cause of its punishment, or as You have it, p.
32. That every reprobate is praedeterminated to eternal punishment, not by
Gods irrespective, but cond^tionall decree. If you will cast upon this latter
some grains of salt, I think I have sufficiently cleared it, that you will
bring them in to no purpose, unless it were to flourish with them against Sir
N. N. whom you prosecute with a Vatinian, or Anticalvinisticall hatred. But 2.
Because at first dash of this Section, where you say you will first (mark that
this first has never a second to be his second) set down the confession of Mr
Calvin, you would feign make the world believe, that Mr Calvin (who as I Calv.
de Aetern. praedest. Si ex Augustino, integrum volumen contexere libeat
lectoribus ostendere promptum esset, mihi non nisi ejus verbis ejus esse.
remember somewhere, professes, that if he were to bring in a full confession
of his faith about praedestination, he would not wish to set down in other
words or senses, then Austin up and down has done) is a great separatist And
how much soever upon this occasion you undervalue that one more modern; he is
no other then Laurentius Valla, a man of no mean note in the world, about the
time of the first Reformation; who therefore too, since you are become a
Lutheran, p. 16. should be the more respected by you, because he is highly
commended by Luther, Joh. Sleidan, ad Ann. 1520. in ejus scriptis multo cum
fructu versari.
from Austin, in the point of absolute praedestination; and that as you are not
ashamed to brag, p. 33. that Austin speaks as plainly and fully in your
behalf, as any man, that can be bribed to be an advocate or a witness. I
shall be forced to discover, how frontlesse you are in this assertion; and that
by abusing and wresting Austins writings as you do, what ever you pretend to
the contrary, you have (were it not for the shame of the world and speech of
people, even of very many in the Roman Catholic Church,) as good a mind to
spurn at Austins writings, as ever we have found you hitherto to have done at
Calvin's. And before I clear this, let me in reference to this Section, 1.
Observe, that the Ancients and Austin, and most of the senior Schoolmen,
speaking of divine praescience, understand it not of a mere notionall and
theoricall praescience, opposed to praedetermination, (such as Mr T. P.
mainteins) but of a practical, which never is, nor can be without some kind
of praedetermination See D. Davenant about this animadversion, p. 60. and
alibi. This is plain by Austins definition of praedestination, which he
proves to have been anciently received, de bono perseveran. l^b. cap. 17. 2. In
sua quae falli mutarique non potest praescientia, opera sua futura disponere,
id omnino, nec aliud quicquam est praedestinare, cap. 17. pertegatur totum. And
this answers to your two first passages out of Prosper, Austins scholar. As
for what you have out of Hieronym. p. 45. and as for the third passage out of
him, that no man is created to the end that he may perish; either none of ours
speak so, or else they add some mollifying interpretation.
, They speak of it as the Scripture does, Romans 8. 29. Acts 15. 2 Timothy 2. 19. 2.
That neither in the Ancients, nor so much as in Austins time, but long after
were the questions of praedestination disputed upon, betwixt the parties, in
the terms now used, whether absolute, unconditionall, respective, or
conditional. 1. They contented themselves to maintain, that nec electio, nec
reprohatio, was in potestate electi vel reprobati, sed eligentis, vel
reprobantis, contrary to what our opposites in their conditional decrees
maintain. 2. That neither the number of the elect or reprobate, could be
decreased or increased, August. de corrept. and great. 13. Prosper de vecat,
lib. 2. cap. 20. 3. That the elect obtained all their graces by which they are
saved, by virtue of their praedestination or election. 4. That the dispensation
of salvation or damnation, were regulated by Gods infallible, certain,
merciful or just decrees. Who ever in these or the like particulars, agree
with the Scripture, with the Ancients and with Austin, I dare be bold to say,
shall agree with Calvin, as well as with the truth; and I durst undertake in
the behalf of any sober Calvinist, so called, he shall not upon the first
point of praedestination, canvassed betwixt us and the Arminians, be much
quarrelled at. As for what you bring out of Calvin's Instit. lib. 3. cap. 23. 1.
It is possible that Calvin might commit some sphalma against the first
observation, as, aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus. (...), Jacob. 1. 2. 2. But
as for the matter of what he says, he speaks nothing but what Tertullsan,
Quoted before.
Austin, See the pass^ges in stead of many more, quoted out of his book, de
bono perseverantiae, quoted not long since.
and I cannot tell how many Schoolmen If you understand Calvin and them, not of
Gods efficacious will, by which he would work or force Adam to fall, but permit
and order the fall, and then see, for School men before, agreeing to what one
has, viz. Vasquez in 1. 2. Quaest. 23. disput. 13^. cap 9. disp. 133. cap. 1.
Negare non possumus ex voluntate sola Dei constitutum fuisse ut gratia
originalis traduceretur in posteros, si Adamus in gratia perseveraret, and
amitteretur, si peccaret.
had done. That full little reason you had to gird at him, for having but one
more modern on his side, who yet was no Sr N. N. when as your self poor man,
have none but one Dr (of any considerable note in the Church of England) St
Andrew on your side, if at least that writing, which you quote for you, be his:
of which more when we come to p. 47. Sect. 33. In setting in the forefront of
your citations, August. ad Simplicium. lib. 1. Quaest. 2. you discover, shall I
say your simplicity, yea, (give me leave upon this occasion to deal plainly
with you) impudence. 1. I find this to be a place in which many Jesuits, and
many Arminians triumph exceedingly N. Grevinchov. contra Ames.
. 2. That when orthodoxe Divines have met with it, they have about it been
divided in their interpretations. And some have done it more dexteriouslie then
other some Dr Twisse l. 1. p. 2. p. 217. Dr Ames Rescript. p. 216, 217. edit.
1. 2.
. 3. You had small reason to prefer this saying of his, out of a writing of
Austins, as most think, (to be sure as Bellarm. l 2. de great and lib. de
arbitrio.
Bellarmine) when Austin was but a Presbyter, and the Pelagians but young
sucklings in their opposition. 4. You cite a broken passage, as any body may
see, who will but look round about the words which you quote, where Austin
rather quaeries and disputes, than determines, as appears by the many Ans and
utrums both before and after. No sooner had he produced the words which you
quote, but he falls to a dispute, rather contra then pro, to what you set down.
5. Austin himself does most solemnlie revoke and retract it Aug. lib. 1.
Retractat. cap. 23. Ad hoc perduxi ratiocinat. ut dicerem, non e^go elegit
Deus, opera cujus qua^ in praescientia, etc. nondum diligentius quae siveram
nec adhuc invener am qualis sic electio gratiae: De qua idem Apostolu^ dicit.
Reliquae per electionem gratiae salvae factae sunt.
. He puts himself upon penance for what you do so magnify Jansenius l. 3.
de Haeresi, Pelag. cap. 10. Nam and Pelagius per Esau and Jacob, in cap 9. ^d
Romans 13. Eos prophetari doc^t qui futuri erant ex operibus boni and mali, and
ex ipsis operibus aut odium Dei habere, aut misericordiam.
. And indeed it was high time for Austin to call it in, not only, 1. Because
it came from him, but very doubtfully. 2. And because, as I could show at
large, he had in the very question proposed to him, two diverse times knocked
that saying in the head by his own maxims and positions, but especially by
that most apt and pithy illustration of his, taken from fire and a bowl; the
one burns not that it may become hot, but because it is so, non enim ut
ferveat, calefacit ignis, sed quia fervet. Nor does the bowl run that it may
become round, but because it is so, nec ideo been currit rota ut rotunda sit,
sed quia rotunda est, and he applies it as well, for says he in the Apodosis,
sic nemo propterea been operatur ut accipiat gratiam, sed quia accepit; but
much more justly. 3. did he retract it because it was even literally the
Pelagian, and the after Massilian gloss, Prosper ad Augustine. de Mossiliens.
pene omnium par invenitur and una sententia, qua propositum and
praedestinati^nem setundu^ praescientiam receperunt, ut eos praesciverit vel
praedestinaverit. vel proposuerit eligere, qui fuer ant credituri.
and with which, (as somewhere I have read, and that not long since, though I
forgot to set down the place) the Pelagians or the Massilians twitted him I
think it be in Prosp: ad August. or in Hillar. ad eundem.
. Thus far then you have not much credited Austin, or your self, by quoting
of him, you are but a Simplician in quoting of Austin: I but you will prove
your self a right Augustinian in what you quote next out of his E^chirid. ad
Laurent. cap. 98. And indeed you will, when as a Pelagian objection produced by
Pelagius himself, shall among Austins friends and admirers The objection is
plain in the words that you repeat, and then follows Austins answer pr^sently
thus: Qua in re si futura opera, vel bona hujus, vel mala illius, quae Deus
utique praesciebat vellet intelligi, nequ^quam diceret non ex operibus, sed
diceret futuris operibus, eoque modo istam solveret quaestionem: imo nullam
quam solvi opus esset faceret quaestionem, etc. And so I pray you read on, and
from a popish Bishop, (yet whose books have been condemned by the last Pope)
read with patience that check due unto you for your careless, if not worse
quoting of Austin. August. Jansen. Tom. 2. lib de great. primi hominis, p. 135.
Pro Augustini assertionibus, nonnunquam Pelagii pronuntiata capiunt pro
decisionibus disputationes Augustini. And no wonder they upbraid him with it,
for he wrote it before he was fully settled in it; that faith was the gift of
God, lib. 1. retractat. cap. 23. Profecto non dicerem si jam scirem etiam ipsam
fidem inter Dei munera reperiri, quae dantur in eodem spiritu. Yea, your
learned and beloved Vossius does acknowledge Austin to have revoked all such
sayings, as you and others use to quote out of him about praescience, and that
Vossius is of no other mind then Austin, in matters of praedestination; for
his own opinion, see him in his de historicis lat. lib. 2. cap. 17. of Austins
opinion, lib 7. histor. Pelag. p. 655. Augustinus rejecta hac opinione (viz. de
fide and pietate praevisa) existimabat Apostolum loqui de quorundam electione
ad vitam, aliorum item praeteritione, non habita in his vel in illis ratione
sive bonorum, sive etiam matorum quae personalia sorent.
, pass for one of his opinions, though he do most solemnly confute it in the
Chapter quoted by you, and in some part of the next, as any body may see, who
has but will and skill to turn to the place. Oh, what a hard Student you are
in Austin! Oh how you love him! I now wonder not at your preferring Grotius
before him. I shall not need to say any thing more to any other Authors quoted
in this Section, but may securely refer to what I have delivered before, and
wish you to study your Vossius better, that you may not shame your self too too
bad in quoting of Austin: And let me beseech the Readers to take heed how they
confide too much in you, as on a man they may build upon in your quotations,
for you have many a sly trick with you; only for old acquaintance sake, take
a word or two about what you have, out of my old reverend friend, Dr Twisse, I
perceive you love to be nibling at such Authors, as laborious, honest,
Piscator, as liking in these points, better those things which come sub Annulo
Piscatoris, from the Trans-Alpine Prelate, then such as come from Hannaw Yet I
take not my self to be tied to hold all for truth which Piscator has about
the order of Gods decrees. But I think there is no reason to bespatter him and
other Protestant Authors so frequently, as Mr T. P. does.
, or any other reformed Protestant Coast. 2. If that be true as it is, which
you quote out of Dr Twisse, the more shame for you to represent him in your
mistaken uncharitable Index, p. 9. 10. as one mainteining God to be the Author
of sin, or as mainteining God to damn men without any respect to sin. If
you can blush, I am sure there is reason enough for you so to do; if not, the
Lord I beseech him free you from an adulterous forehead at last, rubor est
virtutis color.

Sect. 35. p. 46, 47.
HEre you do nothing else but 1. Bring us in a list of of your gets and
conquests, of your demonstrations, and (...), p. 47. all your geese are swans.
I trust every discerning body by this time, does see, that what you have got,
you may well put in your eyes and see never the worse. 2. You jeer us, who your
self be a man made up of flouts (especially when you play upon Calvin) when
you tell us of an excuse you have made for being orthodox, as if any malignant
evil eyed neighbor of yours, would have envied you that honor I do not
perceive that you make any have to be honored with orthodoxy, who have
retracted it, or called it in, p. 48. by a conversion, which I think has made
you almost as good a convert as the fellow, who calls himself mutatus Polemo,
heu quantum mutatus ab illo. Totus ^rbis exercet Histrioniam.
. It concerns you far more to cry peccavi for bespattering of far more fairer
names then your own is like to be in have, for your confounding in your
demonstration here, p. 47. and every where else, the motives to the execution
of a decree of God, which is according to his decree, and the motives to the
decree it self, as it is actus imman^ns in Deo, even whilst you your self are
forced to confess, p. 51. that there is neither prius nor posterius in Gods
simple act of willing. 3. If much more fitly you would have called, p. 33. no^
Gods promises and threats, the copies adn transcripts of his eternal and
impervestigable decrees, which cannot be so but in part, but rather have much
more called Gods works done in time so; which are much more fitly and fully by
divines, called specula praedestinationis Vide Theologos Embdanos and
Nassovicos in Synod Dord^ac. cirta primum articulum do praedestinatione.
; and that you would but have granted what even Mr. J. Goodwin does confess,
that nothing falls out in time, but what God has decreed before all time, viz.
either to do, or voluntarily, and not against his will to suffer to be done,
you would not then throughout your book, have been so much mis-lead your self,
or have been an ignis fatuus to all your Readers. For then, ex. gr. from Gods
permitting and ordering Adams first fall in time, you would have concluded that
God did decree to permit his fall before the praevision of it. 2. From Gods
effectual calling of some only in time, according to purpose Romans 8. 28. not
a whit better, yea, oftentimes worse then those who are not vouchsafed such a
call, you would have concluded with the Apostle, Romans 9. 11. that God decrees
to give grace to whom he will, and whom he will he hardens, Romans 9. 18. 3. That
because Christ does not in time promiscuouslie save al, ergo, God did not
decree that he should promiscuouslie dye for all. 4. That because many who do
enjoy the same external, yea, the same internal common means of grace, do yet
not attain to the same special graces of faith, repentance, etc. that God did
decree therefore otherwise to work upon these latter, by some what a more
efficacious work, then he puts forth toward the former. 5. That because the
faith of the elect of God is upheld. Tit. 1. 1. by the mighty power of God unto
salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. when as the temporary faith of others is not, that
therefore the faith of the former is of another kind, then the faith of the
latter, and that all those who have true justifying faith, shall by virtue of
Gods decree, persevere to the end. But if this had been done by you, what use
would there have been of your Uncorrect, or even your Correct Copy?

. 36. p. 47.
WE have words again, and nothing but words, as if you would have me say of
you, as the fellow said of his Nightingale, vox es and praeterea nihil. 1. You
put us in hopes after all your quarrellings and wranglings of a composition and
reconcilement with you, about swallowing the word necessity, whereas I suppose,
were the Church in statu quo prius, it would expect a recantation and
abjuration from you, before it would admit you to composition: you were to
satisfy for wongs done to your mother, and choice sons, nay, Reverend
Fathers in Christ, before it would so much as treat with you upon Articles of
composition. 2. You needed not at all to have stumbled at the word necessity,
applied to Gods decrees, unless you had been, 1. disposed to quarrel with
Scripture expressions, Mat. 187. 1 Cor. 11. 19. 2. With the expressions of
witnesses of all sorts Among whom, such or the like expressions are frequent.
Nemo potest corrigere, quem Deus despexerit. Ruiz. de scient. disp. 66. Sect 1.
p. 634. Cogenti cupiditati bona voluntate resistere non potest. Idem de
perfect. Just. resp. 5. de Pharaone; obtemperare Deo non potuit: Ratio est,
quia infallibilitas actus est aliqua impotentia omittendi, and infallibilitas
omittendi, est aliqua impotentia, operandi tal^m actum. De scient. Dei disp. S.
6.
. 3. If you had not been set upon confounding necessity, with necessitation,
n^cessitatem infallibilitatis, with necessitatem coactionis. 4. If without
infringment of man's liberty, you would have but allowed that to the praevious
determination of Gods will, in determining man's free will, which all allow to
man himself; he, but a mere creature, spoils not his own liberty, by
determining it to one, Quicquid est, vel agit, necessario est, vel agit, quando
est, vel agit. And yet if God do so by his decree, he overturns man's liberty
forsooth. 3. You give us little hopes that you will keep your composition
Articles, when you have made them; because throughout all your Boethian
discourse, Sect. 39. from p. 48. to the end of the Chapter, and especially in
your instance about necessarily going to London, p 62. Where you renounce the
received distinction, of a necessity of coaction, and infallibility; and if you
allow of neither, what shall we get by the wideness of your swallow, in taking
down the word necessity; or what third one will you devise? The same may be
said to what you have, ad Nauseam, p. 60, 61, and ^.
you break all again, and are faedifragus. But I should remember* that p. 7.
and 8. you put in early cautions for contradictions. 2. You discover your
intolerable partiality, in degrading, and what lies in your power, unsainting
Dr Whitaker, (a known Regius Dr, (...), before Mr T. P. could either pipe or
peep, or be known by the letters, T. P.) whilst he must only be styled Mr
Whitaker; and Dr Andrews laden with the epithites of Learned, Reverend,
Saintlike: when as it is well known to the Christian Church, that Dr Whit. was
before Dr Andr. in time, not a whit behind him in solid learning, and in all
probability, far before him in sanctity. Had not Dr Andrews in some other
of his writings, discovered more of learning or sanctity, then in that which
you do now the second time so highly commend, and every where so much follow,
but especially, p. 56. where you order Gods decrees by the Andraean order, p.
70. where you affirm, as it were, out of Pelagius his mouth, as well as his,
That there must be a difference, before there can be an election, and confirm
this by a place out of Augustine ad Simplic. (produced as simply by him, as by
you) had he not (I say) got himself a better fame in the Church by some
writings of good note, especially that of his Catechisticall doctrine, written
by him, when as most think, that knew him, he was as much, if not more a Saint,
then when B. of Winchest. Yet I would not have any mistake me, as if 1. Either
I took it for granted, that that whiffling writing fathered upon him by F. G.
was truly his, any more then Fur Praedest, at the tail of it, was a genuine
son of his. Till this be proved further, I must charitablie have leave to be
a Sceptick: what can I tell, but the same audacious Armintanizing of F. G.
might as well abuse Dr Andrews, as in the very entrance of his preface, he
does most sottishlie abuse Dr Whitaker, and after Dr Whitgift, the Reverend
Archbishop himself. 2. Or as if I did mislike, what in the margin you quote
out of him, which for substance is nothing, but what a thousand times over, all
our own writers, with whom you use to be so angry, say as well as he For a
reason before expressed, I must not wonder that you never commend any other
Saints to us, but of his stamp; yea, worse, Cassander, Grotius, Hofmeisterus,
known Papists.
. 3. You complain of some, who censured you to hell: who these some be, I
cannot tell; if I could know them, I would surely chide them for censuring
another man's servant, who stands or falls to his own Master. What, any so foul
mouthed, as to censure, not only Mr T. P's foul opinions to hell, but his fine
person too? What ever become of your Tenants, I shall ever pray for your
person, that you may never descend into the place of torments, from whence
there is no redemption; And I will allow you to pray the same prayer for me,
and never shend you for it.

Sect. 37. p. 48.
IN this you do nothing, save, 1. Take back, what just now, Sect. 36. you had
yielded, about the term necessity, in your composition Article, p. 47. Quo
teneam nodo? etc. If Gods praescience (and you may as well say his
praedetermination too) be constant and infallible, must it not in some sense,
give necessity, though not coaction to all the events, which are the objects of
them? Dr Twisse says well to Dr Jackson, p. 275. The authors of this opinion
maintain, that God by his decree, lays contingency upon some things as well
as necessity upon others. And that as he will have the fire to burn, the Sun
to enlighten necessarily, so he will have Angels and men, produce their actions
contingently and freely, etc.
Yet that you may seem with reason to contradict your self, as well as us, you
run out from Sect. 38. to the end of the Chapter, through six whole pages, into
a wild Asiatick digression, wherein you do nothing but bewilder your self and
your Readers. 2. You who have so much reason, of thinking to correct your own
errors, will needs be correcting the errors of the vulgar, and of vulgar Mr
Calvin among them. Tantum est tibi abs re tua otii aliena ut cures. 3. We have
a parcel of tender soft words from you, about the mistakes of men of good
parts, and these wrapped up in a fine Italian proverb: Unto which I shall need
to say no more, but that 1. It is not likely we should have had any mention of
good parts, but that you would not have us think, that elegant and ingenuous
Mr T. P. wanted good parts, whilst he was for the absolute decree; so that for
any thing I know, you commend your self rather then any body else. 2. If the
former mistake, and that of other men of good parts, were only about a
philosophical notion, and that as you acknowledge, bordering upon truth: (for
other then an emplastrum philosophicum, do not you, your own and other men's
great Physician apply to their sores, in all your Boethian discourse) then
surely you were extremely to blame for ranking greater Divines and
Philosophers, then your self, amongst modest blasphemers, for mistaking of
themselves in a point of Philosophy. 3. Me thinks it suites very well, that an
Italian Roman discourse, such as yours is turned to, since your conversion (as
you call it) should be a little interlarded with some Italian language:
convenient rebus nomina, etc. And truly I have been so wearied with writing
against your Uncorrected, and Corrected Copy, that I could even have wished,
that they had been both written in that language, the present language of the
Roman Beast; for then would none of our plain hearted English men, by your
fine lines, have been betrayed into Roman doctrine, or I have been well able to
have answered you. 4. You do but antiquum obtinere, in exagitating of Calvin's
opinion, as if it were his alone, that Gods praescience (viz. praescientia
visionis, quae est rerum futurarum) is grounded upon his praeordination. Unto
which* pray take an answer for this time, (and I can see no reason, why it may
not stand for a full answer to all your Boethian discourse) from Dr Twisse, who
both seriously and merrily, writes thus to Dr Jackson for this opinion, which
you do very magisterially censure, as an ill weed, which has not only Calvin
for the patron of it, and Valla alleged by him (that one more modern, with
whom, p. 43. you upbraid Calvin) but Scotus also, the father of the reals, yea,
and Alv^r. ^ Thomist, a Sect of School-Divines, commonly opposite to the
Scotists; yet herein professedlie concurring with Scotus, and avouching also
Aquinas himself to be of the same opinion. You had need therefore look well
to your tackling in opposing such, who I tell you, were never reputed Babies
Unto whom add Ruiz. de praedest. and repr. disp. 2. S. 2. p. 19 etc. Omnibus
hominib consideratis sub esse possibili, prius ratione, quam praedest^nar
entur, au^ reprobare^tur, nulla fuit ratio discriminis, quae potuerit divinam
voluntatem movere, ut praedestinationem Judae negaret, poti^s quam Paulo. Nulla
scientia visionis, ultimo formaliterque constituit reprobationem, sed potius,
totam reprob^tionem supponit ex part objecti.
. Yet I confess they were but men, and may have their matches. Leave then your
censures, and trust to your sword, and dint of arguments, and do not think
that words or phrases, or figures (much less imperious censures) will carry
it: pray take this good counsel from that learned and venerable Dr* p. 277. in
his answer to Dr Jacksons vanities, p. 277.

Sect. 38 to the end of the Chapter. p. 54.
SIR,
IT concerns me, who have often promised my self and friends, not to swell
into a volume or Tome against you, (who at first sight of your Correct Copy,
did well hope, I might have been much briefer then I have proved) not to follow
you as I have done, but too much hitherto, from Section to Section, and from
word to word, (who yet by wording, am never like to get the better of it,
against your wordy self). In reference therefore to what you bring in, from
Sect. 38 p. 48. to the end of this Chapter; I will only do the^e three
things* 1. Deliver in some observations, which relate to all your Boethian
Transcript. 2. Because in your praeamble to this discourse, you talk, p. 47.
of composition, charity, and reconcilement, and that I be some way certain,
that next to truth, I have reason to love peace, and truly do so, the peace,
the peace of my Mother the Church, the Mother of us all, Gal. 4. 6. I never was
of a Spanish temper, of whom of old it has been observed, that they did, Bella
gerere solo pacis odio. I hope my Motto shall ever be, Nulla salus bello, pacem
te poscimus omnes. Oblato placuit componi foedere bellum. I will therefore 2.
Attempt to make some composition Articles for you, which if the next general
Assembly in Gods good time, legallie to be convened in England, (for which I
pray, for which I do long) shall be pleased to ratify in your behalf, I
doubt not but they will do you and the Church a better service, then all the
Bulls of License, which under the hand of any Italian S^ignior Con, you may
easily be able to procure, for your whole Correct Copy, as for the present it
lies. 3. I will vindicate the passage of Calvin's, against which, p 50. you do
so insolentlie insult, like some Massilian Gaul. Of the Gauls it was observed
of old, that primi impetus gallorum were plus quam virorum, secundi minus quam
mulierum. And then as to the gaudy flowers of your Oratory, with which you do
as you think, most triumphantly conclude this Chapter, you should pleasure
your self and fine friends with them. As to the first observations. 1. They
have a rare turn of it, who chance to be, or do but seem to be on your side,
since your late conversion (as you call it) p. 48. viz. to Pelagian^sme and
Arminianisme, they shall not from you their Eloquent Tertullus, want for baies
of commendation, Boethius shall be admirable, p. 48. He shall be a most
excellent Christian, a profound Divine, a terror to heresy, and a Martyr to
boot, p. 51. Though as yet I can but learn that he was a Christian, but cannot
learn what Christian books he wrote, to the terror of Heretics, nor what he
was banished for (which I think is the Martyrdom you speak of) unless as it
appears by what I collect from the lib. 1. Consolat. Philosophiae, for some
public politic contests betwixt him and his fellow Consuls, and that to me
makes him not a Martyr, as John the Divine was, Rev. 1. 9. who was relegated to
the Isle that is called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of
Jesus Christ. If you can in this better enlighten me, you will do me a real
courtesy, for which I will remain your Debtor: My scant library in this for
the present, fails me, I am no way able to divine why you should so much dote
upon Boethius, but that you abound with so much (...) to your self, and those
who be like you, as indeed Boethius is in Oratoriall, Musical, Poetical, and
Philosophical transcendent strains. 2. I cannot apprehend, whilst you were
on our side, and for the absolute decree, that there was any thing of a
robustious, sound, theological stomach in you, when a mere Philosophical, and
in many things Chimaericall discourse, (see p. 95. 102. 99. 103. edit. Lugdun.
Battavor. in oct. An. 1590. interlarded with the strongest Pelagianisme) about
the absolute and unpraejudiced freedom of man's will, p. 98. 119. 131. 144.
(manebit voluntatis integra atque absoluta libertas) besticked too, which
methinks you should not like, with Stoicisme, p. 55. about fate and necessity,
p. 109, 110. Ordo fatalis ex providentiae simplicitate proced^t, p. 144. with
Platonisme, throughout his five books, which yet if it had pleased him, he
might about praescience and praedetermination, have represented somewhat better
then he did Indeed it cannot be denied, but the Platonists did so decipher
their humane Ideas of divine decreeing, as Mr T. P. and Dr Jackson had done
before him. Alcinous de doctr. Platonis. Sic fatum pronuntiat, ex sententia
Platonis; Quaecunque animae talem vitam el^gerit, and hujusmodi quaedam
commiserit, consequenter talia patientur, etc. Libera ergo est anima and in
ejus arbitrio, agere vel non agere, ponitur: quod autem sequitur actionem, ab
ipso fato praefinitur: yet by fits Plato was of another mind See Marsil. Ficin.
de Theolog. Plat. c. 13. Deus naturarum omnium temperator, dum regit cuncta,
singulas pro singulis regit naturas, etc.
with contradiction both to himself and you, as any may perceive, if they will
but peruse that fifth book of his, (as I out of love to you, have perused all
the five) and in which there is not a word directly nor indirectly, which gives
us any the least hint of his comforting of himself in his greatest distress,
in his Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in his love, grace, promises, the only
Christian cordials. I say I stand amazed at it, that this fifth book of his
should so enlighten you, p. 48. and work such an admirable conversion in you,
as you talk of very often. In this same you will not imitate Austin, whom you
commend so highly for his retractations, p. 51. and whom you use to imitate the
clean contrary way, by licking up again, what he had cast up, as we have seen
in your simple doings about Simplician, p. 44. (he, when Pelagius at first set
forth in a mere Ethnic, Philosophic garb for nature against grace) he then
with all his might opposed it with as much of Christianity and Grace, as in the
days of his minority he was acquainted withal Vide fuse Jansen. per tot.
lib. 5. de haeres. Pelag. in Augustino suo. August. sermon. 11 de verb. Apost. c.
7. and in lib. de great. and lib. arb. c. 13. and hoc Pelagiani ausi sunt
dicere, gratiam esse naturam in qua sic creati sumus, ut habeamus mentem
rationalem, qua intelligere valeamus, etc. Sed non est haec g^atia, quam
commendat Apostolus, per fidem. Jes. Christi, etc.
. And when Pelagius grew more crafty, and to decline Envy, dressed up Nature
in a Semi-Christian dress, as Austin grew stronger and stronger in grace, and
in some sort to be of a tall stature in Christianity, so he opposed him more
resolutely in the fullness of the might and grace of Christ. But you on the
contrary, will not follow Austin so far; but your ne plus ultra, and terminus
ad quem, was what he made his terminus a quo. Nay, by your Boethius, you would
bring us back again to pure primitive Pelagianism, alias Paganism; and this you
would call the special grace of Christ, p. 55. and dub your self a convert.
If your friend now might but be allowed to give you counsel, your way to
imitate Austin in his retractations, would be, against the next time of your
drudgery (as you, p. 20. call it) to turn most of your five Chapters, into one
poenitentiall Chapter of retractations. My good brother, be not ashamed to do
what incomparable Austin did. 3. Your admirable Boethius, though in the
discourse he seems to have manifest streins of contradiction both to himself
and you, yet ever and anon, he does not so crudely propose his judgment about
praescience of things certainly to become future, without all divine previous
determination as you represent him, p. 124. Quae ille cuncta prospiciens,
providentiae cernit intuitus, and suis quaeque meritis praedestinata disponit,
(...), and when he is most himself, and comes to determine, p. 141. p. 123.
Licet de finire casum esse inopinatum, and ex confl^entib. causis, in his quae
ob aliquid geruntur eventum; concurrere vero and confluere causas, facit ordo
ille, inevitabili connexione procedens, qui de providentiae sonte descendens,
cuncta suis locis, temporibusque disponit.
he seems but to say what no Christian orthodox soul, though much opposed by
you, ever denied you yet, that all things by virtue of Gods decree and
praescience, which are necessary, should fall out necessarily, and all
contingent things contingently, and free things freely, without altering the
nature of things or introducing violence and coaction. And if this be all you
and he would have, you need not (as we have diverse times seen) have made such a
stir about that which none denies. 4. You might have been the more shie of
Boethius, not only for opposing that maxim received in all Christian Schools,
denied no where, but in the Jesuiticall, if it be interpreted of that which
they call Scientiam visionis. That non ideo sunt res futurae, quia Deus
praeviderit, sed e contra, p. 126, 127. Futurition depends not on Gods
praescience, but praescience upon futurition: But also for the starting up
almost, as many objections against the praescience, which he and you maintain,
p. 128. as you had belched out blasphemies against the praedetermination which
we maintain: all which he does allay but very weakly and sorrily, as you may
see, p. 144. in the very winding up of all his Philosophical consolations. So
that you had not need to be too bold with such objections, as you with the help
of Boethius, will as little be able to conjure down, when raised up against
praescience, as we can do, when they are brought in against praedetermination.
5. Though for your greater credit, and honors sake, you would seem to fetch
your greatest light p. 48. from Boethius, (however that light be but darkness)
yet Armin. Resp. ad Artic. 5, 6, 7. Quod vero res quae respectu secundarum
causarum contingenter sit, necessario fieri dicitur, respectu decreti divini,
id non modo perperam sed and imperite dicitur, vide p. 115. And he instanceth
in the Jews crucifying of Christ. Videsis Simon. Episcop. ad Joh, Beverovic,
etc.
Arminius, Episcopius, Nich. Grevinchovius, and every Trivial scribbling Lad
belonging to the Arminian School, could have helped you to as much light, as
there you (to use your own phrase, p. 57.) enlighten your self withal. Nor it
is likely when you were in our way (if you were ever in it) who are receded
from it, 1 John 2. 19. you so bookish a man, could be ignorant of this. 6. In
the strength of all your Philosophical, Platonicall consolation, fetched from
Boethius, your scope is and must be, (if you will oppose Calvin, or any
orthodox person holding with him) from the 38. Section to the end of the
Chapter, by heaps of distinctions hudled odly together, to maintain, 1. That
God has rather a post determination, then a praedetermination of all future
contingent things, yea (as I could enlarge in the proof, if I were not tied to
brevity) a Postscience, then a praescience: and then the sum of what you strive
to prove, is but what Dr Twisse, told Dr Jackson he labored to make out; if
you speak to purpose in this, and that by way of opposition, your Dr Jacksons
vanities, p. 279
meaning must be this: God does not first decree them, and afterward foreknow
them (viz. future contingent things) but rather he first foreknowes them, and
then decrees them, which is as much as to say, that God foreknowing that they
will be, does hereupon decree, that they shall be, so that Gods decree of
things future contingent, proceeds in this manner, seeing they will be, they
shall be. 2. You as before, appear all along, for a mere intuitive praescience,
devoid of all praedetermination of by far the major part, and more noble part
of all sorts of actions done by Angels, men or Devils in the world, whereof God
is no ways a praedeterminator, but takes his part after man; and is, and was
ab aeterno, as a mere spectator, p. 48. as your self have it in that Boethian
simile, when you behold men walking on the earth, or the Sun shining in the
Heavens. And is not this worse then to divide the government betwixt God and
men? Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet. Is it not to exempt all rational
creatures, and their actions, qua tales, from all divine government, unless
such as is without all praedetermination And is not this, as one learnedly,
Abr. Vand. Mylen, in Beverovicio, p. 27. Fortuito casui omnia tribuere, and
pervigilem Dei curam dissolvere, some nolento villico negligentiorem facere?
Nullum numen ^dest si sit prudentia: T. P. facit Deum dependere ab humana
prudentia, quae ipsa fortuna est magis versa^ilis. Te nos facimus fortuna Deam,
etc. coeloque locamus. And yet this Vander Mylen was an Arminian.
. 3. You would gladly out of that Boethius p. 110. revive that long since
exploded opinion, of the actual existence of all things aeternallie with God,
which therefore you would have called, not praevidence, which is of things
future, but providence which is of things present. Whereas there can be nothing
so plain, as that from aeternity, there could be nothing actually present
besides God, unless we shall fall back to maintain the worlds aeternity a
priori, unto which I find your Boethius but too inclineable, when though he
dare not say, that the world was aeternall, yet he says it was perpetuum.
Which is as true, as that Mr T. P. was a thousand and millions of years ago,
writings of his (...) Correct Copy. Indeed, as Philoponus the Gramma^ian
ans;wered well, more like a Christian then a Heathen, when he was asked by
those that denied the worlds creation in time, and so that it was possible to
be before it was, where that possibility did lodge before it was produced into
act, he answered that it was in the agent Dr Twisse vind. great. l. 1. digress.
1. S. 4. p. 54. objectum dici non potest esse simpliciter, sed duntaxat in Deo,
ut cognitum in mente Dei, etc.
in God, all things from aeternity had in God an intentionall being, but not an
actual. In which sense, the Apostle says, that God calls all things, not being
as if they were, Romans 4. 17. It is but a quasi of being, not a real one,
existing extra causas. God then in his decrees, looked upon them as entia
possibilia, and as such things which by virtue of his decrees, were in their
own time and order and way, to obtain actual being. But these things are so
evident in themselves, and have been so learnedly ventilated by Dr Twisse
Against Dr Jacksons vanities.
and many more (among whom, I do not reckon my reverend good friend Dr Kendall,
against Mr John Goodwin, to be any of the meanest) as that I should but abuse
my leisure further to insist upon them. 4. By your frequent repetitions of that
first and second will of God: of your antecedent and consequent will, the
absolute and conditional, your inviting and revenging will, p. 51, 52. your
will of mercy and judgment, all which distinctions, as you say very well, come
to one and the same purpose, p. 41. 52. and with which, as rare dainties, we
were once served, p. 36, 37. etc. in that Deca-chorde of Arguments of yours
(already sufficiently considered) oditur chorda quae semper oberrat eadem. I
say by all these you would feign make us believe, what I am confident no
Christian in the world will dare long to believe; that Gods antecedent first
and chief will, and that which as I may so say, God is most big withal, and
enamoured with Vid. D. Riv. disp. 7. de great. univers. these. 12. Nemo sibi in
Deo imaginari debet, sicut in hominib. voluntatem, studium sive conatum
aliquem, quo velit, studeat, imitatur, and quantum in ipso est agat, ut omnes
salventur, quod tamen propterea non assequatur, quia bonae ejus voluntati
obsistat mala hominum voluntas, qua praevalente and impediente, divina
frustretur: Quod commentum, divinae potentiae and faelicitati repugnat: Si enim
non potest Deus quod vult, quomodo omnipotens? Si non assequitur quod optat,
quomodo faelix and non potiuomiser?
, as he is with the manifestation of his own glory, in one kind or other,
Prove. 16. 4. Romans 9. 12. may be repealed, annulled, etc. p. 52, 53. etc. But
that his consequent will, which depends upon the creature, p. 53. and which he
cares no more to have, then a just Judge, p. 52. to hang a murderer is absolute
and unrepealable, etc. and so made by the act of an impendent headstrong
creature. He that can believe these things, has a wide swallow (g) And I (r)
Wider then that of Avistotle, Rhet. lib. 2. St enim voluit and potuit, id etiam
fecit; omnes enim cum volunt and possunt aliquid facere, id etiam faciunt.
trust, all the Christians in England, whether Episcopal, Presbyteriall, or
congregationally* Independent, will a thousand times sooner agree among
themselves, than be willing from you, or any of your adhaerents, upon the terms
of believing such theological paradoxes to compound with you. And for my own
part, how much soever you flout me with my opinions, and Religion, in the last
words of this Chapter, p. 54. and who by Gods blessing, believe this as firmly
as any Article of my Creed, that in God there is no mutability nor shadow of
turning, Jam. 1. 17. Mal. 3. 6. August. Enchirid. cap. 102. Quantaelibet sint
voluntates, vel Angelorum, vel hominum, vel bonorum, vel malorum, vel illud
quod Deus, vel aliud volunt quam Deus; omnipotentis voluntas Dei semper invicta
est, quae mala esse nunquam potest, quia etiam cum mala irrogat, justa est, and
profecto quae justa est, mala non est, etc.
. I would not for a thousand worlds, in these points change opinions or
religions with you, any more then Fr. Gomarus, as he professed in a full
assembly of States, would appear in the faith of Arminius, about the ipsum
(...) credere, in the matter of Justification, before the Tribunal of Christ
Vid. Praes. ad Synod. Dordracen.
, at the bar of which, we must one day all appear, 2 Cor. 5. 10. I have no
mind to a (...), to an aurum pro carbone. I am not for a conspiracy, with whom
you say a conspiracy. No, my good brother, come you to me, I am not like to
come over to you (God defending me) to change religions in have; and yet in
this I wish you no more harm, then Paul did Agrippa, when he prayed, that in
every thing he might be like him, his chain only excepted, Acts 26. 29. 2. But
in hopes, that you who gave me the first hint by your soft words of Charity,
Reconcilement, composition, will come in upon some easier terms, then the last
Articles which you propose, p. 53. I be take my self briefly, to the second
thing promised, viz. to the drawing up of Articles of Composition for you to
subscribe to, if you be in good earnest to come in, upon a personal treaty.
If you yield to them; as poor a Presbyterian as I am, I durst warrant that you
may be, as to the matters contained in these l^st Sections* and third Chapter,
upon terms of peace and reconciliation, with any orthodox Protestant Assembly
in England or Christendom, ever to be summoned, but if not, I must bid an
Aeternum vale to you. and I doubt most Christian Churches will do it with me.

Honest easy Articles of Composition, for Mr T. P.
Article 1.
YOU shall no more dispute against Sir N. N. and make the whole world believe,
that all the while you be disputing against Mr Calvin, and the whole Nation of
the halfe-witted Rabble of Praedestinarians, (as you call them, first papers,
p. 11.)

Article 2.
You shall no more confound Election and Salvation, reprobation and damn^tion,
as you do all along: Nor yet the decree of God, as it is an act immanent from
all eternity in him, with the temporal execution of it.

Article 3.
You shall with all the speed you can, gather up all the Distinctions which you
have brought together, for the reconciling the Liberty of man's will (such as
now it is since the fall) with divine praescience. As viz. that of an absolute
and hypotheticall necessity, p. 49. that of a consequence, from that of a
consequent, p. 49, 50. that of infallibility or certainty, from necessity,
mostly so called, ibid and diverse other distinctions useful in their kind and
way, numbered up by you, Chap. 4. p. 60, 61. and girding like a valiant man,
your Gladius Delphicus you speak of, p. 5^. by your side, you shall as
dextrouslie and indifferently, apply all these useful distinctions for the
cutting asunder of the knots about free will and praedetermination, as you do
for the cutting asunder of the chiefest knots, in the Question about free will
and praescience; and then as to those matters, we shall be in a fair way of
agreement. In like sort you shall bundle up those other distinctions which you
have, viz. that of the antecedent and consequent will of God, that of his
comparative and absolute will, p. 51, 52. of his inviting and revenging will of
God; of his mercy, and of his justice, ibid. and you shall not apply them to the
mould and making of Gods decrees as they are in themselves, but to the
execution of them in time, which you ought to yield to, who have unwarily, I
wish but cordially confessed, that in Gods will simply, there is neither prius
nor posterius, p. 51. And then, as to all what you have, Sect. 40, and 41.
(excepting always that which you put into a parenthesis, p. 53. about the
dependency, or independency of Gods will, which we must ever maintain to be
independent) we shall be mavelous like to accord with you.

Article 4.
You shall for the future, next to the holy, blessed, unerring book of God, in
the Quinque-Articularian Controversy, and what depends upon it, study the best
and most choice orthodox authors, such as of old has been Austin, Prosper,
Fulgentius, Hilary, Historia Gottes. etc. and of late (that you may know that
we are not so Presbyterian, as in every thing to cross the Episcopal humor)
Matthew Hutton, Archiepiscop. Eborac. Jacob. Armachanus, Rob. Abbot.
Satisburiens. Jos. Exon. John Dav. Sarisburiens. Georg. Cicistrens. and a
number more.

Article 5.
You shall not for after times, with Tilenus, be such an Antizelote, as he was
in his Paraenesis ad Scoto^ disciplinae Genevensis zelotas, to Presbyterian
discipline, as out of hatred to it, to abhor all the doctrines which are
delivered by the men of that way and order, and so in opposition to them, turn
Arminian and Thompsonian, and then yet call your self in despite of all the
orthodox Fathers and Articles of the Church of England, a very orthodox
Protestant of the Church of England, p. 4. For indeed now, if you have such
tricks with you, you will not only deserve to be disciplined as somewhere
Hieron. professes of himself, that he was by the Lady M. in a vision, Quod
potius Ciceronianus quam Christianus esset, and as you might be for your
Boethian rather then Christian Philosophy. But you will give cause to your
Mother the Church of England, to look upon you as a son that causes shame, to
desire your room rather then your company, and to tell you, that at Rome, as
appears by the Bull of Innocent the tenth, you and your doctrines shall be
more welcome, then they can be to England, whiles the Articles of the Church
are in any credit with the sons of the Church. 3. As to the third thing
promised, viz. the clearing of the passage quoted, p. 50. out of Mr Calvin's 4.
Section of the 23. chap. of the 3. book of Institutions, he shall not need to
be reverenced any thing the less, or suspected any thing the more for what he
says there, if that may be but considered, what has been said often in his
behalf already, upon occasion of such like passages, in answer to p* 9, 10.
But you lessen your own reverence, and give reason enough to Protestants, for
to the marking you atro carbone, with the black coal of their censures, for
your so frequent branding of Calvin, whose spots whereover they do appear in
his writings, were but like those of Cyprians, Naevi in candido pectore,
whereas yours do but appear to be like those which are not the spots of Gods
children, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. you do but in your censures resemble him in the Poet
too much, who did pass by the Crows, and shoot at the Pigeons, (...)
Praeteriens Corvos, vexat Censura Columbas. But what must Mr Calvin be
suspected for? for mainteining that God did praedestinate Adam, and in him all
men, to the cause of their damnation, sin. But first, that which is in the
objection, which was made against Calvin's Doctrine, which he had delivered in
his former third Chapter, is it also in Calvin's Resolution? Does he consent to
the whole of that objection Does he not deny it with a non protinus sequitur
Deum huic obirectationi sub jacere?
? Does he join his fateor, I confess, to the all of it, as it lies? or does
he only say, which unanimously enough Schoolmen Ca^thus. in 4. q. 1. did.
46. Causa naturae and proprietatum ^jus est divina voluntas, (vel eligentis vel
reprobant^s) ideo totus ordo j^st^tiae or^ginaliter, ad div^nam voluntatem
reduci^ur and did. 41. D^^o quo^ Deus ord^navit A. ad essectum
praedestinationis, and non B etc.
had said before him, that Gods will was the only prime sovereign cause, why
Adam, and in him all men, were at first left to their own free sinful wills,
from falling into which, God might have preserved them, if he had been so
pleased, as well as he did uphold Adam any one hour, before his fall, or does
the Angels unto this day. 2. You misrerresent Calvin most shamefully, contrary
to his clear Doctrine in the foregoing Section What Ruiz. de vo^. d^sp. 39. S.
3. says Aliq^i modi in voluntate non reducuntur in Deum tanquam in co^s^m,
pras^rtim, quando culpabilis est nodus se habendi, vid. and disp. 6. n. 12.
, when as you would have him teach, that God does as much praedestinate men to
the misety of sin, as to the misery of punishment, which followed upon it,
that very thing which he had confuted, Section 3. just before the objection
which you would have him in the whole to consent to. 3. You fear not, or be not
ashamed to add to his answer, when you say, that by the express will of God,
etc. The word express, is an express forgery, fingis non leg is, you foist it
in, but read it not in Calvin's text: and it so sounds, as if by an express
warrant, or approbation from Gods will, Adam had fallen into sin, whereas
Calvin's decidisse filios Adam Dei voluntate, signifies in him at the utmost,
but an efficacious permissive will, which differs much from his will of
approbation, or his effective will, as we have heard long since. 4. You will
take no notice either of what Calvin disputes against the Sorbonists, who were
for Gods absolute power and will, devoid of all reason, known to himself lib.
3. c. 23. s. 2. Commentum non ing^rimus absolutae potentiae, quod sicut
profanum est, it a merito detestabile nobis esse d^bet. Non singimus Deum
exlegem, qui sibi ipsi lex est. etc.
Section 2. nor of what he does in this very fourth Section, as well as Section
2. before, and Section 4. immediately behind, produce for Gods
unaccountablenesse for any of his decrees or doings, to any of the children of
men. And yet these Reasons to the Apostle, to Austin and others, as Calvin
shows you before and behind the place, which you quote out of him, were
judged very weighty. But about these, and other such Cavils of yours against
Calvin, I hope ere long you will be soundly paid, when the answer of Dr
Kendall comes forth against Fur Praedestinatus, unto whom for these and such
like objections, you be very much beholden. Est is ignobile par fratrum, as
Simeon and Levi, brethren in evil. 5. Your triumph against Calvin about the
dereliction of Angels will be but like the joy of the Hyp^crites, Job 20. 5.
which is but for a moment. If you will but turn back to the answer which you
have had to it by me, or if you would but (which methinks should be easy for
so multifarious a distinguisher as you show your self to be, in the latter
Section of this your 3. Chapter) distinguish betwixt the sole cause of the
Angels dereliction, or rather as it is in Mr Calvin, reprobation, which was
Gods act, How Calvin must be understood in this, and such like expressions,
See Dr Riv. disp. 3. These 13.
and no sinful one, though a secret one, and the sole cause of the Angels
defection or apostasy, which Calvin ascribes not to God, (though you most
impudentlie thrust the word defection, instead of dereliction into his text.
His is thus: Si illorum (viz. angelorum bonorum) constantia in Dei beneplacito
fundata fuit, aliorum (viz. malorum) defectio arguit fuisse derelictos. Cujus
(supple) derelictionis, non defectionis non potest alia adduci causa, quam
reprobatio, quae arcano Dei consilio abscondita est. And for this God cannot be
blamed any more, then the Scripture does blame him, Jude 6. when it tells us,
that they relinquished, viz. voluntarily and sinnefully their first station.
And thus I am at last come to the end of your terrible long third Chapter.

Unto Chap. 4 and 5. from p. 55. to the end.
IT would be easy to me, (who in short notes, as well as in extended ones,
against your first papers, have delivered in a world of matters, referring to
this) as well as useful to others, to be voluminous in the answers to what
you have in the two next ensuing Chapters: but because I find it most necessary
for the present, (as it were) to contract all my own Iliads into a Nutshell, I
will (God being with me) in opposition to all your extravagancies in these two
Chapters, (wherein with a witness you show your self to be clericus vagrans)
confine my self to these ensuing particulars. 1. I Will wipe off, nay, retort
the most of the aspersions of Stoicisme, Manichaisme, Marcionisme, Turcisme,
which you would feign bespatter our Doctrine of absolute praedestination
withal. 2. I Will charge home, and prove the charge of Pelagianisme, and
Massilianisme, to belong to you, against all your solemn disavowing either of
them, p. 55, 56. etc. 3. I Will make some additions to what I have proved
already, p. 79, 80. that it is impossible that in any orthodox sense, you
should hold your second principle, again repeated, p. 55. and yet opine as you
do in your former Chapters, and in these two last. 4. I shall a little show
the disorder of your St Andrean order, p. 56. wherein you marshall as it were
into rank and file, the several decrees belonging to praedestination. 5. I
shall somewhat more elaboratelie, then I shall do any thing else, state the
Question about Gods irresistible or resistible (as you call them) operations in
the way of gracious workings upon persons to be converted, about which you make
a most irresistible coile and pudder, from Section 44. p. 56. off and on, to
the very end of you 4. Chapter, ending. p. 68. and yet about which you do most
weakly, if not wilfully, most mistake your self. 6. I shall somewhat discover
your escapadoes in the Quaestions of free will, and the Saints perseverance. 7.
And then I shall wind up all in answer to your petitionary epilogue for
Liberty of Conscience, and commend my self and all my labors, and even you,
unto Gods mercy. Unto the first then, and here to the 1. The charge of
Stoicisme, I need but say, 1. That Stoicisme belongs more to you, then to us,
who have, 1. As much, nay more reason then we, to tie the Almighty to the fate
of the Stars See before, p. our saying uses to be, astra regunt homines, sed
regit astra Deus, certe non regitur ab astris, nec a voluntatibus hominum.
and their influences, then to the much more versatile turn pin fates of man's
slippery free will. 2. Who use with a much greater (...) and (...) to speak of
the powers of man's free will, in making themselves good and happy, then we do
or dare to speak. 2. That all fatality (the chief thing laid to the charge of
the Stoics) is not to be denied, unless you will renounce all certainty in
Gods decrees, as Austin has taught us, de gra. and lib. arb. 5. c. 1. Si
propterea quis quam res humanas fato tribuit, quia ipsam Dei voluntatem vel
potestatem sati nomine appellat, sententiam teneat, linguam corrigat.
and withal, kick up your own admirable Boethius Whose saying it is, l. 5. de
consol. Fatum est immobilis dispositio, rebus mobilib. inhaerens. Sic. Aquin.
par. 1. q. 116. a. 4. See Dr Dav. an imadverl, p. 24^.
. 3. The very Stoics, who were most for fates, yet they were so much for
confatalia too, for a sapiens dominabitur astris, as they made a shift, not
withstanding all the hard opinions which they maintained about fates, to be
the strictest living Philosophers in the world, and if I may so speak, very
Puritans amongst the Gentiles. They did not believe, (and yet they excelled
more in Logical skill about consequences, from antecedents, then any other
sect of Philosophers) that their opinions about fate, did necessitate them to
neglect virtue, (in which they above any other Sects, did place their
happiness) or excuse them in their vices, as you would have the doctrine of
absolute praedestination to do, p. 42. etc. alibi. 4. No objection more common
among Pelagians, or Semi-pelagians against Austins doctrine about
praedestination, then that of introducing Stoicall fate Prosp. ad August.
objiciunt sub hoc praedestinationis nomine, fatalem quandam induci
necessitatem, etc
2. As to Manichaisme, and Marcionisme, 1. Had you not more studied to multiply
the tale of accusations, then to prove the pertinency of them against our
doctrine, you would not have objected Manichaisme and Marcionisme, as two
distinct things: whereas it is well known Vid. Lambert. Danaeum in August. de
haeres.
, that Manichaisme was the latter in time, but the same in opinion with
Marcionisme and Cerdonianisme, from whence they both derived their blasphemous
and monstrous conceits about two principles, or Gods, whereof the one was the
author of all good, the other of all evil and wickedness: which you may as
often as you please, object against our doctrine, but shall never be able more
to prove it against us, then the Pelagians, and Semi-Pelagians were to prove
Manichaisme against St Austin Prosp. Epist. ad Ruffin Adj^ciunt etiam
accusatores, duas humanl generis massas, and duas cr^di velle naturas, ut scil.
tantae pi^^atis v^o, Paganorum and Manichaeorum adscribatur imp^etas.
, and yet they had nothing more frequent at their tongues ends, and pens ends
against him. 2. You your self look a thousand times more like a Manichee, then
we do, who up and down do maintain, especially, p. 41. in opposition to us,
that the Devil is bec^me master of most part of the world, the very black
Prince of the world, and yet by not so much as a full voluntary, just,
permission of the Almighty, p 14. who now is the Manichee, in making God not
only a coordinate power in a different kind with the Devil, but a superior
to him? 3. As to that of Turcisme, it has been so far answered before, as
that I can assure you, 1. That if Pope Innocent the tenth's late Bull, did not
promise that your doctrine should be more welcome at Rome, then the grand
Turk has ever done that ours shall be at Constantinople, you would never set
forth (pray God you may not, and I pray it seriously) for Rome the first, nor
were we ever to be like to sail to Rome the second, alias Constantinople. 2.
Its easy to tell who were your praedecessor: in objecting Turcisme to our
doctrine, v^z. your beloved S. Castalio Turp Apol pr^d^fens Theol. Castal,
praef Mahumetanis ac plane perditis hominib. rel^nquenda est ea (doctrina
praedestinationis) qua^ Diabolus ad Christiani populi perniciem induxit, etc.
, and the Belgic Remonstrants, who as Learned J. Bogermanus observes well,
would have done the like against King James, but that then they were afraid of
his Triple Crown Bogerman. Annot. 104 cont. H Grot. Vel hoc solo nomine,
plerique odium alicui conflant, quod Calvini and Bezae sit studiosus: and in eo
toti sunt, ut hos Dei servos velut Turcis, and Marianis crudeliores and plebi
reddant exosos, etc. and apud mul^os hoc dedere eff^ctum ut quotidiana
experientia testatur Nec mitius hoc genus hominum tractaret ipsum Britanniae
Regem, nisi fastigium formidaret regium.
. Thus as to the wiping off of aspersions from us, which stick nothing so fast
to us as rain to the most slippery oiled coat. But as for the second, it is
not all the water of Noah's or Deucalion's flood, can wash you (without a
recantation) clean from the charge of Pelagian^sme, and Massilianisme, now to
be proved against you, 1. For both, I think it has been sufficiently well
done already, up and down in the margins of this book, so that he that runs
may read them. 2. As for the charge of direct Pelagianisme (I do not say
learned out of Pelagius his book, but out of your Pelagian nature; for nature
inclines us all to Pelagianisme, it is the most natural heresy that is in the
world) I had thought to have proved it at large, by making good this assertion,
That Pelagius when pursued by Adversaries, gives as good words to grace, nay
ascribes more to it, in the matter of habitual grace, in the matter of the
remission of sins, and diverse other matters, then as yet you have in this, or
in your former papers, discovered your self, according to your way of
reasoning, to allow of Compare but what you say, with what Jansen. in his
Augustine. l. 5 and 6. de haeres. Pelag. does quote as Pelagian Concessions, out
of their writings, and no body will doubt of the truth of this.
. 3. By what you have in these papers, within the compass of these 4. and 5.
Chapters, as well as in your former as genuine papers, about the three capital
points of Pelagian Heresy, viz. 1. Original sin As for original sin, the
very first root and basis of all Pelagianisme, as every body knows, who sees
not, that in these your corrected papers, you do most warily decline all
express mention of it, when p. 6, 65, 67. you had reason and occasion enough
for so doing, the strongest expression looking that way, is that which you
have, p. 6. of the Serpents and the Protoplasts promoting of your guilt, which
who sees not? You may as well interpret of a promoting it by way of persuasion
in the Serpent, and of example in Adam, and of imitation in you and others, the
very phrase of the Pelagians. And as for the guilt you speak of, may you not
also interpret it only of reatus poenae, and that only as to temporal
punishment, death temporal, then of any guilt of sin? And why may not I more
then suspect this of you, when as I find in two Copies of your first genuine
papers, where indeed for fashion sake, you own the term original sin; but
then, 1. You define it only thus, It is the want of original innocence,
together with natural concupiscence in the posterity of Adam, p. 10. 2. You
quarrel with the definition of absolute praedestinarians, p. 11. 3. You
oppose, p. 10. original sin to a man's own, and quote Ezekiel. 18. for it. 4.
You maintein, it never killed, never damned any: Your express Thesis there,
is, p. 10. That none in the world dying infants are damned. 5. Ibid. You
maintain, the state of all infants to be a harmless state, and that it cannot
be utterly lost in our riper years without our will. All which, what do they
speak, but that of Pelagius. August. de not. and gra. Naturam humanam neque in
parvulis indigere medico, quia sana est, and in majoribus sibi ipsam ad
justitiam posse sufficere, si velit.
. 2. Free will. 3. Universal grace, p. 71. This will be put past all dispute
against all frontlesse denyals, as the more learned sort of Readers (whom this
most concerns) will easily discern, by viewing what I bring for proof of it
in the margent. By which it is very clear, that out of courtesy and craft,
rather then kindness and love, you do complement with grace, giving her 1.
The higher title; she is with you, p. 55. the nominall mistrisse. 2. And
bestowing upon her, an encomiastick declamation, of just 24 lines long, p. 46.
in a book of 74. pages, wherein now and then you bedawb her with some fine
words, yet nothing so full nor significant, as any body may see, as those of
the Remonstrants, in their third and fourth Articles, whose method, as well as
matter, you own really, though not verbally, throughout your book, which I
think too, was the rather distinguished by you into five Chapters, that you
might some way discover to your friends, how well you liked their five
Articles. For these great services, over the left shoulder, done to grace, Oh
that in case of your obstinacy, there were but in England a Synod or Council,
like to that of Orange, as Civil, to use your own phrase, p. 55. to reject
your haeresy, as it did that of Pelagianisme, and then it would be done
effectually. You would be soundly rated for Courting that Mistress, and in
the mean while lying and committing spiritual fornication, with that more
beloved Handmaid, Dame Nature. After you would be shent, Can. 7. An Haeretico
falleris spiritu. An Resistis ipsi spiritui. sancto. Nay the Anathema of the 4.
Canon, Council. Milev. Can. 4. etc. And then 2. As to Massilianisme, (which once
your great Oracle, Jacob. Arminius Art. 10.
with some grains of allowance, would have questioned, whether it were not to
be looked upon, as verus Christianismus, true Christianity) none shall have any
the least shadow of reason to doubt of that, who either can or will but compare
what you have in your fifth Chapter, about conditional election Massilianisme,
or Semipelagianisme, may as well be denied by you, as that your nose stands in
your face, unless you will blot out most of all your fifth Chapter. There, 1.
to you, Election is founded upon praescience, p. 69. 71. So the M^ssilians,
Psosp. Epist. ad August. Qui credituri sunt, quive in ea^fide, quae deinceps
per Dei gratiam sit juvanda, mansuri sunt, praescisse, ante mundi
constitutionem Deum, and eos praedestinasse in regnum suum, quos gratis
vocatos, dignos suturos electione and de hac vitae, bono fine esse excessuros
praeviderit. 2. Faith in Christ, which you make the difference between the
elect and reprobate, and a difference you say there must be, before there can
be an election. So they, as Austin himself did, when he held their error,
August. Epist. ad Hilar. Non potest in rebus omnino aequalib. electio nominari,
quoniam sp. sanctus non datur, nisi credentib. 3. Election to you, is a
retribution, p. 70. reprobation a punishment, passim cap. 3. So they, Prosp.
resp. ad dub. Genuens. ut ipsa electorum praedestinatio, non sit, nisi
retributio. 4. The number of the elect or reprobate, is not to you fixed, nor
determinate; if it be conditional, how can that be? But you say most
expressly in your first papers, p. 4. That God praedestinated Israel, both to
salvation and reprobation; God does write and blot, and write again, p. 8. So
they, Prosp. ad August. Nec acquiescunt praedestinatorum electorum numerum, nec
augeri posse nec minui. Sic Hilar. Arelat. ad August. 5. According to you, none
can be certain of election, till he have believed, obeyed, and persevered in
both. p. 69. So they, Jansen. l 8 de Pelag. haeres. Ab electione sola, ad bona
opera, nemo (secundum illos de quibus loquitur nemo potest simpliciter electus,
aut praedestinatus esse vel dici; hoc enim nemini competit, nisi postqua^ non
solu^ sanctus esse, been vivere, sed etiam in eadem sanct^tate, ac bona action
permansurus esse praescitur. 6. Add to this your doctrine about universal
grace and free will, p. 64. and 71. wherein you and they are one. Prosp. ad
August. universis hominib. (aiunt) propitiationem, quae est in sacramento
sanguinis Christi, esse propositam, ut q^icu^que ad fidem and ad baptismum
accedere voluerint, salvi esse possint. August. lib. de gra. contr. Petag.
Habere nos possibilitatem utriusque partis a Deo insitam, velut quandam radicem
fructiseram, and soecundam, quae possit, ad proprii cul^oris arbitrium, vel
ni^ere flore virtutum, vel sentibus horrere vitiorum.
, p 69. and other matters with the marginall parallels, which I have drawn up
in short, and may have occasion as to Pelagianisme, and Semi-Pelagia^isme, to
draw out more at large some other time. The third thing proposed, has been
proved already in the second; for whosoever proves you a Pelagian, or
Massilian, proves you either no Christian, or but a piece of one; and as good
never a whit, as never the better. But that you may know how kind hearted I am
to you, after all the many course salutes which I have had from you; I will add
somewhat to what already in these, and much more to what I have had in answer
to your first papers, toward the probatum est, that in words you do indeed
say over your second principle, p. 55. but that it is impossible that it should
be consistent with the rest of your tenants: for which in this book, and in
these very last Chapters of it, you do appear like another pugnacious
Bellarmine, Anagrammatice spirans Bella, Arma, minas. Take these few Arguments,
as a supra-pondium, or auctarium, to what has been brought in already.

Argument 1. He defends not the special, evangelicall grace of Jesus Christ,
of which Christ said, you have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, John 15.
16. who mainteins his good works to be a necessary condition (we shall find
that to be tantamount, when we come to it, if leisure will serve to speak to
it, to a necessary cause) of our election. But that does Mr. T. P. indeed, and
in ipsis terminis, p. 69. Ergo quod est causa cansae, est causa causati. If Mr
T. P. his good works be a necessary cause, or say but a necessary condition of
his election, it must much more be so of his vocation, justification, adoption,
etc. For as Bishop Carleton learnedly proves, it is possible that a prior grace,
may in some sort and sense be said to be the cause of a posterior, as ex. gr.
election of vocation, vocation of justification and Sanctification, etc. but
that a posterior grace should be the cause, or a necessary condition of a
prior, is most absurd and impossible See B. Carleton at large, exam. of the
Author of the appeal, p. 52, 53, 54. etc. where these words are most
remarkable. To hold the contrary to this, is, for love to hold with Pelagius,
to say something wherein they forsake* understanding, reason, Divinity, and
Philosophy, and speak nonsense. For that I call nonsense, that is against
Divinity, Philosophy, and common sense, as this is, which makes a subseque^t
gtace, to be the cause of a precedent grace, to set the effect before the cause.
. If then faith and good works, and perseverance in them, be before election it
self, the very first grace and fountain of all grace, Romans 8. 30. Ephesians. 1. 4.
then of necessity man's free will and good works, must be before all true
Christian special grace, according to you.

Arg. 2. That grace which for kind and species, is but the same with the grace
which was given to the first Adam, from whence he fell totally and finally,
that is none of the special grace procured and purchased by Jesus Christ. But
such is the grace which Mr T. P. does most ^ouragiouslie stand up for, p. 95.
Sect. 52. which as Jansenius does most learnedlie out of Austin dispute, did
only afford unto Adam, adjutorium sine quo non, without which it had been
impossible for Adam to have stood at all; but did not afford him Adjutorium
quo, by which he was enabled certainly to stand. Ergo.

Arg. 3. That grace which does not absolutely give us to will and do,
according to Gods will and pleasure, but only upon condition of our willing and
doing, and that in the very first act of our regeneration and conversion, that
is not the special grace of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2. 12, 13. But no other grace
does Mr T. P. stand up for, either before regeneration, as may be seen and read
of all men, in the application of his illustrious simile, taken from the
opening of the eyelid, as a necessary condition for the intromitting of light,
p. 63. (A thing which as Austin has well cleared, is most necessary, even
sanis oculis, to those who see best, and unto whom not a faculty of seeing is
given, but external light) nor after regeneration, as is plain, Sect. 45. p.
57, 58. by what he disputes there, and what is not greatly, as he might have
known, disputed betwixt him and his adversaries; who deny not but that after
the first grace received, and after the habits of grace infixed and impacted
into the will, that does voluntarily act being acted. But T. P. mainteins the
will to be not only the material cause, or rather the subject in which and
upon which as not a blockish and brute instrument (as he represents it) but
upon a rational intelligent subject, grace works Bernard. de lib. arb. and
gra. opus hoc sine duobus perfici non potest, uno a quo sit, altero in quo sit.
Deus est Author salutis, liberum arbitrium tantum capax. De hoc primo actu
intelligendum est quod Augustinus dicit, Deum ut velimus, in nobis sine nobis
operari; Idem quod Thomas in primo actu voluntatis qui procedit a gratia
praeveniente, voluntatem esse motam, and non moventem.
or the formal cause which does elicite the acts of willing, believing, doing;
for questionless we will, when we will, we believe when we believe, and God
does not will, believe, repent August. de gra, and lib. arb. c. 16. Certum est
nos velle cum volumus, sed ille facit, ut velimus bonum, etc. Certum est nos
facere, cum faciamus, sed ille facit ut faciamus, praebendo vires
efficacissimas voluntati, vid. and de bon. persev. cap. 13.
, but he does, as has been seen often, and in his never to be forgotten
simile, p. 63. make the will as very an efficient cause of its own willing, as
the faculty of seeing, is of the eielids opening, ergo, T. P. defends not the
special grace of Christ.

Arg. 4. He that mainteines no other grace then what is conveied by a general
covenant, founded o^^y upon conditional promises, he does not maintain the
special grace of Jesus Christ, Jer. 31. 33. Heb. 10. 16. But that does Mr T.
P. p. 36. 71. Ergo.

Arg. 5. He that so interprets those scriptures which speak of Gods most
efficacious omnipotent wonder-working grace, as to allow grace, not a
supernatural real efficacious work, but only a forinsecall, moral, suasive
work, he, say he what he will to the contrary, shuts Christ's special grace
out of doors, and makes it stand in the cold, lackying upon man's will, Pelagian
like (e). But that does Mr T. P. by his glosses (d) August. de gra. cont. Peag.
and Celest. l. 1. cap. 7 Adjuvat nos Deus per doctrinam and revelationem suam;
dum cordis nostri oculos aperit, dum nobis ne praesentib. occupemur futura
demonstrat, dum Diaboli pandit insidias, dum mult^formi and ineffabili dono
gratiae coelestis illuminat. Nay, does Mr T. P. allow so much as Pelagius does,
who c. 38. ibid. has these words, N^s qui per Christi gratiam, in meliorem
hominem renati sumus, qui sanguine ejus expiati. and mundati.
upon Phil. 2. 12, 13. Sect 45. and upon Ezekiel. 26, 27. Cant. 1. 14. 1 John 3.
9. Sect. 47. p. 60. etc. Ergo.

Arg. 6. And last, He that mainteins Christ himself to jeer at sinners, p. 37.
etc. alibi, and every where jeers at Christ's faithful servants, for
mainteining with Christ and his Apostles, John 15. 2. Romans 8. 7. 1 Cor. 2. 14.
men to be so impotent since their fall, as that they cannot come to Christ,
unless Christ and the Father draw them by their special, all conquering power
of grace, not communicated unto all, John 6. 44* But this does Mr T. P. p. 37.
and in this Chapter, from Sect. 44. p. 56. almost to the end of it. Ergo, I
trust I may upon the whole matter, something more theologically and logically
conclude with an (...), then Mr T. P. that though in aemulation to Dr Jackson
Of divine Attri. praef.
, the very oracle, and Arminius revived to all English Arminians, you did think
it most conducing to the credit of your interest, to maintein God to be the
special author of all grace and goodness, p. 5. yet you will never be able,
without contradicting most of your whole book, to defend it: If the three fair
lines and a half, set down, p. 55. or the four and a half set down, p. 6.
must stand uncrossed, you must provide a deleatur, and an Index expurgatorius,
for many five hundred lines of good English, but bad Theology in your book. 4.
As to the fourth thing promised, touching your ordering of Gods decrees
proposed by you, p. 56. 1. The Father loves the Son, etc. I list not much in
these high points, to contend with any man, about mere matters of order, D.
Riv. disp. de praedest. these. 12. Certe inter eos qui credunt,
praedestinationis causam, referendam esse ad summam voluntatis divinae
libertatem, non ad prae visa bona, vel mala in hominibus controversia in re
nulla est, etsi in loquendi modo, videantur dissentire.
if all other matters were but right, especially in an age and Church, which
after many vows and Covenants for good order and discipline, seems to have
adjured both good order, and all Ecclesiastical discipline; but yet I must
needs confess, I think not yours, though it be verbatim, a Saint Andrean order
to be either soundly, 1. Theological. 2. Rightly rational. 3. Or so
passable, as that of Arminius himself. 1. It is Atheologicall, without any
necessity to multiply decrees in God, who is purus putus actus, and in whose
will simply, (as you say very truly, p. 51.) there cannot be either prius or
posterius, first or second. Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per
pauciora. The orthodox do much better, who for their own ease, distinguish one
entire decree of praedestination, into that about the end, and that about the
means according not to the diversity of Gods acts, as according to the great
diversity of objects among themselves, about which in time, according to
praedestination before all time, God puts forth many and sundry acts. 2. It is
so, to pretend to give in the whole order of praedestination, and yet to give
in only the order of election, as if reprobation, and praedamnation, were in no
sense at all, parts belonging to praedestination. 3. It savours not of
Divinity, wholly to obscure Gods chief ends in creating men, and suffering
them to fall, Prove. 16. 4. as if the Lord had not made them for any ends of his
own, and only to acquaint us with that which is only Gods secondary end, the
benefit, the gracing, or the glorifying of the creature. 4. Here we have Christ
by the Father loved as Son, or rather as it should have been, as a Mediator,
or head of the Church, (for the Fathers loving of the Son, as Son, is nothing
to the business of praedestination) before he did so much as think upon any to
be redeemed by him, to be his purchase, his spouse, the members of his body,
contrary to John 3. 17. Here I may safely say with Dr Riv. disp. 3. de
praedest. These. 28. Pessime de magno illo mysterio sentiunt, qui talem
decretorum ordinem instituunt, ex quo sequitur, Christum ita fuisse destinatum
hominum servatorem, ut tamen Deus, nullas certas ac designatas personas
respexerit, ita ut nulla infallibiliter Christo assignaverit me^bra, nullos
subditos, nullam sponsam, etc. Cum praedestinatio nihil aliud sit, quam
praescientia and praeparatio beneficiorum Dei, quibus certissime liberantur,
quicunque liberantur, unus praedestinatus est ut caput nostrum esset, nos multi
praedestinati, ut membra ejus essemus.
5. Diverse things are omitted, as Gods love, in giving Christ unto, and for his
people, of his sending him into the world to be a ransom for them, of his
preparing them sufficient and effectual means of grace. 6. Here diverse are
considered as beloved in Christ, before so much as endowed with the spirit: A
thing which otherwise the Arminians before you, and you after them, do use so
much to declaime against, p. 70, 71. 7. Those who are to be elected, are here
considered, as endowed with the spirit, (which if you will speak like a
Christian, what can it be so much as the spirit of vocation, regeneration,
faith repentance?) before such time as they be so much as elected or
praedestinated to them. Belike they rather elect or praedestinat themselves to
them, then that they be elected or praedestinated to them, contrary to Romans 8.
29. Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. 2 These. 2. 13. Acts 14. 13, 46. 8. Election and
praedestination come bringing up the rear of all Christian graces, which
hitherto without control, in Christian Churches and Schools have been taken
for the first causes and fountains of them. These things according to your
devotionary way, you may possibly judge saint-like, because you are beholding
to your St Andrew, p. 47. for them, but they be not Divine-like, as I doubt not
but most versed in Divinity will quickly judge. Nor yet secondly, is this order
so much as Rational or Logical, which always requires, that in rational
free councels, the end should be before the means, and not e contra, that is
first in intention, which is last in execution, Primum in intention est
ultimum in executione; and then according to your way of ordering of Gods
decrees, we should be first saved and glorified, and then be loved in Christ,
endowed with the spirit, elected and praedestinated. Spectatum admissi risum
teneatis amiei? But about these matters, for this time, I would rather see you
and Dr Twiss set together by the ears, in answer to Vindiciarum, lib. 3.
digress. 3. then to strive any longer with you. Nay, thirdly, though for
substance it be much the same with that of Jacobus Arminius in his declarat.
sententiae, p. 95, 96. and which is bad enough, and has been soundly confuted
by a multitude of most learned Authors Dr Twisse vind. gr. passim. D. Walaeus
cont. Corv. c. 12. D. Riv. disp. 3. de praedest. D. Dav. Animadvers. D. Ames
cont. Grevinch. Bogerman. cont. Grot etc.
, yet it is more unhandsomely proposed, then Arminius does propose his. Of the
four decrees proposed by Arminius, he does expressly acknowledge the two
first of them to be precise and absolute, and in effect the fourth too, whereas
this Saint-like order has not a word of absoluteness in it. 2. Arminius in
his third decree, speaks of sufficient and efficient means to obtain
salvation; but of this with you in your order, there is high silence. 3.
Arminius in his fourth decree, speaks of appointing certain particular persons
unto salvation and damnation, but your order speaks on that fashion, as if all
were beloved in Christ, all were endowed with the Spirit, etc. at least quantum
ad Deum, and none were appointed to destruction, Romans 9. Mr T. P. must then as
yet be so civil to me, as to give me leave to dissent from him, both in the
matter and in the order of his Correct Theology. And thus I am at length
brought to the fifth thing promised, the stating of the question about the
Resistibility, or Irresistibility of grace: And here I shall be forced to make
some longer pause, or stand and not to come quickly to my period, or if you
will, to my finitus Orestes, or determination of this question. The Arminians
of late, as well as the Pel^gians of old, place all the fortunes of their cause
(if I may so speak) in the gaining of the term resistible, and the matter
denoted by it; and some good hopes they give us, that we shall carry the cause
against them, because they will needs obtrude upon us, in this cause, the
terms of irresistible, ineluctable, necessary; and content themselves with
that of resistible, etc. magna est veritas and praevalebit. Somewhere I am sure
Austin has it to this purpose De gra and lib. arb. e 18. Sinon ex Deo, sed
hominibus vicerunt Pelagiant, etc.
. If grace be strongest, the Catholics have conquered, but if man's will be
strongest, the Pelagians have conquered. I think it therefore reasonable upon
this occasion, to handle these three things. 1. In brief to show what is the
state of the controversy betwixt the contending parties. 2. To show the
several Sophismes, and mischievous feats of the Arminians, and of Mr T. P.
their true Disciple, and genuine son, in fastening the terms of irresistible,
physical, and such like upon us, whether we will or no. 3. To show for what
ends and purposes these terms are sometimes taken up by the orthodox, since
they will needs have us to espouse them. As to the 1. That it may be by all
perceived, I am resolved to be fair, I will set it down, 1. In the very words
of our adversaries Arnold p. 263. etc. An Pos^^is operatiamb. omnib. gratiae,
quib. ad conversionem, in nobis ^fficiendam Deus utitur, manet tamen ipsa
conversio, ita in nostra p^tes^ate, ut p^ssimus non converti, id est nosmet
ipsos convertere vel non convertere? Assi m. tuentur Remonstr.
viz. Whither when all the operatios of grace are granted, which God does use
for the effecting of cur conversion, it does notwithstanding so remain in our
free power, that we may not be converted, that is, that we may convert our
selves, or not convert our selves. Or else as even Suarez has it In br^vi
resolut de gra. effi^ac, S^ct a punctus controversiae est quid addat hot
auxilium ^fficax, supra auxilium s^ffi^^ns. aut ^ur in uno habeat actualem
^ffi^aciam, non in alio.
, what addition is made by effectual grace (which Mr T. P. would seem to be
very careful. p. 61. in distinguishing from sufficient and irresistible) above
that which is called sufficient, or why in one it has an effectual efficacy,
and not in another? 2. And then in the words of our friends Quaestio est, An
motus voluntatis, qu^m Deus per gratiam effi^it, cum homin^m ad se vocat
^fficatit^r, sit p^op^^ius, immediatus and vere ^ff^ct^vus, an vero mediatus
tantum and metaphoricus, D. Riv. disp. 9. these. 19.
, all wimples of words being removed, the question is, Whether the motion of
the will, which God does effect by grace, when he calls men effectually to
himself, be proper, immediate; and truly effective, or only mediate and
metaphorical, and so God be only a cause disp^sitive, imputative, excitative,
by the way of counsel entreaty, or the like. Our adversaries, and Mr T. P.
with them, as is plain, p. 45* 57. Sect. 47. p. 60. hold the first in the
affirmative, we in the negative. They hold the latter in the negative, we in
the affirmative. 2. As to the second, the discovery of the several Sophisms
and feats about this question, their Snake-like windings and turnings, both of
the Arminians, and Mr T. P. non mihi si centum linguae oraque centum, can I
express into what various shapes they put themselves, that they may play boo
peep themselves, and yet spit out their venom of rancor against us D. Preston
has proved, and that in no less then 5. particulars, that the doctrine of the
Jesuits is more orthodox, then that of the Arminians, and so of T. P's. These.
de irresistib. gra.
, tantae molis est Romanam condere gentem, to set up the Roman Jesuiticall
Idols of resistible grace and free will. Sooner shall you wrest Hercules his
club out of his hand, then be able to make them desist from upholding these
fair Diana's of theirs. Yet if I have been able to observe any thing in either
of their Serpentine like motions; the chief of them be these. 1. With a world
of confidence and forehead, they make the world believe, that these terms of
Resistible and Irresistible, were of our own coining, choosing and picking
out, whereas we say, they came first out of Jesuiticall and Arminian Schools
Vid. Bogerm. Arnot 82. Synod stas se^me omnes in ^llorum judicio.
they are pinned upon us, but not willingly owned by us. Even old Paraeus, when
he had one foot in the grave, could find at least six or seven canting
equivocations in them Synod. Dordra. Sess. 99. p. 256. Edit in 4 to, etc.
. It was not only Dr Twisse then as he pretends, p. 59, 60. who found fault
with them: But Paraeus, Rivet Disp 9 These 11. in hac materia introductae sunt
voces prodig^osae, ^rr^sist. b^l^a^is, etc.
, and I think almost every judicious Author writing upon these questions, can
be content that Mr T. P. should again, with his adjective in Bilis, p. 67. and
the forepart of it, Resisti or Irresisti, go to school among the technicall
Grammarians, and get the Irresistibilis and Resistibilis to be whipped, for
being barbarous, and false Latin, as some good Latinists stick not to affirm
Paraeus supra.
. 2. When from pregnant places of Scripture, such or the like, as our Mr T. P.
reckons up p. 57 p. 60. Phil. 2. 12, 13. Ezekiel. 36. 27. Cant. 1. 4. 1 John 39 ^n
the question about the gracious workmanship of Gods own hand, Ephesians. 2. 10* they
be u^ged hard, they are not ashamed (to use your own phrase, p. 66.) so far
to skip from the question, as to betake themselves to their tottering hold of
mere speculative praescience, opposite to all praedetermination. This when it
is done (as has been showed) in the questions about aeternall praedestination,
is bad enough; but it is most absurd and monstrous, when it is done in the
question of Gods temporal gracious operations: And yet this is Arminius Cont.
Perkins. p. 153. Praescit Deus, quae argumenta, sthoc rerum statu, and tempore
animum sint motura hominis, eo quo Deus illum inclinatum cupit.
Sect. 31. and Mr T. P. their way, p. 61. and this way is the way of their
shame and folly. The question is, how in the collation of grace God determines
the will, and they talk of praescience Aug. de corrept. gratiae. Quae promisit
Deu^ potens est facere, non a^t quae praescivit potens est promutere, aut quae
praedixit potens est ostendere, etc. sed quae p^omisit potens est facere.
. 3. These terms are imposed by them upon us, but in the matters debated, they
are owned by themselves, as Mr T. P. does, p. 67. for a double end and purpose,
and in a double way, (Arminians are much for double dealing) in a way offensive
against us, as is every where to be seen in their writings, that they might if
we own them, securely accuse us, for maintaining Stoicisme, Manichaisme,
Turcisme, and what not? for turning reasonable creatures into brutes,
introducing fate, coaction, violent raptures, and enthusiasmes. 2. To the great
injury of God, men and Angels, good and bad, whilst placing upon occasion of
this question, the will in an absolute (...), to good or evil Pelagius like,
Hieronym. ad C^es^^h, Destruitur volun^as quae alterius open indig^t. Sed
liberum dedit arbitrium Deus, quod aluer liberum non crit, nisi quod-volu^ro
f^c^ro: Ac per hoc aut utor semel petestate quae mihi data est ut liberum
serv^^ur arbitirum, aut si alteri^^ ope^i^d^geo libertas arbitru in me
distruetur.
, they strip God* Angels, and Saints departed, Heb. 12. the wicked on earth,
and the Devils in hell of all liberty of will, which in any propriety of
speech, can be so called, p. 63. T. P. (as his Arminius before) conceives it
absurd to say, that God does choose to be good. 2. In a way defensive, and for
the recovery of what ever good words, they do sometimes for the commendation
of grace, and for the di^paragement of nature, give in, out of their policy
rather, then love to grace. Armin^us at first entering upon his profession,
having the term of resistible, as a mental reservation in his head, professed
before the Curatores Academiae, and the Deputies of Synods, that he did allow
of all that Austin and the Fathers had written against the Pelagians and
Semipelagians, and that he took them all to be justly condemned. And in another
solemn conference with diverse great divines Praefat. ad Synod Dor Ibid drac.
, he professed, that if grace was not maintained to be irresistible, he would
yield to all other imaginable operations of divine grace Armin. Profitebatur
omnes s^s^ gratiae d^vinae operationes quaecu^que possum statui modo ne gratia
ulla statuatur quae sit irresistibilis agnoscere; Gomarus ostend^bat quae
ambiguitas, ac qundolus sub ista irresistibilis voce lateret occuliatam nempe
sub eadem damnatam Synergistarum opinionem.
. And upon this score it is, because for some reasons, Dr Tw^sse waves the
terms of irresist^ble, that you can reconc^le as you say, Armin^us and Dr
Tw^sse p. 60. id est, that greatest enemy which grace (for diverse centuries of
years since Pelagius and his followers has me^ withal) with one of its
greatest and most noble defenders and cha^pions; great things will you do,
which if you do this, eris mihi magnus Apollo: But before you do it in the
point of graces efficac ous working notwithstanding all kind of nominall
agreement, you must remove the real difference betwixt them, wherein you shall
find a (...), almost as far distant, as heaven is from hell, and find set
down distinctly, in the very place you point at. 2. And indeed by this door of
resistible grace, do they, both Arminians and Je^uites, as is to be seen every
where in their writings, let in their doctrines. 1. Of the Almighties
dependency on the will of his creatures or vassals. 2. Of man's absolute free
will since the fall. 3. Of mere moral suasion in the work of conversion. 4.
Of scientia media. 5. A bare slight concurse in the work of grace. 6.
Universal grate. 7. Total and final falling away from grace, etc. Any Reader
may pick up passages proving this, without my help, out of the s^verall
Sections of T P's two last Chapters. 4. The Arminians, and Mr T. P. with
Bellarmine, and diverse other Jesuits, waving either altogether, or as much as
they dare amongst Christians, the terms of irresistible, necessary, physical,
immediate, proper, effectual, (for the most harsh sounding of all which, they
might among our authors, if their pride would but suffer them to consult with
them, find sufficiently made digestible to any Christian by our
interpretations) take up instead of them, those of certain, infallible,
moral, sufficient, efficacious, resistible, etc. Out of which when it serves
their own turns best in Cryptis among their Disciples, they can take out all
real efficacy or operation, and make them signify nothing, but either, 1. A
mere certeinty of event, p. 60. depending if not upon fortune, or upon the mere
^ubrieity of man's choice, yet upon bare speculative, and intuitive prescience.
p. 61. 2. Or an odd congruous determination adapted to the critical good hour
and opportunity of our wills being at leisure forsooth, and in a handsome
posture for the entertainment of divine influences and suggestions, p. 62. Vti
Suarez and other Jesuits, Moralis suasio et si abundans non sufficit, physica
determinatio nimia est, tollit enim libertatem, sed in congruitate quadam tota
gratiae efficacia consistit. And so they glow to a viator post lapsum, not so
much grace, as Aug. allowed to Adam before the fall, of which see at large, and
learnedly, Jansenius in his Augustinus, cap. 20. de gratia primi hominis No
wonder the book was condemned by the Pope, for it will ever be in the sides of
Jesui^es and Arminians, tanquam lateri lethalis arundo. And look what questions
Jansentus puts upon his adversaries the Jesuits, to be resolved, would be
re^olved by T. P. p. 177. Tom. 2.
3. A mere forensicall foreign work of suasion, per modum proponentis and
laudant is objectum. 5 Yet the Arminians when they have been by the vindices
gratiae, the orthodox, hotly pursued, they have been ready to throw up all
their gettings, whilst they have been forced to confess, that Gods works of
grace is absolutely irresistible in the illumination of the understanding,
excitation of the affections, yea some way in the persuasion of the will, and
yet they never clearly discovered either, why it should be more absurd to
defend the irresist^bility of the understanding, then of the will. 2. Or how
the affections can irresistibly be wrought upon, and yet not the will be
wrought upon too, when as the affections according to the best Philosophers,
are nothing else but the will extended or dilated, vehementia voluntatis
transit in affectum. But as for Mr T. P. though he serve us often in with the
exp^essions of certain infall^ble, undoubted, and sometimes comes in words so
near us, as that it is hard to say wherein the difference lies betwixt us, as
^hen he says, p. 61. that the vessels of election do very certainly persevere
to the end And more when he says, p. 67. that grace so powerfully persuades
the Elect, as that they will certainly both believe and obey, and persevere to
the end.
, yet for the most part in these two Chapters, taking him according to the
series and plain scope of his words, he is fa^re less ingenuous, then the
Arminians in diverse parts of their writings appear to be. And when he grants
us most of efficacy in the way of grace, he 1. Mainteines that to proceed only
from divine praescience, not from the omnipo^ent working of Gods hand, p. 61.
which cannot be frustrate. 2. He bespatters us, who maintain the ineffable,
real victorious work of grace We in the point hold but what Austin did, de
correp. great. c. 12. where he assigns the difference of the grace betwixt the
first and second Adam, fortissimo quippe dimisii atque permisit facere quod
vellet, infirmis servavit ut ipso donante invictissime quod bonum est vellent,
nec hoc deserere invictissime nollent.
, whereby God gives us to will and to do according to his own good will and
pleasure, and infuseth the habits of grace into the soul, with overturning the
nature of the will, as if it did not correct, but destroy the will, p. 57. to
work as Balaams Ass, p. 63. for the mistaking of the question so wilfully,
some would cry out, though I will not, Asinus ad lyram argumentum est Asininum.
3. He does all that he can to enervate the most efficacious Scriptures,
proving the efficacy of grace, p. 60. but all after so ridiculous and childish
a fashion, upon such mistakes of the matter, as very Alphabetarians in these
controversies, would hardly run into, as that I should blush to spend time
(having laid open matters as I have done) in the confuting of them. 6. The
Arminians and Mr T. P. when as they can scarce be ignorant that the debates
betwixt them and their adversaries, are chiefly of Gods way of working upon
the soul in the first act of conversion or regeneration, yet for the serving
of their own turns, they will make the world believe, that even after
conversion we maintain, that God works always irresistibly in his children,
as to all occasional individual acts, whereby they are kept from sinning
against him, p. 56. This liberty and freedom of the regenerate will, is at
once expressed, Psalm. 119. 32. p. 65. I may wonder as well as Grotius, Nullum
magnum ingenium sine mixtura dementiae, ^emo sapit omnibus horis. You, and your
admirable Grotius with you, may trifle and toy: for pray when was this ever
questioned by any adversary which either of you had? 7. If what the Arminians
and T. P. every where say, that we cannot prevail for the irresistibility of
the will, because it destroies it, how can they look to prevail for the
resistibility of it, for that will be as contrary to it, as the former De his
vide Dr Ward concionem de gratediscriminatrice. Dr Ames in coronid, ad Artic.
3. and 4. J. Bogerm. Annot. contr. H. Grot. Dr Riv. disp. 9. agnoscunt in
homine illam potentiam resistendi semper manner, qua si vult resistere po^est.
Sed negant (...) velle resistere.
. And this I trust may serve abundantly as to the second particular proposed,
p. 326. For the third, what ends the orthodox have when they use these terms
of irresistible, physical, necessary, etc. 1. It is seldom done without some
renitency. 2. Never done without granting some resistency actual before, in,
and after the work of conversion, from Romans 7. 22, 23. Gal. 5. 17. not in the
least fashion denying a connate and adnate power of resistency, to remain in us
to the last Vid. Antea in marg. p. 171.
, however strenuouslie denying any of these actual or potentiall resistences
to be stronger then the grace of God, which in Gods elected converts, and that
by virtue of the grace of their election and conversion goes forth conquering,
and to conquer, gets the mastery, and binds the resisting and strong man. 3.
They never use them for the destroying of the essential liberty of the will,
the introducing of fatal necessity, coaction Dr Pressed. p. 17. Haec. cautio
praemittenda est, hoc vocabulo irresistibiliter non intellegere nos vim aliquam
voluntati ill at am, sed in superabilem tantum efficaciam gratiae divinae.
, who in reference to Gods eternal decree and temporal execution of it in the
the matter of grace, introduce no other necessity, then what in reference to
divine praescience, T. P. with a world of other Arminians, he calls certeinty,
infall^bility, a necessity of consequence, p. 61. etc. save only we date no^
be so bold, as with him, 1. To suspend Gods decrees upon the mere certeinty of
event, p. 60. as if it were not directed by Gods determinate Counsel. 2. And
then far less dare we when we speak of saving gracious works, (for of them
he is treating, and he knows, or should know the question to be) say with him.
p. 61. that it is one thing to follow as the effect of a cause in order of
nature, and quite another to follow as the sequel of an antecedent, in the way
of argumentation. For although this be a true Logical maxim in it self, yet
when it is applied, as here it is, to the acts of Gods grace there can be
nothing clearer, however you do peremptorily deny it several times. Chap. 4,
5. p. 73. but that you deny Gods decree of eternal election, and his grace of
temporal vocation, to be any causes in nature, ex. gr. of faith, repentance,
or any other grace as the genuine fruits thereof. Habeamus confitentem reum.
Sorex se prodit proprio judicto That questionless is truth which Dr. Preston
expresses, These. de great. convertentis irresistibilita^e conversio simul est
and libera and irresistibilis. Irresistibilis est, quia non solum necessitatem
consequenti^ sed consequentis sequitur physicam inclinationem voluntatis
praeeuntem, and ultimum dictamen intellect us illud probans and confirmans, nos
dicim us veluntatem non posse tum physice motioni a gratia profectae, tum
divinae suasioni reniti vel refragart, sed necessitate consequen^^s ductum Dei
sequi.
. 4. But when they use them, they do it as Austin August. Enchirid. cap. 96.
Liberum arbitrium non potest De^ salvum facienti resistere. Prosper contra
collat. cap. 6. Non quae resistentem invitumque compellat sed, ex inviio
volentem faciat. Aug. de praedest sanctorum, cap. 7. Haec gratia quae occulte
divina largitate humanis cordibu^ tributtur, a nullo duro cord respu^tur; Ideo
quippe trihu^ur ut cordis d^r^^ia pr^mitus aufera^ur, alib: a nullo duro cord
rejicitur. Inspirata nempe ut loquitur. de sp. and lit. cap. ^7. g^attae
suavi^^t^ per spiritum sanctum, faciente plus delectare quod praecip^t, quam
delectat quod ^ p^di, and ut alibi brev^us indendo certam scientiam and
victricem del^ctationem. Si^ lib de praedest. sanctor. lib. 1. cap 20. in nobit
mirabil^ modo and in^ff bili operatu^ and velle. Prosper de vocat. gent^um,
cap. 33. Nihil obsistere divinae grat^ae posse, quo m^nus id quod vol^erit
impleatur. Fu^gent. de remissione peccat. lib. 2 cap. 2. Quia ho^ vult, qui
omnia quae^u^que voluit fecit, quod semper insuperab^l^ter facit, ho^ utique in
his impletur quod ommpotentis Dei volun^^s immutabili^ and insuperab. lis ^acit.
and others have done, such as are tantamount with them, to express as far
as lies in them, that which to the full is ineffable viz. Gods working in the
soul graciously. 1. By a proper real way of working, opposed to an external,
meraphoricall constructive or merely moral way. 2. By a most internal
penetrating way of putting into the soul, the life of God, and all the habits
of grace, called the seed of God, depth of earth, oil in the lamp, and not
only by some slight coruscations; or irradiations, which most probably you may
call, p. 56. grace infused. 3. We understand by such expressions, an Almighty,
Almercifull grace, a most durable, lasting, everlasting work of grace, in the
commending of which, the Scripture is most sweetly and excellently copious. In
all which matters, oh that Mr T. P. were but soundly instructed by that
teacher, qui cathedram ^abet in coelo, John 6. 45. and in which, if it pleased
him, he might have had sound information from all our orthodox writers, but
that I perceive he is above them all, for he tells me (in an Epistle) that
stultum est sapere cum commentario, our Eagle forsooth will catch no flies.
However I am come to the end of the fifth thing promised; and having finished
that, and so as I trust, not only discovered, but even battered down that
which is to the Arminians, and Mr T. P. with them, their great Palladium and
fortress of strength, wherein yet they make lies their refuge; for all along
in it they stand up for lies, and with all their strength, tanquam pro^aris and
focis, stand up for a wretched, miserable, lying, sinful power of resisting
the grace of God, which he that has most of, is the more truly a slave, and
the more to be hated by God and man, if he will offer to plead for this Baal
See Mr Pemble about the nature and property of grace and faith, p. 150. To be
able to commit this act comes not from power and strength, but from weakness
and infirmity, perfect strength and liberty is to have no power or will to
commit sin, etc. As for my part, what would become of so good natured a
creature, as T. P I will not determine. But as for my self, were I to be left
to the good mannagement of my own free will, I were certain to go to hell.
August. de corrept. cap. 12. Inter tot a^ tantas tentationes infirmitate sua
voluntas succumberet; and ideo perseverare non possent quia deficientes nec
vellent, ^ut non ita vellent infirmitate voluntatis ut possent.
, I say, having thus overcome this, I may be much brief in the sixth thing
proposed about the liberty of the will, and perseverance of the Saints. As to
the first, your splendid, gaudy, Idol free will; And yet (as a Reverend Father
calls it) the rotten D^gon, for which you do so freely and voluminously plead,
as the only Baronissa Bogerman, ex D. Pareo Annotat. p. 75. Si remonstrantibus
suis liceat uti aequivocationibus, Deus da^ velle, invitando and rogando hanc
liberam BARONISSAM ac DOMINAM.
Lady Empress whom you court, though I might deliver in many things, yet I
will deliver only in these few things, which are not the sphalmata corrector
is praelii, but are the proper and only faults of the Corrector of the late
uncorrected Copy, and the chief of them be these following, which I would
beseech you Mr Corrector, to amend in your next edition. 1. You carry matters
so throughout, but especially, p. 57. 59. etc. as if your adversaries did
wholly, and in all cases, deny free will, whereas they are most ready with
Austin, to take up that voluntas est semper libera, sed non semper bona. The
Question is not about the wills freedom, but about its freedom to grace and
goodness, not about the essence or faculty, but the powers of man's will Aug.
lib. ad Bonifac. c 2. Quis nost^um dicit quod hominis peccato perierit liberum
arbitrium de humano genere; and paulo post: Nam liberum arbitrium usque adeo in
peccatore non perii^, ut per illud peccant maxim homines qui cum delectatione
peccant, and amore peccali, hoc in eis plac^t, quod eis libet.
, si^ semper es tu praeter casam, or if you will not in your own phrase, p.
15. you shoot still beyond what you aim at, to be sure what you should aim
at. 2. I cannot tell how it comes to pass, (rem scio, modum nescio) but I am
sure so it is, you will needs most Jesuitically place the esteem of the wills
freedom, just as and where the Jesuits do, viz. in an undetermined
indifferency, both ad contraria and contradictoria Dr Preston quo supra, est
definitio in cerebro Jesuitarum solummodo consita.
. It cannot be said to be free with you, unless it be alike inclineable to
good, as to evil, and e contra Which because that Austin of old would not do,
the Pelagians quarrelled with him extremely V d. Jansen, in suo August. cap. 2.
lib. 3. de statu not. laps^.
, for else it is but taking, not choice, p. 62. and all this you do in
despite of Fathers, ancient Philosophers, the more ancient sort of Schoolmen,
who thought the essential liberty of the will, to be well enough preserved, if
it were but secured, 1. From natural necessity which is confined though
spontaneouslie to one as you dispute, p. 61. 2. From external violence and
coaction, the very thing you flout and jeer at, p. 62. 3. If it were but
allowed to be the former principle, and the subordinate intrinsecall efficient
principle of its own volition. You will by no means allow it to be free,
unless it be exempt from all divine (and in that sense only) necessary
praedetermination, p. 61. and but for shame of the world and speech of people,
you would have as well concluded it free from all divine praescience, ibid. p.
61. 3. You give no considerable or sufficient indications of any vast
difference betwixt the wills liberty in the state of its integrity, or in its
lapsed state. But you so carry matters in your quotations of Tertullian, p. 57.
and the son of Syrach, p. 65. who speak chiefly, if not only of the condition
of man's will before the fall, as if man's freedom to good or evil were alike
in both. Slightly indeed you touch upon something looking toward some
difference, when you say, p. 6. that the Protoplast was the promoter of your
guilt; and when by way of explication you add, p. 57. that God does correct,
but not destroy man's free will; but So that according to you, man's will before
the fall, and since, as to liberty, to goodness, differs but as your correct
Copy, from your uncorrect, and that I am sure for substance, is very little,
Austin otherwise, cap. 53. de not. and great. Quid tantum de naturae
possibilitate praesumitur vulnerata? Sauciata, perdita est, vera confessione
non falsa defensione opus habet.
when all this comes but to a correcting of Viz. not of a will dead in
trespasses and sins.
man's free will, in stead of reviving of it, of a restoring of it to its
pristine integrity in some measure, (and in that sense a destroying of the
vicious inclination of it) nay, when this correction of it, p, 63. is but to
concur to its perfect sanity, as the light of the Sun is to the eyelid, and the
opening thereof, which rather supposes a faculty of seeing in the eye, (as
Austin was used to say, even in reference to Adam, that lumen est necessarium
san^ssimis oculis) then any way effects it; to me you assign no difference at
all, but suppose them alike in both. 4. You are so confident of your notions
about free will, Lat. liberum arbitrium, and Greek (...), though in the Latin
Vulgar, and Greek Septuagint, there words be not a word of either, and though
the Hebrew relating to the freedom of man's will, as (...) Riv. disp. 8. these.
1. Liberi arbitrii phrasis non legitur in vulgata interpret. latina veter^ and
novi Testament.
rather refer to (...), or spontaniety, which you reject, p. 64. then to what
is the full liberty of the will, option, option twice, which in all cases you
plead for, p. 64. optio est optimorum Sic Jacob. Armin. Art. 2. p. 132, and you
transcribe him, p 63 just as Julian twitted Austin, Non minore stultitiae
profissione quam profanitate liberum v^cas, quod dicis nisi unum velle non
posse. Aug. upon Matthew, supra.
besides that (as we have heard) both Austin and Melancthon, scarce durst name
the free will of man since the fall) I say you are so confident of them, as
that you deny unto God himself, all true liberty of will, and election of
good, as if he Just as the Pelagians had done before, Aug. l. 1. operum
imperfect. liberum non est nisi quod duo potest velle, id est bonum and malum.
Liber Deus non est, qui ma^um non potest velle, de quo etiam ipse dixisti, Deus
esse nisi justus non potest siccine D^um laudas ut ei auferas, libertatem, etc.
were not liberum sed necessarium agens, no free, but necessary agent, p. 63
whereas the very School of Plato, wherein your admirable Boethius was brought
up, could have taught you better Let him but look, says my old good Tutor, Dr
Ames Praef, to Dr Jacksons vanities. Marsil. ficin Theolog. Platonia de immor.
anim^, he shall find this title, voluntas Dei necessaria simul est and libera.
and in the Chapter it self he shall find, that the Platonists would be
ashamed of such flim fl^n^s. In ipso bono certe summa naturae necessitas cum
summa liberate voluntatis concurrit, usque adeo ut necessario liber
voluntariusque Deus sit, and voluntary necessarius. A nobis id tantum ubique
affirmari optamus, quod Deo dignum sit, quale est in Deo cum summa necessitate
summam congredi libertatem.
. And thus to your illiberall escapes about free will. Come we to the next, to
speak of your mistakes about the Saints perseverance which we maintain, or of
the Saints Apostasy, which you like better, and treat of, p. 65. to the end of
the third Chapter. And here I find it true, what you my good Medicaster (you
know in your Epistles, you began with me medice, offering to be my Physician)
do observe very truly, p. 60. that an error in the first concoction, is hardly
mended in the second, and therefore you having taken in so many errors about
praedestination and free will in your first concoction, are not like to mend in
your last about perseverance.

(...). Uno absurdo dato mill sequuntur. The chief of them be these; for
drawing up toward a conclusion, I am only for the summa capitula rerum. And
here your first stumbling stone is, that Adam, p. 65. fell from the same kind
of grace, which is now by Jesus Christ the Redeemer, given unto Christians to
preserve them from falling, and that ergo Christians may Apostatize, as well as
he, whereas Austin long since has shown many differences betwixt the grace
given to the first Adam, and the grace given by the second Adam: the chief
whereof be these. 1. That God did more give up the first strong Adam into his
own keeping, but that now he puts his weak lambs into a stronger hand, viz.
into the hands and keeping of the second Adam, out of whose hands no man or
Devil shall be able to pluck them. 2. He gave to the first Adam a power to
stand if he would, he now gives by Christ to his elect, a will to stand and
persevere by his power, and not by their own. 3. All the grace which Adam Posse
si v^llet, velle ut possit.
had, was only adjutorium sine quo non, a certain help, without which,
neither men nor Angels could have stood. The grace which true Christians have
now, is adjutorium quo, such a succor, by which they do, and shall certainly
stand, which two differ as much as Austins solemn illustration uses to be, as
the giving and continuing of the faculty and act of seeing to a blind man, and
the giving of the light of the Sun to a seeing man The giving of food to a
living man, and the raising up of a dead man, see him in the place before
quoted, cap. 12. de correp. great. most excellently and fully. Nunc sanctis in
regnu^ Dei per gratiam Dei praedestinatis non tantum tale adjutorium
perseverantiae datur, sed talis ut perseverantia ipsa eis donetur.
, ergo Adam might and did fall, but the elect Saints shall not. 2. Your next
rock of offense is, that upon which your admirable Grotius, p. 65. makes you to
stumble, and here caecus caecum ducit, whilst neither of you will distinguish
betwixt a partial foul fall, such as David's was, p. 66. and a total and
final Apostasy; whereas even apostatizing Bertius in Bertius de Apostasia
sanctorum.
his famous book which he wrote about Apostasy, might have taught you, that
though David by his fall, did most heinously resist the Holy Ghost by grieving
of it, yet he did not totaliter expectorare spiritum sanctum, which made him to
pray, Psalm. 51. 11. that the Lord would not take away his holy spirit from him,
ergo, as yet he even had it after his fall, viz. to restore unto him the joy of
his salvation, ergo, he was fallen not from the state of salvation, but from
the joy of it. And if this had not been true, David after his fall must have
been circumcised again, and all Christians at any time falling into enormous
sins, must be baptized again. I hope Mr T. P. shall not need to turn
Anabaptist, so soon as he shall have recanted for writing his offensive Correct
Copy. As for what you scoff at about the circular return of Gods omnipotent
grace, coming and giving it, is for substance but a Pelagian flout, who used to
cry out, that if grace be necessary unto every act of doing good or shunning
evil, that then God is conquered and his grace, and not man and his will
Hyeronym. Dialog. l. 3 Si non f^cimus quod praecepit, aut voluit nos ad^uvare
Deus aut noluit, si voluit and adjuvit and tamen non quod voluit facimus, non
nos sed ille superatus est. Si autem noluit adjuvare, non est culpa ejus qui
voluit facere.
. 2. Far wiser and holier men then your self, dare maintein it against all
your jeeres, that some graces of God Greg. mor. lib. 2. cap. 42 In sanctorum
cordibus secundum quasdam virtutes semper manet spiritus, secundum quasdam
recessurus venit, and venturus recedit, in his virtutibus sine quibus ad vitam
non pervenitur in electorum suocum cordibus permanet
, do go and come, etc, and that at sometimes in preferring of his people, he
does more put forth his omnipotent power of grace, than at other times, upon
which indeed they should not: but indeed they will more sin when grace
withdrawes, and will repent when it returns again. 3. Upon your reviving of a
sottish notion, of an half english, half Belgicke, but a really drunken Dick
Thomson, of a falling damnably from grace, (you and he mean a total, though
not final fall, falling into a state of damnation, Romans 8. 1. John 5. 24.
which none of ours say: yet they all say, that whenever any man falls into any
sin, he falls damnably, is so as to deserve damnation, Romans 6. 23.) and upon
the urging of a worse conceit of your own. that no man is elected until he
has persevered, p. 69. in faith and repentance, which cannot be till he is
dead: you sport your self with a baby of your own making, or you be at ^
deadly fewd with Sir N. N. again, and I wish b^ could be conjured up to answer
you, for I am even (...) ^eary of such toies, and of such capering and skip^^^^
^^to questions of your own making, and your (...) ^^^^ngs indeed never
approaching to the questi^^^ (...) you and your real adversaries: And yet with
m^c^ such kind of stuff, answered long ago in my first papers, are we cloid,
from p. 67. to the end of the Chapter, as ex. gr. Who doubts but that those who
at best had but common grace, or perchance at most, only the grace of the
external means of grace? as those in Isa. 5. 4. Mat. 23. 47. Jona 4. 11. or
that those who had only grace baptismo tenus, as Austin speaks, as the sweet
babes of grace you speak of? or some official grace (if I may so speak) unto
magistracy or unto ministry, of which Tertullian speaks? cap. 11. or at
highest only some temporal See about this Riv. R. Abbot, cont, Thompson de
intercision. great.
, but not saving grace, of which Austin makes mention, Augustine de correp. gra.
Sunt quidam qui filii Dei propter susceptam vel temporaliter gratiam dicuntur a
nobis, nec sunt tamen Deo. Quicunque ergo in Dei provid^tissima dispositione
praescii, praedestinati, vocati justificati and glorificati sunt; non dico
etiam nondum renati, sed etiam nondum nati, jam filii Dei sunt, and omnino
perire non possunt.
de great. and corrept. cap. 6. and 9. of which kind of persons, I am sure he
speaks somewhere, that how much patience soever God allows them, he never
gives them true and saving repentance, that namely, of which the Apostle says,
that it is a repentance never to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7. Quantamlibet illis
praebeat patientiam, nunquam illis concedit salubrem veramque poenitentiam, and
of whom in the very Chapter you quote, he says, And he begins the very Chapter
with a Ne nos moveat quod filiis suis quibusdam Deus non dat istam
perseverantiam. Absit enim ut ita esset, si de illis praedestinatis essent, and
secundum propositum vocatis.
August. de corrept. and. great. cap. 9. they were no sons, when in profession
and in name they were sons. Non erant (says he) filii etiam quando erant in
professione and nomine filiorum, non quia justitiam simulaverunt, sed quia in
ea non permanserant. Or that those who were yet never called, but to be called
as the lost sheep, or were fallen in part as the lost groat, the prodigal,
etc. might in some sense be lost, fall, and yet rise again, p. 67. I say,
whoever amongst your much abused Calvinists, (whom you love as well, as he did,
who wrote the Calvino-Turcismus, for unto Turks you compare them, p. 55. Or
that other fellow, who wrote the Absurdorum absurdissima Calvinistica absurda)
Or to that other quoted by Bishop Hall in his Peacemaker, Sect. 5. who used to
put it into his Letany. A fraternitate Calviniana libera nos Domine.
did ever question any of these matters? But if you would be entreated by your
now tired friend, who is even wearied off of his stumps by following you in
your vagaries, for the matters really about the point of perseverance, debated
betwixt you and your enemies, to consult well that pious, reverend Bishop of
Salisbury, Rob. Abbots, in his diatribe against Thompson. de intercisi. justif.
and gratiae, cap. 6, 7, 8. You would better learn to state questions, might
possibly be much edified, by receiving full satisfaction, about Austins opinion
in the matter of perseverance in those and such like passages as you quote, p.
68. Pray forsooth, good Sir, let me persuade you to muse a while on him, reckon
you two together, I am not at leisure for this time to quit scores with you,
but must finish the sixth thing which I promised, and my answer to all your
fourth Chapter. And well might I now be allowed to stride over all your fifth
Chapter, which has been so battered, mauld, and broken by my answers to the
former, as that it moulders all to pieces, like Isa. 30. 13.) to the swelling
out in a high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly. And indeed if you could
not stand, whilst to make us odious, you opposed absolute repr^bation, how do
you think to stand, when you enter upon the defense of conditional election,
depending upon faith and obedience, and perseverance in them, p. 69. which will
make you most odious almost all Christendom over? And to pass on to the final
epilogue promised before. But that you may know, having traveled so many miles
with you, I will not break off for some way bits; take in these few short
answers to what you bring in from Chap. 5. Sect 55. p. 69. and Sect. 60. p. 73.
and if any one shall conclude that I am too short in these answers, let him
consider, that it is because in others I have bin too long, we have already
sufficiently weakened all these objections, and if need shall require, I may,
God giving life, grace and opportunity, enlarge more some other time: However
take some few, 1. General, 2. Particular Animad versions.

1. The General be these. 1. That our good Gentleman is not much inamoured
with the Doctrine of free election, the fountain of all saving grace, which
makes him thrust it into the very posteriors of his Pamphlet, with a preface
before it, p. 68. that it was a subject which he least of all studied, and
least delighted in of any other, and that too, as it is plain by his first
papers, after that he had actually f^iled one weak Gentleman with his
Arguments for conditional election, and that he had been tampering to have
tripped up the heels of some others whom he found somewhat too tough for him.
As to this present Correct Copy, it is to me somewhat more then probable, that
in the behalf of reprobates, for which he pleads in 4 whole Chapters, having
overheated and overstudied himself, he was willing to tell the world that he
had not much studied that point of election, but however was resolved to
maintein it to be conditional, because he had sped so well in opposing absolute
reprobation, Egregiam verolaudem, vitula tu dignus. 2. Having by a matter of
12. or 14. lines, which I think is the summa totalis, overspoken himself, p.
56. in the commendation of grace, and having before it, p. 51. professed
himself to be much for retractations, he does by no less then five reasons in
this fifth Chapter of his, retract or do penance for his over lavish
expressions: for it is not possible that his concessions there, p. 55, 56.
should be consistent with his steadfast belief, p. 68. as he says, divulged
in this Chapter? How can all those good things spoken there, be given us by
special grace, and yet all along in this Chapter, be presupposed as conditions
of that election, by which they be all conveied? How can God by his grace, as
he says, p. 56. make us to differ, and yet here, p. 70. presuppose the
difference made before he elects us. 3. The whole Chapter crawles as much with
real, yea even with verbal Pelagianisme and Massi^^anisme, as has been
showed before in the parallel, as ever Egypt crawled with lice Exodus 8. 7. The
very punctum and apex Pelagianismi, was in this saying Aug. de praedestin.
Sanctorum, cap. 18. Praesciebat ergo ait Pelogianus qui futuri essent sa^cti
and immaculati per liberae voluntatis arbitrium, and ideo eos ante mundi
const^tutionem in ipsa sua praescientia, qua tales futuros esse praescivit,
elegit. Now follows the answer of Austin. Elegit nos in ipso ut essemus sancti
and immaculati, non ergo quia futuri eramus, sed ut essemus, nempe certum est,
nempe manifestum est, ideo quippe tales ^ramus futuri, qui elegit ipse
praedestinans ut tales per gratiam ejus essemus.
, The Lord, said the Pelagian, did foreknow who should be holy and u^blameable
by the liberty of their freewill, and therefore he did in his prescience,
whereby he did foreknow that they should be such, choose them: Unto which
Austins answer unto the point upon the place was, that God did not choose us,
because we were holy, but that we might be so, for therefore were we to become
such, because he praedestinating did choose us, that by his grace we might be
such. 4. The whole Chapter throughout, disallowes all absolute grace, or grace
absolutely bestowed; for without the least haesitation, or the least indication
of any limitation, the man Mr T. P. steadfastly believes, p. 68. that Gods
decree of election from all eternity, was not absolute and irrespective* but in
respect unto, and praescience of some qualification; without which, no man is
the proper object of such a decree, and p. 7^. the Scripture gives as none but
conditional promises. So that now, if (as is most true) we be but called
according to purpose* Romans 8. 29. with a holy calling, not according to works
of righteousness which we have done, 2 Timothy 1. 9. If made Gods workmanship,
created unto all manner of good works, Ephesians. 2. 10. If faith, Ephesians. 2. 8. If
repentance be but the gifts of God, Acts 11. 18. Mr T. P. such is his skill,
can give us a reason and cause, and condition for all this, viz. because man
repents, believes before hand, before he be chosen to them From hence, as
Bishop Carleton well against Montacutis examinat. what can follow but this, that
God gives these graces, in respect of these graces, which were to run giddy
in a circle. Impii ambulant in circulo, just as the Massilians had done before,
Comment. in cap. 21. ad Timoth. Cur non impletur ^jus voluntas? ^ed in omni
condition sensus est, conditio latet. Vult ^nim Deus omnes homines salvos
fieri, sed si accedant ad eum, non enim sic vult ut nolentes salventur, sed
vult ipsos salvari, si and ip^i velint.
. A thing somewhat worse then that of the Pelagian, that grace is given
secundum merita operum, according to the merits of good works. 5. All the five
reasons labor of one incurable disease, viz. of a way of argumentation from the
order of Gods intentions in the making of the decree to the order of the
execution of it. And thus as to the general flawes, which are as warp and
woofe, uti vora vibiam sequitur to this Chapter. There needs then the less to
be said to the five following arguments, from p. 69. ad 71. The first page,
69. has the last mistake, as a leproste in the head, in the very front of it.
And though the good man had so oratorially declaimed against a (...) in
divinity, p. 23. yet he here fiercely runs upon it, whilst he makes the
sequel, God does not in time bestow upon those of ripe years, eternal life,
before the actual existence of faith, repentance, obedience, etc. ergo he did
not so much as intend election before the foresight of them. Of the wildness
of this sequel, pray let the reader see Dr Twisse in his answer to Mr Hoard,
p. 44. 2. The first proposition of his syllogism, is absolutely false, unless
it be understood of grown rational persons, with exception of all Christian
infants, dying before, or presently after baptism; of all Christian natural
fools, dumb and deaf persons, who have no explicit formed faith, repentance
or obedience. 3. The sequel from the justice of the decree, to the justice of
the performing of it, without faith and repentance in the most, is most
ridiculous; for the decree of election is an act of Gods sovereign power and
liberality, whereby he resolves to give grace and glory to whom he pleases,
Rom 9. 18. The actual collation of eternal life or glory, is so an act of
grace, Romans 6. 23. as that the Lords own promises, and Christ's merits
considered, it is an act of remunerative justice, 2 These. 1. 6, 7. 4 Bp
Carletons Exam. p. 92. the 3. proposition that Peter was not glo^ified, without
respect to his ^aith, obedienc^, and repentance, we grant the reasons, because
salvation and glorification are in the nature of a reward. Now the Scripture
witnesses, that God will reward every man according to his works.
The n^cessary condition which you speak of in the foot of this argument, p.
69. and the merits which you would seem to renounce, in the tail or close of
your last, p. 73. in despite of all that you have pleaded, or can plead to the
contrary, will force you to maintain meritorious causes of divine election, as
far as ever Pelagius did, and in the sense that the Fathers did take the word
merit, and deny grace to be conferred according to works. Your second argument,
Sect. 56. p. 69. and 70. has that mistake in the ^ail of it, which the other
has ^ the head, namely, because that Christ in time is the head of the Church,
and before all time was designed to be such, therefore he was the merit^rious
cause of election it self, and not only of salvation, and every saving grace
tending to it, (which none but Socinians, and the grostest sort of Arminians
use to deny) and so the election of Christ being in the in^uition of the
back-sl^ding of the first Adam, p. 69. ergo say you it must needs be
respectively: but because you do but in this imperiously dictate, and offer no
proof at all, and that you be a direct Anti-Augustinian in this, Augustine
using against the Pelagians, to triumph in the contrary Argument, taken from
Gods freely choosing Christ to be the head of the praedestinate Aug. lib. de
p^ecatorum merit. and remis. de persev. sanct. cap. ult. de corrept gra. cap.
17. Nemo enim quisquam tanta rei hujus and sidei caecus est ignorantia, ut
audeat dicere, quamvis de spiritu sancto, and Virgin Maria filium hominis
natum, per liberum tamen arbitrium, been vivendo and sine peccato bona opera
faciendo, mer^isse ut esset Dei filius; resistente evangelio at^ dicente verbum
caro factum est, etc.
. I shall think nothing so fit, as to send you to School again to Dr Twisse,
that famous School-man whom you point at, when you reject the saying which some
affirm, p. 70. that Christ is not only the means, but the meritorious cause
of our election; and there you may understand (I pray God give you grace to do
it) how that assertion is maintained by him, without the least diminution to
Christ's blessed merits: but to the certain overthrow of your cause, D. I will
only at this time leave you to muse upon that saying of Th. Aquinas 1. q. 23.
Artic. 5. Nullus ita fuit insanae mentis, ut diceret merita esse causam divinae
praedestinationis, exparte actus praedestinantis, and whilst you be musing on
it, ask but of your self this question, number satis sobrius?

3. Your third proposed, Sect. 57. p. 70, 71. is so horribly and most uglily
gross in the forefront and ^ear of it, as that it would even affright a
Christian to look upon it; And yet 1. The sequel of it is but taken from the
analogy of humane election to that of divine, because man may ^ay must, if he
will choose rationally, find a difference in the object whom he prefers; for
that by virtue of his choice he cannot make it a whit better then he finds i^,
erga, so God must in his choice, and by virtue of it not make, ^ut find a
difference proba (scilice^) cons^quent^am. I might wonder Even a popish Aquinas
could have taught you better, v. Thomam. 1, 2 q. 2 3. ar^ic. 4 V^luntas D^l,
qua vult bonum alicui dilig^nao, est causa cur illud b^^um ab co prae allis
hab^atur: probe enim observat, D. Rivet disp. 3. de p^aedestinat. these. 10.
Notandum esse electionem and dil^^^anem aliter in nobi^ ordinari quam in D^o,
e^ quod voluntas in n^bis diligendo non causat bonum sed ex bono praeexistente,
incitamur ad diligendum and ideo eligimus aliquem quem diligimus: unde dilectio
praecedit electionem in nobis; in D^o autem est e converso.
our Savior could not hit upon this, when he said, John 15. 16. You have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you and ordained you, not because he di^ find or
foresee fruit, but that by v^rtue of their election, they should go and bring
forth fruit, and that then fruit should remain. That the Logical Apostle
Paul, should be so dogmatically contrary to this, Romans 9. 11, 18. that he
should keep such a coile with his, v. 20. Man who art thou that thou reply
against God. That the beloved Disciple so often in Christ's bosom, as Christ
had been before in his Fathers bosom, should have heard neither tale nor
tidings of this, when he wrote, John 1. 4, 10. that herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a propitiation for our
sins. But I ceased to wonder when I considered that none of these blessed ones,
had ever sat at the feet of any Arminian Gamaliels. 2. The sequel of it seems
to be co^roborated with a saying out of that very same book of Austins, ad
Smplic. of which you had formerly made a very simple use, nor are you yet in
your dealings with Austi^^, come to your much commended retraciation, p. 51.
what Austin cast out by way of argumentation in concertatione, whilst he was as
some where he has it As we have seen before, and often since, in Epist Hilar.
ex lib. exposit. qua rund. proposit. Epist. ad Romanos lib. de persev sanct.
cap. 18. Yea, your Vessius confesses as much, Histo^. Pelag. 655. And so much
you might have learned out of Damascen. quo^ed by your self (...).
in conflict^ de gratia and liberate, you produce as his victorious conclusion
in determinatione. 2. Whilst you and your St Andrew with you, from whom you had
this quotation, and almost your whole 57. Section, for which he is therefore
most worthily shining in your margin, p. 70. take up that for which Austin
himself did beshrew himself very often, and yet all this while, p 70, you
would make us believe, that man has no matter to boast, though God never
choose him, till he has persevered to the last gasp in faith and obedience.
Mira sed non vera canis. 4. Your fourth Argument at length, and not in figures
proposed from 71. to 73. Sect 58 has nothing in it, but what for the most
part, even by me has been often confuted, you impose upon your readers, but
prove nothing. As for what you say about the respectivenesse of Gods counsel
as it relates to Christ. p. 71. Counsel as it implies consultation and
debates, cannot properly be ascribed to God. 2. It might relate to Christ as
head of the predestinate, or the chief, yea, the only meritorious cause and
means of the executing of praedestination, and yet be no meritorious cause of
the decree it self. The praedestinate were chosen in Christ, not because they
had faith, obedience, but that they might obtein them for Christ's sake. The
rest about the intentionality of Christ's merits, universal grace, and
redemption, Christ's invitations, warnings, etc. we have found and dealt with
all so often, as that I have not a mind to salute them now, as hasting to my
wonted rest. But as for that which you now, p. 72 sound out by the press, which
I once heard you trumpet forth out of Northampton Pulpit, p. 72. about the
prayers of Christ. I shall then imagine that it will serve your turn, 1. When
you shall have proved that amongst those homicides for whom he prayed, there
were not some of the elect of Christ, who yet were not come into his sold, John
10. 16. as possibly Paul and many others, who afterward came in, Acts 2. 41.
and alibi. 2. Or you shall have showed how any by our doctrine, can comfort
themselves in the most crimson sins that can be named. Like some in the world,
who never do, dare not, nor can tell any in particular, committing such
sins, that certainly they are of the number of the elect; though we dare say
it is possible that among such (for any thing we know to the contrary) there
may be some to be converted from those sins who may belong to the election of
God Anselme in elucidario ut Columba grana pura eligit, Ita etiam Christus suos
electos, de his ommbus generibus latentes colliget, qui e^iam quosdam de
latronum genere assumit, novit enim qui sunt cjus pro quibus etiam sa^gu^^em
^udit. Item Christus pro solis electis mortu^s est qui erant impii, hoc est in
insidelitate positi, pro om^bus autem dicit, de ommbus scilicet gentibus and
ommbus linguis, and non solum illius temporis, sed and pro futuris ommbus.
. 3. Nor can we imagine, who possibly may teach this last that I just now
mentioned (though but rarely, and I hope p^udently too) how this should be by
one thousand times so dangerous to teach, as that which you do, and plead that
you must teach, that Christ did die for such miscreants, and that without any
such limitation, as whether they be elect or no, behevers or no, from whence it
is most easy for them to conclude, that Christ could bear them no greater
love then he did, John 15. 13. none can lay any thing to their charge, because
it is Christ that died, Romans 8. 32. 33. that they be of his body, of his sheep,
and therefore certainly must never perish. Lo, how prodigal you are of Christ's
blood in your Sermons, to very monsters of men, and yet how tender and
streight-laced to some wicked sinners, who as yet may be among the lost sheep
of the house of Israel, for any thing can be known to the contrary: for God
calls some as well at the last hour, as others at the first. 5. As to your
fifth, taken from the authority of the Fathers, p. 73. against whom you would
needs oppose the sons, Noble Beza, and Dr Twisse; I have spoken so much to
them formerly, when I spoke to the Authors of my first Classis, as that I may
we^^ string up my pen, only I cannot but observe, that ut convenirent ul^ima
primis, that you might end as you begun with abusing such Authors as Dr
Twisse and Beza, you will needs have them stand in opposition to the opinion of
the Ancients before Saint Austin; and therefore you will not suffer Beza
(without some censorious check) to say what Bellarmine Bellarm. lib. 2. cap.
14. Co^nel. Jansen. in suo Augustino pe haeresi Pelag, lib. 7. cap. 17.
, Jansenius, and many more in the Church of Rome, have said about ORIGIN and
some of the Fathers And this very objection you borrowed from the Massilions,
Prosp. Epist. 5. ad August. Obstinationem suam vetustate desendunt and ea quae
de Epist. Pauli Apost^li proferun^ur. See Dr Twisse against Hoard, p. 46. and
inde Massilie^ses and ea quae de Epistola Apost^li P^uli Romany scribentis ad
manifestationem divinae gratiae, praevenientis electorum merita, a nullo unquam
Ecclesiasticorum ita esse intellecta, ut nunc semiantur affirmant. Hoc est idem
quod Augustino dicit H^^rius. Hoc enim and ill is locis suorum opusculorum and
aliorum quae prosequi longum est se dem^nst^are testantur.
. Nor will you stick to say that Dr Twisse yields you, that all the Ancients
before St Austin, did place the object of election in fide praevisa, when all
the world who can but read Latin, can in the place you quote, vindic. lib. 1.
p. 110. find no more, but that quibusdam videsur to some it appears, that
they do; and that it is not to be wondered at, that before Austin, their
writings co propendere videantur, which I am sure, if you li^t, you could have
translated right thus, or if they do seem to incline that way, etc. And else
where I hope to your warning, you have heard (both in his vindic. in the place
you quote, but especially in his answer to Hoard he has cleared it) that
neither did the Ancient Fathers before Austin, differ much in the point of
praedestination from Austin, nor Dr Twisse any thing materially from any of
them. And thus (having given you in beyond what I promised my answers to this
your fifth Chapter, as a deed of supererogation from my hearty good affections
unto you, and as a legacy, which possibly may be the last, which I may ever
give you by my last will and Testament.) I hasten to the seventh and last thing
promised, my most longed for epilogue, and ultimum vale to your whole gaudy,
new, fine well-worded Correct Copy. And here, as to your request about Liberty
of Conscience: let me but say, 1. No orthodox Minister but allows you full
liberty without begging for it, to preach your doctrines, which quasi sub forma
fra^ris m^ndicant^s, you beg that you may preach, as if any herein did go about
to restrain you. 2. But most Ministers I think will believe with me, who are
but acquainted with the doctrines of the Church of England, as well as of Gods
word, that in all conscience, and against all good conscience, you have
sufficiently abused the Liberty of your Conscience, in an age wherein we may
all cry out, that Licentia omnes deteriores sumus. 3. That were it not for a
promise you know I have made you, and I hope shall keep with you, that how
troublesome soever I might prove to your bo^k, I would not be so to your budget
or vineyard (Epist. ult. post. Dedicat.) it might upon this occasion be
debated, what liberty ought or ought not to be allowed to men in the Ministry,
abusing their liberty to the defamation of the doctrines of the Church whereof
they be members, nay, Ministers About these matters, who lists may see, contra
Remonstrant 2. p. 77. and inde. It might be somewhat troublesome to your ease,
to ventilate the question which J. Bogerman. Annot. ^8. has in Ecclesias
Anglicanas adultas, and tanta veritatis luce collustratas concordi hactenus
veritatis prosessione^ nobiles and exemplo aliis praelucentes, post ta^tos pro
veri^ate labores publica authoritate and quidem neglecta synodi convocatione
liceat and expediat introducere, sive in iis stabilire probare ^ut far (...)
in pastoribus and doctoribus qui populum and juventutem pro virili seducunt,
orthodoxiam palam impugnant plerique etiam blasphemant, and de graviorum
insuper errorum, occultatione apud quam plurimos sunt suspecti nec cessabunt
nisi (obstante lege) novis discipulis sententiam suam ad ministerium
posteritatis transmittere: Sed M. D. T. P. nec in ventilatione, vel in
decisione hujus quaestionis ero tibi ulterior, h^c qu^dem vice molestus.
? But because for the present I know no regular Ecclesiast^call Authority,
before whom I list to debate or determine this Question: Nay, though I think
both you and I be certain, that you did but jeere when you talked of Ministers
authority to make you pardonably erroneous, I will wholly wave this debate, and
speak but very few words more to you of my own, viz. That because I know how
much you do reverence Episcopal authority, and how highly you pretend to be an
obedient son of the Church of England, p. 4. I shall beseech you, and if it
please you upon your bended knees, to hearken and say, Amen, to a most pious,
learned, Fatherly, Episcopal, and as it were Canonical admonition of the
Right Reverend Father in God, George, once Lord Bishop of Chichester, directed
to Mr M^ntague, then but a Presbyter, and now as fit for Mr T. P. For the
speeding of which to the good of your soul, and the edification of the Church
of England, I will but cry grace, grace, to the fatherly counsel given you
Minte^ in melius mutare non levitas est sed ^irtus, Amb^os. in Psalm. 119.
, and so I conclude my whole book with an Amen fiat. e Musaeo Brocholensi,
Sept. 26. 1655.

The Admonition is extant in Bp Carletons Examination, etc. p. 44, 45. etc.
IF Saint Peter was called in consideration and respect of these things, then
was that grace of his calling given in consideration and respect of these
things, and so gratia datur secundum merita, whether we translate according to
merits, or in respect and consideration of merits, all is one, I stand not upon
any curiosity of words, there is no difference in the matter, it follows
necessarily, that this man teaches that doctrine, for which Pelagius was
condemned for an Heretic; let him shift this as he can: Here the Author of the
Appeal, may consider what wrong he has done to the Church of England, in
obtruding for doctrines of our Church, the old rotten heresy of Pelagius; and
let him also consider, who does now (...), trouble and betray the Church of
England. We teach with the Scriptures, and with the most orthodox ancient
Church, That St Peter was praedestinated and called unto faith, obedience, and
repentance. This man runs with the Arminians, into the depth of Pelagius his
poisoned doctrine. And was it not likely that he should run this way, who being
a private man, without authority, takes upon him to impose doctrines upon our
Church, to change those that are received, and in place thereof, to revive the
Pelagian errors, to bear men in hand, that these are the Doctrines of our
Church, to scorn men that have been reverenced for their learning, and will be
reverenced in the ages following, such as Archbishop Whitgift, Archbishop
Hutton, Dr Reynolds, Dr Whitaker, and the other Bishops and learned men that
joined with them, whom this man sometimes accounted Calvinists and Puritans,
sometimes they were reputed learned, as if himself had that in truth, which
they did but seem to have, who being a Priest of the Church of England,
accuses Bishops his superiors, to be Puritans, as all must be to him, who
yield not to his foolish and erroneous doctrines, who in this exasperating
humor, cares not, and professes that he cares not what any think, that
pleases not this his humor, who with such height of disdain, slighteth the
diligence and industry of his brethren, gathered at the Synod of Dort: Yet they
who were employed in that service, were authorized by his Majesty's Commission,
directed by his instructions, and when they returned, rendering an account to
his Majesty of their employment, were most graciously approved by his Majesty,
only they cannot get the approbation of this Gentleman. It were good for him
to consider these Aug. Epist. 105. O humana non justitia sed nomine justitiae
plane superbia, quid te disponis extollere?
exasperating humors, they proceed from pride For to you as to him, r^s
sordida est trita ac vulgari vi^ vivere, Sen. Epist. 112. Nihil juvat obvium.
You do sapere absque commentario in your Epistles.
. Here is neither humility nor charity to be found, and therefore not the
spirit of God: And what good can he do in Gods Church, that comes in pride,
and a spirit exasperating without charity and humility? Sir, I write not this
in choler, nor in malice to your person Aug. lib. de oper. monachorum, cap. 13.
in cognitione cavendus est err^r, in action nequitia. Errat autem quisqu^s
putat verita^em se posse cogn^scere, dum adhuc nequitid vivat. This would be
well considered by your selte, your Lic^feldian Amanuen^^s, and some of that
party, quos dicere nolo.
, but I have told you plainly the censures of those men, with whom I have
spoken in this matter, both of the higher sort in the Church, who are your
Fathers, and of the inferior rank, who are your brethren. I omit the censure
of the Laity, I speak of them that are able to judge of your spirit; and
because they have observed these things in you, I thought the best service I
could do you, was to let you know these things, that you may amend them: It
were good and necessary for you to understand how you have been fetched over by
those cosening companions the Arminians, who have plunged you, with themselves,
into the depths of Pelagius. Their end in devising that respective decree, is,
that praedestination should not be ruled by Gods will and eternal purpose,
but by man's free will. And this is the end which you must embrace, unless God
turn your heart, and warn you to avoid those dangerous and pernicious
doctrines, wherein you draw the yoke with Pelagius. God make you to see your
error, and to make some satisfaction to the Church of England, whom you have
so much wronged.

FINIS.
The Author to the attentive Reader.
Good Reader,
MY occasions no way suffering me at London to attend the press, you cannot
greatly wonder at the multiplication of Erra^a's. The truth is, my hand at best
being but a scrawling one, mislead some of my transcribers to mistake both my
words, and the sense of them; when as yet they neither in margin or text, left
me space enough fairly to amend their escapes, which occasioned difficulty to
the overseers of the Press. For my part, I shall but desire the usual favor
of a pardon, for all mere literal oversights of points and stops, that with me
you would be pleased, 1. To observe, that diverse times the numerall letters
referring to the several answers of Mr T. P's text, have been omitted or
confounded. 2. That his text has not always, as it ought to have been, been
expressed in the distinguishing Character, or per un^inos in margin, nor the
pages rightly quoted. 3. That most of the following Errata's noted by me, must,
before your reading, be amended, that I may neither do wrong to any Readers, or
receive it from them. Vale.

PAge 1. l. 17. these words [^or the private use of a friend] are Mr T. P's p.
3. l. 25. r. East. mar. l. 7. r. of false brethren. p. 4. l. 19. r. (...), p 7.
l. 17. r. Herni^. l. 2. in mar. r. Epist. secunda ante publicationem. l. 23.
for Mr, r. my* and l. 28 r. Hesostratus. p. 9. mar. r. Epist. prima ante
publicationem. p. 10. l. 28. r. (...), p. 11. ^. 31. r. vel nenio. p. 14. these
words in the mar. [nostra damu^, etc.] should be s^t against the beginning of
Section 4. p. 15. l. 16 r. as fitting, etc. p. 16. l. 44. r. j am peristi. p.
18. l. 8. in mar. r. Bogerman. p. 19. l. 26. r. Overall. p. 24. l. 8. dele [for
the opinions of the Molinists.] p. 26. l. 1. r. of which* p. 30. l. 21. Za^h.
6. 1. p. 32. l. 16. r. that you are a Witch, or a Bear, Epist. 3. p. 33. l.
20. all these words, [others unhappily, etc. unto 27. Rock* etc.] are not
inserted in their proper place. p* 34. l. 37. r. and lapsis, p. 37. l. 22. mar.
r. omni genere elationis. p. 44. l. 9. mar. expunge the words in the
Parenthesis. Sect. 6. l. 7. mar. r. cibi. p. 46. l. 11. r. m^ridianum. p. 55.
l. 15. r. as. p. 56. l. 15. for Gods hand, r. your hand, and l. 12. marg. r.
cui and 14. r. re^ectionem. p. 57. l. 7. mar. r. quo fine essent. and l. 11. r.
beternaliter. and 12. r. Holco^. p. 60. l. 35* for your, r. for first. Sect.
12. l. 32. r. operari Deum in cordibus. p. 73. l. 31. after Ministers there
should be a f^ll point, and a new Section. vid. Sect 9. p. 12. 13. p. 75. l.
30. the two lines of English put in the marginall notes. And thus according,
etc* should be read, p. 76. l. 34. before those words, a thing* etc. p. 76. l.
20. after to do, r. or not to be left undone without sin. p. 79 l. 16. this
[Ad Sect. 10. p. 13.] should begin a new Section. p. 80. l. 14. r. worst of
sins. p. 82. l. 20. r. (...), p. 86. l. 2. r. persevered. p. 87. l. 23. r.
(...) and (...), p. 93. l. 35. r. ante leves* etc. p. 95 l. penult. r. ungue^.
p. 101. (...). p. 103. l. penult. for force, r. far. p. 108. l. 30. after the
merits of Christ, r. these words, and uncomfortable to Christian souls, and
pass them over, l. 34. and 35. p. 124. l. 20. r. (...) and (...) p. 130. mar.
l. 5. r. dissertation. l. 19. mar. r. Quaest. for de vast. p. 131. mar. l. 13.
r. quae a te. l. 14* ibid. r. suscipiant. p. 146. l. 16. r. Ergo, none, etc. p.
150 l. 22. r. A^debetier, for, and besides. p. 153. l. 16. r. (...), p. 154.
mar. l. 16. r. hoc semper, etc. p. 163* l. 12. r. remotam cadendi, and l. 24.
d. cadendi. p. 165. l. 23. for. we, r. you* p. 171. l. 16. for damnation, r.
denuntiation. p. 172. l. 4. r. (...), p* 176. l. 10. pass over all the words
in the five or six lines after indulgences, unto those words, only I find
Jo^. Sleydan, etc. and l. 22. r. Jubilaeum. p. 177. l. 6. after grant, etc.
read thus: They know of no such matter, who pitch upon massa corrupta in
reference to men only, and not in reference to Angels, the Scriptures, etc. p.
178. l. 25. mar for qui^, r. quae* p. 181. l. 1. r. Act. 1. l. 34. r. extra
sacrificis. p. 195. l. 9. r. Atheologicall* p. 202. for shent, r. sent. p. 213.
mar. l. 8. for glow, r. allow. p. 218. l. 4* praeli. l. 21. for esteem, r.
essence. l. 34. r. formal for former. p. 219. l. 29. d. words. p. 221. l. 29.
for giving. r. going and l. p^nult* for preferring* r. preserving. p. 226. l.
13. r. vara. p. 228. l. 12. r. consequentia. p. 232. l. 2. post publicat. and
l. 13. r. only, for that* and mar. l. 8. r. ^n eccle^ia, etc. and l. 32* r.
sed ^ni D. T. P.


