The CASE of the Children of Sir William Curtius Baronet, late Resident for the
Crown of England to the Princes of the Empire.
^tructions da^ the 14th of ^ober 1632, ^er the Com^nds and Ad^sses of Sir
^ncis Winde^ck.
HIS Majesty King CHARLES the First sent him to the Diet of Noremberg with
Credential Letters to most of the Electors, Princes and States of Germany, and
with Instructions to carry a vigilant Eye upon all the public Actions, and
especially upon the Negotiations of the Agent of France, the Kings Nephew,
being then their Prisoner, etc.

^e Instructions ^der the King's and, dated the ^st of Oct. 1639 ^r Henry Vane.
^r Francis Win^anck.
In this employment His MAJESTY by Privy Seal made him an Allowance of 40
Shillings per Diem, beginning the 18th of October 1639.

Thomas Rowe's Negotiations at Ratisbon and Vienna, upon the Restitution of the
Elector Palatin, etc.

^r Henry Vane. ^r Edw. Nicholas.
The King commanded him by Order under his own Hand, to meet the Queen Mother of
France, and to find her an honorable Retreat at Collen; The 17th of June 1641,
he was sent to Cassel in a Subdelegation from Sir Thomas Row.

^y Lord Falk^nd. ^r Edw. Nicholas.
The Diet of Francfort being begun, he was commanded to apply himself to those
States, for His Majesty's Interests and the Restitution of the Palatinate, and
especially to follow Sir Thomas Rowe's Directions, as it appears by his
Instructions. Also the King having interdicted all Commerce with London, ^r
Edw. Nicholas. ^y Lord Digby. ^r Thomas Row.
he was commanded to encourage Merchants to send to the Ports in His Majesty's
Obedience, etc.

^y Lord Digby. ^r Edw. Nicholas. ^y Lord Gowr^g at Paris.
And to inform those Princes and Public Ministers of the Affairs agitated in
England, to translate and publish the King's Declarations, Manifesto's, and
other Treaties in His Majesty's behalf, especially about the Sickness and Death
of King JAMES, etc. to entertain the Overtures of the Reddition of Frankendall,
made by Count Rebolledo and the Spanish Ambassador at Francfort.

^r Edw. Nicholas. ^y Lord S. Al^ns. ^y Lord Digby.
The King being at Oxford, and not receiving any Advertisement from his
Ministers abroad, commanded him to hold his way by Mr. Bowman there (and he
paid Mr. Baker Bookseller at London for it) likewise to unmask the feigned
Pretenses of Reformation made at London, to all the Protestants in Germany and
Switzerland. The Neutrality of Frankendall being still in agitation, he sent
his Secretary into England to procure his Discharge, but could not obtain it.

My Lord Lane^ck. My Lord Digby.
Both the Secretaries of State being retired into France, he was commanded to
send his Dispatches to Paris, to dispatch an Express to the King of Denmark,
with the Kings Cipher for the settling of a new Correspondence in France; the
way of London being so far obstructed, that his Man (abovesaid) was in danger
to be Hanged for an intercepted Packet.

Sir Edw. Nicholas My Lord Lanerick. My Lord Digby.
The Prince Elector having permission to wait upon the King, the Dispatches were
immediately directed to His Majesty under the said Princes covert. The
Duplicats being sent into France, and to my Lord Digby in Ireland.

My Lord Lanerick. Sir Robert Long. Mr. Oudart.
The Dispatches were sent to London, and the certainty of the Peace of Germany
was by them brought to His Majesty at S. James's, whereupon His Majesty was
pleased to signify his pleasure few days before his Death to the Elector
Palatin, concerning the Offices which his Resident should do with the Ministers
of the Emperor. Also a correspondency was kept with the Prince of Wales,
according to Order.

Sir Robert Long. My Lord of Montross.
His Majesty King CHARLES the Second continued him in the same Employment (at 40
s. per Diem) whereupon he waited upon the Diet of Noremberg, where the House
Palatin was effectually restored, and he received their several Commands under
His Majesty's own Hand for the nearer Concernments of His Crown; especially
concerning my Lord of Montross, whose Declaration he printed in several
Languages in Germany, and followed his Lordships Directions.

Sir Robert Long. Sir Edw. Nicholas. My Lord of Lanerick.
He was commanded to solicit a Loan of 20000 Rix Dollars for the King, from the
Elector of Mentz at Wirtzbourg, where the Foundation was laid of that Imperial
Subsidy.

Sir Edw. Nicholas. Sir Robert Long.
Whereof he gave the first Project to the Queen Mother at Paris, and was by Her
Majesty and the Duke of York charged with diverse Letters and Commissions to the
Princes of Germany.

Sir Edw. Nicholas. My Lord Chancellor. The Privy Seal dated at Paris 8. March
1652. My Lord Chancellor. Sir Edw. Nicholas. Sir Edw. Nicholas. My Lord
Chancellor.
He received the Commission to dispose all things, that the Lord Rochester might
be well received at Ratisbon, the suspicion being that Whitlock should repair
thither from Hambourg, etc.

l. Sterling were granted at Ratisbon for the King by Sir William Curtius's
Mediation.

Collen (where his Account current was stated and signed by His Majesty) and he
was sent back again to Francfort, especially to hasten the Circular Letters for
the effectual Payment of the Subsidy, and to have an Eye upon the Proceedings
of the Diet.

My Lord Chancellor. Sir Edw. Nicholas.
He still followed the Orders of His Majesty's Ministers of State, and continued
the Solicitations of the payment of the Imperial Subsidy for the King, besides
other Services

My Lord Chancellor, Sir Edw. Nicholas.
And the continual Offices with the Elector of Mentz and the Ambassadors of the
Diet, and with those of the Emperor and Bavaria.

Sir Edw. Nicholas.
During the Intrigue in Germany, and the Election of this Emperor, His Majesty
was carefully advertised of all Transactions.

^ir Edw. Nicholas. ^ll under their ^wn Hands and ^als.
He not being able further out of his own Purse to bear the Charges of that
public Employment, His Majesty was graciously pleased to give him his
discharge by his Letters Patents.

Palatin at the Imperial Diet, he did carefully attend His

November. 1662.

During the said Employment he kept Correspondency (according to the first
Instructions) with Sir Richard Brown at Paris, Sir Henry de Vic at Brussels,
Sir William Boswell at the Hague, Mr. Avery at Hambourg, Mr. Tailor at Vienna,
Sir Gilbert Talbot at Venice, Sir Oliver Flemming in Switzerland, as long as
they severally resided there. He likewise entertained Correspondency in most of
the Courts of Germany; the only Port of Letters in so many years Negotiation,
is a Charge too great for most private Men to sustain.

CHARLES R.

WE have perused this Account, Copia.
and do allow and approve the same. And as we have a just and gracious sense of
the constant Integrity and Affection, which Our said Trusty and Well-beloved
Servant Sir William Curtius has expressed to the Service of Our most Dear and
Royal Father of Blessed Memory and of Our Self, and of what he has done and
suffered for the same; so We do oblige Our Self, Our Heirs and Successors for
the true and faithful Payment of the said Debt of Fourteen thousand Two hundred
Fifty five Pounds Sterling, to him the said Sir William Curtius, his Executors
or Assigns, as soon as it shall please God to restore us to Our Rights. And in
the mean time We do promise to pay him from time to time such part of it, as
can possibly consist with Our most urgent Occasions. (...)l. ^55


Dated at Collen the 1st day of November 1654, in the Sixth year of Our Reign.
By His Majesty's Command,

Sir William Curtius made his Application to King CHARLES the Second for
satisfaction of his Debt, and was very graciously received, and had a Privy
Seal for 2000 l. to defray the Charges of his Journey, with a Promise of the
whole; but of the 2000 l. he never received more than 500 l. And about the year
1678 died at Francfort in the Service of the Crown, leaving Five Children, and
the said Debt from His Majesty unpaid.

That Adolphus Curtius, second Son of the said Sir William about a year since
came into England, to solicit the payment of the said Debt on behalf of
himself, his Brothers and Sisters, and Petitioned the late King JAMES the
Second, who referred him to the Lords of the Treasury. But before any thing was
done further therein, the late happy Revolution occurred.

The said Adolphus Curtius has now made Application to the Honorable House of
Commons in a Petition, as is underwritten:

To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in this present
Parliament Assembled: The humble Petition of Charles Curtius, Adolphus, Ernest
Curtius, Mary and Katherine Curtius, Sons and Daughters of Sir William Curtius
Baronet, Deceased:
Shows,

THat the said Sir William Curtius spent the greatest part of his Time and
Fortune in the Service of the English Crown and Nation, during the Reigns of
King Charles the First and King Charles the Second, as their Resident to the
several Princes of the Empire: And his late Majesty King Charles the Second
became so sensible of his Services, that he ordered him to bring in his
Accounts of the Money due to him for his Salary, and which he lent and expended
in that Service, which His said Majesty stated and allowed of at 14255 l. as
appears by the said Account signed by His said Majesty; who was also pleased to
grant him a Private Seal for 2000 l. whereof only 500 l. was paid, as appears
by Certificate under the Hand of Sir Robert Howard.

That Sir William Curtius, Your Petitioners late Father, dying in the said
Employment, and the said Debt (all save the 500 l.) remaining unpaid, Your
Petitioner Adolphus Curtius, in behalf of himself and his Brothers and Sisters,
applied himself unto his late Majesty King James the Second for Satisfaction of
the said Debt; which His Majesty took cognizance of, and referred the
Consideration of it unto the Lords of the Treasury. But before His Majesty's
and their Lordships pleasure and determination could be further known and
obtained, the late Revolution happened, and nothing more was done therein.

That Your Petitioners Father having much impoverished his Family in the said
Service, and being a Public Minister, and the Honor of the Nation being
concerned, that Justice in this respect be done unto his Children, especially
at this time, when the small remainder of their Fortunes are ravished from them
by the barbarous Invasion of the Palatinate (Your Petitioners Native Country)
by the French,

Your Petitioners humbly implore the Compassion and Justice of this Honorable
House, to recommend them to their MAJESTY'S Royal Consideration, that some
Satisfaction may be made to Your poor Petitioners in such ways and methods, as
to the great Wisdom of this House shall seem expedient.

And Your Petitioners shall ever pray

