THE CASE OF William Lenthall Esquire Humblly Submitted to the Consideration of the
Honorable House of Commons.
Setts Forth,
THAT about the Time of Sr. John Cutler's Decease, he was indebted to him,
about 12000 l. Principal and intrest to that Time, for securing of which his
Estate in Oxfordshire, and the Fees and Perquisits of his Office of Marshal of
the King's Bench were Mortgaged.

That about May 1697. Edmund Bolter Esquire Executor to the said Sr. John Cutler
made up an Accounts of 18001 l. for Principal, Interest, and Charges, and did
prevail with the said Mr Lenthall to Sign the same upon Offers of great
Abatements.

That some time after, Mr. Bolter did promise and agree to take 15000 l. in
full Discharge of the said Debt; and that one Mr. Symond Fowkes, did promise
Mr. Lenthall he would remove the said Mortgage, and pay Mr. Bolter the 15000 l.
and pay Mr. Lenthall 400 l. per Ann. or proportionably, for Subsistence, till
the same could be done, for which Mr: Lenthall was to allow him 1000 l. and in
order thereto paid Mr. Lenthall several small Sums, and took Notes under his
Hand for the repayment of the same upon Demand; and never removed the said
Mortgage.

That Mr. Fowkes, under Pretense, and in case of Mortality, prevailed with Mr.
Lenthall to excecut some Deeds to him of his Estate and Office, without any
Copy, or Counterpart thereof, which were agreed to be left in Trust in one Mr.
Card the Councels Hands: And Mr. Fowkes helping him to some small Sums more,
for Subsistence, prevailed with him to execute a Grant (together with the said
Edmund Bolter Esquire persuant to a late Act of Parliament) of the said Office, to
one Mr. Gimbert (now Marshal) at 1400 l. per Ann. Rent, as Mr. Fowkes told Mr.
Lenthall, which since proves to be but 1000 l. per Ann. Upon sealing of which
Mr. Fowkes promised to pay him 500 l. the next Day, but did not.

That Mr. Bolter has been in possession of the Estate in Oxfordshire, about
five Years, which was usually let for 700 l. per Ann. And the Office as long,
which was never let under 1400 l. per Ann. which Mr. Lenthall well hoped would
have Sunk the Debt to 12000 l. or less: But instead thereof Mr. Fowks, brought
Mr, Lenthall another Account, about May last, of the Principal, Intrest, and
Charges of his and Mr. Polters, with Interest upon Interest, amounting to 19794
l. 18 s. 5 d. which they would have him indebted to them, without having
Respect to the 3000 l. which Mr. Bolter agreed to abate.

And since that time, Mr. Lenthall is informed Mr. Bolter and Mr. Fowkes have
Transferred, and Conveyed the Estate and Office, to the Right Honorable the
Earl of Radnor, the Debt being now swelled up to above 20000 l. as they
compute, without having regard to the yearly Rent Mr. Gimbert was obliged to
pay for the said Office.

That the Estate at Haseley and Latchford is esteemed to be worth upwards of
13000 l. having a House, etc. Built upon it which cost 4000 l. Sr. John
Lenthall, his Grandfather sold 1000 l. per.Ann. Land of Inhertance, when he
purchased the said Office, for which the said William Lenthall has been since
bid, above 20000 l.

So he hopes, if the Office be dissolved, he shall have a Compensation
eqaivalent, (there having been no Mismanagement by him) being his Inheritance.

Now, since the said Debt upon it, is so unreasonably swelled up, and the
Estate and Office so undervalued and lessened, and Mr. Lenthall having nothing
to pay his other Debts which he has contracted, nor to subsist on, but the
said Estates and Office, which is his Inheritance, he humbly beggs the
Consideration, Compassion, and Relief of this Honorable House of Commons:
Without which he must Starve in a Prison; and humbly prays he may be heard by
his Council, at the Bar of this Honorable House, before the Bill do pass.


