(...) OR, Sovereign Balsome, Gently applied in a few weighty Considerations
(by way of Quaerie) for healing the distempers of such Professors of Religion
as Satan has wounded and drawn aside (under the Notion of living in God) to
the utter renouncing and casting off the use of Divine Ordinances, and
Gospel-Institutions of Worship.

With an Apendix by way of Postscript to such Professors, wherein the most
principal grounds upon which they build their practice, are fully answered and
removed.

And a Catalogue of the errors that many of them hold since they left the
Ordinances, discovered. As also a true Relation of Gods extraordinary working
upon one of this way very lately in Plymouth, to the sight of his error, for
the good of others published.

By Will. Bartlet, an unworthy Minister of the Gospel, and Lecturer at
Bytheford in Devonshire.

Even from the days of your Fathers ye are gone away from my Ordinances, and
have not kept them: Return unto me, and I will return unto you, says the Lord
of Hosts, etc. MAL. 3.7. Is there no Balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician
there? Why there is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered? JER.
8.22. Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth, and one convert him; let
him know that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way, shall
save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. IAM. 5.19, 20.
Imprinted at London by G. Dawson, for Elizabeth Overton in Popeshead Alley,
near the Royal Exchange. 1649.

TO ALL THE CORDIAL Friends, and sincere lovers of the Lord JESUS and his SYON.
PRECIOUS SOULS,
YE cannot be ignorant how the prophesies of old, 2 Timothy 3.1 ad 10. 2 Pet. 2.
per tot. 1 John 2.18.22. Jude 4. ad finem. Matthew. 24, 24, 25, etc.
mentioned by the holy Apostles of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; yea by
Christ himself, concerning the perilousnesse of the last days, in respect of
the evils both of opinion and practice, that should be broached and embraced
by all sorts of people in them; are now in our times abundantly fulfilled;
wherein there is as much difference, and as great variety, (if not greater)
between men in their opinions, as there is between them in their fashions,
which I find to be Sic etiam in cunctis Angligenis, tanta vestium varietas and
asperitatis multiformitas inolevit ut neutrius generis paene quilibes
censcatur, ex qua re been prophetavit tempore Regis Etheldredi, etc. Anony.
prophesied of also, many hundred years since, touching England: and like as
men's fashions in their apparel, diet, and behavior, are some of them more
monstrous, odious and loathsome then others; so are their opinions in Religion,
and matters of Doctrine and Worship: and so blasphemous, abominable, and
damnable, are some opinions and practices now in England, as that nothing but
the patience of an infinite God could possibly suffer them to have any longer a
Being amongst us. How were the Churches of Christ weakened and endangered by
such Pests in the Primitive times? What a many (...).
Antichrists were there then? 1 John 2.18. What a many false Christ's, false
Apostles, false Prophets and Teachers, selfe-lovers. Sin-lovers, and lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God, going up and down deceiving poor souls,
especially poor silly women, that were always learning, but never came to the
knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 3.6. who were not only resisters, but subverters
of the faith delivered once to the Saints, Jude 3.4. And is it not so at this
day? Are nor the Churches of Christ as much posered and endangered now through
such false Christ's, false Apostles, false Teachers, etc. mere Antichrists,
that have a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof. The Lord Jesus
(the great Shepherd of his sheep, Hebr. 13.20.) has but newly recovered his
poor afflicted weather-beaten Lambs, from bloody Cavalerisme, tyranny and
oppression, but forthwith their souls are assaulted with Beza translates it
Spiritual malices, the words are (...), the spiritualnesse of evil and
wickedness; carnal wickednesses are inferior to spiritual, which ocupieth
the highest part of the Soul, etc. and are not laid out in carnal passions
and concupiscences, etc. Lawr. Com. and War with Angels. p. 5.
spiritual wickednesses in high places, Ephesians. 6.12. Some read it, In high
places; but I suppose it may be read better, in heavenly places, or things, as
The word is (...) in sublimi, says Beza, but it signifies heavenly, as in the
Margent of your Bibles, which may have relation to things as places, and then
it shows the things about which his malicious studies are conversant, that is,
to take all heavenly things from us, and to deprive us of whatsoever is
heavenly. id. ib.
some observe on the place. If the differences amongst us, touching men's
opinions and practices, were only about such things as are not much material,
or were not at all determined in the Scripture, or after such a manner as is
dubious not only to particular persons, but whole Churches of Christ, the
matter were not great; for God is infinitely wise herein, and in my weak
apprehension, has left these things so, that thereby there might be occasion
given the more to exercise our Charity, Patience and Humility one toward
another. But when they shall grow to such a height, as to call into question
fundamental truths, and not so much to question them, as flatly to deny them,
and to pluck up the foundation it self; then it is high time for us to look
about, and not only to hold fast, that no man take our Crown, but to (...). i.
ut fitis propugnatores fidei. uti Hen. Steph. in verb.
contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. And is it not thus
with us at this Who can number the dust of Atheists, Papists, Heretics,
Hypocrites, or measure the spacious Globe of mere Formalists, or
self-condemned Apostates? Barl.
day? Don't we see that men are not ashamed to write and speak against the
Divinity of Christ, and the Scriptures, against the Deity of the Holy Ghost;
yea, how they deny the Trinity, and plead for these very abominations that are
(without controversy) odious and loathsome both to God and good Men A
catalogue of some of which abominable errors held by such as cast off the use
of ordinances you shall find set down in the end of the Book.
. Now concerning errors in Doctrine, I have not so directly to deal with, in
the following Discourse (though my soul bleeds to consider the dishonor comes
to the Lord Jesus by them,) but those which more especially concern Worship,
and not every petty error here neither, but the grand and capital one, and
that wherein I judge all error of Doctrine and Apostasy at last to terminate,
viz. the Renouncing and casting off, of all Duties and Ordinances, or
Institutions of Divine Worship, ordained by Christ himself to be observed in
the days of the New Testament; unchurching the right constituted Congregations
and Assemblies of Syon, dna plucking up the public Ministry of the Gospel by
the roots, and this not so much in some respect (as those that are called
Seekers, who deny public Churches, Ministry, etc. for want of Apostles, and
other like extraordinary gifted men to administer, etc.) but absolutely looking
on the performance of Duties, and use of Ordinances, Ministry and Churches, as
poor, low, weak Dispensations, Childish things, not fit for such as live in
God to stoop so low, as to make use of. And so under a pretense of living in
God, they teach poor, weak souls, that there is a life to be attained unto,
wherein they may live That there is a life to be obtained by Believers here on
earth, that is above ordinances, is not denied. But that this life is without
ordinances altogether, when they may enjoy the use of them, and that puts them
necessarily upon the renouncing and casting them off, is that which we flatly
deny, as being contrary not only to the sacred Scriptures, but experience of
the soundest Christians, as I have showed in the following Discourse.
without the use of Ordinances, or performance of Duties, without observation
of the Lords day, or Sabbath, without Church Fellowship, without instructing
their children in the knowledge of the Scriptures, without craving a blessing
on the Creature when they make use of it, or returning thanks for it. And that
which is most abominable, that they may attain and enjoy such a liberty, as to
be under no law, but that of the Spirit, as they say, and so may perpetrate any
impiety, without control, or check of God or Man; for they live in God alone,
and so are above all things here below: and so would make a persons living in
God, and living in the practice of sin, to consist and stand together. These
are the men that the following Discourse concerns, and whom I cannot but look
on (especially those of them that out of a professed judgment, and fixed
self-will, do in a high and peremptory manner proceed in their way) as the
dangerous pests that can be, both to the State, as well as to Religion; for
take away true Christian Religion, or the true worship of God, and power of
godliness out of a State, or Commonwealth, and what do you therein but as it
were take the soul from the body: For what is the sincere practice of sound
Religion and godliness in a State, but There is nothing in a true Christian
Commonwealth that can only direct it self to the benefit of State only, but
that Religion must be also respected, the care of State being but the By, and
Religion the main of every Christian intendment. And there fore oftentimes even
in those things which seem most properly to concern the State, is Religion in
them most regarded; the care of State in respect of Religion, being like the
care of our bodies, for which holy men care, but so only as for the houses of
their souls. etc. Levers History of the Defend of the Cath Faith.
the life and soul of it? Let that be once neglected, corrupted, or
extirpated, and the other cannot long stand after; and when is Religion
destroyed, but when we make it to patronize impiety. And hence it is that such
as are guilty of the forementioned abomination, in renouncing Ordinances, etc.
are so frequently described by such Epithites as show nothing but confusion and
destruction to betide those places and persons where they are entertained and
countenanced. It is sufficient in this place, (having spoken more largely
hereof in the conclusion of the Appendix) to show you that the Apostle Peter
calls them 2 Pet. 3.17. Lest ye be led away with the error (...). so in chap.
2.7, etc, (...) dicuntur homines qui volunt esse fine lege, qui emnia legum
repagula perfringunt, ab (...) and (...), quod legem praesertim drvinam
significat, homines qui nec jus nec fas curant etc. Ger in loc. vocat (...)
quos prius (...) and (...) ostendit, hos, nullo jure, nullis ne legibus posse
in ordine retineri, sed perumpunt omnia jura: quid vis enim sibi licere putant,
Scripturasque sibi subjiciunt. Horum exemplum valde est perniciosum etiam piis,
ideo cavendum, ne horum erroribus abrepti, veritatem fidei amittant. Aret. in
loc. ut supra.
(...), which Lorinus, and other more sound Interpreters do translate,
ex-leges, or lawless Libertines, such as under a pretense of Christian
liberty, allow themselves in the practice of all manner of sensual lusts, to
the disgrace and scandal of the Gospel; for through their occasion the way of
truth is evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2.2. Yet whiles I am opposing the opinion and
practice of such New, though no True Gospellers, etc. I would not have ye (the
precious servants of God, that keep his Commandments, and the Testimony of
Jesus, Rev. 12.17.) to conceive that I do in the least go about to plead for
any ordinances or worship of man's invention, or making; for false ordinances
and worship that are forged in Antichrists shop, and bear no other stamp upon
them then the Image of humane Authority: For I know as it is all one to Lever ut
supra, p. 366.
deny God and to deny his Service; so I do latry is as well in false worship as
in no worship: and I am assured that Ordinances of divine worship that are of
man's making though never so wise or great, are no plants of Gods. planting,
neither does he accept of them, or of those that make use of them, but Matthew.
15.8, 9-13. Col. 2.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Ezekiel. 20.39.
looks on them as vain worshippers and willworshipers, polluters and
prophaners of his glorious and reverend Name. Or (2.) that I allowed of theuse
of true ordinances and worship that Christ himself has instituted and
commanded, in a false way, or contrary to the right order which Christ has
prescribed to his people in the Gospel, and was in use in the primitive and
Apostolical times for our example, viz. a Society and Combination of Saints in
which (for the most part) they subsist properly, and are to be performed, as I
have at large showed in another Model of the Congregational way, where this
matter is fully handled and cleared in the two first Chapters.
place: For I know that the same God that has called his people to worship
him, does require them to take the same way and order he has As God has not
left it indifferent whether he be served and worshipped, or not, so he has not
left people at their own liberty to worship him how and in what manner they
please, or as it seems good in their own eyes, but has given forth a Rule
and order to be observed by his people under the new Testament, as be did under
the Old; which order of Gods worship is best discerned in the practice of the
Saints in the Primitive and Apostolical times, set forth in the new Testament.
That men might not prevaricate or alter the form of Gods service, has God
himself prescribed us a precise form, how and in what form (or manner) we
should serve him, damning all diversity to this his own order, wherewith he is
only pleased, and wherewith he is always pleased. Levers History of the
Defend of the Cath. Faith.
prescribed them, or else they may not expect acceptance with him, but rather
reproof from him, Ezekiel. 20.29, 40. especially after he has made known his
m^nde herein unto us and given us precious helps for discovery that way,
according to Acts 17 30. Neither is it sufficient for us to say, that much good
is done to poor souls by the use of Gods ordinances, though not performed in
that way God has appointed: For doubtless however God is all sufficient to
work good from our evil, yet we our selves can have but little credit or
comfort in it, seeing we take not Gods way to do his work. And if David, and
other of the servants of God under the Law, apprehended wrath from God, and
occasion of humiliation to themselves, for not seeking or serving of him after
the due order he had prescribed them, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. how much more may such
expect displeasure from God, that now in this clear Sunshine of the Gospel
neglect or refuse to seek and serve him as he has required them by Jesus
Christ; but continue to administer the holy things of Gods house (whether out
of prejudice to the Congregational way, or from looking so much to the examples
of men like themselves or out of slavish fear what will become of them, I know
not) in a most confused and disorderly way and manner, to and amongst
drunkards, swearers, persecuters, scoffers, and most profane ignorant people,
that ought to be driven from, not admitted to Church Priviledges, never making
a separation between the clean and unclean, the holy and profane: like those
Priests in Ezekiels days, for which the Lord was so much Vide the godly and
learned Lectures of Mr. W. Greennill on the five first chapters of Ezekiel,
where he abundantly holds this forth, but especially p. 453, 454.
displeased, Ezekiel. 22.26. Or 3dly, that I would have those that enjoy the
ordinances of Christ in a right way and order of the Gospel, to make a God or
Savior of them, to place their happiness in them, and make them the resting
place of their hearts, or the center into which the lines of their precious
affections should run, or ascribe to them any virtue or power of their own to
confer grace; for this were to idolize ordinances with the Papists, and give
them the honor is due to It Is not our stirring up our graces, opening our
hearts, putting forth our selves to the utmost, that will make an Ordinance
effectual without Christ, it is he must do the deed, as Ioh. 15.5 etc. Paul
may plant, but there is no rooting of those plants but by Christ, Apollos may
water, but no growth nor increase but by Christ, 1 Cor. 3.6. Id. ut supra. p
294. When the hand of the Lord is upon an Ordinance, and upon a man in that
ordinance, then there is good gotten, and then does the soul gain, 2 Cor. 10.4
our weapons are mighty through God. p. 60.
Christ alone; as if ordinances had died for us, and redeemed us from hell, and
purchased life and salvation at the hands of God for us, and were now a
pleading our cause for us in heaven, and making inte cession to the Father in
our behalfes, and had received power to conquer our corruptions, ease our
burdens, supply our wants, perfect our graces, etc. when the contrary is most
clear and evident; and therefore as those that cast off the use of ordinances
altogether, do run into the extreme on the left hand, so do those people run
into the other extreme on the right hand, of trusting in ordinances, and
placing their righteousness in the mere observing of them. And thus the Lord
Jesus Christ (our alone precious Redeemer) is to this day, as of old, crucified
between these two Thieves, of denying him in his ordinances, by a total
renouncing them, or d^wn-right idolizing them, by placing their righteousness
in them. And therefore (pre^ious souls) while I am condemning the one my
desire is, you would not conceive me in the least to plead for, or countenance
the other. But my desire and scope in what is done in the following discourse,
is to press them that profess Christ, and subjection to his Gospel, to keep
the Golden Mean, and to avoid both these Rocks, of lifting too high, or
casting down too low, the sacred Institutions and Ordinances of worship, which
the Lord Jesus Christ, the Head and King of Syon, has appointed his Churches
in all ages to make use of: And he who is the great Searcher of hearts, and
discerner of the reins, knows, I have had nothing else in my eye, in order to
his glory and his peoples welfare, but this alone. Now for the Work it self, I
could have wished it in the hands of some of the Lords Worthies, that are far
my superiors every way, and might possibly have done it more fully and
accuratly then I have; however, seeing it is the Lords pleasure to call me, and
go before me in it, I cannot but follow him; and who knows what the Strong
God may do by Vide Mr. Marshals Sermon on Psalm. 8.2. called, A two edged
Sword out of the mouth of Babes.
weak means? Poor David whose heart was upright with God, and sought his glory
in what he enterprised, did more with a Sling and a Stone in the Name of the
Lord, against Goliath, that defied the Heast of the living God, 1 Samuel 17. then
Saul with all his valiant warriors possibly could. 'Twas not Saul's Armor
could procure David the Conquest, and therefore he throws it from him, and
goes to the work of God in Gods way. Happy souls that have learned that Art,
and know how to set about the Lords work with the Lords Tools; such may be
sure with David, to find a prosperous gale to attend them, and much blessed
success to follow their honest endeavors. Wherefore to trouble you no longer
(dearly beloved) but craving your candid Interpretation of, and earnest
supplication for a blessing on the present work, and that in order to the
establishing of your own souls, and the recovering those that are gone astray
from the paths of peace and righteousness, I leave your precious souls in the
arms of him, who never leaves his, even the God of all grace, 1 Pet. 5.^0.
who has called us into his glory by Christ Jesus, who (after ye have
suffered a while) make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. In whom I
desire and trust for ever to be found

Your and the Churches unfeigned Friend and Servant, W. BARTLET.
March 1. 1648
Courteous Reader, you are desired, in respect of the Authors absence, and
great distance from the Press, to mend with your Pen, or in love to pass by
such faults as these which have escaped.

For the Title, Balm for the Bruised, read A Sovereign Balsome for the
wounded. Page 2. marg.d r. observandum. P. 3. marg.n. r. in nova Ecclesia, etc.
p. 4. marg.s for Apostolis r. Apostolos. p. 9. margh for Mr. r. Mistress
Avery. p. 9. marg. for Id. ibid. r. Musc. in loc. p. 9. l, 17. r.
inexpressible. p. 33. mar. for worship r. walking,

BALM for the BRVISED.
Quaerie I.

LET it be considered in the fear of God, whether the sacred Scriptures,
commonly called the Word of God, consisting of the writings of the Prophets,
and Apostles, in the old and new Testament, that were holy men of God, and
(...) vulg. red. iuspirati, vel (...), sed Graecum proprie sig. acti and
impulsi. Spiritus sanctus erat Scriba, Prophetae erant ejus calami, quibus
Spir. S. scribenda dictabat. Cypr. Ergo Script. sac. est (...), ac infallibile
Dei verbum. Gro.
inspired infallibly by the Holy Ghost, in the composing of them, 2 Pet. 1.20,
21. be not the only visible Rule and (...). The Greek word (...) is taken from
Architects, who in building Houses, do use a Rule, or Square, by which all the
parts are carried ou with a due proportion: so those that Christ imployeth to
build his Church, are to measure all matters of doctrine and worship by the
Rule and Square of the Scriptures.
Canon, so called, Gal. 6.16. by which persons (professing the knowledge of
God, and faith in Christ) are to square and regulate themselves in all matters
of Doctrine and Worship? and whether the best and next way to come to the right
knowledge of the mind of Christ in these things, be not to Nihil in Ecclesia
sonare debet nisi eloquia Dei, juxta 1 Pet. 4.11. (...). vid. Ger. in loc. Omne
quod loquimur debemus affirmare de sacris Scripturis, Hier. in Psalm. 98.
Necesse est nobis Scripturas sacras in testimonium vocare, sensus enim nostri
and enarrationes sine iis, non habent fidem. (...). See Justin. Martyr in Dial.
cum Tryphone. Sancta Scriptura sic fidei nosirae fundamenta proponit, and
doctrinae nostrae regulam figit, ut fides Christianorum iis solum
revelationibus nitatur, quae in Canonicis libris continentur. Dar. de fratcrna
Comm. inter Eccles. Evang. p. 76. Sicut verbum Dei scriptum in practicis vitae
Christianae unicae est rectitudinis norma: sic idem verbume seu scriptura
sacra, unica est veritatis norma in Theoreticis fidei Christianae. See Par. in
Gal. 5.
keep close to this sacred and unerring Rule and Canon of the Scriptures? 1
Pet. 4.11. 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Timothy 3.15.16. Esaias 8.20. Prove. 6.23. and 30.5.6.

2. Whether among many other precious truths, which the Scriptures hold forth
unto us, this be not a special one, viz. That Jesus Christ, our blessed Lord
and Savior, (who having purged away our sins, and is sat down on the right
hand of the Majesty on High, Heb. 1.30) has a spiritual Kingdom or
Churchstate, Observanum est, quod Christus non dicit, Regnum meum non est in
hoc mundo, sed non est de hoc mundo. Et infra, non dieit, Regmon meum non est
HIC, sed non est HINC. Nam Regnum (sc. Christi) est hic, and in hoc mundo,
Coetus credentium, etc. vide Heming. Aret. and Musc. in loc.
distinct from all the Kingdoms of the world? John 18.36. Jesus answered, My
kingdom is not of this world. It Is in this world, but not of this world.

3. Whether this Kingdom of Christ here on earth, so distinct from the World,
is not usually distingnished into Ecclesiae visibilis and invisibilis
distinctio, fundatur in scripturis. Pareus in c. 2. ad Rom The Church is
visible or invisible. A distinction not of Genus into several species, but of
the subject into several adjuncts. For the same Church may be and is visible
and invisible. Sedg. Script. a perfect Rule for Church Government. Irvifibilis
autem nominatur non quod homines ad eam pertinentes non videantur qua homines,
sed quod non cernantur qua electi solus euim Deus novit qui sunt sui. Wolleb.
Compend. Theolog. vid. Tilen. Syntag. de Eccles. Ellis vind. Cathol. p. 4. c. 2.
Visible and Invisible, Mystical and Ministerial, or Political, considered
as the object of Faith, or of sight, and sense, consisting of all the elect,
dispersed through the whole world, called (by some) the Universal Church, or
of particular Churches collected and gathered together of visible Believers, in
this or that place, Town, City, Country or Kingdom, Ephesians. 3.15. Heb.
12.23. Mat. 22.14. Gal. 1.2. 1 Cor. 16.19. 2 Cor. 8.1. 1 Thessalonians. 2.14.

4. Whether the visible Kingdom of Christ, consisting of such particular
Churches, and Congregations of Believers, gathered together according to the
order of the Gospel, Vid. My Model of the Primitive Congregationall ways.
has not a visible Government, Order, and Ordinances of visible Worship
necessarily belonging and appertaining thereunto, according to Functiones quas
enumerat omnes sunt Ecclesiasticae, quibus tunc Apostolica authoritate sic
distinctis, Ministerium Ecclesiae constabat, and quae nunc etiam in Ecclesiis
constitutis vigere debent. Par. in loc. ad Romans c. 12.
Romans 12.6, 7 8. 1 Cor. 5. and 11, 12, and 14. Chapters, Ephesians 4.11, 12. Matthew.
28.19.

5. Whether this Government and external ordinances of Worship, appertaining
to this visible Church state and Kingdom of Christ under the new Testament,
do not by Gods order and appointment succeed and come in the room of those
Ordinances and Laws of Worship which the Jews did enjoy under the old
Testament, according to the prophecy of the Prophet Malachi, chap. 1. verse
11. For from the rising of the Sun to, etc. my By the Name of GOD is meant his
worship, as appears from verse 6. and verse 12. of the same chapter, and so
it is often used in the Scriptures. Vid. Bernard. Thesaur. Biblic. and Flac.
Illir. cla Some.
Name is great (or shall be great) among the Geniiles, and in every place
incense shall be offered to my Name, and a pure offering for my Name is (or
shall be great) among the Heathen. And whether the words of Christ to the
Samaritan Woman in Nam de abrogatione and cessatione tam Iudaici quam
Samaritani, deinde de inductione very and siuceri cultus mulierculam instruxit.
Musc. in loc.
John 4.22, 23, 24. do not very much hold forth the truth hereof; as also the
scope of the Epistle to the Hebrews, in that the Apostle makes it a great part
of his work to dissuade the Jews from their former Legal Ordinances and
Services, and to stir them up to embrace the Ordinances of the Gospel,
showing how the government of Christ in his Church under the Gospel is The
government of Christ's Church under the Gospel, in respect of external Worship
and Ordinances, is said to be a better Testament in a threefold respect. 1. In
respect of their use, because they present Christ to the soul more lively and
clearly, more feelingly and spiritually, more fully and abundantly. 2. In
respect of their end, because they are to end in heaven, at the coming of
Christ to glory, whereas those of the Law had their period in the grave of
Christ. 3. In respect of themselves: for this is a more perfect testimony, the
rites being fewer, the questions and controversies are not so many as did arise
concerning the Legal ceremonies. Sedgw. Script. A perfect Rule for Church
government p. 14.
a better Testament and Covenant then that of the Law. And whether the visible
Churches of Christ under the Gospel, be not every way As the Jews had
circumcision for them and their seed under the Law; so now Believers in right
constituted Churches, have Baptism for them and their seed. As the Jews had
the Passover, so Beleevert now have the Supper of the Lord. As the Jews had
Officers to lead them; so Believers now have Pastors and Teachers, etc. As the
Jews had the ministry of the Law read and preached; so Believers now have the
ministry of the Gospel. As the Jews had a Temple and an Altar; so now
Believers have Jesus Christ and the Saints in fellowship, which are living
Temples. And as the Jews had sacrifices; so now Believers have the spiritual
sacrifices of Prayer and Praises, which they offer to God by Jesus Christ. 1
Pet. 2.5.
as complete in point of Ordinances, as the National Church of the Jews was
under the Law, according to Coloss. 2.10.

6. Whether Jesus Christ the alone Head and King of this visible Church State,
and Kingdom, did not Nova Ecclesia sonare debere ca quae Christus credenda and
servanda praecepit Discipulis. Facessere igitur debent traditiones humanae,
neque misceri cum Evangelio Christi. Idem in Matthew. 28.20.
Himself institute and ordain those Holy Ordinances of Worship for Believers
to make use of in all Ages till his coming again, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 11.
Non dicit, Ego enim vester Apostolus Apostolica vobis authoritate sic tradidi,
sed ego enim accopt a Domino, quod and tradidi vobis. Ad eandem and nobis
respiciendum est hodie, videndum que ne a uorma illius quolibet deelinemus. Non
sunt audiendi qui praetexunt Patres, Concilia, Magisterium spiritus, potestatem
Ecclesiae, Catholicam confuetudinem, etc. omnia haec posterius sunt inducta.
Nobis regula veritatis esse dobet quae veniat a Christo, per illius Apostolos
transmissa. M^^c. in loc.
23, 24, 25, 26. 1 Cor. 12.28. Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. And whether these Ordinances
of worship being Jure Divino, it be in the What is made a Law, no authority can
pull down, but that which sets it up.
power of any public or private person on earth, to eause an alteration or
cessation of them.

7. Whether Jesus Christ and his Apostles, who (I suppose without controversy)
lived more highly in God, then any now do or can, did not in their first
ordaining and gathering of this visible Church State and Kingdom, make use of
Gospel Ordinances of worship Our Lord Jesus himself did not only institute
holy ordinances and duties of worship for his Churches to observe, but was in
the use of them himself. He made use of Baptism, of the Lords Supper, of
publishing and preaching the Gospel, of Prayer, of singing Hymns, or Psalms,
of private conserence, of giving thanks before meat, of praying amongst and
for the wicked, of society with the Disciples, and that after his resurrection
in their meeting together at times of worship, etc. And thus it was with the
Apostles also, as is evident to such as are but meanly acquainted with the
Histories in the Scriptures.
themselves, and intend that the Saints that followed them should do so also;
yea whether they did not by their own use, and practice of these
Gospel Ordinances of Worship, leave to the Saints in succeeding ages, a
precious There are three sorts of works which Christ wrought: 1. Some, Qua
Deus, i. as he was God, as working of miracles, pardoning of sins, etc. In
these we cannot imitate him. 2. Some, Qua mediator Dei and hominum, i as he was
mediator between God and Man, and satisfying Gods justice for our sins, and
reconciling the world to God: And in these neither can we imitate him. 3. Some,
Qua homo privatus, i. as he was a private person: and these are all such duties
as God required in his word to be performed. And herein Christ has given us an
example to follow and imitate him. Vide Zanch. in 1 John 2.6. Apostolos Domini
habemus authors, qui nec ipsi quicquam ex suo arbitrio, quod inducerent,
eligerunt: sed acceptam a Christo disciplinam fideliter Nationtbus
adsignaverunt. Tertul. de praescript. advers. Haeres. c. 6.
example, and ground of encouragement to walk in the same way of practicing and
using jointly or apart, those ordinances of worship, according to their
conditions and relations private or public, 1 John 2.6. 1 Cor 11.1. And
whether the practice of the primitive Saints and Churches, be not also a
pattern and copy for believers now to write after. Romans 15.4, Non vult ergo ut
quosvis temere imitemur: sed qui sunt fimiles Apostotis. Nequc etiam Apostolis
simpliciter, sed quatenus Christum imitantur. Zanch. in loc.
Phil. 3.17, 18, 19. and 4.9.

8. Whether the things of Christ's Church and Kingdom, which we call
Gospel Ordinances, and divine Institutions of visible worship under the new
Testament, as the preaching of the Gospel, administration of the Seals,
finging of Psalms, or Hymns, Prayer, Conference, etc. be not in their nature
and use spiritual, The Church is called a spiritual House, (...), as in 1
Pet. 2.5. The worship called spiritual Sacrifices. (...), 1 Pet. 2.5. (...).
Col. 3.16. The worshipers called holy and Spiritual, (...), Phil. 3.3. 2 Pet.
2.^. So Christ, the substance of the Ordinances, is called spiritual meat and
drink, 1 Cor. 12.3.4. (...). We may read the nature of many things in their
offects. All the Ordinances of worship bear this Inscription. Holiness to the
LORD, and are appointed to work holiness in man. Caryls duty and endeavor of
the Saints. p. 28.
1 Pet. 2.5. Col. 3.16. etc. And whether there may not be abundance of sweet
delight, and soule-satisfying comfort and content found, if holy and spiritual
hearts meet with them, and are acted on Christ in the use of them.

9. Whether those Divine and Spiritual Offices, Officers, and Ordinances
instituted by the Lord Jesus Christ, are not his (...) from (...), rota,
Chariots using to run on wheels.
Chariot, in which he rides gloriously in his Church and Kingdom, and by which
(through his Spirit) he not only subdues his enemies, and conquers the hearts
of Sinners to himself, (that his father has given to him from all eternity)
but more and more works over the hearts of the Saints themselves, to a further
degree of subjection to his Scepter, Cant. Ainsworth by this Chariot,
understands more especially the Church and Ministers of the Gospel, holding
forth the word of Truth, and Christ in the midst of them sitting, teaching,
governing, and triumphing. So Merc. in loc.
3.9, 10. Psalm. 45.4. Rev. 6.2. And I saw and behold, a By white Horse, Paraens
on the place understands the Church puritate doctrinae and disciplinae nitidam:
and by him that sat on it, Christ, who is carried or born (as it were) in the
Ordinances with great triumph, according to Acts 9.15.
white horse, and he that sat on him had a Bow, and a Crown was given to him,
and he went forth conquering and to conquer.

10. Whether there be not many singular and choice 1. Promises of salvation to
worship in general. Romans 10.12, 13. 2. Promises in particular, and so 1. to
the duty of prayer, 1. Of Preparation and assistance, Psa. 10.17. Romans 8.26. 2.
Of Acceptance, Esa. 60.7. Ezekiel. 43 17. 1 Pet. 2.5. 3. Of consolation, Esa.
56.7. 4. Of answering and recompensing, Psalm. 86.5. and 145.18. and Ephesians. 6.8.
Matthew. 6.6. Jam. 5.15, 16. Joh. 14.13. and 15.16. and 16.23. 2. To preaching
and hearing of theword, and administering the Seals, Matthew. 28.20. Prove. 8.34,
35. Esa. 55.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 10.16. Esa. 25.6. Psalm. 36.8. Cant. 2.3, 4. and 5.
1. Esa. 12.3. 3. To conference, Mal. 3.16; 17. 4 To sanctifying the Sabbath, or
Lords day, Esa. 58.13, 14. Esa. 56.2.5, 6, 7. Jer. 17.24, 25. 5. To praising of
God, Psalm. 50 23. Psalm. 7.5, 6. 6. To the Assemblies and Church-meetings of the
Saints to worship God: 1. Of Christ's presence with it, Mat. 18.20. 2.
Protection over it, Mat. 16.18. Psalm. 84.11. Esa. 33.20, 21. Esa. 4.5. 3
Blessings of all sorts upon it, Temporal, spiritual, eternal, Psa. 84.11. 1,
2.15.128.56.92.13, 14. and 94.14.65.4.
Promises made by Christ to believers, whiles they abide and continue in the
right and pure use of those Ordinances and duties of Worship, and many sad and
direful threatenings and comminations to those that neglect, leave and forsake
the use and practice of them, Psalm 97.7. Ier. 10.25. Heb. 10.38, 39. Luke 10,
11, 12. Heb. 12.25.

11. Whether to cast off the use of Gospel Ordinances, and to pretend only to
live in God, be not to make Christ and his Spirit to act contrary to their own
Sacred Laws, Institutions, and Injunctions of Worship, given to believers in
the Scriptures to follow: and when or where it was or is to be found in all the
Scriptures, that Jesus Christ has, or does so lead the Saints out of, or take
them Vid. Quaest. 39.
off from the duties of his worship, and bid them to cease calling upon the
Name of the Lord, seeing the Scriptures hold forth the contrary. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
Pray without ceasing.

12. Whether a believers living in God, or in the Spirit, and bosom of the
Father, and using of Gospel Ordinances, may not very well stand The nearer we
are to God, the more in love we shall be with spiritual exercises, and with
all means to draw nigh to him, as Books, Sermons, good company, etc. Dr Sibbs
in his Saints Happiness, p. 65.
together: And whether the right use of those Therefore the Lord converghes
himself to the poor soul by an ordinance; which is such a thing as consists
of a spiritual and yet an external and sensible nature. An Ordinance is the
subject by which God communicates himself and his goodness with a power of
his Spirit to carry them to the soul, as by preaching of the word to the care,
through the sound of a mortal voice: by prayer, consisting outwardly of
sentences and order: by the Sacrament also, standing of outward weak Elements.
The Lord carries to the soul by these, most inward and spiritual things. Rog.
Treat. de Sacram. p. 247.
Ordinances which Christ has commanded, will not very much further, and
advance a persons living in the God of those Ordinances, considering, that
through the presence of Christ with them, and the blessing of Christ upon them,
the heart of a believer is made the more spiritual and heavenly.

13. Whether the Scriptures do not join the greatest enjoyments of God, with
the greatest performance of duty toward God, and the greatest faith with the
greatest obedience, and the greatest sense of love with the greatest care of
service, as Psalm. 119.32. 2 Cor. 5.15. 1 Thessalonians. 5.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Luke
12.48. The Apostles meaning is, that we not only try, approve, and practice
those things which possibly may be pleasing to God in some low degree, such
things as set us a step beyond his displeasure; but we must search and do
those things which give him highest content, and carry us furthest into his
favor. Things which come up to the exactest Rule, and bear truest proportion
to the standards of Truth and Holiness. Car. present duty and endeavors of
the Saints. p. 9.
Ephesians. 5.10. Luke 7.47.

14. Whether to live in God, and neglect the use of Ordinances, be not a
dividing between the end and the means, Christ having sanctified Ordinances as
precious Experience teaches, that the fellowship of the Word, Prayer, and the
like, is the life, strength, blood and marrow of communion. Hence it is that
they are called the Banners, Ensigns, Standards of Christ, and the Ministers
the hearers thereof. For as Soldiers flock to the Standard and Ensign, so do
the Doves of Christ to these windows, etc. Rog. pract. Chat. p. ^01.
helps and furtherances to the Saints in their fellowship with God and one
another, 1 Ioh. 1.3, 4. Acts 20.32. 1 Cor. 10.16. 1 Pet. 2.2. And whether to
divide between the end and the means, which God has decreed and Christ
instituted, be not to make (in this respect) the will and mind of God, and
Jesus Christ, void and of none effect.

15. Whether those that are true believers, should in the least refuse to own
and to act in the use of those duties and Ordinances of worship which the
eternal God himself does not refuse to own, and to act in and work by to the
end of the world, The word is (...), rendered by Hen. Stepb. Consummatio. Matthew.
13.39.49.
Matthew. 28. 0 And whether that place of our Savior in Exhortatio hinc sumatur
ut nos verae Ecclesiae adjungamus sententia, voluntate, confessione, cultut
(...), and sejungamus nos ab illis coetibue, qui vel in totam doctrinam.
Ecclesiae abjiciunt, u Mahometistae; vel fundamentum, hoc est doctrinam,
articulos fidei, and verum Dei cultum subruunt quovis modo ut Papistae. Heming.
in loc.
John 4, 22, 23, 24. does not hold forth thus much unto us, in that he says to
the Woman of Samaria, that the Father seeks after such to worship him, as
worship him in Spirit and in Truth.

16. Whether the clearest demonstration that can possibly be given of a persons
living in God, be not his holy walking with God, and living to and for God, as
the Saints have done in former ages, and as the Scripture is clear for, Genesis
17.1. Romans 14.8. 2 Cor. 5.15. Gal. 2.19. And whether to walk with God, and live
to God, be not to deny our selves, and all that is ours, (in opinion or
practice) and to subject our selves to the obedience of all that is his, that
in all things he may be honored by us, according as he is worthy. And whether
the subjecting of our selves to all that the Lord has made known to be His, in
his Word, touching matters of Doctrine and Worship, be not the next way to
honor and exalt his great Name before the world, Mat. 5.16. 1 Pet. 2.9.

17. Whether a person, as he is a Believer, and a Christian, has not a
general calling to walk in, in which he is in a more immediate and special
manner 1 Cor. 7.24
to walk with God, and do him service in the duties of his worship publicly
and privately, as well as a particular calling, as they are men, in which they
have more immediate commerse with the creature: And whether the duties of their
general callings, as they are believers, are not of as great a consequence,
and as much to be looked after in order to the honor and glory of God, and
their own spiritual welfare, as the duties of their particular callings for
the good of the Commonwealth in which they live, and their own temporal,
welfare; and if that a persons living so highly in God, (as the casters off of
holy duties and Ordinances speak so much of) do not take us from, nor destroy
the performance of the duties of our particular callings, as we are men, which
are the less; how can they, or why should they take us from or destroy the
performance of the duties of our general callings, which are the greater?

18. Whether there be not sins of omission as well as sins of commission,
mentioned in the Scriptures, which Christians may become guilty of: And whether
the rejecting and casting off the duties of Gods Worship, either in public or
private, or both, be not a sin of this Nature in a high degree: And whether
such a sin of omission reigning in a person that pretends to godliness, does
not declare him to be The wicked in Scripture are uncharacterized by such kinds
of sins as the sin of omission, Jerem. 10.25. Psalm 10.4. Hosea 4.1.
Eccles. 9.2. Malach. 3.18. Matthew. 25.41, 42, 43. Vide Reig. vol. 2. p. 297.
Vid. Quaest. 26.
out of Christ, and the state of grace, seeing that no reigning sin can
possibly stand with a persons being in Christ, according to Romans 6.6, 7, 11,
12, 13, 14.

19. Whether there be not a mavelous slighting and undervaluing of the Pro.
9. ^, 2, 3. Wisdom bath built her House: i. Christ who is the wisdom of the
Father, in whom are hid (...): i. All the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,
Coloss. 2.3.
wisdom and faithfulness of Jesus Christ, to cast his holy Heb. 3.2, 5, 6. If
Moses the servant was no couseuing Merchant, but faithful to him that
entrusted him, in appointing the ordinances of legal service, how much more
faithful was Christ the Son in appointing the ordinances of Evangelicall
service?
Ordinances of divine worship, which he himself has instituted, and given a
Being unto in his kingdom behind our backs: And whether it be little less
then blasphemy to speak disgracefully of the sacred things of his House, The
word signifies to speak disgracefully, or to take away the fame, credit, or
good name of another, from (...), famam alterius laedere. Vide the works of
Mr. Sedgwick, Mr. Saltmarsh, Mr. Wilk, Mr. Avery, etc.
and the Scriptures in which they are recorded, calling them poor, low
dispensations, childish things, gold and silver Idols, empty forms, and such
like ignominious speech^s, if not a great deal worse (though the least of them
does not become any, much less those that pretend to live in God, to utter and
make use of.) And yet further, whether such practices of casting off, and
reviling the Ordinances and Churches of Christ (if willingly and knowingly
done) be not a high step to that Commendat igitur nobis, etc. He therefore
commends to us love and reverence to the Ministry of the Church, and the
study of frequenting Church Assemblies, from the danger of those who neglecting
them, do wander away and tempt God. Paraeus in loc. And then shows what the
particular steps to the unpardonable sin are: 1. A defection from the
Assemblies of the Saints, or Church Communion. 2. A voluntary abnegation of the
truth formerly acknowledged. 3. A malicious opposing and persecuting it. 4. A
defection joined with scorning and deriding. 5. A final persisting and
persevering in such a defection, etc. id. ibid.
unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, according to Heb. 10.25, 26.

20. Whether such persons as cast off, and contend against the use of divine
Ordinances, do not ex diametro, i. directly cross, and go against (not only
others) but their own former experiences, (if ever they had any) of those
inexpressable Incomes of the Spirit, and discoveries of Divine love, and
favor, which they have enjoyed both in public ordinances, and private duties
of worship, which time was, they would not have given, nor parted with for all
the treasure and pleasure of the whole world, though now they judge lightly of
them, and look upon as delusions of their own hearts, or things of no account,
or value.

21. Whether casting off of Divine Ordinances, and forsaking the Assemblies of
the Saints, that have fellowship together in the worship of God, be not so
far from living in God, as it is rather in the Scripture sense, a living 2
Cron. 15.3. Ephesians. 2.12.
without God, yea a departing from him, according to that of the Apostle, Heb.
3.12. which place is to be understood of Gospel Worship, as is evident by
comparing it with the 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 verses of the same chapter, where the
Apostle makes comparison between Christ and Moses, and shows how far the
Lord Jesus Christ excells Moses in building and ordering the House of God with
all the Ordinances of worship belonging thereunto under the Gospel, And thus
Cain is said to go out from the presence of the Lord, Genesis 4.16. or from Gods
(...) i. e. a facie Domini.
face. Now what is signified by this, but his being removed from the ways and
means of enjoying the favor of God, which are his So the face of God is
frequently taken in Scripture, Psalm. 24.6. Psalm. 27.8. Psalm. 105.4. Jonah 1.3.
Quare non dubito sub hac voce notari adminicula quibus Deus nos ad se tollit,
ex sua immensa gloria ad nos descendens, atque in terra nobis proponens
imaginem ^^elestis suae gloriae caeterum quia in unius Dei arbitrio est se
nobis conspiciendum praebere (quod facit in verbo and sacramentis) in hoc
intuitu oculos retineri decet ne nobis contingat quod Papistis, etc. Calv. in
Psalm. 27.8. Vide Sal. Glass. Philalog. sac. in verb. p. 104.
Ordinances, and therefore called his Face, because in these he uses to
manifest himself to his people, as two friends are said to do when they speak
face to face to each other.

22. Whether the promises of the Gospel (excepting only that great and
absolute Psalm. 2; 8. Ioh. 6.37.39. Isai. 49.8.9
first promise of calling the elect to Christ) do not carry and contain in the
bowels of them the matter of Rewards, and those rewards stand in The promises
are free in fieri, being made only out of grace, but conditional in facto
esse, being performed and accomplished with dependence on duties in us, Reign.
Synf. of Sin. p. 337. and 364. Vide Stock on Mal. cap. 2.
Relation to presupposed services and duties to be performed by believers in
order to their enjoying those Rewards, as Matthew. 7.7, 8. Ask and it shall be
given to you. 2 Thessalonians 3.4, Gal. 6.9 Heb. 3.14. 2 Pet. 1.5.8. and 10, 11 And
whether a person can expect the performance of the Reward on Gods part, that
neglects the duty required on his own part.

23. Whether one main end of the new Covenant of grace, mentioned Ier. 31.33.
Heb. 8.9, 10. wherein God promises to give his Spirit, be not to enable
Believers, and cause them to walk in all the Statutes and Ordinances of the
Lord Jesus, according to (...) The roat (...) is very emphaticall, and
fignifies, ad certum usum aptare vel disponere: i. To dispose and fit a person
for employment, taken from dressing and making ready of meats and sacrifices
under the Law. Vide Sheind. Lexic. penta Hutt. Heb. Bib. cum Cub. Leigh erit
sac. Heb. in Radie.
Ezekiel. 36.27. And whether a departing from Ordinances, and ceasing to walk in a
right observation of them, be not a terrible shaking, if not a making of this
glorious new Covenant of grace (in this respect) void to the Saints: For to
what purpose is there a Covenant made with the elect in Christ, to enable them
to walk with God in all the righteous Statutes and ordinances of God, if there
be none to be observed by them?

24. Whether a persons ceasing to perform the duty of prayer, and other duties
of Gods worship, and to live only in God (as such say that are against
Ordinances) be not destructive to the Mediatorship of Jesus Christ, and all his
glorious offices belonging thereunto, especially that of his Priestly office,
whereby he makes continual Intercession for true Believers, and by which we
are made acceptable to God, Rom 8.34 Heb. 7.25. Ephesians. 1.6. And whether (in
this respect) it be not to raze the very foundation of all our faith and hope
in God for justification and acceptance alone by Christ; yea, a razing of the
very foundation of all true Christian Religion, and according to the Apostle,
to preach another Gospel, Gal. 1 8 9. For if there be no more need of the
performance of the duties of Gods worship, in which (through Christ) we draw
nigh to God (but the soul is to be caught and swallowed up wholly into God,
as these men speak that deny the use of Ordinances) then to what purpose is
Christ's Priestly office now on foot, to make our persons and Gospel spiritual
sacrifices and services of prayer and praises acceptable to the Father, Heb.
13.15. 1 Pet. 2.5.

25 Whether to leave off, and altogether to cease the use of Gospel Ordinances
and duties of Gods worship, be not directly against the revealed will and mind
of God, and Jesus Christ contained in the Scriptures, that Isa. 29.18. Ier.
29.12, 13 Zech. ^.17. Ioh. 10.16. Ephesians. 6.18. 2 Timothy 2.22. 1 Cor. 11.26. Heb.
3.7, 11. Heb. 10.25. Jam. 1.18, 19, ad finem.
expressly command and require the continual performance of these duties, as
hearing the Word, Prayer, administration of the Seals, Church Communion, etc.
And whether this practice does not proceed from a Popish, Prelaticall, and
Antichristian Spirit, to make, and bring persons (in a great measure) to
forsake the holy Scriptures (which ought to be the All Writers both ancient and
modern, that are sound and Orthodox, aver so much, as may be seen abundantly
in their works against the Papists and Heretics, in all ages from the Apostles
to to this day.
only and sole Rule in all matters of faith) and prefer men's private thoughts,
opinions, inventions, and unwritten Traditions above them, as is the practice
of idolatrous and Antichristian Papists to do; yea whether such a principle as
this, to cast off the duties of Gods worship, so expressly commanded in the
Scriptures to be performed, be not with the Papists, (the great enemies of
Christ and his Gospel-institutions, to call for an Index Expurgatorius, to
correct and cancel those many precious Texts and places in the Scripture, that
are point blank against this dangerous opinion of forsaking Church Assemblies,
and use of Ordinances, as they do many places of Paul in his Epistles, that
hold forth justification E sola fide, i. by Faith alone without works.

26. Whether the Scriptures do not number and reckon such persons as cast off
Ordinances amongst the vilest of men, as profane The children of God by
nothing are better known, then by calling upon him. Barlow on 2 Timothy 2.2. Let
them go branded like Satan's slaves, sounes of Belial, who omit this duty. Id.
ibid.
Atheists, and Hypocrites, that make not conscience of the observing of them,
but cast his Laws behind their backs, and count them grievous, and do what
in them lies to make them void, as Nehem 9.26. Psalm. 10.5. Psalm. 119.126. Psalm.
53.4. Mal. 3.13, 14. and in especial that of prayer, as Psalm. 14.4. Job 27.10.
Est emm hoc mortalium animis insitum, ut Deo offerendu^. etc. Musc. in Joh.
the law of Nature teaching men to worship and serve that God whom they
acknowledge, (as we see in the practice of the mere Heathens, Romans 1. and 2.
chap.) and the law of Grace teaching men to delight in that God and his
worship, whom they so draw nigh unto by faith in Jesus Christ, Psalm.
119.97.103. 1 John 5.3. Acts 2 46, 47. And whether that place in This is
evident from the Apostles quoting this Text in Acts 4.25, 26, 27. against the
Rulers, Elders, Scribes, etc that sat in counsel against them, and made open
opposition against Christ in them, refusing to bow to his Scepter and
Government held forth both in the Doctrine and practice of the Apostles. And to
this agree Expositors generally.
Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3. be not meant of those wicked men (more especially) that cast
off all Divine Ordinances and Laws of Christ's Kingdom and Government under
the Gospel.

27. Whether the Face of Christ, in which the Glory of God the Father does
shine forth Non loquitur autem de corporea Christi facie; sed de ea quae
salutis nostrae dispensationem spectandam proponit. Musc. in loc.
2 Cor. 4.6. be not to be understood of Gospel Ordinances and Institutions,
Christ himself personally being now sat down at the right hand of the Majesty
on high, Heb. 1.3. In which Face, or Ministry and Ordinances of Christ, the
admirable and illustrious beauty of the eternal God, his infinite wisdom,
power and love, (which is hid from the world) does so shine forth oftentimes,
through the Spirit of Christ to the hearts of the Saints, that they seem to be
out of the body, and in heaven, before they are in heaven, and in glory on this
side glory, as it was with Paul, 2 Cor. 12.1, 2. And whether a Believer be not
bound to be in the use of these Gospel Ordinances and administrations, where he
may Psalm. 27.4.
behold this beauty and glory of the Lord, it being the Lords own way he has
appointed to reveal himself by, and not trust to other ways of our own
making, for the sight of this glory, having not a warrant for it in the
Scriptures.

28. Whether a Believer in this life, whiles he is clothed with his earthly
Tabernacle, can see Spiritual things, especially God Himself, who is an
infinite and incomprehensible Spirit, so as to have fellowship and communion
with him, and to live in him, otherwise then by an eye of faith, in the We
cannot see Divine things othewise then in a glass: that sight of God which we
shall have immediately in heaven without the Word and Sacraments, is of a higher
nature, when we shall be perfect; but while we live here, we cannot see God but
in Christ; and we cannot see Christ but in the Word and Sacraments, such is the
imperfection of our fight. Dr. Sibs Excel. of the Gospel above the Law, p. 280,
281, 286, 287, etc.
glass of Gospel Ordinances, as the works of God, and the word of God; but
especially Jesus Christ, who is God incarnate, God manifest in the flesh, and
this Jesus in the mystery of the Gospel, and Seals, according to 2 Cor. 3.
ult. And whether the Lord does not, (as a great testimony of his love to us in
Christ) very much condescend and stoop to the weak and imperfect condition of
his people, while they are here below, to make known the glory of his Wisdom,
Mercy, Power, and Love to their souls by his Spirit in the Ordinances.

29. Whether the Commandments of Christ, so much spoken of and mentioned in
the Scriptures, do not extend to the obedience of the outward man, as well as
the inward, and to the externals of worship as well as the internals of faith:
And whether a person can upon Just grounds, number himself among the friends
of Christ, that does not make conscience of Nota igitur verae amicitiae est
observantia voluntatis amicivoluntas Christi est in illius praeceptis; illis
obedtre est voluntati Christi este conformem. Amici Christi non sunt, qui
Christi praecepta susque deque facientes doctrinis and mandatis hominum
subjiciuntur, Musc. in loc.
keeping those commandments of Christ, according to that of our Savior, John
15.14. Yea, whether any one can say upon just grounds that he loves or knows
Christ, that does not keep his commandments, seeing the Scriptures speak
directly against it, and renders such for liars that pretend to know Christ,
and love him, but yet keep not his commandments, Necessario igitur consequi
quicunque jactant sidem sen studium pietatis, et interim studium servandae
legis Dei negligunt, eos impudentissimc mentiri, Zanch in loc.
1 John 3, 4. John 14, 15.

30. Whether the end of Christ's coming into the world, were not rather to
fulfill and confirm, then to disanull and make void the law of God engraven in
our hearts, and revealed in the Scriptures, whereby he calls for the obedience
of the whole man, inward and outward, in the service of Christ. And whether
such as break the least of these laws, and shall teach others to do so
likewise, do not bring themselves under that penalty of Matthew. 5.15. to be
counted (...): i. e, minimi fiet, imo nihili fiet, vult enim dicere, illos
exclusum iri e regno coelorum. Piscat. in loc.
least in the Kingdom of heaven, that is, to have no part nor portion in the
Church of Christ here on earth, or the Kingdom of glory hereafter.

31. Whether those that enter on the actions and works of their particular
callings, or upon the use of the creature, especially at the accustomed times
of refreshing Nature, as at Dinner, Supper, etc. without seeking to God by
prayer for, and praises through faith in Christ, can expect a blessing upon
them, or a sanctified and comfortable use of them. And whether they do not
transgress the revealed will of God expressly manisested herein, and discover a
loose, Let us never come to the table without calling upon Gods name, let us
never rise from the table without giving thanks; for it is certain, that all
they that eat so, and do not pray to God, are for the most part worse then
bruit beasts. Calv Sermon. in 1 Timothy 4.3, 4.
brutish, and profane frame of Spirit herein, Phil. 4.6. Be careful for
nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thankesgiving, let
your requests be made known to God. So 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Pray without ceasing,
and the 18. verse, In every thing give thanks, for this is the will of God in
Christ Jesus concerning you So 1 Timothy 4.3, 4.5 speaking of meats that seducing
Teachers should in the latter times endeavor in a As on Fridayes, in Lent, in
Embring days, and fasting days, etc. Calv. Id ibid.
superstitious manner to cause people to abstain from, he says, that God has
created them to be received with Sic passim Dominus cibum sumpturus sursum
aspiciens et coelum in^vens, benedicit patri, et gratias agit. Mat. 14.15, 26.
Marc. 6.. Sic Paulus Acts 27. 1 Cor. 10.31, ad hunc inquam usum cibos Deus
fecit, Claud. Espenc. in loc.
thankesgiving; so that a chief end of Gods creating every creature for man's
use is, that they should be used with thankesgiving, and that they are not
sanctified and blessed to us, without the Word and Prayer: i.e. without acting
The Sun is a noble creature of it self, and yet the brightness of it cannot come
to us but to our condemnation, unless it be sanctified to us. By what, means?
By faith. So fares it with meat and drink, and all the rest. Calv. ut supra.
faith and Christ a promise, and desiring God we may so receive it, and have
it blessed to us; so that to neglect prayer, and the exercise of faith in the
promise, and giving thanks for all by Christ, we do not only frustrate and
make void the end for which at first the Lord created them for our use, but we
are deprived of that comfort that does attend them, to those that are in
Christ, and are at no better pass under the enjoyments of them, then those are
that are out of Christ, who are wicked, profane, and brutish, like the swine
that feeds on the Acornes, that are under the tree, but never looks up from
whence they fall.

32. Whether the Scriptures do not hold forth unto us, that the greatest and
highest enjoyments of God in the Spirit, which the Saints have attained unto in
this life, have been in their diligent use and improvement of Divine
Gospel Ordinances, and duties of worship, Acts 4.21, and 9.11, 12. and 10.9.44.
2 Cor. 12.6, 7, 8, 9 And whether the Scriptures show unto us any other way,
wherein the Lord of glory has ordinarily appeared unto his people, besides
that of his ordinances, to the helping of them upon all occasions, as their
necessities have required.

33. Whether departing from Gospel Ordinances, and Societies of the Saints in
the pure worship of God, be not a notable trick (if not a strong delusion) of
the Devil, which he makes use of, the better to further his cursed design,
upon the Lords people, by taking them off from their Rev. 2.4.
first love, and cooling (if not quenching) that sacred heat, and fervor of
the Spirit, that they formerly manifested in the service and worship of God,
prescribed by Jesus Christ: And whether sad and lamentable experience does not
evidence so much, in some that are now changed in their walking, from what they
were formerly, being as barren and empty in spiritual actions and assections as
those that never knew what it was to be exercised in them, and as much to seek
of their tenderness, that once they manifested in respect of sin, Contrary
to Mat. 5.4. Mat. 26.75. 1 Cor. 5.2. with 2 Cor. 7.7, 9, 11. 1 Cor. 11.30, 31.
Iam. 4.9, 10. 1 Ioh. 1.9. Zech. 12.10. (...), fig: luxum et delitias. Inde
verbum (...), delicate vivere, deliciari, voluptatibus indulgere. (...). In
deceptionibus suis. Cum meudaciis et imposturis suis deceperint fimplives
Christianos et pecunia eosdem e^^^^^erint, postea eandem in splendida et lauta
convivia in aleam structuras magnisicas et scorta profundunt. Osiand. vide
Gerrard. in loc.
as that they judge it no other then a Spirit of bondage to been humbled for
it, making no scruple at all to have fellowship with the unfruitful works
(and workers) of darkness, which the Saints are commanded to reprove and fly
from, Ephesians. 5.11. yea, being found in the number of those thato sport
themselves with their own deceivings, 2 Pet. 2, 13.

34. Whether it be not a principal part of that great mystery of
Heart-deceitfulnesse is within us, to conceive, that living in God will dead a
Christian to the use and practice of ordinances, and performance of holy
duties, when the chief end of a persons living in God is to dead the heart to
sin, and take it off from carnal and wordly things, that obstruct and hinder
his communion with God, and to quicken it to Ordinances, and spiritual duties;
by the use of which (through the mighty working of the Spirit of Christ) his
communion with, and communications from God, are increased, and perfected day
by day. And whether (to speak properly) the more a person lives in the Spirit,
the more that person be not Gal. 5.16. Vide Par. in loc.
lifted off from Sin and Self, and worldld carnal delights, to walk closely
with God in the duties of his general and particular callings; the contrary to
which we too much find and now meet with in those that cast off Ordinances.

35. Whether Jesus Christ be not infinitely delighted in, and affected with the
assemblings of the Saints and exercisings of their gifts and graces in the
duties of his worship, as appears every where in the Cant. 2.14. The Hebrew
root (...) signisies prayers, praises, songs, thankesgivings, etc. as Psalm.
5.3.26.7.28.2. vide Ainsworth in loc. Placet Domino vox Ecclesiae in discrimine
ad cum consugient^^ sicut de Israelitis ad marc interceptis dicitur. Exodus
14.15. Vox Ecclesiae eum confitentis et celebrantis, et ejus totus aspectus,
species, forma ac facies Ecclesiae. Merc. in loc.
Scriptures, by his drawing nigh to them at such times, as to the Eunuch when
he was reading the Scriptures, Acts 8.26. to the two Disciples when they were
in conference going to Emmaus, to Cornelius and his friends when they were
hearing Peter, to Paul when he was in prayer, and Peter also in the same duty,
Acts 9. and Acts 10.

36. Whether it be not the greatest unkindnesse that can be offered to the Lord
Jesus, to cast away, and speak evil of, yea to contend against those ways and
means in which he has most of all appeared to them, and spoken peace to
their souls: And whether it be not a grieving of the spirit to The word (...)
properly signifies basely to account of a thing, and esteem it nothing worth.
This reproves those who pretend the Spirit, and despise prophesy, they have the
Spirit to guide them, and therefore need no preaching. Tail. in his Saints
progress to full Holiness. p. 46. And then a little after, Many who have
Jacobs voice (says he) profess in word better things, yet prize the preaching
of Christ as a thing of naught: they think it better to be casting up some
account, or reading some History, or walking in the fields, or visiting some
friends, or perhaps going to a Play, then to a Sermon. Are these the sons of
Abraham, or the sons of God, and not rather the sounes of profane Esau? Id.
ibid.
despise prophesying, cease praying, and to forsake the Assemblies of the
Saints, that meet together to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, 1 Thessalonians. 5,
17, 18, 19, 20.

37. Whether the Father has not commanded us to honor the Son as we are to
honor himself, as in John 5.22, 23. And whether a person may be said truly to
honor the Father, that Quia ut una est essentia, sapientia, potentia, voluntas
utriusque, ita etiam honor idem est utriusque, adeo ut qui alterum non honorat,
aut ignominia ^fficit, is and alterum non bonoret, aut ignomiuia afficiat: cum
propter identitatem essentiae, omnia ipsis sint communia, adeo ut qui video
filium videat patrem, Ioh. 14.9. qui confitetur aut negat filium, consiteatur
aut neget and non habe at patrem. 1 Ioh. 2.23. Tarnov. in loc.
neglects the honor of Christ the Son: And whether the casting off those
duties and ordinances of Worship Christ has instituted and ordained, yea
commanded to be made use of, as King of his Church, be not rather a
dishonouring then an honoring of him.

38. Whether there be any such way for Believers ordinarily to promote the
honor and glory of Jesus Christ, and proclaim and bear out his Name before
the world, then this their holy and conscientious observing the duties of his
Worship at all times, and on all occasions, especially in times of persecution:
And whether Jesus Christ has not taken it well at the hands of his Churches,
when they have done so, as Rev. 2.9, 10, 13.

39. Whether the Saints in the most purest Gospel times, that are yet to come,
when the fullness of the Gentiles shall be brought in, and the Jews called,
shall not then make use of Ordinances, and duties of Worship, In most or all
these places of Scripture is mention made of visible worship, officers and
ordinances, and they are understood by the most godliest Interpreters of the
purity of those Gospel days and times which shall succeed the overthrow of
Antichrist, and the calling of the Jews, as could easily be showed, and
doubtless some of those Texts, if not all of them, are yet to be fulfilled. So
that the purest Gospel times shall not null, or make void the use of Divine
Ordinances.
Ezekiel. 37.21. to the end of the chap. Jer. 3.15, 16, 17. Esaias 2.2, 3, Esa. 66,
18. to the end of the Chap. Mich. 41, 2. Zeph. 3.9, 10. to the end, Zech. 8.11,
22. Mal. 3.4. with many more. And whether the overthrow of Antichrist, and
discovery and removing of all false Worship at this day in the world, shall not
be in order to the introducing and erecting or setting up the true worship of
Christ in this Kingdom among the Saints.

40. Whether at this present juncture of time, when God is appearing in his
glory, and setting up his King (the Lord Jesus Christ) upon his holy Hill of
Syon, as he has promised and purposed of old to do, Psalm. 2.6. there be any
thing more obstructive, if not destructive to the carrying on of this blessed
work, according as men may judge to outward appearance, then for those that
presend to so much of God in them, openly to contest against the use of Divine
Ordinances and Institutions of worship, wherein a principal part of Christ's
Kingdom on earth confisteth: And whether many of those that thus reject and
despise the holy Institutions and Commands of Jesus Christ laid forth in the
Scriptures for all believers to observe in the worshipping of God, (after they
have known and professed the same) be not like to prove the fittest instruments
in the hands of Satan and Antichrist (if the Lord of glory prevent not) to
trouble the peace of the Churches of Christ afresh, after the raging waves of
the late tribulations be a little more assuaged.

41. Whether the Scriptures, when they speak of the Saints drawing nigh to
God, be not meant of performing the duties of his worship, and drawing nigh to
him in Ordinances, as in that of Every Ordinance brings us near to God, Levit.
10. The original is (...) in propinquis mels. The Priests under the
ceremonial worship had the special honor of that Title, to be called Gods
nigh ones, Numb. 16.9. he caused them to come near him in holy services. Now
all the Saints are a holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, 1 Pet.
2.5. Caryl Sermon. in James 4. See abundance more to this purpose in that
precious Sermon. If any desire further and fuller satisfaction in this
particular, let him diligently peruse that excellent Treatise of that late
eminent and precious servant of Christ Mr. Jer. Bur. called, Gospel Worship.
Levit. 10.3. Psalm. 73. ult. James 4.8.

42. Whether those that now cast off Ordinances, and contend against the use of
them, do not go against the judgment, practice, and profession of all the
true Churches of Christ, that ever were, or are, from the beginning of the
world to this day, and not only since but before the defection of Antichrist:
And whether those that did first lead the dance in this unhappy course of
denying the use of Ordinances, were not tainted and corrupted with the foulest
Errors, and greatest Apostasy from the Truth, that may be, denying the
authority of the Scriptures, denying the Trinity, denying the Divinity of
Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, denying the Resurrection, the Being of Sin, or
else making God the author of it, etc. in whose dreadful steps many of late
begin to tread, that cast off the use of Gods worship and ordinances, as
lamentable experience witnesses

43. Whether such as wilfully cast away the use of Ordinances, and duties of
worship, and contend against them, have not just cause to question the truth of
their Spiritual estates, and to doubt whether ever Jesus Christ were rightly
formed in their hearts, seeing the truth of the work depends ordinarily upon
the same means to build and perfect it, that first of all instrumentally begat
it, which is the public ordinance of the Ministry of the Gospel, as 1. of
Pet. 2.2. compared with James 1.18. Acts 20.21. Acts 26.18.

44. Whether departing from the ordinances of God, be not one of those These
are times wherein a spirit of error is gone out into the world. That prophecy
of Christ seems (in a great measure) to be fulfilled in our days. Matthew. 24,
etc. Vide Car. Present Duty and Endeavor of the Saints. p, 36, 37.
deceivable ways that false Prophets, and false Christ's shall make use of in
these latter days of the world, that are come upon us, to deceive if it were
possible, the very elect, as Christ himself has forewarned and foretold,
Matthew. 24.24. And whether an elect person may not possibly be carried away with
the error of the wicked (against which the Apostle Peter exhorts, 2 Pet, 3.17)
for some time, Esaias 29.24. And whether such may not come to see their error
this way of leaving Ordinances, and casting off duties, before they are out of
this world, especially on their Deathbeds, when they may bewail it with
tears of blood, if it were possible, so sad may their condition be, as I heard
a gracious woman in London once to speak of one of her Sex, whom she knew
well, that was brought into such a dreadful condition when she was on her
Deathbed, for her wilful slighting and casting off Ordinances and Duties of
Gods worship, and pretending only to Christ's doing of all for her, and she to
do nothing but look to him, Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
that she was brought to the very gates of hell and desperation.

Those happy are that others harms
Against like evils strongly arms.
45. Whether Apostasy and falling away of Professors from the holy ways of
Gods worship, which once they professed and practiced, be not a grievous
judgment in it self, that God justly inflicts upon persons for their
unthankfulness, and for unfruitfulnesse under Gospel-dispensations and
Administration, receiving not the truth in the love of it, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.
And whether this evil be not a cause of many other evils to the Kingdom,
provoking the Lord to lengthen out the miseries of this Nation.

46. Whether Anarchy, or the rejecting of all Civil government in a State, be
not eminently destructive to that State and Commonwealth where it once
prevails: And whether rejecting of Christ's spiritual Government, Ordinances,
and Laws of worship, be not to introduce a spiritual Anarchy into his
Churchstate, and Kingdom, which he has in the world, and is daily more and
more advancing, and consequently an endeavoring (according to what lies in the
power of creatures) to subvert and overthrow the glorious Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, and to lay his honor in the dust: And whether those that shall persist
and persevere in such ondeavours, deserve not to be branded for enemies to the
glory and dignity of him whom the Eternal God has exalted to be the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, and to whom whosoever shall refuse to yield
subjection (be he Prince or Peasant) shall be broken in pieces as a Potters
vessel, according as the mouth of the Lord has spoken, Psalm. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.

47. Lastly, to add no more, Whether the Kingdom of Glory hereafter to be
enjoyed in Heaven, be not the proper State in which God has appointed the
Saints to live immediately in Himself without the use of Ordinances, and not
the Kingdom of Grace here on earth, in which the Saints are imperfect, and see
the Lord (for the most part) through a glass darkly, knowing but in part, and
prophesying but in part, till that which is perfect be come, according to 1
Cor. 13.9, 10, 11, 12. and the Apostles own judgment of himself, Phil 3.13,
14. And whether to hold the contrary, be not to confound those two States of
Grace and Glory, which the Scriptures do distinguish, so that the casting off
the use of Divine Institutions, and Gospel Ordinances, and Duties of Worship
appointed for believers to walk in the practice of, till the Lord Jesus Christ's
coming again, must of necessity be looked upon as having no bottom on the
sacred Scriptures, but a vision of men's own brains, and deceitful hearts,
directly contrary to the Faith once delivered to the Saints, Epist. Jude, v. 3,
4.
and therefore of all those that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, justly to be
condemned and exploded.

AN APPENDIX By way of Postscript, To all those whom the former Considerations
do more especially concern.
SIRS,
YOU have seen, (or may see) what that Balm is, which I have (as a weak
instrument in the hands of Christ the great Physician of Souls) endeavored to
power forth in the former Considerations, for the healing of your wounded
souls: And you have also seen (or may see) in my Epistle to the Reader, what
my grounds and ends have been in so doing; so that (I doubt not) but you will
look upon me as one that has had nothing in my eye, but the honor of Christ,
and welfare of your souls. If the business I have undertaken, had not been of
great importance and concernment, I had not (I assure you) put pen to paper,
but when I saw the sad effects were like to attend this opinion and practice of
yours, by introducing a spiritual Anarchy and Confusion in the Kingdom of
Christ, and threatening Ruin to all the true and right constituted Churches in
the world, I could not but Principiis obsta, sero medicina paratur, Cum mala
per longa^ convaluere moras.
make haste (according to the Ephesians. 4.7.
measure of the gift of Christ vouchsafed to me) toward the preventing of
them. If I have spoken or written none other then the words of Truth and
Soberness, I shall desire you in the name of him, who is Truth it self (our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ) to subscribe thereunto: If otherwise, I trust by
the same grace received, I shall be ready to see it, and acknowledge it
whenever it shall be made out unto me: only I shall desire, that the same
Apud Ecclesiae Alumnos non ad humanas rations and cogitationes dirigendae sunt
res divinae; sed ad sensum and voluntatem doctrinae spiritus, oration
interpretatioque accommodanda. Just. Mart. Neque te quoque disserentem
sustinuissemus, nisi cuncta ad seripturas refcrres; inde enim demonstrationes
adducere studio tibi est. id. ibid. Dial. cum Triphon.
medium, viz. the holy Scriptures of God, contained in the old and new
Testament, which I have endeavored to use in the former considerations, may be
used by such as shall attempt such a work. But because I may save that labor
in order to your further and greater satisfaction, I have thought it requisite
to do something by way of answering those objections, or removing those
grounds, upon which (I suppose) all of you, (or at least) many of you, do
build your practice of renouncing and casting off the use of Ordinances and
religious Duties.

Now I suppose the grounds upon which you build the casting off the use of
Ordinances, may be reduced to these eight Heads.

1. That a person may do well enough, and comfortably enjoy himself without
the use of Ordinances, as hearing the Word, Prayer, breaking of bread in a
communion of Saints, etc. 2. That the success of things does not depend upon
the performance of Duties and Ordinances, but on Gods eternal purpose and
decree. 3. That God knows our wants, and stands not in need of any of our
performances, to move him to the helping and satisfying of us. 4. That many
have used Ordinances, and performed Duties, but to small purpose, and those
that do use them, are little the better. 5. That Ordinances are but poor low
Dispensations, and not so consistent with a Believers living in God, that is
altogether above Ordinances, and that God does use to lead his people from
Gospel-formes, to a more immediate enjoyment of himself in the Spirit. 6. That
none are to pray or perform Duties at any time, further then they are moved
thereunto by the Spirit. 7. That the use of Ordinances is more Legal then
Evangelicall, and engenders to bondage rather then liberty, looking more to a
covenant of works then grace, the Gospel requiring believing not working. 8
Another ground upon which people build their casting off the use of Word and
Ordinances, is this, Because the Word and Ordinances are nothing without the
Spirit. They can never work any impression upon the soul, or acquaint the
Spirit of a man or woman, that the Lord is his God, or that Christ is his
Savior, etc. but this belongs to the office of the Spirit of God; the Word and
Ordinances of themselves are never able to work such an impression in the
soul. 9. That there are many places in the new Testament, which hodl forth the
nonperformance of duties, and laying aside the use of Ordinances, as Heb.
8.11. 1 John 2.27. Rev. 21.22, 23. 2 Pet. 1. ult.
These are the grounds upon which people build their leaving and casting off of
Ordinances, some of them respect those that are mere Atheists, and others
respect such as pretend to the greatest perfection of holiness attainable in
this life, I shall (by the help of Christ) make answer to them all, as they are
laid down, in order to the discovery of the unsoundnesse of them.

1. Touching the first of the former grounds, upon which people build the
casting off the use of the holy Ordinances of Christ, and duties of religion,
it was this, That a person may do well enough, etc. without the use of them.
Now in answer to this, for the discovery of the unsoundnesse of it, I utterly
deny it, and affirm the contrary, that such as cast off the use of Ordinances,
1 Cor. 3.22.
or live in the neglect of them, cannot possibly do so well, nor so
comfortably enjoy themselves in the neglect, as they might if they did
conscionably perform them, and my reason for it is this (which I conceive is
ungainsayable) Because whatsoever such do enjoy in order to their welfare and
prosperity here in this world, though in the greatest fullness, they do not
enjoy it with the blessing and favor of God, they may enjoy them, but not
comfortably, because not through a promise, nor by virtue of having interest in
Christ, through whom all our enjoyments become blessed to us, and without whom
all good things become evil and accursed to us.

Now such cannot possibly enjoy their good things through Christ and a promise,
that neglect prayer, etc (and so by consequence not enjoy them nor themselves
comfortably) because those mercies that come to us through a promise, and by
virtue of our interest in Christ, they come in the way of Prayer, and the use
of Ordinances; for the same God that has made a promise to be our God, and to
make us blessed in the enjoyment of himself and his mercies, has also said,
that he will be sought unto for all those mercies, before we shall enjoy them,
as Ezekiel, 36.37. And when a person is once in Christ, his being in Christ does
not take him off from duties, but rather puts him upon the diligent performance
of them. And hence it is, that the Spirit of Christ that dwells in believers,
is called a Spirit of prayer and supplication, Rom 8.15.26. Gal 4.6. Zech. 12,
10. And Christ has promised believers to grant them their desires upon their
asking his Father in his name John 14. and 15. and 16. chapters, Matthew. 7.7.
with many other places to the same purpose, and hereupon he enjoynes believers
to watch and pray, and ask necessaries daily at the hands of God their Father,
for the good both of their bodies and souls, their temporal and eternal
welfare, Matthew 6.11, 12. So that it is not faith in Christ, and a promise, that
in it self simply considered, makes us partakers and possessors of the good
things of God with comfort, but faith exercised, and put forth in prayer, and
use of holy Duties and Ordinances of worship. Faith in Christ, and the covenant
of Grace, lays claim to the good things of God, yea God himself (blessed for
ever) is his Portion, but Prayer fetches them in to the soul, through Jesus
Christ's mediation. And therefore as persons living in the neglect of duties,
discover themselves to be destitute of the Spirit of Christ, and consequently
of true faith in Christ, so they manifest themselves to have no true right to
what they enjoy as men and women in Christ, nor to have them in mercy from God,
or in a capacity to enjoy a holy and sanctified use of them, but are under all
with the curse of God upon them, so that as the wise man says, the very
prosperity of such fools destroys them, Prove. 1.32.

The second ground upon which people build their neglect of duties, and casting
off ordinances, is the Eternal purposes and decrees of God, who has by them
appointed how things shall be, and there is no altering of them, by our
fasting, praying, etc. or performing any duties of worship whatsoever. Shall
we think (say some) that the judgment of the Sword, Pestilence, and Famine
that walked up and down the Kingdom, as the Executioners of divine Justice in
an uncontrollable manner have been (in so great and wonderful measure) removed
from the prayers and supplications of any or all the Saints in England, and not
rather from the predeterminate Council and decrees of God.

To which I answer, That the Decrees of God do not exclude in the least, the
use of the means toward the effecting and bringing about of them, but as God
has determined in his eternal counsels what he will do for the good of any
of his people, so he has also determined that the means shall be used for the
obtaining it: Yea, we find in Scripture, that this is made a certain sign
that God has determined to do us some great good, when he stirs up our
hearts to be earnest with him in prayer, and the use of other lawful means
for the obtaining it, as we may see in Daniel 9.2, compared with Jer. 29.10,
11, 12, 13, 14. where we find in these two Scriptures, two things to our
present purpose, 1. That God had purposed the deliverance of his people from
their Babylonish captivity, after 70. years were expired. 2. That he purposed
also, and foretold by Jeremy, that near about the expiration of those 70.
years, a Spirit of Prayer should be given to them, and they should go and
pray unto the Lord for their deliverance; and hereupon Daniel is stirred up
about the end of those 70. years, to a more then ordinary seeking to God by
fasting and prayer, for the accomplishing of his promise, as is clear from
Dan. 2.3. and how much is the Lord taken with it, verse 20, 21, 22, 23. so that
we may from hence easily see, that the decrees and purposes of God, do not
exclude the performance of prayer, and use of holy ordinances, but rather
include them: not that they are deserving causes of our mercies, but only such
ways and means as God has in his wisdom appointed (in order to the
manifestation of our duty toward him) without which he will not vouchsafe us
our desires. And hence it is also, that we find the practice of the Saints has
been manifested this way, by seeking to God in the way and use of his
ordinances, for their enjoyment both of mercies Spiritual and Temporal, as the
Scriptures abundantly declare and testify.

And whereas many think, that the use of second causes, and ordinary means
naturally, are sufficient to attain their desires without the use of prayer,
etc. because God has given a power, or natural force to second causes to do
us good, as fire to heat us, meat to nourish us, clothes to warm us, reason to
guide us, Physic to keep us in health, and cure us of diseases, etc. I will
evidently prove from the Scriptures, that the Lord has put his servants upon
the practice of prayer to seek his blessing and directions in the use of all
these, yea, in such natural, civil, and moral things and actions, wherein
all men have freedom of will, and want neither ordinary means to help
themselves, nor wisdom and understanding naturally to guide them. As for
instance, 1. in the use of food, though there be therein a natural virtue put
and placed by God to nourish us, yet we find how the servants of God have used
prayer to desire the Lord to bless that unto them, as Christ himself
frequently, when he took bread he looked up to heaven and prayed for a blessing
on it, and so the Apostle Paul and many others, according to 1 Timothy 4.5, 6.

2. In the undertaking of Journeyes, how was the Apostle Paul carried out by
prayer to the Lord, for his direction, as in 1 Thessalonians. 3.11. Now God himself,
and our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way unto you. and Romans
1.10. And thus Ezra in his journey toward Jerusalem with the children of
Israel that came out of Babylon, earnestly sought the Lord for a right way Ezra
8.21, 22, 23.

3. In the making of marriages, how did Eleazer, Abraham's servant, (though he
were an understanding man, and very able to manage his business he went about)
earnestly supplicate God for direction and success, Genesis 24.12. where we
find, that before he attempted his work, he sought the Lord to give him good
speed, as knowing that such in businesses as these, though but of lesser
importance, the way to become prosperous was to seek to the Lord for direction
and good success.

4. In the actions of our common Tradings and ordinary employments, the Lords
people have desired God to bless and prosper them, as knowing that it is not
so much their natural actions, and diligent endeavors that makes them rich
and prosperous, as the blessing of God. And if there were no instances at all
to be given, yet the command of God is so clear for it, that it may abundantly
satisfy those that are ingenuous, as that of Prove. 3.6. In all thy ways
acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths And Phil. 4.6, 7. Be careful
for nothing, that is, in respect of the event, or issue, or success of things,
but in every thing, mark in every thing (...), by prayer and supplication with
thankesgiving let your requests be made known unto God. And then this will
follow, that the peace of God shall keep our hearts and minds through Christ
Jesus, as if there were no true peace to be enjoyed where there is a neglect of
a persons duty this way.

3. The third ground upon which people build their casting off the use of
religious duties and ordinances, is taken from Gods knowing of all our wants,
and his readiness to supply them without our seeking to him: for say they, God
has no need of our prayers and performances to move him to do us good.

To which I answer, that though this be a truth, yet the inference men make
from it in casting off the performance of duties, is not good, but weak and
idle; for first of all, though God know our wants better then we our selves
do, yet he has made it known to us in the Scriptures, that it is his will we
should spread them before him in prayer, etc. as Phil. 4.6. In every thing let
your requests be made (...).
known, says the Apostle, and that by prayer and supplication, now this cannot
be meant of making known these requests to any other then unto God, because he
alone is able to supply us, to hear and help us. So Mat. 6.11, 12. and 7.7.
Ezekiel. 36.37.

2. Though God stand not in need of our prayers and supplications, yet he will
have us to perform them that we may the better know our duties, and how much
we are beholding to him who is the alone Author and Donor of all our
enjoyments. And hence it is that he would have his people of old to put him in
remembrance, and declare that they might be justified, Esaias 43.26. not that
Jehovah is forgetful, or stands in need of a Monitor, as it is too too
frequently with poor creatures like our selves. No; but that we might know our
duties, and consider from whom all our mercies flow, and to whom all our
Returns of praise ought to be made.

3. Although the blessed Nature of God in Jesus Christ be infinitely carried out
with readiness and for wardnesse toward the helping of poor creatures in and
under all their wants and weaknesses, yet our seeking for this help, does not
in the least derogate from the glory of his goodness, but rather advance it.
My reasons for it, are these: 1. Because it is a most evident Demonstration to
Heaven and Earth, that he is gentle and easy to be entreated, full of bowels
of compassion, rich to all that call upon him, even to the young Ravens when
they cry, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 147.9. And me thinks there is a great
Emphasis in the word [Cry,] as thereby noting to us, how gracious and full of
compassion the Nature of God is, which could not be so well discerned, if there
were not such Cries put up from poor creatures to him: So that the drawings
forth of those tender mercies which are in God, by the cries of his poor
creatures to him, do exceedingly speak: out and commend to men and Angels, the
unconceivable goodness of his Nature. 2. Because the Lords pleasure, that we
should first seek him, before we enjoy mercies from him, is a great Argument of
this singular love to us. And this is evident from hence: 1. In that it is from
the great delight he has to behold and hear the work of his own Spirit in
us, making intercession with sighs and groans that are unutterable, Romans
8.26. Cant. 2.14. 2. because he knows that his mercies and blessings will be a
great deal the sweeter to us, when we have got them in the way of prayer, as
we find they were to David, Daniel, and other of the Saints. And this the
Saints find by experience, that those mercies which are gotten in a way of
faith and prayer, (through much wrestling with God, and endeavor to honor him
by believing) are far sweeter to us then those that come to us in a common
and ordinary way of general Providence, and cost us nothing.

4. The fourth ground upon which people build their leaving the use of
Ordinances, is this, that they themselves have used Ordinances, and performed
duties, but to small purpose, and those that do use them, are little the
better by using of them.

To which I answer, 1. As concerning themselves, whether they have not
oftentimes discovered the contrary, believing that they have enjoyed very much
of God at such times, when they have been in the use of Ordinance, as in
Prayer, hearing the word, communion with the Saints, etc. saying with David, O
how amiable are thy Tabernacles! my soul longs, yea even faints for the
Courts of thy House, Psalm. 84.1, 2. And with Peter when he was with Christ in
Mount Tabor, It is good to be here, let us build here three Tabernacles Matthew.
17.4. This, I say, and much more, have those said and spoken, that now cast off
Ordinances. If they played the Hypocrites, and were not real in what they did,
but suffered their tongues to speak more then their hearts felt, they must
blame themselves, and not find fault with the Ordinances. Besides, does the
grace of God (wrought in any soul) teach them to lay the fault of their
unfruitfulnesse and barrenness on the means, Christ has instituted to make
them fruitful? Are not such reasonings carnal and fleshly, and not from the
Spirit, which such persons pretend to be wholly caught up to live and walk in.
Why may not a sick and diseased person, that lies under the predominancy of
corrupt humors in his stomach, complain as well, that the ground of his
distemper proceeds from his food which he eats (which is excellent good, and
full of sweet nourishment in it self) and not from the super fluity of corrupt
humors in his stomach. Therefore I should advice such persons as blame the
sacred ordinances of Christ, to reflect back on themselves, and see the ground
of all their unprofitablenesse in their own hearts. And whereas some say, that
they have often prayed, but to small purpose; for they have seen it has been
all one to them and with them, when they have, or have not prayed, I would fain
know whether this be not the very garb and language of the Wicked, as the
Scripture abundantly mentions, Esaias 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, say they,
and thou see it not? Wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou take
no knowledge of it? And therefore it seems in the Prophet Malachies days,
they resolve to leave praying, Malach. 3.14. It is in vain, say they, to serve
God, and what profit is it unto us? Hippoctitas cannot endure to wait on the
Lord, but like the King of Samaria, What should I wait on the Lord any longer?
2 Kings 6. ult. whereas those that are true worshippers of God, (though they
may at some times through temptation be shaken in their confidence, and
consequently be taken off from drawing nigh to God in duties for a season, yet)
their hearts fall not foul with the duty, but rather with their own
corruption, and are still pressing on after further communion with God, and
greater enjoyment of him in the duties of his worship, and are resolved to wait
on the Lord in a way of seeking his face, through the strength of Christ, and
not to give him rest till he has returned to them, and spoken peace to their
souls. The Saints know that the Lord has gracious ends in deferring to answer
and help them when they cry unto him, and that they shall be no losers by their
waiting on God, and therefore keep on seeking and waiting, though the Lord do
not forthwith hear and answer them.

2. As for that concerns others, that such as use Ordinances, and are daily in
the practice of prayer, etc. are (for ought they can see) little the better for
them: I answer, if they mean Formalists, and carnal Gospellers, that have a
mere form of godliness only, but want the power of it in their hearts and
lives, it cannot be denied but so it is, yet no reason in the least, why the
blame should be laid on the Ordinances, or that any that are upright in their
walking with God, should cease the using of them: for the abuse of what is
lawful by some, is no sufficient reason why others should be taken off from
the use of it. Meat and drink, and recreations, with other things that are
lawful and good in themselves, may be abused oftentimes by some that seek
after nothing more then the satisfying of their carnal lusts; yet that may not
take off others from the moderate use of them. And so it is here in the point of
Ordinances; we may as well reason, because Judas and Demas, with others, abused
their profession of Christ, therefore none are to make profession of him.

But secondly, if it be spoken of all in the general, those that are upright
before God in their performances and use of Ordinances, as well as those that
are mere formalists, then I demand of such, whether living in God (who is Love
it self) can possibly lead them forth to such ways of uncharitable judging
their brethren. It Is true, that the best of the Saints may not live and walk up
so exactly to those performances of duties and enjoyments of holy Ordinances as
were to be wished; I plead not for the unprofitablenesse of any under the
means of grace: but, that none of them are fruitful, nor growing up to fuller
enjoyments of God in Christ, through the Spirit, in the use of Ordinances and
holy Duties, this I deny, as a gross and foul untruth, having experience to
the contrary in many of the servants of God through rich mercy. And I am
confident of it, if those that now cast off Ordinances, could look with a
clearer and stronger eye of love and charity in those that make use of them,
and could believe that they live in the use of Ordinances (not formally and
customarily, as the men of the world that place their greatest religion in the
enjoyment of them, but out of pure conscience, and obedience to the commands of
Christ, and from higher and more noble principles and ends, then Hypocrites or
carnal Gospellers can possibly put forth and manifest) they would not cry down
the use of Gospel Ordinances, nor judge those for poor, low, weak Christians,
that use them as now they do. But (through an ungrounded and unchristian
jealousy that is entertained by them touching others, together with an high
and overweening conceit of themselves) it is to be feared they are so offended
with ordinances, and speak so contemptibly and undervaluingly of those that use
them, I shall say no more to such, on this particular, but wish them to be
clothed with humility, and better to study the grounds of their own leaving
ordinances, before they call into question their brethrens, in the use of them.

5. The fifth ground upon which people build their neglect of Duties, and
casting off Ordinances, is this: That they look upon Ordinances, and Duties of
worship, as Prayer, Preaching, admistring the Seals, Church Fellowship, etc.
as poor, low dispensations, weak forms, childish things, and such as be not
so consistent with a persons living in God, etc. but out of which God does lead
his people to a more immediate enjoyment of himself in the Spirit.

Now for answer to this, First, I desire it may be seriously considered,
Whether the Ordinances and Institutions of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ, are low things, poor, weak, childish dispensations; Are those low and
childish things, in which the glory of Christ's Wisdom, Power, and
Faithfulness does shine forth? And are not the Scriptures, and divine
Institutions and Ordinances of Christ held forth in them, such Dispensations?
How then darepoore sinful dust and ashes thus reason and argue? Is it not
rather a clear Demonstration, that such men and women as thus speak, have low
and base thoughts of Christ in the managing of that great business his Father
has entrusted him with, about the ordering and governing his House and
Kingdom. Let that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.7, 8.9, 10, 11. be seriously
weighed, and then tell me whether the Dispensations of Christ under the New
Testament, be low things and childish. The Apostle in the former place shows
clearly that the very dispensation of the Legal Covenant ministry and
ordinances, was (...).
glorious, but how much more then (says he) must the Evangelicall Covenant
ministry and ordinances under the New Testament be glorious? If the
ministration or dispensation of Death and Condemnation under the Law, and that
which was to be done away, was glorious, how much more the Ministration and
Dispensation of the Spirit under the Gospel, which is perpetual, and to
remain, so that we see that the Dispensations of Christ under the New
Testament, are all glorious things: and if so, how dare any speak so
disgraeefully of them, as to call them poor, low, weak childish things?
Doubtless the Lord Jesus will give men and women but little thanks for those
* hard speeches of theirs they have uttered against him, (...).
at his coming to execute judgment upon all ungodly ones, Jude Epist. v. 15.

Besides, I desire such persons as speak so ignominiously of the Lord Jesus,
ordinances, and Gospel-institutions, would but answer me, or rather the Lord
Jesus Christ, to these few demands.

1. Is the Name of the great and glorious Jehovah a low and mean, a poor and
childish thing, and is not his Worship his name? 2. Is the publishing and
bearing forth his Name before the world, a low and childish thing, and is not
the Ministry of the Gospel so much? Acts 9.15. 3 Is the sanctifying this great
and glorious Name of Jehovah, a low and childish thing? And do not the Saints
do so much, when they drw nigh to God in the performance of the duties of his
worship? Lev. 10.3. 4. Is Glory a low thing, and not worth the looking after,
and is not Mount Syon and all the holy Assemblies so styled? Esaias 4.5. and
60.7.
In a word, are not all the Vessels of the Lords spiritual Temple and House
under the New Testament, clean and holy? And shall we call that common and
unclean that the eternal God, the King of Sion has cleansed and sanctified?
As Christ said to Peter, Act. 10.15. so may I say to such men, Call not those
things common and unclean that the Lord Jesus (the great Judge of quick and
dead) has cleansed and sanctified, and set apart for his use and service, call
not the ordinances and institutions with the holy Saints and servants of Christ
(that are called out of the world to make use of them, in order to the lifting
up of the glory of their Lord and Master, their Head and Husband) poor, low,
weak things. If Christ will own them, and honor them, let men take heed how
they despise and dishonor them.

2. Whereas it is said, that the use of such Gospel Ordinances and Institutions
of worship, are not consistent with a persons living in God, I utterly deny it;
and my reason for it is this, because those things that are subordinate in
their nature one to another, may very well stand together without confounding
and destroying one another: And so is it here, Divine ordinances of Worship, as
Prayer, Preaching, hearing, communion with the Saints at the Lords Supper, etc.
are subordinate ways and means which Christ has appointed to further (not
hinder) a believers living in God. And the more the Saints are in the use of
those means, with upright and spiritual hearts, the more they are furthered
therein. Indeed living in God, and living in ordinances, cannot stand together,
because a person cannot give his heart to two lovers at once; but living in
God, and using of Ordinances as means in order to the enjoyment of the end,
may very well stand together. As for example, A person that depends on God for
his natural life, eats and drinks, and sleeps, and marries, and takes
physic, and uses these and other like means, in order to the preservation of
that life, and the use of these means does not null or make void his faith in,
or dependence on God. Indeed placing our life, joy, comfort, excellency in
these, and putting our confidence in them, cannot stand with a persons living
in, or depending on God, because it is to make them our gods, and not the Lord;
but where there is only a conscientious use of them in obedience to the will of
God, and in order to the furthering of his providence, there a person may be
said to live in God, and depend on him, very well notwithstanding his use of
these. And thus it is in respect of a Christians spiritual life, he lives in
God alone through Christ, and makes him alone the Rest and Center of his Soul,
and yet makes use of Prayer, Preaching, reading the Scriptures, fellowship with
the Saints, etc. as the means which Christ has appointed in order thereunto.
And therefore what can be plainer then this that we affirm, viz. that living
in God, and using of Ordinances, are consistent, and may well stand together.
And what horrible wickedness and Hypocrisy is it in I charge not all, but
some more especially, that are (...) of this opinion and practice, who are
grown very loose and profane in their worship.
many of those that deny the use of Ordinances, and affirm that living in God,
and using of ordinances and duties, are not so consistent, when they can grant,
that living in God, and dicing, drinking, dancing, drabbing, etc. (with diverse
other abominations that are done of them in secret, and too too openly, that a
man may be a shamed to mention, Ephesians. 5.12.) are consistent, and may very well
stand together. But, o tempora! o mores! Oh the desperate wickedness of men
and women in this Age! Can the ways and works of darkness that the Lord has
forbidden, stand with a persons living in God (which is such a blasphemous
abomination, as hell it self can hardly afford a fouler) and cannot the ways
and works of righteousness and godliness, the serving and worshipping of God,
stand with living in God? O quintessence of impiety. thou child of the Devil,
thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right
ways of the Lord? Acts 13.10. What shall be given unto thee, or what shall be
done unto thee, thou false tongue? Sharp Arrows of the mighty, with coals of
Juniper, Psalm. 120.2, 3.

3. Whereas they say, That God does use to lead his people out of those low and
childish dispensations, to a more high enjoyment of Himself: I answer briefly,
Is it not a childish reasoning to say, God leads children from their childish
words and actions they manifest whiles they are children, therefore he leads
them from speaking, and reasoning, and discoursing, and studying, and other
actions that belong to a rational creature when they grow old: So here, what
weakness do men discover to the world, when they say, God leads his people
out of the use of ordinances, and ways of worshipping and serving of him, by
prayer, etc. when he leads them out from their ignorance, darkness,
fleshlinesse, filthiness, carnalnesse, that was wont to cleave to, and be
mixed with their performances. Because God leads his people out of living in,
and trusting to their meat and drink, and other creature comforts and
enjoyments, to which their hearts are apt and prone to bow down; therefore he
leads them out, and takes them off from eating and drinking, and use of
creature comforts: what madness would it be in any man to affirm this? So
here, because God is pleased to take off his people more and more from their
unbelief, pride, selfe-seekng, etc, and other weaknesses and sins, in the
performance of the duties of his worship, therefore he leads them out of, and
from the duties themselves; Is not this handsome reasoning. Besides, how can it
possibly be, that God should lead the Saints from the use of Ordinances, when
he has ordained the perpetual use of them to his Saints in all ages, as I
have showed in the Quaeries. He leads his people indeed to live above them,
but not to live without them.

6. The sixth ground on which people build their neglect of Duties, etc. is
this, That none are bound to pray, or perform Duties,, etc. further then the
Spirit moves them thereunto.

Answ. To which I answer in the first place, That though this be a Truth in
somesense, yet we should take heed how we Though we are to go when Gods
Spirit moves us, yet are we not to neglect when we do not perceive such
sensible motions of the Spirit. etc. Bolt. Bounds of Christian freedom, v.
202. We must do duty sometime out of obedience, although we want both a heart
to it, and a heart in it. Id. ibid.
abuse it, and make a wrong use of it, to bring about those ends for which it
was never intended, as this in particular for one, viz. The willing omission,
and witting neglect of the duties of Gods worship both public and secret,
which he calls us daily to the performance of. It is true, as the Spirit of
Christ is the efficient cause of spiritual life in believers ( without whom we
can do nothing, John 15.5.) and works the grace of Sanctification in their
hearts, so there is no performing of holy duties without him: But whether a
believer so sanctified and enlivened by the Holy Ghost, is not to Though we
cannot bring the Spirit to us, yet let us set our selves in the way for him, to
meet with us. Hold up the performance of duty, etc. Id. ibid.
enter upon religious duties, before the Spirit put forth a new act of
spiritual life in him, I suppose can hardly be made out: For I suppose after
Regeneration, or the new Birth, when a person is implanted, or incorporated
into Christ, he is not to be looked upon as a mere passive in the performance
of holy duties, as Prayer, Mortification of sin, etc. but as a worker
together with God. And so much those eminently anointed and qualified servants
of Christ, Mr. Tho. Goodwin, and Mr. Jeremy Burronghes, and Mr. W. Greenhill
affirm. Mr. Tho. Goodwin in his Treatise of the trial of a Christians growth,
p. 82, 83. and 138, 139.
Treatise quoted in the Margent touching a believers Mortifying sin, says,
We are purged from sin as the body is by Physic from humors; though the
Physic work, yet Nature joins with the Physic, being quickened and helped by
it, to cast out the humors: so as the means whereby God purges us, are not
to be imagined to do it, as mere Physical Agents, like as the pruning-hook
cuts off branches from the Tree, or as when a Chyrurgion cuts out dead flesh;
but these means do it by stirring up our graces, and quickening them, and by
setting our thoughts, and faith, and affections a-worke, and so God assisting
with the power of Christ's death, he does purge us daily, by making his word,
afflictions, etc. for to set our thoughts on work against sin. It is certain,
that unless our thoughts work on the means, as well as the means work upon
us, and so mingle themselves with them; unless Faith and Christ's death be
mingled in the heart, it purges not: And therefore it is said, we purge our
selves, as 2 Timothy 2.20. and 1 John 3.3. and Romans 8.13. We by the Spirit
mortify the deeds of the flesh, this is said (says he) as well as that God
purges us, because God still in going on to purge us, does it by stirring up
our graces, and uses therein acts of our faith, and love, and many motives and
considerations to do it. Thus this precious servant of Christ holds forth,
with much more to this purpose, taking off the grand objection is made against
it in the same Treatisa, p. 138, 139.

Mr. Burroughes on Hosea speaking against wanton Professors in this Age, says,
We find revealed in the Gospel, that it is God that must work the will and the
deed; the Covenant of grace is such, as that God does not only require, but
work all for us. How is this goodness (says he) mis-interpreted and abused?
Therefore (say they) what need we do any thing? Why do Ministers urge people
to duties? Your principle is good, the truth is good, that it is God that
works all in the Covenant of Grace, but this deduction is very absurd and
vile, and an abuse of Gods goodness, that therefore you must not work together
with God, as rational creatures, etc. p 743.

So Mr Greenhill, in his elaborate Lectures on Ezekiel, Chap. 3. verse 1, 2, 3.
p. 293. Observe; 1. has these words, The godly must act and put forth their
graces toward further reception of spiritual things; When Christ will give
Ezekiel Donum Prophetiae, a Roll to eat, he opens his mouth, he sets a-work his
faith to receive this gift of prophecy; Faith in the habit is like the mouth
shut up, nothing enters; but in exercise it is like the mouth open, and ready to
receive. It Is infinite mercy that God at any time will offer us spiritual
favors and excellencies; we should therefore beforward, and stir up our
souls and graces to the receipt of such mercies. It Is a lazy and ill excuse for
godly ones to say they can do nothing: Grace is an active andan enabling thing,
and where there is a principle of life (as all godly men have) there is a
specificall difference between that man and another that has it not; a man
without it cannot act nor stir up himself to a further reception of
spiritual things, because he is dead, but a man that has it, can and ought to
quicken up his own soul to spiritual things. The Prophet had received the
Spirit that entered into him, and he opened his mouth, exercised his Faith, to
take what the Lord should give: The Apostle Paul bids Timothy stir up the
gift of God that was in him, (...).
2 Timothy 1.6. He would have men deal with their gifts and graces, as they do
with fire under the ashes, they blow them off. and blow the fire up, and there
is a flame fit for service. Sloth, fear, infirmity, carnal reason, are ashes
that do often cover divine fire, that it seems dead; but we must stir up our
selves, blow off those ashes, and blow up the fire of grace, that it may burn
and shine, be useful to our selves and others. The Prophet complains in Esaias
64.7. There is no man that stirs up himself to take hold of me: they are
like men asleep, that sit still and do nothing. The vulgar is, Non est qui
consurgat.

So that I conceive as it is in the great business of a Believers
mortification of sin, so it is in the performance of prayer, and other
religious duties; the Rule by which a true believer is to walk in the
performance of those duties, is not to sit still and do nothing till he is
wrought upon by the Spirit, but he is through the strength of grace received,
to act his They that speak against performance of duty, might as well speak
against the actings of faith and exercise of grace: for prayer is nothing else
but the communication of the soul with God, the actings of faith, and exercise
of grace. Bolt. ut supra.
faith on the truth and faithfulness of God in the promise, who has
undertaken to give in assistance to us, and ability to go through that work
he calls us unto, and requires at our hands. For the same God that calls us
to duty, has promised to give in strength by his Spirit, to discharge it; and
this faith is to rely on, and make use of for its encouragement in all the
works the Lord calls a believer to the performance of; not but that faith and
all other graces are the Spirits, but because the Spirit does not act without
them in a true believer. For doubtless such as are truly incorporated into
Christ, and made one Spirit with the Lord, are not acted as dead stocks, as if
every time and moment of their acting Godward, they received new life from the
Spirit of Christ. And I am confident, for want of the knowledge of this, it
comes to pass, that many formal easy Professors, take such liberty to
themselves to live in the neglect of holy duties, because they say, they can
do nothing of themselves further then the Spirit moves and quickens them, as
if one that is in Christ, were altogether without spiritul life and motion
longer then the Holy Ghost falls upon him, as in the first act of conversion.
From whence it must needs follow:

1. That there are no habits of grace, nor inherent works of holiness wrought
in believers at their first Conversion and Regeneration, when Christ is formed
in them, which is contrary to the John 1.16. 2 Cor. 5.17. Ephesians. 2.10. Ephesians.
4.24.
Scripture, and all found Writers.

2. That whenever a believer is without the motions of the Spirit, as in
times of sleep, and bodily rest, or times of temptation, yea falling into sin,
as the best are subject to do James 3.2. then he is not to be looked upon as
one in Christ, which is as absurd as unsound.

3. That all those 1 Timothy 4.14, 25. 2 Timothy 1.6. Luke 21.26. Ephesians 6.18. Iam.
1.19, 21. Phil. 2.12. 1 Cor. 15. ult.
exhortations to believers, that concern the stirring up their grace, their
watchfulness to the performance of religious duties, their working out their
salvation with fear and trembling, Their giving all diligence to make their
calling and election sure, their fruitfulness in good works, and abounding in
the work of the Lord, etc. are void and of none effect, making believers under
the Gospel and new Covenant of grace, to be in no better condition then those
that were under the Law, and a Covenant of works, who had their duties
discovered, but had not grace and power given to them to enable them to the
discharge of them, which is contrary to the Tenor of the new Covenant, which
all those have a share in, that are in Christ, and can say in some measure, as
Christ their Head did, Psalm 40.7, 8, 9. compared with Heb 10.7, 8. I delight
to do thy will, O. my God, yea thy Law is within my heart.

4. That there are no just grounds for Christ and his Apostles in the
Scriptures to Mat. 26.40. Mark 16.14 Luke 24.45. Mat. 25.26. Heb. 5.11, 12. 1
Cor. 5.2. Rev. 2.4. Rev. 3.15, 16, 17.
charge home the guilt of sins of omission and neglect of prayer, repentance,
mortification of sin, etc. nor the guilt of carelessness, slothfulness,
negligence, luke-warmnesse in the service of God, upon such as are believers,
which is frequently done by them, as we may read in the New Testament: for if
they can act no longer nor no further then the Holy Ghost acts them, as ^t
their first conversion, then why should they be charged with such faults, and
commanded to amend, threatened if they do not, as Rev. 2 4, 5. seeing God
deals not with believers in Christ under the Gospel any longer by a Covenant
of works, but of grace, though the Covenant of Grace be full of justice, and
in the hands of him who orders it in righteousness, whose Psalm. 89.32, 33.
Scepter is a righteous Scepter, and will correct his subjects in
righteousness yet still in greatest love and mercy.

2. Besides secondly I answer, Does not this ground upon which people build the
neglect of duties, etc. as it is propounded, expose them to great danger of
being acted by Vid. Boltons Bounds of Christian freedom, p. 199. where he
shows how Satan may move a person to the performance of religious duties many
ways.
a Spirit of Delusion: For suppose (they staying till the Spirit move them (as
they speak in the former ground) to pray, etc.) that the motion to the
performance of the duty be irregular, and unseasonable, yea altogether
unsuitable to the calling and condition of the party that is moved to the duty,
shall they forthwith conclude, that this motion is from the Spirit of God? Nay,
are they not rather to conclude, that it is from Satan, who is a lying and
deceiving Spirit, whose depths and wiles are numerous, and who knows how to
advantage himself against us as well by ill performing of duties, as by
Non-performing them: and is it not the general opinion and judgment of the
godly that are taught of God, that one special differencing character between
the motions of the Spirit of God and Satan, is this, that the one moves
orderly, seasonably, and suitably to the word, and a persons calling and
condition, but the other disorderly, unseasonably, and contrary to, or at least
without the word. And therefore without question, those that build their
performing of duties upon this ground only, may as well (especially if they be
not experienced Christians) be deluded by Satan as led by the Spirit of God.

3. Lastly, to say no more; are not the Scriptures altogether silent herein,
and do not in the least hold forth such a Rule as this to believers, that none
should not enter on the performance of duties, till the Spirit move them: nay,
is it not as clear as the Sun at Noon day, that the Scriptures do expressly
hold forth to the contrary, Luke 21.36. Romans 12.12. Ephel. 6.18. Col. 4.2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
enjoining believers to pray always, to pray continually, to pray without
ceasing, to watch unto prayer, with sundry the like expressions, not (take
heed) as if believers were to do nothing else but pray and perform religious
duties; for then there would be no place left for their civil employments in
their particular Callings, which in their place and order are to be done also,
but that they should endeavor to preserve in themselves a holy and spiritual
disposition toward that duty, and all other duties of the like nature, that so
they may be ready upon all occasions, ordinary and extraordinary, public and
private, to draw nigh to God in the performance of them.

Object. But does not this derogate from the honor of the Spirit?

Ans. No more then the working of particular and next causes do from the
universal cause, which seldom or never produces particular effects without a
concurrence of particular causes. e. g. The Sun is the universal cause of
all the fruitfulness of the Earth, Vide Bridge Overflowings of Christ's
fullness, p. 31, 32.
yet it does not produce that fruitfulness without the help of man: So here,
the Spirit of God is the universal cause of all the spiritual actings of the
Saints, yet he does not ordinarily produce those actings without the
concurrence of those gracious habits are wrought in their hearts in their
conversion. Nay, the concurrence of such particular causes with the universal
cause, can be no dishonor to it, in regard that they do not act by themselves
properly, but together with and from the influence and virtue of the
universal, without which they could do nothing, John 15.5.

The seventh Ground on which people build their neglect of duties, is this,
That the performance of duties and use of Ordinances, is more legal then
Evangelicall, looking more to a Covenant of works then a Covenant of Grace;
engendring to bondage, where as the Gospel gives more grace, and affords more
liberty, looking more to believing then working.

Ans. The whole frame of this Argument is carnal, and savours too much of the
flesh, and very much nnbeseeming those that would have the world to look upon
them as more then ordinarily spiritual, and such as have attained to greater
enjoyments of God then others. My Reason is this, Because those persons that
enjoy most of God, and live highest in the Spirit, have their hearts most
enlarged and carried out in communion with God in Ordinances, and especially
that of prayer, so that I may truly affirm it, A man of most grace is a man of
most prayer, but a man of least grace is a man of least prayer. And we have a
singular evidence of it in the Apostle Paul, who was as Evangelicall a
Christian, and lived as highly in God (I suppose) as any that now cast off
Ordinances, how exceedingly was he given to prayer, how much was he in that
duty as well as in other duties; but in this of prayer he was more then
ordinary, so frequent, as if he had leisure for no other employment, and took
delight in nothing else. And hence it is, that he says oftentimes, that he
prayed without Romans 1.9. Col. 1.3.9. 2 Timothy 1.3. Phil. 1.4. Philem. v. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. 1 Thessalonians. 3.10.
ceasing, that he prayed always, that he prayed exceedingly night and day,
with diverse! such like expressions. And as it was with this precious servant of
Christ, so it has been with the most eminentst believers in all Ages, so far
have they been from looking on performance of holy Duties, as Legal Services,
and engendring to Bondage.

2. But secondly, if we diligently observe the Tenor of the Gospel, and new
Covenant of Grace, shall we not find that they call upon believers for the
strictest and most exactest performanees of the duties of Gods worship, not
allowing believers to live in the willing neglect of any known duty toward
God, or man, or themselves; if we are not convinced of it, let that notable
place of Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. be considered, where the Apostle shows, that
the Grace of God that brings salvation, viz. the Ministry of the Gospel and
new Covenant, that works grace instrumentally in men's hearts, and reveals
the freelove of God through Jesus Christ, to sinners, has appeared to all men,
teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world: i. e. soberly in respect
of our selves, righteously or justly in respect of men, and godly or holily and
religiously in respect of God. In which words I conceive are wrapped up the whole
duty of a Christian as it respects the first and second Table. This is the
Doctrine of the Gospel, or new Covenant of grace, not of the Law, or Covenant
of works: And the Apostle in the 14. verse goes on to amplify it, by showing
one chief end of Christ's coming into the world was, to redeem them from
iniquity, and to sanctify to himself a people zealous of good works; where
he gives us also a character of those that are the peculiar redeemed ones of
Christ, that they are such as are not only freed from the power and thraldom
of their lusts, but are made zealous of good works. To this place many more
might be added, as Luke 1.74 75. Jam. 2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Ezekiel. 11.14 and
6.27.37.

But thirdly, it is considerable to examine and enquire what this Liberty is
which the Gospel brings with it to beleevets; now without question it cannot be
meant of a lawless liberty, a carnal, sensual, sinful liberty, a liberty
and freedom to dishonor Christ, to cast his Laws and Ordinances behind our
backs, and to live as we list. It Is as clear as the Sun at noon day, that
the Gospel brings no such liberty with it to the world: indeed the Devils
Gospel does, and Antichrists, and Mahumets, they give to people elbow-roome
enough, as we use to say, in the ways of sin, but not so with the glorious
Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.14. Romans 6 14. 2 Timothy 2.19. 1 Ioh. 3.3.
Romans 6.1, 2.
for this says, Christ came to redeem us from iniquity, this says, sin shall
have no Dominion over us, this says, whosoever names the Name of Christ, must
depart from iniquity, this says, he that has true hope in Christ, purifies
himself as Christ is pure; this says, we are not to continue in sin that
grace may abound, nay it demands a reason how men can imagine that those that
are dead to sin (through interest in Christ) should live any longer therein;
1 Pet. 1.14, 15. 1 Cor: 15. ult. Phil ^. 11. Tit 3.8. 2 Cor. 7.1. Phil 3.13, 14.
and does not the Gospel of Christ say also, that we should be holy as Christ
is holy, that we should abound in the work of the Lord, that we should be
filled with all the fruits of righteousness, that we should be zealous of
good works, and maintain good works, and perfect holiness in the fear of the
Lord, forgetting what is behind, and pressing after what is before, etc.

4 Besides fourthly, the use of Ordinances, and performance of duties under the
Gospel, is to be looked upon as a Believers privilege, not as his burden: and
if the commands and service of Christ be called a Yoke and a Burden, and Bonds
and Cords, in the judgment of men, yet it is an easy yoke, and a light
burden, such cords and bonds as are gentle, so that as the Apostle says, his
commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5 3. The pedagogy of Moses indeed was
burdensome and grievous, so that our forefathers could not bear it; but not
so with the service of Christ under the Gospel, when heavenly and spiritual
souls are in it. Indeed when carnal hearts enter upon, or tarry any time in
and under the service of Christ, they are as under a burden, and the work
they are about is a burden to them; and what is the reason but this, that there
is an unsuitablenesse between the work and their hearts, neither come they to
enjoy communion with Christ in Duty, but come to the very duty as men do to
their task or daily labor: Vide Bolt. true Bounds of Christians Freedom, p.
213, 214.
now that person that has to do with nothing but duty in duty, cannot choose
but find that duty tedious and irksome to him, as the ordinances under the Law
were to the carnal Jews that did not eye Christ in them. But now on the other
side, when a gracious spiritual heart comes to a spiritual duty, and not to
the duty so much as to God and Christ in the duty, to converse with the Father
and the Son in the Spirit, how sweet and delightful then are times of duty
unto such souls, so that the performance of duties in a right manner, is no
Legal thing, nor matter of burden and grief to the Saints; but that which
affords them the greatest sweetness, content and satisfaction that is to be
enjoyed on this side glory, and so is to be looked on as matter of privilege,
not of bondage.

5. To say no more; whereas it is said, that the Gospel requires believing, not
working; if by working you understa^d the purchasing of life and salvation at
the hands of God by our performances, the justification of a sinner before God,
etc. it is granted, the Gospel requires it not at the hands of sinners, because
it offers more grace, that is, it shows us the work is done to our hands by
Jesus Christ, he has procured our ransom, satisfied his Fathers Justice,
appeased his wrath, procured peace and reconciliation, and that firmly through
his own blood, and wrought all our works for us this way, Esaias 26.12. And our
duty is primarily, and above all, to believe this, and accept this as it is
held forth in the Gospel, John 6.29. 1 John 3.23.
because the great work of God, and commandment of the Gospel, is to believe
in the Name of the Lord Jesus, that we may be saved. But if by working we
understand the fruit that flows from our believing in Christ, and taking hold
of him to justification and salvation, viz. a holy study in all our ways to
please God, and do his will, to walk in a childlike fear and reverence before
God, and have respect to all his commandments, that in all things we may be
found to the honor and praise of him that has loved us, and called us out of
darkness into his mavelous light, etc. then I suppose there is none
whatsoever that pretends to Christianity (especially if he have in an
experimental manner felt the love of Christ shed abroad in his heart) but will
acknowledge the Gospel requires such working. And the whole scope of the New
Testament is so clear and plain for this, as that none but such to whom the
Gospel is hid, can be ignorant of it. If any desire further satisfaction
herein, (for it would be too large for me to produce all that might be spoken
to this particular) let him read those Gospel Downam of Justification, l. 7. c.
1. p. 434, 435, 436, 437, 438. Bisco's golrious mystery of Gods mercy, p. 298,
299. Eatons Honycomb. Boltons bounds of Christians freedom. Burges Vindidiciae
legis, p. 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. with many other. etc.
Treatises that are abroad concerning this point.

8. Another ground upon which people build their casting off the use of Word
and Ordinances, is this, Because the Word and Ordinances are nothing without
the Spirit. They can never work any impression upon the soul, or acquaint the
Spirit of a man or woman, that the Lord is his God, or that Christ is his
Savior, etc. but this belongs to the office of the Spirit of God; the Word and
Ordinances of themselves are never able to work such an impression in the soul.

Answ. I find an answer to this objection in Doctor Crisp, vol. 3. p. 93. 94.
95. which because his works have been of great esteem amongst such people not
long since, and because he speaks fully to the point in hand, I will here
transcribe, as they are in the book set down; the words are these, p. 94. What
serve all the Ordinances for, will you say? Is not here a crying down of
Ordinances? There will be still this scandal cast upon us: But let me tell
you, there is a most comfortable use of Ordinances, though they serve not to
such high purposes as these are: I say, though they are not efficient to beget,
and find out, and reveal to the spirits of men the things that concern God,
yet beside the efficient revelation of God to be out God from the Spirit alone,
there is a passive Instrument, by which the Lord does make himself known to be
the God of his people, but that way is merely passive, not active.

1. Passively God makes himself known to be the God of his people by the word
of his grace, and faith laying hold on the word of grace revealed, and more
subordinately in prayer, fasting, receiving the Lords, Supper, and such
ordinances, so far as they are mixed with faith. Now give me leave to
communicate to you the full use and utmost extent of Gods thoughts concerning
the ordinances that he has propounded, how far forth he would have the
creature look upon the ordinances, and as much as may be put upon the use of
them, so far forth as they are useful. Know therefore, as I said before,
that all these ordinances are but passive ways of conveying this great gift,
the knowledge of God to be our God, I mean more plainly thus: These ordinances
are only of, and in themselves, empty, dry Channels, or Pipes, through which
the Spirit of the Lord brings from God himself the Spring, those riches, and
conveyes the same into the Spirit of a man. Look as a channel dug in a dry
ground, is the way through which the Spring conveyes his water unto a cistern,
the channel it self communicates none of its own, only it is a passage
through which the Spring conveyes his water: So are all the ordinances, even
faith it self, prayer, and all other Services, they are but channels through
which the Spirit of the Lord passes and brings from the Lord himself (the
Spring and Fountain) the revelation of God to be our God. In all the rest of
the gifts of God, which he has so freely bestowed, never a gift of Gods Spirit
procures any thing of its own, our faith has nothing of its own, fasting and
prayer have nothing of their own, but as the Lord has been pleased to make
these ordinances to be passages to convey himself to the sons of men, and
so they are to be made use of by the sons of men: Faith as it apprehends
the Lord Jesus, and other Ordinances, as therein true faith is exercised, and
no otherwise. And indeed beloved, this is the loadstone to provoke persons to
the use of all ordinances, God has ranked them together, that the Lord has so
much and so often promised through them, to convey himself. You are kept
through the power of God through faith (says the Apostle) unto salvation. As
if he should have said, The Lord does convey himself, and the manifestation of
his own salvation through our believing. The Spirit of the Lord passing through
the Ministry of the Gospel, as the breath of man passes through a Trumpet;
the Trumpet is the instrument, the breath is the Spirit of the Lord: the
Trumpet adds nothing to the breath. Now know beloved, so far as you will attend
the Ordinances, because God calls out to Ordinances, and because you have heard
the Lord to promise to bestow such things upon you in the ordinances, so far
you shall attend the ordinances according to his pleasure; but when you ascend
so high, that the ordinance does get things, then you rob the Lord, and give
more to ordinances then God has given. Now though the ordinances have no
efficiency of their own, in the nature I have spoken, yet there is good cause
for all Gods own people to esteem very highly of ordinances, and to be joyful
of ordinances, and to long much after ordinances, to make much of them, for why
the Lord has made his promises to be found of them, and to be with them in
ordinances. In the day of adversity call thou upon me and I will deliver thee.
And here by the way know from hence what is the expectation of believers
themselves, which they ought to have of the Lord for such things, when they
come to such ordinances, that so, when we attend the Lord in his ordinances, we
may find him in them, etc. Therefore as the poor man lay at the Beautiful
Gate, not because the Gate would relieve him, but because it was a place of
concourse where honorable men resorted, from whom he might have Alms; so in
the Ministry, in fasting and prayer, and all other services, there is the gate
of the Temple of the Lord, there is the place the Lord makes usually his
concourse and resort, there is the place God appoints to give the meeting;
therefore in expectation of the Word of his grace, that we may find him in
Ordinances, we do resort to them. Now what derogation is there all this while
from the Ordinances, while we make the but thus passive? The richest treasure
in the world may come to a man through the poorest vessel; the treasure is
never the further off, nor never the worse, because the vessel is poor. It is
no matter of what price the means of conveyance is, so that the thing we
desire be conveyed to us by it, only we must not give it that which is above
its due, etc.

And this shall be encouragement sufficient to wait upon all ordinances of all
sorts, where the Lord appoints, that he will for his own sake give you a
gracious answer, and bestow all good things upon you that you stand in need of,
in ordinances, This is motive sufficient, I say, to stir you up to attend
upon ordinances, and yet not to make Gods of them, to ascribe that to them
which belongs alone to God (who does all ordinarily through ordinances) which
is the only way to disappoint you of your hope, when you expect help from them.

9. The 9. ground upon which people build their casting off the use of
Ordinances, is the several Texts of Scripture which seem to plead for the
Nonperformance of duties, and laying aside of all ordinances in the ties of
the Gospel; As,

They shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying, Know the Lord: For all shall know me from the least to the greatest.
Heb. 8.11. We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the
day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts. 2 Pet. 1.19. But the
anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you: and ye need not that
any man teach you: but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is
truth, and is no lie: and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him, 1
John 2.27. And I saw no Temple therein; for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb
are the Temple of it, Rev. 21, 22. And the City had no need of the Sun,
neither of the Moon to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and
the Lamb is the light thereof. Verse. 23. Ans. Much might be spoken in answer to
such as produce these and the like Scriptures for the cessation of
Gospel Ordinances; but I shall study brevity, and refer all to two heads.

1. Show what I conceive to be the proper meaning of these texts of Scripture.
2. Give in the joint consent of the most judicious and godly Authors with it,
that have written on these Scriptures.
Touching the first, I suppose that the holy Ghost in the forementioned
Scriptures, does not in the least, mean or intend, that the Word, Ordinances,
and Ministry, appointed and instituted by Jesus Christ in the days of the New
Testament for the Saints to make use of, should be laid aside, and not at all
made use of, because I have showed in my Quaeries, that in the purest
Gospeltimes, Christ will have Ordinances, and Officers to administer them, and
Saints to enjoy them, though in a purer manner then they have been, or possibly
now are; but I conceive he means, that Christ himself will be their Teacher
in the new state of his Church, in the use of these his own means he has
institured and appointed. And this teaching of Christ, the King and Head of his
Church, will be, I conceive, diverse ways.

1. By giving the Saints a greater measure of the Spirit, and a more nearer
communion and fellowship with himself then formerly, the fullness of God shall
be more brought into their hearts by the ministry of the Spirit; and then
Christ shall be all in all indeed: not all without all, but all in all, that
is, all in all Saints, and all in all Ordinances, and all in all duties, and
all in all mercies; so that nothing shall be lifted up, acknowledged and
exalted, but Christ alone, and the Father in him.

2. By making the Saints to be so wise and understanding to salvation, that
they shall not hang or pin their faith upon the Authority of men, the Authority
of Parliaments, Councels, Synods, Conventions, Dictates, Decrees, Judgments of
men, though never so wise, learned godly, but they shall cleave to the
Authority of the Scriptures (...), and rest upon the teachings of the Spirit in
the Word, who is alone the infallible teacher and revealer of the mind of
Christ.

3. By clearing tho truth made known by outward instruments, after so sure a^^
^^^tain a manner by the Spirit inwardly, that the outward teaching shall be as
no teaching in comparison of the inward operation and concurrence of the holy
Ghost persuading of them, as the Samaritans when they came to Christ himself
upon the report of the woman that had been with him, they got such satisfaction
from him, that they said, Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we
have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed that Christ, Joh 4.42.
Even thus doubtless, will the Lord Jesus deal with the Saints when those
gloririous times come, he will by his Spirit inwardly so make known the mystery
of the Gospel preached outwardly, that they shall say to those that are his
instruments, Now we believe and understand, not so much because of your saying,
as that we have heard him ourselves teaching us inwardly by his Spirit. This I
take to be the scope and sense of those Texts of Scriptures, not a taking away
the use of ordinances, but a more spiritual and fuller enjoyment of God and
Jesus Christ in them.

2. Touching the judgment of the godly agreeing with me herein, take a few in
stead of many that might be alleged.

1. Pareus, that famous and judicious. Writer, in his Commentary on Heb. 8.11.
has these words: Non itaque hinc recta conficiunt fanatici, ministerio
Ecclesiae opus non esse in novo Testamento, quo ^am ad complement um tanta luck
Deus in huc vitae per ministerium Evangelii nos preparat. Fides enim est (...)
auditu, auditus per verbum Dei; Ideo dedit Christrs alios Apostolos, alios
Doctores, ut Ecclesia exedificetur ad perfectionem futioram. Vtrumque docet
Scriptura, omnes docert a Deo, and omnes debere audire, legere, meditare
scriptur as and verbum Dei. Itaque promissiones non evertunt praecepta; neque
positae causa prima tolluntur mediae. Ut enim non sequitur, Deus omnes pascit,
ergo non opus est pane and agricultura, per haec enim media Deus pascit. Ita
non sequitur Deus omnes docet, ergo non opus est verb. Per verbum enim auditum
and praedicaetum omnes doret. The interpretation is this; Therefore those
brainsick men do not rightly gather that there is no need of the ministry to
the Church in the times of the new Testament, because God to the completing of
so great light in this life, does prepare us by the Ministry of the Gospel;
for faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word, Romans 10.17. Therefore
Christ gave some to be Apostles, others to be Teachers, that the Church might
be built up to future perfection. And the Scripture does teach both, viz. all
to be taught of God, and all ought to hear, read, meditate on the Scriptures
and word of God. Therefore the promises do not overthrow the commands and
precepts, nor the first prime cause take away the means: For as it does not
follow, that because God feeds us, therefore there is no need of bread nor
husbandry, or tilling and sowing the earth; for by these very means God
feeds us; so it does not follow, because God reaches all, therefore there is
no need of the Word: for by the Word heard and preached he teaches all.

Thus we see by a little, how the judgment of this famous Writer joins with
us in what was formerly delivered touching the true and genuine sense of those
Scriptures; he has much more in the same place upon his solution of diverse
questions to this purpose.

So learned Hyperius in his Commentary on this place of the Hebrews, is so
full and copious, that I hardly know any have written more largely on this
subject (unless it has been in a Treatise by it self) answering all
objections against it, which would be too much to transcribe in this place.

2. For that place of 2 Pet. 1.19. many of the Ancients have understood it of
the state of glory: but learned Gerard in his Exposition of the words, shows
it to be understood of Gospeltimes here. Sed per diem illucescentem and
Phosphorum orientem rectius intelligitur uberior, perfectior, clarior, and
magis explicata Christi and mysteriorum divinorum cognitio. And this he proves
by five Arguments, but yet reproves those that would hereby lay aside the
Scriptures, and look upon them as unusefull to them, when the Day Star is
risen in their hearts; considering the whole state of the New Testament-light,
is no other to that of glory, then the midnight is to the noonday; and
especially because that the dawning of the day, and the arising of the
Daystarre in our hearts, spoken of here, is meant of the Ministry and Doctrine
of the Apostles, who were the best interpreters of the Prophets, Christ
himself having (before his ascension) opened their understandings to that end,
Luke 24.44, 45. Sic ergo sermonem Propheticum comparat Apostolus lucernae
tempore noctis lucenti; Apostolicum vero sermonem, seu Evangelii in N. T.
praedicationem comparat Lucifero and diei plenam lucem adferenti, and hac
ratione majorem doctrinae claritatem N. T. tribuit. And thus Piscator, Beza,
and others understand the place; so that believers are to have respect to the
Scriptures always, both of the old and new Testament, and not to cast off the
use of them, as soon as the Day Star begins to rise in their hearts, that is,
so soon as they come to understand or attain a more clear knowledge of the
doctrine of the Gospel, or salvation by faith alone in Christ crucified, by the
ministry and teaching of the Spirit.

3. Concerning that Text of 1 John 2 27. in my judgment Calvin and Beza speak
out the proper sense of the place, Vide Be. Annot. Calv. in loc.
saying, That the Apostle in these words, only signifies to those he wrote,
that they were not so ignorant as to be taught such things as were unknown to
them, or that he propounded such things to them, as the Spirit of Christ which
they had received into their hearts, did not readily prompt and make known unto
them. And therefore faith Calvin, Frantic men do rashly from hence seek to
shut out of the Church the use of the public Ministry. For in that the
Apostle says, that they are taught in all things by the Spirit, it must not be
generally taken, but restrained to the circumstance of the present place, etc.

4. As for that of Revel. 21.22, 23. though the most (both Ancient and Modern)
Writers, do understand it of the Church Triumphant hereafter in glory; yet Mr
Brightman and others, take it to be meant of the glorious times of the Church
here on earth, when the Jews shall be called, and come to their full glory in
Gospel-enjoyments. At which time the worship that shall then be in use, shall
be most simple, and most pure, etc. Let the Jews (therefore says he) hearken
to this, and let them not expect the re-edifying of a new material Temple
amongst them any longer, as they have done to this day foolishly and perversty,
but let them breathe and bray with their hearts and hearty wishes ter the right
manner of worshipping God, which shall not stand in need of any Temple: Let
them long with hopeful hearts to see Almighty God himself, and the Lamb
conversing among them; in respect of which glory, they shall judge whatsoever
can be framed by the policy of men, are but vile and nothing worth. And then
afterward upon the 23. verse. Now these things (says Mr Brightman) are not
spoken to this purpose, as if there should be no use at all of the Scriptures,
but because all men shall be so able to understand the will of God at this
time, as if they had no need to be brought to knowledge by the reading and
studying of the Scriptures, or any other holy books which help to open them.

To this agree Mr Bernard on the Revelations, with Mr Burroughes on Hosea, and
diverse other late Writers.

10. Lastly, though some of those that renounce Ordinances, will make use of
Scriptures, so far as they conceive will advantage their cause, (as is the
property of all Heretics to do) yet for the most part such persons wholly
renounce them, calling it a dead letter, a common writing, of no more value,
truth and authority, then the writings and sayings of other Saints, containing
in them many weak, silly, vain, gross, and contrary things, and therefore not
to be made use of, especially by grown Christians, as a Rule to guide them; but
the Saints are to follow the dictates and teachings of the Spirit within them.

Answ. 1. It seems then that the Scriptures, or the word of God which was
written by the holy Prophets and Apostles, (who were infallibly led and guided
by the holy Ghost in the penning of the Old and New Testament, as I shall show
in the following Answers) will serve young Christians turns, and may bea help
to such as are poor, weak, low believers, Babes in Christ. Well then, they
are some way useful: but why not as useful and serviceable to S. Seripturae
usu^ sui et necessitatem non ta^tion rudibus and Alphabetarils in
Christianismo, sed and perfectioribus ac regenitis passim commendat, nec tantum
in vetere, sed etiam in novo Testamento quemadmodum ex multis Scripturae locis
and exemplis liquet. Synops. pur. Theolog.
old men in Christ, to strong and well grown Christians, as to them that are
weak? Nay, is it not evident, that not only the most eminentest Saints before
Christ came into the world, as David, Daniel, etc. but after Christ was come,
made use of the Scriptures, as their rule and guide in knowing and doing the
mind and will of God. Let us make a trial.

1. The Apostles, though they had such a fullness of the Spirit powered out upon
them, Acts 2. yet they made use of the Scriptures, Peter did, 1. Pet. 1.10, 11,
12. and chap. 2.6. and 2 Pet. 1, 20, 21. and chap. 3.16. And the Apostle Paul,
who was caught up into the third heaven, (whose divine enjoyments were so
great, that few could match him) he made use of the Scriptures, Acts 17.2. Romans
1.2.4.3.9.17.10.11.11.2. Gal. 3.8, 22.4 30. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. 1 Timothy 5.18. So the
Apostle James he made use of them, Jam. 2.8, 23, 4.5. So the Evangelists, we
read how often they quoted the Scriptures. So Apollos was mighty in the
Scripture, Acts 18 24.28. So the Bereans, they searched daily the Scriptures,
and were highly commended for it, Acts 17.11. Yea, the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, (our alone blessed Savior) made use of the Scriptures often, as we
find John 7.38. Luke 4.18. Luke 20.37. Matthew. 21.42.22.29. Luke 24.27, 32, 45.
Neither did Christ and his Apostles make use only of the Scriptures for their
own use, but charged others to make use of the Scriptures, and those also that
were no mean Christians, but such as had attained a great measure of the
Spirit. That they gave the Saints in charge to make use of the Scriptures, is
evident from John 5.39. Col. 3.12. Romans 15.3, 4. 2 Timothy 3.14, 15, 16, 2 Pet.
1.19.

That they were no mean, but well grown Saints, and such as had attained to a
great measure of the Spirit, is also evident from the Epithites the Apostles
give them.

1. For first, they style them such, whose faith is spoken of throughout the
whole world, Romans 1.8. (...). 2. Such as were wise men, 1 Cor. 10.15. I speak
(...), that is, sapientibus, to wise men. 3. Such as were perfect, Phil. 3.15.
Let us therefore as many as be perfect, (...). 4. Such as had received (...),
i. e. Like precious faith. 2 Pet. 1.1. 5. Such as were strong men in Christ,
(...), 1 John 2 14. 6. Such whose faith did grow exceedingly, (...), 2 These.
13.
So that by all this it plainly appears, that the Scriptures are useful to
all the Saints, high as well as low, strong as well as weak, wife as well as
simple, yea every way able to furnish (...), the man of God himself, or
instruct him perfectly, as the word (...).
signifies. 2 Timothy 3.17. to every good work; and therefore it is a fond and
idle thing in any to say, that any of the Saints, while they are here in via,
are above the use of the Scriptures.

2. Whereas they say, the Scriptures are not to be a Rule for the Saints to
walk by, in matters of faith and practice, because they are a dead letter,
common writings, containing in them many weak, filly, yea gross
contradictions, etc. I answer, This is blasphemy against the holy Ghost, (that
was the Author of them, 2 Pet. 1.21.) in a high degree: For it is as clear as
the Sun, to any but those whose eyes are shut up, that the Scriptures are
without imperfection, without weakness, vanity or Vid. Roberts Keye of the
Bible, p. 38. to 49. excellently clearing and freeing the Scriptures from
contradictions in themselves.
contrariety, being inspired by him who is Perfection it self, 2 Tom. 3.16.
Now if they be inspired of God; then they must needs be the most excellent of
all other writings, both for verity, purity, certainty, efficacy, perfection
and perpetuity, as were easy to Read Master Traps Theologia Theologiae, or the
true Treasury.
demonstrate, which made one to call the Scriptures, Liber Librorum, the Book
of Books; in comparison of which all other are but Sibyllae folia, Luciani
libri, imo ipsae Aesopi Fabulae, vanitas vanitatum.
leaves, fables, trifles, vanity of vanities, etc. which drew this saying from
Auferantur de medio chartae nostrae, procedat in medium codex Dei. In Psalm. 57.
Austine of old, Away with our writings, that room may be made for the book of
God: and that of renowned Ego odi me e libros, and saepe opto eos interire etc.
In Genesis
Luther, I heartily hate mine own books, and could wish them out of the world,
because I fear they keep men from spending so much time from reading in Gods
book, the only fountain of all the wisdom. Now if the Scriptures are so
excellent, so perfect,, why should they not then serve to us as a Cauon or rule
to walk by, in things that are both to be believed and practiced?

Object. But they are a dead letter.

Ans. And why so? Are the words of the We must never abstract the Scripture
from that Spirit of God which is always in it, and with it, as a clear and
sufficient witness of it, and as the very life and soul of it; whereas you
with the Papists take the Scripture for no other but as a bare letter, or bark
of a tree, or dead corpse without any divine spirit in it. Mr. Burious Reply to
a Relation of the Conference between the last Archbishop of Cant. and Fisher
the Jesuit. For even as the veins in a natural body, do carry and convey in
them the life blood; and as the arteries do contain in them those animal
spirits conveyed from the head to all the members, whereby they are vegetated
and moved: so the Scriptures, and every part of them have in them the Spirit
whereby they are quickened, and which is in them, as the light in the body of
the Sun, their proper light, etc. p. 151.
living God dead words? Are they not spirit and life? John 6.63. Are they not
quick and powerful, sharper then a two-edged Sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intentions of the heart, Hebr. 4.12. How are they
then a dead letter?

Obj. But they are full of contradictions, leaving men still in the dark, and
under uncertainties.

Answ. If we apprehend any darkness or contradictions in the Scriptures, the
fault is ours, and not theirs, it is defectus vasis, non fontis: There is a
sufficiency of light that accompanies and shines forth in the Scriptures
continually; but that we cannot see it, is because we come to it with blind
eyes, Not habemus non limpidos, sed lippos oculos, as Aquinas notes on Coloss.
2.3. There are unsearchable treasures of wisdom and knowledge in the
Scriptures, as there is light in the Sun beaming forth to the world; but that
men cannot discern it, is from their own darkness and not the Scriptures. How
match the blind Papists have urged the obseurity of the Scriptures against our
Writers (the better to keep up Antichrist on his throne by keeping the vulgar
people in ignorance, through prohibiting and forbidding them to read the
Scriptures) and how abundantly they have been confuted, is It is true, the
Scriptures are obscure and difficult, but not all, nor to all, nor always. 1.
All the Scriptures are not difficult and obscure, every part of them is not
invol^^d in obscunity, 2 Pet. 3.16. these things thas arenecessary to
salvation, are plainly set down. 2. Those places in the Scripture that are
obscure, are not so to all persons, but as the same Apostle says, they are so
to the unlearned and unstable, that is, to them that are mere Naturals, or
Animals, 1 Cor. 2.14. Such as want the assistance of the Spirit to give them
understanding. 3. Neither are they obscure always: For those that are dark to
day, and cannot understand the mind of God, may have it revealed and made known
to them to morrow. Vide Langfords Enquiry after verity.
plain to those that have any acquaintance with their controverfies. Admirable
things have been done in this Age this way, both in Latin and English, so that
people are left without excuse herein.

And as for contradictions in the Scriptures, it is from the same spirit of
falsehood that acts and works in men to speak so disgracefully as they do of
them. For how can the most High, who is the Author of the Scriptures, and in
whom is no darkness at all, John 1.5. be the God of truth and falsehood together;
and it, must of nececessity follow, if the Scriptures speak plain
contradictions that either Jehovah could not, or that he would not speak so
expressly as to have his mind known by his creatures, though he call upon them
to look after it, which is blasphemy in a high degree. It were to be wished
that Christians would come to the Scriptures with less Cum cord nostro nos
concordemus: Et Scriptura sancta an nulla part discordat. Aug.
discord in their own hearts, and a greater sense of their own personal
darkness, weakness and infirmity, that they may crave the divine assistance
of Christ, to open their understandings, and take more pains to find out the
mind of God by comparing one text with another, those that are more obscure
with those that are clear, and weigh circumstances, Antecedentia and
Consequentia. i. e. what goes before, and what follows after the text, which
would very much help them to know what the mind of God is in it, and not
presently fall Deus bone! in veritds ipsa quae est Author Scripturae, an
spiritus sanctus a quo acti fuerunt sancti Dei illi homines loquentes and
scribentes, ansacra scriptura tota divinitus inspirata sibi contradicere
potest. Tum enim Deus cjusque spiritus simul veritatis and mendacii spiritus
esset, et divinae hujus veritatis pars une necessario vera, ^^era necessario
falsa esset, cum coniradicentium unum uecessario vervm alterum falsum sit. Vid.
Sharph. Symphon. in Epist.
foul on the Scriptures themselves, as affirming and denying one and the same
thing. But this is the misery of this age, that as Austine once spoke of the
Manichees, so may I of people now, that they will not subject their opinions and
judgments to the Scriptures, but would subject the Scriptures to their
opinions. Such places as have but the least outward appearance or show to make
for them, those they will cleave firmly to, but such as directly speak against
them, they throw away and cry out of contradictions, when the difference all
the while is in themselves, and not in the Scriptures.

3. Lastly, whereas they say the Saints are to follow the private and secret
Dictates and Teachings of the Spirit within them, and conform to them as the
only guide and Cynosura of all they believe and practice, and therefore are to
take no notice of the Scriptures.

I answer in the first place, that such that so reason, cannot free themselves
of horrible slighting the sacred word of God, and derogating in a high degree
from the excellency and authority of it: and I fear the guilt of this evil
will one day lie heavy on their souls and consciences, though now they make
nothing of it. For if the contempt of Civil Laws, and Statutes of earthly
Princes and States, when they are printed and published for the better
regulating of Commonwealths, and to which all are bound to yield submission
and subjection, that there may be no Tyranny nor Anarchy; I say, if the casting
off of such Laws, and refusing to square their outward actions in civil
affairs, to make our own wills our laws to guide us, be looked upon as a
matter so heinous, and deservedly punished, what shall we conceive then will be
the condition of those that cast off the Book of the Scriptures, wherein God
has set down his Laws and Statutes to order all States and Commonwealths in
general, and men and women in particular, in their walking before God, as the
Apostle faith, in Heb. 12.25. If they escaped not, who refused him that spoke
on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that
speaks from heaven. And where is the voice of God now from heaven, but in the
sacred Scriptures?

2. To lay aside the Scriptures, and trust merely to the Spirit, is not this a
downright separating and dividing what GOD has joined together and made one?
The Scriptures which are the very Word and Mind of God, have in every part of
them, the Spirit, whereby they are quickened, and the Spirit is in them as light
in the Sun, and we may as easily separate the light from the Sun, as the
Spirit from the Scriptures. For as the Sun would soon cease to be, if the
light and heat were gone, or taken from it: so here, if the Spirit should cease
from the Scriptures, they should cease to be the Word of God, which cannot be,
in regard that Gods Word endures for ever, Psalm. 119.89. and Mark 13.31.

3. If the Scriptures must be laid aside, and men trust to the private Dictates
of the Spirit, as they say, which way and how will they be able to confute
those that are unsound in the Faith? now will they stone Lapidandi sunt
haeretici sacrarum literarum argumentis. Athan. cont. Ari. or. 2.
Heretics but by Arguments from the Scriptures? For others will as strongly
pretend to the enjoyment of the Spirit, and to receive from the Spirit what
they hold, as those that are found. e.g. If one should come and preach
salvation by the works of the Law, or a man's own righteousuesse, and not by
the righteousness of Christ, or of faith in Christ, and say, The Spirit
persuades him hereunto; who can contradict him, if there be no Scriptures or
word of God written, to show him the mind of God to the contrary, but only
the secret and inward teaching of the Spirit? And so I might instance in many
other particulars.

4. Besides, what if you be deceived, (as nothing is more certain) and in stead
of the teachings of Gods Spirit, it be the teachings of your own deceitful and
corrupt heart, or the actings of that foul Spirit the Devil, that oftentimes
changes or transformes himself into an Angel of light, on purpose to deceive?
What then? Now how will you distinguish between the Dictates of the one and the
other, except by this, Hincotiam apparet impietas sententiae Libertinorum
nostri temporis qui se zelotas spiritus appellant. Quorum aliqui Scripturae
sacrae Gra^maticum and genuinum sensum zanquam literam occidentem ecclrs. Nov.
Test. inutilem contendunt, and nescio quae pbanatica sui cerebri somniasub
spiritus titulo bominibus conantur obtrudere. Haec senteneia falsa and
pernitiosa est, quia S. Script: neglecta nihil certi in religione Chri liana
constitui potest, quum nullum (...) aut norma extra eam dari possit, quae a
falsa persuasione, and erroris efficacia, quam Deus Evangelit contemptoribus
tanquam justus Iudex saepe immittit, divinam veritatem distinguat; and quia
spiritus sanctus non nist per verbam extermon and sacram Scripturam in cordibus
hominum ad salutem est efficax: nude and Paulus suitm ministerium, Ministerium
Spiritus appellat, 2 Cor. 3. Vide Synop. pur. Theolog. p. 11. de S. Script.
necess.
that the Spirit of God never dictates any thing but what is agreeable unto,
and may be resolved into the Scriptures, or t written word of God, but the
other not. e.g. When a man is persuaded that Christ is not God, as well as Man,
that there is no resurrection of the body, nor reward nor punishment after this
life, that sin and grace are both equally of God, etc. with a thousand such
like abominations; how shall a person discern that the persuasions he has of
these things, are not from the Spirit of God, but from Satan and his own
wicked heart, but this, because they are directly against what is revealed to
us in the Scripturesl, the Spirit of God never per swading any to such things
as he has himself spoken against in the Word written.

5. Moreover, to what purpose did the holy Ghost make use of those holy men of
God (as the Prophets and Apostles are styled) to be his Amanuenses, or Scribes
to write down and commit to paper, what the mind of the eternal God was,
which he would have made known to the children of men, concerning their faith
and obedience, if the Scriptures are of no more use to believers? Doubtless
the works of God are not in vain, he made the two great lights in Heaven, the
Sun and Moon, the one to rule the Day, and the other the Night; now would it
not be a weak, if nota wicked thing, for any to say, what need we any more the
use of the Sun or Moon, is not God himself sufficient? so here, is it not
as weak, if not as wicked a thing to soy? What need is there of the
Scriptures, when we have the Spirit himself to teach us?

Besides, does not the Apostle affirm in the first to Timothy, that the
Scriptures are exceeding useful and profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. And then to
the Romans. That whatsoever is written, is written for our instruction, that we
through patience and comfore of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4. And
does not Christ himself say, that one chief cause why men err from the truth,
is, because they are ignorant of the Scriptures? Matthew. 22.29. And does he not
also requite men to search the Scriptures upon this ground, because they
testify of him. Mark that well, They testify, not simply the Spirit, but the
Scriptures also, they bear witness to Christ's being the true and only
Messiah that should come into the world, with many other precious ends and
uses, to which the sacred Scriptures are useful and profitable, as were easy
to produce, if need were.

7. But lastly, to say no more, how does this open a door to all manner of
abominations both in opinion and practice: for if every man must be left to the
private teachings of the Spirit, and have no recourse at all any longer to the
sacred Canon of the Scriptures, what abominations will men and women stick to
admit of, and bear off all with this. The Spirit leads me hereunto, I am
taught by the Spirit, and persuaded by the Spirit: so that if a man should be
stirred up to lay violent hands upon his neighbor (as I have heard a drunkard
once did on one that was of this opinion, and basted him to some tune; and
being demanded by the party why he did so, he answered him (in his own
language) he could not help it, the Spirit moved him thereunto) and take away
his purse or his life from him; or a vile wretch should attempt the deflouring
of a virgin, or committing of any other abomination, and put all off with this,
that the Spirit dictates such things to him, and he is under no law but that of
the Spirit, would not this be dreadful both to God and Man: and so for any
damnable errors in judgment, that the Scriptures condemn to the pit of hell,
and warn us to take heed of, as we defire to escape damnation, does not this
opinion make way to the entertaining of them, when people shall be persuaded
there is no use of the Scriptures to be as a Rule to them to walk by, but they
are to trust only to the inward dictates of the Spirit.

Besides, if this should be allowed of, that the Scriptures are of no luse, but
we must, trust to the Spirit in all, what certainty then can there be in any
point of Religion and faith, for every one will believe as the Spint dictates
to him, and as many men, so there will be almost as many minds. Nay further,
what bottom will men and women have to build the foundnesse of their opinions
upon, and that it is not their mere fancy if they cast away the Scriptures,
seeing what they conceive to day to be the right, to morrow they may be
persuaded to be otherwise, if they trust to what is spoken and dictated
secretly to them: and where will your souls end, and fix a period in matters
of opinion, when they once begin to take this course of casting off the
Scriptures? Doubtless they cannot tell themselves, there being a fathomlesse
depth in the pit of error, out of which poor creatures can never extricate
themselves, being once shut up in it. Blessed are those souls, that are so
taught of God in the Ministry of his Word and Spirit, as to fear coming nigh
the brink of that pit.

THus (Sirs) I have dispatched the Answers to the forementioned grounds, what
remains in the close of all (leaving the success and issue of all to the
Lord Jesus) but that I add one word to persuade you, in the bowels of Christ,
to consider from whence you are fallen, and repent and do your first works,
Rev. 2.4. before the Lord Jesus be revealed from heaven against you. I cannot
but apprehend your condition as very sad, not only in respect of your sin, but
of your sorrow that is like to overtake you: For as sure as the Lord lives,
all those that refuse to kiss the Son, and will not have him to rule over
them, but do what in them lies to break his By bonds and cords is meant the
discipline and government of Christ in his Church and kingdom, as the words
(...) and (...) signify, Psalm. 2.3. Now the laws and ordinances of Christ, or
his discipliue and government, are called bonds and cords, not that they are so
in themselves, but because the wicked so judge of them, looking upon them as so
many fetters and manacles that keep them from the enjoyment of their lusts and
carnal liberty, which is the main cause of their enmity against them, and
rejecting of them.
bonds, and cast his cords from them, shall perish in the way of their
rebellion, Psalm. 2.12. and be brought forth and slain before him, Luke 19.27.
You cannot be ignorant how jealous the eternal. God is of the honor of his
Christ, and that he is now dealing with the great and mighty ones of the earth,
for their slighting of him, and rebellion against him: And why should you be
found in the number of them? you (I say) that have made profession of him, and
sworn fealty to him? If such shall have stripes that have not done their
Masters will, though they have been ignorant of it, what will become of those
then that have known it and yet have not done it, nay, wilfully neglected the
doing of it? O consider it betimes, for it is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God, Heb. 10.31. If those that despised Moses law died
without mercy, etc. of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall they be
thought worthy that trample under their feet the Son of God? etc. Can you
think that your profession of holiness, and pretense of living in God, can
bear you out while your practice is clean contrary, using your liberty as an
occasion to the flesh? O consider whether you be not within the number of those
which are prophesied shall come in these latter days of the world in which we
live.

1. Men that shall have a form of godliness, The prophecy of the Apostle Paul.
but denying the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5. that creep into houses, and lead
captive silly women, laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, verse 6.7.
resisters of the truth, as Jannes and Jambres, men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith, who shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be
made manifest unto all men, as theirs also was, v. 8, 9. 2. Men that deny the
Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2.1. The prophecy of the Apostle Peter.
that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, that despise
Government, presumptuous, selfe-willed, and who are not afraid to speak evil
of dignities, verse 10. that count it pleasure to riot in the day time, and
sport themselves with their own deceivings, v. 13. that have eyes full of
adultery, not being able to cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls, whose
hearts are exercised with covetous practices, verse. 14. that have forsaken the
right way, and are gone astray, following the ways of Baalam the son of
Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness, verse 15. that speak great
swelling words of vanity, and allure through the lusts of the flesh, through
much wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them that live in error,
v. 18. that promise them liberty, but in the mean while are themselves
servants of corruption, being overcome and brought into bondage, v. 19. 3. Men
that have a Spirit of Antichrist in them, The prophecy of the Apostle John.
that go out from the Affemblies, and communions of the Saints, 1 John 2. 18,
19. that deny that Jesus is the Christ, that deny the Father and the Son, v.
22, 23. that will not acknowledge J. Christ. to be come in the flesh, 1 John
4.3. that are of the world, that speak of the world, and the world hears
them, v. 5. that are not of God, and therefore will not hear those that are
sent of God, being led by the Spirit of error, v 6. 4. Men that turn the grace
of God into lasciviousness, The prophecy of the Apostle Jude.
Jude 4. that are filthy dreamers, defilers of the flesh, despisers of
dominion, and speak evil of dignities, verse. 8. that corrupt themselves as
bruit beasts in what they know naturally, v. 10. That go in the way of Cain,
and run greedily after the error of Baalam for reward, and perish in the
gainsaying of Core. v. 11. That are spots in feasts of charity, feeding without
fear, that are cloudt without water, carried about of winds, trees whose fruit
withers, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots, v. 12 That are
raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame, wandering stars, to
whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever, v. 13. with much more to
this purpose, in v. 15, 16, 18. concluding all with this, that they are such as
This place has formerly been much abused by the Prelates and their creatures,
and still is by those that have changed the Name, but not the Nature of them,
applying it to such as come out of Babylon, and from the mixtures and
corruptions of man in the worship of God, to serve the Lord after his own mind
and will, made known to them in the word, when the place is clean contrary to
be understood and applied.
separate themselves, viz. from the true ordinances, and from the comunion of
the godly in the use of them, as may be gathered from the following verses, 20,
21. being sensual, having not the Spirit, v. 19.
Now whether such as to this day (under a pretense of living in God, and
enjoying Gospel-liberty, do cast off the use of ordinances, deny Churches
ministry, etc. and walk after the flesh to the fulfilling of the lusts
thereof, as they were wont to do before they were first enlightened) be not
such as are before mentioned, I leave to any that are unprejudiced men to
consider.

Wherefore to draw to a conclusion of all, in regard that the will of Christ
is, that we should have compassion on some, making a difference, Jude 22.
thereby teaching us, that some may err out of infirmity, and others out of
wilfulness, and so are not to be dealt with in the same way and manner: I
therefore in the last place humbly desire in the greatest meekness, and bowels
of compassion, that such who have been carried away with this error of the
wicked (to renounce and cast off the use of ordinances, and performance of
duties which Jesus Christ has commanded to be performed) out of weakness and
infirmity, would be entreated timely to consider the evil of such a course and
practice, how much it derogates from the honor of Christ, and happiness of
their own souls, Dear souls for whom Christ died, and to whom Christ has
(possibly) many times made known the kindness of his heart, I beseech you
weigh the former Considerations without prejudice, and then tell me whether you
are not out of the way. Consider the answers to the several grounds, upon
which you build the leaving off the practice of duties and ordinances, and then
see whether you have not cause to sit down with Ephraim, and smite on the
thigh, and say every one to himself, What have I done? what an evil and
bitter thing is this, that I have cast off the ways and means in which I
formerly enjoyed such soule-satisfying, ravishing, melting communion with the
Lord Jesus, and the Father through him. Pray give me leave to demand seriously
of you, whether it was not far better with your souls, when you kept close
with God in the use of ordinances, and were strict in closet converses with
your beloved, whether sin were not more irksome, tedious, grievous, but then
some to your souls, then now it is? whether the Saints were not more amiable in
your eyes then now they are, and comunion with them in prayer etc. a little
corner of heaven in your apprehension? and the society of the wicked more
loathsome? whether you were not more tender in your consciences concerning the
commission of sin, and more afraid of dishonoring God, then now you be? whether
you were not more carried out and enlarged in doing of good, more spiritual in
your walking, talking, affecting, acting, then now you are, more humble in your
own eyes, and watchful over your own hearts, making conscience of all your
thoughts, words and ways; whereas now you think there is no necessity of such
strictness, though the holy Ghost tells us, that as he that has called us is
holy, so ought we to be holy, and that in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet.
1.15, 16.

Now I beseech you, dear souls consider, can that possibly be the way of
truth, the way to glory, that renders you worse then you have been, more
unholy, unspirituall, uncircumspect, unprofitable to Christ, then you were wont
to be? I beseech you deal plainly and impartially with your own souls; Don't
you begin to find a change in your selves, in respect of the former
particulars? and you can now dispense with the duties of your relations both
toward God and man, which formerly you could not in the least do. Now I pray
consider, can these things stand with a persons living in God? Can living in
God and living in sin stand together? Can the Ark and D^agon stand together? O
that ever Satan should thus beguile any of your precious souls. In my weak
apprehension, the higher a person lives in God, the more holy he is the more
like to God, the more crucified to sin and the world, the less desirous of
liberty to the flesh, the more studious of doing those things that are pleasing
and acceptable unto God, through Jesus Christ. And whereas many talk of their
liberty which they have above others, when they have cast off all duties and
ordinances to live in God: I would fain know whether that liberty be not a
lawless liberty, and whether the excellency of a Christian can possibly lie in
it, or wheter living in God can stand with such a liberty. If to live in God be
to take liberty to think, and speak, and do as we our selves list, and to be
without all check and control in our way, both of God and Man; then we may
cast away the Scriptures in deed, and all religion, and every one walk after
the imagination of his own heart. But, dear souls, be no longer led away with
such deceivings and deceivers, that promise you liberty, but in the mean time
are servants to corruption themselves, and are overcome and brought into
bondage, and seek to do the same by you. O hearken no longer to their
Syren-like Songs, but bow your ears to the voice of Jesus Christ, crying to
you, Return, return, repent, repent, and do your first works, for I am
married to you, I am loath the death of sinners; why will you wilfully cast
away your precious souls? Though you have dealt unkindly with me, and
forgotten those sweet embracings you formerly enjoyed from me, when you made
conscience of the duties of my service and worship, yet return, return, for I
am a God that delights to show mercy, and whom mercy pleases: though you
have in some measure denied my Name; and been ashamed to own it before the
Heathen, yet repent and do your first works, and I will take you and bring you
to my holy mountain, and you shall go no more out and I will write upon you
the Name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new
Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God; and I will write upon
you my new Name. Now the same blessed God, and our Savior, that spoke these
words, set home these things upon your hearts, and make them effectual for
that end for which they were written. Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of those (never enough to be abhorred opinions) that some of those
more especially that cast off and renounce the use of Gospel Ordinances, do
professedly hold and maintain.
FIrst, There Is no God nor Devil, Heaven nor Hell, but what is within us. 2
There is no truth nor power in the Word, but as it is made out so to my Spirit:
i. the Spirit speaks it so within me. 3 The sayings and wrtings of the
Prophets and Apostles in the Scriptures, and of other Saints, are of equal
value and truth, because by the same Spirit. 4 There are many silly, vain,
gross, and contrary things in the Scriptures; poor men they speak according
to the present temper of their Spirits. 5 There may be, and some are, above the
profiting power of the ministry of the Word, and use of the Scriptures. 6
There is no sin in the Saints, they are under no law but that of the Spirit,
which is freedom. 7 There is no sin against GOD, For we cannot reach him. 8
That Gods dealings with all, good and bad, are in love, for God is love. 9
There is no state after this life, but (at that which is called Death) all good
and bad are swallowed up of God. 10 That sin and grace are equally of God,
and agrees to his will. 11 That all persons and things, act and are acted as
God will have them. 12 That whatsoever men can that they do, and in all
according to Gods will. 13 That there is no resurrection of the body, nor
reward or punishment after this life. 14 That there may be as much of God seen
and enjoyed in any servile labor, as in the Ministry of the Word, Prayer,
etc. and that they have more. 15 As for that men call worship of God,
conscience, etc. they know not what it means. 16 That solemn Religious duties
in public or private, are but forms, bodily exercises, merely Legal. 17 That
men may as well work or play on the Lords day, as on any other; And as for them
(to whom God is departed out of Ordinances, and abundantly answers another way)
it is better. 18 That the soul is the breath of God. 19 That it is the Saints
privilege to be one Spirit, and therefore see no reason why there may not be
a community in all things. 20 That none can be certain whether he be in the
truth or error, but themselves; because depending upon the teaching of the
Spirit, yet they themselves soes not knowing what they shall hold for the
future. 21 That they cannot join in prayer with others, because of confession
of wants, sins, drawing near to GOD, and Petitions for the Lords presence,
giving out of help, etc. with which they cannot close, because denying the
first, and enjoying the latter. 22 That as for wantonness, licentiousness,
Libertinisme, and turning grace into wantonness, taking occasions from mercy
to sin, etc. they know not what you mean, they are not incident to Saints. 23
That they will, and think they ought to follow their light, though they are to
lose heaven and gain hell presently for it (if there be such things.) 24 That
such as are one in the Spirit of love, it is a great wrong for any to hinder
their union and communion in any thing. 25 That what men call Bastardy, is
only upon the account of the men of the world, who marry and are called
Bastards, Heb. 12. not with God, with whom Saints are as Angels in community,
Luke 20.34, 35, 36. 26 That they have already for Spirituals what they expect,
and lack nothing, and act Faith only for Corporal subsistence. 27 That what
the Saints (because of others baseness and wickedness do now in secret, they
shall do openly, Matthew. 20.26, 27. 28 That there is nothing fleshly or carnal
in the Saints persons or actings, but all spiritual and holy. 29 That there is
no Trinity of Persons in the Godhead. 30 That there is no distinction between
God ana Christ. 31 That all are born without sin, and Saints live without sin.
32 That a Saint may outlive all his religion, all ties upon his conscience,
and yet remain a Saint.
A true Copy of a Letter from Plymouth, February the 12. Relating the manner of
Gods working upon one that had cast off the use of Duties and Ordinances, sent
by an approved and known godly man that was an Eyewitness.
I Have only one thing to tell you, and it is a remarkable passage of Divine
Providence: There is one Nicholas Earl, a Shoemaker, sometimes of Totn^s, and
now a Soldier in the Fort, who having within this month given way to the
studying of estranging himself from God, conceiving that there was no need of
Ministers, but that they must down; Sacraments but Ceremonies, Sabbaths not to
be kept, and thereupon was resolved to open his windows the last Sabbath, and
to that end disputed and argued with some about it the Saturday, and then
charged his wife not to teach his children prayers, or Duties, or
Commandments; and my man George being present, saw him in his hot contestation
fall to the ground roaring and crying, and taking deep detestation against
those that bare the Image of God, commending himself only a Saint, and others
out of the way. He was against singing, insomuch that when the Soldiers in
their daily duties in the Fort sang, he spoke to them and said, they did lie
like Devils. The man that Saturday night was under deep temptations, strange
apparitions, the Devil seeming to appear to him, with strange roaring. The
Sabbath day he sent for me; and when I came, at first sight I was welcome, but
suddenly I was loathsome, and he spat in defiance of me. I saw him in that
temper and fit, I left him: But the monday about Noone the man came to
himself, has a strange conviction of his error; whereas before he left giving
of thanks, before and after the receiving of the creatures, now he is troubled
at the thoughts of it, acknowledging his error. I have had conference with him,
and he cannot be thankful enough that God has so soon returned him: He
desires the Ministers to bless God for his return, and pray that he may be
steadfast. This I write as certain, and that you may acquaint others to take
heed how professedly they keep out of Gods way: he wishes all his friends to
take warning by it.

M. P.


