OR THE TREASURY OF CHEMICAL MEDICAMENTS, BEING A CATALOGUE OF Medicines
carefully and exactly prepared BY JOHN CASIMIR, GERMAN CHEMIST and PHYSICIAN.

IN WHICH ALSO The most predominant and reigning Diseases and Distempers
afflicting Humane Nature in this Age, are briefly hinted at; together with
their Cure by appropriated and adapted Medicines, wherein the Author, (through
the Blessing of God upon his Endeavors) has been very Successful: and those
Remedies which by long Practice and Experience, he has found both safe and
effectual in restoring languishing and afflicted Nature, he has here published
for the good of all.

The following Chemical Medicaments and Preparations may be had at the Author's
House

In Grace Church Street, Nagshead-Court, at the Sign of the Three Golden Keys
near Lumbard-street, where any may be furnished with what Quantities they
please, especially those who make great Voyages, they being such as will keep
their Virtues throughout all Climes and parts of the Word, being proper for
Prevention as well as Cure.

London, Printed by John Bringhurst, for the Author, 1682.

TO ALL INGENIOUS WELL-WISHERS TO THE PRACTICK-PART OF PHYSIC.
AS the Diseases and Distempers incident to Humane Nature are many and
grievous, such is the favor of God granted unto us by the indulging hand of
his Providence, that he has largely contributed to its comfort herein, whereby
we are furnished with Means or Remedies, with his Blessing to remove the same.
And he has also decreed, bounteous Nature should not be wanting to us therein.
Wherefore what God has communicated unto us in this Science, either by
information from Himself, or by Experience in the Practick Part of Physic, I
hereby publish for the benefit of the Sick the following Medicaments, being
also prepared with that Care which Art and Nature do require.

Catalogus Medicamentorum Chymicorum. A Catalogue of Chemical Medicaments.
Aquae Medicinales. Medicinal Waters. AQua Oplithalmica EYe Water Aqua Reginae
Hungariae Queen of Hungaries Water Aqua Diaphoretica Sudorifick Water Aqua
Febrifuga Water against Agues Aqua Epidemica Surfeit Water Aqua Expulsiva
Expulsive Water Acetum Antimonii Vinegar of Antimony Gas Sulphuris Ens primum
Aqua Nephritica. Nephritick Water. Spiritus. Spirits. Spiritus Salis Spirit of
Salt Spiritus Vini Hispanici Spirit of Sack Spiritus Salis dulcis Spirit of
Salt dulcified Spiritus Nitri dulcis Spirit of Nitre dulcified Spiritus Salis
Armoniaci Spirit of Salt Armoniack Spiritus Vitrioli dulcis Spirit of Vitriol
dulcified Spiritus Cornu Cervi Spirit of Hartshorn Spiritus Balsamicus
Balsamic Spirit Spiritus Salviae Spirit of Sage Spiritus vini Tartarisatus
Spirit of Wine Tartarized Spiritus Cochleareae Spirit of Scurvy Grass Spiritus
Mellis Spirit of Honey Spiritus Glycyrhizae. Spirit of Licorish Spiritus
Compositi Drops. Spiritus Antepilepticus Epileptick Drops Spiritus
Antinephriticus Drops against the stone Spiritus Adjuvans Helping Drops
Spiritus Antiparilyticus Drops against the Palsy Laudanum Liquidum Helmon'ts
Drops Spiritus Cephalicus Drops to strengthen the Head Circulatum Medium Middle
Circulate Remedium Princepis. Princes Drops. Tincturae. Tinctures. Tinctura
Cordialis Cordial Tincture Tinctura Lilii Tincture of Lilly Tinctura Solis
Tincture of Gold Tinctura Digestiva Digestive Tincture Tinctura Corallorum
Tincture of Coralls Tinctura Anodyna Pain-stilling Tincture Tinctura Tartari
Tincture of Tartar Tinctura Regalis Royal Tincture Tinctura Antimonii Tincture
of Antimony Tinctura Aurata Golden Tincture Tinctura Succini Tincture of Amber
Tinctura Balsamica. Balsamic Tincture. Elixiaria. Elixirs. Elixir Cordiale
Cordial Elixir Elixir Proprietatis Elixir of Propriety Elixir Helmontii
volatile Elixir Volatile of Helmont Elixir Sulphuris Vitrioli Elixir of the
sulphur of vitriol Elixir Diaphoreticum Sweat-causing Elixir Elixir Cochleareae
Elixir of Scurvygrass Elixir Juniperinum Elixir of Juniper berries Elixir
Aurantiorum Elixir of Oranges Elixir Citriorum Elixir of Citrons Elixir
Subtilitatis Elixir of Subtlety Elixir Salutis Elixir of Health Elixir
Lavendulae Elixer of Lavender Elixir vitae Elixer of Life. Essentiae. Essences.
Essentia Olivarum Essence of Olives Essentia Cornu-cervi Essence of Hartshorn
Essentia Stomachica Stomach Essence Essentia Eboris Essence of Ivory Essentia
Mannae Essence of Manna Essentia Melissae Essence of Baume Essentia Menthae
Essence of Mint Essentia Majoranae Essence of Marjerom Essentia Thymi Essence
of Time Essentia Salviae Essence of Sage Essentia Chamaemeli Essence of
Chamomil Essentia Helenii Essence of Elicampane Essentia Croci Essence of
Saffron Essentia Mellis Essence of Honey. Species. Powders. Pulvis Bezoarticus
Bezoartick Powder Bezoardicum Minerale Mineral Bezoar Bezoardicum Metallicum
Metalline Bezoar Aurum vitae Gold of Life Antimonium Diaphoreticum Antimony
Causing-sweat Mercurius Diaphoreticus Mercury Causing-sweat Species Salutaris
Species Powder Pulvis Resolutivus Resolving Powder Pulvis Lithontripticus
Powder against the Stone Pulvis ad Dentes Powder to fasten and whiten Teeth Ens
Veneris Ens of Venus Pilulae. Pills. Pilulae Polychrestae Pills of great Use
Pilulae Regales Royal Pills Pilulae Lunares Lunar Pills Pilulae Amicae
Sweetning Pills Pilulae Speciei (salutaris) Species Pills Pilulae Cephalicae
Head Pills Pilulae Roborantes Strengthening Pills Pilulae Laudani Paracelsi
Pills of Laudanum Paracelsis Pilulae Antipodagricae Pills against the Gout
Pilulae Pectorales Pectorall Pills Pilulae Galliae Gallican Pills Pilulae
Francofortenses Francfort Pills Pilulae Starkii Matthews Pills Pilulae Delaunei
De Laun's Pills Pilulae Solaris Solar Pills Grana Angelica. Dr. Anderson's
Pills. Extracta. Extracts. Extractum Febrifugum Extract against Agues Extract.
Hydropicum Extract against Dropsies Extract. Animale Animal Extract Extract.
Vegetabile Vegetable Extract Extract. Orvietanum Extract of Orvietan Extract.
Specificum Specific Extract Extract. Catholicum. Universal Extract. Olea.
Oils. Oleum Succini Oil of Amber Oleum Mastichis Oil of Mastick Oleum Cerae Oil
of Wax Oleum Thuris Oil of Frankincense Oleum Caryophyllorum Oil of Cloves
Oleum Camphorae Oil of Camphire Oleum Absinthii Oil of Wormwood Oleum Anisi Oil
of Anis-seeds Oleum Spicae Nardi Oil of Spikenard Oleum Butleri Butler's Oil
Oleum Sulphuris per Camp. Oil of Sulphur Oleum Vitrioli. Oil of Vitriol. Salia.
Salts. Sal Tartari Salt of Tartar Sal Sennerti Salt of Sennertus Sal Martis
Salt of Mars Sal Saturni Salt of Saturn Sal Antimonii Salt of Antimony Sal
Succini Salt of Amber Sal volatile Oleosum Sylvii Sylvius his Salt Sal seu
Lapis salutis. Salt of Health. Tabellae. Loz^^ges. Tabellae Cordiales Cordial
Lozenges Tabellae Pectorales Pectoral Lozenges Tabellae Aperitivae. Cleansing
and opening Lozenges. Balsami. Balsoms. Balsamus Sulphuris anisatus Balsom of
Sulphur-anisate Balsamus Sulphuris communis Balsom of common Sulphur Balsamus
Sulphuris Vitrioli Balsom of Sulphur of Vitriol Balsamus Sulphuris Antimonii
Balsom of Sulphur of Antimony Balsamus Succini Balsom of Amber Balsamus
Animalis Animal Balsom Balsamum Rubrum. Lucatellus Balsom. Ungenta. Ointments.
Ungentum Martis Ointment of Mars Unguentum Flavum Yellow Ointment Unguentum
Coeruleum Blew Ointment Unguentum Primum First Ointment Unguentum Secundum
Second Oyutment Linimentum Vitrioli Liniment of Vitriol Unguent. Diaphreticum
Diaphretick Ointment. Emplastra. Plasters. Emplastrum Aureum Golden or Stitch
Plaster Empl. Magneticum Magnetic Plaster Empl. Bezoarticum Bezoartick
Plaster Empl. Rubrum Red Plaster Empl. Nigrum Black Plaster Empl. Tertium
Third Plaster Empl. Febrifugum Ague Plaster Empl. Wurtzium. Felix Wurtz's
Plaster. Aurum Potabile. Potable Gold.

This Choice and Noble Preparation is added here as a Seal to all the rest as
being a great help for renewing and restoring of Languishing Nature.

AS the preceding Catalogue informs of some sublime, and other the most useful
Chemical Preparations; be pleased to receive this further information
concerning some eminent and particular Cures, whereby the Distempers following
may be deprived of that advantage they otherwise might arrive at.

I. Of the Scurvy.
The Eminently Afflicting Distemper of this Land radically considered, the
Learned acquiesce herein, that it is an ill habit of the body, or a
disproportion of Humors, commonly called the Scarvy, whose hostile quality
assaults nothing less than the purest part of the blood, whence a putrefaction
thereof ensues, and consequently an Abridgement of Life, even in Infancy, if a
timely Remedy be not found. Wherefore in any Sex or Age or at any season of the
Year, in England, Holland, or America, let our Anti-scorbutick Medicines be
known, and esteemed as true Specificks, which with much ease preserve from, and
Cure the Scurvy.

The Symptoms of the Scurvy in the Phlegmatic and Melancholic are
Ill digestion of food, extreme cold and dullness of head, shortness and
difficulty of breathing, weakness in the back, pain in the Limbs, more
especially in the knees and joints of the Arms, swelling in the Legs and
Stomach, botches and breakings forth of the Body, with a heaviness of the
whole, and great aptness to sleep.

For Cure of these, Use
Spiritus Cochleareae Spirit of Scurvygrass Pilulae Regales Royal Pills
Essentia Stomachica Stomach Essence Pill. Polychrest. Pills of great Use.

Symptoms of the Scurvy in the Sanguin and Choleric.
Great Drought, and inveterate Headache, pains in the sides, inflammations,
especially in the Legs and Face, dizziness in the Head, and great unaptness to
sleep, also impostumes, and risings in several parts of the body, which are
Cured with

Elixir Cochleareae Elixir of Scurvygrass Pilulae Regales Royal Pills Spiritus
Adjuvans. Helping Drops.

Descending to particulars we begin with the Head, and Medicines conducing to
the Cure thereof.

II. Diseases of the Head.
The Head is a noble yet tender part of the Body, and is often weakened by
Distempers incident thereunto, which are sufficiently known to the Patient, by
the pain and stupidity they expose him to, and to us by Symptoms, Names or
Terms appropriate, as Impostumes, Convulsions, Apoplexies, Vertigo, Megrim,
Lethargy, Falling Sickness, Palsy, etc. In order to the Curing whereof we have
successfully used and do recommend

Elixir Sulphuris Vitrioli Elixir with the Sulphur Vitriol Pilulae Polychrest.
Pills of great Use Spiritus Cephalicus Drops to strengthen the Head Aqua
Ophthalmica Eye Water Pilulae Francofortenses. Francfort Pills.

III. Diseases afflicting the Neck and Throat.
Some are afflicted with Inflammations, whence arise Cancers and Ulcers, others
have hard tumors and swellings, called Scrophulae, or the King's Evil, which fix
themselves there as much as in any part of the Body, and as much as most
Enemies to Health.

For the Cure of which we recommend such Medicinal Preparations as the nature
of the grief requires wholly to extinguish both the Diseases and its Symptoms,
as are

Piluae Polychrestae Pills of great Use Pilulae Caeruleae Blew Pills Pulvis
Resolutivus Resolving Powder Tinctura digestiva Digestive Tincture Elixir
Cochleareae Elixir of Scurvy Grass Linimentum Vitrioli. Liniment of Vitriol.

IV. For the Stomach.
A weak or foul Stomach if the humors annoying it be not evacuated or
corrected, it not only is disabled to convert food into good nourishment, but
on the contrary corrupts what should nourish, and turns it into an unprofitable
mass, whereby the Body suffers, and many distempers follow, which may be
prevented or remedied by the Use of such Medicines as are particularly adapted
to remove the evil, and settle or establish the good order thereof, viz.

Pilulae Species (Salutaris) Species Pills Pills Polychrest. Pills of great Use
Essentia Stomachica Stomach Essence Aqua Diaphoretica Sudorifick Water Acetum
Antimonii Vinegar of Antimony Gas Sulphuris. Ens Primum.

V. For the Breast and Lungs.
The distempers and afflictions of which are inveterate Coughs, Catarrhs,
Astmahs, Consumptions, caused by a flux of Humors or rheumatick distillations
on the Lungs; attended with shortness of breath, want of appetite, and many
other infirmities, which so impaireth the Body, that no part thereof enjoys
the function, nature has ordained it for: to cure which we commend such
Medicines as are truly renovating and effectually restoring the Patients with
ease, viz.

Balsam. Sulph. Communis Balsom of Sulphur, common Extractum Sulphuris Extract
of Sulphur Pilulae pectorales Pectoral Pills Spiritus Adjuvans Helping Drops
Acetum Antimonii Vinegar of Antimony Gas Sulphuris Ens primum Remedium
Principis. Princes Drops.

VI. For the Heart.
The profoundest Students in Nature, and Spagyrical Science in all Ages,
esteemed it their duty to regard the Heart as the seat of Life, nor would I
appear to have any other than a venerable esteem of this Aphorism, and to
tender both the Fabric and Life of Man, as the workmanship and delight of the
great Creator. In order whereunto as it has pleased him to place me, where I
might be serviceable to them, so have I made it my study to be faithful herein,
and by the same hand have been conveyed unto me such select cordial Medicines,
as are necessary to fortify the Heart, and to withstand or overcome the
afflicting pains of it; such as are

Tinctura Lilii Ticture of Lilly Elixir Vitae Elixir of Life Essentia Croci
Essence of Saffron Spiritus adjuvans Helping Spirit Tinctura Solis Tincture of
Gold Aurum Potabile. Potable God.

VII. Obstructions of the Liver and weakness of the Spleen.
The Liver being the fountain or spring of the little Rivers or Veins of the
Microcosme, if this be obstructed or hindered in its office, the other parts of
the body languish and complain thereof, whence dangerous diseases are
threatened. The Spleen also when it is beset and overcharged with ill juyces
commonly called humors, it is afflicted and stirs up the passion thereof,
afflicts the vitals, oppresses the Spirits, and fiills the Body with vapors
and melancholy fits, and annoys the head with dizziness and other afflictions,
which are so many, that for brevity sake we omit them: however we have
Medicines if not Arcanums, that powerfully tend to reconcile the discord in
Nature, which arises on that account, viz.

Pilulae Lunares Lunar Pills Pilulae Polychrest. Pills of great Use Pilulae
Regales Royal Pills Elixer Cochleareae Elixir of Scurvy Grass Tinctura Tartari
Tincture of Tartar Tinctura Aurata Golden Tincture Sal Martis. Salt of Mars.

VIII. For the Bowels and Belly.
These parts of the Body are also often afflicted, as with Gripings,
Excoriations, Bloody Flux, Colic, Iliack-passion, and other violent paint, for
which there are special Remedies found to restore them (with Gods Blessing) to
their natural and ordained ease, viz.

Bezoardicum Metallicum Metalline Bezoar Species Salutaris Species Powder
Elixir Salutis Elixir of Health Elixir Juniperinum Elixir of Juniper Berries
Aurum Potabile Potable Gold Pilulae Regalis Pills Royal.

IX. For the Stone, Gravel of the Kidneys and Stoppage of Urine, also weakness
of the Back.
The Stone and Gravel by their extremity of pain, have exposed many Patients to
great Travail and Expense to seek a Remedy, and when they fall into the hand of
such as attempt the Cure by way of cutting, it often misseth its desired end,
to the Patients grief, and sadning of their Friends. But the Medicines we give
are not only safe, but effectual in dissolving or wasting gradually the hardened
matter, to the Comfort of the Patient, as may be experienced in the following
Medicines.

Spiritus Nitri dulcis Spirit of Nitre dulcified Pulvis Lithontripticus Stone
Powder Elixir Salutis Elixir of Health Sal Succini Salt of Amber Aqua
Nephritica. Nephritick Water.

X. For the Gout and Sciatica.
The Gout is attended with pains so violent, that those that feel them think it
impossible to express the sense thereof, to speak nothing of the long
continuance of the same with some, which at last ushers them to the Shades, yet
for this rooted grief is also a Balm afforded, viz.

Tinctura Digestiva Digestive Tincture Aqua Diaphoretica Sudorifick Water
Pilulae Antipodagricae Gout Pills Pil. Polychrest. Pills of great Use Bals.
Animalis Animal Balsom Ol. Butleri. Butler 's Oil.

XI. Surfeits.
Surfeits either of heat or cold, eating or drinking any thing noxious to the
Stomach, are incident to most Complexions and Ages, which often bring the
strongest to that weakness, which terminates in the Grave. In this cause,
without any offense to any, we are furnished with such Remedies as do recover
with pleasure and ease. viz.

Elixir Vitae Elixir of Life Pil. Polychrest. Pills of great Use. Pilulae
Regales Pills Royal Essentia Stomachica Stomach Essence Species Salutaris.
Species Powder.

XII. Impostumes and Pleurisies.
Impostumes proceed from an indisposition of the blood, and thereby become
Chronical, or from accident and then they are acute, as in the Pleuresie, which
often assaults the Life with such violence, as puts the Patient in danger of a
speedy death, to prevent which we recommend

Spiritus Adjuvans Helping Drops Pilulae Regales Royal Pills Pil. Polychrest.
Pills of great Use Unguentum Diaphoreticum Diaphoretick Ointment Emplastrum
Aureum Golden or Stitch Plaster. Specif. Digestiv. cum Aq. Regin. Hung.
Tinctura Digestiva Digestive Tincture Aqua Regin. Hungariae. Queen of Hungaries
water.

XIII. Fevers and Small Pox.
Fevers are no less than a passion of the blood, which has often boldly
challenged the Physician, by afflicting his Patient, to allay the fury and rage
thereof. In this case we advise the region of the Stomach to be anointed with
our Diaphoretick Balsom, then take

Spirit. Adjuvans Helping Drops Pulvis Bezoardicus Bezoartick Powder Circulatum
Medium. Middle Circulate.

XIV. Smallpox.
When the Small Pox are attended with a kind of Malignant Fever, be the
Patient young or old use the Diaphoretick Balsom to the Stomach, as also to the
Reins of the Back, and the side too, in case there be any pain there, which
will soon procure ease and bring out the Small Pox, which being out, and any
one of the following Medicines being administered, the Sick will find the
benefit, and the Observer satisfied.

Pil. Polychrest. Pills of great Use Spiritus Adjuvans Helping Drops Tinctura
Solis Tincture of Gold Aurum Potabile. Potable Gold.

XV. Tertian or quartan Agues.
The Cause of Agues is in Man, it being a Creation of his own, a Chaos, made up
of passion and fear, by which a matter is contracted, into which a particular
spirit enters, of a violent nature, by the continuance of which other diseases
are contracted according to the habit of the body, which daily grows weaker,
because of the continual assaults of Life, which at last unwillingly yields to
leave its habitation: to prevent which the vital spirit is to be assisted, and
the accidents removed by such experienced Medicines, to a perfection of the
Cure, which has been often performed in old and young, both Summer and Winter:
such are

Pil. Lunares Lunar Pilln Pil. Polychrestae Pills of great use Aq. Febrifuga
Water against Agues Bezoard. Minerale Mineral Bezoar Pil. Regales Royal Pills
Emplast. Febrifugum Ague Plaster Elixir Diaphoreticum. Sweat-causing Elixir.

XVI. Weakness of the Back.
By reason of relaxation or fluxes, and other griefs, is the back often
weakened, and weakness in that part of the Body is an inlet to many distempers,
to prevent and restore which, we direct Medicines proper and effectual for the
curing thereof, provided the Patient take first for three or four days after
another of Antiscorbutick Pills, and then

Pilulae Roborantes Strengthening Pills Pilulae Polychrest. Pills of great use
Extract. Specificum. Specific Extract.

XVII. For the Dropsy.
The Dropsy is a Distemper known to reduce the esteemed and worthy Structure
of Human Nature into an unprofitable Mass, favoring neither the corpulent nor
the slender. But our design here being chiefly to give a Catalogue of Medicines
prepared, and not so much a Treatise of the Cause of Diseases, our omission
thereof will be excusable. Yet this we say, whilst the Liver is obstructed, the
Reins defective, the Kidneys wasting, and weakness predominant, the event
inevitably follows. But the means ordained for the Cure being carefully
prepared, has not returned without the desired Success, being in time
carefully administered, such Medicaments are

Pilulae Lunares Lunar Pills Tinct. Cordialis Cordial Tincture Elixir Vitae
Elixir of Life Elixir Salutis Elixir of Health Pilulae Polychrest. Pills of
great Use Extract. Hydrop. Extract against Dropsies Aurum Potabile. Potable
Gold.

XVIII. For the Palsy.
The Palsy afflicts not only the Head, but takes also possession of other
parts, to the debilitating and making useless, part of, if not the whole Body,
if seasonable administrations of restorative, vivifying and strengthening
Medicines be not procured, for the preventing and speedy Cure of which, we
recommend these following Medicines, by which many with the blessing of God
have been restored to the activity and use of their Limbs.

Pilulae Lunares Lunar Pills Pilulae Regales Royal Pills Pilulae Polychrest.
Pills of great Use Elixir Lavendulae Elixir of Lavender Spiritus Adjuvans
Helping Drops Aurum Potabile. Potable Gold.

XIX. Ruptures and Broken-Bellies.
This infirmity often happens to many, either by violent exercise, as hard
riding, sudden lifting or overstreaching of the body, or from indispositions,
as ventrosities and extreme cold, when the body is reduced to impotency by
continued and weakening afflictions. Those that are bowed down and labor under
the deviding violenqu thereof, are most sensible of the misery they endure.
Would to God they might be sensible of his Mercies herein, that puts me, as
experienced in the effectual curing hereof, to publish the same for the content
and satisfaction of many. And please to be informed, that to avoid prolixity,
we delight not in the tedious commendations either of these or any other
Medicinal Preparations: yet I doubt not that those who shall have occasion to
use them, may find the benefit thereof, in a far higher degree of Service, than
I commend them.

Pilulae Regales Royal Pills Pilulae Roborantes Strengthening Pills Spirit.
Adjuvans Helping Drops Unguent. Primum First Ointment Unguent. Socundum Second
Ointment Emplastrum Tertium. Third Plaster.

XX. Fistula's and stubborn Ulcers.
Fistula's when once settled have always been difficult to remove, the humors
which cause it being so corroding and fretting, that it forces a current where
Nature never intended it, and that often near the Eye, a place for its
tenderness very remarkable, as well as in other parts of the body, for which we
are stored with excellent Balm and Specific Remedies appropriated to the
several members, wheresoever they happen to fix themselves, as

Aqua Diaphoretica Sudorifick Water Pilulae Ceruleae Blew Pills Pilulae Regales
Royal Pills Extract. Animale Animal Extract Extract. Vegetabile Vegetable
Extract Pilulae Polychrestae Pills of great Use.

XXI. Leprosy and Tetters.
No doubt but those who are troubled with this Evil, would be glad to be clear
of it, for nature allows as little of deformity as pain: neither can these
diseases be said to be without pain, for they are numbered among the Enemies of
Life. However effectual Remedies are here prescribed for the rooting of them
out, as also for preserving the inward parts from being hurt thereby, and
consequently from the danger that would ensue: for the Cure of these make use of

Aqua Diaphoretica Sudorifick Water Pilulae Ceruleae Blew Pills Extract.
Animale Animal Extract Tinctura Digestiva Digestive Tincture Unguent. Flavum.
Yellow Ointment.

XXII. Sore Breasts and Cancers.
The Breasts and Paps are known to be very tender parts, and subject to many
griefs, which some have found mortal, others given over as incurable,
especially in Cancers. To be silent in what God has discovered to us herein,
were to obscure a Blessing many might desire, and in a modest sense have right
to enjoy. Is there not a Balm ordained for the afflictions of any part of the
Body? Except we prove ungrateful to God and unjust to our selves, we cannot
plead ignorance, as to the order and manner to the aforesaid griefs, in any
part of the Body, whilst they are yet growing, for several have found the
certainty of it to their comfort and our Satisfaction, the Medicines are

Pilulae Polychrest. Pills of great Use Extract. Animale Animal Extract Mercur.
Diaphoreticus Mercury causing Sweat Elixir Cochleareae Elixir of Scurvy Grass
Ens Veneris Ens of Venus Oleum Butleri Butler 's Oil Pilulae Gallicae. Gallican
Pills.

XXIII. Barrenness.
Barrenness may not justly be attributed to Nature, for Nature was ordained to
bear and bring forth, and therefore rarely nourishes any thing that opposes
her course herein: nevertheless accidents often prevail against Nature, whence
obstructions proceed, and unnatural consequences do follow. But having by Gods
permission contemplated the state of things that are, I took Liberty to write
of this Subject, seeing that many in a married state, who might have expected
to bear Children, have proved Barren; and know this to be a certain Truth, that
unnatural defects and obstructions may by a Divine Blessing on Physical Means
be effectually removed, and Nature restored to enjoy its decreed and ultimate
end or honor. Whence know that our consideration and studies herein for
Medicines, have plentifully furnished us to the certain content and
satisfaction of many. Which follow:

Elixir Cordiale Cordial Elixir Pilulae Polychrest. Pills of great Use Tinct.
Corallorum Tincture of Coralls Tinct. Solis Tincture of Gold Aurum Potabile.
Potable Gold.

XXIV. Of Children and Rickets.
The Tenderness of the Ancients toward Children in the time of breeding their
Teeth, extended to careful search of such means as might contribute to their
Ease and Relief in the Extremity and Violence thereof, the Knowledge of which
we Promote and Esteem, having found profitable,

Manila Necklaces Pilulae Polychrest. Pills of great Use Tinct. Antimonii
Tincture of Antimony Aurum Potabile Potable Gold Extractum Catholicum Universal
Extract Remedium Principis. Princes Drops.

Besides the fore-recited Maladies, there is one more which those that are
afflicted with, never desire to possess one year, much less to Entail it on
their Posterity; the malignity whereof infects the Bones that flourish with
Marrow, and the Breasts that flow with Milk, fills the Body with Wounds,
unnatural Sores and Putrefactions, but before it arrive to such an exalted
degree of danger, it is attended with Syptoms of less Note, sufficiently known
not to be repeated here.

The Cure whereof in that regular way as Nature requires, we most approve and
esteem of, which is carefully practiced by us, whereby to rectify the great
indisposition of the Body, and to recover the corrupted mass of the blood to
health, in order to which make use of

Aqua Diaphoretica Sudorifick Water Pilulae Gallicae Gallican Pills Aq.
Expulsiva Expulsive Water Pilulae Polychrest. Pills of great Use Merc.
Diaphoreticus. Mercury causing sweat.

The Conclusion.
Other Diseases, Sicknesses and Infirmities not mentioned here were omitted for
Convenience sake, and not of neglect, or for want of a due consideration of the
Cause and Cure thereof: but we would esteem the Opinion of the Ancients in this
matter, whose Labor and Care was undoubtedly great, both to preserve and
recover health, as their large Volumes extant witness for them; as also to
honor this Worthy, Princely and Ancient if not Sacred Science, and would not
so much as have the terms thereof prostituted to every uncultivated mind, but
with Gravity, commended and admired as the necessary means to enjoy Health,
during the time of our Pilgrimage, or sojourning here: whereby, if the Divine
Power permit, we may arrive to a full Age, which was in days past accounted a
great Blessing.

The Fear of the Lord prolongeth Life; for of the Most High comes Healing.

