A PETITION OF W. C.

EXHIBITED TO THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMEN^ now assembled, for the propagating
of the Gospel in America, and the West Indies; and for the settling of our
Plantations there; which Petition is approved by 70 able English Divines. Also
by Master Alexander Henderson, and some other worthy Ministers of Scotland.

Printed in the year, 1641.

TO THE MOST HIHG AND HONORABLE Court of PARLIAMENT now assembled: The humble
PETITION of Wlliam Castle, Parson of Courtenhall in Northamptonshire, for the
propagating of the Gospel in America.
IN all humble manner shows unto your approved wisdoms, the great and
general neglect of this Kingdom, in not propagating the glorious Gospel in
America, a maine part of the world: Indeed the undertaking of the work is (in
the general) acknowledged pious and charitable; but the small prosecution that
has hitherto been made of it, either by us, or others, having (as yet) never
been generally undertaken in pity to men's souls, but in hope to possess the
land of those Infidels, or of gain by Commerce, may well make this and all
other Christian Kingdoms confess, they have been exceeding remiss in
performing this so religious, so great, so necessary a work.

May it therefore please your wisdoms to give your Petitioner leave to
propose briefly, (as the nature of a Petition requires the more then ordinary
piety, and charity of the work; the evident necessity, and benefit of
undertaking, together with the easiness of effecting.

A greater expression of piety (your Petitioner conceives) there cannot be,
then to make God known where he was never spoken nor thought of, to advance the
Scepter of Christ's Kingdom. And now again to reduce those, who (at first)
were created after the Image of God from the manifest worship of devils. To
acknowledge and adore the blessed Trinity in Unity, to do this, is to be
happy Instruments of effecting those often repeated promises of God, in making
all nations blessed by the coming of Christ, and by sending his word to all
lands: It is to enlarge greatly the pale of the Church. And to make those (who
were the most detestable Synagogues of Satan) delightful Temples of the Holy
Ghost.

It was a high point of piety in the Queen of the South, to come from the
utmost parts of the world to hear the wisdom of Solomon. And so it was in
Abraham, to leave his native country for the better, and more free service of
his God.

And certainly it will be esteemed no less in those, who (either in their
persons or purses) shall religiously endeavor to make millions of those silly
seduced Americans, to hear, understand and practice the mystery of godliness.

And as is the piety, such is the charity of the work, exceeding great, to no
less then the immortal souls of innumerable men, who still sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, continually assaulted and devoured by
the Dragon, whose greatest delight is to bring others with himselfeinto the
same irrecoverable gulf of perdition, what those blind and spiritual
distressed Americans are, we were, and so had continued had not Apostolical
men afforded greater charity unto us, Divisis orb Britannis, by long
Iourneying, and not without great hazard of their lives, then (as yet) has
been showed by us unto them.

We are not indeed endued with such eminent extraordinary gifts, as were the
Primitive Christians; but yet (if it be duly considered) how fully and how
purely God has imparted his Gospel unto this Island, how miraculously, he has
lately protected us from Spanish Invafions, and Popish conspiracies; and how
(at this time) we abound in shipping, and all manner of provision for Sea: It
will be found, that we (of all nations) are most for the work, and most
engaged to do it in due thankfulness to God.

Nor is the Arm of the Lord shortened, or his wonted bounty so restrained, but
that undertaking the voyage principally for Gods glory, and in compassion to
men's souls, we may expect a more then an ordinary blessing from him, whose
usual custom is to honor those that honor him, and most abundantly even in
this life, to recompense such religious undertakings.

The Spaniard boasts much of what he has already done in this kind, but
their own Authors report their unchristian behavior, especially their
monstrous cruelties to be such, as they caused the Infidels to detest the name
of Christ. Your wisdoms may judge of the Lion by his claw. In one of their
Islands called Hispaniola of 200000 of men, as Benzo (in his Italian History)
affirms, they had not left 150 souls. And Lipsius justly complayneth, that
wheresoever they came, they cut down men as they did corn without any
compassion. And as for those that survived, they bought their lives at dear
rates: for they put them to bear, their carriages from place to place; and if
they failed by the way, they either miserably dismembered, or killed them
outright. They lodged them like brute beasts under the planks of their ships,
till their flesh rotted from their backs: And if any failed in the full
performance of his daily task, he was sure to be whipped till his body
distilled with goar blood, and then poured they in either molten pitch or
scalding oil to supple him.

A very strange, and unlikely way to work Infidels unto the faith, neither yet
could they (if they would) impart unto others the Gospel in the truth and
purity thereof, who have it not themselves, but very corruptly, accompanied
with many idle, absurd, idolatrous Inventions of their own, which are but as
so many superstructures wickedly oppressing, if not utterly subverting the very
foundations of Christianity.

And although some of the reformed religion, English, Scotch, French, and
Dutch, have already taken up their habitations in those parts, yet has their
going thither (as yet) been to small purpose, for the converting of those
nations, either for that they have placed themselves but in the skirts of
America, where there are but few natives (as those of new England, or else for
want of able and conscionable Ministers (as in Virginia) they themselves are
become exceeding rude, more likely to turn Heathen, then to turn others to
the Christian faith.

Besides, there is a little or no hope our Plantations there should be of any
long continuance, since here in England for some years last past, they have
been rather diversely hindered, then any ways furthered, how, and by whom, your
wisdoms, either have or will shortly find out, but this is evident that the
proud superstitious Spaniard (who hates their religion, and fears their
neighbors, will spare them no longer then (to his over-swelling greatness)
shall seem good: And in the judgment of most judicious Travelers that way,
they may (if they will) easily enough suppress and destroy all other our
Plantations, as they did of late, that of Saint Christophers, when they were no
way provoked by us, as they will now pretend they are, by a latter taking of
Trinidado, and the loss of more then 150. of their men there. At least they
will be sure to be desperately assaulted, as was the I Will of Providence, but
the year last past.

Whence your Petitioner offers unto your Honorable considerations a third
Argument (drawn from mere necessity) that as you tender the happy proceeding
of those (as yet) but weakly settled Plantations. the liberties, livelihood,
and lives of many thousands our dear brethren, and country men: And which is
yet, more the prosperous progress of the gospel, you would be pleased to
consult of such an able and speedy supply, as may secure them against the now
expected cruelty of the Spaniard.

To which needful supply the better and sooner to induce your wisdoms, your
Petitioner desires your yet a little further patience, until he has showed
some temporal benefits that are thereby like to acrew unto this Kingdom,
together with the easiness of effecting.

When a Kingdom begins to be over-burthened with a multitude of people (as
England and Scotland now do) to have a convenient place where to send forth
Coloniesis no small benefit: And such are the North-east and North-west parts of
America, between the degrees of 25. and 45. of the North latitude, which, at
this time do even offer themselves unto us, to be protected by us, against
the known cruelty of the over-neare approaching Spaniard.

A very large tract of ground containing spacious, healthful, pleasant, and
fruitful countries, not only apt, but already provided of all things necessary
for man's sustentation, Corn, Grass, and wholesome cattle in good competencie;
but Fish, Foul, Fruits and Herbs in abundant variety.

If we should look no further, then the South of Virginia, (which is our
own) we shall find there all manner of provision for life, besides
Merchantable Commodities, Silk, Vines, Cotton, Tobacco, Deer-skins, Goatskins,
rich Furre, and Beavers good store, Timber, Brass, Iron, Pitch, Tar, Rosin
and almost all things necessary for shipping, which if they shall be employed
that way; they who are sent away may (with Gods blessing) within short time in
due recompense of their setting forth, return this Kingdom store of silver
and gold, pearls and precious stones; for undoubtedly (if there be not a
general mistake in all Authors, who have written of these places) such
treasure is to be had, if not there, yet in places not far remote, where (as
yet) the Spaniard has nothing to do. And in case the Spaniard will be
troublesome to our Plantations, or shall (as it is generally conceived) be
found an Enemy to this Kingdom, there is no way more likely to secure England,
then by having a strong Navy there; hereby we may come to share, if not
utterly to defeat him of that vaste Indian Treasure, wherewith he sets on
fire so great a part of the Christian World, corrupts many Counselors of
state, supporteth the Papacy, and generally perplexeth all reformed Churches.

Nor need any scrupulous quere be made, whether we may not assault an enemy
in any place, or not esteem them such as shall assault us in those places,
where we have as much to do as they. The Spaniard claims indeed an
Interest, little less then hereditarie in almost all America, and the West
Indies, but it is but by virtue of the Popes grant, which is nothing worth, as
was long since determined by Queen Elizabeth, and her Council; so as for the
Spaniard to debar us in the liberty of our Plantations, or freedom of
commerce in those spacious countries, were over proudly to take upon him; and
for us to permit it were overmuch to yield of our own right.

Especially, when we may, as now we may, so easily help our selves: For your
Petitioner conceives there is no great difficulty in the preparation here, or
tediousness in the passage thither, or hazard when we come there. The
preparation of men and shipping, in respect of the daily happy expected accord
between us and the Scots, is (upon the matter) already made; and as for money
it is in the power of this Honorable House to give sufficient, without any
grievance, or dislike of the Commonwealth, who (undoubtedly) in the general
will think nothing grievous, which shall be concluded by your wisdoms,
expedient to such a pious and charitable work.

And as for the passage, how can it be thought either tedious or dangerous. it
being ordinarily but six weeks sail, in a sea much more secure from Pirates,
and much more free from shipwreck, and enemies coasts, then our ten or twelve
months voyage into the East Indies. And as for our good success there, we
need not fear it. The natives being now every where more then ever, out of an
inveterate hatred to the Spaniard, ready and glad to entertain us. Our best
friends the Netherlanders being with eight and twenty ships gone before to
assist and further us. And which is much more, our going with a general
consent in Gods cause, for the promoting of the Gospel, and enlarging of his
Church, may assure us of a more then ordinary protection and direction. That
hitherto we have been less successful in our voyage that way, we may
justy impute it to this, that as yet they have not been undertaken with such a
general consent, and with such a full reference to Gods glory as was requisite.

And so your Petitioner having delivered his apprehension herein more briefly,
then so weighty a matter might well require, he submits all the premises to
your more full deliberation and conclusion, which he humbly prays, may be
with all convenient speed; the only best way under God to make it the better
successful.

We whose names are here underwritten, having been upon occasion acquainted
with a motion intended to be made by Master William Castle, Parson of
Courtenhall in the county of Northampton, to the High and honorable Court of
Parliament now assembled, concerning the propagation of the glorious Gospel of
Christ in America. As we do well approve of the motion; so we do humbly
desire his reasons may be duly considered: And so good a work furthered their
wiser judgments may resolve upon, to which we humbly submit the same.

John Moseley. D. D Ra: Brownricke. D. D Thomas Bambrig. D. D Robert Sanderson.
D. D Richard Alleyne. D. D Daniel Featly. D. D Mathias Styles. D D Edmond
Stanton. D. D Stephen Denison. D. D Edw. Williamot. D. D Jonathan Brown. D. D
Jasper Fisher. D. D Hanniball Potter. D. D Anthony Clapton. D. D Thomas
Drayton. D. D John Grant. D. D
Ministers of LONDON.
George Walker. James Palmer. Edward Marbury. Joseph Caryll. Edmond Calamy.
Adoniram Byfield. William Price. Richard Maden. James Batty. Math: Griffeth.
Ephraim Paget. Robert Pory. William Ianeway. Nathaniell Barry.
Ministers of several other Counties.
John White. Dorset-shire. William Ford. Somersetshire. John Pyns.
Somersetshire. Zachery Caudry. Lestershire. Henry Paynter. Devonshire. Stephen
Marshall Essex. Samuel Ioyner. Essex. John Ward. Suffolk. Ier. Burroughes.
Northfolke. John Rawlinson. Darby. Moses Capell. Kent. William Rhet. Kent.
Francis Charliot. Buck. Richard Gifford. Herford. William Englesby Herford.
Other worthy Ministers of the Diocese of Peterburrough, where the Petitioner
lives.
Daniel Caudery. Jeremy Whittaker. John Barry. James Cranford. Samuel Craddock.
David Ensme. Edmond Castle. Samuel Moyle. Daniel Rogers. Benjamin Tomkins.
Richard Cook. Richard True-man. John Guderick. William Spencer. Edmond James.
John Baynard. George Iay. Francis Press. John Guderick. Miles Berket. Francis
Atturbury. Jeremy Stephens. John Ward Peter Fawtract. William Malkinson.
The motion made by Master William Castle, Minister of the Gospel, for
propagating of the blessed Evangell of Christ our Lord, and Savior in America,
we conceive in the general to be most pious, Christian and charitable. And
therefore worthy to be seriously considered, of all that love the glorious name
of Christ, and are zealous of the salvation of souls, which are without
Christ, and without God in the world, wishing the opportunity and fit season:
the instruments and means. And all things necessary for the prosecution of so
pious a work, to be considered by the wisdoms of Churches and civil
powers, whom God has called, and enabled with Piety, Prudence, and Peace, for
matters of public concernment, and of so great Importance. And beseeching the
Lord to bless all their consultations, and proceedings for the advancing, and
establishing the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Alexander Henderson. Robert Blare. R. Baillie. M. Gillaspie. N. Smyth. M.
Borthrick.


FINIS.

