The Case stated Touching the SOVEREIGN'S PREROGATIVE AND THE Peoples Liberty,
According to Scripture, Reason, and the Consent of our Ancestors.

Humbly offered to the Right Honorable, GENERAL MONCK, And the OFFICERS in the
ARMY.

Regi qui perfidus, nulli fidus.

London, Printed for Charles King. 1660.

The CASE stated, Touching the SOVEREIGNS PREROGATIVE AND The Subjects Liberty.
TO plead precisely for the Sovereigns Prerogative, is very necessary to be
acquainted with the Subjects Liberty, for otherwise, like the counterfeit
Mother, the Child should be divided, but not aright; by which means I should
incur the hazard of every Extreme, and in stead of being free, carried with a
kind of violence, which would operate improperly: therefore a sound and
well-ordered judgment, which is ever deliberate, can never be conversant in
such Extremes, but is ever free to gives its true weight and measure to all
Proceedings.

What barbarous Cruelties, irreligious Policies, and merciless Practices the
late Rebellion has brought forth, I shall leave to others to discover, whose
distractions are fewer; my present storm and Tempest of Misfortune having
continued so long time, that quocunque aspicio nihil est nisi pontus and aer.

Yet because I infinitely dislike to be less than what a Subject ought to be,
and am a real lover of my Country, and would have the Laws established, and
put in execution, I will render to Caesar his due, in opposition to the great
disturbers of the true Peace and Tranquillity of the Kingdom, persuading my self
I shall at one instant make two sorts of people glad.

In the first place, it behooves the Subject to take notice, That the Kings
Authority is Jure Divino, he is set over us by God himself, he has not his
Reign or Crown by our favor; for, says God, By me Kings Reign, it is plainly
not by us: Yea, by me Princes decree Justice; and yet for all that, some men
will have a Court of Justice upon Earth above him, though in that case the
Scripture is plain and positive, That were he never so wicked, he is not to be
dealt withal according to his deservings, Jeremy 27.5, 6, etc. Where you may
see how strictly God commands this proud Tyrant to be honored, for no other
cause, but because He had given him his Kingdom; he obtained it therefore by
Divine Decree, which is is unlawful to violate, the worst having been
Established by the same Decree that the best Kings are: To whomsoever the
Kingdom is devolved, he is certainly to be obeyed; and as soon as he is
advanced to Kingly Dignity, God therein testifies he would have them Reign.
Behold the Israelites, spoiled of their Goods, Houses, and whatsoever was dear
and near unto them, led away into Exile, (not Exiling their Prince!) and
miserable Bondage, yet commanded by God himself to pray for the Conqueror, not
as we ought to pray for our Enemies, but that the Kingdom may remain in Peace
and Tranquillity, that they also might live prosperously under him: Doubtless
therefore the Duty of Subjects toward their King, is not only to speak
honorably of him, but to live and die for their King, although the disobedience
of Supreme Rebels have taught the inferior, Juglings, Impostures, and mere
Delusions.

The King is the Head of the People, there is a Sacred and near relation
betwixt them; a disease or pain in the Head, causes a Dyscracy in the whole
Body, an Indisposition throughout the whole Members; so that the Calamities of
a King affect every honest man in his Kingdom. Ammon was a most wicked and
idolatrous Prince, yet God punished the Treason of his Servants against him, 2
Kings 21. Saint Ambrose unto Valentinian, says, Princeps Legibus solutus; That
the King is free from the power of the Law, (is a Maxim as old as
Christianity) that is, from the penalties of it. Laws have only a Directive,
no Coercive Power over him: Though not as a Moral man, yet in his Politic
Considerations he is above the Law; Divino sunt judicio reservandi Reges, Kings
stand or fall unto their own Master, GOD; Satis est ad poenam quod Deum
habeamus ultorem, It is sufficient that God will punish their Crimes, he is the
only Judge. See the Spirit of David against Saul, he refers his injuries to be
remedied by the high Court of Justice, 1 Samuel 24.12. How is the Happiness of
a Kingdom twisted with the welfare of a Religious King? How close does the
Ruin of a People follow the loss of a pious Prince? A good King is a Rampire
and Security unto his Kingdom; that being slighted, the destruction is easily
undertaken -- Foelices nimium bon^ si sua norint. But who so apt to undermine
these their own Fortifications, as the People themselves? A King in his Kingdom
is Sole Deo minor, and therefore above his Subjects. Kings are Nursing Fathers,
Queens are Nursing Mothers, the only righteous Justicers, Protectors, and
Conservators of our Liberty and Safety. Does not Paul (and shall others think
themselves wiser) bid the people obey Nero the bloody Tyrant for Conscience
sake, an Idolatrous Persecutor as the King of Babel was; so that, Preces and
lachrymae sunt arma Ecclesiae, not to put him to death, not to try him
Judicially; the whole Scripture affording no instance or example for such
Actions, but the contrary.

Princes are like the Bond of Wedlock, once make them the Fathers of our
Country, and we take them for better for worse: We may persuade them, we
cannot compel them without breach of Divine Precepts; once let them be the
Lords Anointed, and it is Sacrilege to touch them; I mean unfittingly. The
Common People made Caesar's, but being once made, it was utterly our of their
power to unmake them again; nothing could do it but Death. And if a King should
break an Oath made by him to his People, for a right governing according to his
Laws; yet, under favor, his breach quitteth not his Subjects of their
Allegiance: And if this stand not for a Truth, for my part, I do not know by
what Principle any man can walk; for destroy but this Foundation, and then your
Anti-governists will always find starting holes, upon the least discontent to
shake off that Yoke, which is undoubtedly laid upon every Subject, as a
necessary. Tie of their Obedience and Loyalty to their Sovereign, and that even
as they tender the peace and quiet of a good Conscience. For, though God
permitted the people to work Treason against King Amaziah, because it is there
expressed, He turned away from the Lord his God; yet I trust no man can deny but
that, it was Treason still in the People: So that Princes, though they be
Nero's and Caligula's, are not to be rebelled against, neither by the Real
Sword, nor by the Metaphorical one, the Tongue; that is, neither by Speech nor
Action. It is not for naught that the Apostle does so inseparably knit those
two together, Fear God, Honor the King; as if he should have said, None can
give that honor to the King as he ought, except he be one that truly fears
God; and none can truly fear God as he ought, if he give not the honor due to
his Prince, whose Sovereign Prerogative is undoubtedly his, as our Estates are
ours, and by as firm a Law.

Having spoken concerning the Kings Prerogative, I shall now insist upon the
Liberty of the Subject, and show how it is preserved from the Inundations of
the Royal Prerogative, in case of such Invasion. The ancient Liberties of the
People of England, chiefly resided in their Freedom of Parliaments; and being
there so inviolably seated, are secured unto the People by The Petition of
Right, Magna Charta, and the grand Bulwark of the Laws: These so providing for
the Peoples Rights that though the King and Lords had their Negatives in making
Laws; yet no Tax might be imposed but by consent of the Commons, nor any Law
(without them of such validity, that the Ministers of Justice durst enforce the
execution thereof. And though indeed the King had the Power of making War, yet
he had not the Means; and so it signified no more, than giving him leave to
fly, if he could get wings: He had a Sword, but he (alone) could never draw it;
for the Trained-Bands were a Weapon which he decently wore, but the Nation
only could use: And the Power of relieving his Wants resting in the Commons,
must necessarily balance the Power of his Will, and oblige him to a
correspondence with Parliaments.

The Sovereigns Prerogative and Subjects Liberty, are an excellent strengthening
of our Meum and Tuum in the world. I conceive and conclude this Kingdom much
happier, if they go (like Hippocrates Twins) hand in hand. It was a good
speech, though from a bad man (I shall believe the Devil when he speaks truth)
This Kingdom will never be happy, unless there be a right Understanding between
the King and his People. Yet certain it is, the People never enjoyed grea^e^
Immunities, Privileges and Encouragements in Trading both at home and abroad,
than under our Kings; never more Mercy ex^^ted, Justice administered,
Usurpations ^^bed, Happiness lived under, until too much Plenty and Wantonness
(...) in abhorrency of That the greatest part of the three Nations are now so
passionate and impatient after; knowing, that as there has been more Treasure
squeezed out of them for sixteen years past, than by all the Kings, Princes and
Queens of England foregoing: so their ancient and undoubted Liberties were
never more infringed that since they have made, or suffered, both their Kings,
Lords and Priests to be of the meanest of the People. I should expatiate in
these particulars, but I refer the Reader to an ingenious piece, entitled, A
Plea for limited Monarchy, where the Subjects Liberty is more at large
demonstrated; and to Englands Faiths Defender vindicated, viz. CHARLES II.

Upon the Kings PREROGATIVE and PERSON.
PRerogative and Person, both were free
From Subjects Malice and Malignity;
Till haughry Rebels, illegitimate
From true Obedience, changed our settled State
From Sacred Kingship, leaving no Spark
Of Light in Government: All clouded, dark,
Like the first Chaos; full of dire Confusion,
No Spirit moved, but that of strong Delusion:
Whose Hellish Breath drove us to Wars, and Murder,
Even of our Sacred Master; Nay, went further,
We Banished into Exile, HIM, whom now
Upon our second thoughts, we fain would bow
Unto, and Worship, if he would permit
Himself (as Idol) on His Throne to sit.
Which thing he hates: For the Decree of God
Ordains, that Rebels ought to kiss the Rod.
Therefore embrace your Sovereign, and Proclaim
Him Lawful King; and so blot out your Shame.
THE END.

