A BARTHOLMEVV FAIRING, NEW, NEW, NEW: Sent from the Raised Siege before
DVBLIN, As a Preparatory PRESENT To the great Thanksgiving-Day.

To be communicated only to INDEPENDENTS.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1649.

Prologue.
A Pedlar in haste with an Horn. STand off, make room, give way, for I come
Post,
My Fairings do run wild from the Irish Coast;
Poor Cram a Cree untrouz'd, O hone! O hone!
Has lost his cows, his sheep, his Bagh, all is gone:
All is transported hither, view it, view,
Patrick is to be sold at Bartholmew.
All Saints must bow in the old Calender
Unto Saint Ireton, and Saint Oliver:
For the himself is shipped, Father and Son,
Pompey and Caesar's Wars are now begun.
Thus for a Ceremony, and poor jarres,
The Saints do keep us still in civil wars.
This Bartholmew will be the last, I fear,
Fair, we shall see: the next is Py-Powder.
Take every one, a Fairing now, be sped,
You Presbyter, a Bishop in Ginger-bread:
You Cavaleers what will you buy? or how
Here go by Goldsmiths Hall, the States milcht Cow.
You Independents buy no trifling matters,
Hobby horses, babies, d^shes, or Platters:
You are for Kings Revenues, Crown, and Jewels,
And Hangings too, or you will nere have your due else.
Come buy these curious Pendents, and these knots,
They are Scotizing Saints, Saintizing Scots.
You Papists, which have juggled with the King,
Buy you these Crosses, now the Saints-bells-ring.
You honest Citizens who yet stand true,
Against Pres, and Dep, and Pap. and Div: and Jew:
Take ye this Book, and on the day of joy
Laugh at old Nol, and drink to the black Boy.
Exit. Enter 3. Independent Committeemens wives, Mrs. Avery, Mrs. Try-all, and
Mrs. Woola'stone. Mrs. Aver: GOod day to you sisters, I may give you the good
speed, for I know you to be of the Household, for unless it be to such, (it was
Mr. Fenne of Coventrey's opinion, and a good one) we might not give it truly.


Mrs. Try. Mr. Wheatley of Bambury (under whom I was taught in my minority, and
learned the passive obedience of a Bride (though his Rush was a very thorny one
to us since) was of the same mind, and would not have us scatter our
Salutations at random upon any whom, but only Chosen ones, such as you Mrs.
Avery, and you my most intimate and thoroughly edified Sister Woola'stone; and I
think we may bestow the kiss also (salute.)


Mrs. Wool: Verily yes sister, it is now holy, when holy persons use it, we
make every thing holy we use; for the Creature was made for us, and
Creature-comfort too; Be they higher, or be they lower.


Mrs. Aver: Indeed sister you have said well, and do well, and we shall all do
so, we do endeavor it. -- Creature Comforts! a pretty word, that of my sisters
-- (steps aside and writes it down) I would not for a world but that I could
use my hand; I can raise any thing by the means of it, and hold what I get. --
Creature Comforts! very good.


Mrs. Try: It was very long ere the Parliament thought upon us, in that point,
but I knew they would put home at last; Mr. Martin promised upon his Honesty,
(an Oath truly that I have kept with me) that we should in time be remembered
for our Bodkins, Silver-spoons, and Caudle-cups, and now they have done it to
the purpose: this gift of the New Park, insooth sister was it not a pat, a very
pat and opposite, a very pertinent, and as Mr. Goodwine said, a very suitable
and agreeing Present for us; We had no place of Air before, but common with
Infidels, the Cabs and Cabbages, the Grays-Inne-Rufflers, and
Hide-Park-Jesabels, who did profane and unhallow those good places, and
otherwise wholesome Recreations.


Mrs. Aver: Indeed our Husband shall buy a Coach; it is too far for a Sedan,
and I cannot endure to have men under me, it is unnatural, and unfriendly;
what can a St. do a Man-back? Fie, fie, fie.


Mrs. Wool: My Husband shall get stone-horses, and we will use them, indeed we
will sister, and flant it with the best, and in our own Park too. In our New
Park, we will have Old doings, I warrant you.


Mrs. Try: I have acquainted Mr Martin with our intentions, and he says he
will move the House, and will not be denied now Cromwell's gone; and we shall
have an Ordinance for a Cheescake House, and there shall be a Summer House too,
and meet withdrawing Places. Mr. Martin is a very understanding Gentleman, as
most is in the House, and knows what belongs to women's matters very well.


Mrs. Wool: The Noble Lieut: Gen: is as understanding every whit as himself,
and would have gone as far in the Business, as he, if you would use him as I
have done, you would say so sister; He has a notable Headpiece, and another
Piece too: Indeed he is a Man every inch of him. They call him Iron-sides;
Alas, he is flesh and blood as other men are, and after the Conquest of Ireland
and those wild Savages, he will return and do wonderfully.


Mrs. Aver: We will have our New Park strewn with Rushes against his return,
and we will have Cornets under every Tree, our Husbands shall find all. O it
will be a glorious thing to hear all our Hus^ands Cornets sounding together!


Mrs. Try: I, and all the Saints Cornets in the City befides, what an harmony
'twill be! The Hoboyes are nothing to it; no, the Lanc: Horn-pipe is not to be
compared to our London Cornets.


Mrs. Wool: I long for that day, that will be a Summers day, that will be a day
of Jubilee; it shall be St. Olivers day, the Aldermen shall be in their
Scarlets, and the Livery in Velvet, all our Husbands shall be in Velvet from
head to foot.


Mrs. Aver: O deer! in good sooth sister it will be very pomponatious. But are
you resolved upon the meeting there? I will send my 3 Dishes, besides Wine and
Sweet meats, and a Rosebag and other knacks. But my Husband cannot possibly go,
he is so given to the world, he is a very Martha.


Mrs. Try: So is mine too; when I am abroad he is seldom with me. But who
shall we have then in their places?


Mrs. Wool: Some of the young Divines, they will about the beginning of the
week be for us: Good men! The latter end they bestow upon our Souls, and the
beginning upon our Bodies; they labor night and day for our goods.


Mrs. Wool: My Man Ralph has made the prettiest things upon the Present, and
so magified the Parliament, as passes all understanding.


Mrs. Try: My Man is a Poet too, honest Roger, a Knights Son, I can tell you:
His Father is a Cavalier, and with the residue of his estate after his
Composition bound him to my husband, and truly he does such rare things as I
cannot tell they do so ravish me: he shall bring some of his works with the
junkets. Remember I prithee the Codling Tart sister.


Mrs. Aver: I shall dear sister, and do hear? put good store of Amber greece
in the Werden and Quince Pyes.


Mrs. Try: I am foro the Marrow Pyes, I will so feast my little Levites, that
they shall take New Park for Marrow-bone.


Mrs. Aver: And when all is eat, and thoroughly concocted, and applied, it shall
be Hide Park too.


Exeunt. Actus secundus.
Enter three Independent Ministers, Mr. Learned, Mr. Olduns, Mr. Bew, as in a
Chamber. Mr. Ler: Welcome my Fellow Laborers: our Harvest
Is not as the lean Countrey-Pulpit-Thrashers,
Who work for the tenth-cock, and Easter Book,
And twice a year rejoice, or chance to chirpe
At the delivery of a pregnant sow,
Or teeme of goslings: No my Sunday swabbers:
We have one day of Adams heavy curse
The Sabbath, that is our day of sweat, not Rest.
So that our year consists of fifty two
Days of work and swinck: All the rest are holy.
Almost 300. holyd a yes we make,
My head's a Bible with an Almanake.

Mr. Old: Moonday's our prime festival, Luna
Begins our merriment, and Venus ends:
For Saturn makes us melancholy; then
We are for Text, and Exposition: that is
But half holy day, some sack, some notes:
The morn at Syon College, the afternoon
At (...) in Coleman-street: where we agree
What part oth' news to preach; what Prayer, what Use,
(Such as the State prescribes) and the works done,
This Work of double Honor.

Mr. Bew. Double? Treble:
The Primitive Converts laid not more at feet
Of the Apostles, nor did they spend it so.
Yet we allow old Paul 3 Tavernes, but

Mr. Ler: Come sit my friends.
(draws a bottle from under the Table) Come forth (my Posteller) this is Tonseca
The Learned Spaniard, this, this is the Book,
Which gives us Learning, and a politic look:
By virtue of this Author, Don Canary,
Wespeak what truth we please, or else it vary.
(Fills into the glass, Look! how he spirits dance, see how they skirre it?
We that drink this, must need hold forth the Spirit.
Olduns, this lusty glass to all those eyes,
(dr.) Whose whites we lift (as I do this) toth' skies.

Mr. Old: To those that sigh at every Lard, and ab,
And hum, we make upon the Sabbath day.
(dr.)
Mr. Bew. To all those pretty rogues, whose hearts we break
On Sunday, and tickle on the rest oth' week.

One knocks without. Mr. Ler: How now! my Spaniard must retire, he is grave,
And cannot endure strange faces. Back to the cell.
This brittle Instrument must to his case;
Hides Bottle and glass. Reach hither Foxly he shall lie in the place;
(Here Reynolds Sermons) whose most learned Books
Are the gulled peoples baits, and we the Hooks.
Knocks again. Whose there? have patience, and I come; (brother)
Remember where I left, we must not smoother
Our sgifts, nor under Bushels put the light.
Yes.

Enter Ralph Shorthand. Mr. Ler: Ralph Shorthand! what my Stenographicall
Sermon catcher, my Imp of Repetitions, and Conserves of my small wares of
Divinity, little Pedlar of my Dominicall labors, how do thou sweet youth?
what is the business?


(Gives a Letter.) Ralph. This Letter (Sir) will speak it self; the letter
(Sir) as you have often hinted, is no killing letter, nor a dead letter, Sir, I
have brought the Argentum vivum of the last Edition: no Carolus upon these
white-boyes, nor Dei gratia neither, but Anno Libertatis, and what is it?
Crucis novae? as you will read (Sir) better in these circles.

delivers the money.
Mr. Ler: Very hand some Coin? Brethren peruse this letter, it does concern us
all. I am much taken with this stamp, I have some skill in coining: for I my
self am newly stamped.

This shows the State is fixed,
And learned too: O let me kiss this Cross,
The sign of vanquished superstition,
The sign of Reformation in the State
As well as Church; for this we bless, and curse
Thus we will carry Crosses: -- in our purse.

Mr. Bew. With what regard of words? and godly tokens
Are we invited to this feast? This whistle,
This silver whistle of the Saints is shrill,
These Charmers may eene charm me where they will.

Mr. Old: Next Sunday we will hold forth of Thankfulness,
And praise the open handednesse of the Saints:
Our thanks to those, who ministered to our wants.

Ralph. It shall he done: Mr. Learned Sir, I have an humble suit to you, I know
your ingeny, you have a sparkling forge: It would for ever make me (with my
Mrs.) to have an handsome smart copy of verses (Sir) upon the Park and the
present Thanksgiving. Pray Sir think, you have it if you but scratch of the
fantastical side. Sir, I have a piece of singular Tobacco for your Muse. The
very pryme of the leaf. Ochechampano Poca-Hunto's Father great Custos of the
Indies drinks not so good. Against night I pray let them be composed, fair
wrote, and scratched under where the emphasis must lie, for my Mistrisse is
much taken with my emphaticall pronounciation and action. It stands me much
upon at this time, for I am upon the point of preferment, and your wit must
work about, or I am disappointed quite. Think Sir, I find the fancy in your
eye, you have a Poetical muscule Sir.


Mr. Ler: I have indeed Ralph, thou see more then these seers. Thou shall
haveum: and Ralph do you hear, drink no Clarret to night, that will furre the
throat, let Vrsula make you some buttered Ale, and I warrant thee for a smart
one.


Ralp. May your wise Notes, I have wrote, swell into volumes,

Exit. Until the weight suppress my tender columns.

Mr. Ler: We must conclude this meetings; I have work,
This Poem will ask pains, and time, and sack;
I am a Hind at prose, but a dull Ox
At verse, my feet are as they would been in the stocks.
Friends we will meet the Sisters with their knacks,
Keep all things wisely, specially your backs.

Enter Roger Trusty. Solus. Roger. Why my father being a Cavileer should after
my exclusion from the University bind me Apprentice to this D^aper, and a
Committee man, is beyond my intelligence, though not my obedience: I have
scratched my head over and over, and cannot reach the depth, unless it be for
revenge: sure he would have me pervert my Mistress; for, for the conversion of
my Master, it is as impossible, as the others secible; it is so, it mull be so:
Revenge is sweet; what my Master got of him at Goldsmiths Hall, be would have
me get up at Drapers: My father has been in Purgatory, and I must go to hell
for it. She is an handsome Rogue, and reads the Alchoran, there is the book now.
Our Independent Sisters are as much taken with the Alchoran, as our Ladies were
with the Arcadia. Certainly, Mahomets Pidgeon was a pretty Pidgeon, and the
Sisters would have the Spirit hang like a pendent in their ears. They are much
taken with his Paradise for the enlargement of their eyes at the Resurrection;
certainly, if there be such fine additions unto women, they have a hope the men
of Paradise shall be augmented in some part as pleasurable to them, as their
great eyes will be to their glorified servants: These Babylonian whores will
never be satisfied without a Salisbury spire: well if I must work about this
Composition, I will to it as soon as I can: Nocuit differ paratis.

I cannot tell which is readiest, my Mistress or my self. She has been
teaching me how to handle the yard these three days, and says I must learn to
give a little over measure, it t^kes Customers mainly. Besides she takes me
into the darkest place of the shop, and says, There I must show my wares. I
shall learn (Mrs.) I shall apprehend you. If you bring tinder, I'se bring
flints, and such as shall break upon a Feather-bed; you have met with your
match. She has this day enjoined me upon a piece of Rivallship in Poetry with
righteous Ralph, emulation is good Mistress, my brains are at your service.
The subject is the Park, and I must to work.

Who can such sweet, and grateful work refuse,

Who has a Mistress Patroness, and Muse?


Actus Tertius.
Enter three Committee Men, Mr. Woollastone, Mr. Avery, Mr. Trial. Mr. Wool: I
did not think the gain of Godliness
Had been so quick, and great. No mystery,
No traffic half so sure. No hazands run.
For first, we know we are Saints, and that granted:
That world's our own, all that we see, and covet,
That we may safely take; it is All, All ours;
The Childrens Birthright; All the rest Aliens,
Usurpers, and Oppressors: only we
The heirs oth' House.

Mr. Tr: This is our surest Title.
The Scripture is our Charter, we have text
To show for it. The Scripture is a fountain
Of end less treasure if app'y'd aright,
And for our purpose: As you hinted (brother)
The righteous (that is we) possess the Earth,
The estates of all Delinquents: Earth includes,
As bread all that is needful, I or meet
For men.

Wool: Upon that very principal
I did betray a Trust, which gained me all,
I now enjoy. It was an Orphans state,
Whose blinded Father died in actual Arms
Against this blessed Parliament: I first
Discovered my engagement; then disclosed
The foul Delinquencie, and for a slight
Reward unto the Chairman, (some two, or
Three thousand Crowns, a very toy, a toy.)
For services, (I never yet knew done)
And for my losses (truly I was lost
But for this happy windfall) and because
I was affected to the State (as no man more)
And for I was a man of known integrity,
(None serve the State but such) I was voted
Lord of the whole estate, and the Orphan
Proscribed and disinherison'd. He Is sent
Into Barbados with Instructions
Unto a Master, to unlearn his Birth,
Which if he can forget, he may do well,
Then he may live, and prove in time a Planter.

Mr. Av: A piece of charity I have not heard of,
You have approved your trust abundantly
Into the State, the end of Fe^ffe-ships.

Mr. Tr: The youth by these your conscientious means
May in some twenty years become a man.

Mr. Av: And with a little help of Aqua-vitae,
Stockings, and Hats, old Ling and Martlemasse,
Rise to a Fortune great as Cravens was.

Mr. Tr: On whom can he bestow his thanks for it,
But on your care, and providence, and love.

Mr. Wool: I look for no such turns, contented I
Am satisfied in the act of good. That Is all,
All that (old Woolastone) cares for; nor do I
Act without president, that honored Knight,
And now great Statesman, Sir John Danvers showed
Woolastone the way: why did not he prove,
That sometimes valiant man, and Earl
His brother, a Delinquent for some pounds
Lent to the King, and by those virtuous means
Orethrew the Will, and cosend his own sister,
And all the Legatarys? still it holds
The Argument is good. A Friend toth' King,
An Enemy toth' State, a Reprobate,
A Reprobate, no title to the creature,
Argo no power to dispose, no power,
No Will and Testament. Argo it is null.
I have some Logic left, enough I think
To confound all the Hierarchy of England,
And gravel um, though all their land be genne.

Mr. Av: I am a purchaser.


Mr. Tr: So am I.


Mr. Wool: And I. They talk of sacrilege: the text
Is plain: He does not live in Temples made
With hands; Heaven is his seat, yet these Bishops
Will have their Sees Gods seat, and conclude it
Against the sense oth' House, and Harry the eight:
It Is sacrilege to buy their Lands forsooth,
Out with them Antichrists!

Mr. Aver: Indeed if one
Should purchase Heaven, then the text were plain:
But we nere mean it. Let't alone for me.
The House are far enough from such an Act;
That were sacrilege in the highest, and not
On any terms to be committed. No,
Heaven at no rate: O little England
For my money!

Mr. Try: A little Ireland too
Will now do well. That Renegado Lord
Apostat Inchiquin, who has committed
The high offense, revolting to the King,
It Is he that plague us, he has dismunster'd,
He has dismunsterd me, (Dee'l Inch him fort)
Of full three thousand Acres, (his very name
Makes every Inch I have about me quake)
Which if I could have quietly enjoyed,
I would not have engaged in Bishops Lands.

Mr. Av: Ormoud and he shall nere be pardoned, nor
Montrosse, Hopton, nor Langdale, no nor Dives
That shitten Royalist, it is strange he is
Not made a Privy Counselor, or Groom
Oth'stoole. But our brave Oliver will send
Them all to Dives, to their Winter quarter.

Mr. Tr: I was afraid of Ireland once, I gave it
For an unwholesome air, Bogs and Quagmires,
But Colonel Jones has cleared it all again,
With the States Thunder, Powder, and Money.

Mr. Wool: It was a plot of Crumwels all this while
(And Munck will justify it) to loose so much:
To make the business seeming desperate,
To his eternal honor to restore it:
This was the plot, if Ormond had taken Dublin;
He should have put in Governors, then marched,
And joined with Jonny-Presbyter in Scotland,
Then should those Governors have sold it back
(For what is the City money for, but that?)
Unto the high Lieutenant; that once ours,
Grumwell had powdered after Ormond, whiles
Good Sir Arthur Haselrigg, and Lambert
Rebuilt the wall betwixt the Picts, and us,
And kept them out of England, pent in Scotland:
This was the plot which none but sure ones knew:
This is the day to raise more money for it.

Mr. Tr: It shall be levied, what we says a law,
This, is the word, Do it, or Crumwell comes;
We Will fetch him with a whistle, if they boggle,
He lies in Wales on purpose at a lurch:
(Upon prtence of waiting on the winds)
But the truth is, it is to aw those here
The Leveller, and discontented party.
He Will squirt you Regiments into Dublin,
And fright off Ormond with a whiffe of's tail.

Mr. Av: The Welsh do love him mainly.


Mr. W: They have reason.
He is their Cozen very near allied,
Once Ap-Lord Leiftenant General, Ap-All,
Ap Teudor, ap Queen Elsabeth, Ap-Besse,
Ap Great Protector presently; The States
Must have a Grave, and who is fitter for it?

Mr. Tr: We have divorced our King, and broke his Bonds,
We Will try new Lords, variety is best.
One head would never serve the Cities turn,
A change of Governors, if such as these,
Is as delightful, as of meats, one dish
Though it were Capon, and white broth will not
Please always.

Mr. W: Kings were too stately for us,
They thought it much to feast, or ly us,
The State will condescend to take a lodging
With their poor servants, and communicate
The secrets of the House unto our wives,
And they tell all again (good gyrles) to us.
They pump the Juncto for Intelligence,
And on that confidence we buy Kings Lands,
Bishops, or any thing: They word it all.
I intend for her good services, and love
Unto the State, and me, to make a joyncture
Of Theobalds to my Consort, honest Dorcas:
This day she has my leave to see the Park.

Mr. Tr: The State are wondrous wise, there was a gift!
When did the King bestow a Park on us?
There is not such a State in all the world!
To hit the fancy of all sides! our wives
Are taken above measure, out of cry:
It may be I shall air my horse toward night,
I told my Hanna, I had business,
But I may chance to steal upon her.

Mr. Av: Do.
My Abigall, will joy to be surprised.

Mr. W. Let it be so; I Will along for company.


Mr. Tr. It will do excellent, the righteous waggs
Will joy to see their husbands breathe their Naggs.

Exeunt omnes. Actus 4tus.
Enter Ralph and Roger as at New Park gate. Ralph. It Was well drove Carochman,
the Ladies to show they love good Drivers, give you this to drink above your
hire, be moderate, and warm your selves, but not too much; remember Phaeton,
whip and away, that is counsel. Roger the joy oth' Park to you.


Reg: Ralph! you and I must run a race to day, a wit course, pray heaven your
Pegasus be well breathed, I shall have the heels of him else: Gold to silver
on it.


Ralph. Poor Cab! little does he think, whose flying horse I ride, I Will shall
make you spur and switch fort: weel order the Feast, and then Sir, weel try
your vein. But Mr. Learned now has given his masterpiece to me, he has done
it to the life, if I can word it.


Reg. No prompting Ralph.


Exeunt. Mr. Learned leading Mrs. Wool: Mr. Old: leading Mrs. Avery. Mr. Bew,
Mrs. Trial, in the Park. Mr. Ler: These were sometimes high places, and the
Groves,
Where Ahab burnt unhallowed gumms to Baal.
But now a sanctified Inheritance,
A Naboths vineyard, or an Eden rather,
A Paradise, where Innocence is sure,
And holy guards keep out the fiery Dragon,
The riggling, though old serpent, Satan hight.

Old: Here no Abaddon comes, nor creeping thing,
You may sit down, and fear no lurking Suakes.
The herbage is of Grace.

Mr. Bew. The trees all Elder.
Such as are planted about Syon banks,
And do surround our new Jerusalem.

Mrs. Wool: What are those creatures, that trip it so, with the high things
upon their foreheads? they have goodly foretops.


Mr. Ler: Those are the savoury meat oth' place, the diet
Old Isaac longed for, (we call Venison)
Which Esan hunts, but only Israel eats.

Mr. Tr: Is it true indeed, that at sometime they cast their nature, a woeful
season that, and without doubt a great discomfiture unto the creature.


Mr. Av: As snakes cast their skin, for a time they are naked, but they are new
clad suddenly, and the liver fort.


Old: Spirit returns upon the reparation.


Mr. Ler: Their parva naturalia are renewed,
And as they say, a novum organum
Arises in the place.

Mrs. Av: We shall soon dispatch
These Deer upon Thanksgiving-dayes for Crumwell,
And then we will keep our Dairys here, the Country
Churming's too gross for Saints, we will have glasses,
And servants, lusty servants of our own,
And, we will see it come, The buttermilk
We Will sell unto the Cabs, and eat the cream,
The cream oth' kine our selves in stately dishes.

Mrs. Woo: It Was pity so much ground should ly unoccupied.


Mrs. Av: And be a randezvous for savage beasts.
As hideous Stags, and useless barren Does.
A goodly herd of Cows, led in, and out
By serviceable, and untyring Bulls
Were far more useful for the Commonwealth.

Mrs Tr: Deer was the Tyrant's game; but Bulls is ours,
Bishops and Plays were in a day put down,
I well remember; and Bull baytings allowed:
These are no wanton sports.

Mrs. W: We Will have it Common.
But stinted Common, a dozen Cow Commons
Unto a Saint is good proportion,
And a Bull; we will hayne the richer ground:
We may have grazing geese too, and at season
Green gostlings of our own and Pigs, and nere
Be jeered with Bow, and Bartholmew Fair meetings;
Nor James, nor Sturbridge: our husbands shall ply them,
We and our Levites will ply these.

Mr. Ler: We may employ our gifts, and exercise too here
Upon the Turfe; Repentance was first preached
By John in the Wilderness, and ye being
Washed Disciples, may use any place:
All things are clean to you, as you to all;
New Parks as sanctified to us, as Peter's,
Margarets, or Under shafts, or Antolines

To them. Enter Roger and Ralph. Ralph. All things are placed convenient; the
Repast
Is set in order, and the Earth is spread.

Rog: Adams first and best Table, where green Carpets
Were senior unto Diaper, and Damask;
Eve in her Innocence did use no other;
A go^^ broad Sycamore leaf was all her napkin,
Nut-shels their cups, Sallads their meat, and sauce.
Six pretty mole-hils of dame Natures making,
Yet such as Art can scarce exceed, the work
At first oth' Mole, by her blind pains cast up,
Are fince by silver Jupiter fresh verdur'd,
And moss'd with Cushions for your Lady-ships ease.
And in the middle is a Rising Bank,
Swelling most strangely in a ovall form,
On which the dishes stand in equipage.

Mr. Ler: It does resemble much the seat oth' whore,
Hight Babylon, On which the Saints in time,
(And verily I ween the time is come)
Were promised to sit, and judge. Pray move.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Mr. Avery, Mr. Trial, Mr. Woollastone with Musicians. Mr.
Av: Here, here behind these trees will be the shelter, (Musicians) and ours
too. Cornets and small Music Together, makes good harmony, you have your
Hoboyes.


Mr. Tr: Vex not your guts until the Cue be given, well Trial this devise was
thine, and it is a signal one, and will advance the Festival exceedingly.


Mr. W: Would Colonel Jones were here for an hour, and Captain Oatway! we
could spare him from following after Ormond for a while.


Mr. Av: Who would have thought Ormond had been a gamester, I took him always
for a Protestant.


Mr. Tr: I know not, nor I care not. He was against the Papists always, pro,
and con, he made a League and not a league, and so he I think he is well beaten
fort, and not beaten too they say.


Mr. Wool: How not beaten!


Mr. Tr: Not so much as he will be, for Jones will Ormond him if he catch him;
but he is a natural Irish, and not easily to be caught, they will run like mad.
But Crumwell with his running Army will o're-run Ireland, and take all, the
Devil (God bless him) is in him, he will have all, all is his.


Mr. Av: I but the Papishes have done some honest services.


Mr. Tr: Hang um Heretics! our Reformation swords are as simple as their
Toleday Blades were in the Spanish Invasion, they could not distinguish betwixt
an English Catholic, and English Protestant, if he were rich; but for the
poor Catholics they shall have mercy.


Mr. W: Come to our Ambush.


Exeunt. Actus 5tus.
The Sisters upon the grass (sitting) the Levites (standing). Roger and Ralph,
(waiting) the Husbands lying) the Music (sleeping). Mr. Ler: To bless the
Creatures is the business,
We will all sanctify, the Mess is great,
Like that of Benjamins; and may deserve
A triple Blessing well; attend with care:

Rog: The grace begins, when will it end? we shall have three graces now, and
never a virtues grant me Christian patience, he has snuffd, and twird enough,
now it comes forth --.


Mr. Ler: Bless us-um-blesse us (Lard) and these thy gifts,
Marcys, and Creature comforts: By these shifts
Thou try'st our thankfulness, -- um, -- this great store,
(Lard) it does make us praise thee more, and more.
Thou take from the mouths of Cavilers,
And f^^l'^t our hellies with good things of theirs.
Thou feedest Ravens (Lard) who call on thee,
Young Ravens (Lard) thou feedest such as we.
They can not praise thy Name, they eat indeed,
But we do eat and praise, and praise and feed.
So that our life is naught but a thanksgiving
For every eaten thing, both dead, and living.
From stirring oyssers, unto Capon stiff,
And cold, we eat throw says, and corned Beef.
This venison py, a wild untamed beast
Ative; is dead, provision for the blessed.
All sorts of Pye-meats (Lard) bless unto us,
And sanctify our stomachs, by it thus.
Let not our wembs be straightened, but enlarge
Our ventricles unto the whole discharge,
Even unto succetts, confects, dry, and moist,
Let us go thorough, and be not debauch^t;
Be it as thy servant prays, unto his wish,
That he may taste the Lard in every dish.

So be it. (2d. Grace.) Mr. Old: O all sufficient, all satisfying, all sending
Power, we the worst of thy creatures have here before us more then a taste of
thy goodness, even fish, flesh and fowl; O what are we that so regardest us!
um what are we? Ah who are we? we are things of naught man is a thing of
naught; A naugh-ty thing! not worthy of the crumbs that fall from under thy
table (Lard) and yet we are at the upper end of the Board. Bless us together
in the joint receipt of these gifts, and enable us through them to perform even
what thou shall put into our hearts, for all things are sanct fi'd unto us, and
we unto them; thou see no sin in us, conform us to thee, that we may see no
sin in our selves. In confidence hereof, we shall make bold with every thing
before us, which thou have therefore bestowed upon us. We will praise thy name
both full and fasting, upon thy days of Humiliation in abstinence and um --
forbearance. On Thanksgiving days, such as these, and (ah Lard) send us more,
and more, and many more, in laying about us, and playing the men. Be it so.


3d. Grace. Mr. Bew. Give us, o Lard, what will thou give us? even Reading
stomachs: (good Lard) to wit, thorough stomachs, which will not jade us, nor
tire until we come unto the Tables end. Our life is a Race, and here is our
viaticum, um -- we are Travelers -- um -- here is our Inn, here we have a
good Bayt, a very plentiful bayt. It will not wrong us to sweep the manger, to
make clean work. For we are not as other hypocrites, reprobates, and Enemies of
the State, but unto us thou have given, from them thou have taken, (blessed be
thy name A Lard) they are at rack and manger, but we are at full meal. Thrice
blessed we, if we now show in our receptions, embracings, and takings in unto
us thy overtures, our unwearied gratitude, and more then feeding-on-by
heart-thankfulnesse. Which that we may no longer be kept from, with all
powerfulness and sharpness of sense and appetite we buckle to the creature,
before us in meats, behind us in drinks, aside us in sisters.


Selah. All sit down. Mr. Ler: Carving the creature is allowed, you may
Mrs. Wook carves. Approve your skill in firm, or hollow meat;
You have a liberal hand, and use the knife,
As well as those, that learn it from a pattern:
An Italian Carver handles not so clean,
Nor cuts so large a limb, and full.

Rog: What a load she has laid him? A mess of Spaniards and wise Italians
would dine with that one service. These are true Lutheran stomachs! How they
tew it! Bless the man! Olduns will choke himself with gobbets! masticate you
Cormorants: Here Is Reformation gulleys. There Is a weezle will pass a widows
house, and nere strain for'c. How the dish dances! The Surloyn nere moved so
fast when 'twas alive. Mr. Bew tickles the Chyne, it is assimilating meat; when
will they wa^er trow? A hog, or a horse, are gentilemen commoners to these.


Mr. Ler: Some drink; a plenteous glass of Clarret Ralph, such as I always
use after the 3d remove of my trencher. ( dr.)


Mr. Old: A hearty draught unto us all.


Bew. Let go round. dr. I thirst again. dr. and again I say I thirst. dr This
chyne was corned to the purpose, salt as thy Mistrisse, and as toothsome! it
will draw down a hogs-head.


Mrs. Wool: Ralph, some white wind Ralph of that the Merchant sent my Husband
for his Brothers quick dispatch at Squeezing Hall. It is a high, full, and
brisk piece, a friendly glass sister Hanna.


Mrs. Try: May we not not tope about a little sister with the Levites
approbation?


Mr. Bew. I: And example too.


Mrs. Try: Healths are profane. Masky Tope sister Abigail. dr.


Mrs. Av: Tope sister Dorcas. ( dr.)


Mr. Ler: A dry Tope now ant please you sister.


Mrs. Wool: What Is that?


Mrs. Tr: That Is a salute. Frolic is stale.


Mr. Ler: You are very apprehensive, it is so. Tope about.


Mrs. Wool: A tope to the Lieut: General.


(Kiss the Levites.) Mrs. Av: To Mr. Martin too a tope.


Mrs. Try: A tope to all the Able Members of the House.


Mr. Bew. Now a wet Tope upon the occasion. Let Us not forget the valiant
Colonel Jones, and Captain Oatway. Fill largely Ralph.


(All dr.) Mr. Old: Now one tope to Mr. Goodwyn the Elder; (dr.)


Mr. Bew. He is a Saint sure.


Mr. Old: I mean in Opposition to younger,


Mr. Bew. I have top'd. I do tope to you (brother) to the worthy Visitors of
Oxford, a swinging tope.


Mr. Ler: They deserve it highly, they have reformed that plae to the purpose,
there is no dust left behind the door, they have made clean work, they have
swept all out. To good Sir Not.


Mr. Bew. The Malignants say he is an Ass.


Mr. Ler: He? an Ass? and so am I.


Mr. Old: And I.


Mr. Bew. And I. So they say Cheynell and Wilkinson are mad.


Mr. Ler: They mad? And so am I.


Mr. Ol: And I.


Mr. Bew. And I. Nay they stick not to speak unreverently of Dr. Reynolds and
Dr. Harris, and call them hypocrites and dissembling knaves.


Mr. Ler: They knaves! so am I.


Mr. Old: And I.


Mr. Bew. And I.


Rog: This was the best Tope yet; had it been sung it would have gone to the
Tune of thou knave excellently well.


Mr. Ler: Let us return unto the solid creatures; the venison and cold Capon
are untoucht, for which we did particularly give praise, we must not play with
holy things, they must be eaten.


Enter the Husbands from the Ambush. Mr. Av: Now is our Time, I will be in at
the venison Py: How dos my Chuck.


Mr. Tego: How do thou Duck.


Mr. W. How do thou Cony?


Mrs. Wool: Welcome Wat.


Mrs. Av: Welcome Heart.


Mrs. Tr: Welcome Dear: this is thy Plot, thou art such a man.


(Learned rises.) Mr. Ler. Your Fatherhoods are welcome to the place, The meats
are blessed, and thoroughly sanctified, sit down; there needs no repetition, the
creature can not fall from Grace.


Mr. Old: Here should be a Chapter read, or one of Mr. Rous his Psalms: A
parenthesis of Scripture, or a pauze in a hymn would do well, that we might
fall on more vigorously.


Mr. Bew. Talk not of Chapters, unless it be of Deans and Chapters, and their
Lands, and those, that will expound them.


Mr. L: It will do better far to have the verses of the Park, (Ralph) do it
with a Grace now.


Rog: Then you must rise again.


Mr. Ler: Loose nothing (Ralph) accent right (Ralph) emphasis it right (Ralph)
speak out (Ralph), and boldly, be confident (Ralph) as I am at a Thanksgiving
Sermon, and all is thine, (Ralph.)


(Ralph does his homages.) Ralph. Not such a Present since good Noah's Ark,
As this of the new State, their Fine-New-Park,
The Arc, and Park, I do compare the rather,
Because in the Ark and Park were men and beasts together.

Mr. Ler: Well held out (Ralph,) the elbowity of that verse was very graceful.
How it tinks too, the Arc, and Park, 'twill take I see. On (good Ralph.)


Ralph. The parallel still holds, God made the Arc,
God made the Park. God made them both: o hark,
How I shall sing, the wondrous works oth' one,
And the other, before my sylval muse be done.
The Creatures came to Noah's Arc by two's,
So did we come each did his Copesmate choose.

Mrs. Wool: Well (Wat) my Ralph shall be made free to morrow, sweet (Wat) let
him set up for himself, I will give somewhat toward his setting up; shall I
Wat?


Mr. Wool: (Cony) it shall be.


Mrs. Wool: Forward Ralph. I could dry Tope him if Wat were gone, he looks and
speaks like a Cherubin.


On Ralph. Ralph. The Rutting Buck, and Do together came,
The Bull and Cow, the tupped Yew, and Ram.
The leaping Horse and Mare: The Ass and she
Who does submit unto his waggery;
No Mules did come, nor Eterogeneous thing,
My Muse does only of pure doing sing.
Birds in their kind: the Billing Turtles came,
The Cock and Hen, the very Cock oth' Game:
There was the Raven, and the Ravenesse,
(The Type of Glergymens- wife-lawfulnesse.)
Whom he no doubt in multiply'ng did bless.

Mr. Ler: I made a triple close there, first because the second verse is not
exactly rhyme, then secondly to show the fruitfulness of my vein upon a
fruitful subject. On Ralph. He set it forth exceedingly.


Ralph. This Park will not contain the things were there,
Nor can this Park swim, as that Arc I hear.
Yet here are Beasts good store, and the States mind,
Is that they should increase, and that in kind
For unto you is given to eat, and feast,
The Park not only, but the very Beast.
The State a lean, and slender Present scorns;
The Park, the Beasts are yours, the Hides, the Horns,
The Ark and Park in this do differ thought.
The Arc was for the Water, this not so.
This Park is given to us for Land, until
That Irish Canaan be at Olivers will.

Mr. Ler: Now conclude Ralph smartly, with the sting in the tail, as all
Epigramaticall Poems should.


Ralph. It Is all our own, it comes; Be wondrous merry,
The next good news: All Irelands London Derry.

Mr. Wool: Well said Ralph, and well spoke (Ralph,) I could bite thee by the
ear for this (Ralph,) you have learned more then my Trade, sirrah, when I was
a young man I was much given to such toys, you have been peeping in my loose
sheets, go to; it is my very Fancy, the length of my feet to a hair. Well done
Ralph, thou shall wear Cuffs to morrow, and be Free, thy Indentures shall be
cancelled; He has served me but ten years, and I Will remit him one of eleven for
his fancy sake: I am a merciful Master.


Mrs. W: Well don (Wat) Ralph shall know he has a Mistrisse too before I sleep.


Mrs. Try: Where Is our Hodge (Deer)? what cant he say Bob to a Goose now? he
was not turned out of the variety for nothing: Hodge do somewhat, or nere come
nere me more. Art not ashamed to see a stripling do more then thou can, come,
when? out with it (Hodge.)


Rog. Tr: Of gold and goblets changed to Parks I sing,
Assist ye States, from you these wonders spring,
A backward Alchymy, which quaintly turns
Gold into wood, and yet no Coals it burns.
Each Bodkin in this new Alembeck proves
A Tree, Earings and Thimbles start up groves;
Gilt spoonet are saplings, and the Orphans food
Papp with a hatchet, it is nursed with wood;
The Widows jointure here most stately shows,
She calls for it in, the Feoffees say It grows.
Estates are All in Common, this new Park
Is a Fee- simple, the Evidence in Bark:
The City Chamber is a Meadow: There Is
No more Aldermen now, but Forresters;
Our Charters, that they may with ease be seen,
And Charta de Forresta's, all in Green.
Greenmen the Sheriffs are, the Major the while,
And the Recorder John an Oaks, and Steile.
The Registers are leafs: Go burn your Hall;
Attend October, then the Leases fall.
O Providence of State, who wisely pay
In The nick of time, their debts in grass and Hay.
The Public Faith was poor security:
Wu'd you a longer liver, then a Tree?
Earth is no Flincher, and for want of Rain
Is bound toth' purpose; Lend, lend on again.
Old customs are revived from the scurfe,
Possessions are new given by the Turfe.
Old London Stone, forth' good oth' Commoners,
(That each may know his own) cut into Meeres.
Canaan was thus divided, and the Tribes
Possessed by stones, before the use of Scribes.
You are the younger Saints, and your pro-gresse
Is yet, but in a kind of Wilderness.
But when the States have vanquished Ireland once,
You shall have all, and meet it out with stones.
Engage, engage apace, while the State lives,
She is a liberal Governesse, she gives.
This is a taste to the City of their loves,
Lend all you have; and you shall all have Groves.
Then though the King return with foreign Force,
And take your Forest, what are you the worse.
When these are gone, the State more favor yields,
They give Parks now, and then Elysian Fields.

Mr. Ler: You are a little too bitter (sirrah.)


Rog: Satyrs in Woods (Sir) are most proper.


Mr. Old: 'Twas well he was turned out of Oxford. He would have proved a
dangerous Fellow. He was one of some of the Riming Colleges I warrant you.


Mr. Bew. I would not have a Poet, nor Orator left in that University. Let it
be an Article, if any be witty turn him out. Let it be sped to the Visitors,
they will do it.


Mr. Tr: Well Hodge, it is very well, I like thee well enough.


Mrs. Wool: Fie, fie, it is a Hodge podge, neither head nor tall; Ralph is worth a
thousand of him.


Mrs. Tr: Ralph! Hodge shall put him in his pocket, Hodge is a man of his
hands, as well as feet.


Mrs. Wool: Marry get with your Delinquents brat!


Mrs Try: Set that aside, and he is as clean a youth as ever ser^'d City Dame,
I, as Ralph.


Mrs. Wool: Out Impudence! As Ralph? you carry him his shirts, I warrant you,
and reckon with him on Saturday nights for his week lapies, and bring him on
his knees for it. Do you not?


Mrs. Tr: Do you traduce my good name, you Jesabell? I Will send to you, though I
cannot reach you.


(Throws a corner of the Pasty at her.) Mrs. Wool: There Is mustard and sugar to
your venison.


(The husbands run forth.) Ralph. Sweet Mistrisse return unto your temper, let
me allay your heat, pray do not swell so much.


Mr. Ler: This is unseemly in the Saints, and shows you are flesh, which for a
while, and but a while I hope, resists the spirit.


Mr. Old: (rises, and with his hat off) Hum (Lard) Ah why have thou made a
Belshazzars feast of this? hum why this confusion Lard? Let not such a spirit
of violence, and not bearing with one another any longer possess and tear in
pieces the good sisters; Command the Abaddon out of them, even as far as
Rumford (Lard) amongst the Hoggs: I charge thee spirit of trouble, and
Feast-Interruption, spirit of unsociablenesse, and Averseness unto good
doings, and Brother and Sisterly meetings Come forth, Come forth, Come forth I
say instanter, instantanee, instantissime.


Enter the Husbands with the Music. Mr. Try: Strike up merrily now, such an
air as were able to reduce the wilderness, or settle the wild Inhabitants of
Bethlem, or compose the tortures and vexations of Darby House-Consciences, such
a tune now beyond the Taratantara, must recover this Tarantula.


(Music play several smart Tunes.) Mr. Ler: I shall not need to hold forth
ought of Peace
And reconcilement, there is in Music
Strange sympathetick virtue, and occult
Quality's beyond my knowledge, to allay
Passions enraged, or else enrage, tame spirits:
The things is hinted to us in Saul and David.

Mr. Wool: I will no longer strive against my sister,
She is a weaker vessel, as my self.

Mrs. Try: It was a frailnesse in me: I am strengthened, and am confirmed in
love: I do tope to you in sign of Reconciliation.


Mrs. W: I take your tope, both the dry, and wet.


Salute and dr. Mr. Bew. What a Becoming, hum, as I may term it,
One-somenesse, and Christian-piecingnesse is this?
Your broken arcon will be stronger for it.
So; I would have you wedged, and cramped together.

Mr. Wool: Now for a Dance, pace um my nimble (Levites) about with them, about
with um stoutly till they steam again, when I was a yonker as you are, I would
have workt a Sister into sudds, and landred her in her own Bath.


Mr. Tr: To it, to it. Mr. Olduns they say you are a Firker.


Mr. Av: Mr. Bew, my wife will dance with none but you, you have been her
Valentine these ten years; Couple, couple, quickly.


The Levites dance the Sisters. Mr. Wool: We Will run over the Diurnals in the
mean time. The Moderate Intelligencer is very full this week: what a
comfortable Letter is here from Colonel Jones? What was it Ormonds Fair, that
there were such rich prizes taken? who would have taken it for a Siege? And you
will, we will send and buy it all, 'twill be good chaffer.


Mr. Tr: It came in the nick of time, my heart was almost done, I was even
Arkins'd: we may break off again with Cathlicks now, Munck was too hasty. It is
a shrewd aspersion to the Saints to have their necessities made their
upbraidings; we cannot thoroughly serve God and Belial.


Mr. Av: The Presbyterian are more convenient for our purposes; we did begin
with them, and we should not part my thinks. If they would leave their
hankering after King and Coenant, we should unite, and carry all before us.
They were not so well sighted as we to see the end of the Covenant, and the
Saints get ground upon the wicked by advantages; I would they were all
enlightened as I am, they would not care for forms and discipline so much: they
are blind Brethren yet, and want a dipping more. They will look about if this
News hold.


Mr. Wool: I warrant it, it holds: do hear?
His Lordships shipped: we are Princes all.

Mr. Av: I must unto my Court at squeezing Hall,
There wait those Oranges, those humbled things:
While we sit uncontrolled, like Petty kings.

Mr. Wool: We will have the Song and so conclude:
Our wives to their Caroches, we to our Horses, Levites to their
Books. Boys to the Shops, and Music to the scrapps.

The Song.
To the Tune of, In the merry Month of May.
1.
In the merry merry Month of June,
When the Rose fades: But Venison
Ranges stately by the Wood side,
With Head branched in her pride.
Then the State looked down upon
Citizana, and Citizon.
2
The States that styled are the Free,
More then those of Germany:
Free of Flesh, as any State,
Gave us Venison for our Plate.
They will give us any Thing,
A New Park for an old King.
3.
What Returns are these for our loanes?
No man grudgeth, no maid groans.
She that laid her Bodkin down,
In New Park has a green gown.
And if that be not enough,
What is far more pleasing stuff?
4.
Here shall be plenty of kisses then,
And young mayds may kiss young men.
Here shall be lusty Troopers sent,
To recruit the Mayds Regiment.
And every barn that shall be seen,
A Robin hood, or John a-Green.
5.
Let every joyful Citizen
Clothe his triumphant head with Green;
Here Is Green enough for all their Brows,
Seem like a Forest All in Bows:
To after Times let it pass for good,
The men oth' City were all Wood.
(Close.)
Thus Enge-land for a Crown of Gold
Is with a silly Willow garland fooled:
thus Engeland by successe-full knaves,
Is become a State of Fools, and Slaves.
Thus for a Park, like a sort of Owls,
The Charters lost of the Forest of Fools.
Epilogue.
Roger left behind. IF any thing obscure, not understood
Be here, the State expounds the darkest wood:
And makes the thickest thickets plain and clear,
As the back of your hand, as Shot-over:
For Nol expounds, the officers expound,
The Soldiers too expound, All in a Round:
You Would think Jerusalem were building new,
With Swords in hand and Bible, nay by the Jew:
The Jews buy all, the Independents sell,
The wares the King's and's friends; the Fair is hell:
D^fference there is twixt that, and Bartholmew,
That brings Brimstone and Fire, this the cold Deaw.
FINIS.

