A HORRIBLE AND BLOODY PLOT TO Murder Sir Thomas Fairfax, Sir William Brereton,
Sir Thomas Middleton, Colonel Moore, and above one hundred more of the
Parliament Men, Colonels, and other Officers and Gentlemen.

WITH The Names of the Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, and others that were chief
Actors therein. The Copies of the several Indictments, Bills, and other
Parchments and Papers; and the Names of the Judges, Justices, and Grand Jury;
and their proceedings therein. With Letters from the Committee of Chester, and
other Gentlemen of the Country sent up about the same.

These are copied out by the Original Papers, delivered into the Committee at
Goldsmiths Hall, and are printed and published according to Order of PARLIAMENT.

London, Printed by B. Alsop, for E. Griffin. 1646.

SIR,
YOu are desired to add this to your former Labors for the Commonwealth, to
deliver the Packet herewith sent, to the honorable Committee at Goldsmiths
Hall London, for Compositions: Here are Copies of the Indictments preferred at
the Assizes before the Judges at Chester, in February, 1642. whereby Sir Thomas
Fairfax, Sir George Booth, Sir Will. Brereton, Sir Thomas Middleton, Sir
William Fairfax, Col. Ashton, Col. Moore, Col. Mitton, and hundreds more stand
indicted of high Treason, for taking up Arms, and adhering to the Parliament in
this war, together with the Indictments: here is a List of the Jury that
found these Indictments, there is about 18 of this Jury, that would never (that
it can be remembered) appear upon any grand Jury before this which is very
remarkable, many of them now are compounding for their Estates, And it does
appear that diverse do compound without a Certificate hence of the nature of
their delinquency, etc. Mr. Brereton of Ashley who was one of this Jury, has
compounded already, and his delinquency uncertified or tequired: Here is a Copy
of the Letter sent by the Committee here to the Committee for Compositions; by
which you may be satisfied of the proceedings, when the Committee at Goldsmiths
Hall are thus informed herein they know best what use to make hereof for the
Commonwealth: Here is also a particular Indictment against Col. Moore, and the
Exigent whereupon he was returned out-laawed, -- Mr. John Wilson gave judgment
thereupon, who is now compounding for his estate. If the Process, Outlaries,
and Returns had been taken out, it wou^d have taken up so much labor and time,
as I doubt they would not have been ready in any due time such has been the
care and industry of the adverse Party in all their proceedings. You may
observe what an inveterate hatred they have had against Sir William Brereton
who is indicted in every Indictment, And it may well be remembered they prepared
an Engine or Instrument for him, if they had prospered at Middlewich Battle,
when we took Sir Edward Moseley, Col. Ellis, and diverse other Gentlemen of
quality; at which time Sir Thomas Aston fled away: But I would not trouble you
any further. This is all at present herein, my other Letter being so large;
only I am

Your faithful Friend and Servant, S. C.
Chester. July 4. 1646.
SIR,
YOur Letter per Post I received whereby I understand you are informed, That
the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall, does compound with all men what ever Fact
they have committed against the Commonwealth; yea though they have been
Instruments to burn Towns and houses, to the destruction and ruin of whole
Families, and have had their hands in blood, by whom many souls have suffered
death; And therefore you have forborne to deliver the Letter directed to
Goldsmiths Hall, and the Indictments therewith sent; Notwithstanding which, you
are again desired to take the pains to deliver them; The Gentlemen here
conceive they are bound in Conscience, and by their late National Covenant, to
do their duty in their place, to bring Delinquents to condign punishment, and
can do no less right to themselves then to inform that Honorable Committee,
being a Committee of the Members of Parliament in the Premises, who are Members
in the making of the Law, and can best judge of condign punishment, -- You may
do them a noble favor; And therein you shall engage me to remain

Yours to command S. C.
Chester, July 21. 1646.
The Certificate from the Committee of Chester, to the Committee of London,
concerning the Indictments against Sir Tho: Fairfax, Sir W. Brereton, and many
others.
Honorable Sirs,
AMongst such Delinquents as we the Committee for Sequestrations for the City
of Chester, in order to our proceedings find most notorious in this County: We
cannot omit with respect to several heads in the National Covenant by us
taken, and our duty to the Parliament, to publish and make known unto you the
nature and quality of the offenses of certain Gentlemen transcendent in the
eyes and judgment of the Body of this County far above others, though in
hostility against the Parliament.

In February Anno Dom. 164^. after the Battle at Edg-Hill, the Assizes or
great Sessions was held at the Castle of Chester, Judge Mellwood, and Justice
Pretherough being Judges, Sir Richard Gravesnor high Sheriff, Sir Richard
Floyd the Kings Attorney, and Mr. John Wilson one of the Coroners of the
County: At which Assizes there were indicted of high Treason Sir Thomas
Fairfax, Sir George Booth, Sir W. Brereton, Sir T. Middleton, Col. Moor, the
present high Sheriff of Chester, and the rest of the Deputy Lieutenants of
this County that stood for the Parliament, The Committees for the county, and
for Sequestrations, and hundreds more of the well affected and faithful to the
Parliament in this county for taking up Arms and adhering to the Parliament in
this Cause and War, All which were afterward outlawed in the year, 1643. The
several persons whose names are in a Schedule here enclosed being of that
grand Jury, and did return upon the several Indictments Billa vera. Whereby so
much as in them lay to bring these honorable persons and all the rest into a
capacity subject to the greatest of punishment, by death, and perpetual
ignominy, their blood stained, and all their estates real and personal
forfeited: which proceedings being under the color, and ground of a law, many
have been further hardened in their principles and proceedings against the
Parliament: All which Jury, saving three or four, it is not known have ever
appeared, or would serve upon any grand Jury before that time. For your fuller
satisfaction of the proceenings in the premises, we have procured Copies of the
said Indiandments, which herewith we present unto you, desiring your mature
consideration thereupon, in point of Composition (if you shall think fit, to
compound with them) who had determined (if it had pleased God to have given
them power through the county) to have prosecuted these Indictments in the
strictest Letter thereof, wherein lay neither Pardon, nor Reprieve; And withal
to add this further to your indesatigable labors, to make a report hereof,
with the said Indictments and Proceedings to the honorable House of Commons;
to the end, order may be directed for the Indemnity of his Majesty's loyal
and faithful Subjects who have stuck to the Parliament in an evil day, And
such further proceedings may be made thereupon, as in their grave judgments may
be thought meet; wherein you shall engage this County to serve you, And therein
none moae then

Your faithful and humble Servants, John Whitworth. Ralph Judson. John Whitle.
Sam: Buck.

Chester July 21. 1646.
CHESTER, viz.
THe Jury for the Lord the King present upon their Cestr. ss. Juratores pro
Dom. Rege super sacr: suum presentant. Quod Guilielmus Brereton, ^^per de
Handford in Com. Cestr. Baronet, Tho. Fairfax nup. de Nantwich in Com. predicto
mile^ etc.
oaths, That William Brereton late of Handford in the county of Chester
Baronet, Thomas Fairfax late of Namptw^ch in the county aforesaid Knight,
William Fairfax late of the same in the county aforesaid Knight, George Booth
late of Dunham in the county aforesaid Esquire; Will: Marbury late of Marbury in
the county aforesaid Esquire; George Spurstow late of Spu^stow in the county
aforesaid Esquire; William Massy late of Massy in the county aforesaid Esquire;
Thomas Croxton late of Ravenscroft in the county aforesaid Esquire; John Bromhall
late of Namptwich in the county aforesaid Mercer, Richard Holland late of
Middlewich in the county aforesaid Esquire; Peter Leigh late of Tarvyn in the
aforesaid county of Chester Iron-Monger, John -- Timore^ Dei pro oculis suis
^^^ habentes nec debit: sigeantiam suam ponderantes, sed instigatione^
diab^^^^^ (...) and seducti dilectionem ac veram et debitam obedientiam quas
very and fideles subditi dom. nostri Caroli nunc Regis Angliae, etc. erga ipsum
Dom: Regem gererent and de ^ure gerere tenent. penitus subtrahences ac
machinantes, and to tisviribus suis intendent: pacem et comunem tranquillitatem
hujus Regni Anglie, perturbare decimo Octavo Die Julii, Anno Regni dicti Dom.
nostri Caroli Dei great: Angliae Scotiae Franciae, and Hibernie Regis fidei
defensor: etc Decimo nono apud Namptwich, in Com. predicto proditorie compassa
verunt imaginat: fuer and intendebant guerram rebellionem and insurrectionem
contra dictum dom: Regem inf^^ hoc Regnum Angliae levare and suscitar^ and ad
easdem proditiones imaginationes and intentiones suas predictas per implendas
and ad effectum redigend. iidem Guilielmus Brereton, Tho. Fairfax, etc.
Booth of Dunham aforesaid, in the county of Chester aforesaid Esquire; John Leigh
late of Boothes in the county of Chester aforesaid Esquire; Humphry Bulkley late of
Wbatcraft in the county of Chester aforesaid Esquire; Gilbert Gerrarrd late of
Crew-wood in the county aforesaid Gent. Thomas Hint late of Tarvin in the
aforesaid county of Chester Beere-Brewer, S^^. R^tcliff^ late of Tarvin
aforesaid, in the co: aforesaid Beer-Brewer, Hugh Witney late of Cool in the
county aforesaid Gent. John Cheswys late of Mickle in the county aforesaid
gent. Matthew Trevis of Teverton in the county of Chester aforesaid gent. Robert
Duckenfield late of Duckenfield in the county of Chester aforesaid Esquire. John
Trevis late of Horton in the county of Chester aforesaid gent. Richard Iudson
late of Rushton in the county of Chester aforesaid gent. Richard Lecester late
of Pool in the county aforesaid gent. William Peare-tree late of Namptwith in
the county of Chester aforesaid Clerk. Edward Bold late of Acton in the county
of Chester aforesaid Clerk Richard Foule^ of Bartamley in the county of
Chester aforesaid Clerk. Richard Oseley late of Waverham in the county of
Chester Clerk. Peter I^re late of Christleton in the county of Chester
aforesaid Clerk. Thomas Cotton late of Cotton in the county of Chester
aforesaid Esqu. Robert wright late of Tarvin in the county of Chester aforesaid
pistor. William Davis late of Ashton in the county of Chester aforesaid gent.
Alexander Elcock late of Poole in the county of Chester aforesaid, William
Raven late of Elworth in the county of Chester aforesaid gent. John Lownes late
of Smallwood in the County of Chester aforesaid gent. Richard Eaton late of
Anlin in the county of Chester aforesaid clerk Richard Brook of Smalwood in
the county of Chester aforesaid Yeoman, Ralph Poole late of Odrode in the
county of Clester aforesaid Yeoman, William Kent late of Shavington in the
county aforesaid Yeo. John Hancocke late of Odrode aforesaid in the coun. of
Chester aforesaid clerk Thomas Slade late of Shavington in the county aforesaid
Yeoman. Richard Pever of Odrode in the county of Chester aforesaid Yeoman.
Robert Slade late of Shavington in the county of Chester aforesaid Yeoman, Mark
Ialiwer ver late of Shavington aforesaid in the county of Chester aforesaid
Yeoman, Thomas Stanly late of Alderly in the County aforesaid Esquire; Peter
Stanley of Alde^ly aforesaid in the Co: aforesaid Gentleman, Heary Varnon late
of Haslington in the County aforesaid Esquire, William Watson late of
Macclefield in the County aforesaid Gent. John Crew of Namptwich in the County,
aforesaid Yeoman, Robert Low late of Crowton in the County aforesaid yeoman.
Peter Dod late of Tusnington in the County aforesaid Yeoman, Allen VValley late
of Kinderton in the County aforesaid Yeoman, William ^^te late of Alvandley in
the County aforesaid Yeoman, James VVhi^l^y late of the same in the County
aforesaid Yeoman, William Walley late of Davenham in the County aforesaid
Yeoman, Richard Tutche^ late of Crowton in the County aforesaid Yeoman, Joseph
Hall late of (...) in the County Poste^ scile. pred. vicesimo nono dic Jan.
Anno Decimo nono supradicto vi and armis etc. apud Namptwich pred. in Com.
predicto contra dictum Dom. Regem supremum verum and ind^bita^: Dom. suum cum
magna multitudine, gentium sur. predictis ignot: ad numerum ^^^um mill
personarum modo guerrino armat. and arraiat: vid. cum ^^mpanis ^^^lice drums*
g^^diis, ha^^is, and tormentis, and aliis armis tam invasivis quam defensivis
illicite and proditorie ad-tunc and ibidem ^n simul congregar. and assemblat.
guerram publicam contra dictum Dom. Regem apud Namptwich pred. in com. predicto
dicto vicesimo nono Die Jan. Anno supradicto proditorie paraverunt,
ordinaverunt perpetraverunt, and levaver: contra ligeanc: suas debitas in
magnum periculum person Regie di^^i Dom. Regis ac subversionis Regni sui
Angliae ac contra pacem dicti Do. Regis nune Cor. and dignitat. quas ac contra
formam Stat. in hujusmodi casu edit: and provis. Attorn. Dom. Regis pro. Iur.
magna. Billa vera.
aforesaid Yeoman, John Miller late of Kingsley in the County aforesaid Yeoman,
John Sarton late of Crowton in the County aforesaid Yeoman, George Edge late of
Kingsley in the County aforesaid Yeoman, and Robert Blinston late of Netherton
in the County aforesaid Yeoman, not having the fear of God ^^^ore their eyes,
nor regarding their due allegiance, but being moved and seduced by the
instigation of the Devil, utterly withdrawing the love as also the true
affection and obedience which a true and faithful Subject of our Lord CHARLES
now King of England, etc. toward Him then King, bear and are bound to bear. As
also endeavoring, and with all their po^er striving the common peace and
tranquillity of this kingdom to disturb, the 29 day of January, in the year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES by the grace of God of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. the Nineteenth,
at Namptwich in the said County traitorously contrived imagined, and intended a
Rebellious War and Insurrection against the said Lord and King to raise and
stir up within the Kingdom of England. And for the accomplishment of their said
Intention; and to bring the same to pass; they the said William Brereton,
Thomas Fairsax, etc. afterward, that is to say, the said twenty ninth day of
January in the year aforesaid, in the county aforesaid, against the peace of
our said Lord and King, with force of Arms, etc. at Namptwich aforesaid the
said twenty ninth day of Jan. with a great number of people unknown to this
Jury, to the number of three thousand persons, armed and arrayed in a warlike
manner with Drums, Swords, Pikes, Guns, and other Arms, as well offensive as
defensive, falsely and traitorously then and there together in a public War
against our said Lord and King at Namptwich aforesaid in the county aforesaid
the said twenty ninth day of January in the year aforesaid, traitorously
ordered prepared and levied against their Allegiance due to the great danger of
the person of the said Lord and King, the subversion of this Kingdom of
England, And against the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King his Crown and
Dignity, and against the form of the Stat: in that case provided.

The Kings Attorney Prosecutor. The Jury of Inquest. The Bill is found.
CHESTER, viz.
THe Jury for our Lord the King upon their oaths present Cestr. st. Juratores
pro Dom. Rege super sacr: suum presentant. Quod Guilielmus Brereton, ^^per de
Handford in Com. Cestr. Baronet. Georgius Booth nuper de Du^^a^ in Com.
predi^^o miles and Baronett. etc.
that William Brereton late of Handford in the county of Ch^ster Baronet,
George Booth late of Dunham in the county aforesaid Knight and Baronet, Tho.
Bromfield late of VVitton in the county aforesaid Gentleman, Henry Brook late
of Norton in the county aforesaid Esquire; Ralph Ardern late of Hard^n in the
county aforesaid Esquire; Robert Gregg late of Hapesford in the county aforesaid
Gent: Robert Gregg junior, late of the same of the county aforesaid yeoman,
Nathaniel Lancaster late of Tarpurley in the county aforesaid Clark, John
Rathbone late of Er^y in the county aforesaid Gentleman, Thomas Malbore senior,
late of Namptwich in the county aforesaid Gentleman, Thomas Malbore junior,
late of the same in the county aforesaid Gentleman, George Malbore late of the
same in -- Timor^^ Dei pro oculis suis ^^^ habentes nec debit: ligeantiam suam
ponderantes, sed instigatione^ diaboli^^ mo^^ and sedu^^i dilectionem ^c veram
et debitam obedientiam quas very and fideles subditi dom. nost^^ Caroli nunc
Regis Angliae, etc. erga ipsum Dom: Regem gererent and de ^ure gerere tenent.
penitus subtrahences ac machinantes, and to tisviribus suis intendent: pacem et
comunem tranquil^itatem hujus Regni Anglie, perturbaredocimo Octavo Die Julii,
Anno Regni dicti Dom. nostri Caroli Dei great: Angliae, Scotiae Franciae, and
Hibernie Regis fidei desensor: etc. Decimo nono apud Namptwich, in Com.
predicto prodictorie compassaverunt imaginat: fuer and intendebant guerram
rebellionem and insurrectionem contra dictum dom: Regem infra hoc Regnum
Angliae levare and suscitare and ad easdem prodictiones imaginationes and
intention suas predictas perimplendas and ad effectum redigend iidem
Guilietmus Brereton, Georgius Booth etc.
the county aforesaid Gentleman, James Gar^^ide late of Tarvin in the county
aforesaid Gent. Richard Golb^^^ of the same in the county aforesaid Gent. John
Bostoc^ late of Tatton Hall in the county aforesaid Esquire; Roger Bradley late of
Bradley in the county aforesaid Gent. Tho. N^den late of Namptwich in the
county aforesaid Mercer, George Edgely late of Ashton in the county aforesaid
Gent. Will. Edwards late of Tarond in the county aforesaid Mercer Will. Edwards
junior, late of the same Gent. John Win late of the same Ironmonger. Rob.
Venables late of Antrobus in the county aforesaid Gent. John Ru^ter late of
Godcr^ft in the county aforesaid Gent. R^chard H^a^h late of Frodsham in the
county aforesaid Yeoman, William Witter late of the same in the county
aforesaid yeoman, Thomas Ba^^er late of the same in the county aforesaid
yeoman, Humph. Minshall, late of Kinderton in the County afore-foresaid Gent.
Pet. Minshal late of the same in the Coun: aforesaid Gent. Joseph Hall late of
Fr^dsham in the Co^^^^ aforesaid Genesis Humph. Johnson late of Nuton in the
county aforesaid Gent, Galbert Ireland late of Crowton in the county aforesaid
Esquire; William Harri^on late or Minshal Vernon in the co: aforesaid yeo: R^.
Farrington of Stanthorn in the county aforesaid yeoman, Thomas Basnet late of
the same in the county aforesaid yeoman, William VValley late of Davenham in
the county aforesaid yeoman, Thomas VValley late of Shipbrook in the county
aforesaid yeoman, Thomas Axon late of Lostwich in the county aforesaid yeoman,
John Piersun late of Stanthorn in the county aforesaid yeoman, James Wright
late of the same in the county aforesaid yeoman John Milton late of Clive in
the county aforesaid yeoman, Ralph Becket late of Nuton in the county aforesaid
yeoman, Joseph Smallw^^d late of Sproston in the county aforesaid Webster, John
Damel late of Daresbury senior, in the county aforesaid Gent. VVil. Tomlinson
late of VVarton in the county aforesaid Gent. John VVarburton late of great
Budworth in the county aforesaid Gent. William Johnson late of Fredsham in the
county aforesaid Smith, and R^^ Pike late of the same in the county aforesaid
yeoman, and Gilbert Gerhard of Crew in the county aforesaid Gentleman, not
having the fear of God before their eyes, nor regarding their due allegiance,
but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the Devil utterly withdrawing
the love, as also the true obedience, which a true and faithful Subject of our
Lord Charles, now King of England, etc. toward him their King, bear and are
bound to bear; As also endeavoring, and with all their power striving the
common peace and tranquillity of this Kingdom of England to disturb, the 18.
day of July, in the year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles by the
grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the
Faith, etc. the 19 at Namptwich in the said county, traitorously contrived,
imagined and intended a Rebellious War and Insurrection against the said Lord
and King, to raise and stir up within this Kingdom of England: And for the
accomplishment of their said intentions, and to bring the same to pass, They
the said VVil. Broreton, George Booth; etc. afterward, that is to say, the
said 18 Day of July in the year aforesaid, with force of Arms, etc. at
Namptwich aforesaid in the county aforesaid against the Peace -- Postea
scilicet predicto decimo octavo Die Julii, Anno supra dicto vi and armis, etc.
apud Namptwich predictem in Com. pred. contra dictum Dom. Regem supremum verum
and indubitatum Do. suum cum magna multitudine gentium suratoribus pred. ignot.
ad numerum T^^um mill personarum modo guerrino armat. and arraiat: videlicet
cum Tympanis Anglice Drums, gladiis, hastis, tormentis and aliis arms tam
invasivis quam defensivis illicite and prodit. ad tunc and ibidem in simul
congregat: and assemblat: guerram publicam contra dict. Dom. Regem apud
Namptwich predictam in Com. predicto dicto decimo octavo Die Julii Anno decimso
nono supredicto proditorie parayerunt, ordinaverunt, and levavetunt, contra
pacem dicti Dom. Regis runc Coronam and dignitatem suas, ac contra formam
Statutorum in hujusmodi casu edit: and provis. Attorn. Dom. Regis prosecutor.
Inq. Magna. Billa vera.
of our said Lord and King, their supreme, true, and undoubted Lord, with a
great number of people unknown to this Jury, to the number of three thousand
persons, armed and arrayed in a warlike manner, with Drums, Swords, Pikes,
Guns, and other Arms, as well offensive as defensive, falsely and traitorously
then and there together in a public war against our said Lord and King at
Namptwich aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, the said 18. Day of July in the
year aforesaid, traitorously, ordered, prepared, and levied against their
Allegiance due, and against the peace of our said Lord and King, his Crown and
Dignity, And contrary to the form of the Statute in that Case provided.

The Kings Attorney Prosecutor.
CHESTER, viz.
THe Jury for our Lord the King, present upon their oaths, That VVilli^m
Brereton late of Handford in the County of Chester, Baronet, Thomas Middleton
late of Parndon in the said County Knight, Peter Egerton late of the same in
the said County Esquire; John Holcroft late of Tarvyn of the said County Esquire
(and many more in the Indictment;) not having the fear of God in their hearts;
nor regarding their due Allegiance, but being seduced and moved by the
instigation of the Devil, utterly withdrawing the love, true, and due
obedience, which a true and faithful Subject of our Lord Charles now King of
England, etc. toward our L. the King bear, and are bound to bear,
endeavoring, and with all their power striving the common peace and
tranquillity of this Kingdom of England to disturb, the 20 day of January, in
the year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles by the grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland King Defender of the Faith, etc. the 19
at Namptwich in the said County traitorously contrived, imagined and intended,
a rebellious war and insurrection against the said Lord and King to raise and
stir up, and for the accomplishment of their said intentions, and to bring
the same to pass, they the said William Brereton, Tho. Middleton, etc.
afterward, that is to say, the said 20 day of January in the 19 year
aforesaid by force of Arms, etc. at Namptwich aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid, against the peace of our said Lord and King, their supreme, true,
and undoubted Lord, with a great multitude of people unknown to this Jury, to
the number of three thousand persons, armed and arrayed in a war^ike manner,
with Drums, Swords, Pi^us, Guns, and other Arms, as well offensive as
defensive, falsely and traitorously, then, and there together gathered and
assembled, and a public war against our said Lord and King at Namptwich
aforesaid, in the county aforesaid, the said twentieth day of January, in the
year aforesaid, traitorously ordered, prepared, and levied against their
Allegiance due, to the great danger of the Kings person and subversion of this
Kingdom; and contrary to the peace of our said Lord and King, his Crown and
Dignity; and contrary to the form of the Statute in that Case provided.

The Kings Attorney Prosecutor. The great Inquest. The Bill is found.
CHESTER, viz.
THe Jury for the Lord the King present upon their oaths, That William Brereton
late of Handford in the county of Chester Baronet, Andrew Blacon late of Weston
magna in the said county, etc. Not having the fear of God before their eyes:
but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the Devil, utterly
withdrawing the love, as also the true affection; which a faithful Subject of
our Lord Charles now King of England, etc. toward him their King, bear and are
bound to bear; As also endeavoring, and with all their power striving the
common peace of the kingdom of England to disturb the 29. day of January, in
the year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. the 19.
at Namptwich in the said County, traitorously contrived, imagined and intended
a rebellious war and insurrection against the said Lord and King, to raise
and stir up within this kingdom of England; and for accomplishment of their
said Intentions, and to bring the same to pass, they the said W. Brereton,
etc- afterward, that is to say, the 29. day of Ian. in the year aforesaid,
with force of Atms, etc. at Namptwich aforesaid, in the county aforesaid
against the peace of our said Lord and King, their supreme true and undoubted
Lord, with a great number of people unknown to this Jury to the number of 3000.
persons, armed, and arrayed in a warlike manner with Drums, Swords, Pikes,
Guns, and other Arms, as well offensive as defensive, falsely and traitorously
then and there in a public war against our said Lord and King at Namptwich
aforesaid in the county aforesaid, the said 29. of Ian. in the year aforesaid,
traitorously ordered, and prepared against their Allegiance due, and against
the peace of our said Lord and King, his Crown; and Dignity; and contrary to
the form of the Statute in that Case provided.

The Kings Attorney Prosecutor.
Examined with the Original, By me Thomas Acton.

A Copy of an Indictment against John Moore Esquire found by the grand Jury.
Cester. viz.
JVr. pro dom. Rege super sa^am. suum presen^^^t, quod Johannes Moore ^. nuper
de Weston in Com. Ceste. Ar. (...) dei in ^^rde suo non habens, nec debit.
(...) suam p^^d^^ans, sed instigation. diabolica (...). and seduct^ dilectionem
and reram and debit. obedientiam; quas rerus and fidel subdito dom nost. Caroli
nun^ regis Angl. etc. erga ipsun^ Dom. Regem gerere^^ and de jure gerere
tenetur penitus subtrabens and machinani, and totis viribus suis intendens,
pacem and com. tranquilitatem hujus Regni Angl. preturbare vicesimo die Ianuar.
Anno B^gni dom Caroli dei great. Angl. Scot. Franc. and Hiber. Regis fidei
defensore, etc. decimo n^no apud Weston in Com. pred. proditorie compassavi^
imaginat. fuit and intendebat guerram, Rebellionem and insurrectio^m, cont.
dict. Dom. Ragem infra hoc Regnum Angl. levare and suscitar Et ad easdem
proditiones imaginationes and intentiones suas praedict. permiplend* and ad
effect. redigend. It Johannes Moore postea seil. predict. vicesimo die Ianuar.
Anno superdicto vi and Armis, etc. apud Weston pred. in Com. predict. cont.
dict. Dom. Regem supremum ver^m and indubitat. dom suum. c^m magna multitudine
Gent. Iar. predict. ignot. ad numer. centum personar modo guerr^io armat and
arraiat. viz. cum Tympanis, Anglice Drums, Gladiis, Hastis, Tormentis and aliis
Armis tam in vasivis quam defensivis, illicite and proditorie ad tunc and
ibidem in simul congregat. and assemblat. guerram publicam cont. Dict. Dom.
Regem apud Weston predict. in Com. predict. dict. vicesimo die Ianuar. An
supradict. proditorie paravit, ordinavit and levavit, cont. pacem dict. dom.
regis nunc Coronam and dignitat. su. ac cont. formam Statuti in hujusmod. casu
edit. and provis.

Attorn Dom. Reg. pros.
THe Jury for our Sovereign Lord the King, upon their Oaths do present. That
Io. Moor late of Eston in the County of Chester, not having the fear of God in
his heart, nor considering his due allegiance, moved and seduced by the
instigation of the devil the love, the true and due obedience, which a true
and faithful subject of our Lord Charles now King of England, etc. toward his
said Lord and King bears, and of right i^ bo^nd to bear, altogether
withdrawing, and imagining and with all his power intending, the peace and
common tranquillity of this Realm of England to disturb, the 20 day of
January, in the year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the grace
of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, defender of the faith,
etc. the 19th at Weston in the said County, traitorously did contrive, imagine
and intend War, Rebellion and Insurrection against the said Lord and King
within this Kingdom of England, and the same did gather and stir up, And to
perform and bring to pass, such his Treasons, Imaginations and intentions,
The said John Moore, afterward, that is to say, the said 20th day of Innuary
in the said year with force of Arms, etc. at Weston aforesaid in the said
County against the said Lord and King, his supreme true and undoubted Lord,
with a great number of people to the Jury unknown to the number of 100
persons, Armed and arrayed in a Warlike manner, that is to say, with Drums,
Swords, Pikes, guns* and other Weapons, as well offensive as defensive, falsely
and traitorously then and there did gather and assemble together in a Warlike
manner against the said Lord and King at Weston aforesaid the said twentieth
day of Ian. in the year aforesaid, Traitorously prepared, ordered, and levied,
against the peace of the said now Lord and King, his Crown and Dignity, and
contraty to the form of the Statute in that case made and provided.

The Kings Attorney prosecuteth the grand jury.
The tenth of Febr. 19. Carol. A Copy of an Outlary against John Moore
Esquire; with the return of the Coronor Com. Cestr.
CArolus Dei gra. Angliae Scotiae Fran. and Hiberniae Rex, fidei defensor, etc.
vic. Cestr. salute
Precipimus tibi quod non omittas propter aliqut. libertat. Com. tui quin exigi
facias Johannes Moor nuper de Weston in Commit. tue, Ar. de Com. in Com. quousq:
secund. legem and co^suetud. regni nosti. ang. ut lagat finon compervet, Et si
compreint tunc eum capias and salve custod. Ita quod habiam Cor. eus coram
Justice. nostris Cestr. apud Cestriam primo die prox. Session. Cestr. apud
Cestr. tenend. Ad respond. nobis de qui Iusdam proditon. Rebellion, and
Insurrect, unde idem Jo. hannes indictas existit. Et ad saciend. and recipiend.
quod cur nostra de eo tunc and ibib. constit Et a^ istat^mp. Cestr. apud Cestr.
ad cert. diem mand. Justin. nost. quod predict. Jo. non est invent. in Ballivo
tua. Et habe^^ ibi. hoc Br^.

Test meipso apud Cestr. decimo die Feb Anno Regni decimo nost. Per K. Febr.
20. Car.

CHARLES by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King,
defend of the faith, etc.
To our Sheriffs of Chester greeting.
We command thee notwithstanding any liberty within thy County, but that thou
cause Joh^ Moore late of Weston in the said County Esquire, to be summoned to
appear until according to the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom of England,
he be Outlawed if he appear not (...) do appear, that thou take and keep
him in safe custody, so that thou bring his Body before our Justices of
Chester, sitting at Chester the first day of the next Sessions of Chester at
Chester to be held, to make answer unto us concerning diver^* Treasons,
Rebellions and Insurrections, whereof he the said John is Indicted, and to do
and receive what our Court shall think fit concerning him, And from that time
we command our Justices of Chester at a certain day to certify the neglect
of appearance of him the said John within thy Baillwick. And thou shall bring
thither this Wait;

witness our self at Chester the tenth day of February in the ninteenth Year
of our Reign. By K. February, in the twentieth Year of King Charles.

The Sheriffs return is thus Englished.
VIrtute istiut^ble. mihi direct. ad Com men Cestr. tent. apud Cestr. in Com.
Cestr. in com. Auta. (...) Com. pred. die Lunae videl. quarto die Martii, Anno
Regni dom. Regis infra script. decimo (...) infra nominat. Johannes Moor primo
exact. suit and non comparait, Ad. Com. meum Cestr. tent. apud Cestr. in com.
Cestr. in com. A^la plime. com. (...) Lun^ videl, primo, die April. Anno Reg.
a^c^. (...) Regis vicesint (...). Jo. Moor (...). fuit and non (...) Cestr.
tent apud Cestr. in com. Cestr. in com. Aula Pllo^ ^om pradi. die Lunae, viz.
vitesinet novo die Apr. Ann. ult sup. pred. Johannes Moor ^ertia non^ exact.
fuit and non compar. Ad com. meum Cestr. tenti. apud Cestr. in com. Cestr. in
com. Aula. plim. com pred. die Lunae, viz. vicesimo Septemo die Maii Ann. ult
sup praedict. Joha. Moore quarto exact. fuit and non comparuit. and ad com.
meum Cestr. tent. apud Cestr. in com. Cestr. in com. Aula plimt. com. pred. die
Lunae videlic. vice simo quarto die Iunii An. ult supradict. predicto Johan.
Moore quin. exact fuit. and non compar. ideo pred. Johan. Moore pre judic. Jo.
Wilson Genesis coronat. dict. dom. Regis com. pred. scundum legem and
consuetudinem Regni Anglie ultagat est.

Istud bre. prout. indorsat mihi deliberat. fuit per pred. Ric. Grosvenor Ar.
Rich Grosvenor. Ar. nuper vic. Chestr. in exita. ab officio suo. Robert.
Tatton. Ar. vict. com. Cestr.

BY virtue of this Writ to me directed, to my County of Chester, held at
Chester in the County of Chester, in the common Hall, for Pleas for that
County, on Monday, that it to say the fourth day of March, in the year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord with in written the ninteenth, the with named
John Moore, had his first summons and appeared not. At my County Court of
Chester, held at Chester in the County of Chester in the common Hall for Ple^
for the County aforesaid on (...) is to say, the first day of April in the
year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the Twentieth, the aforenamed
John Moore had a second summons, but appeared ^or A^ my County Court of Chester
held at Chester in the County of Chester, in the common Hall, for Pleas for the
said County, on Monday that is to say, the nineteenth day of April in the Year
last mentioned, the said John Moore was summoned but appeared not. At my County
Court of Chester, held at Chester in the County of Chester, in the common Hall
for Pleas in the said County, on Monday that is to say, the seven and twentieth
day of May in the Year last mentioned, the said John Moore was summoned, but
appear not. At my County court of Chester, held at Chester in the common Hall
for Pleas for the said county, on Monday, that is to say the 24 of June in the
Year last mentioned the said John Moore was summoned a fifth time, but appeared
not. Therefore the said John Moore by the judgment of John Wilson Gentleman
the Coronor of our Sovereign Lord the King for the said county, (according to
the Law and custom of the Realm of England) is Outlawed.

Signed Rich. Grosvenour Esquire Sheriff.
This Writ (as it is indorsed) was delivered unto me, by the said Rich
Gravenour Esquire late Sheriff of Chester, at his departure out of his Office.

Signed. Robert Tatton Esquire Sheriff for the County of Chester.



The names of the Judges and Justices. Nomina eorum lustic. qui comparuerunt ad
Assisias Cestr. quinto die Febr. Anno regni Caroli Reg. Angl. etc. 19.
RObertus Vicecomes Cholmondly. Thom. Mildward mil. Justic. Cestr. Richardus
Pritherow Ar. alt. Just. Cestr. Thom. Cholmley, Ar. Richardus Brereton, Ar.
Emanuel Edwards, Ar. Thomas Bromley. Johannes Werden, Ar. Jonathan Woodnoth,
Ar. Johannes Wilson, Coronator. Com. pred. tunc comp. Willielmus Kelsall Gent.
Capital. Constabul. Hund. de Ra. Tunna Gent. Broxon tunc Comp. Johannes
Robinson Gent. Capital. Constabul. Hund. de Christoferus Bennet Gent. VVorall
tunc Comp. Fredericus Terry Gent. Bal. libertat. Hundred. de Broxen tunc comp.
Willielmus Massey Mil. Bal. libertat. Hundred. de VVorall tunc comp. Richardus
Grosvenor Ar. vic. Com. Cestr. tunc.
The names of the Jury. Nomina Iur. jur. supr. Inquisition. magnam ad Session.
Cestr. tent. apud Cestr. etc. quinto die Febr. Anno regni Caroli Angl. etc.
decimo nono.
HUgo Cholmley de Culceley mil. Henric. Bunbury de Stancy Ar. Richard. Brereton
de Ashley, Ar. Johan. Bellot de Morton, Ar. Petrus Leicester de neith Tabley
Ar. Hugo Wilbraham de Eccleston Ar. Jonathan Woodnath de Sheuton Ar. Thom.
Trafford de Bridge Trafford Ar. Edmund. Pessall de Oven Ar. Will. Hassall de
Hankelow Ar. Will. Brock de Upton Genesis Lauerenc. Wymington de Armitage Genesis
Richard. Mallory de Mobberley Genesis Robert. Weever de Cholmondley Genesis Elisha
Manwaring de Martyn Genesis Will. Meyre de Meyre Genesis Stanleus Burroughes de
Tassington Genesis Petrus. Hatton de Quistybirches Genesis Johan. Kelsall de Mickle
Trafford Genesis Thom. Ponket de Bridge Trafford Genesis Johan. Frygg de Whitby Genesis
Jacobus Hulwood de Sutton Genesis Robertus Waynright de Christleton Genesis
FINIS.

