Another famous VICTORY Obtained by His EXCELLENCY The Earl of ESSEX.

Against the Kings Army, near Reading, Oxford, Marlow and Healy. December. 3.

Wherein is declared the manner how these three Regiments gave the Kings Army
the overthrow, killing about 1100. of them, and taking great store of
Ammnition, money, and prisoners with the loss of 300. men.

Namely, the Orange Coats, commanded by his Excellency: The Green Coats,
commanded by Colonel Goodwyn: The Blue-coats, commanded by Colonel Langham
merchant in London.

Also, His Majesty's proceedings at Oxford, and the great preparations that are
made there to entertain the Queen of Bohemia.

December. 6. Printed for Joseph Neale.

Another Glorious VICTORY OBTAINED By his Excellency, and Col. Langham
against the Cavaleirs, at their second surrounding of the Kings Army, near
Reading, Marlow, and Henley, December. 2.
UPon the first day of December. His Excellency had intelligence that the
Cavaleirs were resolved to leave Oxford Reding, Marlow, and Henley, and to
betake themselves further down into the West Countries, thereby thinking to
strengthen their wicked and Tyrannical Crew, and to furnish themselves with
such Arms and Ammunition which they stood in extraordinary need of: Whereupon
his Excellency taking the same into serious consideration, and finding that it
would prove very prejudicial unto them, if that they did neglect and let this
opportunity slip, he forthwith called a Council of War, where his Excellency
very nobly declared himself unto most of the Officers and Commanders, and after
some time spent in consultation thereupon, it was concluded that several
Regiments of Horse add Foot should be forthwith drawn out of the Main Body to
wheel about toward Reding and Marlow, and so by that means to get beyond the
kings Irmy, which was accordingly put in execution and performed.

And upon the second of this month his Excellency caused and gave command that
several Pieces of Ordnance should be with all expedition Planted against
Marlow and Henley, where the Cavaleers had strongly entrenched themselves.

The Ordnance played for the space of two hours very furiously, doing great
execution upon the Enemy, and after they had done playing, His Excellencies own
Regiment advanced up toward the aforesaid Towns, together with the Lord Sey
his Regiment and Colonel Langham, accompanied with fourteen Troops of Horse,
who performed that which they took in hand so undantedly, and with such Noble
and Heroic courage, that they may well be styled, the undanted spirits of
Christendom.

For no sooner had Colonel Langham brought up his Regiment and placed them in
a fa^r battalia, but they immediately fell on, fighting for the space of three
hours most intolerable, being resolved either to lose their own lives, or to
win that honor which the former Blew-Coats has lost.

It is credibly reported, that the Enemy lost in this fight at the least seven
hundred men, besides many hundreds that are taken Prisoners.

Then the other two Regiments commanded by his Excellency and the Lord Sey
marched up to relieve Collonell Langham, where they did great execution, the
Orange Coats fighting with the same Courage and Resolution as they formerly did
at Kinton, and after much shot spent on both sides, the Cavaleirs retreated,
and left the Town of Marlow, together with above two thousand of their
Confederates dead behind them, besides many that were slain and taken
Prisoners, as they were running away.

Thus by the great mercy and providence of God his Excellency has obtained
the victory, giving unto them a far greater Overthrow then they had at
Kinton, insomuch that they have now cleared the Towns of Marlow and Henley.

A True Relation of His Majesty's proceedings at Oxford.
IT is credibly informed, that His Majesty will abide this Winter Quarter at
Oxford. Also there is great preparation for Her Majesty the Queen of Bohemia,
and her Son the Prince Elector, who is expected with his Majesty on saturday
next for there is sent the Lord Capell, the Lord Seymour, and other Gentlemen
of quality to meet them at Dover, and for the safe conducting of them to His
Majesty. The City of Oxford is strongly fortifying it self, and there shall
be four Troops of Horse, containing a hundred in a Troop, that shall every
night keep centinell at the four thorow-fares to the City; as also four
Foot-companies a mile from the Horse.

His Majesty has lately proclaimed a Proclamation, that what Soldier soever
shall rob or pillage any house in the said City, shall be punished with death,
which hitherto has been observed. There are three Gentlemen in Election to be
Lord Privy Seal, but I imagine Mr. Holborne will have that fortune of Honor,
though the Lord of Dorset have the place in reversion; Master Hide stands
likewise for it, who is as great with His Majesty as any, if not greater, for
he is the man that draws and corrects all His Majesty's Declarations,
Proclamations, and Protestations, and what not before they are published to the
whole World. There came the last night intelligence to His Majesty, that there
were near fourscore Troopers taken at Harlow Roe by the Parliaments forces,
before the taking of which there were ten or more slain, but in the conducting
of them toward London a party of Horse about forty were set on the
Parliaments Forces to rescue their fellows, were likewise taken upon the
Forest of Windsore. I have not for the present any more news to write you
save this, that near my house at Abbingron there were two of the Kings Forces
hanged in the High way for cutting a Marker-womans throat; There is far more
mischief done by the Irish and welehwomen then by the Soldiers themselves all
men, women, and children are greatly in fear of them. Upon Saturday last his
Majesty in Triumph knighted Master Sidenham, Sir Edmund Sidenham, who is also
knight Marshall. There were some few Lines in Uerse presented to His Majesty
by the Provost of Queens College. His Majesty does hourly expect a Message
and Propositions from the House concerning a Peace, but upon Saturday next you
shall hear and receive of me at large, in the mean time I leave you to Gods
protection and tuition, and rest

Your affectionate Friend and Kinsman, T. C.
Dated the 2. of December, 1642.

