I'NOGPAPHI'A. OR A MODEL OF The Primitive Congregational way: Wherein
satisfaction is offered, by unfolding (according to the Scriptures) what the
right order of the Gospel, and way of the Saints in the visible worshipping of
God is, in the days of the New Testament.

And how the Saints in these days may walk up to it, notwithstanding their
present hindrances.

Together with the maine points in controversy, touching the right visible
Church State Christ has instituted under the Gospel, with the extent of
Church Officers, and power of particular visible Churches, and continuance of
Divine Ordinances and Institutions under the defection and Apostasy of
Antichrist.

By W: BARTLET, Minister of the Gospel, at Wapping.

Esaias 30.21. And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is
the way, walk in it. Ezekiel. 43.11. And if they are ashamed of all they have
done, show them the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, etc. Rev. 18 4,
5. And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her my people,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues,
for her sins have reached to heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities.
Jer. 50.5. They shall ask the way to Sion, with their faces thitherward, etc.
Calv. in Epist. ad Sado et. In illa Ecclesiae forma quam Apostoli
constituerunt, unicum habemus verae Ecclesiae exemplar: a qu^ si quis vel
minimum deflectit, aberrat. Echo Nobiliss. viri Pet. Beauvis. Benlosi. Papismus
pompatica quaedam est Monarchia, quam genuit ambitio, fovit superstitio,
roboravit Tyrannis, propagavit tam ignorantia seculi, quam fallacia
pseudo-Cleri. Ergo ab execrandu Antichristi faecibus redeatis, ad Christi
sacra. LONDON, Printed by W.E. for H. Overton, at the entrance into Pope's Head
Alley, out of Lumbard-street. 1647.

To all the Saints, and Servants of Jesus Christ, scattered up and down in the
Kingdom of England, and throughout the world, that hitherto have been
strangers to the paths of Sion, and have not worshipped God according to the
right order of the Gospel.
Dearly beloved in the Lord,
TIll better provision come, In all humility I here present you as from Jesus
Christ, (the Head and (...). Rev. 15.3.
King of Saints) with this plain Treatise, for whose sakes it is composed, and
sent abroad into the world. The subject matter of it, (looking directly to the
glory of Christ, and the welfare of your souls) is so excellent, that I
ingenuously profess, it calls for the richest annointings from ^n high, to
declare and hold forth the beauty and luster thereof: And had I not proved by
experience, that the glorious God ordains strength out of the mouths of
Babes, Psalm. 8.2. and as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. chooses the
foolish, the meal, the base things of the world, and things that are despised,
yea things that are not, to be isntrumental for his praise; I should have been
altogether discouraged from setting about it. But in regard the Josh. 6.20
Jericho's wall fall down at the blowing o^ Rams horns. 1 Samuel 17. David
conquere^ Goliath with ^ Sling and a stone. Esaias 41 14, 15, 16. the Church a
poor worm, thretneth the mountains to dust. The Disciples of Christ taken
out of Fisher-boates, by no other means then preachin^ subdue Kingdoms, and
nations to Christ
weakness of the instrument, exceedingly advances the glory, both of the
wisdom and power of God; I was the more encouraged to undertake it. ^ow
because of my intending the general good of believers, and profiting the
meanest, in publishing this Treatise: I have propounded to my self 3. things
in the carrying of it on.

1 The manner and way of ordering and disposing it.

2. The grounds and arguments that divinely moved me to it, and were as a fire
in my bosom, not suffering me to rest.

3. The end and scope that I had before me, and at which I aimed: of all which
I shall briefly give you an account.

As for the first of these, I have endeavored three things.

1. That the method be plain and easy, by way of Proposition, and Deductions
or inferences from them; according to the most usual and ordinary way of
preaching observed in the Kingdom, to which people have been accustomed,
whereby the truth is not only cleared and defended, but that which is contrary
thereunto, and unsound, is discovered, and weakened.

2. That the style be not lofty, with an affected strain, soaring above the
capacity and reach of the ignorant, (a distemper that sticks too close the
tongues and Pens of many men, forgetting that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.19.
That in the Church he had rather speak five words with understanding, that he
might teach others, then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue) but low and
familiar, avoiding to the uttermost (according to the same Apostle, 1 Cor.
2.4.) the entising words of man's wisdom, in handling the sacred mysteries of
the Gospel: neither can this be any prejudice I suppose to such as are
learned, considering that they (especially if they have learned Christ) do
judge of Books rather by the matter then the style. That great Orator
(Demostenes) himself could say, that the riches of Greece did not consist in
words.

3. That the matter it self propounded and discussed in this Treatise, be not
so much an argumentative as positive way held forth from the authority of the
Scripture chiefly; and sound reason consonant thereunto, which are those
spiritual weapons, that are mighty through God, to the casting down those
strong holds in the hearts of men, that exalt themselves against the knowledge
of God, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. As for the judgments of the most eminent, learned, and
godly men which I have here and there, throughout the Treatise produced, I have
not done it in the least, to disparage the authority of the Scriptures; for
without controversy, the word of God is greater To build upon any Doctor^
saying, without Scripture, or reason agreeing to Scripture, were to follow
Pythagoras, rather then Christ. vid. Cranmers confutation of unwritten Verities.

Be a man never so learned after the Apostles, yet his words without Gods word
ar^ of none authority: id. ibid. And this he abundantly proves from ancient
Fathers and Schoolmen, as Chrysostom Jerome, Ambrose, Augustine, Cyril*
Fulgent. Greg* Theophil. Damasc. Bruno, Beda, Ansel. Tho. Aquin. and others, in
the Treatise.


then all the testimonies of men, but only to satisfy such as are weak, and
conceive that those of the Congregationall way, are singular and contrary to
all men, both in their judgment and practice.

2. Touching the grounds and reasons that prevailed with me to the setting upon
this work, they were such as these following.

1. The ardent and burning desire of my soul, after the lifting up of Jesus
Christ's honor, and furthering Sions welfare, both which at this present time,
do not a little suffer, from the tongues and Pens of multitudes in this
Kingdom, and other parts of the world.

2. The stopping in some measure (if it be possible) the mouths of opposers,
and giving satisfaction to other more moderate, that enquire after the truth of
the Congregationall way, according to the Scriptures, and vindicating of it
also, from those foul aspersions that have been, and are still cast upon it,
and those that walk in it: many men not fearing in these days of iniquities
abounding, to speak all manner of evil, of the ways and servants of Christ,
that will not, dare not comply with them, in their sinful ways: as was the
practice of many in the primitive times, 1 Pet. 4.4. Wherein they think it
strange that you run not with them to the same excess of riot, Blasphemy in
a Greek word, and with the learned in that tongue, a blasphemer is one that
takes away the same, credit, or good name of another; from (...). Demost.
(...), blaspheming, or speaking evil of you.

3. The bleeding condition of the true Churches of Christ, through the violent
outrage of diverse men, that of late are prejudiced against them, and that
right order of the Gospel they walk in: So that the feet of many weak souls
begin to slide, and the feeble Lambs of Christ, that of late have been folded
and brought in to the beauties of holiness, are thereby in danger to be turned
out of the way.

4. The great danger of Reformations miscarrying, that of late years was so
happily begun, there being not only an obstructing thereof at present, but a
great and mavelous appearance also of recidivation, and returning to the old
and former ways of formality, superstition, and tyranny, in many places of
the Kingdom.

3. As for the ends I have proposed to my self in the publishing this
Treatise, they have been such as these.

1. Not to increase and widen, (the Lord knows) but to heal and abate the
present differences that are now on foot in the Kingdom, about the Sacred and
Divine Ordinances and Institutions of Christ, touching the right way and order
of the Saints in the visible worship of God. The truth is, I have not a little
suffered from the tongues of men, as a rent-maker, and peace-breaker, for my
endeavors to bring the Saints (in the place where Providence cast me) into the
order of the Gospel; but whether justly, I doubt not but my Lord and Master
will in due time make evident. In the interim, this is my comfort, that my
sufferings in this or any other kind, being for righteousness sake, shall
infinitely advantage my internal and eternal peace and welfare, however it
shall go with my external condition in this world.

2. Nor yet to condemn, or contemn in the least, the personal gifts and
graces of the servants of Christ, that yet remain in their present
questionable Church State, but only (as duty ^inds me toward Christ and them)
to discover, how vain a thing it is for them to expect a right
Gospel-Reformation in matters of visible worship throughout the Kingdom, so
long as they Its greatly (...) be desired ^^at this que^^ion were ^^roughly
de^^ted. Qu. Weether ^he Church of ^ngland as it is National, con^^sting of so
^any thousand ^arishes, that ^^e as branches and members of ^he same, and ^ave
no power ^f government ^n themselves, ^ut stand un^er an absolute ^uthoritative
^cclesiasti^all ^ower without them to rule and ^overn them ^n the m^t^er^ of
Gods Worship, be a ^rue Church for matter and ^orme, accor^ing to the
Scripture, and divine appointment.
remain under a false, visible, National Church State, and order of worship:
because, as long as the right order of the Gospel, instituted by Jesus Christ,
for the Saints to walk, and worship God in, is slighted and rejected, the
blessing of Christ on our endeavors, after a sound and through Reformation in
the Kingdom cannot be expected: the old leaven of a false and Antichristian
constitution must first be cast out, as the Apostle reasons with the
Corinthians in the point of their Church pollution, 1 Cor. 5.6, 7. before there
can be a new lump, that is, a sound Church state according to divine
institution.

We cannot be ignorant, how the whole (...) or frame of Englands visible Church
state, and order of worship and government has been unsound, from the very
first day that the Lord was pleased to begin the freedom of this Kingdom
from Antichristian bondage and thraldom: And though the Reformation in
doctrine and matters of faith (as being the principal) was carefully looked
after, (for which we and our posterity after us have great cause to bless God)
Though matters of faith are the principal parts of Christ's will, and so ought
to be done, yet matters of external worship and Church Order are also
commanded, and so not to be neglected, as Christ said to the Scribes and
Pharisees in a like-case, Mat. 23.23. and so Call. Pet. Mart. M. Cartwright, and
others judge.
yet in respect of the visible frame and constitution of the Church, and order
of worship and government, so there was little or no Reformation, nor
separation from Rome: All the separation in England from Antichrist formerly,
was more in respect of purity of doctrine, then worship; and the reformation
that is now on foot is more in respect of government in the Church of England,
then of the Church state of England it self: which I desire may be marked, for
the same National form and frame of Church state continues still, and is
allowed of, as it was formerly, before ever there was a renouncing of the power
and authority of the Pope, in H 8. and Ed. 6. days. The change hitherto is
only in point of government, the constitution still the same.

And therefore I say one chief end I have had in publishing this plain
Treatise, is not to despise the godly that yet remain in their old National
Church* state, or in the least to give a check to the Parliaments proceedings
hitherto, who doubtless (as charity binds me to believe) have proceeded
according to that light they have received, but only to hold forth in a brief
manner, according as it has been desired, what the true visible Church State
is, of Christ's appointment under the New Testament, and how proper it is to him
only to institute it, and what necessity lies upon all those that profess the
doctrine of the Gospel to embrace it, and submit unto it, and to come off from
all other Church states that are of humane constitution, (as I understand a
National political Church State to be) if we will expect Jesus Christ to
dwell amongst us, and take pleasure in us for the future.

3. Another end proposed to my self in composing this Treatise, was not to
discover or lay open before the world, the nakedness of any of my brethren, that
either walk contrary to the rule of the word, and besides it, in the matters
of worship, or that through the wiles of Satan, and cunning craftines of men,
as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.13. have been carried away from their former
stedfastnes in the use of those pure Gospel ordinances and institutions, and
now live and walk up and down the world, as if Jesus Christ were
Church-lesse, and the Saints Christ-lesse; yea, as if the barrel of Christ's
Meal, and Cruse of his Oil, (locked up in his spiritual ordinances and
administrations,) were altogether drawn dry and exhausted: but that I might be
a poor instrument in the hands of Christ to deliver such from their false
ways, that are yet in Egyptian darkness, and reduce those to the Tents of the
Shepherds, that are gone from them; where they may again (as formerly) enjoy
their beloved, Cant. 1.7.8.
and be built up to a further enjoyment of his glory.

And thus (beloved in the Lord) you have a brief discovery of what I have
propounded to my self, touching the method, grounds and ends of this Treatise.
I have only a few things to request at your hands, and then I shall dismiss
you to the Treatise it self, and commend both it and you to the blessing of
Christ. Now that which I have to request of you is this.

1. That you would not receive with the left hand, what is offered to you with
the right, but endeavor to put a candid and fair construction (as in charity
you are bound) on the weak endeavors of him, that had nothing in his eye, but
Christ's honor and your and the whole Kingdoms welfare.

2. In the reading of the following Treatise, to take with you the help of the
Spirit of truth, who alone searches the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. and
can enable us to judge of spiritual things spiritually: If we plough with
Christ's heifer, we shall understand his Riddles; whereas, if we consult with
flesh and blood, in the things of God, and measure divine mysteries, by the
wisdom of this world, we shall be so far from having our expectation
answered, as that we shall stumble, and be offended at them, 1 Cor. 1.18, to
26. and 2.14.

3. When you meet with an any Scriptures and Arguments that are brought to
clear and confirm any point, that you would vouchsafe to take in the whole,
and consider them together, and not apart, be cause what may be wanting in
some, may be made up in the rest. For if there be but one or two, aamongst six
or ten Texts of Scriptures, or Arguments that are produced to prove the truth
of any one point, that are substantial and to the purpose, its sufficient,
though the rest are not so strong: as if ten men were to lift a burden
together, though the one half of them were but weak in comparison of the
other, yet if the work be done, it is sufficient, we look after no more.

4. Where Scriptures alleged, do not expressly, and in so many words speak
out the truth of that they are produced for, yet to remember, if they do it by
a sound and good consequence, then that is sufficient, as we may see in the
practice of our Savior, when he would prove the truth of the resurrection to
the Sadduces, he does it not by a Scripture that speaks expressly, but only by
sound consequence; as Mat. 22, 31, 32. Mark. 12.26, 27.

5. Not to take offense, at the short and brief passing through particulars,
because I undertook at first to give a draught or platform only, (according
to the Title of the Book) of the visible Church state which Jesus Christ has
instituted for the SAINTS to observe in the days of the New Testament. Now in
a business of this nature, understanding men will confess, that ^are pointing
at truths is sufficient, and therefore I purposely avoided the transcribing of
most of the Scripture proofs that are cited in this Treatise.

6. That wheresover I have been necessita^ed to speak (in any of the
inferences drawn from the Propositions) against those ways and practices which
do vary from what is laid down as the truth, whether it be the way of absolute
and h^gh classical Presbytery, over the particular Churches and Congregations
of believers; or the way of re-baptizing; or the way which is (only for
distinction sake) styled The rigid Separation; or way of living altogether
without visible Ordinances and worship, because of the defectivenes is in the
administrators, or above them in the Spirit, as those that look upon the divine
institutions of Christ, but as shadows, or things indifferent; or the way of
fashioning the sacred orders and ordinances of Christ's Church, to the
government of civil States and Commonwealths, or any other mentioned in the
following Treatise* it has not been in the least, out of a spirit of
contention against those that walk in those different ways; nor to disparage
or undervalue their gifts and graces with which they are endowed; or to
infringe their christian liberty, by bringing their persons into trouble; but
in the discharge of my duty toward Christ, and the giving occasion for a more
clear discovery of the truth professing my self (as in the sight of God)
always ready to perform any christian duty or office of love, toward any of
them, whenever I shall by providence be called thereunto.

7. Lastly, if any shall attempt the answering of it, I shall in the Spirit of
love request him that he would first of all sit down and consider with himself
seriously, that whiles he thinks to strike at an error, he may do what in him
lies, to wound the truth, and so make work for repentance: It Is not for me to
boast in the least of what is published by so weak an instrument as my self;
but so much I have seen and observed from the first day of the Lords putting me
upon it, to the time of its publishing, (besides what I have found in the
practice of it) that I cannot but expect the truth therein held forth, for the
substance of it shall stand, and take place, notwithstanding all the Batteryes
and blasts of opposers that shall come against it. I know the age I am cast
upon to bear witness to those truths of Christ I have published, cannot easily
digest what is set before them; and so I shall be exposed to the deepest
censures that men of evil and perverse spirits, (who have only a form of
Godliness, but deny the power of it in their walking) can lay upon me: but
(through infinite riches of mercy) I have learnt in some measure to look above
them all, and to cast my self and the work I have published, on him, who is
that Alsufficient God, and faithful Creator, that is every way able to keep
that is committed to his charge in weldoing, and to bring about his glorious
ends, 1 Pet. 4.19.
by weak and contemptible means.

Thus having premised these few things, I forbear troubling you any further in
this place, having reserved a word of exhortation to you, in the end of the
Treatise; only desiring the Father of mercies, and God of all consolation, to
make the following Treatise effectual, for the bringing over of your hearts to
the beautiful ways of Sion, and accomplishing all those other gracious ends,
for which it is intended, which is the constant prayer of him whose greatest
ambition is to be isntrumental for Jehovahs glory, and his Saints happiness.

WILL. BARTLET.
March 1. 1646.
A TABLE to find out the principal matters contained in the following TREATISE.
A.
ACts 15. No warrant for Claessical and Synodical ruling power over particular
churches, but makes for the privilege of particular congregations, p. 133,
134, 135 Accidentals of the visible church state, instituted by Christ, only
lost under Antichrist, not the essentials. p. 80. Administration of Seals and
censures not common and promiscuous, but ordinarily limited to, and bounded
within each particular Church. p. 61. to 68. Instances brought to the contrary,
showed to be invalid. p. 68* 69. Apostles practiced and declared a visible
church state of divine institution to be observed by the Saints. p. 5. The next
age after, the Apostles observed this visible church state of Christ's
instituting. p. 6. Apostles no heads of, but Ministers and servants to the
churches of Christ. 21 Doctor Ames for the power of particular churches within
themselves, with out subordination to others. p. 43. 6. Arguments to prove the
being of a visible church state under the Gospel. p. 6, 7, 8, 9. 11. Arguments
or motives to prevail with the Godly in the Kingdom, to submit unto it. p.
88. to 101. 9. Arguments to prove the power of government in particular
congregations. p. 48, 49. Assertors of the congregationall way, or Primitive
order of the Gospel, free from the foul aspersions of Schism, error,
heresy, and blasphemy, laid to their charge. p. 28, 61. M. Ainsworth for the
power of particular Churches within themselves. 43
B.
M. Baynes for the power of particular churches within themselves. 38 Baptism
administered out of particular churches unlawful. 69, 70. Repeated, or taken up
again de novo, without any warrant, and altogether unlawful. 70. 71, 72. Once
administered though corruptly, not to be reiterated, when the Saints enter into
church fellowship. 105 Believers gifts and graces not so well exercised singly
and apart as jointly, united together in church fellowship. 7. 8. bound to
submit themselves to that order of the Gospel Christ has instituted, and no
other. 18 19. and 88, to 101 M. Brightman for the power of particular churches
within themselves. 38
C.
M. Caryl against suppressing of errors by external violence and compulsion.
129, 130 M. Cartwr. for the power of particular churches within themselves, 39
Visible Church State under the Gospel, Christ the sole Author of it. 9. to 18
Christ was qualified with power from his Father, for church-work above all
other, seven ways. 9, 10, 11 Diverse things proper to Christ the Head of the
Church which are not communicable to any creature. 22 Sacred visible Church
state of Chris^s instituting under the Gospel, consists of six parts, viz.
matter form, end, rule, quantity or extent, and prerogative. 30 Parish
Church^s in England, sound faulty in all these, and their constitution
discovered to be merely civil and humane. 55. to 61 Right visible particular
Churches have power of government within th^mselves, proved by Scripture,
testimony of the choicesest English Writers, and reason. 35. to 49 Church State
of Christ's instituting proved to be without alteration, or cessation. 78. to 82
Classical way of governing churches not a plant of Gods planting, showed to be
not only unscripturall, but unreasonable also, and sinful in many respects.
52, 53, 54. and 72, 73, 74. Compulsion of Con^ci^nce proved to be unlawful
many ways, both in Magistrates and Minist. 128. to 133 Commandments of Christ
not to be neglected, for want of men's countenance. 135, 136 Congr^gationall
Churches do not swerve from, but come nearest to the practice of the Primitive
Churches, 61. No losers by opposition. 115, 116. No cause of errors or
licentiousness. 122. Vindicated in their admission of members, and not coming
into public 75. 76, 77. have as much power against errors and looseness as
the Classical way, and better, and as free from errors. 124 separate only
where Christ commands them* not from sound doctrine and christian fellowship,
but from a false Church State, and order of administering the holy things of God
in England, 121, 122. do not sin in refusing to administer the seals to those
are not in the right order of the Gospel, 74 Their way, proved to be according
to the Scriptures and sound reason. 138, 139
D.
Denyers of Divine Institutions for the right worshipping of God in a sacred
visible Church State, under a great sin. 19, 20 Dividers between Christ and
the creature, in ordering and appointing the spiritual ordinances of Gods
house, how absurd and injurious also to Christ. 20, 21, 22 Duties of
church members one toward another set forth in fifteen particulars. 110, 111
E
Saints are to embody, and what concerns their practice therein. 101. 106 Ends
of Christ's instituting a visible Church state under the Gospel, 31, 34, 99 Envy
to young ones, that God has in a more excellent manner gif^ed in these last
days, and given light unto touching the right order of the Gospel, a great
cause of men's crying it down. 115 Epitome of the Congregationall way according
to the Scriptures. 140 Five Evils that attend those that hold cessation of
Ministry, and Ordinances. 85, 86, 87 A threefold Exhortati^n to those are out
of the order of the Gospel, to those that are against it and to those that God
has brought into the practice of it. 140
F.
D. Fenner for the power of particular Churches within themselves. 4^ No
fellowship to be had ordinarily with God, out of a true Church State. 20 Right
external form of a true visible Church, what. 32, 33 34 Friends of Christ,
cannot well slight the sacred institutions of Christ. 20 D. Fulke for the power
of particular churches within themselves. 43 Eight sorts of fruit that grow on
the lofty tree of high Presbitery. 52, 53.
G.
Glory, beauty, and excellency of Christ's instituted Church State and order of
worship under the Gospel, set forth in six particulars above and beyond all
other Church-states of men's framing. 93. to 99. God rejects in his worship
whatsoever he commands not in his word. 18. Godly, not all so that pretend to
be so. 112. Godly many times do that, which becomes not their high and holy
calling. ibid. make opposition oftentimes against Christ, 112, 113. not
enlightened alike, ibid. Are still in a way of learning. 114. great numbers of
them for the Congregationall way. ibid.
H.
No Headship properly in any but Christ over his Church. 21. Distinction
between a supreme and subordinate H^adship over the Church of Christ, unsound
in many respects. 21, 22. Word preached may be heard in mixed Congregations, and
parish assemblies, 66. 67, 68. Heaven and the true visible Churches of Christ,
alike in ten resemblances. 94 95 96. Many excellent helps for the godly in a
right visible church state 91 92. Simple and me^re Heresy not to be punished
with death. 26.
I.
M. Jacob for the power of government within particular Churches themselves,
without standing in subordination to others. 42. Eight Impedime^ts that stand
in the way of the Saints, and hinder them from coming into the right order of
the Gospel, discovered and removed. 112 Indepency a term most pro^er to God,
27. in what sense Divines give that term to particular Churches. 41 margent,
four things that discover those of the Congregationall way, not properly
Indep^ndents. 27. Why they are so styled, 28. they allow of civil government
and reverence, and yield rea^y subjection thereunto in the State. 137. God will
clear their innocence. ibid.
K.
Five things that concern the Knowledge, and practice of those that enter into
a right visible Church State, and Gospel order. 107. to 112
L.
Laws and Ordinances of Christ's visible Churches, and how they are to be
administered. 97, 98 L^berty of particular Churches where in it consists, 1^9,
110.
M.
Magistra^es duty in, and about the matters of Religion, and worship of God,
set forth in five things. 22, 23, 24 25 Mar^inus a french Bishop, against
punishing errou^s with death. 26 Matter of true visible Churches, De j^re, only
such as are godly. 30 31 Men the best of them in^ufficient for ordering the
spiritual matters of Christ's church. 12, 13, 14. No power to bind the
conscience, not so much as in things that are indifferent, and of a less
concernment. 17 Proper means by which the true visible churches of Christ are
gathered. 96 Ministers, Multitudes of them without either learning or
godliness in the church of England. 118. f^w have the teach^ng of the Spirit.
^bid. few renounced their Antichristian Ordination. 119. what makes a true and
lawful Minister of the Gospel. 121 Extraordinary gifts of Miracles, not
necessary to church officers now. 92, 93, 94
N.
A National politica^^ church state not instituted by Christ under the Gosp^l.
51, 52
O.
O^jection touching the power of greater assemblies in Classes and Synods, over
particular churches, fully answered in four particulars. 46 47 48 Order of the
Gospel according to Christ's ap ointment, what, and wherein it consists. 102 1
3. ^04 Ordinances of Christ to be administered to Bele^vers, as united together
in a church state, and not otherwise. 8. they best subsist in a church state. 9
Ordination of church officers by imposition of hands not of absolute nec^ssity.
107, 108 Ordination of Ministers by the Prelates in former tim^s, to be renounce
now, and the reasons why. 119. objection to the contrary answered. 120
P.
Parish-Churches defective in the essentials of their constitution 56. 1071.
their false constitution not to be allowed of, nor continued in, though
conversion and salvation may be had in them. 116* 117 Master Parker for the
power of particular churches within themselves. 40 Master Perkins for the power
of particular churches within themselves. 40, 41 Power of church government
within each single congregation, without standing in su^jection and
subordination to the classes or Synods proved by Scripture, testimony of
learned men, and argument. 36. to 50. 98. Presbyterians found to confess the
power of government within particular chu^ches six ways, and so yield the
cause to the congregationall party. 45 46 Presbyterians in the Preface to their
late Book, styled, Jus Divinum R^g m. E cles. found in a manifest untruth
touch ng the Independents. 4^. ma^g. Greatest Powers on earth bound to submit
themselves to the Laws Christ has already made touching his visible church
and order of worship, and not to make new to themsel^es or others. 17 Some
Promissory engagement necessary to church union. 106 Corporal punishments for
mental evils, a pernicious invention. 26 Purity to be preserved in the
churches of the Saints, and by what means. 109
Q.
A Question worth debating in these times of Reformation, touching the visible
church state of the Kingdom of England, in Epist. Ded. marg.
R.
Practice of Re-baptizing altogether without warrant. 70, 71, 72. not necessary
when Believers are to enter into church fellowship, having been baptized
formerly, though the manner of external administration corrupt. 105 Master
Robinson for the power of particular churches within themselves. 43 Reformation
of England from the very beginning only in point of doctrine, not in their
Antichristian church state and order of worship and government. Epist. D^d. no
ground for comfort to those that reform evils in the church, when they proceed
merely out of subj^ction to the commands of men, and not out of a particular
hatred of those evils, and respect to the honor of God. 114, 136
S
Saints have a liberty given them from Christ to refuse whatsoever is not
agreeable to the word of God 17 Scriptures, sixte^ne ways give the authority
and power of appointing a visible Church State, with Officers, Ordinances, and
worship suitable thereunto, to Christ only, excluding the creature wholly. 15,
to 18 Nine ways they take away from us whatsoever may be thought to ^e a
warrant to us from men to worship and serve God by. 17 They are for the power
of particular churches exercising government within themselves. 35, 36, 37
Separation twofold, 121. Congregational men separate not from the doctrine of
faith is received in England, but from their false church state, and order of
worship and government. 122. Englands separation from Rome only in matters of
doctrine. Ep. Ded. Se kers under a great sin in leaving Church Fellowship.
60, 85. 86, 87, Doctor Sibbs for the Power of particular churches within
themselves. 44 Submission to the order of the Gospel proved lawful, from the
practice of the Saints in the Primitive times, and many other ways. 88, 89, 90
Synods and Councels, the very best of them since the Apostles days subject to
errors, and seldom or never of any good use* 23. of little account amongst
the most illuminated and choicest servants of Christ, for learning and
godliness. 23, 24
T.
Temple of God usually understood in Scripture, for his visible Churches. 79
Tolleration of all Religions, not allowed of by them of the congregationall
way. 124, 125, 126
V.
U^ion of Saints in church fellowship set forth by nine resemblances, and from
many words in the original Text. 32, 33. An excellent help against
temptations. 8 Universal, visible, political church, no such instituted by
Christ under the New Testament. 51
W.
Doctor Whitaker, ten things that he observes concerning Councels and Synods.
23. For the power of particular churches within themselves. 43 Wicked persons
no fit matter for a true visible church. 31, to 104 Will of God revealed in the
Scriptures the only rule to the Saints in worshipping of God. 34. Not to be
departed from in the matters of Gods worship, upon pain of Gods highest
displeasure. 18 Five things to be observed in the right order of Gods visible
worship, by those that enter into church fellowship. 106
The Heads of the Treatise.
Chap. I. That there is under the New Testament a sacred visible Church State,
order and polity, instituted and appointed by Jesus Christ, and him only, to
the observation of which, Believers are every where bound, willingly to submit
and subject themselves. p. 1. Chap. II. That this visible Church State is a
free society of visible Saints, embodyed or knit together, by a voluntary
consent, in holy fellowship, to worship God according to his word, consisting
of one ordinary congregation, with power of government in it self. p. 30 Chap.
3. That the several Administrations of this Church State, especially for
seals and censures, are now since the Apostles decease, limited to, and
bounded within every particular Church. p. 62 Chap. IV. That this Church state
is of perpetual use to the coming again of Jesus Christ, the Author and
institutor of it, without either alteration or cessation. p. 78 Chap. V. That
the godly are bound everywhere, to gather themselves into such a Church State
if they are of a competent number, or to join themselves to such Churches as
are already gathered. p. 88 Chap. VI. How and in what manner the godly are to
embody in the places where they live, and what concerns them to know and
practice after embodying. p. 101 Chap. VII. All the chief impediments, lets
and hindrances of the Saints, that lay in their way to the effecting of this so
bless and happy a work, are removed, and all the main and chief objections
brought against it answered. p. 112 Chap. VIII. Lastly, a brief Exhortation to
three sorts of persons. 1. To the godly out of the way. 2. To opposers of the
way 3. To the Saints already in the way. p. 140
(...) Courteous Reader, thou art entreated to correct such or the like faults,
that have escaped the Press, as
Page 4 (...) ^s read could bring it to pass. p 6. l. ul^. r. simply. p. 10.
l. 16. r. (...). p. 13. l. 24. r. will. p. 14. l. 21. r. strong holds. page 16.
l. 20. r. what and l 21. r. as. p. 32. l. 29 r (...) p. 38. l. 26. dele selves.
p. 43. l penult. r. contingen^er. and p 44. l. 1. r contingenter. p. 63. l. 8
r. relative. p. 72. l. 22. r. its to believing. p. 85. l. 34. r. an age. p.
122. l. 19. marg. note, r. constitution.

A Model of the Congregationall way: OR, Satisfaction offered and endeavored,
by unfolding what the right order of the Gospel, and way of the Saints, in the
visible worshipping of God, after the CONGREGATIONALL manner and way, (so much
opposed,) is.
CHAP. I. That there is under the New Testament, a sacred visible Church State,
order, or polity, instituted and appointed by Jesus Christ, and him only: to
the observation of which believers are every where bound willingly to submit
and subject themselves.
THis Proposition, and the next that follows in the second Chapter, are as the
two great Pillars, or groundwork and basis, upon which the weight of the
whole discourse (in this small Treatise) lies: And therefore I shall study to
be the more punctual, in clearing of them up, and giving satisfaction to those
that enquire concerning the truth of them.

As for the first of these Propositions, (viz.) that I have now in the first
place laid down, I shall do these four things.

1. Show that there is such a sacred visible Church State, order, and polity,
under the New Testament.

2. That this is instituted and ordained by Jesus Christ, and him only.

3. That Believers every where are bound willingly to submit and subject
themselves thereunto.

4. Take occasion to discover and confute the errors of those tha^ are
contrary minded.

Touching the first of these particulars; That there is such a sacred visible
Church State, etc. before I come to the evincing the truth of it, I shall crave
leave to premise thus much.

1. That I do not lay this down by way of opposition to, but only in
distinction from, that which is internal and invisible.

2. Neither as the chiefest, most excellent and glorious, but only as that
which I find in the number of those Credenda and facienda, i. e. those truths
of Christ, which by his Word and Spirit, he has given out to us, to be
believed, and practiced, and which (I have conceived to be (at this time more
especially) seasonable and useful to the Saints in a way of honoring of
Christ, and advantaging their own souls.

Now this being briefly premised, I come to the proof of the first branch of
the former Proposition, and this I shall do, these three ways.

1. From Scripture. 2. From Examples. 3. From Reasons and Arguments.
For the first of these. The Scriptures that make out this truth, are partly
from the old Testament, and partly from the New.

1. The places from the In spe^it movendem hic iterum est, de N. Test. actis
and cultu, in Ecclesia Christi Deo prestando, non raro allusiones fieri
allegoricas, ad ea, qu^e Veteri Testam. propria sunt, and ab his illorum
descriptiones sumi. Glass. Philo. Sac. Vol. 3 p. 496.
old Testament, may be referred to promises, and prophesies of this sacred
visible Church State under the Gospel: now among others, (for the old
Testament is rich and plentiful this way) take these few. 1. That of Psalm.
110.3. Thy People shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the In o^natibus
sanctitatis, as Avenar. renders the word, from (...) ornavit, and so Buxto. ph.
Pagaine, and others also, because, as I conceive, the visible worship and
ordinances of God, are to his Church, as the hangings to the house, the beauty
and ornament of the house, not the house it self: and so the holy Ordinances
of Worship in the Church are not the Church, but a part of the beauty and glory
of the Church, as Christ by his Spirit shines forth in them where they are
purely administered.
beauties of holiness: now these beauties of holiness can be understood, of no
other, then that visible worship, or holy ordinances, wherein the Saints have
communion, and fellowship with Christ in his Church; according to Esaias 33.17.
Hence it is, that we find this title given to the Church, Psalm. 29.2. Worship
the Lord in the beauty of holiness; because the beauty and glory of the Lord,
shines forth most splendently in the Churches and Congregations of the Saints,
where this worship is visibly performed: As Psalm. 27.4. Psalm. 63.2. as it is
noted in the margent.

2. That of the Prophet Esaias, chap. 2.2, 3. And it shall come to pass in the
last days, that the mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the
top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills. Meaning the visible
Kingdom and Church of Christ, which should be enlarged by the Preaching of the
Gospel; to which the Nations should Mo^e fluminis Oecolampad.
flow, and they shall say, Come let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to
the house of the God of Jacob; alluding to mount Sion, where the visible Church
then was: as Psalm. 48.1.2.

3. That of Esaias 4.5. And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of
mount Sion, and upon her Assemblies a cloud, and smoke by day, and the shining
of a flaming fire by night, for upon all the glory shall be a defense: Which
place clearly speaks out to us, not only the truth of this visible Church State
under the Gospel, Calv. Maesc. Oecolamp. and alii quamplurimi in loc.
but the excellent and glorious privileges also, that attend it; alluding to
Gods careful protection over his Church, in his going before them, and
carrying them through the waste and howling wilderness. Deuteronomy. 32.9.10.

4. That of Esaias 9.6, 7. And the government shall be upon his shoulders, etc.
of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end: Upon the
throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with
judgment and justice from henceforth, even forever. By all which can be meant
no other then the power of Jesus Christ, extending it self both to internals,
and externals. By the first he rules internally in the souls of men, by grace
and holiness: And by the second, he rules externally the outward man, with the
inward, in his visible worship and ordinances.

5. That of Ezech. Adnuncietur igitur his, qui in Babylone sub Antichristo,
quanta futura gloria in Christi templo, and qua^ nos gloriam expectamus quam
caput multitudinis templum, quam illustratum luce, quam fundatum in petra, quam
ornatum doctoribus and turribus, quanta varietas auditorum, qui tamen omnes ad
cognitionem Dei contendent. Oecolamp. in loc.
43.10, 11. And if they be ashamed of all they have done, show them the form
of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the
commings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the ordinances
thereof, and all the laws thereof, and write it in their sight, that they may
keep the whole form thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them.
Which Scripture looks to the times of the Vid. Gl^ss. Philog. Sac. vol. 3. p.
563, 564.
Gospel, and days of Christ, by whom the glory of the new Temple or
spiritual Church of God, should be erected and set up, as Interpreters for the
most part agree.

6. Lastly, (though many more might be added) take only that of the Prophet
Zachary, chap. 6.13. Even he (speaking of Jesus Christ) shall build the Temple
of the Lord, and he shall bear tbe glory, and he shall sit and rule upon his
throne: Now it must of necessity be granted, that the Prophet here understands
the Fu^t quidem Ch^istus ipse Templis quoad corpus, quia in eo habitavit
plenitudo divinitatis: sed aedificatur Templum Deo Patri, dum erexit ubique
purum cultum, superstitionibus in nibilum redactis: and dum nos consecravit
etiam in regale sacerdotium. Calv. in loc.
Church-work which the honor of was fit for none, but Christ himself, because
none but Jesus Christ could bring to pass, as I shall abundantly prove, from
the next particular.

2. Come we in the next place to the new Testament, and there we shall find
plentiful testimonies to this purpose.

I shall refer all (for method sake) to two heads.

1. To what we find from Christ himself. 2. To what we find to this purpose
from his Apostles that succeeded him.
1. Those Scriptures that respect Christ himself, are of two sorts.

1. Before his death, as Math. 16 18, 19. And I say unto thee, that thou art
Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church and the gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it: and I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of
heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. Now
this must be understood of the visible Church State, and order we are speaking
to, which the Saints enjoy here on earth; because Christ did not give any power
to Peter to bind in the world, for the Kingdom of Christ is not of the world,
Ioh. 18.36. But by binding and loosing on earth, must needs be understood the
executing of the censures and ordinances of the visible Church of Christ on
earth, which is distinct from that Kingdom of glory in heaven.

So that of Math. 18.17, 18. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it to
the Church: But if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an
Heathen, and a Publican: Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on
earth, shall, etc. Which place, though there be some difference between the
Classical and Congregationall Divines, whether by Die Ecclesiae, be meant the
classical Presbytery, or the Congregationall, yet they both, and all of all
sorts agree in this, that it is meant of the visible Church State under the New
Testament; which is s^fficient for us in this place to have granted, because it
answers the end for which it is alleged.

2. After Christ's resurrection, when he had made a glorious conquest over all
the powers of darkness, and as the true Sampson, the mighty one, had carried
away the gates, i. e. all the powers of death and hell on his shoulders, then
(by his own mouth) he declares this truth, as in Math. 28.18.19.20. And Jesus
came and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven and in
earth, go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: and so I am with you always, even to the
end of the world. This is so plain to the business in hand, that there needs no
explaining of it. And that of Act. 1.3. speaking to them of the things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God.

In the next place we come to what we find delivered by the Apostles of Christ,
to whom he gave order, to see his Will, in this, as well as other things
fulfilled, and whom he qualified in an extraordinary manner, for the very
purpose, that it might be put into execution.

Now the Scriptures that hold this forth from the Apostles, may be referred to
two heads.

1. To their own practice. 2. To their declaring it to others.
1. Their own practice, as will appear throughout the history of the Acts of
the Apostles, chap. 1. and chap. 2.42. And they continued steadfastly in the
Apostles doctrine and fellowship, (viz. Church fellowship) and in breaking of
bread, and prayers: and ver. 46.47. so chapters 4, 5, 6, 11, 14, 15, etc.

2. Their declaring it to others, wheresoever they went to gather and plant
Churches, and this I shall make out four ways.

1. By instructing them in it, Romans 12.1, 2, 6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians.
4.11, 12. Heb. 3.1, 2, 3, 6. and 7.12. and 10.1.

2. By pressing them to it, as 1 Cor. 14. per totum, Col. 2.6, 7, 8. and 2
These. 2.15. and 3.4, 6.

3. By praising and commending them for it, as 1 Cor. 11.2. Col. 2.5.

4. By admonishing them about it, as the Apostle did Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.14. and
this he does two ways.

1. Partly from fear of their being seduced, 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. 2. Partly that he
might prevent their seducing, Col. 2.4, 18, 19. and so much for Scripture.
2. For examples: We may reduce all to three heads.

1. To what has been. 2. To what now is. 3. To what shall be.
1. To what has been, and so two ways.

1. To the Apostles times: As the Churches of Corinth, Rome, Jerusalem,
Antioch, 7. Churches of Asia, the Churches of Judea, Macedonia, Galatia.

2. Next after the Apostles death, which we find recorded in the works of
^useb. Hist. ^l. l. 4. c. 22. ^6. ^r. l 7. c. 26. ^t. in pluri^ suis opusc.
^or. in Epist. ^b. de habit. ^. ^. Hom. 5. l. ^ de morib. ^es. ^om. li. 5. c. ^
with many ^rs that have ^e collect^y Daneus ^ other Mo^e Authors ^eir systems
^ivinity.
Eusebius, and other Ecclesiastical writers, and were in the days of
Ignatius, Justin Martyr, Ireneus, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian and others, all
which were under this visible Church order, and polity, we speak of.

2. What now is, not only in this Kingdom, but in New England, and other
reformed Churches abroad in the world.

3. What shall be, and cannot be far of, when the Jews shall be called, and
the fullnes of the Gentiles brought in, which the Scriptures speak out
abundantly.

3. For reason and Argument to clear this point, I shall refer all to these
six heads.

1. Because it is agreeable to the Law of nature and nations: for we find by
experience, that there is scarce in the whole world any Nation, whether Turks,
Indians, Romans, but they have still had their external and visible order of
worship and government, they have their Temples, Priests, Laws, Ordinances,
Sacrifices, Ceremonies, which they visibly observe, and conform themselves to
the observation of. Now doubtless Jesus Christ is not behind heathens in his
Church and Kingdom.

2. This is no other then is suitable to the practice of the Church of God, in
all ages, and conditions before the coming of Christ.

1. In Paradise, before the fall of Adam, there were two sacramental trees,
the tree of life, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil: which were not
simple trees, but trees set a part by Gods appointment, and divine institution;
as water in Baptism, etc.

2. After the fall, before the Law was given, while the Church of God was in
Families, then they had external worship, sacrifices, Priesthood, first borne,
etc.

3. When the Law was given, in the wilderness, there was an external form of
worship and Ordinances suitable to their condition, a moving Tabernacle, etc.
and after the Israelites came into Canaan, there was a fixed Temple at
Jerusalem, and a complete form of Worship in externals, that God had
prescribed to Moses, and after revealed to David by the Spirit, 1 Chronicles.
28.11.12.19. Answerable to which, (though in another kind) Jesus Christ has
laid down, and given out to his Saints, a platform of Church order under the
Gospel, as the Apostle holds forth plainly, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, as
Heb. 7.12. where he shows that the old Law, will not serve a new order, but we
must have a new one, and he proves tha^ Moses and Aaron are met together in
Christ: For Christ is not only a Priest, as Aaron, but a lawgiver, as Moses,
and he did both their works; a high Priest to succeed Aaron, and an Apostle to
succeed Moses: as Heb. 3.1. Christ is Aaron in point of offering up sacrifice,
and Moses, in point of prescribing laws, for holy worship. With many other
places.

3. This Church order, and sacred polity, is most consonant to the Church of
Christ, as it is his visible Kingdom, City, House, or Temple: Now a visible
Kingdom, and House, or City, must have an order, and government equivalent, as
all men grant Ecclesia es^ domus Dei, ait Paulus, 1 Timothy 3.15 atque in dom^ Dei
nihil (...) and conf^fieri debet, i^ docet ide^ Pa^lus, 1 Cor. 1^ 40. sed omni^
(...), e^ politia aliqu^ in ea opus e^ ut decenter ordine omni^ fiant and
ger^tur. Daneus Eccles.
.

4. It is requisite in reference to Christ himself, the master of this house,
and King of this Kingdom, in which the glory of his power, wisdom, and
goodness, abundantly shines forth, even to the am^zement of men and Angels.

5. It is necessary in respect of the Saints fellowship and communion together
in the worship and service of God:

1. In respect of the exercise of their graces, which cannot so well, nor so
conveniently, and with that advantage to one another be performed, as in this
order, as the Apostle holds forth in 1 Cor. 14. per totum. For as it is in
Civil society or Polity, so it is in Ecclesiastical. Now in Civil
Government, that Political virtue that is in a man, cannot be so well exercised
and managed in a confused multitude alone by himself, as in a society: So
here, these gifts and graces which Christ has bestowed by his Spirit on the
Saints, cannot be so well exercised singly by themselves alone, as when they
are united together into a Church state and order, as 2 Cor. 12.7.

2. In respect of their enjoying the ordinances, for its worth our serious
knowledge and observation, that the ordinances of Christ are not due to
Christians merely as Christians or Believers, but to Believers as in a Church
State, for a Believer is to come under a double consideration, as a man is. Now
a man is considered two ways, either as (...), or as (...), that is, as he is
rational, or political, that is, as he is a man by himself, or as he is
joined to some society, or Corporation: So a believer is to be looked upon,
either as a believer, or member of Christ singly by himself, or as a member of
some visible Church of Christ: and in this latter sense only is he capable of
enjoying fellowship with Christ in his visible ordinances and worship. The
reason is this, because the same Christ, that inwardly unites him by the
Spirit, and faith to himself, does outwardly also call him to his body, the
Church, to worship, and serve him in the use of his Ordinances.

3. In respect of those many singular helps, and encouragements that in this
Church State they enjoy, as I shall hereafter in particular show: Which without
it they are deprived of; for a man cannot possibly be so happy alone, as he is
in company, especially when that society proves a help, not a hinderance to
him, as this does we now speak of: We find that in the very state of
innocence, God saw, that it was not best for Adam to be alone; now if society
were good for man in a perfect state, how much more then in an unperfect state,
as the Saints are now in, whiles they are here below, and absent from the Lord?
And the truth of this is further evident from the many enemies the Saints meet
with in their walking with God, where they have all the powers of darkness set
against them. Now union together in this Church State, is a singular remedy
against those temptations they thus meet withal; we know by experience, that
company in traveling makes the way both sweeter and safer, whereas traveling
alone singly by a man's self, is not only the more tedious, but dangerous: so
here: and therefore without all controversy, this condition of the Saints in
this way of the Gospel was foreseen of Jesus Christ, as most necessary and
useful.

6. If we look to the Ordinances of Christ, we shall find the truth of this
particular very clear; the reason is, because they cannot well subsist but in
this Church State and order, especially since the Apostles times, as I shall
speak more fully to, in the following discourse.

1. The office of a Pastor, how can it be executed but in this Church State and
order? A Shepherd we know cannot be a Shepherd, but to a flock, nor a steward
be a steward but to a family: So here to be a Minister in office requires a
particular society of believers, to which he must stand in relation.

2. The administration of the seals, how can they take place, where there is
no Church State? I am not of their mind that say they are ordained to make
believers, but rather to confirm and build up those that are believers, when
they are brought into Church Fellowship, as we find in the Primitive Churches.
The word is to plant Churches, and the Seals to build and stablish them.

3. The censures, which are the Keys of Christ's Kingdom; we know they reach
not any till they be in a Church State, 1 Cor. 5.12. for by being without,
there, is properly meant of a visible Church State. And so much for the first
branch.

2. In the next place we come to the proof of the 2. branch of the former
Proposition, which is this. That this sacred visible Church state, order, and
polity, under the New Testament, is instituted and appointed by Jesus Christ,
and him only. No created power in heaven or earth is exalted to this dignity
besides himself, nor has a hand with him in it.

Now this I shall endeavor, (being a truth of great importance, especially at
this time) to make out fully.

Much might be said from the Prophets Esaias 9 6. Zech. 6.12, 13* Micah 5.2.
foretelling it: from the Churches Esaias 33.22 James 4.12. Rev. 5.12, 13. and
15.4.
acknowledging it: from the Angel Gabriels Luke 1.31, 32, 33.
message to the virgin Mary: from Christ's Phil. 2.8, 9
right to it, and publishing of it. Mat. 28.18, 19, 20.
But I shall pass by these, and endeavor to clear it by ^hese six things
only.

1. From God the Fathers designing him alone, to this honorable work and
employment, he has set no other apart to it besides Jesus Christ: David was a
glorious type of this, and Solomon, and so was Eliakim, Esaias 22.20, 21, 22, 23,
24. and therefore the Father is said to commit all judgment in to his hands,
Ioh. 5.22. and to put all things under his feet, and crown him with honor and
glory, Heb. 2.7, 8. and to make him head over all things to his Church, Ephesians.
1.22. Col. 2.10. 1 Pet. 3.22. and to give him a name above every name, Phil.
2.9.

2. From God the Fathers qualifying him for it, above all others; Christ was
anointed for this work above all his f^llowes, whether Kings, Priests,
Prophets, or Saints in common: as we see in Psalm. 45.6, 7. Heb. 1.8, 9. Now
Christ was qualifyed with eminency of power from the Spirit for this work,
above all others in a sevenfold respect.

1 In respect of the greatness, strength, glory, and Majesty of it: No other
created power can compare with Christ in this: All the power and dominion of
men and Angels, is only a finite power and dominion, the power of a poor
creature: but this in Christ, as he is Mediator, (...), God-man, is above a
mere creature, and so infinite; and therefore when the holy Ghost speaks of the
power and authority of Christ's K^ngly office and government, he sets it forth
by the titles of Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, the Prince of peace, Esaias 9.6.

And though other created powers, as men and Angels, are sometime in the
Scriptures called Gods, yet have they not the nature of God, but shall dye like
men, Psalm. 82.6, 7. but Christ has both name and nature also.

2. In respect of the latitude and extent of it, it has no limits or bounds,
all the power and authority of men and Angels, is a limited and confined power
and authority: like the proud waves of the Sea, thus far shall thou go, says
the Lord, but no further: but now the power of this Monarch is universal, it
extends to heaven and earth, not only to the persons and estates of men, but to
their hearts and consciences also, Dan. 4.34, 35. Psalm. 45.11.

3. In respect of the equity, justice, and integrity of it, all other power and
authority is subject to flawes in it, to injustice, and sin, the best
Magistrates and Ministers, the best Church and state may possibly be corrupted,
Humanum est errare, but now, the Scepter of Christ is a righteous Scepter, it is
not possible for him to be unholy, unjust, etc. Psalm. 45.6, 7.

4. In respect of the solenes of it, he is alone of himself without the
creature in his power: all other powers on earth are mined powers, they have
others joined with them in commission, as the King and Parliament together, the
Lord Major of the City, and Common Council together, the Pastor and People
together: But now Jesus Christ is Solus in thronum, he is alone of himself,
the Father has put all power into his hands alone, without joining Angels or
men in commission with him, he depends not on any of them, but they all d^pend
upon him: As he is by himself alone, so he is of himself alone, without the
help of others: All other created powers are beholding to him, but he to none
of them.

5. In respect of the absolutenes of it, he is exalted to be Lord and King over
his Church, to gov^rn it, so that he can do whatsoever he pleases: but it is
not so with Angels or men, they cannot pro arbitrio command and enjoyne to the
Saints what they please in matters of Gods worship, they have no absolute
jurisdiction, they are only (...), Ministers, not Lords, servants to Christ and
his Church; they can act no further then by virtue of leave from him, and they
shall one day be accountable to Christ for what they now do.

6. In respect of the fulness, compleatnes and perfection of it; all created
power is defective, and full of weakness and imp^rfections: But in Christ there
are none, for in him there is (...), all fulness, and in him are hid (...) all
treasures of wisdom, Col. 2.3. which cannot be said of the creature; what they
have is but a drop, to his Ocean, and that little they have, is from him also.

7. Lastly, in r^spect of the duration and perpetuity of it: All other power is
perishable, uncertain, and fading. The Monarchs of the world cannot say of
their power and authority that it is everlast^ng, as Jesus Christ can, (...)
Dan. 4.34, 35. and Esaias 9* 6 7. Of the increase of his government there is no
end. Now if Christ be so ^^inently qualifyed for this work, no wonder if it be
put altogether into his hands.

3. From Christ u^dertaking and perfo^ming it, as in Mat. 16. and ^8.17 18.
Mat. 28 19, 20. Ioh. 20.21. Ephesians. 4.10, 1^, 12. 1 Cor. 11.23. and 12.28. In
wh^c^ plac^s we find a Church state appointed by Christ, with offices,
officers, gifts, ordinances, and government correspondent.

4. From the Apostles their disclayming this power and authority, professing
their work was merely a (...).
Ministry; not a Lordship, Act. 17. and that they were the servants not only
of Christ, but of the Churches also, 2 Cor. 4 5. Romans 15.31. and that they had
no power or dominion over the faith or consciences of the people, but helpers
of their joy, 2 Cor. 1. ult.

5. From the insufficiency of all humane abilities to accomplish this work,
which I shall make out three ways: 1. From want of wit and skill to do it. 2.
From want of a mind and will to do it. 3. From want of power nd strength to do
it.


1. Men have no wit nor skill for this work: all the abilities of the creature
are too low to reach such Mysteries as these: what could Moses, or David, or
Solomon do, toward the building the visible Tabernacle and Temple of old, with
the ordinances of worship thereunto appertaining, if God had not first made
them acquainted with it by his Spirit? So what could the Prophets and Apostles
have done toward the building the living Temple of Chr^sts Church under the
New Testament, if Jesus Christ had not acquainted them with the order and
manner of it from his own mouth? Who has known the mind of the Lord? 1 Cor.
2. ult. Doubtless if Christ had left this work to the wit and discretion of
men, we should have had sorry Church work. Whence is it that there are so many
divisions and differences amongst men in the world in the matters of Gods house
and worship, but this, that men are dark and ignorant, and not acquainted with
the mind of Christ revealed in the word?

2. As men have no wit nor skill for this business, so neither have they a mind
and will to do it. Look we narrowly into the dispositions of men, and we shall
find how backward they are this w^y: As the Apostle spoke in his Epistle to the
Church at Philippi, Phil. 2.21. All seek their own, but few the things of
Jesus Christ, men are so taken up with the building their own houses, that
they care not what becomes of Gods house, as those in the Prophet Haggai^s Hag.
^.2.
days, every man said, The time is not yet come to build the house of the
Lord. And doubtless if Jesus Christ did not carry on the building of his
temple further then men are disposed thereunto, he might stay long enough for
it. We are all of us, even the best of the Saints, of Cranzius disp^sition and
temper, who answered Luther, it were to be wish^d, that such a work were done
he spoke to him about. We could wish that Antichrist were down, and Jesus
Christ exalted on his throne; but where is the man that is of Luthers spirit in
the things of God? Christ and his Cause may sink for ought that men do, to put
themselves forward in preserving and forwarding of it. And if at any time men
do begin to set upon this work, do we not see how soon they are
discouraged, and draw back, and are ready to cease and give over, as it was
with those Jews that God brought out of Babylon to Jerusalem: after they had
begun to build, how long was it before they finished? near as many years by
computation in building the Temple, as they had been in Babylon from the
Temple. There was little heart, little stomach in them to this work. Yea
though many of them were good men as well as great men, every small threat of
their adversaries was enough to make them cease building, so that the Lord was
feign to send Prophet after Prophet to them, to spur and excite them forward
to their work they were called unto. And is it not so now in these days? how
long have we been building Gods house? what murmuring, what repining, what
objections, what excuses, what carnal reasonings? Every man is ready to say,
The time is not yet come; and so sad consequences come of it, and sadder yet
are like to come I fear; and all this I say for want of a will, of a heart in
Gods own people to this work. And therefore without controversy this is a
truth, that further then Jesus Christ acts in us by his Spirit, men have no
mind to the work.

3. From want of power and strength to do it. If men had skill and wit for the
work, yet so long as they want power, how should they bring it to pass? Now
that men want power and strength for this work, is evident from hence.

1. In that there are many and mighty enemies to be thrown down, when this
Church State is to be set up: great and high Mountains that must be made
Plains. What a great mountain was there of a Samaritan faction, joined with
the power of the Persian Monarchy, before Zerubbabel, when he come in the name
of the Lord to build his house that had been laid waste? And what a great
mountain is the Roman Empire, and that Antichristian State, which now
opposes, and who shall be able to dry up th great river Euphrates, Rev. 16.12.
that the way of the Kings of the East may be prepared? By which River, some
understand the Monarchy on which it borders, which is the Turkish Empire. Now
this men cannot do, the stilling the rage of adversaries is beyond the power
of men: He that shakes the Nations when he comes to this work, Hag. 2.7. he
only can build this house amidst all those commotions and tumults that are
made in the world against it. This work is the work of a God, and not a poor
silly worm, as Man is: And therefore says the Lord to Zerubbabel, Zech. 4.6.
Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit. And again, in Psalm. 2 6. Yet
have [I] set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. It is the work therefore of
God, and not of men. If the Lord should leave this wo^k to the creature, when
would his great name be hallowed? when would his kingdom come? or when would
his will be done this way?

2. In that there is much rubbish to be cast out that stands in the way of
building and setting up this work of the Lord, as there was at the building of
the wall of Jerusalem, Neh. 4.10. a kingdom within us, as well as without us
to be subdued, before this work of the Lord can take place. What (...), what
strange holds of carnal imaginations and reasonings are there in the hearts of
men against this work of the Lord, (...), places of defense, of (...), safe.
as the Apostle calls them, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. How do men love the relics of
Baal, long after the fleshpots of Egypt, their old superstitious ways of
worship they have been accustomed unto? how do they to this day mourn for
Tammuz? It Is no easy matter to prepare the hearts of the people to meet the God
of their Fathers, and before this be done, it will be hard to build this house
and Church of God, and to do this, the arm of the eternal God must appear,
or else all is in vain, as the Psalmist has it, Psalm. 127.1. Except the Lord
build the house, they labor in vain that build it: So here especially this
house of God, that cannot be set up before the hearts of men be prepared Do
not we see by sad experience to this day, that people look upon the right order
of the Gospel, as a light, vain, novell thing, and those too, that pretend to
great knowledge? Now this very opinion of novelty that men have touching this
way of Christ, is such a hindrance to this work, that unless the Lord put
forth his power on the spirits of men, it is not all the men in the world are
able to bring them to embrace Reformation, and therefore doubtless this is
Christ's work, and not the creatures; Gods, and not man's.

6. Lastly, to add no more to what has been laid down for the clearing of
this truth, take this only, That the Scriptures do wholly exclude and shut out
the Creature from having a hand in this business, and attribute all to the
Lord: and this I shall make out I h^pe very plainly, and to abundant
satisfaction.

1. It is evident, that the Scriptures never speak in the plural number of
Heads over the Church, primary and secundary, but only in the singular number
of one Head, viz. Christ, who has absolute and sole power, ju^isdiction and
authority in the matters of Religion and Worship, as Ephesians. 1.22.5.23. Col.
1.18. and 2.10, 19. and therefore they speak only of one Lawgiver, James
4.12. and the government on his shoulders only, and not on any other with him,
Esaias 9 6. and 22.21, 22, 23.

2. It is evident, that the Scriptures deny all headship and Lordship to any
other besides Christ in the Church, 1 Pet. 5.3. Psalm. 45.11.

3. Our Savior himself forbids it to his Disciples and Apostles that were to
follow him, Mar. 10.42. Luke 22.25. Mat. 23.8. to 13. and Mat. 28.20.

4. The Apostles themselves after his departure, (who had most right of all
other to this power) altogether disclaim it, 2 Cor. 1. ult. professing their
work was merely a service and ministry, Act. 1.17. not a Lordship, as we have
noted before. And therefore when you meet in reading the Scriptures with such
places as these, as I ordain, and as I give order in the Churches, you are not
to understand it of any absolute, but only a derived power from Christ, to
establish in the Churches what Christ commanded, and gave them in commission,
nothing of their own, but as 1 Cor. 11.23. that they received from the Lord,
that they delivered to the Saints.

5. The Scriptures in an express manner forbid Believers to be the servants of
men in this point, as to bow our consciences to their injunctions in the
matters of Worship. 1 Cor. 7.23. in Civil things we may and ought, but not in
divine and spiritual things, there Christ alone must have active obedience,
Psalm. 45.11. and hence it is that the Scriptures do charge us, not to serve
God after the traditions, doctrines, and commandments of men, let them pretend
never so much holiness and zeal for the glory of God, Mat. 15.9. Col. 2.7* 8
20, 21. the reason is, because God will be worship^d after his own mind and
will, revealed to us in the Scriptures, and not after the wisdom of men.

6. The Scriptures reprove and sharply rebuke such as stoop and bow their
consciences to the precep^s and commands of men, in serving and worshipping of
God, as Hos. 5.11. Esaias 29.13. Gal. 4.9, 10.

7. The Scriptures hold it forth as matter of commendation to the Saints, when
they have withstood the authority of men in the matters of Gods worship, and
rather suffered their bodies to die, then their consciences to be defiled by
ye^lding to their humane injunctions, as the three Children, Dan. 3. Revel.
3.4. and 14.4.

8. The Scr^ptures hold it forth as a property and character of Antichrist, to
make Laws, and impose them on the consciences of m^n, 2 These. 2.4. and so Rev.
13.16, 17.

9. The Scriptures take away whatsoever may be thought to be a warrant for us
from men to worship God by, besides which, Jesus Christ has left us a rule to
walk by in his written Word.

1. They take away the wisdom of men, as a warrant for us in the worship of
God, as 1 Cor. 3.20. Coloss. 2.20, 21, 22, 23.

2. They take away whatsoever seems good in our own eyes, Deuteronomy. 12.8. Esaias 66
3.

3. T ey take away men's traditions and customs, Mar. 7.9. Colos. 2.8. Act.
21.21. Deuteronomy. 18.9. Levit. 18. ult. Jerem. 10.3. and whatsoever inventions of
men, as Psalm. 1^6.29, 39. Ps. 99.8. Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32. Prove. 30.6.

4. T ey take away the very will and commands of men, as Hos. 5.11. Amos 4.4.
Mat. 15.9. Mar. 7.7. Col. 2.22. Tit. 1.14. Esaias 29.13.

5. They take away whatsoever word or doctrine comes from Ministers, or any
other, which cannot be resolved into the written word of Christ, as in Ezekiel.
13.3, 7. Esaias 8.20. Gal. 1.8 9. 1 Cor. 4.6.

6. They take away all good intentions of men in this business, as ^o 2 Samuel
6.7. and 1 Samuel 13.9, 10, 13. 1 Chro. 15.13. and 2 Chro. 26.16.

7. It takes away all examples of men, though never so eminent, Ezekiel. 20 18. 1
Cor. 11.1.

8. It rebukes the counsels of States for their boldness this way, and lays
it as a blot on t^em, showing that by this means people have been brought to
Idolatry, as 1 King. 12.26, 27, 28, 29 30. and 2 Chronicles. 25.16. Jer. 19.5, 7.
Mich. 6. ult.

9. It takes away from men all power to make Laws to bind the Consci^nces of
Believers, so much as in things that are indifferent. Vid. M. Burr.
Heart-Divisions, p. 159, 160, 161. where he discourses excellently to this
point.
For where Christ has left men free, there they are not to be bound. Now if
they deny men power for the lesser, then doubtless much more for the greater:
but the first is true, therefore the latter. And lest Christians should abuse
this liberty of theirs in the use of things indifferent, he himself has
provided diverse rules for this purpose in the Word. Romans 14.19. and 15.2. 1
Cor. 6 12, 23. 1 Cor. 10.32. 1 Cor. 14 40 Romans 14.13.

10. It takes away from men the very power of tempting and enticing their
brother to follow after their ways and counsels in this business of Worship,
as Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 7, 8.

10. The Scriptures hold forth, that the greatest Powers on earth are to
subject themselves to those very Laws and Ordinances for Worship that Jesus
Christ has already made and enjoined, and not to make laws to themselves or
others, as they themselves think best, P^al. 45.11. Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12 Mat.
28.20. Phil. 2.7, 8 9. 1 Pet. 3 22.

11. The Scriptures show us, that our duty is to hear what the Spirit says to
the Churches, after they are constituted and planted, and not what Angels or
men say, as Rev. 2.7, 11 17 and 3.6, 13, 22. so that men have nothing at all to
do with these matters, e^^her in the beginning or carrying on of this
Church-work, but we are to rest satisfied in what the Spirit by the Word holds
forth to us, Esaias 8.20.

12. The Scr^ptures show that the Saints have a liberty of rejecting and
refusing whatsoever they shall find is not agreeable to the revealed mind and
will of Christ in the Word, when it is charged on them as matters of faith, and
req^ired in conscience to yield subjection thereto, as 1 These. 5.22. Col. 2.20,
21, 22. 1 Ioh. 4.1.2. Act 17 11. Gal. 5.1.

13. The Scriptures forbid us to turn to the right hand or to the left in
matters of Gods worship, Deuteronomy. 5.32. and 18.19. Josh. 1.7. Prove. 4 27. and
there is a p^omise to prevent it, Esaias 30.21. and a blessing to the observation
of it in Josh. 1.7.

15. The Scriptures change us, upon pain of death, not so much temporal as
eternal, not to add to, or diminish from what God has set down in his
written Word touching the matter and mannee of his worship, Deuteronomy. 4.1. and
12.32. Prove. 30.6. Revel. 22.14, 19. The reason of it may be this, because to
add thereunto, argues Gods word to be defective and insufficient, and to
diminish from it, argues it to be superfluous: which for men to do is
abominable, and for which we shall be proceeded against as liars, Prove. 30 6.

15. The Scriptures show us that God rejects whatsoever he commands not in
his Worship, Levit. 10.1. Ierem. 7.31. and 19 5.

16. Lastly, to add no more, the Scriptures show us the honor that attends
this work, is proper only to Jesus Christ, and fittest for him, who is the
builder of his own house himself, and not the creature, as Zech. 6.13. and
Psalm. 22.27, 28 29, 30. and to speak as the thing is, this honor and glory
that attends the forming of this Church State, and right order of worshipping
JEHOVAH in the days of the New Testament, is a Crown that becomes not the
head of Angels or men, but Christ's alone. And therefore let them all veil
Bonnet to him, and cry out with those ten thousand times ten thousand, and
thousands of thousands, Rev. 5.11, 12. and say, Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor,
and glory, and blessing. Ver. 13. And every creature which is in heaven, and on
the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in
them, heard I, saying, Blessing, honor, glory and power, be unto him that
sits on the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever. Ver. 14. And the
four beasts said, Amen. And the 24 Elders fell down and worshipped him that
lives for ever and ever. And so let all those do that love the Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity. Amen. And so much for the second branch.

3. Now I come to the third branch of the Proposition, which is this: That
Believers are bound every where to observe what Jesus Christ has done this
way, and to submit and subject themselves willingly thereunto.

This I need not be large in the proof of, seeing the Scripture is so clear
for the truth of it.

1. It Is clee^e by way of Prophecy, that they shall do so, as in Psalm. ^10.3.
They shall be a willing people in the day of his power, in the beauties of
holiness: and Et haec est dignitas Ecclesiae, quod voluntario confluit non
tyrannide coacta. Ibunt dicit, non trahentur vi, neque bellis adigentur, sed
sua sponte and voluntarii aud^to Evangelio ibunt, tracto nimirum occulto illo
and paterno tractu, hilares and non metu, sed amore evocati. Ibunt, non
subsistent ad vocationem Dei, non moras trahent, etc. Oecolampad. in loc.
Esaias 2 2, 3, 4. Jer. 50.4, 5. They shall not be forc^d by outward violence to
this work, nor have their excuses to delay their coming, as those Luke 14.

2. By way of precept and injunction, Psalm. 45.11. Mat. 28.20.

3. By way of threatening, Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye
perish from the way. So Luke 19.23. But those mine enemies which would not that
I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me.

4. By way of encouragement, from the many and singular privileges which such
shall have that thus honor Jesus Christ, as their only Lord and King: which
privileges I shall not here set down, but refer them to their proper place in
Chap. 5. where I lay down several Arguments to work and win over the Saints
to the practice of their duty this way. And so much for the 3. branch.

4. Now for the discovering and confuting of those that are contrary minded,
there are diverse sorts of men that more especially oppose this former Truth.

The first sort are those that affirm there is no such external visible
political Church Order, that Christ has instituted, 1. Such as de^ Divine
Gospe^ Institutions appointed by Jesus Christ for his Saints to observe in the
days of the New Test.
to which the Saints ought to conform and subject themselves: But all the
government that Christ has in beleivers, is only internal by the spirit. As
for externalls (as officers, ordinances and government) either they look on
them as forms and shadows that are to vanish and have no more being since the
coming of Christ but are swallowed up in the substance, and so deny them
altogether: or else as things that are left indifferent to the discretion of the
Saints which they may use, if they shall think fit, or forbear if they
please. Now how fully is this error confuted by the truth that has been
formerly laid down. For if Christ has instituted (as we have showed) such an
external Church politye, for his Saints to observe to his coming again, how
then dare men deny it? may they not as well deny the scriptures themselves, by
placing all in the office and work of the spirit within us, without the use of
any external rule or means to worship God by? And the truth is, that to this
at last men come, speaking very basely and unworthily, if not blasphemously of
the scriptures. But before I leave those men* (if it may please the Lord to
show them the ev^ll of their way) I would feign know of them whether it were
not the practice of Jesus Christ himself in the days of his fl sh, and his
Apostles after him, (whom he substituted in his room, and appointed to give
out his divine will concerning the ordinances of his kingdom) to live in the
use and practic^ of outward worship and ordinances. Did not Christ himself
pract ce preaching, praying, Baptism, Supper, etc. and so the Apostles after
him? and did they not give the Churches this in charge, that they should tread
in their steps, and be followers of them, as they were of Christ? and can it be
denied, that the O^dinan^es of God are those sacred things, in and by which the
Saints come to have lively fellowship and communion with God? Neither let men
think it sufficient to say, that they have fellowship with God without and
above ordinances, for then it would follow, that men should live in fellowship
with God without worshipping and serving of him in that way he has prescribed,
(viz.) by observing those duties and ordinances which Jesus Christ has
instituted and commanded in his Word, as preaching, prayer, singing, receiving
the Sacraments, executing the censures, etc. in Church fellowship, as has been
and shall be farther noted in the following discourse. And therefore if these
men desire to be found in the number of those that Christ calls his friends,
^^hn 14.15.
let them labor to do what he has commanded them, and not slight the way of
his visible worship and ordinances, which he has instituted for his Churches
to walk in, till his coming again, when he shall deliver up the Kingdom to
his Father, and have put down all rule, and authority, and power, in 1 Cor.
15.14.

2. The other sort of men, contrary minded to this blessed truth, are those
that teach and write for sound doctiine, that Jesus Christ has not sole power
of headship over the Church in appointing and ordering this visible
Church State, for all Nations to observe and ke^p, but it is in the power of
men also to appoint and set up a frame of Church Government, and order for men
to serve and worship God by, according to the nature and frame of those States
and Kingdoms wherein they live: and the foundation they build on, is by
distinguishing between a Supreme principal headship, and a Ministerial
subordinate headship: They do not deny, but Christ is the supreme Head over
all, but then they would feign make the world believe (if it lay in their
power) that there is a secondary and subordinate headship, which Jesus Christ
has deligated in his room, and has left power and authority with, to make
laws to his Church: and they say, that this Ministerial headship may stand
well enough with the Principal and Supreme, as a Viceroy may stand with a King,
but I utterly deny it, affirming it to be a distinction coined in the Popes
conclave at Rome, and holy Baines in his Commentary on Col. 2.19. shows it to
be altogether unsound.

1. Because it is contradictory, for it is such an essential property of an
head, to be principal, and have rule, that what is not thus, is not an head.

2. Who ever heard of any secundary ministerial head in a natural body
without deformity? Now it is a natural body, with which Christ does compare
himself in this respect.

3. That which is a ministerial head, must do the work of an head, but that
none can do: the work is double, internal or external influence, regiment or
direction. Of the first it is granted: for the other of Regiment, The Apostle
themselves w^ not Heads of but servants (...) the Churche^ Id. ibid.
the Scripture denies it to any but Christ the Prince of Pastors, leaving to
all other a power ministerial only to serve the Churches as superior unto
them.

4. No Direction which is dependent is the direction of an Head, as the hand
leading and drawing up the foot, directs it, but is not an head to it,
because the direction of the hand comes from the principality of the head
reported unto it. As for those instances that are brought for the upholding of
the former distinction, he answers them clearly, and shows, that the union of
the Church, the Scripture teaches to depend on Christ and his S^irit, and not
on a visible head. Men may have many names properly attributed to them, but
this improperly. Kings may suffer men to be called Noble, Wise, Rich, but to be
called Kings within his Dominion, is not permitted, because there is nothing
more derogatory from the glory of his Crown. So here. And what this l^arned
man has spoken in the former place, is confirmed both by Ancient and Modern
Divines against the Papists, as is easy to prove: And sufficient might be
added from the Sermons which have been pr^ached for these several years
before the Honorable Houses of Parliament, by learned men of all sorts: but I
suppose it is needl^s in a business so clear and palpable.

Now if Jesus Christ be sole Head, and none joined in commission with him, for
the ordering of these affairs that concern his own, and his Fathers
spiritu^ll and eternal Kingdom, then doubtless no Powers on earth, Civil or
Ecclesiastical, can challenge that honor and authority to themselves, which
is only p^oper to Jesus Christ, and which he has reserved to himself alone,
and is communicable to none other besides him. Now there are some things which
Christ has reserved to himself: as for example, to erect a spiritual Church
and Kingdom to himself, like himself. 2. To appoint a ministry and worship,
order and government, both internal and external, suitable thereunto. 3. To
give out glorious Gospel truths and doctrines of salvation for the Saints to
belleeve, and practice. 4. To reign and rule in and over the hearts and
consciences of the Saints, by the mighty Scepter of his Word and Spirit. 5. To
forgive sins, to heal diseases, to bless O^dinances, to c^allenge praises,
command homage, duty, service of the whole man from sinners, these and the like
things are proper to Jesus Christ, as he is the great high Priest, Prophet, and
King of his Church, and not communicable to Angels or men: and therefore let
not humane powers take that to them, which is none of their due but belongs to
Christ alone.

Quest. What is their due then?

Ans. M. Sprig in his Ancient Bounds has spoken so much, and so ^ully to this
particular, that I need not say any thing; however because something will be
expect^d, I shall refer all to these five he^ds, which I desire may be
heartily interpreted, as seriously co^sid^^ed.

1. T^^y are bound by diligent study (in their own proper persons) (...)
enquire after, and acquaint themselv^s with, what the eternal God by Jesus
Christ has already revealed in his word touching the right order of government
in his Church, and manner of his visible worship among the Saints, which he
has given them in charge to observe and practice; and not to take up these
sacred things by custom or tradition, or depend altogether upon the judgment
and information of others: as is evident from Deuteronomy. 17.19, 20. And it shall be
when he sits upon the throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write him a
copy of this law in a book, out of that which is before the Priests, the
Levites, and it shall be with him, and he shall read them all the days of his
life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of
this law; and these Statutes, to do them, that his heart be not lifted up above
his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the Commandment, to the right
hand or to the left, etc. This indeed must be granted, that the supreme
Magistrate may crave the help and assistance of counsels and Synods, for
information and counsel herein, but not wholly depend and rest on them, to
neglect his own personal endeavors: and the reason is, because no Councels or
Synods can now say, that they are so immediately and infallibly guided, and
assisted from heaven, as that we may build upon their determinations, without
further enquiry, but are subject to errors in the matters of Religion as well
as others; as Histories abundantly make manifest. Vid. Cranm^ who suffered
martyrdom for Jesus Ch^^^^ in Qu. Mar^ days, in his Treatise, called, A
Confutation of unwritten Verities, against the Papists, wh^ he proves this
abundantly from Eusebius. Greg. Naz. August. Panormitan. etc So Doctor Whit^
sometimes profess. of Di. in Cambr. de Council. p. 12 concilia generalia posse
errare et falsa^ ^piniones amplecti, nam concilium Antiochenum veritatem
damnavit, et heresin apertam prop^navit: Similiter Ariminense et Ephesinum
secundum, ex quo patet veritatem non esse metiend^ ex numero Episcoporum. And
this he proves at large, p. 248. ad finem, from Scripture, Reas^ Examp. and
test. of Fathers. And though he spoke much in the commendations of right gathe^
Councels, yet in diverse places of the Treatise, he delivers these ten things
concerning them. 1. That their calling together, is quiddam (...), p. 35. et
humanum inventum, p. ^ that is merely humane. 2. That they cannot frame
Articles of faith to bind the conscien^ p. 19. 3. That their end in coming
together, is not to feed as Pastors, but to con^ what is best for the Churches.
p. 85. 4. That they are not simply necessary. p. 23. 5. That they do not give
authority to the Scripture, p. 242, 243. 6. That their dec^ are not (...), that
is, immediately inspired by the holy Ghost, p 262, 263. 7. T^ the ultimate
determination and judgment of a General Council may be false, p. 231. 8.
That there is no judgment of a Council properly in matters of faith, p. id.
9. T^ the truth of things determined in Councels, may afterward be called into
question, and aga^ disputed, p. 283. 10. That the Churches of Christ h^ve been
kept found in faith with them, for the first three hundred years, p. 23. And
to this agrees M. Owen, a mode^ and learned Presbyterian in his Country Essay
for Church government, annexed to his Ser^ preached before the honorable House
of Commons, p. 72. his words (among others) are these. (...) Judge of heresy
since the Apostles days, but have been obnoxious to error in that judgment,
^d those that have been forwardest to assume a Judicature and power of
discerning between ^th and e^ our, so as to have others ^egulated the^eby, have
erred most foulely: Of old it was ^erally con^eived to be in Councels. Now I
should acknowledge my self obliged to any man ^t would direct me to Council
(since that of Acts 15.) which I may not be forced from the lord to assert,
that it (in something or other) went astray, and he produces testimonies to ^s
purpose from Luthe^, Beza, Nazian. etc

(...). Luther, (he shows) did not fear to affirm of the very first and best
of general Synods, ^t he understood not the holy Ghost to speak in them, and
that their Cannons were but plain ^y and S^ubble.

(...). Beza, that such was the folly, ignorance, ambition, wickedness of many
Bishops in the best ^es, that you would have supposed the Devil to have been
President in the^r Assemblies.

(...). Nazianzene, That he complained, he never saw good end of any Council;
and affirmed ^t he was re^olved never to come at them more; with much more that
he has in that place (...) this purpose.

So that although Synods and Councels of learned and godly men, are not wholly
to be re^ted or despised, yet they are not so to be depended upon, as the
Scriptures are, which we ^e comm^nded by Christ to search, Joh. 5.39. and which
alone in themselves are the rule of ^th, and Judge of controversies, as all
Prot^stant Divines do grant.




2. When God has so blessed their endeavors, as to reveal and make known his
will unto them laid down in the Scriptures, they are bound to publish and
declare the same to their Subjects, and require them for the honor and glory
of God, to yield willing subjection and obedience thereunto, according to the
practice of religious Princes of old, as Asa, in 2 Chronicles. 14.4. who commandded
Judah to seek the Lord God of their fathers, and to do the law and the
commandment: and so Iehoshaphat after him, 2 Chro. 17.7.8.9 and Hezekiah, and
Josiah, and so did David, and Solomon before them.

3. They are not to rest here, but the better to encourage their Subjects, th y
are to go before them in exemplary practice, requiring no more of them, then
they are forward and willing themselves to do; according to the famous examples
of Moses, Ioshuah, and Samuel And the rather, because that hereby they shall
not only publish to men and Angels, that they acknowledge the supremacy and
sovereignty of Jesus Christ over themselves, though the greatest on earth, but
also engage him to the preserving and prospering of them in all their
undertakings: as the Prophet told King Asa. 2 Chro. 15.1.

4. They are bound to countenance and encourage all those, that they find the
Lord to make a willing people in the ways of his worship, by granting them
their liberty, though they be the fewest and meanest, and never so much
contemned and despised in and by the world; and though they also differ and
vary, (through their weakness) in some small circumstantialls about the worship
of God, among themselves, yet so long as they hold the head, and strive after
the life and power of Godliness, in their walking, and submitt to Civil
government, they are to be protected, because herein they do well, and so come
within the compass of the Magistrates countenance, encouragemen^, and
protection, as Romans 13.3, 4. Esaias 49.23. whereas on the contrary, if they
should be discouraged, by denying them their liberty, and exposing them to the
rage and fury of malevolent spirits, they should never enjoy the end of their
prayers to God, in the behalf of the magistrate, which is, That they may under
them, lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2.

5. Lastly they are bound to the utmost of their strength and authority, to
uphold and maintain those sacred Laws and Ordinances of Christ given to the
Saints, in their purity, power, and liberty, against all such as by force, or
fraud, shall endeavor the extirpation and overthrow of them: and this they are
to do, these three ways.

1. By declaring openly against all such known and manifest errors, that fight
against Christ and his truth, and are condemned in the Scripture.

2. By restraining of all such exorbitant and apparent wicked practices,
whereby men do openly resist, and make opposition against those precious ways
of the Lord, and his people, that are in the religious practice of them.

3. By inflicting punishment on the persons of such as shall obstinately
persist in their opposition, and will not take notice of the laws either of God
or man to subject themselves unto them, Such as the Apostle styles 1 Timothy 1.9.
(...), qui ^ugum om^ excutiunt; ta^quam ferae indomitae ad su^ cupiditates
e^plendas curre^tes. Nam ex lo^ ille proprie dicitur, qui refu^git subjici
r^cusatque pare^ ac repagula omnia t^ansili^ Anton. Fa^u^ in loc.
these are evil doers, Filii (...), qui nullius sunt usus, aut frugis, (...)
and (...), fighters against Christ and God, and so come within the compass of
justice to be executed on them; otherwise the Magistrate should bear the Sword
in vain, which would be his sin, because he is appointed for the punishment
of evil doers, as well as the praise and encouragement of them that do well,
Rom 13.3, 4. good and evil actions being the proper object of the Mag strates
power.

Yet herein I desire I may not be mistaken, as if I would have the civil
Magistrate to proceed so far in the inflicting of corporal punishment on the
persons of men, as the late Printed Paper entitled An Ordinance for the
preventing and spreading of heresies, etc. would have him: for I cannot see how
^he sentence of blood can be pronounc^d in the case of spiritual and mental
evils, as simple heresy, or misbelieving any point of Christian faith, where
men are otherwise peaceable in the state: And that it is not my judgment or the
judgment of those that are called Independents alone, I shall refer the
Reader to M. Owen mentioned before, in his Country Essay, for the practice of
Church government, annexed to his excellent S^rmon preached before the House of
Commons, April 29 1646. p. 76. 77. 78. where he has much to this purpose, and
to the purpose: I^ would be seriously considered (says he) upon a view of ^h^
state and condition of Christians, since their name was known in the world,
whether this doctrine of punishing errin^ persons with death, imprisonment,
banishment, and the like, ^^der the name of heretics, has not been as
useful and advantag^ous for error as truth? Nay, whether it has not appeared
the most pernicious invention that ever was broached. In the first, second, and
third Ages, we hear little of it, nothing for it, something against it; much
afterward against it in Austin, and others: Marlinus that famous French Bishop
(he shows) rejected the communion of a company of his associated Bishops,
because they had consented with Maximus the Emperor, unto the death of the
Priscilianists, as vile heretics as ever breathed. I know the usual
pretenses, (says he) such a thing is blasphemy, but search the Scripture,
look upon the definitions of Divines, and by all men's consent, you will find
heresy, in what head of Religion so ever it be, and blasphemy properly so
called, to be exceedingly distant: Let a blasphemer undergo the law of
blasphemy: but yet I think we cannot be too cautious how we place men in that
damnable series, calling heaven and earth to witness the contrary.

Obj. To spread such errors will be destructive to souls.

Ans. So are many things, which yet are not punishable with forcible death, let
him that thinks so, go kill Pagans, and Mahumetans, as such heresy is a canker,
but a spirirituall one, let it be prevented by spiritual means: cutting off
men's heads, is no proper remedy for it: if State-physitians think otherwise
(and I may add, those that take themselves to be Church-physitians) I say no
more, but that I am not of the College: This, and a great deal more, has
that judicious Author.

3. A third sort of men that walk contrary to the former truth, are such as
not only refuse to subscribe to the former truth, in lifting up the Lord Jesus
Christ, as the sole orderer and instituter of this visible Church State, order,
and polity; but quarrel with those of the Congregationall way, for their
forwardnes and faithfullnes in so doing, nick-naming them Independents, as if
self and creature denial, and lifting up the name and authority of Jesus
Christ, in the forementioned things, were blasphemy, and to be numbered among
one of the seven deadly sins: (...).
Indeed if such false accusers, fierce ones, despisers of them that are good,
as the Apostle calls them, 2. Tim. 3.3. having a form of godliness, but denying
the power thereof, v. 5. could justly lay to those of the Congregational way
this lofty title of Independency (proper only to the most high God) as men
turned in upon themselves, regarding only themselves, living to themselves,
depending on themselves, their own wisdom, understanding, council, judgment,
and strength, sleighting and rejecting him, who is styled Jam. 4.12. (...),
That one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy: it were another matter:
or else if it could be clearly evinced by any of the Congregationall men's
words or writings, opinions, or practices in old England, or new: First that
they do altogether exclude the advice and counsel of the servants of Christ in
neighbor Churches, when there is occasion for it: or, secondly, That they
refuse to be accountable for their actions unto those, who shall in a fair and
orderly way, according to the rule of the Gospel in the name of Christ desire
them. Or thirdly, deny appeals unto men, as they will appeal to Christ in the
Scriptures, as the only Umpire and Judge, in matters controversall and dubious.
Or Lastly, scorn to accept from men what they bring to them, with the Image
and Superscription of Christ upon it, the Lord helping them by his Spirit, with
the eyes of their own understanding to see it, I say if these things could be
fairly made out against those of the Congregationall way, it were something;
then I confess our brethren (as in words they profess themselves) might
justly accuse us before heaven and earth, of Pride, and Arrogance, of
presumption, Blasphemy, and impudency, as they are pleased many of them in the
heat of their wrath and indignation to do: but (for ever blessed be the Lord)
this they cannot do. Wherefore is it then that the furnace of their displeasure
is seven times more heated against those of the Congregationall way, then
formerly, and this title of Independency so abusively given them? For my own
part, (all unavoidable infirmities incident to man excepted) I know no other
reasons then these, either because they will not subject themselves to their
high Presbytery, to their Classical, provincial, and National Churches, and
their absolute power of government, over single Congregations of Saints: or
secondly, because they will not say God speed to all such as bring the
doctrines of blind obedience, and teach the fear of God by the precepts of men,
to them. For as for those foul aspersions which are cast on the prime
assertors of the Congregationall way, by the sons of the high and lofty
Presbytery, v^z. of error, heresy, blasphemy, etc. are they not well known to
truly ingenuous and sober minded men, to be no other then the fruit that comes
from the womb of envy, hatred, and discontent? Do not they themselves know
(what ever they bear the world in hand to the contrary) that neither
Antipaedobaptisme, Rebaptisme, Antinomianisme, Arminianisme, Arianisme, etc.
(that are made the common evils of the times) can justly be laid to the charge
of the former persons, in old England or New? no not all this while they have
appeared in this cause of Christ: Let the records of the Assembly be searched,
or any other places, and see whether any thing of this nature can be found
against the dissenting brethren, living or dead, or those that are of the same
judgment with them, touching the right order of the Gospel, and point of
visible Church Fellowship and government: What though diverse that are
erroneous, and hold such Tenets as are destructive to Church and State, do
shelter themselves under the name of Congregationalists, shall the way
therefore, and those that are the chief assertors, and practisers of it,
suffer for it? Is this fair and honest dealing? there are many now possibly
among the multitude that are for the Classical way, that are abominable
livers, Drunkards, Swearers, Extortioners, Oppressors, Persecutors, Scoffers,
if not exact malignants, and some of them it may be also hold as gross errors
as any of the former, if not grosser: shall we therefore presently condemn
those that are the great Champions for it, to be such? Would not the world cry
shame of us, as of men wanting both Reason and Religion? And yet thus the
precious servants of Jesus Christ must be dealt with, that are asserters of the
Congregational way, by those that are Presbyterians, It seems those
Presbyterians that are now so hot and violent against those that are not of
their own tribe, have forgotten the Prelates practice to themselves of late.
and yet men will not see the unreasonablenes and irreligiousnesse of their
proceeding in this manner: But certainly, (if they belong to Christ) he will
bring them to see it, and make them ashamed of all their hard Speeches they
have uttered this way.

Wherefore to close this Chapter, however we shall be dealt withal by the
Tongues and Pens (or any other ways) of our opposers, we shall not be
discouraged, but sit down with our aflictions as with our Crown, blessing
Jehovah, that he will count us worthy to suffer for his Name, and Sons sake:
Being assured that those that suffer with him, shall also reign with him, but
those that deny him, shall be denied of him at the last day. 2 Timothy 2.12.

CHAP II. That this visible Church State, Order, and Polity which Jesus Christ
only has instituted and ordained under the New Testament, to the observation
of which, etc. is a f ee society or communion of visible Saints, embodyed and
knit together by a voluntary consent, to worship God* according to his Word,
making up one ordinary congregation, with power of Government within it self
only.
HEre lies the stresse of our business, and therefore I shall endeavor to
steer my course the more exactly Chr^sto duce, and auspice Christo.

Two things I shall, in the strength of Christ, undertake.

1. To clear and confirm this Proposition. 2. To draw some inferences from
it.
Touching the first of these. There are six things to be opened and cleared up
to us: 1. The matter. 2. The form. 3. The end. 4. The rule. 5. The quantity
and extent. 6. The privilege and prerogative of this Church State.


All which particular Heads hold forth to us a Summary of the Congregationall
way; in the right understanding of which, Christians may abundantly satisfy
themselves and their friends about this way of the Lord, (...) Materia. ^oetas
fideliu^.
so generally cried down and opposed. I shall open the particulars in order.

1. I call this Church State, a society or fellowship of visible Saints, to
note the matter or persons that are both to enjoy and exercise it. For we are
not to imagine that the Kingdom of Christ is of this world, but chosen out of
the world; it is in the world, but not of the world. That is, as the world is
taken in a moral evil sense, for the wicked of the world, but for those that
are called from amongst them to a A visible ^^^gregation ^^om the world, ^^d a
visible ^^^gregation to christ, is neces^^ry to Church ^ion and com^union. Vide
^oyes Temple ^easured, in p. ^6.
visible profession of, and subjection to the Gospel of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. And this is no more then is evident in the Scripture: For we find
that the members of visible Churches, according to their first constitution,
were all Saints by calling, as appears Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2. Philip. 1.1, 7.
Col. 3.12. and 1 These 5.27. (...), which was a calling separatim and
conjunctim, as Junius observes, a And this is agreeable to the signification of
the Greek word (...), in English, Church* (...), ab ^vocando. Leigh, Critic*
Sac.
calling of those Saints to fellowship in a visible Church externally, as well
as to Christ invisibly and internally. And hence it is that those Churches
which were planted and gathered by the Apostles in the first and Primitive
days of the Gospel, are styled The Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14 33. The
Temple is holy, so are the Keys, the Tables of the Law, the Seals, Censures,
Officers, Ordinances, Noyes, ut sup. p. 6.
all holy, as Christ himself is, that is the instituter of them. When the
Temple under the Law was to be built, the materials of it were all hewne,
squared and polished; the Tabernacle was curiously wrought; the Candlestick was
of beaten gold; the twelve Tribes were represented upon the Highpriests
breast plate by twelve precious stones; so the visible members are
correspondent to the mystical in outward appearance. And there is great reason
for it.

1. Because Jesus Christ, the King of his Church, requires that all such as are
profane and scandalous, should not be admitted to, but driven from the holy
things of his house, Mat. 7.6. and 18.18. 1 Cor. 5.5, 7, 13. Revel. 2.20. and
therefore no fit matter for this Church.

2. Because such only as are Saints, can answer to those ends for which Christ
has instituted this Church.

Now these ends among others are these three.

1. To perform spiritual worship and service to God, and Jesus Christ their
King, 1 Pet. 2.9. 2. For spiritual communion and fellowship, as with Christ,
so one with another, 1 Cor. 1.9. and 10.16.17. 3. For mutual edification and
consolation, as appears in 1 Cor. 14.26. and 1 These. 5.11.
Now this is no work for drunkards, swearers, blasphemers, ignorant and
scandalous persons; these serve to dishonor God, and destroy his house, and
therefore not fit matter for his house.

2. I call it a free society of Saints, 2. Forma. In this divisi^ let there be
the name of Christ, and fear of God, a gathering of Professors, (visible
Saints, men and women of good knowledge, and up^ight conversa^ion, so holding
^orth their ^ommunion with Christ) ^y their own ^esire and vo^untary consent
unto one body ^nite themselves. Vide ^wens Coun^y Eassy p. 60.
embodyed and knit together in one, by a voluntary consent, to note the form
of this Church State. Now this uniting and embodying of the Saints together in
Church fellowship, may be cleared and made evident diverse ways to us.

1. From the several Resemblances this Church has with those things that hold
forth near union. As

1. That of a house, or building, where the materials are not only knit fast
to the foundation, but to one another. Ephesians. 2.22.

2. That of a Temple, 1 Cor. 3.17. alluding to the Temple under the Law, where
the stones were so knit together, that it seemed to the eye of the beholder, as
one entire substance.

3. That of a natural body, 1 Cor. 12.27. Col. 3.15.

4. That of a fraternity or brotherhood, 1 Pet. 2.17. compared with Chap. 5.2,
13. and Zech. 11.14.

5. That of an Army with banners, Cant. 6.4.

6. That of a City compact, Psalm. 122.3.

7. That of a golden candlestick, in which the shaft and branches are closely
knit together in one, Rev. 1.12, 20.

8. That of the Tent and Tabernacle, which the Lord built for himself to dwell
among his people, and filled and sanctified with his glorious presence, Exodus
25. Revel. 21.3. Now the materials of the Tabernacle were so coupled and united
together with loops and catches, that they were but one Tabernacle, and so the
Saints in Church fellowship.

9. Lastly, that of the joining together of several grains of corn into one
loaf or bread, 1 Cor. 10.17.

Secondly, from the several words the holy Ghost uses to hold forth this in
the Scriptures.

^ide Leigh in ^is* Critic. Sac. ^ verbum.
1. That of Ephesians. 4.12. (...), for the injoynting of the Saints.

2. That of Gal. 6.1. (...), set such an one in joint again.

3. That of 1 Cor. 1.10. (...), which signifies a knitting together in one.

4. That of Ephesians. 2.22. (...), when materials of a house are put one within
another.

5. That of Col. 2.2. (...), the word signifies to descend one to another, as
men that are knit together in the same judgment, ver. 19.

6. That of Acts 2.1. and 5.13. and 9.26, (...), etc the word signifies, to
glue things together that are unjoynted, and at a distance one from the other.

7. That of Jer. 50.5. Come let us join our selves to the Lord, etc. where the
Hebrew word, to join, (...) Mutuo dedit, accepit, item adhaesit. So Zech.
2.11. Many nations shall be joined to the Lord, in that day, that is, they
shall mutual give themselves to the Lord with the consent of one another. For
i^ the same wor^ with the form
signifies mutually to give our selves, that is, with the knowledge and consent
one of another, as Avenarius and others, viz. Pagnine, Sheindler, and Buztorph.
observe.

Thirdly, from sound reason.

1. Because the godly, without this embodying, are not a Church properly, but a
casual loose company, under great disorder and confusion, as a heap of stones
thrown together, without any further distinction,

2. Because without this, there cannot be that beauty shining forth in the
Saints and Ordinances, for what are a company of choice materials which are fit
for a building, so long as they lie loose one from another? It Is with the Saints
united, as Philosophers speak of the Via lactea, or milky way in the heavens,
they yield forth a glorious luster, and precious light, above what they are
single by themselves.

3. Because without this, the Saints lose not their beauty only, but their
strength also, both defensive and offensive.

1. Defensive, for by their knitting together, they are able to make far more
resistance against the common adversaries of their peace, then when they are
single and by themselves. Vis unita fortior. A bundle of Arrows together are
not easily broken, but taken asunder, and they are easily snapt to pieces. So
here.

2. Offensive, for hereby they are the better able to prevail with God, against
those that annoy and hurt them: for the Saints thus together wrestling with
God, they do offer a kind of holy violence to his sacred Majesty, and obtain
their requests speedily in Christ. As the heat of the Sun, when the beams
thereof meet together in a burning-glasse, is greatly strengthened, so it is
with the prayers of the Saints met thus together, they prevail much with the
strong God, Act. 12.5.

4. Because without this knitting together in one, the Saints cannot so well
discharge and perform those mutual duties Christ has called them unto, as
watching over one another souls, reproving an offending brother, telling the
Church in case of not hearing and receiving admonition, and such like. For
where there is no engagement, there men are subject to neglect duty, as we find
by sad experience.

^. Finis.
3. I say to worship God, to note one chief end for which Jesus Christ has
instituted this Church state, not the whole end, for there are diverse ends of
this institution, but this is the chief end, that so God may receive honor and
glory from his people, which he has called out of the world, 1 Pet. 2.9. Heb.
2.12. Ephesians. 3.21. Prove. 16.4.

^. Regula.
4. I add according to his will, revealed to them in his Word, to note the
rule, by which the Saints are to walk in all the worship they are to perform
to God, both in respect of the matter and manner of worship, according to Mat.
28.20. 1 These. 4.2. 1 Timothy 6.3. 2 Timothy 1.13. for it is not in the power of men,
be they never so wise, learned or godly, to prescribe a rule to the Saints to
worship God by, besides what is left us in the Word of God, as we have before
showed at large.

Quantitas (...) extensio.
5. I call it one ordinary congregation, consisting of so many believers, as can
conveniently meet together to worship God in one place, to make it distinct
from all other Societies, or Bodies called Churches, of the same kind. So that
the Officers and Members of one Church, are not the Officers and Members of
another, but as they are knit together among themselves, so they are
distinguished from others, being as the similar parts of the Catholic, and
have the nature of the whole entire, (viz.) immediate fellowship with CHRIST,
and right to all the Ordinances. Thus the Church of Corinth was one in it
self, and distinct from Cenchrea, which is conceived to be no other then Pagus
vel Portus Corinthi, the Port or Haven Town of Corinth, near adjoining to it,
and yet two distinct Churches. And so the seven Churches in Asia, what were
they but so many distinct congregations? So the Church of Antioch was but one
ordinary congregation, as Act. 14.27. and so the Church at Jerusalem was no
other then one such Church, if we will credit the holy Ghost, as Act. 2.46. and
5.12. and 6.1. and 15.25. and 21.22. And hence it is that we find in the first
planting of the Gospel, that the Churches were many in number, as we may read
1 Cor. 4.17. and 2 Cor. 8.18, 19, 23, 24. and therefore frequently in the
plural number, called the Churches of Gal. 1. 1 Cor. 16.1^
Galatia, of 2 Cor. ^
Macedonia, of 1 Cor. 1^
Asia, of 1 These. ^ Gal. 1.22.
Judea, of Act. 9.
Galile and Samar* of Act. 15
Cyria and Cylicia. So again, sometimes they are called in the plural number,
the Romans 1
Churches of the Gentiles, the 1 Cor. ^ 33.
Churches of the Saints, the 1 Cor. 1
Churches of God, the Romans 1^
Churches of Christ, at least 37. times are they so named in the plural
number, to note that they were distinct bodies, and were no larger then could
meet together in one place, to worship God, as the Parish Churches do Vid.
Bay^ Dioc. Trya^ and Noyes his Templ^ measured, of the qua^ of the Chu^
here in England, some of which congregations consist of diverse thousands. All
which particular distinct bodies or Churches of Christ, though they be many in
number, yet they are all of them but one in nature and constitution. To which
purpose we shall find the Scripture often speaks of the visible Church
indefinitely, as of only one, so 1 Cor. 12.13. Mat. 22.2. 1 Timothy 3.5. calling
it one body, Ephesians. 4.4. that is, one in nature and power, though many in number.

6. I add, having power (under Jesus Christ) of government within it self, to
note the privilege 6. Privileg^
and prerogative Christ has endowed it withal, and to exclude that
superiority that some claim to themselves over their brethren in the point of
Church power. For if every particular Church of Saints (which here we speak of)
have received alike the power of binding and loosing, of opening and shutting
the Kingdom of heaven, within it self, then certainly no Church whatsoever
has power of government over another. But now this we take to be the very mind
of Jesus Christ in the Gospel, that every such particular visible congregation
of Saints, as here we speak of, has received alike this power of government
within it self, without standing in subjection and subordination to others.

Now that this is the very mind of Christ, we shall endeavor to clear, 1.
From Scripture, 2. Testimony of the Learned in England, 3. Reason and Argument.

1. Scripture, and so both in the general and particular:

1. In general, from whence the truth will appear, in that we find in those
Epistles the Apostle does write to the several Churches of Rome, Cor. Coloss.
These. etc. he seldom or never singles out the Officers apart from the rest of
the body, but takes in the whole, both Officers and Church together, in the
ordering and managing of Church affairs, as appears from Romans 16 1. 1 Cor. 5 4
6, 7, 12, 13. and 14.40. Col. 4.10, 16, 17. 1 These. 5.14, 27. and it is no more
then what we find the Apostles to do in that Church business they went about,
Act. 15. where ver. 22, 23. we find the Apostles did not single out themselves
from the rest of the Church, but took the Brethren in with themselves, both to
their debates and resolutions. And so we find in the several Epistles that
Christ sent by John to the Churches in Asia, the words are, Let him that has
an ear, hear what the Spirit says to the Churches, not to the Angels and
Officers alone, and apart by themselves. And if so, then it is no rotten
foundation, as the Vi. Jus Divin. ^egim. Eccles. ^.108, 109.
Presbyterians say, the What name ^ill the Pres^yterians in^ent next for ^s? if
we go (...) the middle ^ay, let them ^^ke heed they ^e not found on ^e right
hand (...) the left, in ^e worship of ^od.
Middle-way men take, viz. the Independents, in the practice of Church affairs.

2. In particular, and so first for the calling and choice of their own
officers, as Deuteronomy. 1.13. and 16.18. and Act. 1.15, 26. where the Apostles call
upon the people to nominate those to the office of Apostleship, whom they
judged fittest, by their direction. Where we may behold clearly that the
Apostles did not choose Joseph and Matthias alone, (...), sig. ^eare per
suf^agia. This is ^^nfessed by ^e more god^ and moderate ^^esbyterians, we may
see a Treatise, ^led, Some ^^lps to Church ^^vernvent, ^m Stafford^re, for the
^ing the Pres^^^erian way, ^^esented to the ^^rliament, 44. page 29. M. Byfield,
his Treatise, ^led, The po^^r of Christ, ^^g. 31.
but the whole Church chose them by consent, giving out their lots, ver. 26.
that is, it was done by the common Suffrage of the Disciples and Brethren,
which were members of that body, afterward expressly called a Church, Chap.
2.57.

So Act. 6.2, 3. where we see the whole Church was called to look out such as
were fit for the Deacons office. The people must choose, and the Apostles
appoint, or design, or set apart such as were chosen. Now if the Apostles
themselves would not set apart Deacons to their office without the peoples
approbation and free choice, much less would they obtrude Pastors on them
without their consent.

So that of Act. 14.23. the Original reads it otherwise then the Translation:
the Translation reads it ordained, but the Greek word is (...), that is, they
chose Elders by the lifting up of the hands of the people, which is different
from ordination, as Coronation is from the election of a King: and therefore
when the holy Ghost speaks of election, he usith this word, (...), but when he
speaks of Ordination, he uses (...): which words, though in writing and sound
they are near alike, yet in signification otherwise as much as between the
lifting up of the hands, and the laying of them on. So that of 2 Cor. 8.19.
abundantly proves this power of the whole Church. And to this agrees the
testimony of the Learned, both Ancient and Modern, as (if need were) I could
abundantly produce. But my labor is saved herein by a late Treatise to this
purpose, wherein the judgments of the Reformed Churches, and Protestant
Divines, are abundantly declared touching this, and other matters of like
nature.

2. For the power of administering the Censures, as excommunicating, etc. this
also is in the Church, as appears from Scriptures, Mat. 18.17, 18. which is to
be understood of such a particular visible Church we now speak of: because when
Christ speaks of binding and loosing, he understands the Brethren, Whatsoever
ye shall bind on earth, etc. meaning those that complain. And doubtless this
is a truth we may not depart from, for although the execution of Censures be in
the Elders and Officers of a Church, yet it is still in ordine ad Ecclesiam,
that is, in reference to the whole Church, whose servants they are. There is no
such particular relation between the party offending, and the Eldership, as
may advantage the Eldership or Presbytery, of a particular Church, to exercise
such an act of power over the party, no more then they may administer the
Sacraments to a private person; but to him as a Church member, and with the
whole Church, so they are to act, and no otherwise.

Another place is that of 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. where we find the whole Church is
concerned in that business of excommunicating the incestuous person. And 2
Cor. 2.6. to 10. there he writes to the whole Church again, to release, and
absolve, or forgive him: The Elders by sentencing his absolution and
restitution, the Brethren by consenting thereunto.

Again, is it not evident from the Asian Churches, where we find Jesus Christ
to charge the neglect of censuring their guilty members upon some of them, as
the Church of Pergamus, and Thyatira, both in one Chapter, Rev. 2.18, 20. Jesus
Christ was displeased with them, because they did not put the power in
execution he had given unto them, for the purging out of those that offended.
And it is worth observation, that Jesus Christ does not blame the neighbor
Churches for the sins of these Churches, but lays all the blame upon
themselves: Which implies clearly they had received power within themselves to
cast out those offenders, and reform those abusers: Or else without question,
he would not have blamed them, for the neglect of that he never gave them. And
therefore reverent M. Perkins in his Exposition on these Chapters says, that
God gave to every one of these Churches, power and authority to Preach the
Word, administer the Sacraments, reprove evil men, and exclude all obstinate
sinners from all spiritual privileges among them, as will appear from his
testimony.

2. A second sort of proofs, is from the testimony of our English Divines; for
what Master Perkins says of the privilege of particular visible Churches, is
confirmed also by many more of our own English Worthies, some that are asleep
in Christ with him, and others that are yet living. I will give you a list of
some of the chiefest of them, men that have been famous in their generation,
not only for their admirable gifts of learning, judgment, and piety, but also
for the service they have done to Jesus Christ in this and other Nations. And
the rather, 1. because this equality of power in the Churches of Christ, is
looked upon by some as a novell and late upstart opinion, held only by such as
are poor, weak, injudicious, unlearned men at best, men that are of a factious
and schismatic temper. 2. Because others of the moderate sort affirm, that
they differ only in the point of Church rule and government, they approve of a
communion of Saints, only they suppose the power of Government is not in
themselves, but in the Classis and Synod. Now that it may appear to be so, I
shall produce these several testimonies following.

^ghtm. Rev. 2. v. 1. page ^. edit. 4.
I shall begin with eminent and famous M. Brightman, who agrees with the
Centur. that the Pastors looked every one to the health of his own Flock, and
that the Primitive purity of Church government, (which as the Centur. observe,
was almost like a popular, every Church having equal power in it self, to
transact her own affairs, Cent. 2. c. 7.) was not defloured with the dregs
of men's inventions till Constantines time, his words are these: The
description does agree very excellently to the Primitive Church, etc. It was
most glorious with the clothing that was made of the righteousness of faith,
etc. Neither was it yet defloured with the dregs of man's inventions, but in
her whole Worship, Discipline, Life, and manners, she had the Moon under her
feet, following the holy truth, as her load-star: There was one form of
government in all Churches, namely, that, that is delivered in the Acts of the
Apostles, and the rest of their writings, etc. Neither had Satan brought in
Prelaticall Pomp and Pride, into the Sheepfold of the Lord, but the Pastors
having work enough to do, in looking every one to his own flock, etc.

2. Reverend M. Cartwright, whose works speak out his eminency, in his first
reply to Bishop Whitgift, he has many passages to this purpose; I shall
mention only a few: It Cartw. 1. R^ to Whit. p. ^
is certain (says he) S. Paul did both understand and observe the rule of our
Savior Christ, (viz. that of Mat. 18.17. tell the Church) for he communicates
this power of Excommunication to the Church: and therefore it must needs be the
meaning of our Savior Christ, that the excommunication should be by many, and
not by one, and by the Church and not by the Minister of the Church alone; for
he bids the Church of Corinth twice in the first Epistle, once by a
Metaphor, another time in plain words, that they should excommunicate the
incestuous person: And in the second Epistle, understanding of the repentance
of the man, he entreats them that they would receive him again: And therefore
considering that the absolution of excommunication does pertain to the
Churches, it follows, that the excommunication does in like manner appertain
unto them: And so afterward he shows, that the Peoples consent was required
in things of this nature, and that the Ministers did not take upon them, of
their own authority to excommunicate, etc. and shows the truth of this from the
authorities of Cyprian, and Augustine, p. 187. and so before p. 35. of his
first reply, in the case of a Churches neglect to call a Minister, or to
consent upon one that is unmeet, he shows, that the power of Elders in other
Churches, is no other then of Admonition, or sharply chargeing them that they
forbear such an election, or in case it be done, not to confirm it: and in
case these Churches neglect their duty, or the Church which is admonished, rest
not in their admonition, then to bring it to the next Synod, and if it rest not
therein, then the Magistrate is to do his duty: and the same he confirms in
his second Reply, Tract. 7. p. 80, 81, 82. where he maintains the Church of
Corinths joining with the Apostle in the excommunication of the incestuous
person.

Thirdly, Master Dudly Fenner, Fenner de sac. Theol l. 7. page ^77, 278.
that was contemporary with Master Cartwright, and joined with him in the
public Ministry to the English Company in Antwerp, in his Treatis^ De sacra
Theolog. (to which Master Cartwright in an Epistle prefixed to it, gives a
singular testimony) Lib. 7. p. 277, 278, 279. has much to th^s purpose. Among
other passages, this is not the least for our purpose, that in matters maximi
momenti, i. e. of the greatest moment, as Censures, elections of Ministers,
etc. they are to be done in the Assembly by the authority of the whole Church.
And if the people have any thing to counsel or object, they have liberty to
bring it in, and afterward matters are to be concluded, when they have been
heard speak, and have given their consent.

Fourthly, Master Parker, Parker de Eccl. ^olit. l. 3. c. 12.
who is so large and full for what we affirm, that it would require a whole
volume by it self to translate what he has written to this purpose, In his
third book De Eccles. pol. Chap. 12. he has no less then 22. Arguments to
prove the superiority of Churches over their own officers: and he that reads
him diligently, shall find that from the authority of Scriptures, Ancient and
Modern Writers, and other unanswerable reasons, he proves the authority of
Churches to be in themselves: and then Lib. 3. Chap. 22. p. 329. and so
onwards, he shows that Synods and Classes have no other power over those
Churches, then by way of counsel and admonition, and whosoever reads that 22.
Chapter shall find him to prove it, six ways, from the ground, from the
form, from the matter, from the object, from the manner of proceeding, and
from the end of those Classical combinations: All which would be too large to
translate. Where let the reader take notice, that he does not simply deny the
use of synods and combination of Churches into Classes, as we do not, but
only their superiority that is challenged to be due to them over the
congregations of the Saints; which we cannot see to be any other then an
usurpation, not given to them by Jesus Christ.

Fifthly, pious and learned M. Perkins, ^erk. his Expos. (...) Revel. c. 2. ^.
2. and v. 20
in his Exposition on the three first Chapters of the Revelations, affirms
that Jesus Christ gave to every one of those seven Churches in Asia, power and
Authority to preach the Word, administer the Sacraments, to reprove evil men,
and exclude all obstinate sinners from all spiritual privileges among them.
His words are these, chap. 2. ver. 2. Christ has given to his Church a power
judicial, to suspend evil men from the Sacrament, and to excommunicate them
from the outward fellowship of the Church, for else he would not have commended
this Minister with his Church, for the execution of his power. And the reasons
(says he) alleged to the contrary, are of no force. And at ver. 20. of the
same Chapter, he says, We may learn two things, 1. The large power that God
gave to his Church, which was besides the power to preach the Word, and
administer the Sacraments, a farther power to appoint who should preach amongst
them, and who should not; and also power to repress evil men and women, and
so keep them in order. The like power was given to the Now the C^ of Ephesus w^
a particular v^sible Church, having power of governme^^ within it self, Master
Perki^ shows, and clear from t^^ Scripture.
church of Ephesus, as we have seen (says he) before, and the like power did
God give to all Churches, as we shall see, if we read the Histories of the
church. And great cause there is hereof, for without this authority, no church
could long stand and be a church.

Sixthly, Holy Baynes, Baynes Dioc^ Trial, page 1 printed 162
that eminent light, which succeeded Master Perkins. We affirm, says he, that
no such head Church was ordained either virtually or actually, but that all
Churches were singular Congregations, equal, This godly learned Autho^ with
others, d^ use the word Independen^ not simply, b^ in some respec^ not in
respect of God, and Christ, and the Spirit, the scriptures, and principles of
reason and equity, for so we acknowledge all Churches to be dependen^ but in
respect of men only, and as it refers to other Churches or subordination to
them, in poi^ of power and authority, because we know of no such ordained by
Christ in the Word.
INDEPENDENT each of other in regard of subjection. So in page 21. touching the
Churches of Geneva, he shows by answering to an objection was made from thence,
1. That they have power of governing themselves, but for greater edification
voluntarily confederate, not to use or exercise their power, but with mutual
communication, one asking the counsel and consent of the other in the common
Presbytery. 2. He shows that it is one thing for Churches to subject
themselves to a Bishop and Consistory, wherein they shall have no power of
suffrage: another thing to communicate with such a Presbytery, wherein
themselves are Members and Judges with others. And then afterward he shows
that Geneva made this Consociation, not as if the prime Churches were
imperfect, and to make one Church by this union, but because though they were
entire Churches, and had the power of Churches, yet they needed this support in
exercising of it, and that by this means, the Ministers and Seniors or Elders
of it, might have communion, (mark that.) Communion (viz.) among themselves,
not jurisdiction over others. So page 81. where after a large discourse
touching this power that was in the particular Church of Corinth, he concludes
with these words, Finally, says he, the Church^s of Asia, as it is plain, had
power of government within themselves. And a little after, page 84. "Hence it
is, that the Governors ( sc. of the Church) are in many things of greater
moment, to take the consent of the people with them.

Seventhly, Master Jacob, Jacobs Treatise, called, An Attestation of many
learned, godly, and famous Divines, etc.
a man that was excellently qualified for the work of the Ministry, and
sometimes Pastor to a gathered Church in London, how many Treatises has he in
print, to prove the point in hand? but above all other, that treatise, called,
An attestation of many learned, godly, and famous Divines, Lights of Religion,
and Pillars of the Gospel, justifying this doctrine, (viz.) 1. That the Church
Government ought to be always with the peoples consent. 2. That a true Church,
under the Gospel, contains no more ordinary Congregations but one. In which
Treatise, he holds forth these two points. First, from Testimonies of many
particular late Writers largely set down, as Beza, Calvin, Viret, Zuinglius,
Luther, Bucer, Pet. Mart. Musculus, Bullinger, Gualter, Vrsinus, Daneus,
Tilenus, Junius, Piscator, and Chemnicius. 2. From the consent of many public
Churches, as the Bohemian, Helvetian, Genevian, Belgic, etc. 3. From
testimonies and practice of the best Antiquity, as the practice of the Church
of Jerusalem, immediately after the death of the Apostle James, Anno 70. of
Christ; from Ignatius to the Church of Philadelphia, Anno 112. so the practice
of the Church of Rome, Anno 240. mentioned by Eusebius. The practice of the
Church of Carthage, Ann. 250. in Cyprians time. So at Antioch, An. 273. 4. From
Councels, 1. The Council of Nice, An. 330. So from the Council of Carthage,
Anno 420. So the Council of Constantinople, An. 682. 5. He shows ^he
intolerable inconveniences that follow the denying this truth. 6. He answers
the chiefest objections are brought against it.

8. So M. Robinson and Ainsworth, men without exception for their learning and
godliness; what large Treatises have they in print to clear this point we have
in hand? some of which have not to this day been answered, as that of M
Robinsons Reasons discussed. Ainsw. guide to Sion. Robinson Reas. discuss^d.


9. Doctor Ames, Ames Med. Theol. l. 1. c. 37. sect. 6.
in his Medulla Theologia, lib. 1. chap. 37. sect. 6. has these words,
Potestas hujus disciplinae, quoad jus ipsum pertinet ad Ecclesiam illam in
communi, cujus membrum est peccator ad illos enim pertinet ejicere, ad quos
pertinet primo admittere, etc. that is, The power of this Discipline in respect
of the right of it belongs to that Church in common, of which the offender is a
member; for it belongs to those to cast out, whom it concerns first to take
in, etc. And so in his Cases of Conscience he has much to this purpose: And M.
Peter's in his last report of the English Wars, says this of him, That he
left his Professorship in Freezland to live with him because of his Churches
Independency at Rotterdam, and charged him often even to his death, so to look
to it, saying, if there were a way of public worship in the world that God
would own, it was that.

10. Doctor Fulke, against the Remists, Fulkes Notes on Remists test,
on 1 Cor. 5. Sect 3, the authority of Excommunication (he says) pertains to
the whole Church, although the judgment and execution thereof is to be
referred to the Governors of the Church, which exercise that authority, as in
the name of Christ, so in the name of the whole Church, whereof they are
appointed Governors, to avoid confusion: which is no other then Paereus,
Musculus, Zanchy, and Calvin, have spoken in their writings, with many others,
as can easily be produced.

11. Doctor Whittaker has much to this purpose in his learned works, as de
council. quest. 5. p. 178, 179. Whitak. de council. q. 5. p. 178, 179.
where he shows that Ecclesiastical power and authority belongs princ^p^lly,
primarily, and essentially to the whole Church, to each Bishop, or Minister
only accidentally, and secondarily, his words are these; Haec quidem authoritas
ecclesiastica singulis episcopis convenit sed accidentaliter, et secundarie, et
minus principaliter, ecclesiae autem primario principaliter et essentialiter
competit: And he illustrates this from a rule in Philosophy, Cum virtus aliqua
duobus inest, uni necessario et essentialiter alteri contingentur, et
accidentaliter; principalius inest ei cui necessario and essentialiter inest,
quam ei cui contingentur tantum et accidentaliter convenit, ut calor magis
principaliter igni, quam aquae inest, quia inest aquae, gratia ignis. So de
Pontif. Romans 9. q. 1. c. 1. Sect. 1. his words translated are these: We say
plainly, that the Churches in the primitive times were so governed of their own
Pastors, that they were not subject to others, either Bishops or Churches
without them, the Church of Colosse was not subject to the Church of Ephesus,
nor the Church of Philippi, to the Church of These. nor these to the Church of
Rome, nor the Church of Rome to any of them, Sed pares omnes inter se juris
e^lent, i. e. They were all of equal power among themselves.

12. To these we might add Doctor Reinolds, in his conference with Heart:
Doctor Willet in his Synops. Papis. Doctor Tailor, in his Commentary on Tit.
But I shall produce only one See Doctor Sibbs.
more, that was famous for his Gospell-anointings, and little thought by the
most men to have been of this judgment: And yet you shall find, in a little
Treatise of his (printed before these troubles brake forth in England) called A
breathing after God, that he speaks fully to this purpose, h^s subject leading
him to discover himself herein, being (as I suppose) a little before his
death; his words are these, p. 91. speaking of Gods house, House (says he) we
take for the persons that are in it, and persons that are ordered, or else it
is a confusion, and not a house; it is a company of those that are voluntary,
they come not by chance into our house, that are members of our society; but
there is an order, there is a Governor in a house, and some that are under
government: and there is a voluntary conjunction, and combination: so the
Church is a voluntary company of People, that is orderly: some to teach, and
some to be instructed, and thereupon it is called a house. And a little after,
p. 94. speaking of the Tabernacle in David's time, before the Temple was built,
he says, If we apply it to our times, that that answers the Tabernacle now, is
particular visible Churches, under particular Pastors, where the means of
salvation are set up: Particular visible Churches now, are Gods Tabernacle: The
Church of the Jews was a National Church, there was but one Church, but one
Place, and one Tabernacle, but now God has erected particular Tabernacles,
every particular Church and Congregation, under one Pastor, their meeting is
the Church of God, a several Church, Vid. the note before in the margent, at
the testimony of M. Baynes.
INDEPENDENT. And as for the Church of England, he says, it is called a
particular Church from other nations, because it is under a government civil,
which is not dependant on any other foreign Prince.

Now what can be spoken more fully for the Congregationall way, then this
famous Minister has in these words? So then put all these together, (besides
multitudes of other choice servants of Christ, that are yet living in this
Kingdom, and foreign parts, who are many of them in the practice of this
truth, with abundance of the rich blessings of Christ on them) and then see
whether it becomes men to say, that none but a company of injudicious, weak,
simple, idle, and giddy-headed men, are of this opinion, that the power of
Church government, is entirely within a particular Church.

But that we may leave men for ever without excuse, let us before we leave this
particular, see what our brethren themselves of the Presbyterian way do say for
this in their piece called Jus Divin. Regim. Eccles. they set forth with all
their strength; wherein when I read, me thinks that Scripture of the Apostle is
verifyed, 1. Cor. 3.19. For the wisdom of the world is foolishnes with God,
for it is written, he takes the wise in their own craftines: And my reason is,
because when e they should speak most, there they say least, and where they
should be strongest, there they are weakest: For whereas the whole Volumne
consists of near about 32. sheets of Paper, there is not much above 6. sheets
that speaks to the point of their Presbytery, and not above a sheet and half
to the principal part of the controversy, p. 231. in laying down of which
also they have not dealt fairly and heartily, by expressing themselves in full,
plain, and ample terms, but equivocally and ambiguously, And in la^ down the
d^^^rences bet^ the Presb. Independ. their Prefa^ they speak untruth in very
first ^ticular; for the Independants have left it upon Record, that a
particular Church is a sin part of the Catholic, their own expression. Ames.
medulla Theolog. c. 32. De ecclesi^ stituta, p. 148. Istae enim congregationes
sunt quasi parts SIMILARES Ecclesia catholica que adeo et nomen et naturam
ejus participant: So M. Will. Sedgwick in his Sermon before verse of the Parl.
printed by Ralph Smith at the sign of the Bible in Cornhill, has the s^ p. 4.
And yet these men in the place before quoted say to the contrary.
reserving more to themselves in their practice, then what is expressed in
their Proposition; as I doubt not but will ere long be made out: Now these
Ge^tlemen in the last chapter of their Book, before they come to lay down
their own Assertion (which is the thing I produce to the confirmation of the
former truth) grant six things to the Independents.

1. That particular Churches have within themselves, power of Discipline
entirely, so far forth as any cause in debate, particularly and peculiarly
concerns themselves, and not others.

2. That where there is no consotiation, or neighborhood of a single C^urches,
whereby they may mutually aid one another, there a single Congregation must not
be denied entirenes of ju^isdiction.

3. That every single Congregation has equal power, one as much as another,
and that there is no subordination of one to anoanother, according to that
trite and known Axiom, Par in parem non habet imperium: i. e. An equal has no
rule or power over an equal: Subordination Prelaticall, which is of one or
more Parrishes, to the Prelate and his Cathedral is denied, all particular
Churches being collateral, and of the same authority.

4. That Classical or Synodall authority cannot be by Scripture introduced
over a particular Church in a privative or destructive way to the power which
God has bestowed upon it.

5. That the highest ecclesiastical Assembly in the world, cannot require from
the lowest a subordination absolute, and Pro Arbitrio, i. e. at their own mere
will and pleasure, but only in some respect; subordination-absolute, being only
to the law of God laid down in Scripture.

6. They grant Charitative, consultative, Fraternall christian advice or
direction, either to be desired or bestowed, by neighboring Churches, either
apart, or in their Synodall meetings, for the mutual benefit of one another,
by reason of that holy profession in which they are all conjoined and knit
together: Now what can be more fully to our purpose, then what these men
themselves say?

Obj. You will say, though they say all this, yet it is not all they say, for
they say the Presbyteri^ns have a further power, that particular Congregtions
have not; which is the power of greater Assemblies, in a Classis or Synod, over
a particular Church, to deliver it to Satan, in case of obstinacy.

Ans. But first, where do these men read in all the New Testament, of these
greater Assemblies, and lesser Assemblies, that have this authoritative power
over one another, to excommunicate and deliver over to Satan? Let them produce
but one plain Scripture for it, by way of precept for it, or practice of it,
and we will say something to it; let them not think to put off the matter so
easily, as if 3. or 4. Recocta cr^ be fastidiu^ parit et n^ seam.
old Arguments that have been at least ten times answered, will serve the
turn: Gods people have learnt to be more wise now then formerly.

2. Do not these men know, that its a great question amongst themselves, or
their friends in the Assembly, whether Traditio Satanae, i. e. The power of
delivering over to Satan, were not Apostolical? that is, peculiar to the
power of Apostles, so as ordinary Elders had it not: and then the utmost power
of all those great classical Presbyteriall Assemblies, over the lesser, as
they call them in way of censuring, will be at last the same with the
Independants non-communion, which the Independants acknowledge (upon good
grounds) to be the last means Christ has appointed in his Church to work
upon the heart, and therefore as forcible and effectual, as that formal and
juridicall delivering over of a particular Church to Satan, which the
Presbyterians so stiffly, though ungroundedly plead for.

3. Let the Assembly of Presbyters be never so great, yet I hope there is none
of them that will affirm, that such an Assembly can proceed (by all their
authority they claim) to the delivering over a particular Church to Satan,
Clave non errante, they are not freed from error, no more then a lesser
Assembly: and commonly the truth of Christ is with the fewer, not the greater
number: one poor despised Saint, may understand more of Gods mind, and see
further into some one particular truth, then a whole Synod: And we have
examples of it. Indeed if they could, or would claim to themselves an unerring
Spirit, as the Pope does, it were something: Or if they had such a presence of
the holy Ghost with them, that they might say as the Apostles did, It seemed
good to the holy Ghost, and to us: then it were to the purpose: but before this
be done, they do but Oleum et operam perdere, and Jesus Christ will give them
but little thanks in the end; and if that those that are champions for these
higher Assemblies, as they call them, whereby they would rule the churches of
Christ, would but read Doctor Whitaker De council. from p. 248. ad finem,
without prejudice, and an evil eye, I am confident they would be more humble
in their own eyes, and moderate and gentle toward their brethren they so much
scorn. If any desire further satisfaction in this very particular, let him
read M. Buroughs his Heart Divisions, p. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47.

4. Lastly, if the divine right be in the Congregationall Presbytery, as they
aknowledge at large, p. 182. 138. of their Jus divinum: How comes it to pass
that they claim such power in higher Assemblies, as the Classical, Provincial,
and National Presbyteries? how can these things stand together? are there two
divine rights, especially, when the Classical divine right, (as they call it)
over the Congregationall, is merely humane?

1. In that the preaching Elders of greater Presbytery, were ordained to their
office by a questionable power (by the Bishops) which they have not to this day
renounced. 2. In that the ruling Elders are made by a power as questionable,
(though not so Antichristian) to wit, an Ordinance of Parl. as M. Saltmarsh
has lately observed, in his Reasons discussing the divine right of Presbytery,
p. 3, 4. And so much for the testimony of the learned.

3. In the last place, we come to those reasons and Arguments the learned do
usually give, for the confirming the former truth, and confuting the contrary,
I shall name only the heads of some of them.

^od omnes at^git, ab omni^ approbari ^et. Whit. de ^e. p. 44.
1. That which concerns all the Church, reason requires should be done by all
the Church; but to choose this or that Officer, to excommunicate this or that
member, concerns all the Church, ergo.

2. No adjunct in order of Nature, is before the Subject, nor is it capable of
receiving any thing, but as it adheres to, and so from the subject; but
administration of Ordinances is the adjunct of the Church, and the Church the
subject, ergo.

3. The Church is the body of Christ, but the Presbytery is not so, but a part
of the body, ergo, the power is in the Church primarily, and not in Presbytery.

4. If the Church has power to refuse a man, and to cast him out, then she
has power to choose, and put him in: but the first is true, because otherwise
she does not sin in suffering false Teachers, nor can she decline a vicious
Elder, Invito vel non curante Presbyterio, ergo.

5. There is no power that any can have from heaven ordinarily, but by some
transaction between God and them; but there is no such transaction between God,
and the Presbytery primarily; the Covenant and Promise was not made with them,
but with the Church, ergo.

6. If the Church only, and not the Presbytery, be the Kingly Nation, Royal
Priesthood, and Kings and Priests to God, then the power belongs to the Church,
and not to the Presbytery: But the Church is the Kingly Nation, and not the
Presbytery, ergo. The antecedent is without question, the consequent is
evident, because else they should be titular Kings only, without power, and
they that are not Kings and Priests, as the Presbytery, Qua tales, they should
have Power.

7. If the Text Mat. 18. Go tell the Church, be not meant of the Presbytery
only, but of the Church, consisting of Elders and brethren together, then the
power belongs not to the Presbytery alone, but to the whole: But that place, Go
tell the Church, is not meant of the Presbytery only, but of the whole, Vid.
Cottons Keys, p. 40, 41, 42, 43, 44. Jacobs divine beginning and institution
of Christ's visible Church. Philips answer to Lamb, p. 150.
consisting of Elders and brethren; as those Divines in the margent have fully
cleared, answering all the objections that have been brought to the contrary,
which would be too large here to set down; only take these few reasons, why
this place cannot be meant of the Presbytery alone.

1. Because in all the New Testament we cannot find the word Church is given to
the Presbytery alone, but sometimes for the Members alone, without it, or
distinct from the Presbytery: as Act. 14.23. and 15.4, 22. 1 Cor. 12. and
frequently, for the whole Flock, Elders and Brethren together. 1 Cor. 1. Phil.
1.2.1. etc.

2. Because the relation of the party offending is to the Church, not to the
Presbytery, for the fellowship is with the Church, as Church, the covenant and
brotherhood is with them; and therefore, though the Presbytery orderly
exercises the power, yet it is In ordine ad ecclesiam, there is no particular
relation between the party and Presbytery, as may advantage the Presbytery to
exercise such an act of power over him, no more then they may administer the
Seals to a private person, but to him as a Church Member, and with the whole
Church.

3. The Presbytery consisting of a few Elders, are offended by a brother, that
is bound up in fellowship with a hundred private brethren: now the Presbytery
dealing with him, can go no further, if they be the Church, then themselves,
etc.

4. The Presbytery may be the party offendi^g, and then you must tell the
Church, that the Church offends: that is, go tell themselv^s.

O^j. I may tell a higher Classis or Assembly.

Ans. But what if they join with the offending Presbyters? then I must stay for
a general Council, which is not free from error, neither.

5. If by tell the Church be meant the Presbytery only, then there being but
two or three of the Presbytery, a brother offended, cannot take one or two of
them for witnesses, because then he should tell the Church before the time
come, and so could make no further proceeding. But a brother offended may take
one or two of the Elders for witnesses, ergo, Presbytery cannot be the Church;
and if so, then much less can it be taken for a Classis, Synod, etc.

8. If the Church be complete in point of government, without Presbyterian,
classical, and Synodicall Offices, and callings, then the Church has power in
it self, without such offices and callings: But a particular Church is
complete in point of Church power, and exercise of government, as we have
showed, and proved abundantly before, and they themselves grant ergo.

9. Where the sentence administered by the Church of a particular Congregation,
is ratifyed and confirmed in heaven by Christ, there the power must needs be
granted to be in the Church: But the sentence administered by the Church of a
particular congregation, is ratifyed by Christ in heaven, as Mat. 18.18, 19.
ergo.

And thus now by the assistance of Christ, I have gone through all the parts of
this second Proposition; whereby the meanest may come to have insight into the
reality and excellency of the Congregationall way, and be able not only to
satisfy themselves about it, but others also, and see sufficient ground to
suffer for it, as for a principal p^rt of the will and mind of Christ, if ever
they should be called unto it.

Now then, this being so, that the Church to which the Officers and
administration of the Seals is limited under the New Testament, is an ord^nary
congregation of Saints, having power of government within it self under Jesus
Christ, 1. Inference from the former Proposition.
their head and King, then it will follow,

1. That there is no ground or warrant in Scripture for an universal visible
Church, with Officers and government correspondent, a universal visible Church
militant on earth, is not denied, but the question is of a universal, visible,
political Church, with Officers and Administrations suitable, that is,
universal Pastors, universal Elders, universal Deacons, universal Seals
and censures, universal Laws, and rules of Government: for such as the Church
is, such must her Officers, O^dinances, and Government be: But this we cannot
find the Scriptures to hold out in the least to us, but are altogether silent:
and little do men know how much they contribute toward the keeping of the Pope
in his chair, by pleading so much as they do for such a universal visible
Church, subject to government: for if there be such a Church, of divine
institution, then it will necessarily follow, that there must be a universal
ordinary Pastor of that Church, and then the Papists will thank them. And to
speak truly, let us but once grant that particular Churches are not entire in
themselves, nor endowed with the power of government, immediately from Christ,
but are parts and dependants of one whole universal Church visible,
ministerial, or political; then it will follow, that we must refer our
selves in matters of Religion and Government, to that one body visible, whereon
we profess our selves to depend: and what this leads to, those that have but
half an eye may discern. The just extent therefore (without doubt) of a true
visible Church under the Gospel, is no other then what we have before showed:
to wit, one ordinary Congregation or society of Saints, that can meet together
in one place to worship God.

2. Then it will follow also, that there is as little ground for a National,
Diocesan, and Provincial Church: And to speak truly, there is lesser show and
ground for these in the Scripture, then for the other we spoke to before: and
are therefore justly condemned by diverse jud^cious and learned men in their
writings: vide Jacob. Reas. for Reformation, p. 5, 6, 7, 8. etc. Borough.
Vindication against Edwards, p. 23. his words are these.

I said that we are freed from the Pedagogie of the Jews, and now there were
no National Churches by institution, as the Jews were, mentioning three
things.

"1. There are no National Officers, as they had.

"2. No National worship as they had.

3. It was not sufficient now to make a member of the Church, because one is by
birth of this or any other Nation, as then it was, because one was born of the
Nation of the Jews; and is this (says he) a doctrine that will not go down
with a Presbyterian? Surely it must be a Prelatical Presbyterian who cannot
digest this: I am confident all the Presbyterian Churches in the world, will
acknowledge what I said here to be true: That we may call the Church in
England a National Church, because of the many Saints in it, who are the body
of Christ, I deny not, nor ever did, (neither do I know any of his judgment or
practice that do;) but that it is by the institution of Christ formed into one
political Church, as the Nation of the Jews was, this is no Independency to
deny. Where are any particular men standing Church Officers to the whole Nation
by divine institution? What National Worship has Christ instituted? Does our
birth in the Nation make us members of the Church? These things are so palpably
plain to any that will understand, that it is tedious to spend time about them;
so also Cottons Keys, p. 31, 32.

3. It will follow also that the ruling power of Synods and Classes over the
particular Churches, which is now so much pleaded for, (not the counselling
power, for that is granted by us) is not Jure divino, but a mere usurpation,
and such a way and practice as Christ will never own, nor prosper: For what he
has said Mat. 15.13. shall certainly come to pass; which is, That every
plant, which is not of his Fathers planting, shall be rooted up; such a
government possibly may stand for a time, as the Prelaticall did, having the
power of the Prince to support it; but doubtless it will (being so near of
kin to it) share in the like destiny: And that which moves me to believe and
expect it, is not only the non-Scripturalnes of this high Classical way of
Government, but the unreasonablenes, and sinfullnes of it; which will easily
appear from these ensuing particulars, which are the natural issues of this
government; and by which you may understand from whence it takes its original,
Several sorts fruts, that ^owes upon ^^e lofty Tree high Pres^^terie.
and derives its pedigree.

1. This high Classical government makes one ordinary Pastor, or Elder, to
undertake the rule of more Churches and Flocks then his own; perhaps twenty or
forty, if not more; and so brings in a burden too heavy for the ablest
Minister to go under: for if one Flock be work enough for one Shepherd to
watch over, he has little reason to take the care of twenty on him: wise men
judge it the safest course to meddle with no more work then they can
comfortably go through, especially such work as the care of souls, which is
of greatest and highest concernment: and the rather considering that of the
Apostle 2 Cor. 2.16. (...), who is sufficient for these things?

2. It makes the church (which is the body of Christ, and has all parts and
members suited to her condition) to be lame and defective, having no power of
discharging her own offices; viz. of receiving in, and casting out members, but
by another leave, that is inferior to her.

3. It refuses to have matters heard and determined in that place where they
are done and acted; then which, what more unreasonable? it was condemned in
Cyprians days, as Doctor Reinolds proves against Heart in his conference with
him, p. 570. and Cyprian himself says, lib. 1. epist. 8. That it is not fit
that those over whom the holy Ghost had made them overseers, should go to and
fro, speaking of matters that were carried from their own church to others.

4. It occasions tyranny and oppression, to the free born Subjects of Christ's
Kingdom; domineering over their consciences, not suffering them to enjoy their
liberty in Church or State, unless they will subscribe to their dictates, and
be of their judgment, as he that runs may read, in their late published and
printed Petitions, etc. The right garb and strain of Antichrist, that man of
sin, that (...) and (...), mentioned in Rev. 13.17. that will not suffer any
man to buy or sell, unless he have the mark, or the name of the Beast, or the
number of his name: and of that Giant M. Buroughs speaks of, in his Heart
divisions, p. 55. who laid upon a Bed, all he took, and those who were too
long, he cut them even with his Bed, and such as were too short, he stretched
them out to the length of it: and this verrily (says he) is cruelty.

5. It puts men upon inevitable temptations of wresting the Scriptures, and
applying them to another, and clean contrary sense then God appointed them
for: e. g. to make them speak out, that there is a pattern of diverse single
Congregations in one church, and of a Presbyteriall government in common over
these single Congregations: That differences in matters of opinion are not to
be suffered, though in things not destructive to Church or State: that men are
to be driven from their errors, Cogendo, non persuadendo, by compulsion, etc.
when the Scriptures are directly against these things.

6. It puts a stop in the way of knowledge, stinting and straitning, if not
stifling men's gifts and abilities in searching out divine truths, and the great
mystery, which that Apostle calls (...), ^phes. 3.10.
that manifold wisdom of God, having such variety in it, as is able to
exercise the strongest abilities, even of Angels themselves, to search into,
and make discoveries of. Now says this Classical Government, Thus far you
must go and no farther. This is the judgment of the Church of England, and
the Assembly and Presbytery in their several Classes have subscribed to it,
touching the knowledge of God, and the way of his Worship, and Government in
the Church; and no man is to vary or differ from it, nor call it into question,
without running the hazard of his precious liberty, etc.

7. It makes men to build their observation of, and practicing obedience to the
Divine Laws, Institutions and Ordinances of Christ, upon the principles of
humane wisdom and policy, yea the mere wills and commandments of men. For
Ministers must not preach, nor administer in the holy things of God to their
people, neither must the Saints believe or practice, further then shall the
Classis shall judge to be sound and orthodox, and give their consent to, and
approbation of: and are these things of God?

8. Lastly, it so genders to bondage, and begets in the best men such a
Diatrophes-like spirit, (...) Epist. of ^oh. 9, 10.
a spirit of pride and bitterness against the Brethren, (like the Prelates
chair, that infected the most pious souls, and ablest Preachers that sat
down in it, as we could instance in many.) Yea it so mingles with the world,
and introduces such formality (if not worse) in the worship and service of
God, that I cannot but belevee and expect the Lord Jesus root it up, as he did
the Prelacy, the difference between them being more in name then nature, show
then substance.

^he 4. Infe^nce from the ^^oposition.
4. From what has formerly been said touching the nature and privilege of a
particular society of Saints united together as the true and proper visible
Church of Christ, now under the Gospel. The constitution of the Parish Churches
in England, must of necessity be found faulty, and their original to be from
beneath, and not from above; from men, and not from God: and therefore not so
much to be pleaded for and defended, as true visible Churches of Christ, as
they are by the Presbyters in the Preface of their Jus Divinum. Reg. eccles.

1. For first of all, how do they answer to this Church we have spoken of in
this chapter, in respect of the efficient cause and institut^r of it, scil.
Jesus Christ, when their original is from men? Now that this is a truth, is
evident from the first founding of them, which appears to be from Dyonisius
Bishop of Rome, which first ordained Diocesan Churches, as Platina observes of
him, and in England, by one Honorius Bishop of Cant. as Master Saltmarsh has
lately observed out of Master Seldom, De decimis. So Polydor Virgil, De invent.
rerum, li. 4. c. 9. And it is no other then what M. Reas. for R^formation, p* 28,
29.
Jacob has long since noted from M. Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity, and
Doctor Tooker, both Prelaticall men, who affirm the distinction of parishes to
be a mere positive law, and not jure divino, i. e. by Divine right. And I find
the like in that famous learned man Master Paul Baynes his Dioc. Trial, p. 12.
whose words are these: A Parishionall Church may be considered, 1. Materially,
and 2. Formally. 1. Materially, as it is a Church within such local bounds,
the members of which dwell contiguously, one bord^ring upon the other. Now
(says he) this God instituted not, for it is accidental to the Church. If a
parishionall Church in London should dwell as the Dutch do, one far enough
from the other, while the same Believers were united with the same Governors,
the Church were not changed, though the place were altered, (which is worth
observation against such as cry out against the Independent Churches, because
the members of them dwell not contiguously one bordering upon the other,
(though in point of convenience (not of absoulte necessity) we judge it fit
that Members of Churches should dwell as near together as their occasions and
callings will give leave.) 2. Formally, for a multitude which do in manner of a
parish ordinarily congregate, Now (says he) such Churches and such only, we
say God erected.

To this purpose M. Owen also in his Country Essay for Church Government,
answering this Objection, By this means, parishes will be unchurched, says,

1. If by Churches you understand such entire societies of Christians, as have
all Church power both according to right and exercise in and among themselves,
as Independents speak of Congregations, then they were never churched by any.

2. If only civil divisions of men, that may conveniently be taught by one
Pastor, and ruled by Elders, whereof some may be fit to partake of the
Ordinances, some not, as the Presbyterians esteem them, then, etc. So that
here is no other then an humane constitution* allowed of to the parish Churches
in England.

2. How do these Parish Churches in England, answer to the former true visible
Church of Christ under the Gospel in respect of the right matter of it, which
we have showed to be Saints? Now in this they come as short as in the other,
for experience tells us, that Parish Churches for the general consist of loose,
profane, scandalous livers, such as the Apostle says are without God, and
without Christ, and without hope, Ephesians. 2.12. that are strangers to the
commonwealth of Israel, and covenant of Promise. Now we may safely argue from
that Scripture, that such as are without God, and without Christ, cannot make a
Church of Christ. Besides, the Kingdom of Christ, which is his Church, is
spiritual, and not of this world, as he himself says, John 18.36. Now these
parishes for the generality of their matter, are of this world, carnal and
earthly, and therefore cannot be the Kingdom of Christ. Jesus Christ cannot be
the Head of such a Body, nor King of such a Kingdom. Moreover, that cannot be
the matter of Christ's Church, which he has commanded to be cast out of his
Church, as we have showed before. But the subject matter of the Parish
Churches are such, as ought to be cast out from the Church of Christ. And
therefore some of our more godly Brethren of the Presbyterian way, dare not
admit of them to Church privileges with the godly, but separate the godly from
them, where they have a competent number by themselves to administer the seals
to, as we could give instances, if need were. Neither will it be sufficient in
this case, to say as many do, that the denomination is from the better part;
because we never find in the Scriptures, that holiness is ascribed to a
multitude for the sake of a few, if the rest be unholy, loose and profane: As
we do not say, that because such a meeting has three or four Gentlemen or
Nobles in it, that the whole company are Gentlemen and Noblemen. We read that
unclean persons and things do pollute and unhallow clean persons, as Levit.
14.46, 47. and 15.4, 11, 12. Hag. 2.12, 13, 14. and that a little leaven sowres
the whole lump, 1 Cor. 1.6, 7. and that by the springing up of one root of
bitterness, many are defiled; and that by one dead fly, the whole box of
ointment is spoiled; but that clean persons should hallow and sanctify
persons that are unholy, or that a little sweet meal should make sweet a sour
lump, this we read not of.

Besides, can it be made out by any man, that the matter of those Parish
Churches, for the most part, can answer the ends for which a Church is
instituted by Christ, as we have noted before? can a company of dissolute
livers, worship God and Jesus Christ spiritually? can there be ab^lity for
spiritual and holy services, where the Spirit is not yet given? can there be
communion between light and darkness, between Christ and Belial? as 2 Cor.
6.16. can they edify one another in the most holy faith, that have not the
work of faith yet wrought and begun in them? I desire to know of any
sober-minded and religious-hearted man, whether a company of vile, profane
drunkards, swearers, scoffers at goodness, enemies to the power of godliness,
ignorant poor souls, that know no more of God and Christ, (I had almost said
then the seats they sit on) can do any thing in a Church society, that tends
to the honor of God, and edification of the body of Christ.

1. If you say they are hearers of the Word, that is not sufficient, for
Heathens may do that, and yet not be Church members, as 1 Cor. 14.23, 24. The
Scribes, and Pharisees, and other wicked Jews, came often to hear Christ
himself preach with his Disciples, and yet they were not his Disciples, but
enemies, and opposers, seeking to kill him. It Is not bare hearing the Word, that
makes a person a member of Christ and his Church, but his willing and professed
subjection to Christ and the Gospel to be ruled and ordered by it, as 2 Cor.
9.13.

2. If you say, they are Professors of Christ, yet that also, if contradicted
in the life, is not sufficient to make a member of Christ and his Church, for 2 Timothy 3.5. we are bid to turn from such.

3. If you say, they are baptized. I answer, that is not sufficient to make
them members of this Church of Christ, because the Church of Rome has Baptism
in it, and yet no true Church, as Master Perkins has well observed in his
Exposition on the Creed. A false Church may usurp Ordinances that has no
right to them, as well as a true church be for a time without them, that has
right to them. Neither is Baptism the form of a church, or the way and means
now left to bring men into the church, but a seal of Confirmation rather to
those that are already joined to some particular visible Church of Christ. And
to add no more, Baptism in it self is so far from making any man a
churchmember, as that church membership may be dissolved, though Baptism
remain, as in case of Excommunication.

4. If you add farther, and say, that the primitive visible Churches, as
Corinth, Ephesus, etc. had profane wicked men in them: This neither will be to
any purpose; for the question is not, whether a true visible Church of Christ
may have wicked persons in it? for that is not denied: but whether it is to be
constituted and made up of such persons. It Is one thing what these Primitive
Churches may be through degeneration, another thing what they were in their
first constitution. And therefore I suppose we are not to produce those
Churches for examples as they were in their degenerate estate, but as they were
in their first planting, otherwise we do but delude the simple. Indeed if those
that plead so hotly for the Parish Churches could make it out, that in the
beginning they had a pure constitution, and their first planting was juxta
Evangelium Christi, it were something, and their degenerating only from the
right, should not hinder us from the upholding of them. But till that be done,
they must bear with us, if we labor the bringing of them to the Primitive
rule and order of the Gospel, which how it may be effected, I shall endeavor
to hold forth in its proper place.

5. If you add farther, that the Parables of the draw-net, and the tares and
wheat together, seem to hold out, that the visible Church of Christ consists
of good and bad together. I answer in a word, if by the field it be granted is
meant the visible state of the Church, though Christ himself says, by field
is meant the world, which is never called the Church, Mat. 13.38, 39. but
suppose it be taken for the visible church of Christ, yet it cannot be
understood of the essence and constitution of the church, which here we are
disputing of, and what ought to be the matter of such a church, de jure, 1.
because Christ says that those Tares were sowed in the field by the envious
man, the Devil, through the carelessnes of those that were set over the Field
to keep it, Mat. 13.39. So that if they be in the church, he has no hand in
it, it is not by his allowance, and much less his appointment and ordination,
and therefore to make this more clear, I add this 2. reason, that if Jesus
Christ never ordained that wicked men should be matter of his house, stones in
his building, because if this should be true, then all those commands of Christ
for casting them out of his church, when they are discovered to be in, should
be void, and to no purpose: for if that wicked men which are the Tares, be the
true matter of a church, and of the true constitution of a visible Church, then
they are to be let alone and not cast out; lest in so doing we destroy the
church, sin against the commandment of Christ. So that notwithstanding what is
said for the matter of the parish churches, we see they cannot be found to be
according to the first constitution of the Gospel, and I fear those that go
about to set up a new building of Reformation, upon this rotten foundation will
find in a short time, that all they do will fall about their own ears.

3. Again, it may be further demanded, how these parish-churches do answer to
the church we have formerly spoken of, in respect of their union and knitting
together, by a free and voluntary consent, which is the form of a true visible
church of Christ: has there ever been such a knitting and combination of the
Officers and Members, in an holy and unanimous consent and agreement to walk
together (as we have formerly showed) according to the rule of Christ in the
Gospel? etc. Is not the contrary evident? For

1. Have not those parishes been time out of mind under one visible
Antichristian church government, and rule, for the outward worship of God, and
dispensation of Ordinances?

2. Have not Prelates and Patrons imposed preachers over those parishes,
without, yea, many times against the approbation and consent of the People?

3. Have not the godly with the wicked in those parishes, been always mixed
together in the ordinances and worship of God, making up one church frame and
constitution, without any separation?

4. Has not co-habitation, and coming within the bounds and precincts of a
parish, been sufficient to make a person a member of the Church in their sense,
though never so notorious a liver, so he be not poor, and (through his charge
of children) burdensome to the parish, never enquiring whether he be capable
of communion with Christ, and his Saints in the enjoyment of the Ordinances?

5. Wherefore else is it, that now in these times of greater light and liberty,
that many of our Presbyterian brethren do begin to gather the godly in their
parishes into a body of themselves, separating the precious from the vile, in a
way of acknowledging what work of grace the Lord has wrought in them, of
which there would (I conceive) be no need, if they were already united and
embodyed together?

4. Lastly, to speak nothing of the rule by which they walk in the worship of
God, it may be demanded, how these parish Churches, do answer to the pattern
before set down, according to the Gospel, in point of Discipline and
government? do they enjoy the privileges of church power within themselves,
without subordination to others? Have they not generally to this day been
without it, standing formerly under the authority of the Lord Bishops, and
their Courts, that used them at their pleasure, and led them captive to their
wills? Did not both Priest and people dance after their pipe? And if the
classical government do now take place, is it not to be feared, that they will
be (poor souls) In statu quo prius, under as great bondage, if not greater
then before? But for that, we leave it, till time (the discoverer of all
things) make the truth known in this particular.

5. Another inference from the former position, is this, to show how great the
sin is of those that are called Seekers, that have been professed members of
such a particular church of Saints rightly constituted according to the order
of the Gospel, but now have left it, denying any such church, or churches, and
Ministry to be, and so have left all communion with Christ and his Saints, in
the ordinances of his worship, expecting a Ministry accompanied with the gifts
of Miracles, as in the Apostles days: But such men do not see how much Satan
has blinded their eyes. I shall speak more largely and directly to them in
the fourth chapter of this Treatise.

6. Then it will follow in the last place, that the brethren of the
congregational way are not guilty of all those foul crimes of error, heresy,
blasphemies, and of making schisms and rents in the church of Christ, as they
are accused by the tongues and pens both of Preachers and professors in the
Presbyterian way: for the judicious Reader may see by what has been already,
and is yet further to be laid down, that those that walk in this Separated
Church State from the world, do not swerve from the way of the Lord, which he
himself has instituted and commanded: nor from the judgment and practice of
those that have been some of the famous lights that have shined in this
Kingdom, and therefore after all those former aspersions have been laid, and
cast upon them, they will be found in the truth, and God will make their
enemies ashamed, that ever they should write such volumnes, and waste so many
precious hours, to oppose and vex their righteous souls, for Magna est
veritas, et praevalebit.

CHAP. III. That the several administrations of this Church State, especially
for Seals and Censures, are now in these days (since the death of the
Apostles, and extraordinary Church Officers and governors) limited to, and
bounded within every particular Church: the Officers of one Congregation, may
not ordinarily and in common, (as the Apostles did) administer the Seals and
Censures, that belongs to another Congregation.
Now the truth of this I shall endeavor to make out, in these ten following
Conclusions:

1. THat all Ministerial power for administration of Seals, and execution of
Church censures, was first given in commission to the Apostles only; as these
Scriptures hold forth, Mat. 20.19. Joh. 20.21, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 11.23. And
therefore we read oftentimes of Peter's baptising Cornelius and others, Acts 10.
and Paul's excommunicating of Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.20. and such like acts of
theirs, which they did by themselves alone, as the first Subjects of this
executive Church Power.

2. That these Apostles were immediately called, and extraordinarily gifted by
Christ for this work and employment of their Ministry, Joh. 20.21, 22. Gal.
1.1. Act. 2.4. 1 Cor. 12.

3. That these extraordinary officers were only Protempore, and so were the
last, as well as the first subject of this power and authority; so that when
they dyed, their extraordinary call and commission, together with their
extraordinary gifts for the discharge of it, dyed with them, as may be gathered
from Asts 20.29. and experience has manifested soon after their decease.

4. That Jesus Christ the Head and King of his Church, in admirable wisdom,
ordained such to succeed them, which should (though they were not so
extraordinarily called and qualifyed) accomplish and effect that great work of
gathering and perfecting the Saints, which are his body the Church, as is
evident from Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 12.28. Romans 12.7, 8.

5. That these kind of ordinary officers, as Pastors and Teachers, were (in the
very times of the Apostles, and by the Apostles themselves, with the consent of
the people) begun to be chosen and settled in particular Churches and
Congregations, as appears from Act. 14.23. and 20.28. and appointed to be
perpetual, and continue in the Churches of Christ to his coming again, Ephesians.
4.13.

6. That these ordinary officers were charged by the Apostles to look to their
own flocks, over which the holy Ghost had made them overseers, as Act. 20.28.
and 1 Pet. 5.2. and the People also to obey them, and submit themselves to
them, as Heb 13.17. and that notable place, of 1 These. 5.12. where he shows
how that Church should know them that were over them in the Lord, and did
labor amongst them, and admonish them, and how highly they should account of
them for their works sake, ver. 13. In which Scripture he excellently and
clearly holds forth the truth of the Proposition in hand, by discovering that
special relation was between those officers and the members of that Church,
three times in one verse, which labor (...), amongst you, (...), are over you;
and then again, (...), and admonish you: where we see the Apostle still keeps
himself to the Pronoune Rolative, Vos, vos, you, you, not others, so much as
you (viz.) members of that particular Church, to whom these Pastors and
Teachers were related.

7. That these Pastors and Teachers, did obey for the most part this charge and
command of the Apostles, as we see in the former instance; neither can we read
that the officers of one particular Church did (...), that is, play the Bishops
in other men's Diocesses: they did not administer the Seals and censures out of
their own Churches: they might preach and pray in other Churches beside their
own, but not administer Seals and censures; the reason is, because there is a
greater liberty allowed by Christ in the one, then in the other.

8. That the office of a Pastor and Teacher, is founded in the relation that is
between the Church and the officer, or officers thereof: now the Church under
the Gospel, to which these officers do belong, is not Universal, and
National, or Diocesan (as we in the former Chapter made manifest) but
congregationall only, (viz.) such a company of believers as can meet together
to worship God in one place: and therefore the execution of their office,
cannot be universal, but limited to the congregation to which they belong,
especially, in the administration of the Seals and Censures.

9. That no such Officer, as Pastor, etc. can require from any other Church or
Congregation besides his own to which he belongs, and over which the holy Ghost
has made him overseer, that respect, maintenance, and obedience, which is due
from people to officers, as appears from (...)
Heb. 13.17. 1 These. 5.12, 13. Neither stand they charged with giving account
for the souls of any other, then those are committed to them in that
particular Church where they are called; nor can any other then those of their
particular Church, challenge from them the watching over their souls, and
dispensing to them the Ordinances of Christ: This is clear and evident in
nature, and civil government of States and Families: one State cannot be
charged with the government of another, nor one master of a Family with the
rule of another: but as nature has ordained one to one, Arist.
so Christ has ordained in his Church, to each congregation their proper
Pastors and overseers, and they that know what belongs to the work, will not
complain they have not enough to go through, and answer for, as I noted before.

10. That no such Pastor and Teacher (lawfully called to a particular Church
and charge of souls) may easily translate himself from such a Church to
another; but attend on that office and work he is called unto, notwithstanding
many hardships he meets with: the reason is, because ev^ry man, in every place
and calling, is to strive to continue and abide with God in it, and to attend
that work God has called him unto; and not out of covetuousnes or
distrustfullnes (as it is with many) get more work into their hands, then they
can with a good conscience discharge.

And though the testimony of the learned does not in the least add any worth
or weight to the Scripture, yet because many men think nothing is authentical,
that has not evidence from learned men, I will add the judgment of two,
among many famous writers, M. Calvin of Geneva, and M. Baines of England.

1. M. Calvin, I shall only quote that in his Institutions lib. 4. cap. 3.
sect. 7. The words translated are these; he having spoken of what helps a
Minister of one Church may afford to another, by way of council in any dark
and difficult matter; he presently adds, But for as much as for the keeping of
the Peace of the Church, this polity is necessary, that there be set forth to
every man, what he should do, lest all be confusedly dis-ordered, run about
without calling, or rashly run all together into one place; and lest such as
are more careful for their own commodity, then for the edification of the
Church, should at their own will leave their churches vacant: this ordering
ought commonly to be kept so near as may be, that every man contented with his
own bounds, should not break into another man's charge: And this is no
invention of man, but the ordinance of God himself. For we read (says he)
that Paul and Barnabas made Presbyters or Ministers in all the churches of
Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch, Act. 14.22, 33. and Paul commands Tytus that he
ordain Elders in every town, Tit. 1.5. elsewhere he mentions the Bishops
which were at Philippi, Phil. 1.1. and Archippus the Bishop of Coloss. Col.
4.17. and there remains a famous Sermon of his which he made to the Elders of
the Church of Ephesus, Act. 20.28. whosoever therefore shall take upon him
(says he) the government and charge of the Church, let him know that he is
bound to this law of Gods calling: And so goes on in his discourse to this
purpose.

2. M. Baines in his exposition of the Epistle to the Ephesians, Cap. 3. ver.
2. p. 350, 351, 352. where he is large to this purpose. I shall give you but a
taste of what is more fully to be seen in the Book on this place: His point is
this; That as the Lord does give a calling and grace, so a people toward whom
it is especially blessed with Gods calling and grace: there are a people
designed, toward whom it is especially blessed: It is true, the Apostle had a
more large flock, the care of all Churches was upon him; but wheresoever God
gives a calling, there he gives a People of whom the Minister may say, toward
you Grace is given me of God, Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. God has assigned every
ordinary Minister a portion of his people: For this is the difference between
extraordinary, as the Apostles, Evangelists, the seventy Disciples, and our
ordinary Pastors: The Apostles had an universal Commission, and the
Evangelists were Delegates of the Apostles, Durante beneplacito, that is, as
long as they pleased: The seventy, if not Evangelists (which some of the
Ancients incline to) yet they were illimited helpers and fellow laborers in
the work of the Lord: But ordinary Ministers, the Lord commanded to fasten
them to certain places, Tit. 1.5, ordain Elders, City by City: and in the
Council of Chalcedon, (...), Ne ^icatur men^icat in Palae^tra, infelix
Clericus. Grec. Scoliast.
the 6. Chap. Let none be ordained at large, lest he prove a wandering
Jonathan: Every Minister must be 1. Separated. 2. Authorized. 3. Have allotted
to him a certain portion of people, which may be instructed by him, which the
Diminutive (...), not (...), may seem to insinuate: Now as God does give every
Pastor his several flock, so he will that we travel in leading of them; we
must not (...), be B. B. in other men's Dioceses, lest God say who required this
at your hands? When the Lord lights candles, he does find candlesticks on
which to set them; when he gives a calling, he gives a people amongst whom
this function should be exercised, in whose consciences he does give his
Ministers a special report, etc. And thus we see the judgment of both these
reverend Divines, full up to the business in hand: There remains only one
objection to be answered, and then I shall give in the several inferences from
what has been laid down.

That from what has been delivered it will follow, that the word of God should
be bound, if every Minister should be tied within the compass of his own
Congregation.

Virtute officii, the other may be done only vid. A little but learned Treatise
of late set forth, concerning preaching by those that are not ordaind minsters.
Virtute donorum; one that is not in the number of Wisdoms maidens, by virtue
of office, yet may be one of Wisdoms children; whom God may so bless in the
exercise of the gifts and graces of the Spirit, to be an instrument of turning
many to righteousness, Dan. 12.3. As for those that are in office, and called to
particular Churches, doubtless they are not so tied to their own
Congregations, but that they may preach in other Churches besides their own, as
M. Baines has well observed out of Clemens, lib. 2. constit. cap. 48. and not
only in other churches of the same constitution, or with their own according to
the Gospel, but in such assemblies and meetings of people, that are not yet
converted to the faith of Christ, if they may be permitted and have liberty
given them, especially if they be desired and entreated, as we find the
servants of Christ have done in former times, as in Act. 14.7. In which Cities
of Lyconia, and the inhabitants were for the time Idolaters, as in ver. 11, 12,
13. of that chapter, so Act. 17.22. where we find that Paul in Mars Hill, a
place that was consecrated to Idolatrous worship, takes occasion to preach the
Gospel to those heathens: and doubtless so may the Ministers of Christ, that
are in office, if they may have liberty given them, take occ^sion to exercise
their gifts in preaching Jesus Christ to the Congregations of men and women,
yet uncalled, and in an Idolatrous, and Antichristian State.

Indeed those of the rigid Separation do deny the Ministers of those they call
Independent Churches, this liberty, A digression touching the rigid
Separatists, that will not allow any to preach, or hear in the meeting places,
commonly known by the name o^ Churches, because they were at first dedicated to
Idolatrous and superstitious uses.
saying that Paul was forced to that place of Mars Hill, when he preached the
knowledge of God in Christ, to the Athenian Idolaters; but I answer, though it
should be granted, that by violence he was carried by the Athenians to that
Idolatrous place, which the words will not yield to them, ver. 19. but suppose
it, yet it seems when he came there, he was not forced to preach, but what he
did, he did voluntarily, ver. 22. as one that had a fit opportunity put into
his hands to do good; it seems that the former words of their taking him, and
bringing him to that place, was no other but their bringing him to a place of
greater convenience to deliver and make known the truth, then the market place
was. And without question the Apostle knew under the Gospel, all places were
alike to hold forth the truths of Christ: none holy, nor unclean, but one as
lawful to preach Christ in, as another, all things being pure, to those that
are pure, Tit. 1.15. and for that place of 1 Cor. 8.10. where the Apostle
forbids believers to sit at meat in the Idols Temple, it is manifest that it
was in case of scandal and offense to them that were weak, not that the thing
was simply in it self an evil, as we may see ver 9. and Romans 14.14.15. now as
for those places wherein the mixed multitude do meet here in England ordinarily,
commonly called Parish churches, though many of them were dedicated to Saints
and superstitious uses by the Papists, and the ignorant people have formerly
put holiness in them; yet now these abuses being removed, and ignorant people
may be better informed in this point if they please, as is evident by the late
Ordinance of the honorable house of Commons, for the removing of all
scandalous and offensive Pictures, and Monuments of Idolatry, and these places
looked upon as only such, where for more convenience, the worship of God may be
performed. I see no reason why Ministers and other gifted men may not preach,
and the Saints comfortably, and without sin, come to hear and enjoy the
ordinances of Christ in them, so they be performed according to the order of
the Gospel, And this was ^he judgment ^f M. Robinson, ^^e his Apolo^y, p. 49.
As for that place of Jeremy, 15.19. where the Lord says, they should return
to him, but not he to them, doubtless the Lord does not speak it of the
Ministry of the word, for that he continued afterward to those rebellious
Jews; but in respect of more special ordinances, wherein the Lord prohibits
his Ministers and Saints to have communion with Idolaters: but especially I
take it to be understood of the Lords forbidding the Prophet to conform
himself in his life and conversation, to their wicked ways; but that he should
be such an example and pattern of holiness and righteous walking before them,
that they might the better be convinced of the evil of their ways, and so
return to the Lord from whom they had departed: not in the least, that he
should cease declaring the mind and will of God to them. Now this objection
being answered, I come to the inferences.

Now the truth of the former Proposition being thus cleared and confirmed,
these things will then unavoidably follow.

Inference ^^om the for^er Propositi^^.
1. That those particular instances which are produced by diverse reverend
Divines, of the Eunuch, Centurions and Jailors baptism, though not belonging
to any particular Church, against what we have laid down, are of little force
and validity, in regard that what was done to those persons, was by the hands
of extraordinary officers, that were not tied to particular Churches, as
ordinary Pastors and teachers were then, and still are: and of like
insufficiency, is that instance of circumcision which is brought by some (of
high accomplishment in learning and pyety) to warrant their practice against
what has been delivered, for it is well known that to the administration of
circumcision, there was not required a Church Officer: but God left it
undetermined, and as a thing indifferent in respect of the administrator,
whether the Priest, or the Father, or the Mother, so the thing be done, as we
see in Moses child, whereas it is otherwise in the administrations of the Church
under the New Testament, as we have showed before: and though we cannot read
of any baptismall administrations in gathered Churches, in the days of the
Apostles, yet I suppose we are not to deny it, unless we will deny that
children which were members of Churches, (as appears, Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3. Col.
3.20.) were not baptized at all, either they must be baptized before the
Churches were gathered, or after, not before, for doubtless many of those
children were not then born, therefore after, and then without all controversy
there must of necessity be baptismall administrations, when and where the
Churches did meet; though the holy Ghost (for reasons best known to himself)
is pleased to conceal them.

2. That those are justly blame worthy, that very frequently and ordinarily in
these days of the Gospel in which we live, go from place to place to baptize
such as are not of their own, nor scarce of any other particular Church of
Christ: I shall crave leave to propose these few things to them.

1. Whether they do not hereby introduce an universal or National church
visible, with officers, and ordinances suitable thereunto, taking for granted,
that their Parish member-ship being a branch of the other, is sufficient to
instate them in church privileges? the insufficiency of which, I have already
showed.

2. Whether they do not by this their practice, not only confound those offices
which Jesus Christ, the King of his church has distinguished, Ephesians. 4.11. but
also hereby hold forth to the world, 1. That the extraordinary offices of
Apostles and Evangelists are not to this day ceased, whose commission did
extend it self to all Churches? 2. That they presume to have the same Call,
Warrant, and Commission for what they do, which the Apostles had at first from
Jesus Christ?

3. Whether they do not take that to them, and upon them, by this their
practice, which the Apostles themselves by all their authority, did never give
to the officers and Elders of particular churches? for we never read that ever
the Apostles did give in command, that the Elders and Ministers of particular
churches, should extend the exercise of the office, especially the
administration of the Seals and censures (which is the point we speak to)
beyond the bounds of their own congregation?

4. Lastly, whether hereby they do not only by this their example, occasion
from and by others, the pollutions and profanation of the holy things of Gods
House, but also lay stumbling blocks in the way of many precious and godly
souls, that would come off from their old ways of confusion, did they not
discern such practices in those that take upon them to be guides and leaders
of others: for are we not ordinarily upbraided with these and the like words,
Do you not see, how such and such godly men, reverend Ministers, and learned
Divines, make no scruple at all of administering the Seals, especially that of
Baptism, to those that are not of their own congregation? and thus according
to the old saying, Plus prosunt exempla, quam praecepta, multitudes are kept
from coming to the enjoyment of the pure ordinances of Christ, in the right
order of the Gospel.

3. It will follow also from hence unavoidably, that those many Christians (the
truth of whose grace and union with the head and foundation we question not)
which of late days (calling into question the truth and lawfullnes of their
first baptism) have fallen upon the practice of rebaptizing, and taking up the
Ordinance of baptism, De novo, are utterly void, and altogether to seek of a
true and a just ground from the Scripture for their practice herein, and so
this latter baptism of theirs, will be found as unlawful upon the same ground
they held their first unlawful: (because) unlawfully administered. For if the
administration of the Seals be now tied to ordinary officers, and these to a
particular Church, since the Apostles times, that give them their lawful and
right call to administer the ordinances, then it will follow that there is no
lawful baptism, but by him that is an officer of some particular Church, and
he that is an officer of some particular church, must have a lawful calling
from the Church to which he is an officer, for all extraordinary officers that
had their call and commission immediately from heaven, are ceased: now those
which rebaptize, cannot prove the taking up of that ordinance again after this
manner, but are enforced to hold, that a Disciple in common, that by the
exercise of his gifts, does convert a sinner from the evil of his ways, may
also baptize him; which if true, then first of all, what need of Christ's
ordaining officers in a Church for these purposes? Secondly, then why may not a
godly woman (by her good exhortations and chaste conversation, converting her
husband) baptize him also, which I suppose they are far from maintaining, and
yet it necessarily follows, the ground they build their practice upon:
wherefore three things I shall here propose (in the spirit of love and
meekness) to be seriously and conscienciously considered by them.

1. Whether there be any lawful baptism, where the administrator has no
lawful calling thereunto.

2. Whether the lawful call to the dispensing of that ordinance of baptism be
not now, (in these days of the Gospel) from or by that particular Church, and
society of Saints, to which that administrator or officer does belong.

3. Whether a persons entering on such an action of so high a nature, by his own
mere private motion, or supposition of an extraordinary and immediate call from
heaven, wanting the ordinary instituted way of Christ in the Gospel, be not a
strong delusion, and an occasion of leading them into dangerous errors, as we
find by woeful experience, to wit, universal grace, free will, denying
original sin, and the decrees af God to be absolute. And of late there is a
small Pamphlet that goes under M: Francis Cornwals name, (a great pleader for
rebaptizing, and champion against Paedobaptisme) that has diverse unsound
things in it, deceiving the simple, and among other these two that follow.

The first is, that those that are not able to make out a confession of their
belief in Jesus the Christ, are therefore not born of God, 1 John 5.1. Then it
must follow, that there is no salvation where there is no actual profession,
and confession of faith; Nay, that there is no work of inherent and habitual
sanctification and regeneration, where there is not ability and power to hold
it forth, which how false, and against the very letter of the word, those that
have but half an eye may discern.

2. That those that refuse and deny to be baptized, (that is, after that manner
he there speaks of all along, by making a confession of their faith, and going
into the water to be dipped) have no promise to receive the gifts of the Spirit,
but rather shall be given up to strong delusions to believe a lie, 2 These.
2.11. Now whether this poor man be not given up to strong delusions in writing
as he does in in this manner, let any understanding man judge: for either he
means the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, as the gifts of Miracles, that
such as are not so baptized, have no promise to receive; or else he understands
the ordinary and usual sanctifying gifts of the Spirit, that all the elect
have in their regeneration, and conversion to God: Now let him take either of
these, or both, and he shall find how he is deluded: For as for the first sort
of gifts, we have a clear instance that they were powered out upon Cornelius,
and those that heard the word with him, from the mouth of Peter, before ever
they were baptized, or came near the water, or the water them, as we find Act.
14.44, 45, 46. So that it seems the gifts of the Spirit did precede baptism,
not follow it: And if it should be demanded of him, whether since his
rebaptizing, and other of his way, they have received those gifts of speaking
tongues, and healing all manner of diseases, and casting out of Devils; I fear
they would be to seek of answering affirmatively: and why then do men speak
so confidently of that they have no warrant for, nor experience of? And then
for the second sort of gifts, those which are proper only to the Elect, as
Faith, Repentance, and the like; its as clear as the Sun in the firmament,
that they are in the hearts, and put forth many times in the lives of elect
persons, before ever they were baptized; as we see in the new converts, and the
Eunuch, Jailer, Paul himself, and others: and experience shows it abundantly
to this day, in those that were never baptized by way of dipping. But to make
the vanity of this doctine to appear fully, is it not evident from Christ's own
mouth, that the promise of the Spirit is to believing simply without the least
mention of baptism? as in Joh. 7.38, 39. Which they that believe on him should
receive, not they that are baptized.

4. It will unavoidably follow from hence, that the power of Ministers in a
Classis or Synod, exercising authority and jurisdiction in the name of Christ,
over more Congregations and Churches then their own to which they belong, is
altogether unwarrantable, and not from Scripture: for if the administration of
the Seals, and execution of Church censures, that officers are entrusted with,
be appropriated to their own Congregations, then it must needs follow, when
they take upon them the government, ordering and censuring of other Churches,
they violate those sacred bonds which Jesus Christ has tied them to.

And for this M. Buroughs in his Treatise of Heart Divisions, is very clear,
6.22. p. 157. where having laid down the chief controversy now on foot, he
gives two considerations to help us in our thoughts about it,

1. That the extent of power of jurisdiction, must be by institution, as well as
the power it self; all juridicall power whatsoever, either in State or Church,
receives limits or extent, from the same authority it first had its rise: this
is impossible to be denied. If a man by a Charter be made a Major of a town,
he cannot therefore challenge the power of a Major wheresoever he comes, except
the authority that first gave him his power shall also extend it: now the
Charter by which any Church officer is invested with power is the word, and
therefore we cannot straiten or enlarge the power of a Minister, otherwise then
we find it in the word, etc.

2. That a man naturally, is of nothing more impatient, then to have
jurisdiction challenged over him, except he sees the claim to be right: and in
the point of spiritual jurisdiction, man is the most tender of all, because in
that men come in the name of Christ to him, challenging authority to exercise
the power of Christ over him, not over the outward man, so much as over his
soul, to deliver it up to Satan; surely there had need be shown a clear and
full charter, that any men have, that gives them such a power as this, that men
in conscience should be bound to submit to.

Obj. You will say, what help or remedy can there be, if the officers of a
Church, or a whole Church should err, as its possible?

Ans. See what the same M. Buroughs says in his answer to M. Edwards, p. 31.
where he has this very question.

The Church (says he) is a spiritual society, gathered for spiritual ends;
it has within it self no help against spiritual evils, but spiritual, and
these can only prevail with men, so far as they are spiritual and
conscientious. If the declaring the mind of Christ by other churches, if the
protesting against erring Elders or churches, and withdrawing communion from
them, will not strike upon conscience, what shall? Can the adding of an act of
formal jurisdiction, whose divine institution few see, (and I may add, which
the Presbyterians themselves have no precept from Christ, nor example in all
the primitive Churches to show for) and is doubted of by those, with whom it
should prevail: can that do it? The former means will remedy evils if men be
conscientious, the latter will not do it, if men be not conscientious.

Obj. But the Magistrate must come in and help.

Ans. Then in Church help there is little difference between the Presbyters
and the Independents, whatsoever they pretend to the contrary, in the point of
church power.

2. If you interesse the Magistrates power, he must then either by himself, or
by some commission, take cognizance of the jus and fact wherein his power is to
be exercised, he must not act upon an implicit belief, that the acts of the
church are right.

3. Will you call in his power in all matters of difference, wherein your
selves cannot agree, or will you only desire his power to help, when either
the heinousness of the matter, or the turbulency of the carriage manifests
stubbornness? If in the former case, then you make the Magistrate the Judge of
all controversies in Religion, which I believe you are not willing to do: If in
the latter only, we are agreed. Why then is there such a stir, such an
outcry, against that which is called the Independent way? as if there must
needs be a confusion of all things, if liberty in it be granted. The Lord judge
between us and our brethren in this thing, to him we refer our names, and
our cause. Thus that eminent and famous servant of Christ in the conclusion of
his Vindication against M. Edwards. And if any desire further satisfaction
touching the undue power of the classical way, he may read at large M.
Damports Reply to M. Paget, sect 27. p. 226, to 231. and 254, 255.

5. The next inference from the former position, is this. That those of the
Congregationall way, commonly known by the nickname of Independents; do not
walk without a rule for what they do, in appropriating the administrations of
Seals and Censures, to their own particular Congregations; nor sin against
Christ, in refusing to administer the Seals to such, as are not in fellowship
with them, nor any other true visible Church of Christ. I know it is laid to
the charge of such, as if they were proud and scornful, but it is no other
then an aspersion: for if this be the revealed will of Christ, that the
administration of the Seals is limited to Pastors and Teachers, and they to
their own particular charge, then if they had all the humility in the world,
that is in the hearts of the Saints, yet that would not allow them to go
against the least part of the revealed will and mind of Christ, which they
should do, if they should administer Church ordinances, to such as are of no
Church, and refuse also to sit down in fellowship with them. For as M.
Buroughs in his Heart Divisions, p. 166. has well and rightly observed, In
all worship that belongs to Saints, as Saints, they joyfully join with them,
that is (as I conceive) in prayer, hearing of the word, holy conference, and
duties of such like nature, that concern christian communion: but as for that
worship that belongs to Saints as gathered into a society under officers, so
they judge it unreasonable that any should have the benefit of the privileges
of the Church, and yet be under no power nor discipline of any Church, but live
at liberty, and pick and choose ordinances where they please, and if they walk
disorderly, have no Church to call them to an account. And therefore hence
forward let not men censure us as they have done, for the discharge of our duty
to Jesus Christ.

Indeed if it were mere will and not conscience, that did lead and guide us,
it were another matter, but when (through riches of mercy) we can upon good
grounds appeal to the Lord, that it is mere conscience and not will that leads
and swayes us, let them take heed how they pass such unrighteous judgment on
their brethren, lest that of our Savior light on them, Mat. 7.1, 2. Judge not
that ye be not judged, for with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged;
and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. I would only
desire to know this one thing, of such rash and bitter censurers of their
brethren, what profit and advantage it can be to us, to expose our names to
reproach, our persons to contempt, and all we have to hazard, if we were not
persuaded of the truth of what we practice, and that we should sin against
God, if we should (to please men) do the contrary. Besides, is it not well
known that we strive to go so far as we may possibly, with a good conscience,
for the satisfying of those that are contrary minded? what would men have yet
further of us, unless it be to sin against the light of truth God has
revealed to us? let but a few things be duly considered, and then see whether
we are guilty of those abominable and foul crimes that are laid to our charge.

1. Those of the Congregationall way, are content to receive such into
communion and church fellowship, upon their proffering themselves, that differ
from them in their judgment, in things of lesser consequence and moment, so
long as they have good evidence and testimony of their upright conversation,
and find them willing to sit down with them, and submit themselves to the
churches proceedings, as far as God shall give them light.

2. They are studious of taking notice of the least breathings of Christ, in
those that offer themselves to join with them in Church communion, whether
poor or rich, condiscending to the meanest work of grace, where they have any
the least hintes of truth and sincerity, being assured that Christ has
appointed his green Pastures for his weak Lambs, as well as for his grown
sheep.

3. They are willing to give liberty to any such poor souls to manifest what
God has done for them in uniting them to Christ the foundation, (not to make a
confession of their sins, as many report) for the satisfying of those that
shall have communion with them in the holy things of God, (which is no more
then reason requires) either before the whole Church publicly, or else if
they are weak and bashful (as many are) to the And thus much the
Presbyterians themselves practice in their admission of men and women to the
Sacrament.
Pastor in private, with one or two more of the Church, and they to transmit it
to the Church.

4. If they meet with broken language, and bad and low expressions (as
oftentimes it falls out) yet they make not that a ground of refusal, so there
be sufficient testimony of the holiness of the life, viz. such a profession as
carries with it no palpable contradiction in men's walking, but is accompanied
with the power of Religion and godliness.

5. They bind not any to a formal and express written covenant at their
coming in (as they are commonly slandered with) but only, after satisfaction
is given, demand their willingness to give up themselves to the Lord, and his
Church, and to walk together in the mutual discharge of those duties that
concerns such a Church State, and Gospel relation, upon the manifestation
whereof, they are admitted to fellowship and use of the ordinances.

6. If any are not found fit upon trial, they are only desired to wait a
while, till God shall bring them into a further capacity. Some Spirits I
confess when they see they cannot obtain their ends, fly out, and leave
walking with those they would have joined, speaking evil of the way of Christ
and his servants that walk in it, and for no other cause, that is truly
discovered, but this, that they cannot have their own wills, though it be made
(upon good grounds) evident, that they are not fit for such a condition. Now
what shall be done in such a case? Either those of the Congregationall way must
act so as to please Christ, or the creature; now if they strive to do the
first, then they incur the displeasure of the last, and if they should in a
sinful way seek to the pleasing of the creature, then they displease Christ;
but this will be their comfort, so long as Christ helps them to discharge
their consciences toward him, they need not regard how the creature deals
with them: In the world we must have tribulation, but in Christ we shall have
peace, Joh. 16. ult. And as our tribulations abound for him, so our
consolations shall abound also in and by him, 2 Cor. 1.5.

O^j. But they will not come into public.

Ans. 1. Jesus Christ says, wheresoever two or three are met together in his
name, there he will be present with them, Mat. 18.^
he will own them, and bless them: he has taken away all difference between
places under the Gospel, there is not one more holy then another, but all
alike now, and Jesus Christ and his Apostles indifferently showed their
practice this way in the Synagogue, Temple, Field, Chamber, and doubtless
where ever the Church meets to worship, there is a public, not private
Assembly.

2. They shut not the doors where they meet, for the most part, but seave them
open for all to come and behold their ways, unless they come to make
disturbance.

3. Some Churches are in public (as you call it) and others have been, but
have been forced back again, and all would be more public then they are, (in
that sense as you call public) if they might enjoy their liberty, and not
endanger their peace or purity: let but Authority allow us that liberty they do
the Presbyterians, (as in conscience they stand bound, we walking peaceably) to
dispense the ordinances of Christ without molestation, and then see whether we
would refuse it. Alas! alas! that ever men should find fault with us for that
we cannot remedy but count our affliction.

CHAP. IIII. That this Church State, with the Officers, Ordinances, and
administrations thereunto appertaining, is of perpetual use, to the coming
again of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the instituter of it, without
either alteration, or cessation.
BEfore I enter on the evidencing and making clear of the truth of this
Proposition, I desire to premise this one thing, to wit, that by this
Church State, I do not here understand, any one particular and single
Congregation, residing in any one place or country, but the instituted state
of Christ's visible Church, in one place or other, consisting of few or many,
whether in liberty or bondage, in purity or corruption, according to its
several and various conditions to which it is subject, and in which, for the
essential and integrall parts thereof, it is kept and preserved by the
Almighty power and presence of Jesus Christ; for doubtless in respect of this
or that particular Church, and single congregation, it may cease and be utterly
lost, but in respect of the essentials of that instituted Church State and
order of Christ, revealed to us in his word, and delivered to us by the
Apostles, and left by them upon record for us to follow and practice: so it is
not lost, but remains and continues to the Saints to his coming again. Now
that this is the truth of God, I shall endeavor to make out, 1. from
Scripture, 2. from Argument.

1. For the Scriptures that hold out this truth, they are of three sorts.

1. Prophesies, as Esaias 9.6, 7. and 59.21. Psalm. 110.1. compared with 1 Cor.
15.25. Luke 1.33.

2. Promises, Mat. 16.18. 1 Cor. 11.26. and Ephesians. 3.21. and 4 11, 12, 13.

3. Precepts, Mat. 28.20. 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. to which I might add the judgments
of many learned men, it there were need. All which do clearly show the
perpetuity and continuance of this Gospel Church State in all ages to the
coming of Christ.

2. For the Arguments that confirm the perpetuity of this Church State, and
confute the contrary that is affirmed by many, viz. the cessation of it, they
are such as these.

1. If the government of Christ's church, which the Father has given him, and
he has accepted, shall never have an end, then it must of necessity follow,
that this Church State cannot cease, to which this government has relation,
unless we can suppose, that Christ can be a King without a Kingdom, a Head
without a Body, a Husband without a Spouse, which once to imagine, is exceeding
dishonorable to him, and little less then blasphemy. Esaias 9.7. Luke 1.33.
But now the Scriptures are clear, that the government of Christ in his Church
shall never have an end, as we have showed before: therefore, etc.

2. If this Church State, which Jesus Christ has instituted, for the
essentialls of it, should cease, and not be continued in all ages, then it
would follow, that there would be a time, when the gates of Hell should
prevail against it, and his presence with it, Mat. 16.1
to the end of the world, should not continue, Mat. 28.2
and so all his promises to the contary should be void and of none effect: But
this cannot be, for he is faithful that has promised, and not one jot or
tittle of his word shall perish, or be made void: and therefore there must
needs be a perpetuity, and continuance of this church state.

3. If the Temple of God, which is his visible Church, as appears from 1 Cor.
3.16, 17. Rev. 3.12. and 11.1, 2. does remain where Antichrist sits, even as
the Church of Pergamus did, where the seat of Satan was, Rev. 2.13. then this
Church State is not ceased, but remains to this day. But this Temple of God is
where Antichrist himself sits, as appears by the Apostle, 2 These. 2.4. who
opposes, etc. So that he is as God, sits in the Temple of God: where the
greek word for Temple, sc. (...), is one and the same with that of 1 Cor.
3.16, 17. (...), i. e. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God? so v. 17.
(...), i. e. If any man defile the Temple of God, and that of 2 Cor. 6.16.
(...), i. e. For ye are the Temple of the living God: In all which places, with
diverse other, that word Temple is used for the visible Church, because the
Apostle there speaks to, and of the whole Church of Corinth conjunctim, Ye are
the Temple of God, etc. So that by Temple here where Antichrist sits, is to be
understood the Church of God.

Obj. You will say, by Temple is meant the consciences of Gods people, in that
place of the Thessalonians.

Ans. 1. Grant it, yet that does not make void the other, but rather confirms
it.

2. We never read in all the Scriptures, that the conscience is so called, but
the church of Christ is frequently so styled, as we have showed before: and
therefore, either its the Church of God, Antichrist sits in, or it is not; if
not, then that Scripture is not true; but if true, as cannot be denied, then
there is a church state remaining under Antichrist.

Obj. But how can this church state remain, where there is such a general
defection, as there is under Antichrist? Rev. 13.

Ans. We must distinguish between the corruption of things, and the things
themselves, between the essentials of a church state, and the accidentals: now
it cannot be denied, but in respect of the accidentalls of a church state, so
all is lost, under this defection of Antichrist, that is, in respect of the
right order and administration of Ministry, Ordinances, and government, but
not the essentials of these; and so long as these remain, the Church State is
not lost: for we cannot reason from the corruption of a thing, to the nullity
and non-being of it: as for example, the children of Israel, and vessels of
Gods House, that were carried captive into Babylon, and profaned by their
being there, yet so long as they were not destroyed, and broken in pieces, they
were brought back again to Jerusalem, and sanctified from their pollution, and
set again in the Temple as before, and the Lord owned and accepted them
notwithstanding their being in Babylon: so here the Saints and ordinances, the
Ministry, Seals and Censures of this instituted Church of Christ, though they
have been under Antichrist, yet so long as the essence of them remains, they
may be brought back from Rome, and reduced to their former purity, and first
order of the Gospel, not that they have a new being, but rather they are
brought to their wonted welbeing, and primitive institution.

Obj. But does not this then make the Church of Rome a true Church, having the
essentials of a true Church State in it?

Ans. No not a jot, no more then a Thieves having the goods of an honest man in
his house, which he has stolen, makes him to be true, he is a thief still.
So here Rome is still Rome, the mother of Harlots still, notwithstanding her
possessing of the essentials of Christ's holy things: we may see it clearly in
Babylon of old, the type of Rome, when the Jews were carried away captive with
the holy vessels of the Temple, it was not the being of these in Babylon that
made her the church of God, but she was Babylon still, full of abominations,
there was Bell and Merodach, her great Idols and Images still worshipped, Ier.
50.2. and as God once overthrew the Type, (as he overthrew Sodom, and
Gomorah,) so that not so much as a son of man should dwell there, ver. 40. So
shall be it with the Antitype, Rome, the mother of fornications, the habitation
of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, Rev. 18.22, 23. and the good
Lord, for his Son, and Syons sake, hasten it.

4. If Church State, and Ministry, and Ordinances be all lost under the
defection of Antichrist: then the Scriptures also are lost, which are the
churches treasure, and as a Depositum, were once delivered to the church to
keep, Iud. 3. but we find that the Scriptures are not lost, but by the power
of Christ they have been preserved, yea recovered out of Babylon, and freed
from those horrible corruptions, they were exposed unto, while they were in the
hands of Antichrist, and why may not the Ordinances as well as the Scriptures,
the church as well as her treasure?

5. If this Church State, and Ordinances, should not continue, but were all
lost and ceased, then it would follow, that there were no means left
ordinarily for the conversion and salvation of poor lost souls; but the
contrary to this appears, as we find by experience, for 1. We have the word
of life in the sacred Scriptures to be our Cynosura or rule and guide to direct
us in the way to life. 2. We have the holy Ghost accompanying the Ministry and
preaching of this word, in an effectual manner, to the calling and conversion
of multitudes, and bringing those that are called out of their
Antichristian-church-state, to Sion, and to worship God according to his own
revealed will. 3. We have Pastors and teachers lawfully called, and set apart
to the work of the Ministry, and faithful dispensing of this word of life,
and other ordinances, that concern a true visible Church State, according to
the practice of the Primitive Churches, as we before showed: now where there
are the same word and ordinances, the same Officers for kind with those in the
Apostles days, to dispense and administer them, and the precious presence of
Christ in his Spirit, accompanying them, to make them effectual, (though
perhaps not in such an ample and large measure as in those Primitive times)
there we may conclude the ordinary means for salvation are not lost, but still
remain and continue.

holy things of Gods house, are not so qualified as these were in the Primitive
times, they have not those extraordinary gifts of working miracles as they had.

in office in the churches of Christ, in those times, had those extraordinary
gifts, as the Officers of the Church of Ephesus, 1 Cor. 12.29.30
Philippi, Corinth, etc. does not the Scripture show the contrary?

2. I would feign know, whether the gifts of working Miracles be so essential
to the Ministry, as that there can be no true Ministry where these are
wanting. If so, then many in the Primitive times were not true Ministers of
Christ, as John the Baptist, Apollos, and those Pastors and Teachers that were
in the several Churches of the Saints, mentioned in the Scripture. For we
cannot find in the least of their working miracles, and yet they had a true
Ministry. If not, why then do men refuse the Ministry that has no miracles?

3. I desire to know, where it appears, or how it can be made out, that the
Primitive Saints, Ministers or People, were given to succeeding ages, as
patterns for extraordinary gifts of Miracles, that they were left as patterns
of grace, and helps of faith, and love, and repentance, and obedience to the
truth of Church Fellowship, is without controversy, Ephesians. 4.12, 13. but not of
the former. And the Apostle makes it clear in Heb. 2.3, 4. that the chief end
of gifts of Miracles, was to confirm the Gospel of Christ, then sent forth to
be preached, which now needs not; for as M. Thomas Goodwin lately in one of his
Lectures on the Ephesians, showed, common education serves so far now, as
Miracles did of old, which were not to begin a saving, justifying faith, for
that was the office of the Word, but to make men to attend the Word, which now
education does, and therefore there is no such need of a Ministry with
Miracles.

4. Does not the Scripture abundantly show us, that working of Miracles may be
in a false Ministry, as Mark 13.22. 2 These. 2.9, 10. Rev. 13.13, 14, Rev.
16.14. and 19.20. and in such as Christ will not own for his at the last day;
as Matthew. 7.22, 23.

5. Does not such an opinion as this, of requiring gifts of working Miracles in
those that are called and sent to preach and administer ordinances, bring a
great disparagement on the truth it self, for if it be not able to make it
self evident without Miracles, is it not a great Argument of its weakness and
insufficiency? whereas its far otherwise with the truth, as Ephesians. 5.13.

6. Does not this opinion directly cross and contradict that of our Savior,
Joh. 16.8. and derogate from the authority and power of the Spirit, for there
he tells us, that its the office of the Spirit, to convince the world of sin,
of righteousness and judgment: now to say that this work cannot be done
unless there be Miracles wrought by men, that are the Spirits instruments,
what is this, but to derogate from the Spirit, and to make the efficacy of the
Ministry to depend more upon the external working of Miracles, then upon the
internal working of the Spirit: whereas the greatest Miracles that ever were
wrought by the Apostles or others, can never prevail to gain the hearts of
wretched sinners, to the embracing of the truth, nor convince them of sin,
righteousness, and judgment, if the Spirits presence be wanting, and
therefore many times we find amongst the Jews, that notwithstanding all the
Miracles that Christ himself, and his Apostles wrought before them, they
continued obstinate and hardened in their sins; so that the efficacy of the
means depends on the Spirit, and if so, then there is no such necessity for
working of Miracles to convince men of the truth: for be the external means
or instrument weak or strong, it matters not, so the Spirit employ it: and
commonly we find it to be true by experience, that the weaker the secondary
cause or means is, the more glorious does the power of the Spirit appear,
according to 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29.

7. Lastly, what greater miracles can there be wrought by men to evince the
truth of their calling, then by casting out of the Devil from men and women's
souls and consciences, and the opening of the eyes of their understanding,
Act. 26.1 John. 5.^
the raising of them from the death of sin, the healing and sanctifying of
their corrupt natures, etc. by the power of the Spirit. All which are far
greater Miracles, then corporal dispossession, healing of men's bodies, opening
of their bodily eyes, etc. and the power of Christ appears far greater in
working of these Miracles, then in all other miracles whatsoever: and of these
kind of miracles, I conceive that Scripture is to be understood, Joh. 14 12.
where Christ promises, that his Disciples after he was ascended to the Father,
should by the power of the Spirit do greater works then those himself
wrought, which I suppose he understands of those spiritual works of wonder
that I have formerly mentioned in the raising poor souls out of the grave of
sin, opening the eyes of their blind and dark understandings, etc.

The truth of the Proposition being thus cleared, I now come to some inferences.

1. In the first place, it will clearly follow, that those men are mightily
mistaken and out of the way, that stick not to affirm, that the Church State
and order of Government thereunto correspondent, which Jesus Christ has
instituted, is mutable, and ought to be suited according to the Laws and
Government of particular States and Kingdoms, as if the Churches of Christ in
the Primitive times had a mixed government and administration of the Ordinances,
according to the laws and customs of the countries: As for example, the
Church of Christ in Asia had one way of government, the Churches in Galatia
another way of order and government, and the Churches in Judea another. Whereas
the Scripture affirms the clean contrary, scil. that Jesus Christ has left
but one order of Church state and polity for all his Churches to observe and
make use of, which as I have showed in the essentials of it, is unchangeable,
and to be observed and kept to the appearing of Jesus Christ, the author and
instituter of it, 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. and therefore what the Apostle ordained in
one Church, he did in all, as 1 Cor. 7.17. And this is the judgment of learned
Whitaker against Duraeus, and Cartwright against Whitgift, who handles this
point very largely in his second Reply, his words are these: Thus (says he to
Whitgift) where the Christian Magistrate is given of God, to keep the order
which God has set in his Church: you bring him in as a breaker and changer of
the order, which God has appointed by his holy Apostles: But the godly
Christian Magistrates may understand, that as neither our Savior Christ, nor
any wise and well instructed Ministry under him, will meddle with any order or
form of Common wealth lawfully instituted of them, for the better government
of their people, but leave them as they find them: So they ought to leave whole
and untouched, that order that Jesus Christ has placed in his Church. And as
the Author says truly in another place, that Christ came not to overthrow
civil governments; even so, he says, it is as true, that God sends not
Kings to overthrow Church Government, planted by Christ and his Apostles. Yea
so much more absurd is this latter then the first, by how much they ought to
have more firmity, which were set down by the Lord himself, then which were by
men. For what son of Adam shall presume to alter that order, which the Lord
himself from heaven has set? etc. And therefore certainly Jesus Christ will
give such men but little thanks another day, for their endeavor to make his
Institutions as a nose of wax, to be altered and changed to whatsoever form
and fashion men shall please in every Civil State and Kingdom on earth.

2. But I shall pass from such Formalists and Time-servers, to another sort of
men, who although they allow not of an alteration of Christ's Institutions and
Ordinances, yet plainly hold a cessation of them for the present, and therefore
forsake the Assemblies of the Saints, to which they were joined, and say there
are no Churches, no Ordinances, no Ministry now, to dispense them, but all
lost under Antichrist.

Now that such men may see the evil of their opinion and practice herein, and
so (if it be the good pleasure of Christ) they may come to repent, and do
their first works, and return to the Shepherds Tents, where Jesus Christ
feeds and causes his flock to rest at noone, Cant. 1.7, 8. I shall set these
few considerations before them, from the evils that follow this practice.

1. That this opinion and practice of theirs, Five evil effects that attend
those the hold cessatio^ of a visible Church-stat^
directly crosses the very letter of the Scriptures, is that of Ephesians. 3.21.
formerly mentioned, where the holy Ghost says, that glory is to be given to
God by Jesus Christ, in the Church, (...), that is, throughout all generations,
or ages. Now how could this Scripture be true, if there be an or generation in
which this Church state does cease and is utterly lost? So that of 1 Cor.
11.26. where the holy Ghost also shows, that the Lords death, that is, the
effect and fruit of his death, in the administration of the Supper, is to be
observed and made use of by the Saints in Church Fellowship, for their benefit
and comfort, to his coming again. Now how can this be, if the Church, and
Ministry, and Ordinances are all lost and ceased? And that of Mat. 18.20. and
28. last verse, in which places Christ promises to be with his Churches and
people in the administration of his Ordinances, to the end of the world, as we
have formerly showed.

2. It discovers men, notwithstanding the high thoughts they have of
themselves, to be of a low and sensual frame of spirit; that Thomas-like will
not believe, nor give credit to the testimony of the Word, unless they see,
and have visible and sensible signs and wonders wrought before them, and so to
speak truly, destroy the excellency and livelynesse of faith, which our Savior
places in this, that it acts and works most properly and genuinely, when it
has no external and visible sign to look on, as Ioh. 20.29, 30. and the
Apostle, Heb. 11.1. The Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, and those
hard-hearted Jews indeed, in our Saviors time, stood much upon signs and
wonders, that so they might believe; but our Savior returns them this answer,
that an evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, but there shall
none be given them, that is, to profit them, etc. Mat. 12.38, 39. And we may
much fear, that all those signs and wonders that God has of late wrought in
England to recover us out of our old ways, and to bring us to his own
instituted ways of worship, shall not profit such kind of spirits, who walk
more after the flesh, then spirit, in the very things of God.

3. It makes men to place the power and authority of administering the things of
Gods house, in that which is fallible and deceiving, as gifts of working
Miracles are and may be in a false Ministry, as we have showed before: and if
it were possible, our Savior says, the elect themselves would be deceived by
the workers of them, as in Mat. 24.24. for there shall arise false christ's and
false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, in so much that (if it
were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect.

4. Such as are carried on in this way, are unavoidably brought to deny
themselves Believers; for if there be no conversion now for want of such a
Ministry as they talk of, then they exclude themselves from the number of the
faithful, and proclaim to the world that they are strangers to the Promise
and Commonwealth of Israel, being without God, and Christ, and hope in the
world, and this (at length) some stick not to affirm, not only denying
worship, but Believers and Scripture also.

5. Lastly, It not only leaves upon them the guilt of cursed ingratitude and
unkindnesse to Jesus Christ, for what he has bestowed upon the Saints, and
vouchsafed to them; and they (at least wise some of them) have enjoyed, in the
use of church fellowship and ordinances, for I appeal to them and other of the
Saints, whether the highest and sweetest enjoyments from Christ have not been
by the Spirit in these. Now this relinquishing of this fellowship I say does
not only render them odiously ungrateful to God, but exposes them also to
most dangerous and dreadful temptations, and at last to Apostasy, and that
unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, as appears from Heb. 10.23. to the
end: where he makes for saking Church Communion, ver. 25. to be the Prodr^mus
and forerunner of that unpardonable sin, ver. 26, 27, 28, 29. and a drawing
back to perdition, ver. 39. and how just is it with the Lord, to leave us, when
we wilfully put our selves out of his protection! Wherefore let such be
entreated, in the bowels of Christ, to take heed, how they tempt the Lord in
this kind. I say those that are wilful in their way, and refuse counsel. I
shall leave with such men those few Scriptures of 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Heb. 3.12. and
Rev. 2.4, 5. to be considered, which I conceive do in a special manner look
to the walking and continuing of the Saints with God, and Jesus Christ, in his
Ordinances, and hold forth the danger of relinquishing and forsaking them.

CHAP. V. That the godly in this Kingdom are every where bound to gather
themselves into this sacred, visible, political Church State and order of the
Gospel, if they are of a competent number, in those places where they live, or
to join themselves to those particular churches of Christ, which are already
rightly gathered. One of these must be done by them.
NOw that this is the duty of the godly, I shall labor to make out from these
ensuing Reasons and Arguments, which are as so many soule-quickning and
convincing motives, and which (by the blessing of Christ) may be very
effectual, to put them upon the practice of it.

^otive, The (...) of Christ.
1. Is taken from the call of Christ, which is to come from Babylon to Sion,
that is, not only from gross and sinful practices, but also from communion
in special ordinances, as Esaias 52.11. Rev. 18.4. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. Act. 2.40
Ephesians. 5.11. he calls them to Sion, that they may be a habitation for the Lord
to dwell in. As long as you continue (that are Saints) in your old Babylonish
ways of confusion, you can never be a holy temple to Christ, nor a golden
candlestick for him to walk in. And therefore the names of Temple, house,
tabernacle, candlestick, are given to Believers especially as they are in
Church Fellowship, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Ephesians. 2.21.22. Heb. 3.6. Rev. 1.20. and 21.3.

^otive, The ^ple of the ^s in the ^itive times
2. Because in so doing, they shall do no more then what the Saints have done
before them in the Primitive times; for we find in those days that Believers
did not live loosely, and casually, or (as we say) at random, but were
gathered and brought into distinct bodies, or church-societies, to live under
that discipline and church order or government, which Jesus Christ had
commanded and left to his Apostles to settle. For it is worth our observation,
that Jesus Christ did not only send forth his Apostles and Disciples to
convert sinners to him,
but he appointed an order of government to be established by them, to which
those that were converted should subject unto, as we may see in many places, 1
Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. Romans 12.6, 7, 8. and therefore we read so much of
churches tha were planted and gathered into the order of the Gospel, Act.
14.23. as Corinth. Ephesians. Phil. Coloss. and so the churches of Judea, Galatia,
Asia, Macedonia, as we have noted before; which were no other then so many
distinct bodies, or societyes of believers, which the Apostles after they were
converted to Christ, did unite together in those Cities and Countries: So much
is evident from the Epistles that the Apostle Paul wrote to those Churches: For
he does not write to all in Corinth, to all in Rome, to all in Philippi, but to
the Saints in those Cities, that were called and become a Church to Christ:
'twas not every Town, and City, and Country, that made a Church, as it is now in
England, but so many as were called and united together: now people become
members of a church by virtue of being born in those Towns, and places, and
parishes, where they live, but ab initio non fuit sic, i. e. from the beginning
it was not so.

3. Because till the godly do fall upon this work, 3. Motive. Necessity of
yielding obedience to Christ's commands calls for it.
there are many holy and sacred duties that Jesus Christ has laid down to them
in his word, which they will be found to live in the neglect and omission of,
viz.

1. That of Mat. 18.17. Tell the church; but how can those tell the Church,
that are not joined to a Church? that is, such a Church, or Congregation of
Saints, as we have in the former Chapter set down.

2. That of 1 Cor. 5.4, 5, 13. In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to deliver
such a one to Satan, etc. but how can they cast out of the Church such as are
scandalous, by that authority Christ has given to it, that are not joined to
any church?

3. That of 1 Cor. 14.12. Seek that ye may excel, to the edifying of the
Church; but how can such seek to excel in spiritual gifts for this end, that
they may edify the church, when they are of no church?

4. That of 1 Cor. 14.34. Let your women keep silence in your churches, that
is, church-meetings, as Beza and Piscator read it, Mulieres vestrae in
conventibus sileant, not that there were several distinct particular churches,
standing under one common classical government, as the Presbyterians would
have it: but how can godly women keep silence in the churches, when they are
members of no churches?

5. That of Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves, but how can they obey their Rulers, if they have none to rule and watch
over them in the Lord?

6. That of Romans 12.6, 7, 8. But how can believers keep up the administ^ation
and execution of those offices and ordinances in the churches of Christ, so
long as they are not in such churches, where those offices are to be executed?

7. That of Gal. 5.1, 13. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made
you free, and be not, etc. but how can believers stand fast in that liberty
which Jesus Christ has purchased for them, and bequeathed unto them, while
they are not in any Church State, to which this liberty referres?

^. Motive. Christ has or^ained no other ^ondition for ^elievers to a^ide in
here.
4. Another reason is, because there is no other state and condition that Jesus
Christ has appointed for his Saints in this life, in relation to the enjoyment
and performance of his public worship, then this, to wit, to b^ joined to a
particular church, and therefore as Head and King of Saints, he ordained not
only a word to call and convert them, but holy offices, and officers, holy
laws and ordinances to rule and govern them, and build them up in grace to
glory, as Ephesians. 4.10, 11, 12. 1 Cor. 12.28. Mat. 16.19 compared with Mat.
18.18. but of this we spoke sufficiently before upon the second argument.

^. Motive. The Word and Spirit of Christ ^re more especially entailed ^o this
church state.
5. Because the Lord Jesus Christ has in a more especial manner tied his Word
and Spirit, and all his precious Promises, to believers in such a church state,
as Exodus 20.24. 1 Kings 9.3. Esaias 4.5, 6. and 25.6, 7, 8. Esaias 56.7. Psalm.
132.13, 14, 15. Mat. 6.33. Mat. 18.19, 20. Here the Saints may in a more full
and excellent manner expect the presence of Jesus Christ by way of assisting,
quickening, comforting, sanctifying, and strengthening of them, and therefore
this should greatly prevail with them to come into this church state.

6. Motive. Christ takes most del^ght to be with the Saints in this
church state.
6. Because the Lord Jesus Christ does own such particular churches of Saints,
as the places of his greatest delight, as appears,

1. In that he walks in the midst of them, as Revel. 2.1. 2 Cor. 6.16.

2. In that he not only walks in them, but lodges and dwells in them, they are
his resting place, where he takes sweet repose, Psalm. 132.13, 14. and 72.2. and
26.8.

3. In that here he feeds, Cant. 1.7. and 6.2, 3. every particular church of
Saints is as a Bed of Spices, full of sweetness and pleasantnes to Jesus Christ,
here he eats his pleasant fruits, Cant. 4.16.

4. In that here he imparts his loves, Cant. 7.12. Christ and the Saints do
mutually impart their inward bosom delights to each other, a man will not let
out his heart to others, as he will and does to his wife, nor the wife to any
as to her husband: Now Christ and the Saints in church fellowship are as
husband and wife. 2. Cor. 11.2


5. In that here Jesus Christ does more then ordinarily hold forth and manifest
his glory, as God did of old in the Tabernacle, Psalm. 63.2. which was a type of
particular churches now under the Gospel, and Christ's appearing in his glory
to them, by his word and Spirit. Indeed it cannot be denied but Jesus Christ
does hold forth the glory of his wisdom, and power, and goodness, and holiness,
and truth in every place, but no where as in the Assemblies of the Saint: here
the Spirit reveals the glory of Christ in all these to and upon the hearts of
the Saints in a far more eminent manner and degree, in pardoning their
sins, subduing their corruptions, healing their backslidings, curing their
distempers, supplying their wants, strengthening their weakness, supporting them
under their troubles, helping them against their infirmities, defending them
against their adversaries, perfecting and increasing their gifts and graces,
making them fruitful in holiness, and crowning them with loving kindness, and
tender mercies, as they find by experience. All which shows us how much Jesus
Christ takes delight and pleasure in the right ordered congregations of the
Saints.

7. To make out this more fully, the Scriptures speak of many notable and
singular privileges which such shall enjoy in this relation, which may be
another argument to move the Saints. 7. Motive. Many singula^ privileges the
Saints enjoy i^ this church state.


1. Here they shall have a feast of far things, Esaias 25.6, 7.

2. Here Death shall be swallowed up in victory. v. 8.

3. Here they shall enjoy a fuller manifestation of Gods love, Psalm. 36.8.

4. Here the Lord will command the blessing to them and theirs, Psalm. 133.6.

5. Here they shall see the King in his beauty, Esaias 33.17. that is, in his
excellent ordinances and Gospel administrations.

6. Here they shall have glorious protection and safety, sitting under under
the Banner of Christ's love, Cant. 2.9. Esaias 4.5, 6. Joel. 2. ult. And here the
glorious Lord, will be a place of broad Rivers and streams, wherein shall go
no Gallie with Oars, neither shall gallant Ship pass thereby, Jerusalem shall
be a quiet habitation, Esaias 33.20, Qua descripti^ne incolumitas ^cclesiae, et
de^ensio divina ^b hostibus in^uitur. Glass. ^n Ioc. vol. 3. p. 563.
21.

7. Here they shall enter into Christ's Wine-celler, and be stayed with his
flaggons, and comforted with his Apples, being sick of love, Cant. 2.5.

8. Here their souls shall grow up as calves in the Stall, and spread forth
their roots as the Trees of Lebanon, Hos. 14.6, 7, 8. yea here they shall
flourish and grow fat, and bring forth fruit in their old age, Psalm. 92.13, 14.

9. In a word, here they shall enjoy heaven upon earth, and glory on this side
glory, so that they shall say, it is good being here, and never repent their
condition, nor desire to go back again to the Tents of the Edomites, but go on
triumphing in the service of Jehovah, till they come to breath out their souls
into the arms of Christ their everlasting husband.

^. Motive. The Saints en^oy many ex^ellent helps and advantages ^o their
souls ^n this church-^tate.
8. To make out this more fully as another argument to prevail with this godly
hereunto, consider the excellent helps and means they may enjoy in these
societies, to further them in the ways of godliness, and advantage their
eternal welfare, as

1. Here they shall enjoy all Gods ordinances in Gods own way, after his own
mind, and accompanied with his special power to make them effectual to their
souls, which they cannot enjoy out of these assemblies: because the Lord has
not annexed his promise of meeting his people out of his own way, where he
walks.

2. Here they shall enjoy Christ's own instituted discipline and government,
(the excellency of which I shall speak to in the next place) which is very
effectual, to prevent from falling, and to recover when poor souls are
fallen, and which is no where else to be found, Mat. 16. and 18.

3. Here they shall have the help of the Saints in a more special manner
engaged to look after them, to watch over them, that they go not astray; or if
they be overtaken at any time, to restore them again, not in a rough, but in a
meek and gentle manner, Gal. 6.1. 1 These. 5.14, 15. Phil. 2.4.

4. Here they shall have their burdens borne, their necessities supplied with
cheerfulness, their afflictions and temptations laid to heart. If they are in
prison, or sick, they shall be visited, and prayers made for them, for their
support in, or deliverance out of their troubles. Act. 12.5, 12. If they have
unruly passions breaking out, here they shall be warned; if their minds be
feeble, here they shall be comforted, 1 These. 5.14.

5. Here they shall have special occasions to exercise those gifts and graces
they have received from Jesus Christ, for the edifying themselves and their
brethren in love, and building up each other in their most holy faith, 1
Thessal. 5.11. Jude 20. 1 Corinthians 14.12.

6. Lastly, here they shall find and meet with all the encouragements that
their hearts can desire to make them holy, humble, heavenly, cheerful, and
abounding in the Spirit, because here they shall enjoy most of God, and be
under his continual care, and watchful providence for good, as I have before
showed you. And therefore this should be a great encouragement to the godly to
join themselves.

9. In the ninth place, I shall desire the godly to set before them, 9. Motive.
The admira^ beauty and g^^ry, that shi^ forth in this Church-sta^
the beauty, excellency, and glory of this Church State, and order of the
Gospel, above, and beyond all other Church-states whatsoever, that are false
and spurious; to which end and purpose I shall set before them these six things.

1. The original rise and spring of this Church State. 2. The matter of which
it is composed. 3. The means by which it is effected. 4. The Laws, and
Ordinances by which it is governed, and the manner how they are administered. 5.
The power and privilege, with which it is invested. 6. Lastly, the ends and
purposes, for which it is ordained.
1. The original, rise, and spring of this Church State: Now this is from
above, not from beneath; from heaven, not from earth; from God, not from men.
It Is not in all the power of men and Angels to compass and bring about such a
work, as we have showed, Chap. 1. This is a house for none but wisdom her
self to build, Pro. 9.1, 2. who is no other the^ Jesus Christ the eternal Son
of God, the wisdom of the Father, (...), the brightness of his Fathers glory,
and the express image of his person, Heb. 1.3. and therefore this church state
is said to come down from above, ^cclesia, Do^nus ibi, n^^en habet, quia
^ominus ait, ^i duo vel ^es congregari ^nt in nomine ^o, ibi sum ^ medio eorum.
^ecolampad. loc. ^. 17. 14.
from heaven, Rev. 21. and the name of it * Jehovah Shamah, the Lord is there,
Ezekiel. ult. ult. All other church-states are from beneath, of men's framing and
constituting, they may call corruption their Father, and the worm their Mother
and their Sister, as Job said of himself, for they shall all of them perish
and be consumed at the brightness of Jesus Christ's coming, 2 These. 2.8. but
Mount Sion, that is from above, endures for ever.

2. The matter whereof this church state is composed: now this is spiritual and
heavenly, viz. such as are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, 1
Cor. 1.2. spiritual worshippers, Ioh. 4.24. And hence it is, that the true
visible churches of Christ are frequently styl^d heaven in Scripture, as Mat.
13.24.31.47 and Rev. 12.1. and 12. v. Rejoice ye heavens and ye that dwell in
them, woe to the inhabitants of the earth, etc. by which heavens can be
understood no other but the visible congregations of the Saints: so Revel.
15.1, 5. and 18.20.19.1.21.1. and there cannot be a more lively picture, or
emblem of heaven, then this church state on earth, which I shall make out, in
these brief resemblances.

1. Heaven we all know is a high place, not only separated from, but elevated
far above the earth: so are the visible churches of Christ, though they be in
the world, yet far above the world, and therefore compared to a mountain,
and a City upon a hill, Propter altitudinem, Esaias 2.2, 3.30.9. Mat. 5.14.

2. Heaven is a place of purity and holiness, the inhabitants of it are all pure
and holy, for no unrighteous person can enter into it, as 1 Cor. 6.9. So the
visible churches of Christ are places of purity and holiness, no unclean
person is De jure, i.e. of right, to enter into this church state, Rev. 21.27.
neither is any that works abomination to be tolerated in it, but to be put
away, and cast out. 1 Cor. 5.13. Rev. 2.2.

3. Heaven is a place of unspeakeable sweetness, and joy, to those that are in
it, there being a Sea of boundless and bottomless pleasures, in which the
Saints shall bathe themselves to all eternity, Psalm. 16. ult. So in this
visible church state the Saints that are upright in heart, are filled and
overcome oftentimes with the joys of the Spirit, having fellowship with the
Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, in the pure and precious ordinances of his
worship, 1 Ioh. 1.3. They are abundantly satisfied with the fatnes of his
house, and inebriated or made drunk with the Rivers of Gods pleasures, Psalm.
36.8. they are carried into Christ's wine-cellar, and stayed with his flaggons,
and comforted with his Apples, being sick of love, Cant. 2.4. in a word, they
are made partakers of those joys that eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive. 1 Cor. 2.9, 10.

4. Heaven is a place of great and wonderful dignity, honor and glory, where
the Inhabitants have all of them their crowns upon their heads, to set forth
their excellent and high condition, 1 Pet. 5.4. so the members of this
church state on earth, are persons of great honor and dignity, though the
world sees it not, and therefore they are styled Kings and Priests to God,
Rev. 1.6. and they have crowns of gold on their heads, Rev. 4.4. and 5.10. and
they sit on thrones, Psalm. 122.5. having power committed to them, both of
binding and loosing, opening and shutting the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 18.19 by
their officers.

5. In Heaven there is a l^vely and sweet communion of Saints that live in
wonderful love together, taking unspeakeable delight and joy in each others
society and fellowship: So it is with the Saints in this church state on earth,
their hearts are linked together in wonderful love and dear affection one
toward another, as brethren and sisters dwelling together; and if they are at
any time at variance, through the cunning of the Tempter, or the corruption of
their own hearts, to which the best of the Saints are subject, while they are
here, yet they are not at rest till they are reconciled, and their hearts
closing again sweetly each with other, Psalm. 133.1.

6. In heaven, the Saints and Angels do continually sound forth the praises of
the eternal God: So is it in the congregations of the Saints here on earth,
there is nothing more they are affected with, and exercised in, Rev. 4.9,
10.11. and 5.8, to 12. and 15.2, 3, 4. and 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

7. Heaven is the place where God dwells, and does more especially make himself
known to the Saints and Angels: So here the congregations and churches of the
Saints, are the places where the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, does
more especially shine forth, and his mind is made known by his Spirit, as I
have showed in the 5. Motive.

8. In the lower heavens are placed the Sun, Moon, and Stars, to give light
and influence to the earth, without which the earth would soon corrupt and grow
inhabitable: So in the visible churches of Christ, is placed the light of the
truth, and glorious Ministry of the word, and other shining ordinances, and
divine institutions, without which the whole world of mankind, would live
rather like Beasts then men, and be in continual danger of sinking under the
burden of Gods wrath.

9. The lower heavens are oftentimes darkened, with clouds, storms, and
tempests that are generated in the middle region of the air, so that many
times, neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars, do appear, but are, as if they were
not, to our discerning, and yet they have their being notwithstanding these
clouds and storms: So it is with the visible churches of the Saints, they are
so clouded many times with the tempests and storms of persecutions, etc. that
they scarce seem to be, having no glory, nor beauty, that externally appears
to the eye of men, as Cant. 1.5.

10. Lastly, Heaven is a place that abides for ever, there is no enemy to
overcome and conquer it: so it is with this Church State of Jesus Christ's
instituting and ordaining, he has passed his word, which cannot fail, that
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, as in Mat. 16.18.

By all which we clearly see, of what a spiritual frame and constitution this
true Gospel Church State of Christ's appointment is, but it is far otherwise
with all other false Church states that are not gathered according to Christ's
order and appointment; for they are made up of the world, cages of all unclean
birds, habitations of devils, and all foul spirits, Rev. 18.2. drunkards,
swearers, liars, Idolaters, Adulterers, persecutors, and what not? are
Church Members.

3. The next particular that holds forth the beauty and excellency of this true
Gospel Church State of Christ's Institution, is the proper means and way by
which it is gathered and brought to pass. ^d. M. Durie ^earned ^sbyterian) ^is
Sermon ^re the ho^rable house (...) Com. p. 39.
Now these means are no other then the * Word and Spirit, Mat. 28.19. Ioh.
16.8. as in the Primitive times from the practice of the Apostles is most
clear. The visible Churches of Christ were then gathered and planted, Verbo,
non Ferro, by the Word, not by the Sword. None were compelled by external
force or violence to believe in Christ, and come into church fellowship, but as
the word and Spirit did enlighten them, and sweetly draw them to Christ and his
ordinances of worship, so they came in willingly, freely professing their
subjection to the Gospel of Christ, 2 Cor. 9 13. Act. 2.37.41. But it is
otherwise with false Antichristian church-states, they force men to the faith,
and use of church ordinances; the means they use are external, by power and
policy, allurements or threatening, the Foxes Skin, or the Lions Paw, the
noise of Axes and Hammers are heard in the building of their churches; so that
let persons be what they will, have they conscience or no conscience, knowledge
or no knowledge, they must come in and subject to their power, and authority,
as is the practice of Antichrist, Rev. 12.15.16, 17. and thus they make whole
Nations christians, and churches, (though false ones) suddenly, and in a day.

4. The Laws and ordinances by which this true Gospel church state is ordered
and governed, and the manner how they are administered.

1. The Laws and ordinances by which this Gospel Church State is ordered and
governed. Now these are none other, but divine institutions, such as Christ
gave in commission to his Apostles, to teach those that they converted, and
made disciples, by the preaching of the word, to observe, Mat. 28.20. Teaching
them to observe all that I have commanded you: and therefore says the Apostle,
that which I received of the Lord, that I deliver unto you, 1 Cor. 11.23. but
its otherwise with all false church-states, the laws by which they are ordered
and governed, are not simply divine, and fetched from the unerring rule of Gods
word, but from unwritten Traditions from the Cannons and constitutions of men,
carnal ordinances of the creature, not of Christ's appointment.

2. The manner how these divine Laws and ordinances of Christ are executed and
administered in this Gospel church state. Now This is done by way of
instruction, exhortation, comfort, reproof, and correction, in all meekenes,
gentleness, long suffering, and forbearance, using the Keys of this Kingdom of
Christ, not in a Lordly, and Majesteriall way, but in all humblenes and fear,
as Christ himself the author of them, whose way of dealing with men was in all
gentleness, and love: and by this rule he has charged all the officers of his
Kingdom to walk toward his Saints, that are his Subjects, which have as
great right in him, as those he has made rulers over them, for in him they are
all but fellow servants and brethren, and the vid Duries Sermon before ^he Ho.
House of Commons, ut supra. p. 41.
meanest of them (as M. Dury has observed in his Sermon. before cited) in case
of any offense may call the greatest, though he were an Apostle, yea the
chiefest of the Apostles, to an account, as we see it fell out in Act. 11. But
it is not so in other church-states, that are not according to the order of the
Gospel, for usually they deal with the souls of men, as with vid Duries
Sermon, ut supra. p. 40.
Beasts in a mere arbitrary way and manner, binding men to do all they command
them Volens nolens, let conscience be for it or against it, requiring no more
then a mere implicit faith, ignorantly to obey, only because commanded, as a
horse turns this or that way, because he that rides him, draws the bridle to
this or that hand, having no respect to reason or conscience: and herein indeed
(as the same M. Dury in his Sermon says, The great whore of Babylon, the
mother of fornication, has out-stript all the rest of the earth in policy, and
showed to all the Kings of the earth, the depth of the mystery of iniquity in
this kind of government; so that they have drunk out of the cup of her
fornications, and their Statesmen have committed adultery with her.

5. The Power and Privilege, with which this Church State of Christ's
instituting is invested, This holds forth the beauty of it; here none are
higher and greater then other, or standing in subjection and subordination one
to another, but are all alike in jurisdiction and authority, (as I have proved
before in the second Chapter) all (Sister churches, all golden Candlesticks,
all fellow servants and brethren, seeking the welfare and happiness one of
another; having thrones of judgment set up within every one of them, and whole
Christ to be their King, Priest, and Prophet, by and from whom they enjoy all
his power and promises, all his sacred Laws and ordinances, to rule and govern
them, to quicken, comfort and establish them in the truth, but its far
otherwise with those church-states that are not of Christ's constituting and
framing, for all their power and privilege is locked up within the compass of
the Clergy, that ingrosse all the power to themselves, and among themselves;
for they make themselves the prime subject of all church power and authority,
and are a distinct body of themselves from the people, they call the Layety,
and hereupon, having all power in themselves, they have all Laws, Ordinances,
and administrations in themselves, be they divine or humane, and can add or
detract as they please; the congregations under them, being merely passive,
further then their authority and injunctions act them; which is little less
then mere slavery and bondage, altogether unbeseeming the free Denizons of
Sion.

6. Lastly, The sacred ends for which this Gospel church state was ordained.
And they are these two.

1. The exaltation of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, for here his
name is great, Psalm. 76.1, 2, 3. Esaias 12.4, 5, 6. here he is greatly feared and
reverenced, as Psalm. 89.7. Here his noble acts are declared, and his praise set
forth, Psalm. 149.1. Ephesians, 3. ult. In this true Gospel church state, the
eternal God enjoyes the perfection of his Saints, his service by them in this
state, being far more eminent, rich, and noble, then when performed singly, and
by themselves alone, as Romans 16.6. That ye may with one mind and one mouth
glorify God.

2. The bringing of the Saints into nearer fellowship with God, and Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 1.9. 2 Cor. 6.16. 1 John 1.3. both which are not carnal but
spiritual ends, whereas the ends of a false church state are carnal, not
spiritual: more self, then Christ, is aimed at by those that are the founders
of it, viz. their own greatness, power, and dominion, their own pleasure, ease,
profit, to have all in subjection to them, not to Christ, so they may have an
absolute being of themselves, and have all things in Subjection to them,
without control, (for naturally all false and Antichristian government,
reaches to this, and are the only Independants, as they use the word) that is
all they care for or look after, as we saw in the Prelates of late, and are
like to see in their successors, if the God of all mercy and grace, prevent not.

10. In the tenth place, 10. Motiv^ Without the the work of Reforma^ will be
to (...) purpose.
this should move the Saints to this excellent work, because till they do come
out from the wicked, and separate themselves, and fall upon the practice of
this Church Fellowship, they will not only by their continuance amonst them,
endanger themselves by partaking in their pollutions, but also all endeavors
to reform the worship of Christ, and exalting his Kingdom here in England,
will be greatly obstructed, if not altogether in vain, and to no purpose. For
grant the Prelaticall government be removed, and the Presbteriall set up in the
room of it, which many wise men do much question, and not without cause, yet
they will find it a work not so feisable and possible to rule and govern the
rude multitude, as they imagine: but notwithstanding all their terrible
thunderbolts of excommunication, and delivering them over Brachio seculari,
they will be the rude multitude still, if they should sit never so much in the
chair of Repentance, of the Presbyterians making, yet that would have no
spiritual efficacy upon their hearts, but they would be loose still, and
profane still, as woeful experience shows it in Scotland and other places,
where this Discipline is on foot.

11. Lastly, to add no more, Is not this the day of Englands Vows, to become
the Lords, and his Christ's? Have they not covenanted Reformation in the worship
of God, according to the rule of his Word, and not after the will and commands
of men, or their own or others inventions? And does not the Lord now expect
that they should perform their vows?

If any desire further Arguments to move them hereunto, they may read M.
Buroughs his Moses Choice, that has much to this purpose, from p. 260. to p.
335.

So that all these things rightly and duly weighed, I hope the godly will be
provoked every where, speedily to set upon this course of joining together
where they live, or to some particular churches near them, where they may
enjoy fellowship with Jesus Christ and his Saints, and be built up from glory
to glory. How they should be able to set about this excellent work, I shall
show in the next Chapter that follows.

CHAP. VI. How and in what manner the godly are to embody and join themselves
together into holy church fellowship, in the places where they live, and what
concerns them to know and practice after their embodying.
THis Chapter consists of two parts.

1. How the godly are to embody. 2. What concerns their knowledge and practice
after embodying.
Touching the first, the embodying of the Saints together. For the better
effecting of it, three things are to be done by them.

1. They are to inform themselves touching the right order of the Gospel what
it is, and how it was practiced by the churches, in the days of the Apostles,
before it was defloured and abused with the dreggs of men's inventions: The
Saints are to observe the pattern in the Mount, (that is) they are to look to
the Primitive institutions of Christ, and observe them, and walk according to
them, in all the worship of God: When Moses was to build the Tabernacle, he was
to look to the pattern that God gave him in the Mount, and he did so, and he
was judged faithful before the Lord for so doing, Heb. 3. and David after him,
and other of the Servants of God, they diligently looked into the Book of the
Law, that they might know how to proceed in such a work as this, as building
the Temple, and thus Jesus Christ, when the question was put to him about
divorce, he brings them to the first institution: and the Apostle Paul in the
business of the Supper of the Lord, he raises them up to the consideration of
the first institution, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. And so should the godly in this way of
becoming a Temple, and House to God, and Jesus Christ: look how and in what
manner it was done in the Premitive times; and there is great reason for it, 1.
Because as Tertullian says, Quod primum, optimum, that which is first is best.
2. Because the Primitive order was left to be a pattern to all succeeding
generations, till Jesus Christ himself do come. 3. Because in so doing, we
give a testimony of our honoring of Christ in following his commands. And
lastly, because then we may expect his blessing on our endeavors: but on the
contrary, we shall provoke him to anger, as they did of old, that took not the
due and right order of bringing the Arc to Jerusalem. 1 Cron. 15.13.

2. When we have done so, then we are to sit down and compare our selves in our
present stations, with that first order of the Gospel, and see how far short
we have come of it, and then be ashamed and blush, and be confounded before the
Lord, for the neglect of our duty all this while, and beg pardon through
Christ, as Hezekiah did, for those that have eaten the Passover otherwise then
it was written, i. e. then God had instituted and ordained, 2 Cron. 30 18, 19.
and this is requisite to such a condition, Ezekiel. 43.11, 12. and if they be
ashamed of all they have done, show them the form of the house, and the
fashion thereof.

3. When the godly have endeavored this, then in the strength of the Lord of
glory, they are to set upon the bringing of themselves and all they take in
hand about this work, to that Primitive order.

Q. But you will say, we may mistake in this point, unless we be directed, as
many do to this day, some going too far on the right hand, and others too
far on the left, and both are dangerous. It would be necessary therefore to
afford us some help, by showing what this order of the Gospel is, which the
godly are to come up unto in their practice, for the right worshipping of God.

Ans. To help therefore in this thing, I shall afford what light I have
received from Jesus Christ in the Scriptures, touching this particular, and
refer all I have to say touching the true order of the Gospel the Saints are
to observe, to three heads.

1. To right means of worship. 2. To right persons that are to make use of
those means. 3. To the right manner, or method of putting these means into
practice.
Touching the first of these, the right means of worship. Right means (...)
worship.
Now by these I understand true and pure ordinances, such as Jesus Christ the
Head and King of his Church has alone instituted and commanded, Mat 28. ult. 1
Cor. 11.23. and 12.28. And the reason is this, because if the worship we
perform and bring to God, be not of his own ordering and appointing, though it
be never so specious and glorious to the eye of man, and pleasing to our
selves, yet it will not please the Lord, for he will be served in his own way,
and by his own means and institutions, or else he rejects it, as Commandment
2. Col. 2.

Quest. But what are those Gospell-Ordinances and means of worship which Jesus
Christ has instituted and ordained for the Saints to use?

Ans. 1. The pure Word of God preached, as it is contained in the Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament, Mat. 28.19. Act. 6.4. Romans 1.16. and 10.14, 15, 16,
17.

2. The pure and precious seals of the Covenant of Grace, given to the Saints,
viz. Baptism, and the Lords Supper, Mat. 28.19. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24.

3. The gift of conceived Prayer from the assistance of the Spirit, Act. 6.4.
Romans 8.26, 27.

4. Singing of Psalms, Mat. 26.30. 1 Cor. 14.15. Col. 3.16.

5. The administration of the Censures, opening and shutting the Kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 16. and 18. 1 Cor. 5.4.

6. A right Ministry to dispense all these, viz. those offices and officers
Christ has ordained and given to this end, Ephesians. 4.11.

7. Lastly, a Church or congregation of Saints, in which all these are to be
dispensed, observed and performed, as 1 Cor. 12.28. These I take to be the true
and right means of worship.

2. To right means of worship, there must be right persons to make use of
these means. Now these must of necessity be such as can make use of those
spiritual means, in a spiritual manner, and they can be none but such as are
spiritual, i. e. that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, and called to be Saints,
1 Cor. 1.2. such as are acted by the Spirit, and indeed such only does the
Lord seek to worship him, Joh. 4.23. for they only can worship him in spirit.
But as for others that are yet dead in their sins and trespasses, and slaves
to Satan and their own lusts, as all natural persons are, he seeks not
after them to worship him, for they cannot make use of those instituted means
of worship, though the fault be, not the Lords, but their own, and they shall
one day answer for it; they cannot pray, nor fast spiritually, nor perform any
duty of Gods worship acceptably, for they are destitute of the Spirit,
destitute of faith, strangers to the covenant of promise, without God, and
Christ, Ephesians. 2.1*
and hope in the world. Yea they pollute these holy ordinances of Gods worship,
when ever they make use of them, and thereby provoke the Lord to wrath, as
Psalm. 50.^6, 17 Esaias 1.13, 14. Jer. 77.8. they are a burden to the Lord and
his people, as the Sodomites were to Lot, and the wicked were to David, and
Judas was to Christ, Ioh. 13.21, 31. and therefore as they were not suffered to
come near to the Lord of old under the Law, ^zek. 44.7, 8, 9 ^ Cor. 5.13.
so they are to be rejected under the Gospel, and not suffered to remain in
fellowship with Christ and his Saints; and as the Lord found fault with the
Church of the Jews for suffering the uncircumcised in heart and life, and such
as polluted and profaned his great name, in drawing near to him, and put no
difference between the clean and the unclean, Ezekiel. 22.26. So he blamed the
Churches in the time of the New Testament, for their indulgence toward such, 1
Cor. 5. and Rev. 2. and therefore Christ of purpose ordained Laws and
Ordinances both for the keeping out, and casting out of the Assemblies of the
Saints, such as were open and known vicious and scandalous persons.

By all which it is most clear and certain, that none but such as are holy
and sanctified persons, at the least that is, such a ^fession of ^linesse, as
^h no appa^ contradi^n thereunto men and wo^^ns conversa^ and walk^
professedly so, are in a capacity to use those holy ordinances and means of
worship that Christ has instituted and appointed to be observed and used in
his Church. Indeed those that are yet in their natural estates, uncalled and
unconverted, unsanctified, and altogether destitute of the spirit of Christ,
are to enjoy the liberty of the Word preached, because that is an ordinance
which Jesus Christ has ordained to convert sinners from the evil of their
ways, and to put them into a capacity for communion with Christ and his Saints
in all the rest of his ordinances, but till they are called and brought home to
Christ, by yielding a professed subjection to the Gospel, as those were in the
Primitive times, 2 Cor. 9.13. they are not to be admitted to special
ordinances and enjoyment of those spiritual privileges, which Christ has
appointed only for the Saints.

Obj. Are not those that we judge godly, and in a capacity to make use of all
the holy ordinances of Worship, to be baptized again, before they be admitted
into Church Fellowship, and to the use of those ordinances, as is the judgment
and practice of many in these days?

Answ. Negatively, they are not, and my reasons are these three that follow.

1. Because it is supposed they have been (though corruptly) baptized already,
and therefore not to be baptized again. Now the corruption of an
administration does not wholly make it void and null. If they had the
essentials of that ordinance when it was first administered to them, that is
sufficient, without taking of it up again de novo, though there was an error
in the c^rcumstantials. Now the essentials of Baptism the learned conclude to
be true matter and form, the matter, water, the form, baptizing them in, or
into the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. And both
these cannot be denied, but that the godly in this Kingdom have had, though a
right administration, or manner and way of administration, might be, and
doubtless was to the most wanting.

2. Because it cannot be denied, but such godly persons we speak of that were
baptized in their infancy, have received the effect and fruit of that
ordinance, in a lively manner on their souls, the Lord having added to the
outward washing with water, the inward grace, and baptism of the Spirit, by
causing them to put on Christ, which is sufficient to cover or make up all the
failings that were in the first administration.

3. Because if the essentials of their first Baptism were all destroyed, and
lost in their Antichristian administration, as Re-Sap. hold, but I deny, and
have showed to the contrary in the 4. Chap. then it must of necessity follow,
that the godly must altogether remain without any Church State, because there
must be the same power to erect this ordinance anew, that first ordained it,
and the same or the like officers to administer it, as were before it was lost,
but neither Christ, nor any such extraordinary officers are now on earth. And
hence it is, that this doctrine and practice of the Re-baptizers, has made so
many to turn Seekers and Waiters, denying all Churches, Ministry and
Ordinances, expecting when Christ or his Apostles will come to restore them to
their primitive purity and rectitude.

3. There must be a right manner of performing those ordinances and means of
worship, by those that are qualified and called hereunto by Christ, and this
must carefully be looked unto, because the best ordinances may be spoiled by the
evil handling and managing of them.

Now the right manner of worshipping God by those that are to enter upon this
Gospel Order and Church State instituted by Christ, consists in these five
things.

1. There must be a Owens Country Essay for Church Government. p. 60
voluntary union and knitting together in one. This is necessarily supposed, as
I showed before, Chap. 2. The godly must be formed into one body, or
Church-society, as in the Primitive times, distinguished from others. Now this
is to be done by the Saints that are to embody these three ways.

1. They are to separate, or sequester themselves from the loose and profane
multitude among whom they live, having no more fellowship with them in special
ordinances, whiles they continue such. This is expressly commanded 2 Cor. 6.16,
17. Ephesians. 5.11. 2 Timothy 3 5. Rev. 18.4.

2. They are voluntarily to give up themselves to the Lord, and one another, as
those of Macedonia did, 2 Cor. 8.15. to walk together in all the ordinances of
Christ.

3. This is to be done in a mutual consent, covenant, or Some promissory
engagements. Owen ut supra.
agreement, as was the practice of the Church of the Jews, and was also
prophesied then, should be done now in the days of the Gospel, Ier. 50.5. and
is now practiced in the very National Churches of England and Scotland
accordingly. Now if it be (as they take it) lawful for a National Church to
enter into such a Covenant to walk with God, and one another, according as he
shall make himself known to them in his Word, I cannot see how it can be
unlawful for a particular Church thus to do. And for this, Vide Master Burr.
Heart Divis. p. 69.

2. As there must be union, so also communion, that is, they must in the
worship of God meet together jointly, as members of one body, tarrying one for
another, as 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. and 11.33. 1 Cor. 5.4.

3. There must be a sweet harmony, consent and agreement in the performance of
the holy ordinances of Christ, laboring to the uttermost to be of one heart
and one mind, in executing all Church-affaires. Act. 2.1.41, 42. and Act. 4.32.

4. There must be a free, ready, willing, and cheerful contributing of such
blessings, mercies, gifts and graces, temporal and shirituall, as Jesus Christ
has bestowed upon us, for the comfort and edification of the whole body thus
united and joined together, 1 Cor. 14.12. Ephesians. 4.12. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. Romans
12.6, 7, 8. Act. 4.32.

5. There must be a diligent care had and taken that things be so ordered, and
ordinances be so performed, that Jesus Christ do not suffer in his honor, nor
the church in her happiness and welfare: which is done 1. By keeping the
ordinances pure and free from the mixtures of men's inventions. 2. By keeping
close to the rule of the word, in all church actions and administrations,
without consulting with flesh and blood. 3. By following the dictates of the
Spirit, that Jesus Christ gives to us as our guide, and not our own vain
fancyes, and carnal imaginations, laying aside, and denying our own wisdom,
reason, understanding, further then we see it acted and guided by the word and
Spirit of Christ. 4. By being very spiritual and heavenly, meek, and humble,
lowly and loving in all our undertakings and performances, that Christ may have
glory, and the Gospel credit. 5. Lastly, by aspiring and pressing hard after
perfection in holiness, and coming to a full stature in Christ. Ephesians. 4.13.

And thus we have done with the first part of the Chapter, the Saints
embodying, and how they are to do it. Now follows the second part of the
Chapter, and that is, what concerns their knowledge and practice after
embodying.

Now this I shall endeavor to make out in five things.

1. There must be choice of their officers, as Pastor, Teacher, Elder, Act.
14.23.
Deacon, if they have such provision among themselves, which are to watch over
them, and administer to them, in the things of Gods house: and these they are
to set apart according to the rule of the word, by Fasting and Prayer, craving
the help of other churches in such great and weighty aff^ires, and which may
give them the right hand of fellowship, Act. 14.23.

Q. Are they not to be ordained by imposition of hands?

A. There is no absolute necessity of it, for we read no precept for it, and
but little practice of it in such cases. In other cases we do, but not in this.
That of 1 Timothy 4.14. is no institution of it, but only a practice of the Elders
of the church of Ephesus with the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.6. not of the officers of
several churches, as it is now used. When that Matthias was chosen an Apostle
in Judas room, we read only of his being numbered among the rest of the
Apostles. When they made Deacons for the poor, Act. 6. we read, after they had
prayed, they laid their hands on them, I say after, but not before, or in the
time they were praying, as the presbyterians in their ordination do now, and
whether that Timothy had hands laid on him in time of prayer, as it is now used
in ordination of Ministers, is more then any I suppose can determine: So that
it seems it was used rather in way of blessing of them, as Christ did the
little childeren and others that were sick, then setting them apart to the
office they were chosen to. And that of Act. 14.23. does not prove it as we
have showed before. And Jesus Christ himself never used it, when he sent forth
his Disciples to preach: nor gave it in commission to his Apostles that they
should do it; nor have they enjoined such a thing. And therefore as Polanus,
Tilenus, Calvin, and other great Divines say, it is a matter indifferent, not
absolutely necessary and essential to an officers calling, as many suppose: And
it is no more then what the church of Scotland has also declared heretofore. But
to clear this business fully, there is a learned Treatise put forth lately,
wherein the judgment of the Reformed churches, and Protestant Divines is
showed exactly, about this point, so that I need not to speak further of it.

2. The preservation of their unity, for unity among brethren in
church fellowship, is very lovely, pleasant, and full of beauty, as Psalm.
133.1, 2. O quam bonum and jucundum, etc. and there is no one duty more pressed
on the Saints in church fellowship then this of unity, as the Scriptures do
abundantly testify, 1 Cor. 1.10. Romans 14.19. Ephesians. 4.2, 3. Phil. 1.27. and
2.3, 4, 5. And if we look no further then to the evil and sad effects which
the contrary does produce, viz. Divisions, and Rents in Churches: The truth
both of the excellency and necessity hereof will easily appear. And therefore
for this end and purpose, that the godly in this way, and order of the Gospel,
may live together in unity and brotherly love, they are to study self-denial,
humility, patience, long-suffering, and forbearance toward one another,
putting on bowels of mercy, forgiving one another, as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven us, Ephesians 4. ult. and Col. 3.12. For this, see more in that excellent
Treatise of Heart Divisions.

3. They are to study the preservation of purity and holiness, amongst them;
this in a special manner is to be looked after: what Paul spoke to Timothy in
particular, we may say to them in church fellowship, keep your selves pure:
and the reasons are these two.

1. Because that purity is the beauty of a church, Psalm. 93. ult. as nothing
does more darken and obscrue a church then sin, so nothing does more adorn and
beautify a church then holiness and purity.

2. Because that purity is the strength of a church: We never read of any
churches that have miscarried, but first it came from suffering themselves to
be polluted and defiled, either in opinion or practice: The Vestall Virgins we
read could not be overcome before they were defloured, and therefore the
Emperor first caused them to be defiled, and then destroys them: So here
therefore let the churches that are as Virgins espoused to Jesus Christ, 2 Cor.
11.2. labor to preserve their purity, and then they need not fear their
safety: and to this purpose let them be careful to observe and practice these
following directions.

1. Let every particular member labor to keep their own vessels pure, look
narrowly to his own heart and ways, and keep himself from his own iniquity,
as David did, Psalm. 18.23.

2. Let them study faithfullnes one toward another in their relations,
watching over one another, for the good of the whole, Col. 1.1.

3. Let those whom it concerns look narrowly to the admission of members, not
looking to, nor laboring after multitude, so much as cleannes and purity: a
little church with great godliness, is far to be preferred before a great
church (I mean for number) and small purity.

4. Let there be care taken that no root of bitterness be suffered to spring up
to the defiling of any, or if it appear, let it be in a spirit of love and
meekenes suppressed timely: it was the church of Corinths fault that they did not
mourn for the incestuous persons fact, and put him from amongst them, 1 Cor.
5.1, 2, 6, 13.

5. Let them have a watchful eye to all church administrations, that they be
done according to the rule of the word, and not after the wisdom of the flesh.

4. They are to study the preservation of their liberty, which Jesus Christ
has bestow^d upon them, and purchased for them, with his own blood, Gal. 5.1.
that they may not be servants to men, 1 Cor. 7.23. Now this liberty consists in
these following particulars.

1. In choosing their own officers, Acts 1.15. and 6.2, 3, 4.

2. In adm^ssion of members, Acts 9.26.1^.47. and Romans 14.1.

3. In trying and examining their own members, that are questioned within
themselves, as the church of Ephesus, Revel. 2.2. and debating matters
controverted.

4. In case of difference, to crave the help of other churches, toward the
composing it, as the church of Antioch did in Acts 15.2, 3. which practice was
not by way of appeal, but only by craving advice and counsel.

5. In case of an offending members refusal to hear the church, to admonish,
or cut him off, by excommunication from the body, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5, 13.

6. In sending forth in the public service of the church, such as they shall
judge most fit, as Phil. 2.25. 2 Cor. 8.19.

7. In partaking with other churches in those privileges and comforts that
Christ has bestowed upon them, upon due knowledge and recommendation, as 2
Cor. 3.1. Romans 16.1, 2.

If any desire further light in this particular, they may read M. Cotton in his
Treatise of the Keys, p. 13. to 20. and his Treatise of the way of the
churches in New England, p. 102. to 110.

5. Lastly, They are to look to the diligent performance of those duties
mutually, which their relations call them unto, I shall only mention those
duties that concern chuch members in general.

1. There must be a high esteem one of another, Romans 12.10. Phil. 2.3.

2. Unfeigned love one to another, 1 These. 4.9. and this love must be pure, 1 Timothy 1.5. Fervent, 1 Pet. 1, 22, 4.8. Impartial to one as well as another,
differing in judgment, as well as agreeing, Phil. 2.3. weak as well as
strong, Jam. 2.8, 9. Romans 14. increasing, Phil. 1.9. faithful, 1 John 3.17.
constant, 1 Cor. 13.

3. A care to pray one for another, as well as one with another, Jam. 5.16.

4. Watching over one another, 1 Cor. 12.25. Phil. 2.4. Romans 15.14.

5. Stirring up one another graces, Heb. 3.13. and 10.24

6. Imparting and communicating each to other, of what God has vouchsafed to
us, in temporals and spirituals, without grudging. 1 Pet. 4.10. Acts 2.44, 45.
and 18.26.

7. Delighting in one another society and fellowship, as Psalm. 133.1. Acts
2.42.

8. Sympathising with one another condition, Romans 12.15. Heb. 13.2. thereby
helping to bear each others burden, as Gal. 6.2.

9. Bearing with each others unavoidable infirmities, and weaknesses, as, R^m.
14.3.13. Ephesians. 4.2. Col. 3.12, 13.

10. An endeavor to recover such as are fallen, and overtaken with sin, and
that in the Spirit of meekenes, Gal. 6.1.

11. A care to preserve the credit and reputation of each other, as Jam. 4 11.

12. A striving after unity in mind and judgment, as well as affection, Romans
15.5, 6, 7. 1 Pet. 3.8. that so (if it be possible) there may be no divisions,
1 Cor. 1.10.

13. A giving to each other a liberty in the use of such things as are
indifferent, and not restrained by the word of Christ, Romans 14.2, 3. not tying
up the consciences of one another, where Christ has left us free.

14. A maintaining of brotherly affection, where we cannot be of one mind, not
grudging against, and censuring one another, Phil 2.2, 3. Col. 3.13.

15. Lastly, in being patterns and examples in word and conversation, in
faith, in charity, in Spirit and purity, as the Apostle speaks to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.12. and Phil. 3.17. etc.

CHAP. VII. This chapter holds forth the several hindrances and impediments
that do stand in the way of the godly, whereby they are kept from this Gospel
Church State. All which hindrances are removed, in answering all the principal
objections that are made against it.
^mpediment.
THe first impediment that stands in their way is this, That there are many
learned and godly Ministers, as well as private christians, that both write and
speak against this way.

Now to remove this impediment, I shall desire the godly to consider these few
things.

1. Whether all those are truly godly, that make a profession of godliness,
even amongst them that go for Ministers and guides to others. Is not the
contrary too true? have not too too many the form of godliness, denying the
power of it? according to that of 2 Timothy 3.5. walking up and down in sheeps
clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves, as Jesus Christ spoke of the proud
and lofty Pharisees, and other false Prophets, Mat. 7.15. and do not their
actions both abroad and at home, speak out aloud the truth hereof? So that the
tongues and pens of such men against this way of the Lord, whether Ministers or
others, are no slander, but are rather to be looked upon as the discovery of the
rottennes of their own hearts, and the fruit of those, the Apostle Jude speaks
of, that walk in the way of Cain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam,
for reward, and shall perish in the gainsaying of Korah, Jude 11.

2. But secondly, grant they are such Ministers and Christians, that is, truly
godly, holding forth the power of godliness in their walking, that speak
against this order of the Gospel, and way of the Lord. Yet I hope it is not an
impossible thing even for such men to err, and be drawn aside some times, in
some things, to do that which is unworthy their high and holy calling. Is it
any new thing to hear of the godly themselves making opposition against
Christ, even in the greatest matters that concern his glory? let us look upon
that place of the Prophet, Mal. 3.2, 3. where we may see, that when Christ
shall come to purge and reform his Temple, he shall meet with opposition from
a generation of people, which are not of the vilest and basest sort, but of the
precious, such as are like to gold and silver: The sons of Levi, Preachers,
as well as private Christians: and these shall scarce endure his coming, but
shall make some kind of resistance. And are there not abundant instances for
this? did not Peter oppose Christ himself in the work of Redemption, insomuch
that Christ called him Satan for his labor, as Mat. 16.22, 23. and told him
to his face, that he did not savor the things of God? and yet Peter I hope
will not be denied to be truly godly.

2. Did not the devout women many times rise up (by the instigation of the
Jews) against the Apostles and brethren where they came to preach, and
practice contrary to the Jewish customs, in setting up, and planting this
Gospel Church State?

3. Have we not experience of many godly men, Conformists, in the late times of
the Prelates, that did side with the Bishops, against their godly brethren, the
Non-conformists, that wrote against the Ceremonies, Service Book, and
Hierarchicall Government, and pressed those very things at that time, that now
these men practice, which speak evil of what we now stir up the godly unto?
Now if it be so, then it is not so much to be wondered, that godly men have
their hands, and tongues, and pens against this way of the Gospel, which we
conceive to be a step or two higher for purity, and nearer to the will and mind
of Christ, and practice of the Primitive times, then what is now on foot. The
best men are men, and so have their weaknesses, as well as others.

Thirdly, it is to be considered, that not all men, no not godly men are
enlightened equally alike in the mysteries of the Gospel. But as the wind blows
when and where it lists, so the Lord by his Spirit gives light when and where
he pleases. Gifts of wisdom and understanding in the mysteries of godliness
are Gods peculiar goods, (as one says well) and he may give his own where he
lists; neither must our eye be evil because his is good. Sometimes (as the
proverb is) the greatest clarks are not the wisest men, no not in lesser and
petty things of this life. Now if they are to seek in these things many times,
then much more may they be to seek in the great things of Christ's Kingdom,
and therefore our Savior gives thanks to his Father, that he had hid these
mysteries from the wise and learned, and revealed them to babes, Matthew. 11.26,
27.

Fourthly, though there are many godly, both Preachers and others that are
against it; Yet it cannot be denied, but there are also multitudes of godly of
all sorts and callings in the Magistracy, Ministry, practice of Law, Physic,
in Counsels, and Armies, both in City, and Country, that are for it. And not
only in this City and Country, but foreign countries, and the number
increases daily, and is like more and more to increase, till it have prevailed
against all other, as Dan. 2 44. intimates.

Fifthly, We must know, that the godly are in a way of learning still more and
more, both Ministers and others, they are not come to that (...) and top of
knowledge, as to proceed no farther, for we all know but in part, 1 Cor. 13.9.
So that though they are dark in this point, this year, yet it is possible the
next year they may be enlightened. Seven years since, many godly Preachers and
Professors were for Episcopacie, for the Ceremonies, for the use of the
Service Book; what Sermons were preached, what books printed in the defense of
them, and against those that opposed them? how were the Bishops honored and
reverenced, bowed to, vindicated, and stood for, and that with great eagerness
and violence, so that those that were against them, were deeply censured by
their brethren? but now it is otherwise; and why so? but because their
judgment is changed, and men say, that God has opened their eyes, and
convinced them of the evil of those things, which before they saw not; and it is
well if it be so: and not simply a disclaiming of these evils from the
Parliaments removing of them, and enjoining the contrary, which is much to be
feared, and as some manifest without blushing, saying, what they now do in
renouncing Episcopal Government, leaving the Service Book and Ceremonies, and
proceeding according to the order and form of the Directory, and Government
established, they do by Law, in obedience and subjection to the Parliament
that requires it in their Ordinance affixed to the Directory, not out of any
judgment of the evil they have formerly lived in, whilst they used that way
of false worship, or out of any more love to this new government, and order of
worship according to the Directory. But suppose the best, that what men now do
is from the Lords merciful enlightening of them, to see into the evil of their
old and former abominations, they yielded to, and so became guilty of, before
the Lord; will it not therefore follow, that there is a possibility before
seven years come about again, they may see further into this mystery of the
Gospel, and so discover the unsoundnesse of their present standing in the
Parish Churches, as they are constituted and receive their life and being from
the Civil Laws of the Land? The Air is enlightened by degrees, not all at
once, and so are the Saints. So that I say so long as the godly themselves are
in a way of learning and going from one step to another in wisdom and
knowledge, as Pro. 4.18. men should take heed, how they make peremptory
conclusions against this way of the Lord, and speak evil of the things they
know not, lest the Lord Jesus Christ (the justifier of his ways and people)
make them to eat the words they have spoken, and then they be forced (as
Austin sometimes did) to write Books of Recantation, and have as little credit,
as comfort in what they have done this way.

6. If the truth were known, and men would speak out all is in their hearts,
it is not to be doubted but a chief ground of many men's crying down this way
of the Lord, and those that walk in it, is no other, but their envy at those
(especially young ones) to whom the Lord has in these last days imparted and
communicated greater measures of his Spirit, and larger discoveries of the
mystery of the Gospel, according to the promise, Joel 2.28. Act. 2.17. wherein
young men shall have the priority of old. Because the Lord is good, therefore
their eye is evil, as Christ said to them, Mat. 20.15. that took offense at
his kindness to those that came into the vineyard after them, and wrought but
an hour. But this is an evil frame of heart, and clean contrary to that of
Moses, that wished that all the Lords people were Prophets, Number. 11.29.

7. But lastly, does not this generality of opposition against this way
alleged, conclude and evidence the truth and goodness of it, especially when
such opposition tends to the increase and furtherance of it, and that also
amongst the most pious and spirituallest Believers? What though the Authors in
the D. Bastwick, the Captain of the Presbyterian Army, as he styles himself M.
Prinne. M. Edwards. M. Baily. M. Vicars.
Marg. (as men not having yet learned, or else not regarding what Christ in the
Scriptures requires of them, Romans 12.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. James 1.19, 20,
21. 1 Pet. 2.1.) have cried it down, as the most pernicious way; yet all the
dirt they have thrown in the face of it, cannot make the Saints out of love
with it. In the days of the Apostles, those that embraced the doctrine of the
Gospel, and right way of worshipping God, were generally condemned and spoken
against, as Sectaries, and Heretics, Act. 14.5, 14. Act. 28 22. yet that
could not hinder the prevailing of it, being it was of God. So neither shall
the worst that men can do, hinder it now; but maugre all the powers of hell,
and the world that oppose it, it shall take place, for Christ must reign.

That salvation may be had, in that present church state they for the present
are, and therefore judge it a nee, less thing to come into any other
Church State.

To such I shall commend these few considerations.

1. That though it be granted as a truth, (which cannot be denied) that its
possible for men to be saved, though they never come into a right visible
Church State and order, because faith and salvation is not so tied to the
visible church, as that there is no partaking thereof out of it. And though it
be true also, that conversion may be obtained, and is, in many of the Parish
Assemblies, as we know by experience, yet how unkindly do such Christians deal
with Jesus Christ, that shall as the Head and King of his church, appoint and
ordain a holy order for his Saints to observe, in their serving and
worshipping of God, and yet they shall refuse to submit thereunto, is it not a
disparagement to the wisdom of the Lord Jesus, that has thus ordained a
church order for his Saints to walk in, and yet they shall count it a
needless thing?

2. Such should consider, whether the truth of grace, does not teach them to
have respect to the whole revealed will of God; and not to dispense with
themselves in the neglect of obedience to any, the least part of it; and if so,
then how dangerous is it for them to sit down and content themselves in their
present disordered station, without coming out of it to Sion, as Christ
commands, Esaias 52.11. with Rev. 18.4.

3. Is not this an argument of a low Spirit, exceeding earthly and c^rnall,
like those Potters that remained of the children of Israel in Babylon, when the
rest were returned to Jerusalem, 1 Chronicles. 4, 23. that preferred their carnal
ease in Babylon, before the enjoyment of the true and pure worship of God, in
Sion: do not such men exceedingly degenerate from the servants of God of old,
spoken of in the Scriptures, that have greatly longed after, and mourned with
much bitterness when they have been deprived of the enjoyment of God in his
ordinances, as David, and others? Esaias 56.3, 4. Psalm. 84.

4. Does not this plainly discover to the world, that such men are to this day
mavelous ignorant of this great mystery of the Gospel? they see not the
luster and beauty that shines forth in the visible Churches of the Saints, a
right and true communion of Saints, having fellowship with Christ in his own
ordinances, is a mere riddle, a paradox to them, the comely order and sweet
harmony of Jacobs Tents, and Isreal's Tabernacles is not discerned by them,
though a Balaam himself was greatly affected therewith. Oh when shall this
darkness be removed!

5. I would feign know whether such poor souls are not great enemies to their
own happiness, and hinderers of their own welfare. For first, have they not many
precious Talents, Gifts, and Graces, bestowed upon them, for which they shall
be accountable to Christ one day, which now are as it were put under a Bushel,
and lie asleep, and of no use or benefit to themselves or others? all which, if
they were once come into a society of faithful and zealous Saints, would be
occasioned frequently to be brought forth, and improved to the glory of God,
the benefit of others, and their own great increase and advantage. Secondly,
are they not subject to many wanderings, and outgoings from God, and so have
need of some to watch over their precious souls, to prevent (as it is
possible) such swervings from Christ, by their wholesome and gentle admonitions,
exhortations, and reproves, which privilege they might enjoy if they were in
this order of the Gospel, but now are deprived of? Thirdly, are they not many
times so overtaken through the subtilty of Satan, and deceitfullnes of sin,
that they not only fall into sin, but there lie and continue in their
backsliding, and have none to look after them to restore them again, to set
their broken bones in joint again: whereas if they were in this way of the Lord
the Gospel requires, how sweetly might they be recovered, according to the
injunction of the Apostle to the Church of the Galatians, Gal. 6.1. And
therefore doubtless those men that thus reason as before, that its no great
matter to come into any other church state then they are, are no small enemies
to their own good.

6. Lastly, may it not be just with God to leave men to themselves in this
thing, and for their slighting of his ways, swear in his wrath, that they
shall never enter into this rest of his, that he gives his Saints, that he
brings to Sion? Let us fear and tremble.

That they have as learned and godly a Ministry over them, as any to this day
in the world.

Now for the removing of this, let these few things be seriously considered.

1. That it cannot be denied, but diverse of those Parish church: have those
over them, that are both learned and godly, though withal it must also be
granted, that there are in the Kingdom a far greater number of such as have
neither learning nor godliness, that go for Ministers of the Church of England,
and are settled in those Parish Churches, such as are not only the shame and
blot of this ^. Whites ^tury of ^isters.
Nation, but have already endangered the welfare of it, and are like to do it
the second time, if the Lord from heaven prevent it not.

2. For many of those that have learning, its much to be feared, if it were
brought to the Test, it would prove rather to be from beneath, then from above,
not that of the Spirit, by which men are taught of God, and enabled to speak a
word in due season to the weary soul, as Christ and his servants were, Esaias
50.4. but only that which is natural, and from men, and they have attained in
Natures School, which natural parts, and acquired learning, not meeting with
a sanctified heart, and a true principle of grace, does oftentimes through the
corruption of pride and selfe-co^ceite that attends it, render men blind in the
things of God, and lead them aside from the truth; and commonly, (as we see by
experience) such men trust chiefly to other men's works and judgments, looking
no further for the Sense and meaning of what Scriptures they preach upon, and
produce then, what this or that Father, this or that Commentator speaks of it,
not daring to swerve from their interpretation, and the common received opinion
of the Church, though oftentimes, quite besides the purpose and mind of Christ,
and the holy Ghost.

3. As learned and godly, as the most and best of the Ministers are, in the
Church of England, yet (with grief of heart let it be spoken) very few of them
have learned to this very day to disclaim and renounce the evil and error of
the way of their coming into the Ministry, I mean their Antichristian
ordination, which they received from the Prelates; but allow of it to this day:
which cannot but much provoke the Lord, and hinder his blessing of their
endeavors for the future, to the People, the charge of whose souls they take
upon them. For if the allowing of our selves in the least sin may justly put
a stop in the way of Gods prospering his people, and cause him to withdraw his
presence from them, then much more doubtless such an evil as this, for those
that bear the vessels of the Lord, are to be clean, Jer. 52.11. and that
cleanness respects freedom from Babylonish and Antichristian pollution. And
doubtless the Lord looks much to his vessel-bearers, that they be clean and
holy, and not contaminated with these, or any other kind of pollutions, as we
may see in his exemplary punishment on Nadah, and Abihu, that perished in their
will worship, and false zeal, the great Idol of the world to this day.

Obj. But you will say, what need this renouncing our Antichristian ordination
by the Prelates, seeing the Parliament has removed and disclaimed the whole
Episcopal government, root and branch?

Ans. There is great need, as may appear in these four things.

1. Because personal sins must have personal repentance, and humiliation,
the Parliaments Act is National, and does not exclude, but rather intimates
and leads to the practice of the other: Now each Ministers sin, being
particular and personal, so ought their Repentance also.

2. Because such Ministers, especially here about London, have lately
covenanted to cast off whatso^ver belonged to, and was an appurtenance of that
Antichristian Hierarchy they were formerly under: Now their ordination was not
the least, but a chief part of that power of the Prelates, wherein they so
much gloryed.

3. Because the Lords detestation of Antichrist is so great, that he will not
endure his people should touch with the least of her abominations, as I showed
before; and as he would not of old so much as take a stone for a corner, nor
for a foundation of his Church, from heathen Babylon, Jer. 51.26. So neither
will he now make use of any thing of Antichristian Babylon, in his Church of
the New Testament.

4. Lastly, because God has required that his people should be humbled and
ashamed of all their old sins in this way, before he will show them the right
and true pattern of his Gospel worship, Ezekiel. 43.10, 11. And who knows but
for want of this amongst those that go for Ministers in the church of England,
it is, that God suffers them to be so dark as they are even to this day, in
the midst of so much glorious light, in the matters of his house and worship? A
man may come into 40. places, where they are preaching and praying, even upon
days of humiliation, and yet never hear them bewail (among multitude of
other sins they confess) this particular evil of their Antichristian
ordination.

Obj. But some are so far from seeing a necessity of this, that they rather
plead for what they have done, and justify themselves in their condition,
saying, that though they received their ordination, and so the office of their
Ministry from the hands of Antichristian Bishops, (as they are now
acknowledged since the Parliaments voting them so) yet they looked on them as
Elders and Presbyters, and no otherwise.

Ans. To this I answer, 1. That it may be some did, though I suppose it will be
graneed, that thousands did not, not so much as enquiring or making scruple out
of conscience, but as the blind man swallows all, so have they done; and their
sin may be lesser then those that have had more light.

2. But secondly, its well known to those that have their eyes but half open,
that the Bishops did not act in their ordaining of Priests, as they were
Presbyters, but as they were a degree above them, to wit, Bishops, which was
allowed them in those days by the Ministers of the church of England, and what
preaching Elder was there by himself, or with a few other of his brethren,
and Colleagues, that could then (as now) without a Bishop make a Minister? Now
then those Bishops being Antichristian, their ordination also must needs be so,
according to that known Philosophical maxim, Quicquid est agit secundum quod
est, the effect must needs have resemblance with the cause, vid. Whites Answer
to Prynne, page 20. read the Queries about the ordination of Ministers, lately
published.

4. I Answer in the last place, that it is not mere learning, no nor learning
with godliness, that makes any man a true Minister of the Church of Christ, in
these days of the Gospel, (though neither of these is to be excluded in their
proper place) for a man may be qualifyed for the place and office of a
Minister, and yet no Minister; he may have excellent endowments of humane
learning, natural parts, truth of holiness, and yet no Minister. Some women
have store of all these, and many Lawyers and Physicians abound in them, and
yet no Ministers in office. So that I say, though many men have excellent
natural parts, acquired gifts of humane learning, many precious breathings of
Christ and the Spirit in him, yet that does not presently denominate him a
Minister in office, and I may add, no not his Ordination by the Classis, nor a
Noblemans or a gentleman's Presentation, or bestowing an Advowson or Benefice
upon him, no nor the execution of that office in a parish where he is sent. It Is
not enough to say a man is a Minister, but how truly and lawfully he came to be
a Minister.

Quest. What is it then makes a true and lawful Minister?

Answ. A true and lawful call to that office, and work of the Ministry, as
Heb. 5 4. Now this call in these days is not only internal from God, in
qualifying a man, and making him willing to the work, but external, from
those he is to take the charge of, whose prerogative it is, they have received
from Christ to choose their own officers, which the most learned and judicious
Cyp. Ep. 3, 4, and 68. Theod. l. 1. c. 9. Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 3. Azor. the
Jes. part 2. l. 3. c. 28 and l. 6. c. 14. Jerome ad Ruff. Ambr. epist. 82
Nazian. Aug. Bazi. Chrysostom. So multitudes of Modern Writers, as Call. Musc.
Bulling. Jun. Ames. Cartwr. etc.
Divines of all sides grant, as could with ease be manifested. Now the first of
these is not sufficient without the last, and God has so joined them together,
that it were no less then high presumption in any to separate them. So that
this being granted for the truth, (as it cannot be denied) then it must needs
follow, that most of the Ministers of the Church of England are not Ministers
properly in office, being without the call of their people to them, (especially
the godly) and not a few of them living where there were never any godly to
call them.

A fourth hindrance in their way, is, That they look upon this way,

Now to remove this, I answer in a word, there is a twofold separation the
Scripture speaks of.

1. A good separation, a separation from evil, from evil and sinful ways,
and things, and persons, a separation from false worship, from Babels
confusion, a separation of the precious from the vile, of the clean from the
unclean.

2. A Bad separation from good to evil; from Christ to Belial; from God to the
Devil; as Jud. 19. Now that Separation we stand guilty of, is of the first
sort, and not the last, the separation which God allows, commands and
justifyes, and without the practice of which he will not be well pleased with
his people, as Jer. 15.19. 2 Cor. 6.18. Rev. 18.4. Ephesians. 5.11. 2 Timothy 3.5. and
therefore I conceive there is no just cause or reason why the godly in the
Kingdom should be offended, at what is now done, and which they themselves are
called also to practice.

Indeed if they could prove their By National Church State ^n the King^ome of
Eng^and, I do not ^nderstand the ^reaching of the word, and administration of
^he Sacraments ^for these make ^o more a Church then ^he ornaments ^f a house
make (...) house.) But that false visi^le order, poli^ie, and institu^ion, in
which ^hese divine or^inances are ^erformed. The officers and members of the
National Church State, ^ot being framed, regulated and ordered ac^ing to
Gospel ^nstitutions, but after the tradi^ions and inven^ions of men ^^om whom
^hey receive being and ^ubsistance.
Nation^ll Church State to be of divine and Gospel constitution, (as I said
before) it were something; but till that be done, they shall find in the end,
that they themselves are guilty of the fault they lay to the Congregationall
men's charge.

* 5. Another stumbling block that lies in the way of many godly persons, is,
because they see many, after they have entered on this way, to fall into
grievous errors, and some turn Libertines, and grow loose in their w^lking.

Ans. Now to remove this, consider these following pariculars.

1. Suppose this be a truth, and so to be greatly lamented, yet dare any man
say, that such persons would not have taken such courses, if they had not
entered on this way of the Gospel? How many are there which are guilty of
gross errors in judgment, and looseness in practice, and yet never knew in
all their lives, what this way of the Gospel meant? as in Germany, France,
Holland, England, and other parts of the world.

2. If this way be of God, and has footing in the Scriptures, example from the
Apostles practice, and approved of by many famous servants of God, and purest
churches in the world, as we have showed you: then far be it from any to make
it the cause of such abominations: Can the light of the Sun properly beget
darkness?

3. Did you ever hear or know of any Church, where the government was most
exact according to the Scriptures, and unquestionable, that has been perfect,
and without errors; or has God promised that here on earth, his Churches
should be totally free? Does not the Scripture speak otherwise, which is left
to us for our instruction, as in 1 Cor. 11.19. There must be heresies amongst
you, says the Apostle, and he gives the reason for it, that so those that are
approved may be made manifest amongst you: not that these heresies and evils do
necessarily flow from the true being and right government of a Church, but only
per accidens, (viz.) from the evil disposition of those members that are
sinfully tolerated in a Church, and not cast out, and those temptations of
Satan, that they are exposed daily unto, by Gods permission.

4. Consider where the Lord is most rightly and purely worshipped, there the
Devil is most busy to make Divisions, sow the seeds of error, occasion
scandals and offenses, and the Lord in infinite wisdom sees it good to have
it so, partly

1. That his power may appear the more in preserving such a Church and society.

2. That his wisdom may appear the more, in guiding such a Church.

3. That his mercy may appear the more in pardoning his People.

4. Lastly, that his justice may appear the more, in hardening those that do
not love, but hate his ways.

5. Such as fall into errors and loose walking after their entrance on this
way of the Lord, come not thereunto from their submitting to that way, but from
want of good principles, and sound hearts at the first: If their ends had been
good at first, and their hearts upright, they had never gone out to crooked
ways of their own, or others* but as the Apostle says, 1 John 2.19. They went
out from us, because they were not of us; so such as fall away from the truth,
to the embracing damnable heresies, do therefore fall away, because they were
never properly of the truth; certainly when men venture on the pure and sound
ways of God, with unsound and base ends, the Lord justly suffers them to fall:
such as have not the glory of God, but themselves in their eye, the Lord shall
in just judgment lead such forth, with the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 125.
last verse.

6. Though this way of the Lord, may have such evil weeds to grow up in it,
yet it does not allow of them, but labors either the reforming or casting of
them out when they are discovered, as a sound Constitution does those
distempers it lies under, as Mat. 18.11. 1 Cor. 4.4, 5. 2 These. 3.6.14. Rev. 2.
and as a learned Author says, What flaming Sword is there in the hand of a
classical Presbytery, to keep men out of errors, which may not be in a
congregation? In one Congregation there may be as many Presbyters as from many
Congregations make a Classis, and why then may they not do the self same acts?
their offices and office is the same, and therefore the promise of assistance
is the same; and if the council and advice of other neighbor Churches be
required, a Congregation may have that as well, Anatomist Anatomised, p. ^0.
and perhaps sooner then a Classis can, which must stay for a Provincial Synod.

7. Lastly, let it be considered, that there have been (as the former Author
observes) as great defections both of Ministers and people, unto errors under
Presbyteriall Government, as under any other, as is clear in the Low
Countries, where so many Ministers and People have turned Arminians, Papists,
Socinians; greater errors then the denial of Paedobaptisme: and yet those of
the Presbyterian way here, are not free of that, as is well known, besides
other evils of more dangerous consequence, as might be named.

do not enter on this way of the Gospel, is, because they s^y, this way cries
up toleration for all sorts of Religion, and liberty of men's consciences, and
so every man may do as he list, and what confusion and destruction will this
soon produce in Church and state?

For the removal of this impediment, let these few things be considered.

1. That this is a great untruth, and so nothing but a slander, and an evil
report that some evil Spies give out upon the view they have taken of this
holy L^nd, from some base private ends (its much to be feared) of their own,
which the Searcher of all hearts will in due time reveal and discover.

And that it is so, is evident from the works of some of no mean abilities for
learning and godliness, that have been in the Congregationall way.

1. That late precious servant of Jesus Christ, M. Ier. Buroughs, who was
eminent for his Gospel annointings, in his Heart Divisions, chap. 7. page 41.
where he spends most of that chapter to this purpose, page 42, 43, 44. and at
last toward the end of the chapter, page 45. he has these following words.
And consider now my brethren, whether the Congregationall way be such, as if
it be suffered, there will be no help to reduce an erring or heretical
church, but all Religions, Arianisme, Mahumetisme, any thing must be suffered,
Surely, men do not deal fairly, in raising such mighty accusations upon such
poor and weak grounds: This great aspersion, and huge outcry, that these men
would have all Religions suffered, and in their way, there is no help against
any heretical Congregations, moulders and vanishes away before you.

So likewise in his Sermon before the House of Lords, November 26. 1645. page
45. where speaking to them excellently in the behalf of the Saints, that have
been faithful to them in the trust committed to their charge, though they
could not come up fully in some things to them, they have published to the
world, and therefore desires them not to listen to any, who should whisper such
suggestions, or vent such things, as tend to he exasperating of their spirits
against those dear servants of Christ; he has these words, There is a great
outcry against the Toleration of all Religions, and we are willing to join
against such a tolleration: But that which fills the mouths of many in this, is
the heat of their spirits against those that differ from them in any thing
that they might with the more strength be able by this to strike at them;
suffer not your power to be abused, to serve men's designs; be faithful with
God, encourage those that fear him, and God will take care of your honors,
etc.

2. Master Thomas Goodwin, of whose worth (without flattery speak it) the
Kingdom is not ignorant, in that notable Sermon of his, before the honorable
House of Commons, called The great Interest of States and Kingdoms, p. 53.
where pressing that Honorable House to look well to their interest, meaning
the Saints that are in England, to maintain and preserve them, and make
provision for them, as they meant to preserve the Kingdom: he has these
words, to our purpose; If any man think I am a pleading for a liberty of all
opinions, of what nature and how gross soever, I humbly desire them to
remember, that I only plead for Saints, and I I answer plainly, the Saints they
need it not; The Apostle tells us there are damnable heresies, 2. Pet. 2.1, 2.
and they will soon un-Saint men; there are errors that are Capital, not
holding the Head, Col. 2. Do but distinguish these from others, and let this be
one foundation laid for this union.

3. Master John Goodwin, whose innocence and integrity in the cause of Christ,
and great work and labor of love to Christ and his Churches, I doubt not but
in due time shall be cleared and rewarded abundantly: In his Reply with another
Brother, to A. S. 2. Edit. page 24. whose words to our purpose are these; Nor
on the other hand, do I speak this to intimate, that I approve a toleration of
the broaching of all opinions, or any toleration of some practices, And that
men might see what he says, if they will not shut their eyes wilfully against
the light, he reduces his discourse to 3. Heads.

1 The least venting of any opinion against Fundamentals, as Judaisme, denying
Christ to be the true Messiah; Arianisme, and Socixianisme opposing the Deiety
of Jesus Christ, Arminianisme, that quest^ons the person of the Holy Ghost,
Papisme, that holds justication by works; or that Anababtisme that denies the
derivation of Adams original corruption to us, etc. the venting of these and
the like opinions he acknowledges to be suppressed, and much more the practice
of Idolatry. page 25.

2. The spreading and practizing of opinions that apparently tend to
Libertinisme, licentious ungodlines; ought not quietly to be permitted. page
ibid.

3 And then shows what opinions are to be tolerated, to wit, such are not
against Fundamentals, nor lead to licentiousness, but tend only to the beating
out of truths, page 26.

4. Master Sprigge, my quondam colleague in the University of Oxford, whose
fruitfulness in the grace of the Gospel, has not a little rejoiced my soul;
In his judicious Treatise, called the Ancient bounds, or liberty of Conscience
stated, chap. 1. page 4. whose words are these. Nor do we question whether the
Magistrate may not to this negative discountenance, add positive, viz. to
declare against errors, as well as the Ministers to convince and exhort against
them: Nor whether (amongst us) errors of manifest scandal and danger to men's
souls and consciences, as Arianisme, Socinianisme, Familisme, etc. ought not
to be restrained by the Christian Magistrate, and the Assertors and maintainers
of them, interdicted under penalties, the divulging or spreading of them, by
public preaching or printing, with much more to this purpose: So that this
being so clear and manifest from the published writings of these precious
Saints of Christ, it can appear to be no other then a gross untruth, and
apparent scandal and slander that is cast upon this way of the Lord, and those
he has risen and stirred up to assert and maintain it.

2. If by a tolleration of liberty of men's consciences, men understand it of
things that are doubfull only, and in controversy amongst the godly, then what
hurt can follow, though there should be a declaration of difference of
judgment and practice? And doubtless if there should not be a forbearing one
another in such things as are not clear, but dubious, all the world (as M.
Burroughes truly says in his Heart-Divisions, Chap. 9. page 55.) must needs
be quarrelling; and he in that Chapter shows the lawfulness hereof, not only
from the judgments of many Protestant Writers, but also from eight (as I
conceive) unanswerable and ungainsayable Arguments and considerations, from
page 57. to page 66. which are too large to transcribe, but are very worthy the
godlies serious looking into, and search after. See also M. Sprigs Ancient
Bounds, c. 4. p. 17.

3. But if by a tolleration of liberty to all men's consciences, we understand
it simply of the things of the mind and judgment, as opinions, and not of the
external practices of men. What hinders but that it should be granted, without
the use of any external ways of compulsion, to force men from them? For my
own part, I am so far from seeing any reason or Scripture for using
external violence, to force men from their present judgments, though
erroneous, suppose the worst of errors, as Papisme, Arrianisme, Socinianisme.
Turcisme, Judaisme, etc. as that I judge such a course both against Scripture
and Reason, as I shall endeavor to make out in these following particulars,
though in so doing I shall cross, and it may be displease two sorts of men.

1. Such as would give to the Civil Magistrate a coercive and compulsory
power, to enforce men from their present opinions in the matters of Religion,
and to change their minds, and alter their judgments by the use of external
violent, ways and means, as Imprisonments, Mulcts, Fines, Whippings,
banishments.

2. Such as give to Ministers met together in a Classis or Synod, an absolute
power not only of judging and determining in matters of Religion, but of
imposing their conclusions on the consciences of people to be obeyed; and in
case of non-obedience (ipso facto) to cut them off from enjoying the privilege
both of Church and state.

Now to show my reasons against both of these, for the better confirming of my
former answer, I shall speak to each of them apart.

1. To those that cry up compulsion in matters of Religion, to force men by
external violent means, from their present judgments and opinions they are
of, as proper to the civil Magistrate, and a part of his office: I cannot allow
of it for these reasons.

^sons against ^pulsion of (...) science in ^ters of Re^on.
1. Because for any man whatsoever to take such a course, as coercive and
compulsory ways to force the minds of men, positively to act contrary to their
principles conscienciously held, is to act beyond their commission, and
contrary to the rule of Christ laid down in the word, which is to win men by
instruction, and not to force men by destruction: ^id. The ^ly of the 2. ^heren
to ^S. p. 23. 24.
as Mat. 28.20. Luke 9.54, 55. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. and 4.1, 2.3.

2. This course were for poor, weak creatures to encroach upon the
Prerogative of God himself, whose work, and in whose power alone it is, to
change men's minds, as is apparent from Scripture, as 2 Cor. 10.4. 2 Timothy 2.25.
1 Pet. 1.22. 1 Cor. 3.6, 7. Ioh. 16.8. and the reason is, because the subject
to be wrought upon, is too high for any, but God alone, humane power may reach
to the bodies of men, to the outward man, but not to their inward, to their
souls and consciences, poor weak man cannot make, as Christ says, one hair
white or black: they may restrain from practice by outward means, but convert
and change they cannot. No not the glorious Angels that are fair above man,
for power and strength, and for sutablenes to the Spirits of men, to whom they
can in a more easy and familiar way, apply themselves, then one man can to
another: and yet these blessed Spirits cannot effect this work: This they can
do, they can present things to the fancy, and affect the mind many times, but
it is not in their power to make those things they present to the
understandings of men to take effectually, so as to work that for which they
present them, without the Almighty power of God go with them: they are all but
ministering Spirits, but as instruments in the hand of God, as men are; so that
this is proper only to God, to convert and change the minds and consciences of
men, and not in the power of any creature, and therefore as they incroach on
Gods prerogative, so they lose their labor in all those violent ways they
take, unless the Lord concur with them, which we cannot expect he should do,
because its not a means of his ordaining, but contrary thereunto, as we have
showed before.

3. Because such ways and means of external violent compulsion, are against
the very nature of the mind and conscience, the one being spiritual and
rational, and the other carnal, and therefore they must be either spiritual,
or moral, and rational ways at least, that must be used to work upon the
minds and consciences of men. What says that judicious Minister M. In his
Sermon before the ho. House of Parl. and Cit^ on a day of thanksgiving page
23, 24, 2^
Caryl, (whose judgment I suppose, and learning will every way balance M.
Prynnes, or D. Bastwick, or M. Edwards, or any of the rest that have appeared
in Print against the point in controversy, if we had not the Scriptures on our
side)

To the said objection I answer, 1. Possibly there are more errors named, then
are; all is not error that every one thinks to be error. We know who spoke
it, After the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers,
Act. 24.14. and they were no mean, no unlearned men, who called that way
heresy. And I shall never believe all Heresiographers for his sake, who put
Aerius into his Catalogue, for opposing Prelacy. There may be an error in
taxing some with errors. But Secondly, whatsoever is an error or an heresy,
whatsoever is contrary to wholesome doctrine, (such opinions are knowable) else
all rules about dealing with them are vain, whatsoever I say is an error or
heresy, let all the penalties which Christ has charged upon it, be executed
to the uttermost; if we favor error, I know not how we can with confidence
lift up our eyes to Christ for favor: If Christ would not have had error
opposed, why has he left us means, both for the opposition and suppression of
error? Then presently he shows what those means are: As he (to wit Christ)
has given a complete armor to every christian, wherewith to fight against the
wiles and temptations of the devil; so he has given a complete armor to his
church, wherewith to fight against all the errors and unsound doctrines of
seducers. Therefore (says he, excellently) search the Magazine of the Gospel,
bring out all the artillery, ammunition, and weapons stored up there, look out
all the chains and fetters, the whips and rods, which either the letter of the
Gospel, or the everlasting equity of the Law has provided to bind error
with, or for the back of heresy, let them all be employed and spare not. I
hope we shall use, (I am persuaded we ought not) Antichrists broom to sweep
Christ's house with, or his weapons to fight against errors with. Christ has
formed and sharpened weapons for this war, we need not go to the Popes Forge
or File. We (says the Apostle) have weapons in a readiness to revenge every
disobedience: they are ready made to our hands. And a great deal more to this
purpose: By which we may see, if errors themselves must not be suppressed by
any other then such spiritual ways and means, that Christ has set down in
his word, then much less may the minds and consciences of men, that hold these
errors, be proceeded against by any other then such means, and so there will
be no place left for these compulsory ways that some men of harsh and legal
dispositions stir up the Magistrate unto the practice and use of.

4. Is not such a course as this, against the golden Rule of charity, Luke
6.35, 36.
and mercy, and to tread in the very steps of Antichristian cruelty? as Rev.
13.15.16. and we have had experience of this but lately, in the Antichristian
Prelates, whose best arguments to draw men and women from their judgments, to
be of their own minds, were Fines, and imprisonments, the Stocks, Whip, and
Pillory, etc.

5. Nay, is not this course of violent compulsion, against the very law of
nature, that our Savior speaks of, and would have men to practice, Mat. 7.12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, that do y^e unto them, for this
is the Law and the Prophets. For suppose one should come upon his ordinary
occasions into Turkey, or some other foreign country, would it not be an
offense to him if they should compel him to alter his mind and judgment in
the matters of Religion, and enforce him by violence to be of theirs? So here:
And therefore the Turks are so far from enforcing men's consciences, as that
they permit them to use their consciences, and practice their judgments,
though different from them. And though in Spain the Protestants are prohibited
the practice of their Religion, yet the Spaniard does not violently compel men
to alter their minds, and to be of their Religion: Temptations by way of
Argument, or gifts, etc. they may lay before men, but not outward ways of
violence.

6. Besides all this, does not this course directly cross the commandment and
practice of Christ himself, who bids us to love one another, as he has loved
us? Ioh. 13.14. that is, for quality, and not for equality or quantity and
degree: Now its as clear as the Sun at noone day, that Christ loved all that
believe in him, one as well as another, though they differ one from another in
the knowledge of the truth, and are not of the same stature and tallnes, in all
things he has commanded, so long as they hold the Head; yea, though they
differ from himself in many things revealed, and mistake and mis-understand
him in many things, (as who does not) yet still he loves them, and bears with
their weaknesses, and fellowship with them by his Spirit, whilst their hearts
are upright with him for the main; and the same he requires of the Saints one
toward another, Ephesians. 4.2, 3.13.32. Col. 3.12.13, 14. not that they should
proceed in a bitter manner, to cut off, and cast one another over board.

7. To take this course with men that differ from us in judgment, is it not
the Highway to make more hypocrites, then sound Christians, and so to
introduce a profession of Religion, no way pleasing to God, as all forced
profession is? for when men become Proselites more for fear, then conscience,
there is not only a mocking with God, in what they do, but a readiness (when
an opportunity is presented) to return to their old and former errors, for
outward violence is of this nature, that it rather restraines then changes,
and of this there has been abundant woeful experience in all ages, and which
of the two is worst, heretics or hypocrites, to maintain an error, or
counterfeit the truth, is not easily determined.

8. And does not this course bring people to be more in love with errors then
before? the reason is, because People conceive those errors so persecuted, are
the truth of God, in regard that Jesus Christ has foretold that persecution
should attend the truth, and those that are embracers and professors of it: now
when men (especially the weak) shall see that such and such persons (otherwise
quiet and peaceable in the Land, only differing from others in their
judgments) shall be violently opposed, for what they hold, and have cruel
means used to take them off from what they conceive is the truth, they
presently conclude, this must needs be the very way of God, and so there is
more hurt a thousond times done, then good by such violent ways of compulsion.

5. Lastly, to add no more, how contrary this way is, and has been not only
to the mind of Christ in the Scriptures, but to the judgment of the most
ablest servants of God, in all ages, twere easy to determine. If any desire
satisfaction in this particular, let him read M. Spriggs Ancient Bounds, where
this particularr is abundantly manifested, with M. John Goodwins Innocencies
Triumph, M. Buroughs Heart divisions, etc.

2. Now for the second sort of persons, that give to Ministers met together in
a Classis or Synod, an absolute power of imposing their conclusions and
determinations on the consciences of people in particular, or whole Churches in
general, to be obeyed necessarily without refusing; I shall propose these few
things to be considered.

1. Whether this does not cross that command of Christ by the Apostle, 1 These.
5.21. Try all things, hold fast that which is good: now to what purpose is this
command, if I am necessitated to yield to another imposition the trial here
spoken of respects the mind and understanding, as all wise men know, but how
can he exercise his mind this way, that is tied and bound up by another vote
and imposition to obey? Seeing by this means he must yield without any further
enquiry or search into the thing commanded, whether it be according to the mind
of Christ, or not.

2. Whether this does not make the liberty of the Saints less now in these
days, then in the days of the Apostles, when we find the Bereans had liberty,
first to examine the Apostles doctrine themselves, I say themselves, before
they submitted and subjected their consciences to the obedience of it; and they
are commended for it, Act. 17.11. whereas now, its counted a matter of
disobedience, and faction, for any the most holiest, and soundest in the faith,
so much as to question and enquire, whether what an Assembly or Classis does
impose on them, as necessary to be obeyed, is according to the Scriptures, to
Christ's will, and not their own.

3. Whether such a kind of Imposition, does not bring such Ministers in their
Synods and Classis, under the guilt and condemnation, of being Lords over Gods
heritage, in exercising authority, power, and dominion over the faith of their
brethren, contrary to 2 Cor. 1. ult. and 1. Pet. 5.3. and which we know was
the common and usual practice of the Lordly Prelates. And the rather also
considering, that no Councels or Synods, since the Apostles times, can
challenge to themselves, an absolute, infallible, and unerring spirit, in the
matters of Religion, above the rest of their brethren, that sit not on those
Thrones with them.

4. Whether this practice of such Ministers does not bring into the Churches of
Christ, that Popish doctrine and practice of implicit faith, for if I must
take all for granted to be true, that such men command obedience unto, without
any further enquiry, then my faith is not an expl cite, but a mere implicit
faith, and consequently my obedience blind, and so abominable: which some more
moderate Presbyterians themselves, in their Sermons, dispute strongly against;
as M. Hill in his Sermon called the good old way.

5. Whether this be not for Ministers to challenge that power, which Jesus
Christ never called them unto, nor bestowed upon them.

Obj. Did not the Apostles practice it, in that Synod? Act. 15.

Ans. 1. Grant it, what will follow? Therefore Ministers may now do it, a mere
non sequitur. Unless that ordinary Ministers now could expect the same
infallible guidance of the Spirit, as the Apostles could: They could say
without the least haesitancy or doubting, It seems good to the holy Ghost and
to us: And can any Assembly or Synod of Ministers do so now? can they say
certainly, as the Apostles, that those Synodicall and classical constitutions,
they impose with such authority, on the consciences of others, to obey and
practice, are according to the true mind and meaning of Christ? If they can
produce any warrant for it, let them; if they cannot, why do they bear the
People of the Kingdom in hand, that it is in their power alone, without the
Peoples consent, to determine and impose as they (by themselves alone) conceive
to be right? I am sure that Chamier, that famous French Divine, in his
Panstrat, Cathol. Tom. 3. l. 15. cap. 10. says, that there is not the same
authority of the Apostles, and of other Pastors: with them, he was
extraordinarily present, Adeo ut quae illi proponerent a Deo simpliciter
manarent: i. e. So as what they propounded did simply proceed of God. But he is
not so present with ordinary Pastors, and therefore their Decrees are not to be
paralleled with the D^crees of the Apostles: and in matters of conscience, he
shows, that God alone is Judge and binder, and not the creature: and it is no
other then what we find abundantly in the writings of learned men, both ancient
and modern, and agreeable to the Scriptures, as we have before abundantly
proved.

2. But in the next place, can it ever be proved from the fifteenth of the
Acts, that the Apostles in that Synod or Assembly, did exercise such a power as
the Presbyterians speak of? did the Apostles in that meeting meddle or touch
with any act of Church government? nay is it not clear to him that has but
half an eye, that there was no penalty annexed to what they wrote, and sent to
the Churches, in case they should not have embraced their counsel? Do not the
words declare so much, ver. 29. From which if you keep your selves you shall
do well, etc. And that which is worth observation, the Apostles do not determine,
(as M. Buroughs has well showed) ^. Bur. Hea. ^isions.
they should observe to do these things from their own authority, but from the
reason of the things, for those things they enjoined, were duties before they
decreed and enjoined them, and had been, had they never decreed them. As for
example, that of forbearing the eating of blood, was a duty in case of offense,
though their decree had never been: and otherwise it had been no duty, if there
had been no scandal, notwithstanding their decree: For afterward the Apostle
Paul says, that men might eat whatsoever was sold in the Shambles, asking no
question for conscience sake. And we find that every creature of God is Good,
when it is sanctified by the word and by prayer, and received with
thanksgiving: yea the same Apostle says in that place, that nothing then is to
be r^fused, 1 Timothy 4.4.

3. Lastly, if we observe that Scripture which the Presbyterians so much urge
and stand upon, for the authoritative power of Synods and Classes, we shall
find, that what the Apostles there and then did, as it was not from themselves
alone, but from the holy Ghost; so neither by themselves alone, but with the
approbation of the whole Church: as appears in Act. 15. v. 22, 23. Then it
pleased the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, to send chosen men of
their own company, (viz. the Church) to Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas,
namely, Judas surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, chief men among the BRETHREN, and
wrote letters by them, after this manner; The Apostles, Elders, and BRETHREN,
send greeting to the Brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch, and Syria,
and Cilicia: that is, the Churches that were gathered and planted in those
Countries. Vid. Jus Divin. reg. eccl^
Now this is far from the practice and opinion also, of the Presbyterians, in
these days, that affirm the authoritative power of Synods and Classis is in
themselves, without the joint consent and approbation of particular brethren
in the churches: and therefore this instance of theirs which they produce
against the Congregationall way, is altogether without warrant from the
Scripture.

7. Another impediment that stands in the godlies way to this cannot see it to
have the Magistrates countenance and allowance, whereas if this were once done,
they would not forbear to enter on the practice of it.

For the removing of this impediment, Let these few things be minded.

1. That if by the Magistrates countenance and allowance, they mean an express
Warrant and Ordinance for it, as they have done for Presbytery; it is granted,
there is no such: yet thus much I can say, (and we have cause to bless God for
it) that to this day, the Lord has so far kept authority in Parliament, that
they have not made any express Law against it; nor (we trust in Christ) will
they ever do.

2. Who knows, but by that time the three years allowance of the other, be
fully expired, the Lord may so far reveal himself to Authority, as that
they shall not only countenance the Congregationall way, but also make a Law
for the establishing of it, not only three years, but as the Laws of the
Medes and Persians, that shall never be altered or repealed. Jehovah, the Lord
and God of truth and peace, has done, and can do as great things as these, and
why should we not believe it? Seeing he has made a promise, that Kings and
Queens, that is, such as are in authority shall be nursing Fathers and Mothers
to his People, in the pure ways of his worship, as Esaias 49.23.

3. Suppose that this way of the Gospel should never have the express command
and countenance of the civil Magistrate for it, which for my part I cannot
believe, (because of the former promise) yet I hope it will be granted, that
what Jesus Christ the Head and King of his Church has ordained and commanded,
for his people to walk up to the practice of, (as I take this order of the
Gospel, to be that has been formerly laid down) is not to be left undone,
and the practice thereof neglected, because it cannot obtain the countenance
of the creature: the reason is, because the practice of Gods will, Quare in
gra^m hominum ^il est agen^m con^^a de^: sed quic^id deus prae^pit, agendum
(...): etiam si ho^nes eo offen^ntur, seque ^o a nobis ha^i putent, ^d ipsis
noli^us contra dei ^cceptum gra^ca i. Piscat. ^ Mat. 10.37. ^bser. 28.
and worship revealed in the Scriptures, does not depend on the will and
pleasure of men, but merely on the command and injunction of God himself,
whom we ought to love and honor above all men:* And therefore we find in the
Primitive times, that the Apostles and servants of Christ, when they had no
countenance at all from the civil Powers, that were in those days, but rather
the contrary, yet they went on in the practice of what Christ enjoined them,
against all their opposition: And its worthy our consideration, that if the way
of the Lord, that now we plead for the enjoyment of in peace, and holiness, was
lawful in those days, when civil Magistrates were no friends, but professed
enemies, to Jesus Christ and his Churches: Then doubtless its much more
lawful now in these days, wherein civil Magistrates do openly profess
themselves friends to Christ, and hold forth to the world (by manifold
Protestations) that they place their greatest ambition, in being Servants to
Christ, otherwise it would follow, that Christ and his Churches should be
losers, and in a worse condition by living under such Magistrates (as we are
bound to believe are real in their Protestations and professions of and for
Christ) then under those that were Heathen, which were absurd in any to
affirm: The reason is, because such Magistrates know themselves to be ordained
of God, for the good of the Saints, and not for their hurt; for their
encouragement and furtherance in the ways of Godliness, and not for their
discouragement and hinderance, Romans 13.4 5.

4. Lastly, what ground for comfort can those have to build on, if the
Magistrate should approve of it, and countenance it, (as we doubt not as we
said before, but in the Lords time he will) when they enter upon it for that
very reason and cause, because its the command of the Magistrate, and he
approves of it: I say, for that very cause and reason, and no other, as many of
late, that would not part with the Ceremonies and Service-booke, (though never
so Popish and Antichristian) til they saw the same Power that set them up, did
pull them down, not touch with any other way of worship prescribed in Gods
Word, before they saw what the Civil Magistrate did authorize: Now I say, what
comfort can these men have in what they do, seeing that hereby, 1. They make
the order appointed by Christ for his service and worship to depend on the will
and pleasure of man? and 2. Their fear of God is taught by the Precepts of men,
Esaias 29.13. And 3. Their honoring of the creature herein, is a flat
dishonouring of God, for this kind of obedience to humane power, diminishes,
if not annihilates the right and true obedience that is due to divine power,
setting up the Minister and servant, in the place and room of the Lord and
Master. And what comfort can men take in this? doubtless there is a day
coming, when the eternal God will make men ashamed of it, and it may cost
them bitterly.

Obj. Then you will say, by this doctrine, Magistrates are not to be reverenced
nor regarded.

Ans. A mere non sequitur, for cannot Caesar be obeyed, unless he be set up in
Gods room? but this is no other then a vile aspersi^n that malicious and
envious spirits would cast on the faithful servants of Jesus Christ, whose
reverence, respect, and just obedience to authority, I make no doubt, shall be
found in due time to appear in its beauty and excellency, (through the good
hand of our God upon them) when the rottennes of such base malicious selvish
spirits, shall be discovered, to their everlasting ignominy and disgrace; For
God is faithful, that has promised, to plead the cause of his people, and
cause their integrity and faithfulness (even in this point I doubt not) to shine
forth as the Sun at noonday, Psalm. 37.6. And doubtless authority is wise as
an Angel of God, to discern what such Sycophants aim at, in their seeking to
asperse the Godly in the Land withal, as those dealt by Daniel, chap. 6. where
it is evident, what a course they took to be rid of him, as we may see from v.
4. to 18. and the cause of all is noted, v. 3. Daniel was honored above them;
because an excellent spirit was in him, and Darius thought to set him over the
whole Realm: I need not make application; certainly whatever such men talk in
Press and Pulpit, Authority may for ever be assured, that those that
faithfully endeavor in all good conscience, as for their lives, to honor the
eternal God, and their Savior Jesus Christ, in one command of his, they will
in another: and therefore they need not doubt but those they nickname
Independants, will (by the help of Christ) strive to obey the the fifth
Commandment as well as the first, or any other: and I suppose to this day,
(notwithstanding all the aspersions of malevolent tongues and Pens) Authority
has found the truth of this we now speak of in abundance, and I doubt not but
so they shall to the end.

8. The last and great Impediment that lies in the way of the Godly is this;
That they are jealous lest this way we plead for, is but the device of man,
having not the stamp and image of Christ upon it, whatsoever we pretend, and
so, if they should close with it, they cannot expect the Lords presence with
them, and blessing upon them in the practice of it; but the Lord may say to
them as he did to the form a Jews in the like case, who has required these
things at your hands? Esaias 1.

Now for removing of this huge mountain, I shall only desire one thing may be
seriously considered, which is this, that far be it from those of the
Congregationall way to persuade any man whatsoever, to walk in obedience to,
and the practice of that which Christ himself will not own for his, nor
carries his image, and superscription upon: wherefore let it be put to the
trial, whether this way of worshipping God, I have pressed the godly in the
land to the practice of, do not hold weight in the balance of the Sanctuary,
and be not more like to Jesus Christ, then all other ways of worship that are
on foot in the Kingdom. I shall for this purpose set before the godly some few
brief particulars, that most naturally agree to this way, we press unto the
pract^se of, and undoubtedly prove it to be from Heaven, and has the eternal
God in Jesus Christ for its only author and institutor.

Arguments ^r the Con^egationall ^ay.
1. That way of visible worship and government in the Church of God, that is
most agreeable to the Scriptures, in all its parts and parcels, that must needs
be the way of God, but such is the way we have before set down, commonly
called the Congregationall way, and nicknamed Independency, ergo.

2. That way of etc. That most lifts up Jesus Christ, and throws down and
abaseth the creature, that must of necessity be the way of God: but such is the
congregationall way, therefore,

3. That way of, etc. that makes most for holiness and advancement of purity in
the hearts and lives of men, that cannot be denied to be the way of the Lord,
and to carry Christ's image on it: but such is the congregationall way, ergo.

4. That way of etc. that carries most of Christ's glorious power and presence
in it, and with it, to the souls and consciences of men, that is without
controversy the way of Christ; but so does the congregationall way. ergo, etc.

5. That way of, etc. that in the very nature and essence of it, not only tends
to the preservation of the spiritual liberty of those are within it, but to
the safety and welfare also of those that are without it, that must needs be
the way of the Lord; but such is the congreg. way, ergo.

6. That way of worship, etc. that has not only least of the world in it, but
most of the worlds hatred and opposition against it, that unavoidably declares
it to be of God: but so it is with this way we plead for, therefore

7. Lastly, That way of, etc. which draws the most choysest and heavenliest
souls to the embracing of it, and delighting in it, as most suitable to the
workings of the spirit of Christ in them; that none can deny to be the way of
the Lord; but so it is with this congregationall way we plead for. ergo.

These and the like Arguments might be produced, and easily confirmed, if need
were, to satisfy any ingenious and rational man, for the truth of the way we
here press.

Ob. You will say, Prove but the first of these, and it shall be sufficient.

Ans. I have already in a great measure done it in the former discourse. Vid.
C^ of this T^tise, wh^ chief an^ ^stantiall of the Co^gational are open^
proved.
However to satisfy (if possible) all that are not obstinate, take a brief view
of the truth of the way, in these particulars, from Script.

1. For the matter of a visible Church. Saints Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2. and 14.33.
Phil. 1.1, 7. Col. 3.12. 1 These. 5.27.

2. For the form, Uniting together in one spiritual body politic, 1 Cor.
10.17. and 12.12.20, 27. Ephesians. 2.22. and therefore compared to a temple,
house, candlestick, natural body, etc. as I have showed Chapter 2.

3. For the quantity, as many as can meet together in one place, Act. 2. and 5.
and 6. Chap. and 14.27. and 1 Cor. 14.23.

4. For the power of government within it self, Mat. 18.17, 18, 19. 1 Cor.
5.4, 5, 6, 7, 13. Act. 15.22, 23. Rev. 2.20.

5. For the office and officers of a particular visible Church, Ephesians. 4.11,
12. Romans 12.6, 7. 1 Cor. 12.28.

6. For the choosing of officers by the whole Church, Act. 1.15. ult. and 6.2,
3. and 14.23.

7. For admission of members, the godly and their seed, Act 2.38, 39. as the
seed by covenant, 1 Cor. ^
so themselves by declaration of their repentance, and profession of their
faith in Christ, as Mat. 16.16. Act. 2.38, 41, 42. Act. 19.18, 19.

8. For casting out from the Church, Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.5, 13. 2 Cor. 3.6,
14. Rev. 2.20.

9. For partaking in Church Fellowship with other Churches upon recommendation,
Romans 16.1. and 2 Cor. 3.1.

10. For craving the help and assistance of neighbor Churches in difficult
cases, by way of advice and counsel, Act. 15.1, 2.

11. For sending out some of the members in the Churches business, 2 Cor.
8.19. Phil. 2.25. Romans 16.1.

12. For the duties of Pastors and People each to other. Abundant Scriptures
might be produced, as 1 These. 5.11, 12, 13, 14. Heb. 13.17. Act. 20.28. but
this I have fully and in particular (especially touching the members duties
each toward other) spoken to before.

So that here we have in a little room given you an Epitome or compendium of
the substantial parts of the Congregationall way according as it is held forth
to us in the Scripture: especially that which has been most of all
controverted, and called into question: and so have endeavored to answer the
desire of those that would have us to prove our first Argument. The Lord add
his blessing.

CHAP. VIII. This Chapter contains a short exhortation to three sorts of
persons, 1. Such as are truly godly, but are yet strangers to this order of the
Gospel. 2. Such as are open enemies to this way of the Lord. 3. Such as God
has showed mercy unto, in bringing them to Sion, and put their souls in
possession of this heavenly privilege.
1. TO such as are godly, but yet remain in their old confusion, and are
strangers to the right order of the Gospel, and instituted way of worshipping
God: My request is, that they would not slight what has been laid before them,
and brought unto them: but (as they tender the honor of Jesus Christ, and the
comfortable condition of their own souls) with all readiness of mind, to
receive and entertain what they shall find upon due trial and examination to
be the truth: more Arguments then I have formerly given, need not to be pressed
upon you; only this I shall make bold to add, and leave upon your souls,
whether it be not fully declared from Heaven by signs and wonders, that God is
greatly displeased, with your hitherto-neglect of building his house, and
contenting your selves with any forms of worship, and traditions of men, so
you may enjoy your outward and temporal accommodations; as if the enjoyment of
communion and fellowship with God the Father, and his Son, our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, in the right and pure ways of his worship, were not infinitely
to be preferred before all these sublunary and earthly things; and if so, why
then should you not hasten your repentance and reformation to the purpose in
this business? I say to the purpose, because half work cannot, will not please
the Lord, Joel 2.12, 13. 'twas the commendation of Caleb and Joshuah, that they
followed the Lord fully and wholly, in all that the Lord commanded them, and
made known to them to be his will, Number. 14.24. and they found the benefit of
it, for they entered into that good Land, whereas the rest that failed of their
duty herein, (even a Moses and an Aaron) came short: so I say it will be your
commendation, and shall be your righteousness before the Lord, if you halt no
longer between God and Baal, and love no longer to abide in the Tents of the
Edomites, but make haste to Sion, to Jerusalem, to build the house of the Lord:
otherwise, if you continue as before, loving the fleshpots of Egypt, and the
waters of Abanah, and parphar, rivers of Damascus, before and beyond the milk
and honey of this Land of Canaan, and those Wells of salvation that are to be
found in Syon; it may be a just and righteous thing with the Lord that you
should never live to see better days: You know what Jesus Christ said to the
Cripple that he had showed mercy to, go thy ways, and sin no more, Joh. 5.1
lest a worse thing happen unto thee; so give me leave to say to you, go your
ways and sin no more, after the old way of dishonouring God, and Jesus
Christ, by worshipping him after the inventions and traditions of men: You know
he is a jealous God, and will not give his glory to any other, be he never so
great, mighty, or learned, in the World: you know he has borne long with you,
and winked at your former ignorance; Act. 17.2 30.
but now he c^ls upon you to repent, even of this sin of false worship: he
might have cut you off, and swept you away in the common deluge of the Sword,
that was lately on the Land; but he has dealt more kindly and favorably with
you; wherefore be not as the Israelites of old, after such great mercies
received, to fall upon new provocations, lest a worse evil befall you then any
yet: If our deliverances work us not up to those holy ends for which they are
given us, certainly our latter end will be worse then the beginning. Yet God
waits to see what his People will do in this work of his pure worship, in the
building of his house, in the honoring of his Son, in the setting him up above
all, in hi^ Kingly and Prophetical, as well as in his Priestly office, which
hitherto even the Saints themselves most unkindly have neglected in a great
measure: Why should you not therefore, Velis et Remis, with all possible might,
hasten to answer the Lords expectation? Oh trust not your own hearts any
longer! Oh hearken not to the Syren-like songs and enchantments of the world!
Oh build not upon the precepts and examples of men, no not the wisest,
greatest, learnedest whatsoever; but on Jesus Christ, as he has revealed and
made himself known to us in his Word; honor him according to his excellent
greatness, and love him according to his excellent goodness, and then you shall
be honored and loved of him, and his father, more then ever you have yet been.
Oh, wherefore has God called you out of the world? Why has Christ dyed for
you, and by his blessed Spirit married you to himself, and made you partakers
of the divine nature, if it be not to honor and serve him as he has required
you in his wor^? When the Deathbed comes, then it will be too late to say,
would God I had followed the Lord fully, and honored him in lifting up of his
Son Jesus Christ in all the ways of the Gospel, though it had cost me the loss
of all my outward enjoyments. Wherefore that as your lives, so your deaths may
be sweet and comfortable to you, resolve upon this work, kiss^ the Son, bow to
his Scepter, help build up the wall of Sion, and throw down Babylon, that you
may be found in the number of those that follow the Lamb, who are called, and
chosen, and faithful, Rev. 17.24.

2. For you that are open enemies to this holy way of the Lord, and desperately
set your selves, by your Pens and tongues to hinder the progress and
prosperity of it, let me tell you from the Lord, that of all other men that
shall drink of the cup of the Wine of Gods indignation, you are like to have
the bottom: for if they shall be cursed, that come not forth to help the
Lord, what then shall become of those that come forth in all the strength of
their rage and malice against the Lord? If Jesus Christ will be angry with
those that refuse to yield him Osculum subjectionis, the kiss of subjection,
and will have those brought forth before him and slain, (...) 27.
that will not have him to reign over them, what will he do th^n with those,
that lay their hands upon his Throne, and openly proclaim before heaven and
earth, that they will not give rest to their eyes, nor slumber to their
eyelids, till they have brought him low? Ah poor wretches, what shall I say
to you, or do for you? would God my soul could weep for ye in secret, and
mourn over your sad condition: Give me leave to administer one word of counsel
to you, if it be not too late.

Lay down your Arms, and come in, and submit your selves to him that has the
Keys of hell and death in his hands, Rev. 1.18. and the sooner the better, the
easier it will be for you, why will you provoke the Lord to jealousy? are you
stronger then he? 1 Cor. 10.22. was there ever any that hardened himself
against the Lord, and prospered? Job. 9.4. Jesus Christ has rececived gifts
for the very rebellious, Psalm. 68.18. Gifts of grace, gifts of love, and mercy,
he will forgive your past, and present rebellion against him, and remember them
no more, if you will submit unto him: and why should you despise his Love? Is
it not better to fall down before him, and accept of the golden Scepter of his
grace and mercy, that he freely holds forth to you, then to stand out in a
wilful and obstinate way of opposition against him, and ere long be made feel
the unsupportable weight of the iron Scepter of his wrath? Oh be wise betime,
certainly Jesus Christ will be too strong for all the powers of darkness, and
prevail he will over all the opposition of men and devils, of hell, and Rome,
and the Kingdoms of the world, that rise up against him: he will build his
Temple, and his Father will set him upon his holy Hill of Syon, do you and all
the powers of darkness your worst, God does but laugh you to scorn in all you
do, Psalm. 2.4.5, 6. Antichrist must down, the Jews shall be called, and the
fulness of the Gentiles brought in, and then the Kingdoms of the earth shall
become the Lords and his Christ's, and he shall reign forever; Rev. 11.15. And
what will you do then? then you will cry to the mountains and hills to fall
upon you, and hide you from the wrath of the Lamb, because the great day of
his wrath is come; but all in vain* for who can stand? Rev 6. ult. then
Mountains and hills themselves shall be made plain before him; they shall be so
far from succouring others, that they shall not be able to succor
themselves. Now happy is the man that believes and repents, and comes in to
Christ before that day appears.

3. Lastly, I have one word to all such as God has honored in bringing to
Syon, and whose feet have begun to walk in those paths of Paradise. which I
shall as the close of all, refer to 3. Heads. 1. To Peace. 2. To purity. 3.
To Perseverance.

1. Labor after peace. Though others make war against you, yet do you study
to be quiet. Commit your Name and Cause to him who is your King and Husband,
and has all power in heaven and earth given unto him to defend you, and offend
and subdue those that rise up against you. Believe it, there is not a weapon
that is formed against you shall prosper, nor a word that is spoken in
judgment against you, but you shall condemn. Wherefore go on in the work you
are called to, Esaias 54
and fear not them whose breath is in their nostrils, those that only can kill
the body, Mat. 10.
but fear him that has power to destroy both body and soul in hell fire.
Wher-fore if they curse you, bless them, and if they persecute you, pray for
them, and then happy shall you be, and great will be your reward in heaven.
Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.17, 18.

2. Strive after purity. Heb. 1^
It Is not enough for you to follow peace with all men, but holiness also. You
are called unto holiness, unto sanctification, this is the beauty of Sion, the
honor of Religion, 1 These.
the excellency of the Gospel. This commends the ways of Sion to those that
pass by, and invites them to come and walk in them. Yea it stops the mouths
of those that bear evil will to Sion, and set themselves against her. Oh that
the Churches of the Saints were more holy, that they were more like to their
Head and Husband, the Lord Jesus Christ, that they could live more in the
Spirit, and after the Spirit, and that they might not give occasion to the
adversary to blaspheme. What makes many not only to speak evil of, but to
avoid and stand off from the ways of Sion, but only the scandalous walking, of
many that have submitted themselves outwardly to the order of the Gospel? And
therefore let me be the Lords Remembrancer to all such, that they follow after
holiness, and labor to adorn the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, by walking up to the light of that truth he has made known to them,
and convinced them of, and in so doing, how shall they glorify God, and win,
or at least leave without excuse, such that oppose themselves?

3. Lastly, persevere and hold fast to the end in the practice of what Christ
has made known to you, to be his very mind and will in the right way of his
worship: take heed of drawing back, Heb. 10.38, 39. remember that counsel of
the Apostle to the Church of the Colos. Col. 2.6, 7, 8. As ye have therefore
received Jesus Christ the Lord, so walk in him, roo^ed and built up in him,
and established in the faith, as you have been taught, abounding therein with
thanksgiving. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain
deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not
after Christ. As we have been espoused to Christ, as chaste virgins, and not
defiled with the pollutions of Antichrist; so let us take heed we be not as
Evah, beguiled by the subtilty of the serpent, and corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ. (...). 11.23.
The promise is to those that overcome, and are faithful to the death. (...).
2.10.
Persecutions should not discourage, but rather encourage us, in reg^rd that
our sufferings for Christ shall turn to us for a testimony, as Christ himself
says, Luke 21.13. Our Lord and Master himself is gone before us, and given us
an example to follow; and he has promised that if we suffer with him, we shall
reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.12. but if we deny him, he will deny us; and what are
all our sorrows and sufferings to that Crown of glory he has purchased, and
is gone before to prepare for us; especially considering, that there are no
sufferings we are called unto for his sake, but we shall have strength from him
to go through them, (...) 8.37.
and to be more then conquerours, in and over them all. I end with that of the
Apostle, Heb. 13.20.21. Now the God of Peace that brought again from the dead
our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep through the blood of the
everlasting covenant; make you perfect in every good work to do his will,
working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ,
to whom be glory forever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

