A VINDICATION OF Lieut. Genesis Cromwell, AND Com. Genesis Ireton, Against the
scandalous aspersions cast upon them in a Posted LIBELL signed by one TOMPSON.

And likewise a true state of the Case concerning the said TOMPSON.

By A. C.

march.7th. LONDON, Printed for Laurence Chapman. 1647.

A Vindication of Lieu. Genesis Cromwell and Com. Genesis Ireton, against a posted
Libell signed by one TOMPSON.
THis Tompson being a Corporal of Capt. Pitchfords Troop in Col. Whaleys
Regiment, about five months ago was with some idle company at a Tavern in
the Town where that Troop quartered; where in drinking and gaming late in the
night he fell into a drunken quarrel with some of the company about some money
they were at play for; and the Mistress of the house with some of the servants
endeavoring to part them, he kicked her on the face, kicked and beat some of the
servants, and then clamorously charging her and them that they had feloniously
picked 20 li. out of his pocket, he went and fetched his sword, with some other
of his comrades, and with his sword drawn fell upon the household, wounded three
of them, chased away the rest, drove the Mistress of the house into a chamber
for shelter, seized upon one of the servants and took him prisoner away with
him, threatening him to tie him neck and heels together, with other terrible
threats and ourages to the family. Hereupon being complained of to the
Regimentall counsel of that Regiment, he (at last) confessed before the
Council, that his clamor of 20 li. taken from him was but a pretense, and
that it was not really done to him: The rest of the abuses and outrages were
fully proved against him, and to all or most of them himself confessed. For
these and the like matters of Brawling and Baratry he was censured by that
Council (with something of reparation to the family) to be cashierrd the
Regiment at the head of it the next Randezvouz; but at their next Randezvouz
(through some neglect or other) being not brought forth, the sentence of
cashiering was not formally executed upon him, only he was put out of the
muster, and the Regiment-marshall soon after was ordered by the Major to
discharge him from the Regiment. But he taking occasion and encouragement from
the mutinous distempers then wrought or endeavored in the Army by the
London-agents and their partakers, closed in with them, and took the boldness
resolutely to continue with the Troop and Regiment, to march and take quarter
with them in despite of the Officers; which accordingly he did, endeavoring
to inflame discontents and distractions amongst them, and sometimes for the
same purpose employed himself as an Agent in the name of that Regiment to
other Regiments of the Army: In which he endeavored and endangered to raise
great disturbances.

Afterward there being another Rendezvous of that Regiment he came thither
with the Troop, obtruding himself in despite and contempt of the Officers to
be and act in the place from which he was cashiered, and at the Rendezvous the
Officers requiring his departure (as being cashiered) he refused to submit to
that censure, making clamorous outcries to the soldiers, That the Regimentall
Council had proceeded illegally against him. To which the Officers replied,
That if he thought they had wronged him, he might complain to the General and
Council of war at the head quarter, and there the matter being re-examined he
might have reparation if cause appeared. But that also he refused, crying but,
That he could expect no justice there, but he would and did appeal to the
Regiment; And by such mutinous outcries he endeavored, and did endanger a
great mutiny and disturbance in the Regiment, but the Officers with much a do
pacified them for that time: After which he would needs continue to march and
take free quarter with the Troop, and endeavored to raise further mutines, and
disturbances in the Troop and Regiment, and in other Regiments of the Army;
until at last the Colonel or Major caused him again to be apprehended and
sent to the head quarter (then at Windsor) where he was for these things
committed Prisoner to the Marshall General, to be tried for the same by the
Council of War there. But being brought before the Council, and charged with
these things, he refused to answer them, pleading that he was cashiered, and so
being no Soldier, that Council had nothing to do with him; and this he did
with very insolent and contemptuous language and carriage to the Court: The
Council nevertheless thought fit to proceed against him, either as a Soldier
(if the sentence of cashiering were not executed upon him) or (if it were) then
as one pretending to be a Soldier, and obtruding himself into the Army, to be
and act as a Soldier, without being enrolled in some Troop or Company, by the
government whereof he might be kept in order (against which sort of persons the
Articles of War (made laws by the authority of Parliament,) do expressly
provide and authorize the Court Marshall, to proceed as well as against
offending Soldiers:) But the proceeding to Judgment upon him, being suspended
(while some further examinations were to be taken) and he ordered to be
continued Prisoner that while in the Marshall's custody; during this suspense,
coming to Lieutenant General Cromwell with pretenses of extreme necessity,
about some occasions of his own to go to London, and promising faithfully to
render himself again into the Marshall's hands within a few days limited, he
obtained leave of the Lieutenant General to go upon his parole. But instead
of rendering himself again a Prisoner into the Marshall's hands, he sent to
the General, and Council a Declaration and Protestation against them, (which
it seems his business at London, was to get drawn and Printed,) wherein
after much revileing and tedious disputes against all power of the Court
Martial, and all exercise of Military discipline, either upon Soldiers or
others, except in Actual war, (although it be expressly authorized by
Parliament, and limited by certain laws, for the restraining of disorders and
abuses amongst the Soldiery) he concludes with a protestation against the
Council of War, as a company of Robbers, Thieves, and Murderers; threatening
that if they should any further meddle with him, he would raise the Hue and Cry
of the Kingdom against them as such, and would endeavor by all means in the
world to destroy them, or to that effect.

Since this (it seems) he has continued about London and (as is informed)
has been frequently amongst the Soldiers about Westminster, endeavoring to
stir up mutinous distempers amongst them; until on Saturday last, the
Lieutenant General, and Commissary General, going from the House of Commons,
to attend the General upon a Council of War at Whitehall, and meeting this
Tompson as they came out (knowing that he was duly a Prisoner to the Marshall
General as aforesaid; but falsefying his parole, had never since rendered
himself into the Marshall's hands according to it,) They charged two Soldiers
with him, and immediately appointed an Ensign of the Guard, to see him brought
before the General at White Hall, where by his Excellencie's appointment, the
Marshal General did resume him into his custody, to be tried by the Council
of War, upon those things for which he was formerly committed. And this is
all that grand violation to the Rights and Liberties of the free Commons of
England, for which the Lieutenant General, and Commissary General were (in
that Tompsons behalf) posted up the other day, about the Town in Printed
Tickets, whereby (in stead of the Hue and Cry, threatened in his Protestation)
an Alarm was given to the people, as if the estates, liberties, and lives of
all the free commons of England were at one stroke, ready to be destroyed in
him. But what protection to their liberties, estates, or lives, against the
violences of Soldiers, or others the poor Commons might expect from this
fellow and others, of his temper (though zealous p^etenders for the same) if
their licentious humor should prevail, men may take a measure by those abuses,
and outrages, and violences done to the poor people, for which this fellow was
first complained of and censur*d, and upon censure for which, all his later
clamors* outcries, and mutinous practices have ensued. From which and other
l^ke instances it may justly be doubted, that this fellow and such as he, would
feign be such free Commoners, as to communicate freely of what any other man
has, and to say or do freely what they will and can against any man without
control for it, and till then will never think themselves in the full state
of free-commoner-ship.

If any do doubt the truth of the causes and proceedings against this man (as
they are before alleged) they may see them at large (with much advantage above
what is here expressed) as they are upon Record, in the hands of the Judge
Advocate at White Hall; where and from whom also they may understand the later
p^oceedings of the General, and Council of War against him on Wednesday
last, in the trial and just condemnation of him, together with the grounds
thereof, as also his unparalled insolent, contemptuous, contumeliou^, and
menacing carriage against the General and whole Council at his trial, not
becoming a Christian or a civil man.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Gilb. Mabbett.


