BARTHOLOMEW FAIR OR Variety of fancies, where you may find
a fair of vvares, and all to please your mind.


depiction of a snake eater at Bartholomew Fair

With The several Enormityes and misdemeanors, which are there seen and
acted.

LONDON Printed for Richard Harper at the Bible and Harp in Smithfield 1641.

BARTHOLOMEW FAIR OR Variety of Fancies, where you may find a fair of
vvares, and all to please your mind.
With The several enormityes and misdemeanors, which are there seen and
acted.
BArtholomew Fair begins on the twenty fourth day of August, and is then of so
vast an extent, that it is contained in no less then four several parishes,
namely, Christ Church, Great and Little Saint Bartholomewes, and Saint
Sepulchers. Hither resort people of all sorts, High and Low, Rich and Poor,
from cities, towns, and countries; of all sects, Papists, Atheists,
Anabaptists, and Brownists: and of all conditions, good and bad, virtuous and
vicious, Knaves and fools, Cuckolds and Cuckoldmakers, Bauds, and Whores,
Pimpes and Panders, Rogues and Rascals, the little Loud-one and the witty
wanton.

And now that we may the better take an exact survay of the whole Fair, First
let us enter into Christ Church Cloisters, which are now hung so full of
pictures, that you would take that place or rather mistake it for Saint Peter's
in Rome; only this is the difference, those there are set up for worship,
these here for sale: But by the way, I Will tell you a tale of a precise puritan,
who came in all have from Lincoln to London, purposely to see the Fair, where
he had never bin before, and coming out of newgate marget, through
Christ-Church into the Cloisters, and clevating the snow bals of his eyes, he
presently espyes the picture of Christ and his twelve Apostles, with the virgin
Mary, and many other Saints departed; at which sight the very thought and
strong conceit of superstation set such a sharp edge upon the pure mettle of
his inflamed zeal, that very manfully like a man of va'our, and son of mars,
he steps to a stall well stored with two-pany halberts, and wooden backswords,
where having armed himself Capa Pea, (as he thought) he begins in a violent
passion, to exclaim against the I do atry of the times, that it was grown
abominable; protesting that the whore of B^bilo^ was crept into Christ Church,
and that the good motions of the Spirit had brought him to own, to make a
sacrifice of those Idle Idols, to his just angor and holy indignation, which
begot no small laughter to the multitude, which thronged about him, that put
him into such a chafe, in so much that at the last, like Rosicleare, the Knight
of the sun, or Don Quixot, most furiously he makes an assault, and battery
upon the poor innocent pictures, till the shopkeepers apprehending him had him
before a Constable, who forthwith committed my little hot fury to the stocks,
where we will leave him to cool his heels, whilst we take a further view of
the Fair. And now being arrived through the long walk, to Saint Bartholomewes
hospital; that place (me thinks) appears to me a fucking Exchange, and may
be so termed, not unfitly; for there many a handsome wench exchanges her
maidenhead for a small favor, as a moiety of bone lace, a slight silver
bodkin, (...) hooptring, or the like toye; for she comes not thither with her
sweetheart, to serve her own turn only, but also to satisfy his desire;
according to the old saying, one good turn deserves another.

Let us now make a progress into Smith-field, which is the heart of the Fair,
where in my heart I think there are more motions in a day, to be seen, then
are in a term in Westminster Hall to b^ h^ard. But whilst you take notice of
the several motions there, take this caution along with you, let one eye watch
narrowly that no ones ^and make a motion into your pocket, which is the next
way to move you to impatience.

The Fair is full of gold and silver-drawers: Just as Lent is to the
Fishmonger, so is Bartholomew Fair to the Pickpocket; It is his high harvest,
which is never bad, but when his cart goes up holbo^ne.

The Citty-marshalls are as dreadful to these yongsters, as the Plague is to
our London Actors: That restraines them from playing, and they hinder these
from working; you may quickly know these nimble youths, and likely find them
very busie-bodyes in quarrels, which nothing concern them, and sometimes in
discourse with their wenches, (the sisters of the scabard) for the most part to
be found in a crowd or throng of people. Their buttockes walk up and down the
Fair very demurely; The end of their preambulation is to be taken up by some
countrey-Gull, or city-cockscombe, and then your hand is no sooner in one of
their plackets, but theirs is as nimble in one of your pockets; and if you take
not heed of them, they will give you fairings with the pox. Some of your
cutpurses are in fee with cheating costermongers, who have a trick now and then
to throw down a basket of refuge pears, which prove cloake-peares to those
that shall loose their hats or choaks in striving who shall gather fastest.
They have many dainty baits to draw a bit, and (if you be not vigilant) you
shall hardly escape their nets: fine fowlers they are, for every finger of
theirs is a lime-twigge, with which they catch dotterels. They are excellently
well read in Phyfiognomy; for they will know how strong you are in the purse by
looking in your face; and for the more certainty thereof, they will follow you
close, and never leave you till you draw your purse, or they for you, which
they will be sure to have, (if you look not to it) though they kiss newgate for
it. It is remarkable, and worth your observation, to behold and hear the
strange fights, and confused noise in the Fair. Here a Knave in a fools
co^te, with a trumpet sounding, or on a drum beating, invites you and would
feign persuade you to see his puppets; There a Rogue like a wild woodman, or in
an Antic shap like an Incubus, desires your company, to view his motion; on
the other side, Hocus Pocus with three yards of tape or ribbin in's hand,
showing his art of Legerdemaine, to the admiration and astonishment of a
company of cockoloaches. Amongst these you shall see a gray goose-cap (as wise
as the rest,) with a what do ye lack, in his mouth, standing is boothe;
shaking a rattle, or scraping on a fiddle, with which children are so taken,
that they presently cry out for these fopperies; And all these together make
such a distracted noise, that you would thinck Babell were not comparable to
it. Here there are also your gamesters in action; some turning of a whimsey,
others throwing for Pewter, who can quickly dissolve a round shilling into a
three half penny saucer. Long-lane at this time looks very fair, and puts out
her best clothes, with the wrong side outward, so turned for their bette
turning off; And cloth Fair, is now in great request: well fare the Alehouses
therein; yet better may a man fare (but at a dearer rate) in the pig market,
alias Pasty-nooke, or Pie corner, where pigges are al hours of the day on the
stalls piping hot, and would cry (it they could speak) come eat me, but they
are so damnable dear, and the reckonings for them are so saucy, that a man had
as good lick his fingers in a baudy house, as at this time come into one of
those houses, where the fat greasy Hasteffe instructs N^ck Froth her tapster,
to ask a shilling more for a pigs head of a woman big with child, in regard of
her longing, then of another ordinary cumer. These unconscionable exactions,
and excessive inflammations of reckonings made that angle of the Fair too hot
for my company; therefore I resolved with my self to steer my course another
way, and having once got out, not to come again in have.

Now farewell to the Fair; you who are wise,
Preserve your Purses, whilst you please your eyes.

FINIS.

