THE CASE OF THE Borough of TRURO.
THE Borough of TRURO is an ancient Parliamentary Borough by Prescription,
and by virtue thereof only, sent Members to the Parliaments in the Reigns of
Edward I. Edw. II. and Edw. III. Rich. II. and Henry VI. at which times the
Returns were certified by the Sheriff in a Schedule annexed to the Writ,
wherein the Members of Truro are said to be elected pro Communitate Burgi, as
is evident by the said Returns.

The Returns for Parliament in the Reigns of Henry VII. and Henry VIII. are
lost.

In the Reigns of Edward VI. and Queen Mary, the Returns of Members to
represent that Borough in Parliament, were by Indenture; wherein it appears,
That the Election of Members to serve for that Borough, was by the whole
Commonalty.

Queen Elizabeth, by Charter dated 31st year of her Reign, for the better
Government of the said Borough for the future, did grant, That the Inhabitants
of the said Borough, and their Successors, should from thenceforth be one
Body-Politick, Incorporate by the Name of The Mayor and Burgesses of the
Borough of Truro in the County of Cornwall. And further Ordained, That from
thenceforth for ever, Four and Twenty of the most discreet Inhabitants of the
said Borough should be aiding and assisting to the Mayor in all Causes and
Matters relating to the Government of the said Borough; which Twenty-four are
named and appointed in the said Charter by their respective Names, to be the
first and modern Capital Burgesses, and Counselors of the said Borough.

The said Charter does likewise grant, That the Mayor and Burgesses of the said
Borough shall send two Burgesses to represent them in all future Parliaments,
to be elected as formerly, and to be maintained and paid by the Commonalty of
the said Borough.

In the Reigns of King James I. and King Charles I. the Returns are made by the
Mayor and Burgesses; by which words all the Inhabitants at large (who were
Incorporated by the Name of Mayor and Burgesses) must be intended.

That in the Convention, Anno 1660. that Return is by the Mayor and Capital
Burgesses; which appears to be the first Instance of their usurping the sole
Right of Election, and excluding the other Burgesses and Inhabitants.

It is pretended, That in the first Parliament after the Restoration of King
Charles II. it was adjudged in Parliament, That the Right of Election was in
the Capital Burgesses only. But if any such Judgment were, it was obtained by
surprise, the Commonalty of the Borough not having opportunity to make their
Defense, and the merits of their Right not being insisted upon; the Commonalty
never acquiescing therein, but having ever since claimed their Privilege of
Voting, and accordingly elected; which Elections were not decided, by reason of
the Dissolution of those Parliaments.

Some of the Capital Burgesses, and about 300 other Burgesses and Freemen of
the said Borough, elected John Tredenham Esquire and John Manley Esquire to serve in
this present Parliament; which is certified under the hands of about Eight
Score of the Electors, and the hands of Mr. Thomas Trewolla (who was Mayor when
the Charter was surrendered) and Mr. Hugh Ackland, (who was elected and sworn
Mayor the 9th of October last, for the present year) and under the Common Seal
of the Borough.

Sir Henry Ashenurst and Mr. Vincent are returned by Mr. Sladen, (who was set
up to be Mayor on the 5th of January last for that purpose) as elected by the
Capital Burgesses, excluding the rest of the Burgesses and Freemen, tho there
were not above seven or eight of the old Capital Burgesses who voted for them.

It is conceived, That by all this it appears, that the Right of Election is as
well in all the Inhabitants and Burgesses paying Scot and Lot, as in the
Capital Burgesses, who were first constituted by Queen Elizabeth's said
Charter; and that Mr. Tredenham and Mr. Manley are duly elected Members to
serve for the said Borough in this present Parliament.

To be heard before the Committee this Afternoon.


