THE CASE OF THE Orphans and Creditors OF THE CITY of LONDON.
MR. John Dowse and the rest of the Orphans, who by the Favor of the Right
Honorable the Lord Chancellor, presented their Humble Address to His Majesty
at Windsor, and were most Graciously Received: Attended at Guild Hall the 29th.
of October last to present the Petition following; but through the Favor of
His Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain, it was that Evening presented to His Majesty at
Whitehall: And He Graciously Accepted it, and directed the said Mr. Dowse to
read It.

To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition of about 1400. Poor Orphans within Your City of London.
SHOWS,
THat Your Petitioners withal Humility of Gratitude acknowledge the great
Obligations they are under to Your Sacred Majesty, for the Royal Expressions
You have Graciously, and so often been pleased to make of Your Compassionate
Resentments of their Deplorable Condition, and for the Renowned Charity you
have already begun to extend toward some of them.

That Your Petitioners have treated with Nathaniel Reading Esquire concerning
several Proposals which he had humbly to make to Your Majesty for payment of
the Respective Sums due to us: And Your Petitioners humbly hope that the same
will meet with your Royal Approbation and Establishment.

For as much that nothing can contribute more to the Immenseness of that Glory
which Your Majesty has acquired, since the Blessing we have had of Your being
our Sovereign; Than Your being the Father of the Fatherless in Your continued
Imitation of our Heavenly Father.

Your Petitioners in all Submissive and Avowed Obedience prostrate and beseech
Your Benign Consideration of the said Proposals: And if Your Majesty approve
of them, that they may be Established and pursued accordingly.

And your Petitioners, etc.

HIS Majesty Graciously referred the Consideration of the Proposals to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Sunderland, the Earl of Castlemain, Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain, and Mr. Brent; who, (in regard that His Majesty had by His
Letters Patents granted to the Trustees of the City, what ever they formerly
enjoyed before the Judgment against their Charter) conceived it proper to
present them to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen.

Pursuant thereunto, upon the 19th. of December last, the Orphans showed their
Petition following to Sir Basil Firebrass, and prayed his procuring the same to
be Read by the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen. He informed them, that he had
communicated the same, but that his Lordship thought not fit that the same
should be Offered, till after the Holy Days; that Court being particularly
appointed for the Business of the Stewardship of Southwark: And that several
Widows and Orphans appear^d the Court before, and were very Clamorous; and his
Lordship apprehended, that they were set on by the Promoters of that Petition.
Mr. Finch, Mr. Herne and others, who then appeared, assured him that they
resolved against Appearing with the said Widows, fearing their Importunities
might give Offense: And that they came withal Duty and Respect to the Court,
and humbly hoped the Court would not refuse Reading their Petition, especially
when it contained Proposals of as great Advantage to the City, as to
themselves. Sir Basil having acquainted his Lordship therewith, told the
Petitioners, it should be Read. And they being called in, Mr. Recorder told
them, The Petition had been Read; and that after the Holy Days, the Court would
consider of it; and desired Mr. Reading to put his Proposal in Writting. The
Lord Mayor said, That they needed not be Petitioned to pay the Orphans, they
had already Ordered the taking them into their Protection, and as soon as any
Moneys came into the Chamber, they should have notice of it.

Mr. Reading thereupon said, That the Petition of the Orphans, he easily
believed, was no less Surprising to his Lordship and every Member of that
Honorable Court, than the hearing, That it was in their Power to pay the
Petitioners, was to them; especially since their desire to pay what they so
justly Owed, was equal to the Petitioners desire of receiving what they so
severely wanted. That the Honor he had for their Renowned City, had put him
upon great Pains for preparing the Proposals in the Petition; and that he
allowed himself to believe, they would have been very Acceptable. That the
Methods he had taken, and the Measures which were to be taken for the effecting
this Miracle, he would make out with Demonstrations: And where the Blame would
lie if the Honor of the City and Credit of the Chamber was not by the due
prosecuting of the said Proposals, Improved to a far greater height than ever
yet they reached to.

As to the putting off the Considering of the said Proposals till after the
Adjournment; he said, The Season indeed commanded Adjournment, and very
Happily; Because the time of Adjournment was fittest for proceeding on the
Proposals: For to do Acts of Piety and Justice was the Specific Work of a
Holy Day; and then to do them, was to do, Opus diei in die suo. And if to
Relieve the poor of your own Bread was a Duty required to be done at all Times,
certainly to help the Starving Fatherless, and the Perishing Widows to their
own Bread, which had been so long with held, and lately was so Importunely
prayed for, ought to be reckoned among the Chiefest Businesses of a Christmas.
He concluded, That if his Lordship would then appoint Referrees, and they would
please to give but a little of their Leisure to hear him in that Affair,
according to the Petition, he doubted not, but within a very few days to make
out what he undertook; that so a Report may be fit for the Court against their
next Meeting; and a happy Entrance would thereby be made to the approaching
New-year, which would exceedingly tend to the Honor of the City, and the
Petitioners Relief.

To the Right Honorable Sir John Shorter Lord Mayor, and the Court of Aldermen
of London. The Humble Petition of about 1400 Orphans.
SHOWS,
THat in Obedience to the Commands of your Honorable Court, the Portions of
your Petitioners were paid into your Chamber for Securing them against their
coming out of their respective Minorities; and there remains above 500000 l.
due thereupon.

That the Methods formerly taken for paying the said Debt, having been much
Obstructed by the Judgment lately obtained against your Charter: Application
was made to the late Parliament for their Relief; and Nathaniel Reading Esquire was
of Council with your Petitioners therein; but it not taking Effect: And the
said Mr. Reading being duly informed on the Behalf of the said Orphans, that
great Numbers of them were in a most deplorable and perishing Condition; and
his further Assistance being earnestly besought, he acquainted your Petitioners
that he had taken very great pains therein, and had Proposals humbly to make to
His Majesty for paying their respective Portions.

That His Majesty was thereupon Petitioned to refer the Examination thereof,
who gave a Gracious Answer thereunto. And the said Mr. Reading informs us, That
great Deliberation has been had concerning the same: And that he is ready to
make it appear, that your Honorable Court and your Trustees, by His Majesty's
Letters Pattents since the said Judgment, stand Empowered to give your
Petitioners satisfaction out of what His Majesty has already granted to you;
an Honorable Provision for the constant support of your Government of the
City, being first Established and Secured.

For as much that the severe Circumstances which your Petitioners are reduced
to, permit them not to lie down under their Ruins; while so happy a Discovery
can enable them to contribute any thing toward their own preservation.

And for as much that your Petitioners can in no sort doubt; But that your
Honorable Court will cheerfully endeavor to redeem the Glory of your once
Renowned Chamber, and to the utmost of your Powers promote so just a Work;
especially since the fresh and great Demonstrations which our Gracious
Sovereign, who has Commissionated you thereunto, has given of his
transcendent Charity toward the Relief of some Orphans; assures us of his
Royal Inclinations to Relieve us all, in case you shall find it necessary to be
Addressed for on our Behalfes.

Your Petitioners beseech your Lordship that a Commit of your Honorable
Court may be appointed for meeting some of your Worthy Trustees, in the
presence of some of your Petitioners for Hearing the said Mr. Reading therein;
and that they may be attended with what they shall conceive needful to Enable
them to make a speedy Report concerning the same.

And your Petitioners, etc.

The Proposition of Mr. Reading made on the 17th. of January 1687. To the Right
Honorable Sir John Shorter Lord Mayor and the Court of Aldermen, on Behalf of
1400 Orphans of the City of London.
SEveral of the Orphans to whom great Sums were due from your Chamber dying
in Prison and Starving for Want; and their Friends not able to get Money out of
your Chamber to Bury them. And upon the 18th. of December last, several Widows
being told by you in Court, that you could not pay them half a Crown per Pound;
and many offering to take six Shillings per Pound: And Importuning Mr. Reading,
who had long been their Council, to study their Relief: And a Petition having
been presented to your Honorable Court the 19th. following, purporting his
having happily discovered a way to Enable you to pay them their Principal and
Interest. And their having Subscribed an Agreement for allowing him five
Shillings per Pound for a Reward; and praying your Referring his Proposals to
the Consideration of a Committee: But the same being put off to the 22th
following; and he then being violently Opposed and Discouraged therein, and
Ordered to bring his Proposals in Writing upon this day: And thereupon diverse
refusing to Subscribe to the said Agreement, though they had Faithfully
promised it: And others Unconscionably designing to take the advantage of the
said Proposals; and not to give him any Reward; and thereby Obstructing his
Proceedings thereupon, not only to their own, but to the Damage of others also.

And he being ready to make out the certainty and the particulars of his
Proposals, to the everlasting Renown of His Majesty's Charity to the said
Orphans, and to the great Advantage of the City also: In case your Court, will
according to their Oaths and Trust, do what in you lies to the Encouragement of
the said Subscriptions.

Mr. Reading proposes, thas upon your Ordering this day such Encouragement to
be given, that Subscriptions may be gained to half the Sum due to the said
Orphans, which long since would have been done, had it not been obstructed,

He will in the presence of the Right Honorable the Earl of Castlemain, Sir
Nicholas Butler, the Kings Vice-Chamberlain and Mr. Brent on the behalf of His
Majesty; and of Sir William Turner, Sir William Prichard, Sir Peter Rich, and
Mr. Alderman Herne on the behalf of the said Orphans, fully and plainly
discover to the Committee for your Revenues.

First, How you may make an Honorable Provision for the Support of the
Covernment of the City.

Secondly, How that being Established, you are Enabled to pay the said Orphans.

Thirdly, And lastly, How to raise a Noble Fund for your Chamber; and to pay
its other Debts.

In order whereunto, he proposes that no new Lease be made under the City
Seal, before the said Honorable Persons have the Offer thereof, for the
Benefit of the said Orphans: And that in the presence of the Keeper of your
Records, he may have Liberty to Inspect them, in order to the making it
manifest to your Selves; that you have such powers to pay the said Orphans.

In case of Non-complyance herewith, Mr. Reading declares, That he will never
attend you more therein; but take such other Measures for Relieving the said
Orphans, as His Majesty shall please to direct.

Shorter Mayor. Martis 17 die Januarii 1687/8 Annoque Regni Regis Jacobi
Secundi Angliae, etc. Tertio.
WHereas this Court has often taken into Consideration the great Debt due to
Orphans from the Chamber of London: And being desirous to examine the State of
the Cities Revenue, and to understand what Provision may be thence made for
payment of the said Orphans, does refer it to Sir Peter Daniel, Sir Humphrey
Edwin, Mr. Alderman Mauson, Sir William Ashurst, Mr. Alderman Gardener, Sir
John Eyles, Mr. Alderman Chamberlain and Mr. Sheriffs, or any three of them,
to Inspect and Examine the State of the Cities Revenue, and Inform themselves
in the best manner they can, what Provision may be made thereby, or what other
Method may well be used for payment of the Orphans: And afterward, this Court
receiving this day a Petition from several Orphans of this City, taking notice
of Proposals offered to be made by Mr. Reading, for payment of their Portions
due from the Chamber, any Praying a public Encouragement for proceeding
thereupon: And in a Paper now delivered to this Court in Writing by the said
Mr. Reading; it being proposed, That he will in presence of certain Honorable
Persons, and some Eminent Citizens of this City, discover to a Committee of
this Court, how all the Orphans may be paid, and a sufficient Provision left
to Maintain the Cities Government out of the Cities Revenue, with some
particulars therein desired in order thereunto: This Court being willing and
ready to give all Encouragement to any Discovery that can be made, or Means
devised, by him or any other Person for payment of the said Orphans: And also
to Gratify and Reward all such Persons as shall do any Service therein; does
refer it to the said Committee, to Receive and Consider of any Proposals the
said Mr. Reading, or any other Person, or any of the said Orphans, or their
Friends shall make touching payment of their Portions: And all particulars they
shall represent or desire in order thereunto; and they to give any Directions
they shall judge requisite in the prosecution of this matter; and from time to
time make Report unto this Court of their Opinion and Proceedings: And Samuel
Kendall, Mr. Chamberlain's Clark to attend, and Daniel Man to Warn them, and
any Members of this Court may be present, and join with the said Committee at
any of their Meetings. And it is Ordered, That Mr. Chamberlain, Mr.
Common-Serjeant, Mr. Town Clark and Mr. Comptroller of the Chamber, and all
other Officers and Persons the said Committee shall require, do from time to
time Attend and Assist the said Committee: And the said Commit are to Meet
every Wednesday at Three a Clock in the Afternoon, and oftener if they shall see
Cause; and also at such other Times as the Honorable Persons before mentioned
shall be pleased to appoint, to the end they may wait on them, in order to the
receiving or proceeding upon the said Mr. Reading's Proposals.

Wagstaffe.

Mr. Reading's further Proposition on the Behalf of the Orphans, delivered unto
the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of Alderman on the 24th. day of
January 1687.
MR. Reading in his former Attendances on you, on the Behalf of the Orphans,
having upon your Importunities Discovered to you some of the particulars of the
Methods he proposed for the Enabling you to pay them: And you having upon the
17th. Instant Ordered upon the Petition of the Orphans; and the proposition he
then delivered, that you being desirous to Examine the State of your Revenue,
and to understand what provision might thence be made for payment of them; that
it should be referred to a Commmtitee of several of your Members to inform
themselves in the best manner they could, what Provision might be made thereby,
or what other Methods might well be used for payment of them; and declared that
you were willing and ready to give all Encouragement to any Discovery that
could be made, or Means devised by him, or any other person for payment of
them; and also to Gratify and Reward the Service done therein: And the
Committee were to receive and consider of his Proposals, and all particulars he
should represent or desire in order thereunto, and to give any Directions they
should judge requisite in the Prosecution thereof, and to Report their Opinions
and Proceedings; and to meet at such time as the Right Honorable the Earl of
Castlemain, Sir Nicholas Butler, the Kings Vice-Chamberlain and Mr. Brent
should appoint, and to wait on them in order to the renewing and proceeding on
his said Proposals.

And His Majesty's Vice Chamberlain having upon Saturday last Attended your
Committee, and excused the Absence of the other Honorable persons, by reason
of their being upon his Majesty's other Service, and assured them, as they had
all taken great pains in contriving and promoting the Orphans relief, so they
would readily Attend at any other time, and to their utmost improve his
Majesty's Sacred Charity toward them upon all occasions: And Sir William
Turner, Sir William Pritchard, and Sir Peter Rich, and Mr. Alderman Herne, in
their public zeal to carry on so Pious and good a Work, Attending there also
on the Behalf of the said Orphans: Mr, Reading prayed, that according to the
express Condition of the Discovery in his said Proposal, and your Order
thereupon, some public Encouragement may be given fur Subscribing to the
Agreement for his Reward therein mentioned; and that such of the Orphans who
Subscribed thereto might receive the Benefit of his said Service, before those
who refused to concern themselves therein, and that he may have the liberty of
Inspecting your Records, and your several Orders and proceedings thereupon
relating to your Revenue: And it being solemnly declared by your Referrees,
that they would be so far from discouraging any of the Orphans from Rewarding
him; that in case he could enable them to Improve their Revenue, their Court
would certainly give him an Honorable Reward, according to what Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain himself should conceive Fitting: And that their several
Officers should permit him from time to time to inspect the Charters, Rentalls,
Surveys, Tittles, Leases, Orders, and all matters whatsoever relating to their
Revenue, and whereby the same may be any ways Improved: And Mr. Reading resting
thereupon, and Mr. Alderman Chamberlain then importuning him to give some
further particulars, whereby their Revenue might be Improved; he with great
freedom gave several Instances rhereof, but the said Alderman declared, that
nothing he said was New; the several particulars he mentioned were entered in
their Book upon the Table.

Mr. Reading replied, That the knowledge of those particulars was an
Aggravation of the Breach of Trust in not Improving them, and that the Entries
in the Book were made not only since his Proposals, but since the very Order by
which they then sat: And that however, he had several other Matters for their
Service, which themselves would Confess were new to them; and that
notwithstanding the Term, and all his other business, he would withal Dispatch
and Diligence apply himself to the Inspection, and then attend them further;
and thereupon Mr. Vice-Chamberlain took his leave and the Committee rose.

Several of the Orphans attending without to pay their Acknowledgments to Mr.
Vice-Chamberlain; and declaring that they would immediately Subscribe, Mr.
Alderman Ghamberlain told them (as they informed Mr. Reading) that Mr. Reading
had deluded them; that there was nothing in his undertaking but Words, and used
several other unkind Reflections to that effect.

Mr. Reading resolving upon 23th. Instant to give himself up to the Inspection,
and being told by Mr. Comptroller, that it was necessary he should first have
the Order which the Committee had made, he sent to Mr. Kendall for it, but
could not have it; and Mr. Town-Glark told Mr. Reading, that he was ordered not
to deliver it, without the Direction of the Court this day.

Mr. Reading for avoiding all mistakes, and to the end the Orphans may loose no
more time; in case Mr. Alderman Ghamberlain shall continue to oppose their
Relief, and to Affront Mr, Vice-Chamberlain, and the other Honorable Persons,
and to Contradict not only the Orders of your Honorable Court, but of the
Committee also; Humbly delivers this, and Prays your positive Order for
Encouragement and Inspection, or your denial thereof.

Mr. Reading's Third Proposal delivered to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor
and Court of Aldermen on 21th. of February 1687. on the Behalf of the Orphans:
Which containing only the True and Necessary State of their Case: He Prays
that nothing in it may be looked upon as Reflective.
THere being by Account delivered into the Committeee of the last House of
Commons 500000 l. Principal, and near 100000 l. Interest thereof due to about
1400 Orphans, which under pain of Imprisonment, your Court compelled to be
paid into your Chamber: And there being likewise due to several other Orphans
and Creditors upon Bond under your Common-Seal, about 100000 l. more, besides
Interest; the greatest part whereof was Artificially gained from Orphans (upon
Promise of paying them ready Moneys, in case they would acknowledge
Satisfaction; but that being obtained, and Fees paid as for actual Receipts,
nothing but your Bond could be got for their respective Sums:) And the
residue thereof being at the Instance of your Court borrowed upon Interest,
upon Suggestion to Pay the same among the said Orphans: And the common Interest
of the said Moneys being above 30000 l. per Annum, and no Penny Profit made by
you of any of the Principal. And the yearly Revenues brought into your Chamber
Communibus Annis, not exceeding 12000 l. and near 10000 l. thereof yearly paid
out in Salaries, Officers Bills, and several other Particulars which your
Circumstances might well dispense with: So that the said Interest you were to
pay yearly, exceed your Income above 28000 l. per Annum. And it necessarily
following thereupon, that the poor Orphans (whose Right each of you have
Solemnly Sworn that you would maintain) have no prospect of being redeemed from
Perishing; nor the other Creditors any hopes of getting any part of Interest,
you having lately turned Interest into Principal, as a stated Debt; and
actually paid six Pence per Pound to them, with intenr to pay no further
Interest; had not Mr. Attorney General declared His Majesty's Gracious Pleasure
to have Interest paid on, whereupon you vacated your former Order, and
directed the said 6 d. per Pound to be allowed only as part of Interest: And
you having lately in Court denied to hear any but Women on the Orphans Behalf;
and declared that you could not pay them 2 s. 6 d. per Pound.

And Mr. Reading having about two Months since offered in case you would permit
him to Inspect your Books, Rentalls, etc. He would Demonstrate to you, that by
your due ordering the Revenue which His Majesty has Entrusted you to Manage
for the public Good of your City, the Government of it might be Nobly
Supported: The Orphans and Creditors might by fully paid; and a real Fund for
your Chamber raised: As by his first Proposal delivered to you.

And he receiving great Discouragements and Unkindnesses from you in return,
and the Inspection being contradicted, after it was solemnly Ordered in the
Presence of His Majesty's Vice-Chamberlain, Sir William Turner, Sir William
Pritchard, Sir Peter Rich, and Mr. Alderman Herne: As by his further Proposal
delivered to you upn the 24th. of January last.

And no Answer being given thereunto, by reason of the Absence of Sir Peter
Daniel who was Chairman. And the day following Mr. Reading attending the
Committee: And an Order for Inspecting what related to Queen-Hyth being
promised, by them to be obtained for him at your Court the next Morning: And he
being earnestly pressed to discover some further Particulars of his designed
Improvements, or otherwise they would meet no more.

Notwithstanding no Order for Inspection can be obtained: Notwithstanding that
upon the first of February Sir Peter Daniel told him, the Committee thought it
neither fit that he should Inspect any of their Books relating to Queen Hyth;
nor the account of the Cole-Duty: Notwithstanding that he has since also met
with fresh Discouragements and Unkindnesses: And that Mr. Robert Murray has
publicly and falsely accused Mr. Reading, by saying, That he being of Council
with Mr. Murray had made use of his Projects: And notwithstanding that, Mr.
Murray has vainly pretended to pay the Orphans, and to Improve your Revenue to
40000 l. per Annum.

Yet so ready is Mr. Reading to promote the for ever to be Renowned Charity of
His Sacred Majesty toward the said Orphans: And so great is the value he has
for the Honor of your Court, which you have Solemnly obliged to Reward his
Service herein, that without more reserve, He humbly lays before you these
particulars following. (viz.)

I. The Breach of public Trust by the Male-Executions of the Acts of
Parliament, for raising of Moneys for the Re-building your City, has been
exceedingly to the Damage of the said Orphans: Not only by suffering great
Sums of their Moneys to be paid out of your Chamber upon the Credit of the
said Acts, toward raising unnecessary and unwarrantable Buildings, and the
making extravagant Purchases at unconscionable Rates; (while several of the
said Orphans, whose Portions were so Imbezil'd, lay Perishing for want of
Bread) but by not making any Persons Pay for Melioration of their Houses; by
taking away, Churches, Cysterns, Standards, Middle-Rows; and other ways, which
long since ought to have been done, and at this day will justly bring in many
Thousands of Pounds. And also, by not bringing into your Chamber any Moneys for
the Fraudulent Concealment of the Cole-Duties: And yet allowing many Thousands
of Pounds out of your Chamber to Mr. Bridges and his Partners, for Detecting
the said Concealments.

If you please to permit a due Inspection to be made into the Contracts and
Accounts of the Works, for which the Orphans Moneys were Advanced; and into the
great Mis-applications of Moneys about Fleet-Ditch, which is said to have Cost
near 140000 l. and scarcely yields you 100 l. per Annum Rent: About the
Monument, which it is said Cost near 20000 l. and scarcely yields you 20 l. per
Annum Rent. And about Bridewell-Hospital and New-Bethelem, which it is said,
Cost scores of Thousands of Pounds, under the Fraudulent disguise of Prisons;
and yields but 12 d. per Annum Rent; while Thousands of Pounds might have been
raised for your Chamber, by the Ground it stands on; And no one Penny is
answered to you for the vast Improvements of the Manor of Old-Bethlem.

And if you please that the Contracts, Accounts and Mis-applications of Moneys
in like manner advanced for Building Guild Hall, the Houses about it, the
Chapel, the Lombard-Office, Blackwell-hall, the Compters, the Exchange, and
other places which were Burned, and about Leaden Hall, and other places which
were not Burned, may be Inspected also.

And that due Prosecution may be made of all Meliorations, Concealments of the
said Duties, Frauds and Fraudulent Detainers of Moneys for the pretended
Detections thereof. Through your Kindness and Justice to the Orphans, the same
will conduce not a little to their Relief.

II. The Privileges of the Freemen of your City through His Majesty's wh^
Dominions at Home, and beyond the Seas; by reason of the many Royal Favors
formerly granted to it, and at this day Confirmed and Enlarged, are very great,
and Antienly have been very Valuable.

The Trusts which your Court and the rest of the Freemen have been Honored
with have been no less: And as their due Obedience to the Crown, obtained from
it, the Government of the City; so their prudent Managing thereof, obtained to
your Court, the Guardianship of the Orphans of your Freemen: And while no Penny
of their respective Portions was meddled with, but they were Sacredly kept, as
dead Deposits, till they could safely be disposed of for the Benefit of the
Infants; the Blessings of the Father, of the Fatherless, were so multiplied
upon your City, that you were further Entrusted with the Government of the
Tower, with the Fortifying your Wall; and with the Cleansing of the large Ditch
which Encompassed them, and whereby they were then Impregnable: Nay the Crown
it self, and consequently the whole Kingdom were so at ease, under the Loyalty
and Greatness of your City: That not only the Conservacy of the Rivers of
Thames, Ley and Medway, but of the Narrow-Seas, also was committed to it. And
so exceedingly successful was your City in the Service of the Crown, both
against Enemies and Rebels; that the London Laudamus instead of Te Deum, was
publicly Sung for it: And the Reverse of your Ancient Seal, shows the great
Esteem was had for you.

For the Admittance of each Apprentice to this Privilege after seven Years
Faithful Service, the Ancient Fee paid by the Master, to your Chamber, is but
four Shillings; but it was appointed in those days, when Money was so Dear,
that they who Built your first Hall, had but Pence a piece for for their daily
Wages.

The Orphans Patrimony having amongst other things been lately profain'd, to
the laying out near 100000 l. thereof in Fortifying your City against the Kings
Blessed Father (who Graciously Enlarged your Privileges, and declared in his
Royal Charter to you, That his Soul Affected your Prosperity;) and in Pensions,
Thanksgiving-Dinners, Presents to the great Officers of the Rebels, etc. for
the Success of your Arms against Him; and your public Debts doubling, while
the Members of your Court were intent upon Improving their own Nine-pences into
Nobles. And in the particular Companies of which some of you are Free, and by
reason thereof take Apprentices with several Hundreds of Pounds, and gain
considerably by their seven Years Serving you; the taking far greater Sums
than 4 s. for Freedoms has been advised, and is practiced: And every person
praying the Freedom of any of those Companies, Pays it with Thanks, and
something to the Poors Box also; and yet cannot obtain being a Fellow-Citizen
with you, without your Order; and some other small inconsiderable Fees to your
Officers.

If you please therefore, that each Person taking his Freedom from you may pay
for it; and do what in you lies to Establish a Table of Fees for Freedoms,
somewhat proportionable to the Advantages thereof -- To the values of their
respective Companies -- To your public Exigencies -- And to the present value
of Money: By doing whereof, several of the said Companies, have to their great
Honor, paid their Debts, and raised their Funds.

And if you will pursue the legal Powers you stand Entrusted to see performed
concerning Freedoms: And each Freeman stands Sworn to observe.

And if you will not continue to grant Freedoms to Aliens, whereby His Majesty
is defrauded of His Customs; your Rights are prejudiced, your Leasses are
Disabled from paying your Rents; and vast Numbers of your Fellow-Citizens and
their Families are reduced to Beggary. You will then make one further good step
toward relieving the Orphans.

III. The Duties of the Water-Baylage which were in Lease to Mrs. Carpenter,
are by the Consent of the Kings Vice-Chamberlain, (in whom the true Interest of
that Lease is) capable of being Improved considerably: So are the Lands which
were granted to you under the Royal Contracts, for Disposal whereof, Mr.
Brandrith and others were Commissionated by you.

IV. The Kings-Beam, by reason of your not duly Managing the same; is so far
from bringing any Moneys into your Chamber, that it occasions taking Moneys
from other Branches of your Revenue.

The Courts of Conservacy of the Rivers, by reason of the Neglects and Abuses
committed by your Officers; have not only been to the Scandalous Destruction of
Fish, but instead of bringing any Moneys into your Chamber, (as it was once
ordered) have by keeping them, semetimes cost your Chamber near 1000 l. per
Annum, and seldom under 300 l. per Annum. And the Ancient Duties for Barges
passing from Gravesend, etc. have not been so much as asked for.

The Green-Wax-Duties are so far from being Collected for the good ends for
which they were Granted to your City, that the Justice of His Majesty's
Government, the Welfare of the Subject, and the Honor of the City; exceedingly
suffer by the undue Prosecution of them: And so far are they from bringing in
300 l. per Annum (which has been offered for them) that they are a Burden to
your Chamber.

The Chamber Receives no Penny Profit by Penalties Incurred for Transgressing
the Ancient and Established Laws of your City; which are, or ought to be
Presented in your several Sessions, or in the several Ward-Motes, or by your
Officers. Nor by the Presentiments of the Dissolved Monastery of Christ Church,
commonly called Dukes-Place. Nor by those of the Manor of Finsbury: And yet
the Allowances you give for looking after them, are a constant Burden to your
Chamber.

If you please that due Amendment may be made in these Particulars; the Orphans
will not only be Advantaged by saving these Expensive Exhaustings, but by the
great Improvements which may arise to them thereby also.

V. The vast and numerous Charities which have been given to Pious and public
Uses; and which were conceived to be happily committed to the Care and Comptrol
of your Court; are not only sufficient to maintain and Answer the neglected
good Ends for which they were respectively given: But also by due Improvement,
to contribute toward the payment of the Moneys due from you to diverse of the
starving Orphans, who stand Related to their Religious Donors.

And yet some about you, instead of doing their Duties therein, make a very ill
Advantage of the late Alterations which have been among your Members; several
of whom have been altogether Ignorant of the Transactions of your Court; and
either Imbezil, or Connive at the undue Managing of those Sacred Revenues, and
permit the other Moneys of your Chamber, which should buy the poor Orphans
Bread; to be Squandred away, even at this present, under the Notion of public
Works, the which when finished, will neither bring in one Penny of Profit to
the poor Orphans, or your Chamber.

VI. If you please that the 1000 l. per Ann. which is allowed for the single
Mouth of one of your Domestic Officers, may go toward the Feeding of the
Starving Orphans; while your Dogs are plentifully provided for out of their
Estates.

And that the Liveryes which are yearly given out of the Chamber, may go
toward covering their Nakedness.

If the great Sums, which without any shadow of Reason are yearly paid out
of your Chamber, to Mrs -- To your Market-Clarks, To your Fruit-Meters, To your
Water Bailiffs; and others out of your Market-Rents.

If the Frauds and Surplusage of the Revenues of the Bridge-house, above the
just and necessary Expenses relating thereunto.

If the Frauds and Surplusage of the Revenues of the several Hospitals under
your Government; due regard being first had for the just support of them
according to their respective Institutions.

If the great Damage sustained by your Chamber by Nonperformance of the
Covenants of the Purchasers from you of what was granted you under the said
Royal Contracts be justly answered to you: And the Concealments and Frauds
relating thereunto, be Prosecuted and duly applied to the Relief of the Orphans.

If Morefields, which cost your Chamber 20 l. per Annum to the Keepers, besides
Repairs, were likewise duly Improved: And also the New Artillery-Ground which
you Let but at 6 s. 8 d. per annum and some years costs you above 100 l.
besides.

If the vast Expenses your Chamber is at in Ley-stalls (which was never heard
of before the Rebuilding of your City) besides the Fines for Purchasing: And
the Fraudulent Managing of them were Retrenched.

If the Manor of Finsbury, -- the Conduit-Meads and Fields, -- the Gates and
City-houses -- the several Encroachments and Wastes belonging to your City be
Improved, and their Arrears brought in for the Benefit of the Orphans.

If the several public Waters, Grounds and Buildings relating to them were
Improved also: And the Charges of the public Stairs, Docks, etc. belonging to
your City (for the due maintaining whereof, Fifteens were Anciently Assess'd
and raised upon the Inhabitants of the respective Wards) were not born out of
the Moneys which your Chamber should pay the Orphans.

If the Office of Out-Roper, which is justly granted to you, but has been
utterly neglected by you, were duly managed.

If the Notorious and Scandalous Oppression of the poor by Tally-men, were
Redressed by Establishing the Lombard-Office for accommodating those that
desire to take up Moneys upon Pawns: And a Registery of Sales, and Pawns to
Retailing Brokers were set up for discovering Felonies and Clandestine Thefts,
according to the Powers which His Majesty's Blessed Father gave you: And the
Profits arising by them applied to the Orphans.

If none of the late Fines for Aldermen and Sheriffs; appropriated by His
Majesty for the Relief of the Orphans, be misapplied. And the good Sums of
Moneys which may at this present be had for Vacancies, were Expiatorily, and by
way of Accommodation generously added thereunto. And if the Garniture of your
Hall upon your late Entertaining His Majesty, be paid to your Officers out of
your own Purses, for Re-imbursement of your Chamber.

If the Box money of your Chamber: And of the several Ward-Motes.

If the Trophy-money: And the vast Sums which have been received for Tolls
and Duties, were duly accounted for: If the Profits arising by Wool, Leather,
and Commodities according to yourt undoubted Rights were justly Improved and
appleyed to the Orphans; they would have great reason to Bless God for you.

Not to make further Instances, though many more are ready; and these are too
many, if ridiculed instead of being accepted.

To conclude, If you shall please to accept of 2000 l. per Annum for the
Support of the Chair: And 7000 l. per Annum for the Sheriffs, Salaries, and
Accidental Charges.

And vest all the Interest you have in all sorts of Profits under His Majesty's
Letters Patents to you, upon the Honorable persons in the said first Proposal
named, on the behalf of His Majesty and the said Orphans; and do what in you
lies to have the same Improved to the best Advantage of your City and the said
Orphans.

Mr. Reading proposes. That Security above all Exception shall be given you
for paying the said 9000 l. per Annum into your Chamber for the Uses aforesaid;
and for Discharging the several Sums you owe to the said Orphans: And
afterward to the rest of your Creditors upon Bond also.

What the Consequences of suffering any one of your Orphans or Creditors to
Perish for want of Bread, after this Address, must Inevitably be; Mr. Reading
in humble Deference to your great Court, omits to mention.

The Principles your Lordship acts Piety, Charity and Justice upon, are
Virtuous and Noble. Your Lordship Cheerfully Improves the Happy, though short
Opportunities of doing them, for the sakes of God and the King, who put them
into your Hands.

But since we are allowed in the best of our Actions to have an Eye to Reward,
your Lordship will most certainly find, that by a due Prosecuting of these
Proposals, and what attends them, (whereby (into the Bargain) the future Glory
of your Chamber will like that of the New-Temple, exceed your former; Nay, the
Banks of Amsterdam and Venice too.) The Orphans will Erect a Monument for you,
Quod nec Jovis ira, nec ignis, shall ever Efface: And shall not only be Aere
Perennius, but out last Malice it self, as well as all Sinister Opposition.

Mr Reading's last Proposal on the Behalf of the Orphans, delivered to the
Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, March 13. 1688
THe repeated Assurances you have in Court and severally given of your Zeal for
Relieving the Orphans; commanded them, even against their Sense to believe you
were in Earnest: And Encouraged Mr. Reading to drudge on to contrive the
Enabling you thereunto: And to Insert in the last public Occurences, viz.
Guild Hall March 1. The Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen,
in Answer to Mr. Reading 's Proposals (which terminated in an Offer to give
them Security to pay 9000 l. per Annum into their Chamber for the Support of
the Government of their City, and out of the rest of their Revenues to pay the
Orphans and Creditors upon Bond also,) did this day declare by Mr. Recorder,
Nemine Contradicente, That they would give free liberty to Inspect whatever
related to their Revenue; and Cheerfully do what lay in their Power toward
that good work of paying the Orphans, which themselves so heartily desired: For
which Mr. Reading and diverse of the Orphans present, returned their humble
Thanks to his Lordship and the whole Court -- In the mean time, all Orphans,
and persons concerned for Orphans, are desired to repair forthwith to the house
of Mr. Unwin Scrivner in Lombard Street London, in order to their Subscribing
to the Proposals made by the said Mr. Reading for their Relief. The four Months
for doing the same being almost Elapsed, otherwise they are not to expect the
same Advantages as those are to have, who several Months since have subscribed
thereunto.

But the unkind usage which the professed Enemies of the Orphans procured that
day to be made to them, and him, was of infinite Surprise. Instead of having
your Answer in writing to his third Proposal, which your Lordship solemnly
promised, and that it should be shown the Orphans upon the Saturday following;
the Order was the next Morning hudled up in the absence of Mr. Recorder, who
had taken great pains in digesting the said Proposal) and refused to be shown
till it came out in the Gazette; and before the Orphans could see it, a
Committee was privately held the Wednesday following, and Mr. Alderman
Chamberlain, by understanding with Mr. Robert Murry, struck up a Bargain with
him for the Profits of the Office of Out-Roper in Mr. Reading's Third Proposal
mentioned, (and which Mr. Murry never before so much as Dreamt of) and was
intended to have raised immediately for the Orphans, several Thousands of
Pounds per An' And the next morning your Lordship confirmed it, and ordered a
Lease to be made thereof to Mr. Thomas Puckle for 21 years, paying into the
Chamber one Third part of the clear Profits thereof, for the first seven years,
a Moiety for the second seven years, and two Third parts for the last seven
years of the said Term; whereby they already brag of getting above 40000 l. and
no manner of care is taken that the Poor Orphans shall receive one Penny by it.

Nor is this all, the Order of the 1st. Instant which your Lordship published
in ^he Gazette, being as follows. ( This Court, out of their deep sense of
the deplora^le Condition of the State of the Chamber of London, and the great
Debt from hence due to Orphans and others, having formerly appointed a
Committee to inspect the same, and consider by what means any Branch of its
Revenues may be improved, and then to make Report thereof unto this Court; The
said Committee was now by this Court earnestly desired to proceed thereupon,
with the utmost Diligence and Dispatch. And whereas there have been several
Insinuations made, That the Estate and Revenue belonging to this City, is
sufficient both to pay the said Orphans, and also defray the necessary Charge
of the Cities Government. This Court did now firmly resolve and declare, That
all Improvements that can be made (over and above the Charge of the
Government,) shall be duly applied toward Payment and Relief of the said
Orphans and others. And that if any of the said Orphans, or others, can make
any discovery unto the said Committee, how any part of the said Revenues may
improved, they shall be recompensed for the same, propotionable to such
Discovery.) Is not only in contradiction to that of the 17th. of January, but
is in no sort an Answer to the said Third Proposal, or your Lordships Promise.
The Orphans expected that upon the sense, and Condition, and Debt, and
Consideration, and Inspecting in your Printed Order mentioned, your Lordship
would peremptorily have ordered the Inspection so long labored for. -- That
the Quantum of the necessary Charge of the Government should have been therein
inserted. -- That you would firmly have resolved and declared, that you would
for the Honor of your Court, and the satisfaction of the World, have at least
experimented the offer, which though your Lordship terms but an Insinuation,
you well know it is proposed to be made good by Security above all exception. --
They expected you should have said that 9000 l. per An' had been exceedingly
too much for the Orphans to allow to the Charge of that Government, by the
Maladministration whereof, so many Hundreds of them have been Ruined, and at
present want Bread. -- But they expected not, that by the recompense you
promise, you would give a half part to a Discoverer, when but a Third is asked
you. -- Nor that you designed the Second part of the Cole-Duty-Concealment, and
give a prodigious Reward for Defrauding the Orphans.

The Orphans however are not singly disappointed: Mr. Reading expected that
after his having labored day and night in this admirable Undertaking, and been
at great Charge, and suffered great Damage thereby, and never received more
than a 40 s. Fee, your Lordship and all about you, would at least have
recompensed him with Thanks, and that the lean Encouragement which your first
Order gave him, would not have been omitted in that of the Gazette. Yet instead
thereof, and in Ill performance of the kind professions your Lordship made him,
some about the Chair, to gratify your transport against him, because he
Friendly advised your Lordship to give the Moneys for the late Vacancies among
the perishing Orphans, by way of Expiation, have publicly told the Orphans,
that Mr. Reading had deluded and inveigled them, that your Lordship had
discarded him, and threatnened, in case they Subscribed to his Proposals, they
should never receive 6 d. And reproached, for his Sufferings in the late days,
of Perjury and Persecution, and for his being unrewarded since.

Would your Lordship and they have been so just as to have declared at the same
time that Mr. Reading was offered great Sums, and Preferments to have shed
Royal and Innocent Blood by Swearing falsely; and that he rather chose to be
Ruined here, than to wrong his Conscience, and had your Lordship Published the
following Address of the House of Commons in the same Gazette, Mr. Reading who
is a very ill Advocate for himself, would have silently submitted to his being
disregarded for his Indefatigableness in the Service of the Crown, he valuing
himself upon having done his Duty, and the Feast of a good Conscience, while
others drink Muscadine and Orphans, and daily devour Widows and Houses at their
second Courses.

The Address was thus, 8 April, 1679. May it please Your MAJESTY,
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in Parliament
Assembled, having according to our Duty, made enquiry into the Damnable and
Hellish Plot against Your Majesty's Sacred Person and Government, and for the
Extirpation of the Protestant Religion, have upon Examination, discovered that
Not. Reading Esquire has Industriously, and against the Duty of a Loyal Subject,
held frequent Correspondences with several Lords and other Persons that stand
Committed for High Treason. And also used his utmost Endeavors to prevent and
suppress Your Majesty's Evidence: And as much as in him lay, to stifle the
Discovery of the said Plot; and thereby to render the same fictitious and of no
reallity. And by such undue means to prevent the Malefactors from coming to
Justice. Therefore We Your said Commons, do most humbly beseech Your Majesty,
that You will be graciously pleased to Command that a Commission of Oyer and
Terminer do imediately issue forth for the Trial of the said Nathaniel Reading,
that so he may be brought to public Justice.




Mr. Reading Humbly Proposes on the Behalf of the Orphans.

1st. That the Lease which you have ordered to be made for the Office of
Out-Roper may not be Executed, the Orphans being ready to allow three full
fourth parts during the whole Term for the same, which is muh more than Mr.
Murry offers you.

2dly. That no new Lease be granted, but to the Orphans, they allowing the
value for the same. And that all Vacancies of Places which you pretend to be in
your Gift, may for the future be offered to the Orphans, they being duly
qualified, and allowing valuably for the same.

3dly. That the many Thousands of Pounds which you are laying out about
Dowgate, Leystall and other matters equally inconsiderable, while your
Chamberlain declares to the Orphans, he has not 500 l. in Cash, may be applied
to their Relief -- That your Lordship would afcertain the necessary Charges of
the City Government, and that you would join in Petitioning His Majesty, that
He would Graciously please to Grant His Commission to the Persons undernamed,
or such others as He shall approve of for the due managing of all Profits, any
ways arising by His Letters Patents to your Tustees; and out of the same to pay
such yearly Sum into your Chamber, as His Royal Wisdom shall direct: And that
the remainder may be applied for the Payment of the said Orphans and Creditors.

On the Behalf of His MAJETY.
The Right Honorable The Lord Chancellor. The Earl of Sunderland. The Earl of
Castlemain. Sir Nicholas Butler. Colonel James Porter. The King's
Vice-Chamberl. and Robert Brent Esquire
On the Behalf of the CITY.
Sir John Shorter. Sir Bartholomew Shore. Sir Humphry Edwin. Mr. Alderman
Mawson. Mr. Alderm. St. Aumand. Sir John Parsons.
On the Behalf of the ORPHANS
Sir William Turner. Sir William Pritchard. Sir Peter Rich. Alderman Hern. Sir
Thomas Vernon. Sir Henry Tulse. Sir William Russel. Alderman Duncombe. Mr.
George Finch. Mr. Percival Gilborn. Mr. Thomas Farmyn. Mr. Francis Chamberlain.
Mr. Peter Pickering. Mr. Ralph Box. Mr. Joseph Bowls. Mr. Robert Midgly. Mr.
Deputy Carpenter. Mr. Joseph Smart. Mr. John Short. Mr. Thomas Langhorn. Mr.
Michael Warring.
Lastly, If your Lordship will well consider the Judgment against your Charter.
And be content with the Governing part under His Majesty. And take from the
Orphans that large Allowance fer it; and repay them what has been pocketed
contrary to Trust. Mr. Reading doubts not but so to improve His Majesty's
Charity to the Orphans, that the greatest number of them may be paid within a
very short time.

Should not your Lordship oppose this Innocent Experiment, you would make this
88 happily remarkable, and avert that Desolation which otherwise must
overwhealm this Flourishing City, and which will not be in the power of the
Ligislature to Repair. For the Cries of the Oppressed increase daily, they are
gone up, and their Avenger is Mighty.

Been facere, Et male Audire, Regium est.
NATHANIEL READING.


