The CASE Of the OWNERS of The Ship Redbridge.
8. Jan. 1693/4.
DUring this War, it is become a constant Method, used by all Ships that go to
Sea on any Voyage whatever, to have Protections for their Seamen; upon which
score the Owners of this Ship obtained an Order of Council, and Protection from
the Lords of the Admiralty for 50 Seamen for this Ship, for Allicant.

And just when She was ready to depart, viz. the 21 October last, the Governor
and Company of Merchants of London, Trading to the East Indies, Petitioned Her
Majesty in Council, that the said Ship might be Stopped, in these words, viz.

To the Queens Most Excellent Majesty: The Humble Petition of the Governor and
Company of Merchants of London, Trading to East India.
Shows,
That there has been lately obtained of Your Majesty in Council, and the
Commissioners for executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of England, a
Permission and Protection for the Ship Redbridge, Edward Smith Commander, with
Fifty Seamen, to proceed on a pretended Voyage to Alicant in Spain. That Your
Petitioners have notice, That the said Ship is really Bound (not for Alicant,
as pretended, but) to East India, or other those Parts and Places; the Sole
Trade whereof is Granted to Your Petitioners, by Your Majesty's Gracious
Charter. Which Proceedings, being as well in Contempt of Your Majesty's
Government, and the known Laws of this Kingdom, as to the very great prejudice
of Your Petitioners. They Humbly Pray a Stop may be put to the said Ship, till
Your Majesty shall be satisfied where she is really Bound.

And Your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc.

Upon the bare Allegation in which Petition, an Order of Council Passed,
directed to the Lords of the Admiralty, for Stopping the said Ship, in these
words, viz.

At the Court at White Hall, The 21th. of October 1693.
Present, The QUEENS Most Excellent Majesty in Council.
Upon Reading this day at the Board, the Humble Petition of the Governor and
Company of Merchants of London, Trading to the East Indies, setting forth, That
they have notice, That the Ship Redbridge, Edward Smith Commander, with Fifty
Seamen, who had License to proceed on a Voyage to Alicant in Spain, from the
Commissioners of the Admiralty, pursuant to an Order of this Board, of the
12th. of September last, is really bound (not for that place, but) to the
East Indies, or other places; the sole Trade whereof is Granted to the
Petitioners by Their Majesty's Charter; and therefore Praying, a Stop may be
put to the said Ship; It is Ordered by Her Majesty in Council, that the said
Ship Redbridge be immediately Stopped from proceeding in her pretended Voyage to
Alicant, or elsewhere, until farther Order from this Board, and the Right
Honorable the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, and Commissioners of the
Admiralty, are to give the necessary directions accordingly.

And by virtue of an Order of the Lords of the Admiralty, grounded on the said
Order of Council, the said Ship was Stopped, and continued under Restraint about
three Weeks; during which time, Four other Ships bound for Allicant, belonging
to some of the same concerned (who were under Covenants of Two Thousand Pounds,
each to keep Company together) were detained in the Downs, with a fair Wind;
whilst other Ships Bound for the same Place embraced the Opportunity of it, and
got the start of them in their Voyage. And this Ship being thus Detained, lost
the Opportunity of the Company of those Four Ships, who were Ordered not to
stay longer for Her: So that She not depart till the 27 December, along with
the Turkey-Ships, under the Command of Sir Francis Wheeler.


