A CATALOGUE OF VIRTVOVS WOMEN Recorded in the Old and New Testament.

1 Cor. 7. 16. What know thou O Wife, whether thou shall save thy Husband?
Or how know thou O Man, whether thou shall save thy Wife?

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, for William Cooper at the Pelican in
Little-Britain, 1671.

To the Right Honorable the Lady Grace, Vicountess Chaworth; The Lady
Margaret, Countess of Salisbury; The Lady Dorothy, Wife to Anthony, Son and
Heir to the Right Honorable the Lord Ashley-Cooper; The Lady Elizabeth, Wife
to the Right Honorable the Lord Annesley; The Lady Anne Manors, Daughters to
the Right Honorable John Earl of Rutland, and the Lady Frances his worthy
Countess lately Deceased.
Right Honorable and renowned Ladies,
THE favorable acceptance which this small present found with your Virtuous
and Honorable Mother, encouraged me to communicate it to other Virt uous
Ladies and Gentlewomen, who were very desirous of a Copy of it; which desires
growing ample and importunate, made me weary of writing, and willing (though
not ambitious) to impart it to the Press: Partly to Commemorate the Honorable
acceptance and partly to congratulate and gratify the respects it found.

Moreover, by much perusal, I perceived that I had left out many memorable
Persons of high account in Holy Scriptures, wherefore to make all complete, and
to leave a Living Monument of those Resplendent Virtues that are Recorded of
the Female Sex, which will undoubtedly excite good Women to Godly imitation, I
have presumed to make this Paper public for the Honor of that Sex which God
has so highly Honored, as the most Acute Aretius observes upon the Pious
Women's coming first to the Sepulcher of our Savior, Luke 24. 1. Totum hoc ad
gloriam Muliebris Sexus pertinere, That it did all belong to the glory of the
Female Sex; and Learned Polanus says on the same occasion, Syntag. Theol
Christ. Page 149 at the letter C Column 1. Resurrectio Christi primum ab Angelo
annunciata est mulieribus quia ^o^^it Deus sic ornare pietatem illarum quarum
Zelus pro Gloria Christi fervidior erat quam Virorum. The resurrection of
Christ (says he) was first told by the Angel to the Women because their zeal
for the Glory of Christ was hotter then the men's.

Confiding therefore, that it cannot be condemned for flattery; (for none can
inherit such Glory but they that imitate them) nor can it provoke envy o^
disdain (which is so clear a record of the Holy Scriptures,) Neither does it
derogate from the man, but dignifie him. (For as he is her head, so she is his
glory, 1. Cor. 11. 3, 7. And a Virtuous woman is a Crown to her Husband, Prove.
12. 4.) I humbly crave your Honors allowance and acceptance of the
Publication, in your Noble and Religious Mothers stead, to whom the Dedication
was designed: And so with supplications for your Honors long Health and
Happiness, I rest

Your Honors duly devoted and most humble servant, William Barton.

A CATALOGUE OF VIRTVOVS WOMEN Recorded in the Old and New Testament.
IT IS a famous Character
Which I often have heard of Her,
Corresponding to the Fame
Of her Noble Father's Name.
Thus Religion understood,
Often runs in a blood:
And, for multitude we find
Most-what of the woman*kind.
This is still the true renown,
Virtue! which puts envy down:
So the Sacred Book defines
All the Ancient Heroines.
1 Pet. 3. 6. Gen* 17. 15.
Sarah that obeyed the word
Of her Dear, and called him Lord,
Though her own Name mounts so high,
And a like does Signify.
Genesis 27. 46. and Verse. 12.
Good Rebeckah grieved to death
With the Heathenish Dames of Heth:
Wishing him the Princely place
That was Principal in grace.
Mat. 2. 18. Genesis 35. 19. Jer. 31. 15.
Beauteous Rachel, whose sad cross,
Lack of Children, seemed as loss:
For as loss it wass resented,
And as mournfully lamented.
See Diod. on Mat. 2. 16. etc. and Jer 31. 15.
Thus by Faith she propheci'd
Of the Bethlehem Babes that died:
Mothers tears, and Childrens blood
Made a lamentable Blood.
Genesis 30. 22. Chapter 41. 28, 36. Chapter 47. 25.
Yet at length her Prayers obtained,
Such a Seed as Ruled and Reigned:
Joseph, Egypts Foster Father,
Who did large Provisions gather.
1 Samuel 10. 21, 24. Genesis 48. 16. Chapter 49. 22.
Benjamin, from whom did spring
Israel's first exalted King:
And from Joseph soon ensued
Ephraims populous multitude.
Exodus 6. 20. chapter 2. 2. etc. 1. 21.
Next is to be Registered
Resolute good Jochebed,
For, three months she hid her Son
The Inquisition so to shun.
Exodus 2. 4, 9. Heb. 11. 23.
Miriam next, that lent her hand
(Fearing not the Kings Command,)
To secure the Babe from slaughter,
Kindly saved by Pharoahs Daughter.
Exodus 2. 9. etc.
Whom the beauteous Babe did please*
Weeping in the Bull-Rushes.
And her pity and her purse*
Hired for him an Hebrew Nurse.
Ibidem.
Witty Miriam call's her Mother
To be Nurse unto her Brother:
So the Serpent and the Dove
Met alike in Miriam's Love.
Micah. 6. 2. Numb. 36. 59.
So was she recorded One
With her Brethren so well known:
One in their Levitick Stock,
One in Conduct of the Flock.
Numb. 27. 3. chapter 36. 10.
And the Daughters we must add
Of the good Zelopehad:
That were free from all Defection*
And still followed God's direction.
Chapter 27. 4, 7 --
That could plead their own just right,
well approved in Gods own sight:
And a President became
For the Females rightful claim.
Verse 8. See the Postscr. Note ^.
And did prove Estates to fix
With the true inheretrix:
Which by Reason should withdraw,
The Error of the Salique Law.
Isa. 49. 23.
For we find by Scripture search
Nursing Mothers to the Church:
And that Queens as well as Kings*
Are ord ain d to such high things.
Josh. 15. 19. Psalm. 87. 7.
Acsah too that asked a blessing,
Granted at her first addressing:
The upper and the neither Springs,
Which import far higher things.
Ruth. 1. etc.
Naomi for faith excelling,
Whiles with hateful Heathens dwelling:
And when plunged in deep distress
Was upheld by Humbleness.
Josh. 6. 17. Ruth* 1. 17. Mat 1. 8.
Rahab too, and Virtuous Ruth,
Converts that embraced the truth*
Both enrolled by grace Divine
In our Blessed Saviors Line.
Judge. 4. 4. etc.
Deb'rah Wife of Lapidoth,
Prophetess and Princess both:
That arose by Gods command
As a Mother in the Land*
Verse. 14, --
That did call a War, and carry it
Spite of Siseras Iron Charet:
And did startle (to the best)
Brave Resolves in Barach's breast.
Jndg. 4. 21. Chapter 5. 14.
Jael too for courage crowned
Nayling Sisera to the ground:
Whose blessed honor did augment,
Past all Women's in the Tent.
Judge. 13. 23. Heb. 11. 33.
And the Wife of Manoah,
Her good Husbands prop and stay:
Mother of the Nazarite
Magnified for faith and fight.
1 Samuel 1. 18, 27. Chapter 2. 22.
Hannah that revived by Prayer,
And obtained a Son and Heir:
Vowed him freely to the Lord,
With her Husbands joint accord.
Chap. 2. 1, 22. Luke 1 46*
And presents him most complete
With her Gratulation great:
Whose inspired heart and tongue
Hint the Holy Virgins Song.
1. Sam. 4. 19.
And the Wife of Phinehas,
For a Zealous Saint she was,
More lamenting Isreal's fall,
Than her own loss, life and all.
1. Sam. 4. 20.
Troubled that the Ark was taken*
Isreal's glory so forsaken:
Calls her dear Child Ichabod,
Grieving for the Ark of God.
1 Samuel 25. 18, 31.
Abigail that durst engage
To subdue a Soldiers rage,
Courted David, sought and served him,
From a rash Revenge preserved him.
Verse* 23.
Wins him with Civility,
Wisdom and Humility:
Of his greatness prophesied*
And e're long became his Bride.
2 Samuel 20. 16.
And that peaceable good spirit*
Of immortal fame and Merit:
She that at the Seige of Abel
Carried all so amicable.
Ibidem.
Talking with the Royal Captain,
Of the fears the Town was wrapped in*
How, said she, can thou take joy
God's Inheritance to destroy?
Ibidem.
Far from me be such a fury,
Said the Captain, I*le assure ye:
Only Sheba's body bring,
That has clasht against the King.
Ibidem.
Then she treats with all the Town*
Cries the Traiterous Rebel down,
Get's his head cast over the wall,
And forthwith appeaseth all.
Pro. 31. 1. Mat. 1. 6.
And the Queen we count upon.
That instructed Solomon:
Princess in the Royal Line,
Prompting Oracles Divine.
1 King 10. 1. Mat. 12. 42.
And the Queen of famous Note,
That did come from parts remote
In her zeal to seek the Lord;
As both Testaments record.
Ibidem.
That with Solomon did consult,
Asking Questions difficult:
And the Heaven-inspired King
Answered her to every thing.
Ibidem.
That admired the Works she saw,
And his Oeconomick Law:
Most of all his rare Ascent
As he to the Temple went.
Ibidem.
It Is a true report said she
Which at home I heard of thee*
But by what I now behold,
Lo! the one half was not told.
Ibidem.Verse 9.
Blessed be the Lord thy God,
And thy People I applaud,
That such Oracles may hear,
From a Prince to them so near.
1 Kings 17. 13.
She that first Elijah fed
With the last bit of her bread:
But by faith which she embraced,
Neither Meal nor Oil did waste.
2 Kings 4. 6.
And that faithful Widow too
That had vessels not enough
To contain the Liquor filled,
Which by Miracle distilled.
2 Kings 4 36. Heb. 11. 35.
And the Shunamites good Wife
Who received her Dead to Life:
Whom Elisha did requite
That did such a Guest invite.
2 Kings 5. 1.
And the little Captive Maid
From her native Land conveyed,
That did wait on Naamans Wife,
And put fair to end the strife.
Verse. 3, 24.
Would to God (said she) my Master
Were (in spite of all disaster)
With the Prophet, that does dwell
In Samarias CITADEL.
Verse. 3. 14, 15.
For he would undoubtedly
Cure him of his Leprosy:
So he went and was made whole
Both in Body and in Soul.
2 Chr. 34. 22, 26. Mat. 1. 10.
Hulldah dwelling in the College,
Perfect in prophetic knowledge:
That did comfort King Josiah,
(Grandchild to King Hezekiah*)
Verse. 28. 24.
And assured his peaceful end,
For even death must stand his Friend:
Though Gods wrathful indignation
Scorcht the following Generation.
Verse. 25.
And the Prophetess was bold
To denounce the wrath foretold:
For their sin so far incensed,
That the wrath could not be quenched.
Ester 4. 14.
Royal Ester, most religious,
Born as for a time prodigious:
With her Maidens mourned and prayed,
Staked her life for Isreal's aid.
Chap. 7. 6.
Cop'd with Haman, got the day,
Which advanced Mordecay:
And if any Women be
Types of Christ, it is such as she.
Thus the Testament has told
Worthy Women of the Old:
Now great Ladies take a view
Of the Worthies of the New.
Luke 1. 6. Verse. 44.
First Elizabeth admire,
Whose Obedience was entire:
Whose sweet Babe within her Womb
Leaped for joy that Christ was come.
Luke 2. 37. Chap. 7. 38.
Aged Anna that did pray
Instantly both night and day:
Mary that did weep as fast,
Till her tears all price surpast.
Luke 10. 39.
The other Mary we must mention,
Who to Christ gave great attention:
For the better part she chose,
That which she could never lose.
John 11. 2. Mat. 26 13.
This was also she that shed
Precious Spikenard on his head*
Which to such account did come
As must pass through Christendom.
Luke 11. 38. John 11. 5.
And good Martha must be numbered,
Though with two much care encumbered:
One expressly said to be
Loved of Christ among the three.
John 11. 22.
For she was a sound Believer,
Though her Brothers death did grieve her:
And (confiding) told our Lord
He could raise him at a Word.
Mark. 12 44. 2 Cor. 9. 7.
And the Widow whose Gratuity
Passed the Rich men's Superfluity:
Though two Mites was all her living,
So much prized is cheerful Giving.
Mark 7. 26. Mat. 15. 20.
And the Greek Syro-Phoenician
Who so pressed her bold petition:
Term of Dog she overcomes,
Dogs (said she) may eat the crumbs.
Ibidem.
So she stoutl* stood the trial,
And misdoubted no Denial:
For she knew she should prevail,
And her Faith did never fail.
Matt 9. 20.
Such a Faith did Christ avouch
Hers to be that stole a touch:
For, said that believing Soul,
If I touch I shall be whole.
John 4. 26.
She of Sychar made acquainted
With Messiah, (Gods Anointed)
She made all the Town to know,
They believed and found it so.
John 19. 25. Luke 2. 35.
And of them that so surpass
Was the Wife of Cleophas,
Sympathizing in the smart,
That did pierce the Virgins heart*
Ibidem. See Postcript Note the third.
And the Virgins Sister there,
That did like affection bear:
And Salome, who likewise
Did so strongly Sympathize.
Luke 8. 2. Mat. 27. 46.
And that Godly Convert then
Called Mary Magdalen:
Who last served our Savior stain,
And first saw him raised again.
Acts 9. 39. chapter 17. 34.
Tabitha that did prepare
Garments for the poor to wear:
Damaris that clave to Paul
When the Learned neglected all.
Acts 12. 14.
Rhoda that knew Peter's Voice,
And thereat did so rejoice,
That she straight ran in, and said,
Here Is the Man for whom we prayed.
Acts 16. 14. etc.
She whose heart the Lord did open
To attend to what was spoken:
And her heart set open (to teach her,)
Sets her house so to the Preacher.
Romans 16. 8.
Phoebe that did service pay
To the Church of Cenchrea:
And Priscilla that did purchase
Thanks of all the Gentile-Churches.
Ver. 6, 12.
Mary too, a Saint illustrious,
And for Saints dear sakes* Industrious:
So Tryphaena's Works import,
And Triphosa's came not short.
2 Timothy 1. 5. chapter 3. 15.
Lois, next (as Scripture says)
In whom dwell'd unfeigned faith:
And Eunice praised as high,
Which two trained up Timothy.
2 John 1. etc.
And the Lady called Elect
With the Robes of Virtue decked:
And her Children from their youth
Walking steadfast in the Truth.
Romans 16. 15. Phil. 4. 3. 2 John 13.
Some but named are set down,
And a Name is some Renown:
Here a Sister, there a Wife,
Owned in the Book of Life.
Phil. 4. 3. Luke 8. 3.
Women then as well as men
Have their praise by Scripture Pen:
Women of their substance lent
To our Lord with one assent.
Luke 8. 3.
One of these was good Susanna,
And the Noble Dame Joanna
(Herod's Stewards Wife) was one,
And a many more unknown.
Luke 23. 27. Verse. 4^. 55.
Women did with mournful breath,
Most of all lament his death:
Women at his Grave did grieve
On the Sacred Sabboths Eve.
Luke 23. 50. chap. 24. 1.
And that past, they did not fear
To embalm his Body there:
And had there the best inspection,
First, into his Resurrection.
Acts 17. 4, 12.
Lastly, to give all their due,
Famous Women, and not few,
Were converted, and strait way
At the Gospels spring of day.
Wherefore to conclude the story
Of this Faithful Female glory,
One thing more I must annex
In the Honor of your Sex.
Mat. 1. 27. Luke 1. 44, 48.
One of yours excelled all other,
That was both a Maid and Mother*
Whom all Generations shall
Blessed Virgin Mother call.
Luke 1. 32. Verse. 46.
Mother of Almighty God,
Celebrated all abroad:
Yet was she of meek behavior
Magnifying Christ our Savior.
Heb. 1. 6. Luke 2. 10.
Whom all Angels evermore
Are commanded to adore,
And with joy they all obey,
Witness this Triumphant Day.
FINIS.
The Postscript.
NOte 1. For the distick in Italian Character page 2. Take this following if
you think it fit, Infants (of both Sexes some)
Suffered bloody Martydom.


Though some Interpreters say, that the Male Children only suffered; but that
could hardly be: See the text in Jer. 31. 18. and Reverend Bishop Hall, in his
Contemplations of Herod and the Infants, says thus: All the Infants of
Bethlehem shall suffer for this one.

Note 2. The Salique Law is a Law of France, whereby the Crown of France cannot
fall to a Woman; The Original and Injustice of it, and how confuted and
condemned from this President of Zelopohads Daughters, Number. 27. and 36 chap.
See in Dr. Heylins Description of the World, Edition 8. in Quarto, Page 80. and
in the Edition in Folio, Page 177.

Note 3. Some take the Virgin Mary's Sister, spoken of John 19. 25. to be the
same with the Wife of Cleophas; for thus the Text expresses it, (...). His
Mother, and his Mothers Sister, Mary the Wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.
And Calvin construes it, that this Mary (called her Sister) was her Cousin, and
might be the Daughter of Cleophas, for any thing said in the Text, and the
Translators put it in a different Character; But Aretius distinguishes them,
Adest Matter Christi, adest Soror ejus, Adsunt aliae duae Mariae, Uxor Cleophae
and Magdalenae. There was present (says he) the Mother of Christ, there was
present her Sister, there were present two other Mary's, the Wife of Cleophas,
and Magdalene.

The PRINTER to the READER.
THE Author was more willing to the Publication of this Epigram that he might
give notice of the Publication of Two Centuries of Select Hymns Collected out
of several Chapters of the Holy Bible. And said to be printed for the Author
(for this turn) because they had been printed without his consent by an
imperfect Copy, which wanted above fifty of the choice Chapter - Hymns, and the
Psalm*Hymns printed in that Book are far more estranged from the true Copy, as
will shortly appear.

The Books put out by the Author are sold for 1 s. a piece plain, at the Three
Daggers in Fleetstreet, and at the Pelican in Little-Britain; And are printed
without any fault but what the Reader may amend by his own discretion, save
that the first of the Errata has 63 for 68. and the last Greek word in the
Title page has the Aspiration (in some Copies) turned the wrong way.

FINIS.

