THE CASE OF Thomas Violet Citizen AND GOLDSMITH OF LONDON, Before the
Honorable Committee of PARLIAMENT, for Regulating the abuses in making Gold
and Silver Wyre, and Lace.
Humbly Shows,
THat, in January 1634. the Wardens and some of the Company of Goldsmiths,
petitioned the Late King CHARLES of blessed memory, and His Privy Council,
touching the detriment which arose by the undue practices of the Gold Refiners
and Wiredrawers in the unlawful consumption of a great Mass of Silver made
yearly into Wire for Gold and Silver Lace and Thread, etc.

The Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council Ordered them to attend the Attorney
General, to the end the Stat. of H. the 7. made against the same abuses might
be put in execution.

There being a complaint of many abuses in selling and making Gold and Silver
Lace; the King commanded me and some others, to buy up small parcells of Gold
and Silver Lace, Spangles, Wire, and to assay the same.

Mr (...) in the 14. year of his said Reign, did grant to your Petitioner the
Office for rectifying the abuses aforesaid for three lives, whereof your
Petitioner and one other are yet in being; as by the Copy of the Record
exemplyfied under the Great Seal appears, which I here humbly present.

That, His said late Majesty intending the absolute settlement of the office,
for rectifying of the said abuses, by reason of the great service your
Petitioner had done his Majesty, (amongst other things in the said Letters
Pattents contained, is graciously pleased to confirm the said Office on your
Petitioner, notwithstanding his said late Majesty, His Heirs, or Successors,
should at any time afterward publish or make any other Proclamation,
Commission, or Instructions to alter the said Letters Patents. Vide the copy
of the Letters Patents, Folio 37. 38. 39.

That, your Petitioner did for above five years execute and keep the said
Office, the due execution of all and every the matters in the said Letters
Patents contained, on the part and behalf of your Petitioner to be done and
performed immediately after the said Petitioner received the said Letters
Patents, and according to the said Letters Pattents did give eleven Bonds to
His Majesty's use for performance of the said Letters Patents, Viz. One Bond of
the penalty of one thousand five hundred pounds, wherein your Petitioner stands
singly bound; and ten other Bonds wherein ten other sufficient persons stand
severally bound for your Petitioners true performance of the said Letters
Patents in two hundred pounds a piece, as by the Records, remaining in the
Kings Majesty's Remembrancers, appears.

That your Petitioner, by the occasion of the late unhappy troubles, has not
made any benefit of his said Letters Pattents, being under sequestration; and
is by His Council infirmed that your Petitiners Letters Patents cannot fully
take effect, unless confirmed by Act of Parliament.

He therefore (the premises tenderly considered) humbly prays, That his said
Letters Patents may by the Act and Favor of this present Parliament be
Ratified and Confirmed with such Orders and Powers as in Justice you think fit,
in consideration of his right: And also in consideration of his great losses,
imprisonments, hazards for his Majesty and His Royal Father, to his damage
above twenty thousand pounds, as he has proved it by the Testimonies of many
Witnesses of honor, estates, and credit, and all of them the Kings suffering
Servants.

And as in duty bound shall pray, etc. THOMAS VIOLET.

Several Reasons humbly presented to the Honorable Committee of Parliament,
concerning the Gold and Silver Wyer-drawers, by Thomas Violet of London,
Goldsmith. And against the confirming by Act of Parliament, a Patent obtained
from his Majesty about the 2. of Oct. in the 13. year of his Majesty's Reign,
for Letters Patents to be passed, to incorporate the Trades of Refiners of Gold
and Silver, and the Gold and Silver Wyer-drawers, etc.
1. THat Henry Smith Esquire; may be ordered to bring in to the Honorable
Committee the Letters Patents granted to the said Society, or Corporation of
Wyer-drawers, in October. last, that so your Honors may see what you grant by
Act of Parliament, and what they desire: and your Petitioner may have a copy of
the said Patent, to object against the legality of it, to put in his just
exceptions thereunto to this Honorable Committee.

2. And liberty to produce to your Honors his Majesty's Royal Fathers Grant
under the Great Seal, to me of the said Office, dated 7. Sept. 14. Carol.
primo. for the regulating all these abuses.

3. Thereupon your Honors may see my right in Law, and do me Justice,
according to Right and Equity, that so my Patent may be approved on, and
confirmed by Parliament, I being the first that discovered all the
Gold-Refiners and Wyer-drawers abuses, 1635. to King Charles the First, and his
Privy Council, and for five years kept them in such order, that all these
Manufactures of Gold and Silver wire and thread, was made as the Plate or money
of the Kingdom, and I will by Gods assistance reduce them to the same order
again.

4. Whereas now there is nothing but disorder and deceit in the making all
these manufactures, neither has Henry Nevel skill to mend these abuses; it is
a trick of the Wyer-drawers, to abuse the Kingdom as they did formerly, to
procure a Corporation by Act of Parliament, to cozen the Kingdom.

5. Upon view of my Patent under the Great Seal, your Honors will see his now
Majesty has been misinformed, and abused in his Grant; for I have all the
power granted twenty four years ago, under the Great Seal of England, and I
humbly hope having suffered twenty thousand pounds loss and eight years
imprisonment, being robbed of almost all I have in the world, I shall not after
all my Troubles be flayed alive by Henry Nevel Esquire; of my office, which I
executed for five years, and know as well how to regulate these trades, and
every branch thereof, as any man in England. Indeed the Gold wyer-drawers think
I know too much for them, and therefore they desire Nevel Smith Esquire; who they
can lead by the nose, by reason of his ignorance in this business, who has
unduely obtained the Kings Patent.

6. Mr. Nevel is like Dean Murrey in King James's time, he loved to get into
Church livings, but could not preach; Nevel Smith loves to get my office for
nothing, which is worth about one thousand pounds a year, so much for several
years I made of it, and cost me above three thousand four hundred pound to
his late Majesty, and great Officers of State.

7. There is in this act a power that Henry Nevel, his Executors, and
Administrators, shall Assay all silver, and all silver shall be brought to one
place, and to take Constables, and seize all gold and silver lace, which he,
his Executors, etc. shall find to be course silver. Surely this Gentleman has
been a Goldsmith or a Refiner, that so great a skill and trust must be placed
in his hands, when we find him altogether ignorant in every branch of this
profession. After-ages will not believe so much ignorance and confidence to be
in a person of quality, to pretend to that he does not understand: nor I
believe his Executors nor Administrators, to take away my right. I beseech your
Honors observe.

8. If the Goldsmiths that go to the mint with their gold or silver to coin,
should be their own assay-masters, the Kings money would hardly be standard: if
the silver-workers made assay of their own plate, no wise man will think it
would be sterling. These Wyer-drawers are now at their own wills to make their
silver at what finenesse they please, put in as much silk to silver as they
please; they have melted down all the heavy money in the Kingdom, to the great
ruin of the Kingdom; they hinder the Kings Mint by out-buying the same: and
should they now get this Corporation, and have an ignorant governor, that is
no Artist, as Henry Nevel Esquire; labors to obtain, whereas formerly they
committed one fraud, they will by authority of Parliament, be out of the
gunshot of the law.

9. The Wiredrawers are angry with me because I have formerly strictly tied
them to make good gold and silver wire, and thread; if they work according to
the Law I cannot hurt them, but if they abuse the Kingdom in slight and base
Manufactures, my security and my self must make it good, we are bound in the
Exchequer to do it; and therefore I have, and shall prevent them to my power.
They would have Mr. Nevil in my place that has no skill, and then they would
cozen the Kingdom as some of them have done formerly; by this act of
Parliament, the Wardens and Assistants have the power to do what they list; Mr.
Nevil is but named as a cipher to get their Charter by his Friends.

Your Petitioners humble prayer is, that by your Honors Justice for his
Majesty's service, this Manufacture be put under some strict Rule and Order,
and that nothing may pass under your Honors hands that may prejudice your
Petitioners Grant which he has under the great Seal of England, for the
regulating the said Manufacture.

I have humbly to recommend to your Honors great wisdom, the due consideration
of these several following heads, and humbly leav them at your Honors feet;
and though they may not please the Wire-drawers, yet I am sure they be for his
Majesty's service. It is true, there is twenty thousand souls in London, live,
and have dependence on this Manufacture, and that made King James and King
Charles suffer this Manufacture to be made here.

It is worthy of consideration, the great damage his Majesty sustains in the
loss of his Customs, the loss and prejudice of his Majesty's Mint, by
suffering the silver after it is imported into this Kingdom, to be made into
Silver Lace, etc. to be diverted from Coin, which would pay a duty of coynage,
and augment the stock of the Kingdom, which is now converted into this
Manufacture: the value employed in Gold and Silver yearly, is about one hundred
thousand pounds a year in Gold and silver Lace, Wire, etc. which was it
converted into coin every year, and so passed between men, would drive a
million for commodities a year in Trade, to the great improvement of the
Kingdom by Commerce and Trade.

That upon calculation it will be found, the King in point of Customs his
losses about ten thousand pounds a year, by suffering this Manufacture to be
made in England, as will appear upon calculation of his Majesty's Book of Rates
of his Customs. I humbly pray the book of Rates at the Custom-house may be
viewed by your Honors, to see when the gold and silver thread pays.

That as this day by this Corporation there is no Excise laid on this
commodity, which under favor, humbly submitting to your great wisdoms, is a
commodity may bear an Excise as well, and better, than almost any thing in the
Kingdom: gold and silver Lace is a superfluity, and it is the wearers pays
the Excise, not the Silkmen, Wiredrawers, or other Tradesmen: this Trade his
Majesty does allow in favor of the poor women Spinners, and other poor people,
that are above twenty thousand souls, who only have their livelihood from this
Manufacture, or else for the reasons aforesaid, it would not be allowed to be
wrought in England; for as it is now made for this last twenty years, all the
heavy current silver is melted down to make this Manufacturie.

I humbly pray this offense may by Act of Parliament be made Felony, and the
same punishment for transporting gold and silver without the Kings license, if
this be not done, in a short time there will neither gold nor silver be left in
the Kingdom, all the gold in a manner is already gone, and the silver follows
apace.

Therefore my humble Petition to your Honors is, that your Honor settle such
an excise on this Manufacture, at the least two pence in the Ounce Troy, being
so much as his Majesty loses in the coynage of the same, to be approved and
confirmed by the Parliament, for and toward his Majesty's loss in his
Customs, and in his coynage, by suffering this Manufacture to be wrought in
England; the Customs is above three times as much.

That your Honors would Order for the future, that no inferior persons, as
servant-Maids, and other mechanic people, shall wear gold or silver Lace, it
being an abuse to persons of honor, men and women, to have mechanic people
and servants to wear gold and silver Lace; many servant Maids of four pound a
year, do lay out half of it in gold and silver Lace, which causes many great
inconveniences by vanity to come to them, by lewd courses to steal and pilfer
their Masters moneys.

10. If Mr. Nevel be confirmed by Parliament, to be the head Officer to assay
and seal all gold and silver, if his ignorance in this office should ever be
complained of to his Majesty or the Privy Council, he must be expelled by the
same power that put him in; by order of Parliament to be put down.

11. The assay-master of the Tower is upon his oath, the assay-master of
Goldsmiths Hall is upon his oath: this act of Parliament appoints Henry Nevel
to be assay-master, and to seize all adulterate gold and silver wire, and Henry
Nevel knows not how to make an assay of gold or silver, nor knows not when he
sees course silver from fine, this manufacture will be well assayed by a
Gentleman that is not an Artist in silver thread, wire, or lace, how can he
swear by another man's skill.

12. Ignorant officers in places of great skill and trust, which must be
executed on oath, is that that abuses the King and Kingdom: this Gentleman is
ignorant in every branch of the trade, yet by this Act of Parliament, is to
have an ob. the ounce Troy for silver wire, 2 d. the ounce Troy for silver
foliat, 1 d. the pound Haverdupois for all copper wire disgross'd, and one
moiety of all seizures and forfeitures: a place I paid 3400 l. for, and Mr.
Nevil would have it for nothing.

13. And now after all my losses and sufferings, this Gentleman pretends to my
place, and if your Honors read my Patent and his, you will find I am the elder
brother in my grant by above twenty years. And I humbly hope my experience to
execute this place, shall be a bar to his ignorance. It is the fleece Mr.
Nevel looks after, not the flock, the fees, not the regulating the abuse; he
can tell how to take and receive his fees, but knows not how to regulate the
abuses in this trade, nor to any part of the mystery, which not well regulated,
is a mystery of iniquity.

And if you please to observe the Act of Parliament under examination, the
whole power of regulating this manufacture is lodged in the Master, Wardens,
and Assistants of the Corporation of Wyer-drawers, and Henry Nevel Esquire; is but
held forth as a property, by his friends, and power to get the Wyer-drawers by
Act of Parliament a Corporation, the power is in the Wardens and Assistants.

And then they will serve the Kingdom as the Silk-men did, when they got their
Corporation about 1634. the Wardens and Assistants of Silk-men were found to be
the only men that cozened the King and Kingdom in heavy dyed silk, as was
proved 1634. which caused the King to damn their Patent, and fine the offenders
in Star Chamber, many thousand pounds. And so it was proved in Parliament 1619.
Sir Giles Monparsons, and the Wardens and Assistants of the Gold wyer-drawers,
cozened the Kingdom in selling adulterate silver thread and wire, for good.
The sentence of Sir Giles Monparsons, and the cheats of the Wyer-drawers proved
in Parliament, was so famous, that they made Ballads, songs, and pictures of
the discovery of these abuses, and Monparsons running away about this
business. This was the end of the Gold wyer-drawers Corporation in Parliament,
about 1619. as many hundreds of people in London can witness, the like Project
Mr. Nevel now desires.

May it please your Honors, to make an Act to settle the power on his Majesty,
and any six of the Privy Council from time to time to make such Commissions and
Orders, as they in their great Wisdoms shall think fit, to regulate the
Traders, and reform the abuses, with a power to commit and punish the
Offenders; and to impose such sums of money upon the Manufacture, for, and
toward the loss his Majesty sustains in his Customs, as his Majesty and his
Privy Council shall think fit, not exceeding 2d. the ounce Troy for all silver
wyre disgrossed, and the fees already allowed by Patent to your Petitioner for
warranting the same to be made all of good silver wyre, not under Sterling, nor
to draw no silver for any of these Manufactures before it be duly Assayed and
Registered; and a due account given to his Majesty. This is a sure way to
regulate all these abuses, without which the Wiredrawer^ cannot possibly among
themselves be kept in any order, being a great many necessitated people, which
without power will not be kept in compass, being in number above 15. thousand
that have a livelihood by this Manufacture; the Corporation the Wyredrawers now
desire, will be as the former was 1619. if the King and his Privy Council have
not the power and ordering thereof by Act of Parliament to reform all the
aforesaid abuses, and punish the Offenders; What the KING commands I will see
duly observed.

FINIS.

