The CASE of the Proprietors of the BRISTOL WATERWORKS, against the Bill for
making the River AVON Navigable from BRISTOL to BATH.
THE Proprietors having agreed with the Mayor, Aldermen and Council, of the
City of Bristol, to supply the Inhabitants of the said City with fresh water,
did in order thereto in August 1695. Obtain a grant from the said Mayor,
Aldermen and Council, to lay their Pipes in the Streets and Lanes, for which
they did Pay 150 l. Fine, and are to Pay every Seventh Year 166 l. 13 s. and 4
d. Rent, for 200 Years.

After which Agreement with the city, the Proprietors took Hannam Mills on the
River Avon, being the only place from whence the best Water could be brought
for the supplying the said City; and for which they Paid as a Fine 900 l. and
are to Pay 96 l. per Annum Rent, for 200 Years.

And the better to enable the Proprietors to serve the said City with the said
Water, they obtained an Act of Parliament in the 7th and 8th Years of his
present Majesty, whereby they were Authorized to lay their Pipes for the
Conveying the said Water from the said Mills to Bristol.

The Proprietors having made such Agreements, and being so Authorized, did set
up their Engines at the said Hannam Mills upon Avon, and laid their Mains and
Aquaeducts from thence to Bristol, (which is five Miles) and laid Pipes through
all the Principal Streets and Lanes of the said City, and do now serve several
hundred Families, and most of the Ships at the Port of Bristol, and are capable
of serving all the Inhabitants and Ships with the said fresh Water.

They have laid out in the carrying on and finishing of the said undertaking,
near Eighteen Thousand Pounds.

That the Navigation desired by the Bill will be augmented but six Miles, in
which space there are seven Wares, besides several Fords and Bridges, for
Passage between Sommerset-shire and Gloucestershire.

That to make the said River Navigable, it will be necessary to set down Locks
in the Ware of each Mill, which, being done, the strength of the River will be
so abated by the Extreme loss of Water, as often as the Locks are opened; That
the Proprietors Mill (being the last and lowest on the River) will be rendered
incapable of working their Engines; forasmuch as the utmost strength the River
now affords, is but sufficient to raise the great Quantity of Water that is
necessary for the service of the City of Bristol.

As to the Public good pretended by the Bill, the Proprietors conceive that
the servingt the City of Bristol and Shipping with fresh Water is a greater and
more Public good, then the City of Bath is capable of receiving by the
Augmenting their Navigation six Miles.

Therefore they hope their Property and the Public benefit to the City of
Bristol shall not be taken away, or hazarded upon the pretense of an imaginary
Public profit to the City of Bath.

For if the Bill should pass, it will not only be the Destruction of so useful
an undertaking (whereby the City of Bristol will be deprived of the great
benefit they now enjoy) but the Proprietors will lose so many Thousand Pounds,
and be left to Pay dead Rent to the City, and to the Landlord of the Mills for
200 Years, and also to Numerous Actions from the several Hundred Tenants, to
whom they have already leased the said Water.

The CASE of the Proprietors of the Bristol Waterworks.


