ALthough I dissent from that opinion, which this discourse at least intimates;
That the infants of believers are not capable of Baptism; yet I approve that
moderation which is therein, earnestly persuaded in reference to communion in
the worship of God, with all those, who give a fair evidence of their
spiritual sonship, or New Birth, and so of their union with Christ in the
spirit, though (in the sense of this Author) as yet unbaptized.

Joseph Caryl.
The tenth of the 12 month, 1653.
THE NEW BIRTH: In which is brought forth the NEW CREATVRE.

With a description of the true Marks and Characters thereof; which being
manifested and declared, is the true and proper ground of visible Communion, in
which the sons or children of God are to receive and own one another as
brethren, although they differ (for want of Light) in some particular
ORDINANCES.

As many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God.

Romans 8.14. Sirs ye are brethren, why do ye wrong one another,

Act. 7.26, Whereunto Is annexed a brief description of Antichrist, not only
without men, but within them also.

Little children, even now are there many Antichrists,

1 Io. 2.18 By R.B. An unworthy servant of Jesus Christ, who desires and
prays for the unity of all Saints.

(...).

I pray thee let no strife be between me and thee, for we be brethren

Genesis 13.8. London, Printed by W. H. for L. Blairlock, and are to be sold at
Temple Bar, and by John Hancock in Popes head Alley. 1654

To all true believing souls, who are begotten and born of God through the
spirit; Rich: Bartlet wishes grace, mercy and peace to be multiplied, etc.
BEloved brethren, (for so I presume to call you, because we are the children
of one father) although we may differ in our apprehensions, concerning some
particular Ordinances.

To you I dedicate this little book for this end, that there may be no strife
between me and you, because we are brethren. Now, forasmuch as it is so
pleasant a thing for Ps. 133.1.
brethren to live together in unity; my endeavor is to regaine those that are
otherwise minded, and for those that are like minded namely to live in unity.
to Ephesians. 4.3.
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; and upon that account I
have published this little book, to show the true grounds of brotherhood, which
is, the being children of one father, adopted by the same spirit, heirs of the
same promise, joint heirs with the same Christ. And also by way of caution, I
have labored to persuade al true believing souls, that they take heed, that
they reject not any of the children of their Father, because (peradventure)
some have not attained to the like measure of knowledge with themselves, but
rather to receive them, and labor with all meekness, to instruct them in
those truths, which they are not enlightened in. That to the weak, those that
are strong, may become as weak, that they may gain the weak, and not to keep
at distance, from any gracious soul, because they know not so much as others,
nor cannot declare so much as others; But to love own, and receive them,
because they are born of God, as well as others; for although many a precious
soul may bring forth but 30 fold, yet seeing it is good seed, and sown in
good and honest hearts, let them not be despised by those that bring forth an
100 fold; for we shall find that among the sons of God, some babes some young
men, some fathers, some aged in the holy understanding, some newly entered
therein, yet all children. So that where we find the good seed sown in the
good and honest heart, bringing forth good fruit, though in some more and some
less, we should love and own them. For this we find to be the example of
Christ, not to break the bruised reed, nor to quench the smoking flax, but to
have much respect to the lambs and little ones that believe in him; which
spirit may be upon, and in us all, is the prayer of the unworthy servant of
Christ, and also yours for Christ's sake.

Rich. Bartlet.
London this sixth day of the 12 month (...) vulg. Feb. 13. in the year 1653.
To the Reader.
REader if thou be one of the new creation, and a subject of that Kingdom
that consists of righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, I hope
thou will accept of my small mite, cast into thy hand; for although it is but
small, yet I hope it is good seed, and I do assure thee it is not in the least
intended by me, to be the seeds of contention, but that which tends to peace
and unity, and to this end I have sown it and dispersed it abroad, hoping by
the blessing of God, when it falls upon good and honest hearts, it will bring
forth good fruit; and although it may not bring forth an hundred fold, yet if
it bring forth but thirty fold, I shall rejoice, and think my labor well spent.

But if thou be one that is in the strife and contention, smiting thy fellow
servants, either because they know more then thou or because they know not so
much as thou, then my prayer is, that the spirit of the Lord Jesus may meet
with thee, and turn thee out of that way, lest in thy persisting therein, the
Lord should come upon thee, before thou art aware, and find thy feet Or to hate
thy brother without a cause. Mat. 5.22.
swift to shed blood, because the way of peace thou have not known, and shall
deal with thee, according to what he has threatened in Mat. 24.51. But I shall
leave what I have written to the Lords disposing, and thy consideration.

R. B.

THE NEW BIRTH, etc.
John 1.12, 13. But as many as received him, to them gave he power (or Hoc jus.
privilege) to become, or Fieri.
to be made the sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name: Which were
borne, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but
of God.


THE Evangelist St John having in the beginning of this Chapter declared the
Eternal power and Godhead of the Lord Jesus Christ, as verse 1, 2, 3. he
afterward comes to treat concerning his manhood, as verse 14. compared with
the 11. in the 14 verse, we shall find that the word which was in the beginning
with God, and was God, was made flesh, and came and dwelt amongst us; and
therefore in the 11 verse, it is said, he came unto his own, but his own
received him not. He came unto his own, that is, to the Jews, his own
peculiar people, he came to his own Nation, the place which he had chose for
to set up his name; and therefore the word is in the Neuter Gender. Ad sua
venit.
But his own received him not, that is, his own people of that Land, did not
receive him; and therefore the word is put in the Masculine Gender; and sui eum
non exceperunt.
so that his own people the Jews, the seed of Abraham, according to the
flesh, which were his by the old Covenant, made with them, they received him
not: So that the Apostle's words were made good, 1 Cor. 2.14.
That the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God. But there
were some of the seed of Abraham according to promise, they that were true
Isralites indeed, those that were borne (not only of blood, and of the will of
the flesh, and of the will of man, but) of God; which persons did receive
Christ, and are declared in the words of the Text: But as many as received him,
to them gave he this privilege, etc.

In the words of the Text, you may observe these four particulars.

1. Four particulars in the Text.
That there are certain persons, to whom the Lord Jesus has, and will give
this power and privilege to be made the sons of God.

2. You may observe, who those persons are, to whom Christ has, and will give
this power and privilege to; and they are those that receive him: But as many
as received him, to them gave he, etc.

3. You may observe who they were that did receive Christ, and had this
privilege given, and those were such as believed on his name; to them gave he
this privilege, to be made the sons of God [even] to them that believe, etc.

4. You may observe who or what these persons were, that did believe in the
name of Jesus Christ, and they were those which were borne of God.

Even to them that believe on his name, which were born (not of the will of
man, but) of God.

Now from these four particulars, 3 Things very considerable.
there is this very considerable.

1. That those that have this privilege to be made the sons of God, are those
that receive Christ.

2. Those that receive Christ are those that believe on his name.

3. Those that believe on his name, are those that are born of God; [so that]

From the new birth, Note.
persons come to believe one the name of Christ, and through believing, they
come to receive Christ, and by receiving of Christ, they come to have the
privilege of being made the sons of God.

Now although many truths might be raised from the words thus opened; yet I
shall at this time, mention but one by way of Doctrine, which may be most
suitable to the purposo herein intended; and that is this.

Doct. That true believing on the name of Jesus Christ, (by or through, which a
soul does receive Christ with the privileges aforesaid) is a true and
infallible Character of a son of God, or of the New Birth.

And this truth arises in the words, from a twofold consideration.

1. The truth of the Doctrine from two considerations in the text.
From the consideration of what those persons were, that did receive Christ,
and had the privilege of being made the sons of God; and they were them that
believed on his name; so upon that account believing is a mark or Character of
sonship.

2. Considering that those, that did believe in the name of Christ, were such
that were born of God, and upon that account, believing is a character or mark
of the New Birth.

Now in the handling of this Doctrine, I shall take this method.

1. The Doctrine opened 3 particulars.
To show what is to be understood by the New Birth, or to be born of God.

2. I shall give a description of the sons or children of God, which are
begotten and born in this New Birth.

3. I shall show how true believing in the name of Jesus Christ is an
infallible character both of the new Birth and sonship.

4. I shall endeavor to show what use may, and ought to be made of the whole,
by all the people of God.

1. What the new Birth is, or to be born of God.

1. Birth or being born, What birth or being borne does signify in 2
particulars.
it imports a begetting, and bringing forth of that which is begotten or
conceived; or

2. It is the time wherein a child or Infant has its first beginning in the
world; and this is called the birth or time of its being borne: and this the
Hebrew word (...) does properly signify, and comes from the root (...) which
signifies to beget or create and bring forth.

But my purpose is not now to speak of that which is born of the flesh and is
flesh: But of that which is born of the spirit, and is spirit.

And this spiritual Birth, is that which I call the new Birth, or being borne
of God.

And first I call it the new Birth, 3 Reasons why the spiritual Birth is
called new.
for these reasons.

1. Because it is begotten and created in a soul, after the birth of nature;
for says the Apostle Paul; in the 1 Cor. 15.46. That was not first which was
spiritual, but that which is natural, and afterward that which is
spiritual; and therefore it is called the new Regeneratio (or) new Birth.
Birth, in Mat. 19.28. And a being born again, John 3.3.

2. Because that which is begotten and born in this new birth, is a new
creature. 2 Cor. 5.17.

3. Because it is called the new man. Ephesians. 4.24. and Col. 3.10.

Secondly, it is called the being born of God, for this reason.

Because that God by his spirit does beget and create, and bring forth this new
creature in a soul, and this work of God's spirit, is put in opposition to
natural births, and therefore it is said in the Text, not of ex sam guinibus,
it is in the plural number, to show that natural births do proceed both from
the male and female.
bloods, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

Having showed what the new Birth is, and what it is to be born of God: I shall
in the next place, give a brief description of the new creature, which is
begotten and born of God in this new Birth, and I shall define it thus.

That it is a divine being, A description of the new creature.
called the new man, which the Lord by his spirit has created and implanted in
a soul, after the image of himself, in righteousness and true holiness.
Ephesians. 4.24. compared with Col. 3.10. So that as it is said of the first Adam,
that he begat a son in his own likeness, Genesis 5.3.
after his own image.

Why so the Lord by his spirit does beget sons in his likeness, and after
his own image; therefore says the Apostle Paul, as we have born the image of
the earthy, we shall also (by this new birth) bear the image of the heavenly. 1
Cor. 15.49.

Qu. But what is the likeness and image of the spirit of God, according to
which, the new man is created?

An. I answer, first negatively; What the Image of God is not.
That it is not the changing of him into the image of corruptible man, and to
birds, and to four-footed beasts, and creeping things. Romans 1.23. as some
profanely have done, in drawing of the image or similitude of the Holy Ghost,
like to the picture of a Dove.

But secondly, I answer affirmatively, What the likeness of the spirit of God
is.
that by the image or likeness of the spirit of God, is to be understood those
holy and blessed graces, by which he is pleased to manifest himself in the
holy word of God, as namely righteousness, holiness, Gal. 5 22, 2, 9.
love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
with many others, that might be reckoned up, which indeed are as it were the
very nature of the spirit of God. And those graces of the spirit aforesaid,
they are as the engravings of a signet or seal, which being set home by the
power of God upon a soul, (as a signet upon a seal of wax) it stamps its own
image, and begets its likeness; so that a soul receives grace for grace,
holiness, John 1.16.
for holiness, love for love, faith for faith, and so of all the rest of the
graces of the spirit: And these holy and blessed graces; they are called the
fruits of the spirit, in Gal. 5.22, 23. That is to say, the spirit of God is
the good tree upon which they grow, according to the saying of Christ; a good
tree brings forth good fruit. Mat. 7.17. Gods spirit is the root from whence
true faith, or any other grace does flow.
So that if any desire to know from whence true grace does proceed; whether it
be love to God, or love to his people, or whether it be true faith, by which
any receive Christ, and have the privilege of being made the sons of God, or
whatsoever grace it be; why it may be seen that it does evidently appear from
the word of the Lord, that it is the proceed and product of the spirit of God,
and cannot be expected from any other root; for men do not gather Grapes of
thorns, nor Figs of thistles; no more can true faith, Mat 7.16.
or any other grace, proceed from any thing whatsoever, besides the spirit of
God.

Thus I have given some hints of the new creature, and as it were described the
image and form of the new man, which is begotten and born of God in the new
birth.

And so I come to the third particular, namely, that true faith in the name of
Jesus Christ, True faith is a certain mark of the new Creature.
is an infallible Character both of the new birth, and new creature.

And in the handling of this particular, namely, to show the true character of
sonship, or of the new birth, I might make use of all the graces of the
spirit, which are begotten and born in a soul, in this new birth; but I only
name faith or believing, because it is only mentioned in the Text; not but that
I believe all other graces are included, and do accompany true faith,
wheresoever it is; as shall be shown in its due place. But for the proof of
the thing in hand, namely, that true faith is a Character of sonship, and of
the new Birth, is plainly held forth in the words of the Text, as may clearly
appear by proposing of this querie; and that is this.

in any man or woman, we may be confident that man or woman is a child of God.

Secondly, the Text tells us, that true faith and believing, is a certain
character of the new birth, as appears in these words, them that believe in
his name, (are those) which were born of God.

And the Apostle John does fully confirm the truth of this in the first of John
5.1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, whether it
be male or female, Col. 3.11. Gal. 3.26. compared with 28.
Jew or Gentile, bond or free, high or low, rich or poor.

And moreover, this truth may be proved by this argument, namely, that the
spirit of the Lord, in this new Birth, is the root and tree from whence faith
springs, and upon which it grows, as has been already proved: And Christ
tells us, in Luke 6.44. that every tree is known by his fruit, and that for this
reason, that a good tree cannot bring forth corrupt fruit, neither can a
corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. So in like manner, the corrupt natural
birth, cannot bring forth the spiritual new man; nor the spiritual new birth,
bring forth the corrupt old man; John 3.6.
But that which is born of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is born of the
spirit, is spirit: So that wheresoever we find faith, which is a spiritual
grace, it is a certain character that there is the spiritual new birth, from
whence it springs.

Now having proved that true faith and belief on the name of Jesus Christ, is
a true mark and character of the sons of God, and of the new Birth, I might
take occasion to show what is to be understood by the name of Christ; And
secondly what it is to believe one his name. But I shall not enlarge upon this;
but rather come to show of what use the Doctrine, as it has been opened, may
be to all the people of God: Only in a few words briefly, to give you my
understanding cocerning the same. And, What is to be understood by the name of
Christ.
first by the name of Christ, is to be understood whole Christ, that is,
whatsoever he is in respect of his Godhead, or in respect of his Manhood,
whatsoever he is in himself, or whatsoever he is unto others, is comprehended
in his name.

And therefore in this Chapter, out of which the Text is taken, we shall find
that he is called the word, which name or title does include his eternal power
and Godhead, as in the 1 verse, In the beginning was the word, and the word was
with God, and the word was God.

2. It also includes his Manhood, as in verse the 14. And the word was made
flesh, so that in short, the name of Christ may be thus defined, that he is
what he is, that is to say, he is what he is in himself, that he is what he is
to his people, that he is what he is to his enenemies. And this we find to be
the name of God, (...)
in the 3 of Exodus 14. Or according to the Heb. I will be what I will be.
I am that I am; which name Christ applies to himself, in the 8 of John 58.
before Abram was I am: And this is that every one that comes to God, must
believe according to that in the 11 to the Hebrews and 6 verse. He that comes
to God, must believe that he is.

2. What it is to believe on his name, is to make all Jesus; Christ the only
object of our faith.

Now I shall show what the word believe does signify, and import, and then
shall come to the uses, that the Doctrine holds forth. The word does properly
signify, when it is spoken in relation to Christ, a faithful believing of
him, a putting our trust and confidence in him, and to commit all to him. So
now I have done with the doctrinall part, and shall proceed by way of use.

And the first is this; If this be so, that true faith and believing in the
Lord Jesus Christ, be an infallible character and mark of the new Birth, and
of the sons and children of God, as has been plainly proved.

1 Use. A use of information.
Why then it may inform all true believers, that they are brethren.

And this does clearly appear from the Doctrine, as it has been opened; that
all true believers are those that are born of God, and all that are born of
God, are the sons of God, All the sons of God are brethren.
and all that are sons of God, must needs be brethren; for this is the true and
proper ground of brotherhood, the being children of one father, and upon this
account the ten sonns of Jacob, did declare to Joseph, that they were brethren,
by being the sons of one man. Genesis 42.13. Now, forasmuch as true faith is a
character of the new Birth, and of sonship, and sonship the true ground of
brotherhood; it will undeniably follow, that where true faith is manifested,
they are sons of God; and upon that account we ought that are believers to own
them to be our brethren.



1. I answer in two things, Faith manifested in two particulars.
first by confession with the mouth, as in the 10 Romans 10. With the heart man
believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation.

2. Faith is declared by good works, as in the 2 of James 18. I will show thee
my faith by my works. But what are the good works that the Apostle does here
mind to manifest faith? why they are employed in the 15, 16 verses, That if a
brother or sister be naked, and destitute of of daily food, to feed them, and
to cloth them; and not only to say, be filled and be warmed, and not to give
them that which is needful for the body. And comparing this with the 27 verse
of the 1 Chapter. We, shall find That pure religion and undefiled before God
and the Father, is this; to visit the fatherless and widow in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world.

And thus I have showed you how true faith is manifested, namely, by confession
and good works; and where faith is thus manifested in or by any persons, it is
a visible mark of their sonship, and therefore ought visibly to be owned as
brethren; and I shall say to every believing soul, as Peter did in another
case, concerning the believing Gentiles, in the 10 of the Acts 47. Can any
forbid water, that these should not be baptized, that have received the Holy
Ghost, as well as we. So say I, can any forbid that those should not be owned
our brethren, that are the sons of God as well as we.

But it may be objected by some, 1 Ob.
that the Scripture tells us, that those that believed were baptized, and the
Scripture puts faith and baptism together, and we cannot judge persons
visibly to be our brethren, until they have submitted to Christ by baptism.

To this I answer, An.
that although baptism be commanded by the Lord Jesus Christ, for every
believer to practice after faith received, and not to be neglected when the
Lord gives them light, to see it to be their duty according to that in the 22
of Acts 16. Arise, why tariest thou. Yet I never read in Scripture, that the
Lord Jesus did ever declare baptism to be the great character of the new
Birth, or being born of God: Neither do I find, that the Lord does limit
persons that have received precious faith, that because they are not enlightened
in their duty, to be baptized, that they must not therefore practice that which
they are enlightened in, and persuaded of, and that because some of the sons of
God are babes, and know but little (it may be) in some particular Ordinances of
Christ, that therefore they must not be owned to be brethren, by those that
know more. And certainly if the Lord does not limit persons in this particular,
Men ought not to limit where God does not.
men ought not. But God does rather command the contrary, in the 14 Romans 1. Him
that is weak in the faith receive ye. If they have faith, though but weak,
they ought to be received, and to walk so far as they have attained. Phil. 3.16.

But it may be further objected, 2 Ob.
that the persons before spoken of, do not only neglect a duty in that they
submit not to Christ by baptism, but they uphold a tradition of man, which is
no where commanded in the word of God, namely the sprinkling of Infants, which
is a relic of Antichrist, and shall we own such to be brethren?

To this I answer, 1 An.
that the upholding of one Antichristian point, (for want of light) does not
disanull persons to be the sons of God, and therefore not incapable to be our
brethren. But we find in Scripture, that there were some that did hold an
Antichristian point, (for want of light) which were commanded to be received
and owned as brethren, in the 14. Romans 1. The Apostle commands, that those
that were weak in the faith should be received. Now the question is, wherein
the weakness of their faith did consist; why it does appear in the following
verses, it was in this, that they did observe days and meats, which Ceremonies
Christ had abolished and made void by his death.

Now, to observe those things after the death of Christ, which were abolished
by the death of Christ, such an act does in the tendancy of it, deny Jesus
Christ to be come in the flesh, and whosoever denies Christ to be come in the
flesh, is an Antichrist. 1 John 4.3. But this being for want of light, the
spirit of God would have the Saints to bear one with another.

2. 2 An.
I answer, that those that believe in Jesus Christ, and yet for want of light
may hold some things which in the tendancy of them may be Antichristian; This
ought to be a motive to prevail upon those that are strong, to own and receive
them, that they may 1 These. 5.14. 1 Cor. 15.1, 1, 2, 3. Reader, for further
satisfaction, concerning this particular; I shall refer thee to a little book
called the Storehouse, published by Mr Jesse; in which I conceive, all
objections that may be thought on are made and answered, from page 93. to 12^.
support them that are weak and inform the^ better in the things of God. And
thus much at present by way of information.

In the next place; if this be so, that true faith in the Lord Jesus, be a true
character of the sons of God, why then in the second place, it may serve for a
use of exhortation to all true believing souls, to own and receive one
another as brethren; yea, although many of you may come short (for want of
light) both in the knowledge and practice of some things, pertaining to outward
form and order; and that for these reasons following.

1. God has received him, Romans 14.3. And he has received Jesus Christ,
through believing, John 1.12.

Now I would desire every soul to consider this; has God received a soul to
be his son, and shall we deny him to be our brother? And further, I desire this
may be seriously weighed in the fear of the Lord.

If that God has received every believing soul to be his fon; why then this
follows, that If sons, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heires with
Christ. Romans 8.17.

1. The children of God are heirs; what heirs? heirs of God: this may be
understood in a double sense.

1. The sons of God are heirs of God in a twofold respect.
They are heirs of God, in regard that they are begotten and born of him.

2. They are heirs of God also, upon this account, in that they have right and
title to all that God is, and all that God has; and therefore says David, The
Lord Jehovah is the portion of mine inheritance. Psalm. 16.5.

And joynt-heirs with Christ, that is, whatsoever Jesus Christ has right and
title to, every believing soul has the same: And we shall find that this is
consented to, and desired by Jesus Christ; as I shall instance in a few
particulars. We shall find in the 17 of John 20, 21. That this is the prayer
of Christ for those that believe in him.

1. That as the Father and Christ is one, so they may be one in them.

2. That the same Glory that the Father gave to Christ, Christ has given to
them.

3. That the same love that the Father loves Christ withal, he also loves
them.

4. It is the will of Christ, that where he is, they may be also.

Now upon all these particulars, let every every believing soul seriously
consider.

1. Note.
Is every true believer one with the father and the son? And shall not we own
them to be one with us.

2. Will Christ give them the same honor, glory and esteem that his father
gave him? and shall we so much dishonor them, as not to own them to be our
brethren.

But what was the glory that the father gave to Christ, why it was a great
weight of glory; for the word in the Hebrew (...) from whence comes (...)
comes from a root that signifies a heavy weight; and therefore the Apostle
Paul in the 2 Cor. 4.17. calls it an eternal weight of glory, that is, the
father gave Christ abundance of glory, honor and esteem. Why so Christ will
give to every believing soul, abundance of glory and honor, even as much as
they are able to bear. Therefore we ought not to slight those that Christ so
highly esteems.

3. Has the father loved them, as he has loved Christ, and shall not we love
them? certainly we ought, for Christ commands believers to love one another.
John 13.34.


4. Is it the will of Christ, that they shall be where he is, and shall we
think much, to let them be where we are? Will Christ let them be with him, to
all eternity, and must we (if ever we enter into the joy of the Lord) be with
them also; and dare we not own them while they are here?

But again, Christ says, he will that they be where he is: Why we profess
Christ to be with us, and if we deny any true believing souls to be owned and
received by us, do not we as much as in us lies, (contrary to the will of
Christ) deny them to be where Christ is?

And now, O believing souls, does God and Christ, so dearly love and esteem
you: O then consider what is your duty, and mind what the spirit of God says
unto you; in the 1 John 4.11. If God so loved you, ye ought also to love one
another.

And that I may prevail upon believing souls, (if the will of the Lord be) to
perform this duty, I shall offer to their consideration these particulars.

1. John. 13.35.
That by loving one another, you declare your selves to be the true Disciples
of Christ.

2. 1 JOhn 5.1.
By loving one another, you clearly manisest that you love God.

3. By loving one another, Romans 13.8.10.
you pay the debt that is due to each other by the Law of God, and if it be not
paid, you will one day be arrested for it.

4. 1 John 4.20.
If ye do not love one another, you will appear to be liars, if you say ye
love God.

5. 1 John 3.15.
Those that hate their brethren are accounted no less then murderers by the
spirit of God.

And further let me offer to your consideration, Gal. 4.29.
That there is enough of them that are borne after the flesh, to persecute them
that are born after the spirit. There was an Genesis 27.41. and 21.9.
Esau to hate Jacob; and there was an Genesis 27.41. and 21.9.
Ishmaell to mock Isaac; and there was a 4.8.
Kaine to slay Abell. And therefore the Children of God have small reason to
persecute one another, and to disowne and cast off each other. But I shall
conclude this particular, with the words of the Apostle, Gal. 5.15.
If ye bite and devour one another, take beed ye be not consumed one of
another.

And thus I have laid down diverse considerations and motives, to persuade true
believers to love, own, and receive one another, and now I shall proceed to a
third use from the doctrine, which is as follows.

they are not enlightened in every particular with them in outward form and
order; and also it may justly reprove those that do rather make an outward
conformity to some particular Ordinances of Christ, (to wit Baptism or laying
on of hands; which many thousands of gracious hearts are not yet persuaded of)
a greater character of a Child of God, then true and spiritual grace
manifested.

But such mistaken grounds as these, is to be feared, is too much like the case
of the Pharisees, in Mark 7.5. Who were offended at the Disciples of Christ,
for eating of meat with unwasnen hands, for which Christ sharply reproves them
in the 6 verse; not but that it was lawful to wash before they eat. But this
was their evil, in that they went about to limit and bind the Disciples by a
tradition of men, which God never bound them to.

Why so I could wish that it could not be truly said of some in these days,
in another case: As namely, those that by no means will admit of any persons
into communion and fellowship with them, (though never so holy and precious)
before they are baptized; not but that it is lawful for persons to be baptized
before. But to limit and bind up persons though never so gracious, from
communion, till they are baptized, is a tradition of men. So that as the
Pharisees would bind the Disciples from eating, till they had baptized their
hands.

So those persons in like manner do bind up, or keep off many of the Disciples
of Christ, from walking in those Ordinances of Christ, (viz) with them.
which they are enlightened in, until they are baptized.

But says Christ, full well ye reject the command of God, that ye may keep
your own tradition. I could heartily wish, it could not truly be said of some
in those days, that they reject the command of God, (namely, in refusing to
own and receive precious souls upon the manifestation of faith) that they may
keep their own tradition, that is, to limit persons that they must of necessity
be baptized before they are owned and received into fellowship and communion.
Which limitation, I find no where in all the whole Scripture.

But it may be objected and said, Ob.
that baptism is the first Ordinance to be practiced next after faith, and
therefore the Scripture says, believe and be baptized.

To this I answer in the first place. 1 Ans.
It is true, the Scripture says, believe and be baptized; but the Scripture
does not say, that a person that believes, must not practice any Ordinance
between faith and baptism; for if it should be so understood, then a person
must not pray, nor hear, nor read after believing, till he be baptized.

But secondly, I answer, that in my understanding, 2 Ans.
that is the first Ordinance to me, which I know first, and whatsoever
Ordinance the Lord is pleased by his spirit, to inlighten a soul first in, why
in the practice of that Ordinance, that soul ought to walk, according to what
he has received, and not to neglect his duty in what he does know, and is
persuaded of, because he does not know all; for in my understanding, it is a
very dangerous principle, that because a soul does not know every thing, he
must therefore practice nothing. But for further answering of objections of
this kind, I shall refer the Reader to the Storehouse, published by Mr Iesse,
as aforesaid.

Thus having finished the 3 Use, which was by way of reproof; I shall in the 4
place add a few words, by way of comfort and consolation, and shall draw to a
conclusion.

Ordinances, yet to every such believing soul, this Doctrine speaks comfort
(that although it may be many of the children of your father, will not own you
to be their brethren) yet God does own you to be his children, and will give
you an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified. Acts 20.32, and 26.18.
And now I shall lay down a word of caution, because I would not be mistaken in
what I have written, and shall for this present conclude.

And the caution is this.

That as I desire to love and own all those that fear the Lord, and believe
on his name, although they may not be enlightened in every duty, they ought to
perform; yet that they would take heed that they neglect no duty, that they
are enlightened in, for as it is a sin of hypocrisy in any person to practice
that outwardly as a duty to Christ, which he is not persuaded of in his heart
to be his duty:

So it is a great sin of slighting the Lord, and his commands, when a person
shall neglect the practice of any duty, that the Lord has enlightened him in.
Therefore walk according to what ye have attained, and in Gods due time he
will reveal more.

A brief description of Antichrist.
HAving showed you the new birth, and the marks and characters thereof, I shall
now lay down a brief description of Antichrist, which is much cried down in
pretense by many in our days; and for the better laying of him open to public
view, I shall give you some hints of the signification of his name.

And for so doing, I shall take the word in pieces, and show you what it
properly imports.

First, I shall show what the preposition anti signifies.

And secondly, what Christ signifies.

1. The preposition anti, it signifies [for, or in stead of] as in Mat. 2.22.
and secondly it signifies contrary to, or an adversary against.

2. Christ signifies anointed, and answered to the Hebrew word (...)
Messiah, as John 1.41.

So that the word being put together, and taken according to the first
interpretation of the preposition anti, it signifies [for, or in the room and
stead of Christ] and according to this signification, Antichrist is that which
is set up in the room and stead of Christ, and upon this account he is called
the man of sin; who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped, so that he as God, sits in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God. 2 These. 2.3, 4.

So that whatsoever is set up in the room or in stead of Jesus Christ, whether
it be within us, or without us, whether it be that which is good in it self, or
whether it be that which is bad in it self, if set up in the room of Christ,
it is Antichrist.

1. If it be that which is bad in it self, set up in the room or stead of
Christ, it is without dispute Antichrist.

2. But secondly, if it be that which is lawful and good in it self, set up
in the room of Christ, it is also Antichrist.

We have a clear emblem of this, in the Brazen Serpent, which was crected and
made by Moses, Number. 21.8, 9. And was broken to pieces by Hezekiah, as in 2 Kin.
18.4. Now concerning this Brazen Serpent, there is observable these particulars.

1. That it was ordained and appointed by God, to be set up.

2. It was of singular use, to heal and save alive, those that were bitten by
the fiery Serpents.

3. It was an eminent type of Christ. John 3.14, 15. But notwithstanding, when
the people set this appointment of God (which was so useful and good for the
people) in the room of God, and when they set that which was but a type of
Christ in the room, or in stead of Christ, you see it was broken to pieces by
Hezekiah, and the spirit of God does justify him therein, and says, he did
that which was right in the sight of the Lord, because it was in the room or
stead of God.

Why so any ordinance or appointment of Christ, (whether it be baptism, or
Church Fellowship, or breaking of bread, or whether it be our duties and
performances) set up in the room of Christ, is Antichrist.

But it is further to be observed, that when Hezekiah had broken the Brazen
Serpent, he called it (...)
Nehushtan, that is, a piece of Brass, by which name he shows, that in it
self it was but a piece of brass, and had no deity in it, and therefore not
to be adored and worshipped. Why so the holy and good ordinances of God,
through which (in the right use of them) the Lord does manifest himself, yet
if set up in the room of Christ, and made the great characters of a souls
happiness, which at the last, to such as so set them up, they will prove to be
mere Nehushtans, as sounding brass and a tinckling cymball.

Thus having spoke briefly to the first particular, I come to the second.

In which is to be remembered, first, that the Greek preposition anti,
signifies against, or an adversary to: And secondly, that Christ signifies
anointed, to show unto us, that Jesus Christ is Gods anointed, and not only so,
but all that are Christ's, every true believing soul is the Lord's anointed, 1
John 2.20, 27. only here is all the difference, Christ is anointed above his
fellows. Psalm. 45.7.

So that according to this interpretation, the word does signify, that
whatsoever is contrary to, or an adversary against the Lord's anointed (to wit)
Christ and those that are Christ's, is Antichrist; whether it be any thing
against Christ within us, or whether it be any thing against Christ without us;
whether it be that which is against Christ at Rome, or against Christ in
England; whether it be any thing against Christ in a Nation, or against Christ
in a Congregation: Antichrist is Antichrist, wheresoever it be.

Thus having given a brief description of Antichrist, and the signification of
his name; I shall endeavor to make a little improvement thereof, by way of use.

And seeing we live in the last times, in which are many Antichrists, I
conceive it may not be amiss, to exhort all persons in general, and in
particular, seriously to examine, whether there be not more or less of
Antichrist in them, or set up by them.

And the reason why I press this duty, is this.

Because that I do heartily wish and desire, that persons would not only
labor to throw down Antichrist without them, but also to be as zealous and
willing to throw down Antichrist within them. For when persons do labor to
throw down Antichrist at Rome, and to throw down Antichrist in England, to
throw down Antichristian powers, and Antichristian Ministry, and
Antichristian maintenance, and many other particulars, that might be named; and
yet all this while, have a spirit of Antichrist within them, and by the power
thereof, to throw down Antichrist without them, it is no more, then for Satan
to cast out Satan.

But it may be, most persons to whom these presents shall come, will be apt to
justify themselves, and say, we have not an Antichristian spirit, and
therefore this does not concern us.

Well, if it be so, I shall rejoice; but yet notwithstanding, because it is the
property of Antichrist, to pretend that he is for Christ, and although he be a
minister of Satan, yet he does transform himself into an Angel of light; I
shall therefore propound some particular, which through the blessing of God,
may help those whom it may concern, to know whether Antichrist be in them or
no: And first it is to be remembered, that whatsoever is set up in the room, or
instead of Jesus Christ, is Antichrist; and that being remembered, I would begin
first, with a covetous worldly minded man, which hunteth for the world, as a
ravening woolfe for his prey, and the world he must have, though with never so
great oppression of the poor, and yet it may be, pretend for Christ too.

Now let such an earthly minded man examine, in truth, whether his
covetousness does not reign and rule over him, in stead of Christ, and
whether he does not set the Idols of his covetousness in his heart, instead of
Christ; and John 12.5, 6.
Judas-like, had rather have the bag in his hand, then Christ in his heart, and
yet pretend for the poor.

The like might be said of pride, where that reigns, and passion where that
reigns, and voluptuousness where that reigns instead of Christ, all which is
Antichrist, and upon this account, we may conclude with the Apostle John, that
even now there are many 1 John 2.18.
Antichrists, who Dives-like, are clothed in Luke 16, 49, 20.
purple, and fine linen, and fare deliciously every day, when poor Lazarus
lies starving at their doors.

I shall come in the next place to examine the legal professor, who it may be
can say, I thank God I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, proud, and passionate: but on the contrary, I fast twice in the
week, and give tithes of all that I possess; and pray often, and give alms to
the poor, and many other things.

But will you say, this is Antichrist too?

I answer, that those duties in themselves, are not Antichrist, but when they
are put in the room of Christ, and set up as a man's righteousness, and to make
them his saviors; this is Antichrist, for Christ is the only savior of them
that believe, and not men's duties and performances.

I have only one particular more, concerning this first branch of Antichrist,
which I could heartily wish, if it were the will of the Lord, that there might
be no cause to mention it; but so it is, that when the sons of God are met
together, this Antichrist also comes amongst them, and sits in the Temple
of God; and by his power even in the children of God themselves, causes them
to exercise dominion over each others faith, and causes as it were, Ephraim to
envy Judah, and Judah to vex Ephraim: But God has promised, that the envy of
Ephraim shall depart, and then they shall not vex one another any more.

And thus I have done with the application of the first branch of Antichrist.

And now I come to make some application upon the second branch, which is this;

That whatsoever is contrary to, or an adversary against the Lord's anointed,
(to wit, Christ and all that are Christ's) is Antichrist.

Now for the further opening of this particular, I shall show you, that as the
Greek preposition anti does signify, contrary to, or an adversary against,
that it does agree in signification with the Hebrew word (...)
Satan, and this the Apostle Paul plainly shows, in the 2 These. 2.9. speaking
of Antichrist, the man of sin, whose coming (says he) is after the working of
Satan; so that if we look how Satan works, why after the same manner Antichrist
does work, and they are both as one.

And this word Satan or Antichrist, it is applied in Scripture, sometimes to
the Devil, as he is an adversary to Christ and his people.

Sometimes to wicked men, as they are adversaries to Christ or his people.

Sometimes to good men, when they act evilly against Christ or his people.

1. It is applied to the Devil, as he is an adversary to Christ, as does
appear by many Scriptures, as Mat. 4.8. compared with 10 of Luke 22.3. See also
Revelations 12.9 and 20.2.

2. This name is applied to the Devil, as he is an adversary to the children
of God, as may be seen from Job 1.6. to the 7 verse of the second chapter. Also
1 Pet. 5.8.

2. It is applied to wicked men, which are adversaries to Christ or his people;
as in the 1 Kin. 11.14, 23, 25. In all which places, that word which is
translated adversary in the English, it is in the Hebrew, (...)
Satan.

3. It is applied to the children of God themselves, when they act evilly; as
in Mat. 16.23. we may find, that when Peter, one of the Apostles of Christ,
began to rebuke Christ, telling him, that it should be far from him, to go to
Jerusalem, to suffer many things of the Elders and chief Priests and Scribes,
and be killed, and be raised again the third day, saying, these things shall
not be unto thee. Now this his speech being so contrary to what Christ came
into the world for, and also in that act, he being such an adversary to all
those that Christ came to die for, as well to himself as to others; Christ
turned and said unto him, get thee behind me Satan, as if he should have said,
get thee behind me, my adversary, thou art an adversary to me, and an adversary
to thy self, and to all my people, in what thou have done, thou art Antichrist
to purpose.

Now concerning these three particulars, I shall not so much at present mind
the first and second, because this book is dedicated to the sons and children
of God, and therefore I shall rather endeavor to make some improvement of it,
by way of use to them.

And for that I shall consider the case of Peter; and

Therein shall first mind, what he rebukes Christ for, and what he persuades
him from.

2. What the tendancie of his rebuke and persuasion was.

3. Christ's answer unto Peter, upon the whole.

1. That which Peter did rebuke Christ for, was this; because that Christ told
him he must suffer death, and rise again, according to that in the 24 of Luke
and 46. That it did behoove Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the
third day: But Peter tells him, this shall not be unto thee; Lord be it far from
thee.

But now in the second place, I shall observe the tendancy of Peter's speech.

1. It did tend to hinder Christ from doing and suffering that which the father
had appointed him to, Neb. 10.5.6, 7, 10.
for the Father had appointed and prepared Christ a body, that he might offer
it up as a sacrifice, once for all.

2. His rebuke and persuasion did tend to the ruin of all persons, Romans 5.10.
whom Christ came to reconcile to God by his death, because that if Christ
should not have dyed, there had been no reconciliation to God, neither for
Peter himself, nor others, as the Scripture does abundantly manifest.

3. I shall now consider Christ's answer to Peter upon this; and that is, get
thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me; for thou savourest not the
things that be of God, but those that be of men.

Now from Peter's case, we may observe these four particulars.

1. That some of the children of God, may be so far over-powred by a
Satanicall, and Antichristian spirit, as to rebuke persons for, and persuade
them from, that which is according to the will of God, and beneficial to his
people. Thus you see Peter did to Christ, and he rebuked him, saying, be it
far from thee Lord, this shall not be unto thee.

2. We may also note, that Christ does declare, that those that do rebuke any
person for doing what God has appointed, or persuade them from it, that they
are Satan or Antichrist, and in that act, adversaries to him. Thus you see
Christ did to Peter, get thee behind me Satan.

3. We may further observe, that when any shall rebuke a person for doing what
God has appointed, that Christ is much offended at it, for so he tells Peter,
thou art an offense unto me.

4. And in the fourth place, we may observe, that when any person shall rebuke
for, or persuade a soul from any thing that God has appointed, and that
wherein he may be serviceable to others, it is because they savor of the
things that be of men, and not the things that be of God.

Now from what has been spoken and observed concerning Peter's case, there
might be diverse uses drawn, as first.

1. to examine whether there be none in these days, that do I fear upon
strict examination, that there would be some found that do not only rebuke,
but persecute also
rebuke persons, for doing what God has appointed, and persuade them from
that; wherein they may be serviceable to others.

2. It might be of use, to inform all that do so as aforesaid, that in such
acts, Christ gives them the name of Satan, Antichrist, or adversaries, against
him and his people.

3. It may serve to reprove all those that have, or do rebuke any persons, as
aforesaid, as does appear by the words of Christ, to Peter, get thee behind me
Satan, thou art an offense unto me.

4. It may serve by way of caution, to those that have so done, that they take
heed they do so no more.

Thus I have given some hints of what use might be made of the particulars
before mentioned: But I shall not enlarge upon them, but leave the judicious
Reader to enlarge them in his private meditations.

And I might come in the next place, to show that every lust and corruption in
the heart of man, is Antichrist, although it be not brought into word nor
actions, because it is contrary to Christ, and an adversary against him. But I
shall leave this till some other opportunity, and commit what I have written,
to the blessing of God. Amen.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, I entreat thee to mend these faults with thy pen, as
follows.
IN page 35. line 13. the word every is put twice together, strike out one of
them. In page 43. line 17. read these for those.


