THE CASE OF THE BOOKSELLERS Trading beyond Sea, Humbly offered to the
Honorable House of COMMONS.
WHereas in the Bill now depending before this Honorable House for laying a
Duty of 25 l. per Cent. upon all Paper imported, there is likewise a Clause for
laying 25 l. per Cent. upon all Printed Books to be imported, over and above an
Additional Duty lately imposed upon all Foreign Books.

It is humbly conceived this Imposition upon Foreign Books printed beyond Sea,
will not raise any thing considerable to the King.

Considering that by the best Computation that can be made, the Va^^^ of
Foreign Books imported, these late Years, does not amount to above three
thousand Pounds per annum.

The Duty whereof at 25 per Cent. will raise but 750 l.

The major Part of which is imported by French Protestant Refugees for their
poor Livelihood, who by this Imposition will be made utterly incapable of doing
any thing, and consequently much lessen the Revenue to the King.

Such Importation of Foreign Books can be no ways prejudicial to the Printers
or Stationers of England, the Books Imported being the Wor^^ of Foreign Authors
(and not of our own Countrymen) or such ancient Books in Greek and Latin, etc.
of curious Editions, which are not to be found in England, tho much desired by
our Nobility, Gentry and Clergy, and of great Use to both Universities, and for
the Advancement of Learning in General. Whereas the said Imposition of 25 per
Cent. upon so inconsiderable a Commodity as Foreign Printed Books; will hinder
all such Importation, to the great Discouragement of Learning, without any
Benefit or Advantage to the King.

There might likewise be offered the great Uncertainty there is in dis^osing
and vending (...) Foreign Books, which before they are well known, are imported
(...) great hazard by the Booksellers, who generally have more than half (...)
Books they import lie upon their Hands for seven Years, and at last ^^come
Waste-Paper. And if they should all be sold, then 20 per Cent. Profit would not
arise to the Importer, which is less than the intended Imposition.

All which is humbly submitted to the Great Wisdom and Consideration of this
Honorable House.

CASE OF THE Booksellers Trading beyond Sea.


