The Strong Man EJECTED BY A STRONGER THEN HE. In a SERMON Preached at
Gloucester, the 15th of May, 1660. Being the day his Royal Majesty, King
CHARLES the Second, was Proclaimed. SHOWING, How the Strong Man Satan is cast
out of the Palace of the Heart, and the Lord CHRIST Possessed thereof. With
some Application to the present Ejectment of the late Usurper, Satan's
Confederate, out of the Royal Palace, and the Lords Christ, King CHARLES the
Second Possessed thereof. By WILL. BARTHOLMEVV, M. A. and Vicar of Campden in
Gloucester-shire.

If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed,

Jo. 8.36. Duae sunt Urbes, una Civitas Dei Jerusalem: Altera civitas Diaboli
Babylon. Illam aedificat amor Dei-pertingens usq ad contemptum sui: Hanc
aedificat amor sui-pertingens usque ad contemptum Dei.

Aug. London, Printed by W. Godbid, for Richard Thrale at the Crosse-Keyes, at
St. Paul's Gate, entering into Cheapside. 1660.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, My very good Lady and Patroness, JULIAN, Vicountesse
CAMPDEN, All increase of Grace and Happiness.
MADAM,
WHen I Preached this slender Piece, there was not the least thought in my mind
of bringing it to the Press; but since, being beseiged with a strong force of
Importunities, Friends conquered me, though they can never confute me of my
Opinion, touching the little worth so imperfect an embryon as this has to go
abroad in public: I was confident it would meet with Censures, and therefore
careful it might find some Sanctuary: And no better then under your Honors
protection, where the unworthy Author, and those that are dear to him have
found so good shelter. Be pleased therefore, I beseech your Honor, to let it
come forth under your Patronage, both as a pledge of my Duty, and
thankfulness, for your many and great Favors conferred on me, unworthy of the
least. And also that others seeing your Honors Name prefixed, may be induced
to read it over. Some right you have to it, also for the Argument sake: It is a
discourse of a Christians Liberty, purchased by Jesus Christ, from under Sin,
and Satan's thraldom. And to whom muy fitly can it be dedicated then to your
self, whom the Lord has so conspicuously called to partake of that Liberty?
witness the luster of your personal Sanctity, your constancy in Private and
Public Devotions, and your zealous endeavor to plant Religion in the meanest
of your Family, that you and your House, may unanimously serve the Lord.

There is something likewise in this Sermon, by way of Congratulation and
Thankfulness, to the great God of Heaven, by whom Kings reign on Earth, for
that much longed for liberty, restored unto us as Subjects, by the most happy
and miraculous Advent of our Dread Sovereign, King CHARLES the Second, to the
Royal throne of his Ancestors. And in this Liberty, likewise as your Honor
receives a large share, so of Joy and Thankfulness, you render unto God a
liberal tribute. And not your self only, but your Family and noble relations
(who have ever given abundant testimony of their Loyalty to his Sacred Majesty,
and to his Royal Father of Glorious memory) do now proportionably rejoice and
bless God for his happy and wonderful Restoration: And all their Sufferings
for their Fidelity to their Prince, are remembered no more, for joy that our
Sovereign Lord the KING is come in peace to his House.

Thus does your Honors Piety and Loyalty, both challenge an interest in this
little mite, heightened much in worth by your Honors acceptance of it. The
Blessing of God go along with it, and make it effectual to the building up of
every one that reads it in Faith and Love: And the good Lord continue and
multiply the comfort of his Spirit in your Heart, and your blessed hope to be
partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

Campden in Gloucester-shire. Your Honors Chaplain to all Christian Duty, and
Service obliged, WILL. BARTHOLMEVV.

THE STRONG MAN EJECTED, BY A STRONGER then HE.
St. Luke Chap. 11. Ver. 21, 22. When a strong man armed keeps his Palace,
his goods are in peace.

But when a stronger then he shall come upon him, and overcome him, he takes
from him all his armor wherein he trusted, and divides his spoils.


AT the 14. verse we find our Blessed Savior casting out a dumb Devil; In
his own nature dumb, as to any penitent confession of any sin he ever yet
committed: Howbeit here he is said to be dumb in regard of operation, casting
this Daemoniac into a disease that deprived him of his Speech, and of his Sight
too, Blind Mat. 12.12.
and Dumb, says Saint Matthew, and of his Hearing also, as some Interpreters
suppose, because we do not read that our Savior says, as at other times,
Believe thou that I am able to do this?

Now, The coherence and occasion of the words being
as most actions fall under diverse constructions, the best we can say, or do,
undergoes diverse opinions and censures, so does this miracle of Christ. The
Common People, and Illiterate Multitude stand amazed and wonder; saying, Matthew.
12.13.
This is (or is not this the Son of David?) the Messiah that shall deliver us
and reign over us?

But the learned Scribes and Pharisees, A Scandal which the Scribes would
fasten upon Christ
made up of depraving, they slander and disparage him (how much better is it to
be Holy then Witty?) He casts out Devils (say they) through Beelzebub the
Prince of Devils: that Lord of Flies, so called, either from the abundance of
Flies flocking to the Sacrifices offered to that Idol, or from his aid implored
against those Swarms of Flies that did infest Ekron in Palestine their
Country, where this Idol was worshipped: Or because, Removed by him, with three
arguments.
when the Devil gave his responses to the Inchanters, he appeared in the form
of a great Fly. This their calumny and aspersion our Savior refuteth.

Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to desolation. Truth it is
that (upon compact) one Devil may undo what another does (attempting by such
politic combination) in the same project to resieve the Body; but to gain the
Soul, and to enlarge the Kingdom of Darkness. But for one Devil to oppose
another, to cast the Devils Kingdom out of the world, and to set up the
Kingdom of God, Ver. 20.
(which is Christ's design) this Beelzebub will not do, neither can such a
design be carried on, by those that unite in one, but amongst Enemies that are
divided.

ab exemplo pari, from the like example: Ver. 19.
If I by Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do your Sons cast them out? Your
Sons (i) the Children of your own Nation, those Exorcists born amongst you, who
cast out Devils Acts 19.13, 17. Matthew. 7.22.
in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ: You do not say they cast them out by
Beelzebub, why then are you partial Judges, to pass contrary Sentence on the
like fact? To applaud them who cast out Devils by my power, and to condemn me
who am that Power?

Military similitude. The Devil is strong and completely armed, and will not be
cast out of his Possession, but by a strength superior: so that my
dispossessing of Satan, is an evidence that I do not use his power, but that
mine is greater than any he has: For even common experience shows, that no
man can come into a Strong man's house, and (...), Plunder his Household Stuff,
unless he be stronger then he.

When a strong man armed, etc.] Hitherto we have only viewed the Casket, The
sense of the words. History. Mystery. Calvin in loc. and saepe.
there is a Jewel in the Text not yet showed you. Besides the History
(whereunto we shall have occasion to look back anon) there is a farther Mystery
to be discovered in the words. Christ's bodily cures had usually a tendency to
something Spiritual, for the saving of the Soul. This Blind and Dumb man whom
Satan possessed, is a type of all men that lie under the Dominion of Sin: 2
Cor. 4.4.
whose Eyes the God of this world has blinded, Ephesians. 2.2.
whose heart the Prince of the Air keeps in peaceable possession: When a
Strong man, etc.

Until a Stronger then he [i] Jesus Christ, shall be pleased in mercy to visit
any such miserable Vassal. Then he ejects Satan, pulls down the reign of sin,
takes possession of that poor captivated heart for his own habitation, restores
to God his Creature that was lost, and to Man the Graces whereof he was
despoiled.

But when a Stronger, The division and parts.
etc.] Which words are divided as the World is, two Kings over two great
Families or Kingdoms divided both. Christ and Belial. the God that overcomes
the world, and the God of this evil world. The King of Saints, Jesus Christ;
and the King, the Prince of the Power of Darkness, the Devil.

The order of the words invite me to speak first of the Prince of the Power of
Darkness, wherein first we are to take notice of his Power, he is a strong man.

Secondly his Armor, he is a strong man armed.

Thirdly, his possession he keeps the Palace.

Fourthly, the posture of his Subjects, like the people of Laish, all quiet and
secure, his goods are in peace.

When a Strong man armed, etc.

Until secondly, Jesus Christ, the King of Saints comes, ejects Satan, and
enters his Territories by force: Who is described here, first by his strength
and valor, He is stronger then Satan, and comes upon him. Secondly, his
Victory, He overcomes him. Thirdly his most prudent management of that
Victory; 1. He disarms the enemy. 2. Rescues his Captives out of the enemies
hands, and (as David in the case of Ziglag, so the Son of David) recovers all
the spoils and divides them amongst them.

But when a stronger then he, etc.

To all which particulars I shall likely speak something whilst I insist on
these two Propositions, Sum'd up in 2. propositions.
whereunto we are to hold us at this time.

First, That all unconverted ones, living in a state of habitual sin, and
actual disobedience against God: they are in bondage under Satan: Led captive
by him according to his Will.

When a strong man armed, etc.

Secondly, When Jesus Christ is pleased in mercy to visit any such poor
captives, He ejects Satan, pulls down the Reign and Dominion of Sin, takes
possession of their hearts for his own habitation, and restores unto them the
graces whereof they were despoyled.

But when a stronger, 1. Proposition. All men unconverted are in Bondage under
Satan. 1 Cor. 6.11. Ephesians. 2.2.
etc.

I will begin with the First.

All unconverted, etc.

Such were some of you, says St. Paul to the Corinthians, such were the
Ephesians, Walking according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the Spirit
that now works in the children of disobedience; amongst whom (says the
Apostle) we had our conversation in times past. Titus 3.3.
We our selves (says he) had our conversation in times past, foolish,
disobedient, serving diverse Lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy,
haters and hating one another. (Deeds of Darkness all) which sins while men
live under them, we need no other evidence that they are under the Dominion of
the Prince of the power Darkness; for his Children ye are (says our Savior)
whose works ye do; and his Servants ye are (says the Apostle) to whom ye obey.
Romans 6.16. A hard and cruel Bondage because they are under.


A very hard and cruel hondage.

1. A strong man. Prove. 21.16. Mr. Mede in loc. Prove. 21.16.
First, Because he that deteins them is (...) a strong man, a Goliah-Gyant. The
man that wanders out of the way of Wisdom, shall remain in the Congregation of
the Dead; In caetu Gigantium, in the house of Giants (that is the proper
signification) and so was Hell called by the Jews before the Captivity (says a
learned Critic) the assembly of Giants, of those Giants, and mighty men, who
in the old world rebelled against God, and of those apostate Giants, who fell
from God, and of Angels became Devils. Who since their fall have lost their
spiritual Love, but retain their natural power. All which power in them, how
great soever, is now become the power of Darkness, Triumphing in all the
ungodly, drowned in Ignorance, disobedience, and unbeleif, which the Apostle
calls Darkness: militant, combating with the godly, Ephesians. 5.8.
For we wrestle not (says he) with flesh and blood but against principalities
and powers, and spiritual wickedness, against wicked Spirits in ability
transcending the power of flesh and blood.

Mighty Giants in whose sight we are but as Grasshoppers, and as easily
destroyed by them. Job. 40.41.
Behemoth and Leviathan names (say some) signifying the Devil, the King of the
Children of Pride, and all the powers of the earth cannot match him; A roaring
Lion who would devour all, But thanks be given to the Lion of the tribe of
Judah, Jesus Christ, who for those few Lambs sake that are of his fold, the
Church, has chained that roaring Lion the Devil, and none become a prey unto
him but such as yield to his Temptations, and by their wilful disobedience come
within his chain, such he holds fast in the cords of their sins, and they are
Captives to this Strong man; Whose miserable captivity is so much the more hard
and cruel.

2. Armed having arms
Secondly, In that he is armed as well as strong.

A Strong man armed, being furnished with arms, first of his own, secondly
from our selves, thirdly from the Law.

First, I from himself.
He himself is a Magazine of temptations, having his Quiver full of poisoned
Arrows or Darts (as the Apostle calls them) happily because most consonant to
his name (...) of (...) a metaphor from casting of Darts. Ephesians. 6.16.
Amongst which multitude, there be two poisoned ones whereof he makes frequent
use. The one dipped in a cold poison to benumme and make men stupid with careless
security, whilst they presume to sin. The other dipped in a hot poison, to scorch
men after they have sinned in restless despair.

A pregnant Example of both which we have in the incestious Corinthian, 2. Cor.
2.11.
whom Satan carries on so far in lust as to make him presume to join in an
incestuous match. Afterward (when by the Churches censure he felt the smart
and repented of his sin) then Satan wrought upon his sorrow to drive him to
Despair, that he might perish under cure. Which reach of Satan Paul
discovering, he writ to the Corinthians to forgive him, and to comfort him lest
he should be swallowed up of overmuch sorrow, and lest (says he) Satan should
get an advantage over us; for we are not ignorant of his (...) his methods,
Depths and Stratagems, especially in making use of these two, either to set men
on the pinnacle of Presumption, that they may sin without fear, or persuade them
to cast themselves down into the Praecipice of Despair, that they may sorrow
without hope.

Secondly, 2. from us.
He is armed from us, from those exerbitances that are by nature within us, he
throws the stone, but it is the mud within us that troubles our peace. The
Ignorance and Darkness that is in men's minds (especially being yet unconverted)
their carnal reasonings, and all that stubbornness that is in their wills, the
faculties of their soul, the Members of their body yielded up to be weapons and
instruments of sin. Musc. interpret.
Haec sunt diaboli adversus nos tela infesta (says St. Bazil.)

These all become Satan's armor, wherewith he fights against us. The Prince
of this world comes (says our Savior) and he has nothing in me. No
darkness, nor disobedience in me, to arm him against me. But now there is by
nature in debauched Man, many noisome and hurtful lusts, a party of the Devils
within him, to open a postern gate, and give him possession of the whole Isle
of Man. Otherwise Satan being without, could have no power to enter the Fort,
unless it were given him from within; whom to cast out, it is beyond the
sphere of Man's activity. For,

Thirdly, he fortifies himself with a Law, all men out of Christ, and under the
reign of Sin, are debtors to the Law: 3. From the Law.
They owe a debt of obedience to the whole Law, and a debt of eternal
punishment in Hell, for the breach of the Law; all which Satan knows very well,
and will not spare (when he sees his time) to thunder forth and discharge all
his threatenings of the Law against the guilty Offender, to write them in Blood,
to pluck him by the Throat, and to say, Pay that thou owe? to awake
Conscience, to fly in his face, and tell him, that they that do such things
are worthy of Death. Death in the end, and Death without end. Heb. 2.14.
Under the Fear of which Death, (says the Apostle) they are all their lifetime
subject to Bondage. A hard and cruel bondage.

3. Because he keeps the Palace, the Heart.
Thirdly, Because the strong man armed keeps the Palace, the Heart, the
precious Soul.

If we peruse histories of the anguish and cruel bondage, that the worst of
slaves have suffered, we find that the commands which their rigid Taskemasters
exercised over them, terminated in the body, the bodily service; that was the
chiefest they looked after, whence they were called (...) Bodies. Doctor
Sanderson Sermon. 7. ad Aulam.
Now this cruel Tyrant is not content with the Out-house the Body, or the
smaller Forts the Members of the Body, that is but petty inconsiderable Pillage
and spoil: Da mihi animas (says he) give me the Souls, the Royal Palace, the
Heart.

The principal thing that Almighty God challenges of Man, is the Heart, My Son
give me thy heart. That he would have for a Temple to dwell in, but this proud
Devil has usurped it: The House of God is become a den of thieves; the Idol
Dagon is set up in the Ark of God, and the abomination of desolation stands
there, where by Creation was the holy place: The Heart, designed to be an
habitation for Gods spirit is become more impure then the Stable of Augaeus, A
cage of unclean Birds. So that we need not wonder why the Heart is deceitful
above all things, since it has received the Father of Lies to lodge in it:
When it speaks fair, believe it not, for there are seven abominations lodge
there. It was, and it should be a Garden enclosed for Christ, but till
Conversion it is an open Field, where Satan sowes his Tares, whence spring evil
Thoughts, Adulteries, Fornications, Murders, Thefts, Covetousness,
Wickedness, Deceit, Lasciviousness, an evil Eye, Blasphemy, Pride,
Foolishness; for from this Palace, the Devil has influence upon the whole
Man. The Understanding is darkened, with mists of errors, and strong delusions;
the Will is become Rebel to Jesus Christ, saying, We will not have this man to
reign over us; And, What is the Almighty that we should serve him? The
Affections are wedded to Satan's loves and hatreds, and the members of the body
(like the Centurions Servants) are ready to go and return at his beck, who sits
in his Palace, and no man says, cur ita facis, why do thou so? for His goods
are in peace.

4. Because his goods are in peace,
The fourth and last, but not the least aggravation, of sinful man's slavery and
bondage.

When the strong man armed keeps the House, his goods are in peace.

The old Cerberus has his Prisoners sure enough, and now he will not wag his
tongue to disquiet them, yea rather uses all stratagems to preserve in his
Vassalls a temporary peace, which peace proceeds,
that they may not attempt an escape from under his Yoke.

In order whereunto, First, from Satan's tampering with Conscience.
first he tampers with Conscience, to remove thence all scruple. The conscience
of Man lies under two operations of the Devil, Psalm. 65.3.
In the evil day of affliction, when a man's iniquities prevail against him,
then he awakes Conscience, that every sinful moat may seem a beam, and so he
may put all in a hurry, as if Hell and the Soul were met together.

But in time of Prosperity, he sows Pillows under men's Elbows, and is desirous
Conscience should stretch it self on a bed of Ivory, and take its ease.

A Sermon at such a time (like that of Paul to Felix) of Judgment to come, is
not in season. The time he knows is not yet for his Prisoner to receive his
torment, therefore he desires he may live at ease, that his goods may be in
peace.

2. 2. From the nature of habitual sin.
This evil peace receives nourishment from the nature of habitual sin. A
godly man, though he may be taken by occasion in a fault, yet finds he no rest
in the way that is finfull; No rest in my bones by reason of my sin, (says
David;) but an ungodly man Jude v. 12.
feeds himself in sin without fear.

For as no element (they say) is ponderous in its proper place (if we lie under
deep waters, the burden thereof offends us not, though otherwise they may
annoy us) so Sin is not a burden to a man in his unregeneracy, and his
unconverted condition, it being in him as in its proper region or element, he
is at peace.

This Lethargy takes growth.

3. From evil managing plenty, unto living voluptuously: 3. From plenty ill
managed.
It is the rich man in the Gospel that said, Soul take thy ease, thou have
goods laid up for many years.

A Surfeit of plenty or pleasure drowns sinners in a sleep of security, and then
Satan has them sure.

It was Crasus his council to Cyrus that that if he would hold the Lydians in
Slavery, he must let them sing, and play, and drink, and dance and dally, and
such pipes Satan wants not, that a dead sleep of carnal security may fall upon
his Vessals, and that they may for the present live in peace: A wretched and
miserable peace that ends in ruin and destruction.

The Arist. Prob. Sect. 23. q. 5.
Philosopher tells us of a Sea, wherein by hollows of the Earth, or some
whirling attractive property, the Ship is sucked in, and cast away in a calm; so
do wicked men's Souls gently perish in the midst of their own security: While
they cry peace, peace (says the Scripture) sudden destruction shall come upon
them, as travel upon a woman, and they shall not escape.

Great peace have they that love Gods Law, (says the Psalmist) and nothing
shall offend them. But such as have forsaken Gods Law, and cast it behind
their back, if they have Peace, the Devil is in that peace. If Pharaoh be at
peace with the Israelites, it is a sign they are his Bondslaves. If the Jailer
be at peace with his Prisoner, it is a sign he has him under Bar and Bolt;
and if Satan be at peace with wicked men, and they at peace in their Sins, it
is a sign he is possessed of the Palace, (their hearts) and they are his
Vassals; and so my first Proposition is cleared.

That all unconverted ones, etc.

Whither now (by way of Application) shall I convert my Speech, Application to
all that are unconverted, to take up a Lamentation, and to cry mightily to God,
to send his Son Jesus Christ, to make them free.
but to such as are not yet converted from the error of their ways, and from
the evil of their doings. To all that live in the practice of any known sins,
and yet are at peace in themselves: that they would take up a Lamentation and
Mourning for their sad and miserable condition, as one that mourns for the
death of his firstborn.

The Prince of the Power of darkness, they are under him; his Captives,
Vassals and slaves. You walk in darkness, in disobedience against God (that's
the way you are in) and darkness, outer darkness will be your portion, that's
the end you are hasting to.

Profligate sinners may say in their ruff and jollity, as those Gallant
fellows in the 12 Psalm and 4 verse. Who is Lord over us?

Truly it is no hard matter to answer you, even the Devil, all you have, all
you are, is his, he has the custody of that Royal Fort, the Palace the Heart,
that's his house; I will go to my house (says that unclean spirit) Matthew.
12.44. and when he comes he finds it empty, so is every heart that is not
established with grace, and garnished, ready for him and his guests, even seven
Devils more wicked then himself, which push on miserable captives to commit
iniquity with greediness, Doctor Sanderson. Ser. 7. ad Aulam.
for go they needs must whom the Devil drives: Hence some melt themselves in
Lusts and sordid pleasures, possessed with a Voluptuous Devil; others pine
themselves lean, whilst they behold the fatness of their neighbors portion,
Jo. 4.5.
The spirit that dwells in them lusts after Envy, behold a malicious Devil.
Another upon the wings of Ambition, soars to an usurped pinnacle of Honor; lo
there dwells a proud Devil. Another stops his ears, and will not hear sound
doctrine, nor seasonable reprehension, but is a follower of such teachers, as
are after his own lusts, not being pleased with that which is true, but
allowing that only to be true which pleases him: The Devil has infected his
ear with an itch, and unless you claw him, he will not hear you. Another
labors of a Bloody Flux, of Oaths, or lets his mouth loose Epist. Jude ver 8.
to speak evil of Dignities: The Devil has possessed his tongue, and set it
on fire with the fire of Hell. O that all men living and lying in these and the
like sins, would take this to heart, that their precious Soul (for which the
world assords not a valuable compensation) is in the possession of Satan: they
are under the shadow and government of that Bramble the Devil, whence nothing
can be expected but the fire of Hell to come forth and destroy them. Exodus 5.19.
The people of Israel finding themselves in evil case under Pharaoh, when they
were to gather straw, and the whole tale of Brick also exacted, they cried for
anguish of heart, because of their cruel bondage, and the Lord heard their cry,
Exodus 6.6, 7, 8.
and by the hand of his Captain Moses did bring them from under their burdens.
O that all in their sins would be so sensible of their bondage, as to cry
earnestly to God for their Souls, as the man in the Gospel for his Son, Have
mercy upon me O Lord for my Soul is possessed with a Devil, and sometimes he
throws me into the Fire, and sometimes into the Water; Makes me as hot as fire
to the pursuit of that which is evil, but to that which is good, as cold as
Ice. That they would cry mightily to God, one deep call upon another, a depth
of misery, on a depth of mercy. I am so fast in prison, I cannot get out. Then
would the Lord send a greater then Moses to deliver them, even his Son Jesus
the Captain of our Salvation, on whom he has powered his spirit to bring
deliverance to Captives, and to open the Prison door, to such as are bound
under Satan.

The second and most welcome assertion that now invites your attention. 2 Prop.
A sinners deliverance out of Bondage by Christ, who is


When Jesus Christ is pleased in mercy to visit any such poor Captives, he
ejects Satan, pulls down the reign and dominion of Sin, takes possession of
their hearts for his own habitation, and restores unto them the graces whereof
they were despoiled.

But when a stronger, First, stronger then Satan, and comes upon him.
etc.

This strong man Satan, he buckles on his Armor about him, stands upon his
Guard, is resolved to keep his Captives, and will not let them go. But there is
no remedy, he must yield perforce what he cannot hold.

For a stronger then he, comes upon him, and overcomes him.

His valor that the first.

Psalm. 89.19.
The Lord has laid help upon one that is mighty. Dan. 9.25.
Messiah the Prince, as Daniel calls him, enters the lists, encounters the
Prince of the power of Darkness, and the enterprise shall go on with success,
Esaias 53.10.
the good pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands, for he waketh in
great strength, and is mighty to subdue enemies, and mighty to save his people;
In whose presence, Conquest its self stands exspecting only his dread beck.

Luke 1.19.
The Lord has raised up a horn of Salvation, his Son Jesus Christ; Acts 10.43.
To him give all the Prophets witness. A horn of Salvation, noting his power
and strength to break all the horns of Satan, and to batter down his Kingdom,
until it fall to the ground, as the Walls of Jericho at the sound of the Rams
horns.

Hail King (said they in scorn) but King he is in earnest, Esaias 96.54.
The Government is upon his shoulders, having a golden Scepter of Grace, which
his people kiss, and an Iron rod of strength, wherewith (according to the
first Prophecy) Genesis 3.15.
He breaks the head of that old Dragon the Devil, who is as little able to
resist him as a Potters Vessel a rod of Iron: to whom deservedly appertains
this magnificent Elogie, He is stronger then all. Greater is he that is in you,
says Saint John (that is Christ) then he that is in the world [i] the Devil.
And for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, 1 John 3.8
that he might destroy the works of the Devil. For the accomplishing whereof he
is thoroughly furnished. Col. 1.19.
In him dwells all fullness. A fullness of Wisdom to contrive, a fullness of
Power to effect, and a fullness of success; the Battle is not doubtful, the
Event is certain, He goes on conquering, and to conquer.

The second particular, 2. Overcomes him.
His victory; But when a stronger then he shall come upon him, and overcome him.

David, with a stone out of a sling, smote Goliath to the ground, and then with
his own Sword severed his Blasphemous head from his shoulders.

The Son of David, Jesus Christ, Daniels stone, cut forth of the Mountain
without hands (born of a Virgin that never knew man) smote that Great Goliath,
the Devil, foiled him with his own Weapon, conquered him with his own Sword; By
death, overcame him that had the power of death. 1 Cor. 23.24.
Christ Crucified, was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles
foolishness: but to them which are called, the power of God, and the wisdom
of God: The power of God to conquer the strong man, in the Text Satan, and the
wisdom of God to befool that old Serpent, who would not have put it into the
heart of Judas to betray him, had he not thought, that when he was nailed to
the Cross, he could neither fight nor fly: but the Devil was mistaken for all
his craft.

The Cross was Christ's triumphal Chariot, wherein he subdued all the
Potentates and Powers of darkness; Col. 2.15.
having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a show of them openly,
triumphing over them in it, in the Cross: for duo in cruce affixi
intelliguntur, (says Origin) two were fixed on the Cross, Christ visibly and
willingly for a time, and Satan invisibly and unwillingly for ever.

Now this victory takes quite away the scandal of the Cross, and blessed Paul
will glory in nothing Gal. 6.14.
but the Cross of Christ. Christ's Death gave such a blow to the Devil, as cast
him down without any hopes of ever rising again: when he had swallowed up
Christ in the Grave, he thought he had got the Field, and that all was sure,
but he found (to his sorrow) a Hook under that Bait which he never suspected;
he received a Trojan horse within his Walls, which forced him to yield both
Field and Victory; and he by Death seizing upon him that was Innocent,
forfeited his power over us that are guilty, so many of us as truly believe in
Christ. An Eye of Faith, does see in the Death and Passion of Christ. Hell
disappointed, Satan confounded, and Christs-poor captived Lambs rescued (as a
panting prey) out of the paw of that roaring Lion, and the grim mouth of that
raging Bear.

Object. But you will say, Satan does still fight against the Faithful by his
assaults and temptations. Satan yet fights against the faithful.


Answ. True, he does so, Christ permits him.

Childrens Graces, and to work them to a conformity with himself.

Believers, they being built upon a Rock, against which the gates of Hell shall
not prevail.

conquered enemy, who has more Gall then strength: so that if we like good
Soldiers of Jesus Christ resist, steadfast in the Faith, the victory undoubtedly
will be ours. He that has trodden down Satan under his, will also tread him
down under our Feet; and we shall have cause to triumph and say, 1 Cor. 15.57.
Thanks be unto God, which gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Who the better to encourage us in this conflict, and to assure us of conquest,
has taken away from him all his armor.

But when a stronger then he comes upon him, and overcomes him, he takes
from him all his armor, wherein he trusted.

That Is the third. 3. Takes from him his armor.


Satan is armed: first (as you have heard) with his own subtle and serpentine
temptations, which are so many stings and darts, 1. Blunting the darts of his
temptations.
whereby precious Souls receive many deadly wounds. But as a Serpent fixing his
sting upon a Rock, finds no entrance, and renders his sting thereby useless;
so that old Serpent the Devil, attempting to fasten the sting of his
temptations upon the Rock which is Christ, lost his sting there, the power, the
venom of it, and has made it incapable of stinging us, having by Faith once
taken sanctuary in the clefts of that Rock. Ephesians. 6.16.
Therefore above all, (says the Apostle) take the shield of Faith, wherewith
you shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the Devil. Temptations are
as so many darts that poison the Soul, and scorch it as with fire: But Christ
touched by Faith, Faith in the promises made unto us, yea and Amen in Christ,
fetches virtue from his blood, (our Antidote) to repel that poison, and to
quench those fiery darts, which otherwise would drink up our spirits.

Receive Christ Jesus into your hearts by Faith, set open the everlasting
doors, and let the King of Glory come into his Palace: then let Satan's
temptations fly like Darts and Arrows so thick, as they may seem to darken the
Sun: we shall fight in the shade, even under the shadow of the wings of the Sun
of righteousness, we shall be safe under his Feathers, his faithfulness and
truth shall be our Shield and Buckler.

But secondly, besides the darts of his temptations, 2. Subduing our
corruptions.
he is furnished with armor from our own sins and lusts: True, but Christ's
conquest is over Sin, as well as Satan; he has delivered us from the
punishment of sin by his death, and from the power of sin by his Grace. Yet all
this still upon the condition of the new Covenant, (to wit) a lively Faith in
Christ Jesus, manifested by Repentance from dead works, and a care to live
righteously. This is not a cause meriting Christ's victory, but a condition, a
qualification necessarily required in all that shall partake of his victory:
which if by us performed, then our sins shall never be our ruin: Not our sins
past, he has cast them all into the depths of the Sea, he will blot them out
of his remembrance, which is (in some sort) to make them, as if they had never
been. And for those present remainders of sin, he will abate their strength by
the power of his grace, convert our Members to be weapons of righteousness
unto God, and bring us daily to a more intimate communion with himself in
knowledge, love and obedience.

Yet thirdly, 3. Paying the debt, the Law requires of us.
There is another parcel of armor Satan makes not a little use of, the Law. He
draws up a charge against us, as debtors to the whole Law by us violated and
broken, and therefore exposed to the wrath of God, which is even a consuming
fire. But ever blessed be our Redeemer and surety Jesus Christ, he has paid
the whole debt, the debt of universal and exact obedience, which we did owe to
the Law as a Covenant of works, that he has paid, It behooves us (says he of
himself) to fulfill all righteousness: The debt of malediction and wrath,
which the Law inflicteth as a curse that he has paid, being made a curse for
us, and having done so much, he has wrung the evidences out of Satan's hands;
so that now there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. The Law
being satisfied, the deluge of Gods wrath is abated and dried up, and the
Father looking on Believers through his Son, in the midst of Wrath remembers
Mercy. For is his wrath a Fire? the water that flowed out of his side has
quenched it. Is it a Cup? he has drank it; the potion killed him, but cured
us. Is it a Wine Press? he has trodden the Wine Press of his Fathers wrath
alone, and none of the people were with him. Is the severe Justice thereof to
be satisfied? he has done it without the impeachment of an iota. Is it a debt?
he has paid the utmost farthing. And to establish the hearts of Believers, and
penitent sinners in this truth, that they may have strong consolation, it was
not without a Mystery, that the Lord sent an Angel to roll away the Stone
from the Sepulcher of Christ, what needs an Angel? he was God as well as Man:
If stones cleave asunder at his Passion, they would remove at his Resurrection?
True, but an Officer, an Angel is sent to testify the debt is paid, the Law is
satisfied, the Prison door is opened, and the Prisoner may come forth.

Let not Satan now boast of his armor, his own policy, our Sins, or the Laws
claim: Christ has taken away all his armor wherein he trusted, and divides
his spoils. The last Improvement of this great conquest and victory.

And divides his spoils. 4. Dividing the spoils, which is spoken in regard of


Whereof we have have a good comment in the 4. Chapter of the Epistle to the
Ephesians, and the 8. verse, He has led Captivity captive, and given gifts
unto men. He has led Captivity captive, 1. Persons.
is either taken actively or passively, actively, he that did lead his people,
his Elect captive (to wit) the Devil, him Christ has led captive, and Epist.
Jud. v. 6.
reserved him in everlasting chains under Darkness, unto the Judgment of the
great Day, Passively, he has led Captivity captive [i] those that were led
captive by Satan, the Lord Jesus has turned their captivity, and brought them
under his Government, to march under his Banner, to fight his Battles, and to
receive his pay. Thus then he divides his spoils, disposes of Satan as his
Prisoner, of Satan's Vassals for his own Freemen, so many of them as renounce
Satan, and come under him for protection.

Again, 2. Gifts and Graces as
he divides his spoils [i] he has given gifts unto men, even to the
rebellious, if they will lay down their weapons of Rebellion, take up the
gauntlet in his quarrel, and go into the field against Sin and Satan: Look what
we have lost by Adams fall, (who was foiled by Satan) and by our own wilful
disobedience, is all restored to us by Christ's victory. Particularly, the Image
of God, perfect Liberty, the Celestial Paradise, withal the inexhausted
treasures of Grace, and Glory contained in them.

First, 1. The Image of God.
The Image of God, that rich spoil, that best robe Christ has put upon us, so
that if you ask a Believer, whose Image and superscription he bears? Gods, Col.
3.10. Ephesians. 4.24.
being renewed by Christ in Knowledge, in Righteousness and Holiness, after
the Image of him that created him.

Secondly, 2. Perfect liberty.
perfect Liberty; For if the Son make you Free, then are you Free indeed: Free
from Sin, and Free from Death, from the terror of the one, and from the torment
of the other. Only abuse not your Liberty (says the Apostle) it is a freedom
from sin, but a freedom to service, that having your Heart set at liberty, you
may the more cheerfully run the ways of Gods commandments.

Thirdly, 3. The celestial paradise.
the Celestial Paradise, Col. 1.13.
he has delivered us out of the Power of Darkness, and translated us into the
Kingdom of his dear Son, a Kingdom of Grace in possession, Ver. 20.
the Kingdom of God is come upon you, and of Luke 22.23.
glory in reversion. These are the rich spoils our most puissant conqueror
divides amongst his Soldiers. I appoint unto you a Kingdom as my Father has
appointed me. And having brought your Meditations hither, here I shall
endeavor to lodge them, with some short Application, and the shorter it will
be, because so much has been interwoven in the former discourse. That which
remains is,

First, Application.
By way of Query. Secondly, Of Counsel. Thirdly; For Courage and Animation.
First, First, for quaere.
you have heard the whole world is engaged, either for Christ or Satan, all
fight either under Christ's ensign or the Devils. The important quaery now is,
who are you for? unless you return the answer of a good Conscience to this
quaery, you lose your soul, which is more worth then the whole world. Blessed
be God we are yet in the land of the living, let us make it the business of our
whole life, to give a good answer to this weignty quaery, before we go hence,
and be no more seen. Think of it what answer you will give to God, when Death
shall summon you to his awful tribunal: If you have been for Christ behold his
arms open to relieve you, if for Satan, the Devil will have his due. O that we
could say (with that holy Martyr) none but Christ, none but Christ; certain it
is, that all one day, shall be subject to Christ, either as Subjects or Rebels:
if they that will not kiss the golden Scepter of his grace, held forth in the
Word, they shall feel the weight of his Iron rod, which shall break them in
pieces like a Potters Vessel, while there is none to help. Let us therefore
cast down all their weapons of Rebellion and disobedience, lest we be found
fighting against Christ, Are you stronger then he that has overcome this
strong man? are you able to meet him with ten thousand sins, who is able to
come against you with twenty thousand Plagues and Judgments? who will come one
day 2 These. 1.8.
in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.w Depart, (I pray you) from the Tents of
Wickedness, lest you be consumed in your sins.

And now the alarm sounds in our ears, resolve to be volunteers for Christ,
consecrating and giving up your selves a willing people unto him, though other
Lords and other Lusts have had dominion over us: yet now let us make mention of
his name only, saying, We will have no King but Jesus Christ reign thou over
us, for thou have delivered us from Satan that strong man. And being thus
resolved hearken

Secondly, 2. Counsel.
to the Counsel.

If you be for Christ then deliver up the Palace to him, let him have the Heart
for his Temple, and let it be beautified and furnished as is meet for his
entertainment, like the Temple of the triumphant Solomon, with the rod of
Aaron, wholesome Discipline in an holy frame of Heart, the two Tables of the
Law, the two Testaments written in the heart: the Pot of Manna; the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper duly received, and with due preparation; Let not your
heart be so withered within you, as to forget to eat that bread, with Morning
and Evening Sacrifices of Prayers and Praises: For in his Temple does every man
speak of his honor.

Having thus consecrated the Temple of the Heart to Christ, yet know the heart
is naturally deceitful, and Satan will be busy to re-obtain his Possession:
Prove. 4.23.
Go keep thy heart (says Solomon) with all diligence; and above all thy
keepings, keep thy Heart, and let not any bosom sin lodge there with your
allowance, but though it be as dear unto you as your right Hand, or your right
Eye, yet cut it off, and cast it from you, otherwise that sin will hold
Intelligence with the Enemy, to let him in again. But when he shall see that
sin killed and crucified, the Head of it (as I may say) upon the Walls, then he
departs with shame and confusion.

But this departure will be but as he departed from Christ for a season (says
the Text,) therefore,

Thirdly, 3. Courage and Animation.
for Courage and Animation, we must all resolve upon it as good Soldiers of
Jesus Christ, to make War against Satan as long as we live, and never to be at
peace with him nor our sins, according to our vow in Baptism, which was to
renounce the Devil and all his works, and to continue Christ's faithful Soldiers
and Servants to our lives end. When the Children of Israel were entered into the
Land of Canaan, God tells them that they were to make War with the Number. 33.53.
Cananites, until they had destroyed them. So we that are entered into a
covenant of peace with Christ, must be at War with Sin and Satan, even to the
utter destruction of every Amalekite. Luke 12.5.
Think you (says our Savior to his Disciples) that I am come to send peace? I
tell you nay, but debate. Christ's business that he came upon the earth for, was
to pull down the enmity between God and us, and so to make peace; but not a
sinful peace, not peace with Satan, not peace with Sin, but to go out and fight
daily against these Philistines.

This has been the sad Catastrophe of the Caesar's and Alexanders of the world,
they have fled like Eagles to the conquering of Nations, and have been
afterward conquered with their own lusts. Bid we battle to our own
corruptions, labor to be conquerours at home, to keep that vast Sea of
Passions and Affections within due bounds: Fortior est qui se quam qui
fortissima vincit, He that overcomes himself, is greater then he that
overcomes a strong City. This is the holy War, to fight against Sin and Satan:
a War wherein we have Jesus Christ for our Captain, whose quarrel whilst we
espouse, he will Crown us with Victory, and after that gives us a Crown of
Victory. Be thou faithful unto Death (says he) and I will give thee a crown of
Life.

The Jewel, the Mystery contained in the Text, you have had revealed and opened
unto you: I must now beg a few minutes patience of you, until we have reviewed
the History.

We read in the second of the Kings and the seventh, The History reviewed and
revived at this time.
how the Lord by implanting Fantasies, and frightful apprehensions into the
minds of the Syrians, (then warring against Israel) thereby discomfitted the
whole host, so that they fled whilst none pursued them: Here was a strong man,
And a stronger then he came upon him, and overcame him, with a Fantasy, for
the weakness of God is stronger then men. Hereupon the Leapers said to one
another, This is a day of good tidings, if we hold our peace we do not well.
Doubtless this is a Day too of good Tidings, of the Proclaiming and of the
Returning of his Sacred Majesty King Charles the second into his Kingdom, and
into his Dominions with peace, safety and honor.

A strong man armed not long since kept the Palace, the Royal Palace of the
Kings of England, but a stronger then he has come upon him and overcome him.

We should not do well to refrain our lips to keep back Gods mercies from this
great congregation.

Let us cast our eyes therefore once more upon the words, and we shall meet
with correspondencies of like effects, as meet together in the Text, and
therein behold Gods mercy, and our own duty.

First, 1. The strong man, the late Usurper who was
for the strong man in the Text, him you have heard to be the Devil; The strong
man that lately kept the Palace, what was he? We shall best judge by his works
(our Saviors rule) Usurpation, Tyranny, Murder and Rebellion, you know whose
works they are, and you know whose works they have been of late years, and they
represent him that did them, as ill-favored a child as the Devil has any
(unless the Lord rich in mercy, gave him repentance) and that you may the
better know him by his features or rather deformities,

Secondly, 2. Armed.
he was a strong man armed, armed with the Serpents head, more subtle then all
the Beasts of the field: and armed with the Lions paw, with the Arms,
Ammunition, Forts, Castles, and the whole Militia of the three Nations, by him
usurped and surreptitiously gained: but what speak I of that strength? Like the
Man in the Gospel possessed with a Devil; Luke 5.3.
No man could bind him, no not with chains, but he would pluck them assunder
and break them in pieces. This great Job. 41.27.
Leviathan esteemed Covenants as straw, Protestations as rotten wood,
Engagements, Promises, and Oaths, (the strongest bonds in the world) he would
break them as easily as Judge 1.9.
Samson broke the Withs like a thread of Towe when it touched the Fire. Above
all, this 1 Samuel 17.5.
Goliath was armed with a coat of Male, with Impudence of Meridian altitude; for
he would Preach if need were, and Pray with the greatest Pharisee of them all:
yea weep too like the Crocodile over his murdered prey: full well he knew how
to cover all his horrid actings with Religion, Saint-ship, and the Liberty of
the good people of the Nation.

Thirdly, 3. Kept the Kings Koyal Palace.
in this posture this strong Man armed kept the Palace, the Royal and ancient
seat of the Kings of England. There he played Rex. The Bramble was mounted
above the Cedar of Lebanon, Antichrist in his chair (for there are 1 John 2.18.
many Antichrists) exalting himself above all that is called God, his very
Horses in the Temple of God.

Fourthly, 4. His goods are in peace, until
All this while his goods are in peace, none durst say, why do thou so? He
prospered for a time in his wickedness, lived in all jollity without the
controulment of any judgment, which indeed is one of Gods heaviest judgments,
to suffer prosperity to attend upon evil actions: Yet nothing was more common
with him and his Flatterers then to interpret it as a blessing, and from his
good success, to justify the evil of his enterprises: Felix scelus virtus
vocatur, it is no new thing to stamp the name of virtue upon prosperous
impiety; as Dionysius having a fair wind after he had robbed the Temple of
Aesculapius stuck not to say, that the Gods love Sacrilege. This conceit
reigned with him as long as he reigned, that he was bound to God, not bound by
Satan, whilst his goods were in peace.

Psalm. 37.7. Ver. 2.10.
But fret not thy self (says the Prophet David) because of the man who
brings wicked devices to pass, for he shall be cut down like the Grass, and
wither as the green Herb, yet a little while and the wicked shall not be.

A stronger then he [i] Christ in the Text, and Christ too in the first place:
2. A stronger then he came.
he sent his pale messenger Death, who came upon him, 1. The Lord Christ,
and overcame that strong man, and forced him from his Palace, and he is gone
to his own place.

There it was Christus Dominus, the Lord Christ; and Christus Dominus has sent
us Christum Domini, the Lord Christ has sent us the Lords Christ, 2. The Lords
Christ King Charles the Second.
the Lords anointed, our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the Second, to reign over
us who is stronger then the strong man, personal or collective, 1. Stronger
being assisted by God.
for the hand of God has been apparently with him in the whole series and
progress of our settlement.

The great and infinite wise God did see so many men's hearts drawn away from
their obedience to their Sovereign by strong delusions, as they could not be
reduced to their Allegiance, without the infinite expense of Blood, or by a
miracle: Behold therefore a miracle, King Charles returned from his Banishment,
arrived upon the coast of England, settled in his Throne, without one drop of
Blood shed, or one blow given, either by way of offense or defense: All
mountains of opposition are become a plain, and the Lord has brought forth the
head-stone of Englands glorious Fabric with shoutings. And let us cry, Grace,
Grace unto it.

Zech. 3.6, 7.
Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, says the Lord of hosts. Who so
sees not a miracle here, and sends not up thanks to God for it, must be like
the man of whom I spoke in the opening of the Text, possessed with a Blind and
Dumb Devil. The Lord has showed himself from Heaven wonderfully; the Finger of
God has cast the strong Man and his power out, and planted a stronger then he
in. The right hand of the Lord has the pre-eminence, the right hand of the
Lord has wrought this wonderful alteration, and given us a stronger then he,
his right hand, and his arm, and the light of his countenance, because he had
a favor unto him.

A favor to his right and unquestionable title: For the righteous Lord loves
righteousness.

A favor to his incomparable patience, under unparalleld afflictions: Ja. 5.14.
You have heard of the afflictions of Job (says Saint James) and you have
heard of the patience of King CHARLES and have seen the end of the Lord: Psalm.
40.1, 2, 3.
He waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto him and heard his cry,
and has brought him out of his distress, and has set his feet upon a rock,
and established his goings, and has put a new song into his mouth.

A favor to his invincible constancy in the Christian Religion, established in
the Church of England. In that Religion his Royal Father of glorious memory
died, a Martyr, a King amongst Martyrs: And in that, Religion his Royal Son
has lived, being immovable as a Rock in the midst of the Sea of temptations:
Thus did the Stars of his Virtues shine most clearly in the Dark Night of his
Exilement. And for this cause we trust he will be daily stronger in the
affections of his Loyal people, and of all the true Sons of our Mother the
Church of England.

Secondly, 2. And has overcome.
He will come upon them, and overcome them; yea, he has overcome the hearts of
his people already, by his Acts of Indulgence: As the Lord Christ draws his
people unto him, even so does the Lords Christ. Hosea 11.4.
I drew them (says the Lord) with cords of a Man, with bonds of Love, and I
was to them as they that take off the Yoke, etc.

So does our Gracious Sovereign humanely and courteously draw the hearts of
his people unto him, without rigor or violence, not roughly drawing them as
slaves, but gently alluring them as Sons, sparing many, as a Father does his
Son, that has highly exasperated him.

Thirdly, 3. Takes away the armor.
Having overcome his people, he takes away their armor: All those poysonfull
weeds of disobedience and contradiction, which through the malice of the Devil,
and craftiness of Seducers, were planted in many peoples hearts, do now dye
and wither at the approach of this glorious Sun. The people are daily
undeceived, and see plainly, that Liberty and Loyalty dwell together, and that
they can partake of no true Freedom, who withdraw their obedience to their
lawful SOVEREIGN. Who,

Fourthly, 4. Divides the spoils.
divides the spoils amongst his Subjects, by his most prudent distribution of
Justice and Mercy: His Justice restores to him that was spoiled, that which the
spoyler spoiled him of. And his Mercy is of large extent, manifested to a
Miracle, even to such as are conscious to themselves that they have not
deserved it.

Blessed be our good God, and blessed be our Eyes, that we See, and our Ears
that we Hear, that which many Loyal and right worthy persons (now asleep in
their Graves) have desired to see and hear, but have not.

Thus is our Captivity turned from under a strong Man a Bramble, to live under
a stronger then he, a Vine which the Lords own right hand has planted, and
made so strong for himself: Thus I say is the Captivity of our Sion turned,
whilst we were like unto them that dream, a dream indeed; Deliverance came
without looking, without laboring for; the less of Man the more of God in it.
The Lord was pleased not to give our desired success to the Battle at Dunbar,
nor at Worcester, he reserved the glory of this great work for himself.

Not unto thee O Lord, not unto thee, but unto us be the shame of our
Rebellions; not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thee be the glory of
bringing the King back again to us.

What remains now, but that you that hear me this day, and all the three
Nations, would suffer the word of exhortation.

To rejoice and give thanks unto the Lord Christ, Hence an exhortation to
rejoice and give thanks cautioned with.
who has restored to us the Lords Christ, the Lords anointed, our dread
Sovereign. The Lord has highly magnified us in mercy, and deeply we are bound
to magnify him for his mercy, saying and singing with holy David every one of
us; Psalm. 35.10.
All my bones shall say, Lord who is like unto thee, who deliverest the poor
from him that is too strong for him, yea the poor and the needy from him that
spoiled him. Thus let us rejoice and give thanks, yet with due cautions;

First of Sobriety, 1 Sobriety.
a sacrifice of joy and praise such a Mercy requires: But let it not be offered
to Bacchus but Jovi Liberatori, to the great God of Heaven and Earth. Let us
rejoice and give thanks, and express the same by walking honestly as in the
day; Rom 13.13.
not in rioting and drunkenness: who so (after this manner, says the Lord)
offers praise glorifieth me, and to him that orders his conversation
aright, will I show the salvation of God.

Secondly, 2. Charity.
Charity and works of Mercy. A day of feasting and joy is also a day of Esther.
9.22.
sending portions one to another, and gifts to the poor. Let Mercy be showed to
them for his sake, from whom we have received so great a Mercy.

Thirdly, 3. Unity.
Unity and Peace one with another, and the rather, because it is the desire of
a King to his Subjects, and should conjure our hearts to abstain from all
terms and notes of separation. So should our Kingdom, our Nation, our
Jerusalem be as a City that is at unity in it self, whilst we that dwell
together in it are at unity amongst our selves.

Fourthly, 4. Daily prayers for his Majesty.
with daily prayers for his MAJESTY, That the Lord would keep this Mercy
forever, in the imaginations of the thoughts of his Heart, and prepare his
Heart unto the Lord. That the rod of Affliction, which the Lord has removed
from him, may open his ear to Discipline, and teach him with all prudence to
sway the Scepter, which he has put into his hand. That it may appear daily (by
his wise Government) that the Lord has preserved him to set forth his glory,
to protect his Church, and for a blessing to his people.

Glory to God in the highest.
FINIS.

