The CASE of Their Majesty's Subjects IN THE PRINCIPALITY of WALES, In Respect
of the COURT held before the President and Council in the Marches of Wales:
With their GRIEVANCES, and REASONS for taking away the said COURT.
THE Kings of England, having anciently given unto diverse Lords, and great Men,
large Territories in WALES, constituted them Lo^dships-Marchers, with separate
Jurisdictions; which occasioned several Murders, Robberies, and other
Outrages; and the Offenders escape Punishment, by flying from one
Lordship-Marcher into another, where the King's Writ did not run: Therefore the
Court of the Marches of Wales was erected to preserve the public peace, and
for that end, to have a general Jurisdiction over the Principality of Wales,
and all the Lordships-Marchers in Criminal Causes; but never held any Pleas in
any Civil Actions, until after the Erecting the Court of Star Chamber.

The first Commission and Power granted to that Court to hear and determine
Civil Actions, was in the Reign of Hen. 8. And the Constituting Clause in the
Statute of the 34. and 35 of Hen. 8. relates only to the Star Chamber
Jurisdiction.

The Lordships-Marchers (being found inconvenient) by an Act made 27 Hen. 8.
were made new Welsh Counties, and the Court of the great Sessions Erected,
which still continues; And lest Wales should not acquiesce under such
Constitution, the Court before the President and Council of the Marches was
continued, in the Nature of the Court of Star Chamber only.

The Statute of 16 Car. 1. which took away the Star Chamber, does also take
away this Court, and the Lord Presidents Court in the North; And declares that
the King and Council have no Jurisdiction by English-Bill, or otherwise, to
determine Civil Causes: But that the same ought to be determined in the Courts
of Justice, by the Ordinary Course of Law.

Reasons for the taking away the COURT.
I. It is a great and constant Annual Charge to the Crown, and is of no
Advantage to it, but an intolerable Grievance to the Subject: All Causes Tried
there one year with another, amount not in Value, by common computation, to
above 400 l tho the Expense to the Subjects is at least 30000 l per Annum; most
of the Actions brought there, being for Trespasses, Assaults, and other trivial
Actions, where the Damages are generally 4 d or 6 d and seldom exceed Ten
Shillings.

II. It is useless, the Reasons for Erecting and continuing it Ceasing: It is
not concerned in the preserving of the Public Peace, That being done by the
Judges of the great Sessions, and Justices of the Peace, as in all English
Counties.

III. The Lands and Possessions of the Prince of Wales are long since sold, and
all the Revenue arising from Wales, is now yearly paid to the Receiver for
Wales, and Answered into the Exchequer at Westminster, which was provided for
by the Statute 27 Hen. 8.

IV. The Court of the Great Sessions held twice every year, and kept for Six
Days in every County, has in it Courts of Common Law and Equity, and all
Matters of Law are there Tried by Jury, and the Expense there in Trials is much
less, and Causes sooner determined, if prosecuted, than in the Court of the
Marches of Wales; for a Suit in Equity may be brought to a hearing in one
Circuit, the Court of Equity going through all the Circuit, which lasts for
Three Weeks; and all the Actions under 40 s and other trivial Actions, ought to
be Tried in the County Court, and Court Baron, where the Costs never exceeds 4
s as in England.

The GRIEVANCES.
I. The Constitution of that Court is against Law, their Proceedings and
Decrees being Arbitrary; Damages in Causes, wherein Damages are uncertain,
assessed by the Judges without Jury, contrary to the great Charter, the Laws
and Birthright of the Subject; from which Decree there lies no Appeal, and yet
the Subject cannot Plead the Decree of that Court in Bar to a Suit brought in
another Court for the same Matter; whereby all Suits and Determinations in that
Court become ineffectual.

II. This Court, to encourage Suits, gives the Plaintiff on the least color of
Suit his full Costs, and holds Plea of Debt under 40 s and therein, and in
Trespasses, Assaults, and Slander, etc. where the Damages are but 6 d there is
usually 5 l Costs, and sometimes 9 l or 10 l Costs, given to the Plaintiff; and
the Defendant, tho put to greater Expense, and the Suit appear vexatious, is
dismissed without Costs.

III. That tho 6 s 8 d for the delay in having a Dedimus to take Defendants
first Answer, was once taken away, yet the same is still exacted by some
Clerks; and for a second Dedimus they constantly exact of the Defendants 10 s
and double the Sum for every other Dedimus; and scandalous Persons are
permitted to practice there, and the Court grants them Protections from being
impleaded in other Courts; and also grant Injunctions for stay of Proceedings
in the Courts of Westminster, and Great Sessions, and the inferior Courts; and
punish the Disobedience to such Illegal Injunctions, by Imprisonment and
otherwise.

IV. That Prohibitions usually granted in the Courts at Westminster to stay
Proceedings in the said Court of the Marches, have of late (to advance
Arbitrary Power) been denied in any Action whatsoever, tho Damages be
uncertain, which Practice is maintained by a general Contribution of all the
Clerks there.

V. That before Subpoena, which is the Original Process or Summons in that
Court, the Court grants a binding Process, in nature of an Attachment in
Chancery; and the Parties taken thereupon, and upon other Process of Contempt,
give Sureties, who are not only obliged for the person's appearance, but also
to pay the Debt; and the Party in Contempt is obliged to appear in person, and
then being committed to Custody, he is usually charged at the Suit of other
persons; and his Sureties are equally obliged to answer such subsequent Charge.

VI. Process of Contempt ought to be directed to the Sheriff; but this Court,
till of late, directed them to their own Cursitors only: and when of late they
have directed to the Sheriffs and Cursitors, they are always executed by the
Cursitors only, whereby the Poor are much oppressed, and pay intolerable
Compositions. And if any of their Cursitors, who are generally lewd persons,
make any Affidavit of any Abuse in serving of Process, a Sergeant at Arms is
immediately thereupon sent and the Party, before he be heard, must pay the
Serjeant's Fees, and what the Court thinks fit, or sent to Prison, tho the Oath
be never so much falsified.

VII. Witnesses in Causes wherein Damages are uncertain, are examined by
Commissions, and that executed by one Commissioner, and he generally a
Solicitor in the Court named by the Plaintiff; and the Clerks commonly appoint
one another Commissioners, whereby Perjuries and Frauds are encouraged.

VIII. It is no Court of Record; and their Proceedings are in English, and
Paper, (which is against Law); and they cannot try any Error in Fact, having no
power to ^^mmon a Jury.

IX. If any Action be brought for false Imprisonment, for executing any Process
issued out of this Court, the Defendant must be at 8 l or 10 l Charge to plead
to it, so that he must plead the Statute and Instructions.

X. That the Courts of Equity in the Great Sessions in each County can quiet
Possessions: Yet this Court does not only quiet, but alter Possessions; and
upon filing a Bill without any Process served, gives Possession where none was
before. As thus: If the Plaintiff, tho he was never in Possession, swears, or
gets another to swear for him, That He, or those under whom he claims, have for
three years last been in Possession, the Court orders the Possession to such
person from the person that is in actual in Possession, tho at the Hearing it
often appears that such Plaintiff has no Title; and Trial of any Title there
is contrary to the Constitution of that Court.

XI. ^he Inhabitants of Wales are subject to the Jurisdiction of the Courts of
Westminster Great Sessions, and this Unnecessary and Arbitrary Court; and this
Court has been Presented for a Grievance by most of the Grand-Juries in the
several Counties of Wales; and both now and other times the Members of
Parliament for Wales have been ^harged by those that chose them, to represent
it as a Grievance to the Parliament; and accordingly a Bill for taking it away
has passed the House of Commons in King Charles the Second's time, but the
Parliament was prorogued before it could proceed further, and then all
Expedients for reforming the Abuses of the Court were exami^ed and found to be
ineffectual. And the King's Subjects in Wales, by keeping up this Court, are
debarred the benefit of the Statute of Union, 27 H. 8. which decla^^s, That the
Subject in Wales shall enjoy all the Freedoms, Liberties, Rights, Privileges,
and Laws of England; and that the Laws and Statutes of England, and no other,
shall be used and exercised in Wales.

LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX.


