A new and true Description of the WORLD As it is now divided In four parts.
Heathens, Jews, Turks and Christians.
WOe unto the World because Mat. 18. 7*
of offenses, (says Christ to his Disciples) Because ye are not of the World
but I have chosen you out of the world, John. 1^. 19
therefore the world hates you.

By the World, here is meant the peo* of the World, which the Scripture calls
the evil World, The Number of ungodly men, and not the people of God: for none
are Gods peculiar people, but such as obey his voice and keep his Covenant,
Exo. 19, 5.


And the Apostle John says, We know that we are of God, and the whole world
lies in wickedness: John 5. 19.


And as the world has increased, sin has abounded, and its a great question
whether when the Son of man comes he Luke 18. 8.
shall find faith on the earth.

AFter the old Creation. In the year of the world, one thousand six hundred
fifty and six, The old World, 2 Pet. 2. 5.
which the Apostle Peter calls the world of the ungodly, That world utterly
perished by the Flood, In which time of destruction, the Church of God (which
then consisted but of few, even eight persons) was preserved, remaining 1 Pet.
3. 20.
about three hundred seventy and five days in Noah's Ark. Then when the flood
was gone, and the earth was dried they went out, and (by Gods blessing)
increased and multiplied upon the earth, But most of them fell away from the
truth; And there began another world of ungodly men, and have continued in a
way of succession unto this day, the children inhetiting their fathers sins,
and approving of their evil sayings. Psalm. 49. 13
This is the world, but not the world whichi was before the Flood, nor the
world to come, but this present evil world, described in this Treatise.

BEfore the decease of Noah, even in the days of Peleg, the earth was divided:
For at the building of Babel Genesis 10. 25 11.
God confounded the language of all the people of the earth, for their pride,
vain glory, and infidelity, and scattered them abroad throughout all the
earth. And did set the Bounds of the people of each language, that they should
seek the Act. 17, 26.
Lord.

But in stead of seeking the Eternal God that made them they fell to making and
worshipping Idols, according to their own fancies. And Babylon was the principal
seat of Idolatry, and abounded in Zech. 5. 6, 11.
Tyrany, yet it was called the glory of Isa. 13, 19.
Kingdoms, and the beauty of the Chaldeans Excelencie, and continued above
thirty generations, until the seventy years of the Captivity of Judah ended.

And since that golden Kingdom ceased, all the other three, (Persian, Grecian,
and Roman,) successive worldly Monarchs, have been inferior in worldly Dan. 2.
38, 39, 40.
dignity, (as Silver is inferior to Gold, and Brass to Silver, and Iron to
Brass) although they were never so successful in their victorious conquests,
the later against the former.

Yet notwithstanding the Lord of hosts has in the times before of old (as well
as since) punished the Kingdoms and Nations for their sins, especially for
their Idolatry; Nation rose up against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom,
and made great wars against each other; particularly (before the destruction
of Sodom and Gomora with fire and brimstone) Amraphel King of Shynar, Arioch
King of Alasar, Cheodarlaomer King of Elam, and Tydall King of Nations. These
made war against five Kings, and their Subjects, (which rebelled against
them) and subdued them, and smote the Rephaims, and the Zuzims, and the Emims,
and the Horites and Amorites, and victoriously conquered those Giants, whose
height was as Cedars, and their strength as Deuteronomy, 2. ^0. 11. 12. 20.
Oaks, and they took the spoil with those they led captive.

But those Conquering Kings, taking just Lot captive (who was no Idolater, but
a true worshiper of the living God) it was their ruin, for God who had raised
up Abram from Ur of the Chaldeans, Neh, 9. 7, Isa, 41, 1, 2, 3.
and after called him from Charan of Mesopotamia into the land of Canaan, and
gave the Nations before him, and made him rule over Kings, he gave them as dust
to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow; he pursued them, and passed
safely, by the way that he had not gone.

For that Story in Genesis (14) says, That when Abram heard that his brother
Lot was taken captive, he, with his trained servants three hundred and eighteen
pursued those Armies, and recovered all, and slew Chedarlaomer King of Elam,
and the Kings that were with him, and brought back the Captives with the spoil
which wonderful and victorious Conquest did put the world in a maze, and filled
their hearts with fear and terror. (for they were all Idolaters) And Abram, and
his fellows were contrary unto them in Religion as light is to darkness

Then upon this mighty and wonderful Conquest. The Isles feared, The ends of
the earth were afraid, drew near and came, and fell to making more Idols, in
stead of turning to the Lord. They helped every one his Neighbor, and every
one said to his brother, be of good courage: So the Carpenter encouraged the
Goldsmith, and he that smoothed with the hammer, him that smote the Anvill,
saying, It is ready for sodering, and he fastened it with Isa. 41. 24, 29.
nails, that it should not be moved. But they were worse then nothing, an
abomination, and their Images wind and confusion.

Yet the world continued still in wickedness, and would not be persuaded from
their false worship, by all Gods chastisements of them, and the remarkable
examples of Gods judgments, against Sodom and Egypt, and his wonderful
miracles, which appeared afterward Josh. 2. 9, 10, 11. Exo. 15. 14 15, 16.
and were famous to the world, but their hearts were hardened, to their own
destruction, for one and thirty Kings and their kingdoms were destroyed by
Josh. 12. ^4.
Joshua, and none made their peace save only the Gibeonites, who became hewers
Josh. 9.
of wood, and drawers of water, for the sanctuary of the Lord.

After God had settled his peculiar people Act. 1^. 20.
(the Israelites) in their land, dividing it to them by lot, he gave them
Judges until Samuel the Prophet.

And afterward they desired a King, before the time: And God gave them v. 21.
King Saul, whom he anointed. who reigned forty years. v. 22.


And when he had removed him, he raised up unto them David, to be their King,
who reigned forty years.

Afterward Solomon reigned over all Israel, the space of forty years, without
war, Judah and Israel were many as 2 Chr. 9. ^0. 1 Kin. 11. 12, 4^. 2 Chr. 9.
26. 1 Kin. 12. 24. 2 Chr. 11. 4.
the sand, which is by the Sea, for multitude, eating and drinking, and making
merry.

But afterward for Solomon's Apostasy and Idolatry, God did rend ten parts of
his Kingdom from his son Rehoboam, and made Jeroboam the son of Nebat King of
Israel, even over ten Tribes, without wars, which King fell to Idolatry, and
made Golden calves for gods, and builded high places for his false worship
against the laws of God, and set up 1 Kin, 12, 24
base fellows to be priests of those high places, and made other alterations
in matters of Gods worship, by his evil counsel which he took, which the
multitude 1 Kin, 12, 28, 31. and 13, 33, and 13, ^5, 16, 2 Kin, 13, 3, ^7,
followed, for which God punished them with war and other calamities: for
five hundred thousand chosen men out of 800000 valliant men of King Jeroboams
Army were slain in one battle. And afterward they were greatly diminished by
several judgments unto the time of Jeoahaz King of Israel, in the time of whose
reign God delivered them into the hand of the King of Siria, who made them low,
as the dust by threshing, so that he did not leave of the people to Jehoahaz,
but fifty horsemen, and 2 Kin. 13, 7,
ten Chariots, and ten thousand footmen. And in the reign of Hoshea their last
and best King, all the remnant of Israel were carried away captive by
Shalmenazar King of Assiria. 2 Kin, 17, 2,


And the Tribe of Judah also with Benjamin, fell to Idolatry, Therefore God
diminished them by thousands and hundreds of thousands, (by many sore
judgments, as the sword, famine, and pestilence.) And so great was the Lords
wrath Ier, 15, 2,
against them, that he would not hear their cry, nor any prayer for them, for
he said to his Prophet Jeremiah, when they fast, I will not hear their cry, and
pray not for this people, But appointed him to take forth the precious from the
vile, and said, Let them return unto thee, Ier. 15, 19,
but return not thou unto them. And in the eleventh year of the reign of King
Zedekiah they also were carried away and 52,
captive into Babylon.

But in Captivity and affliction, Gods people did bethink themselves, and
repented, and their uncircumcised hearts were humbled, and they returned to the
Lord their God with their whole heart, Therefore God comforted them by his
promises, and Providence, and delivered Ester. --
them from the bloody plots of their malignant enemies, and caused them to find
favor in the sight of them that led them captive. And when the seventy years
of Judahs captivity were accomplished, Ezra. --.
Gods people (the Jews) were delivered out of captivity, and returned again
into their own Land, and there they renewed their covenant with God, and were
settled, and increased, and multiplied, under the power and protect Nehemiah.
chapter. 9. 36, 37, 38 Dan. 10. 13 20, 21. and 8. 5, 7, 21.
on of the King of Persia (That silver Monarch,) until the Prince of Persia
withstood them.

Then God fought against that persecuting Prince, and raised up the King of
Greece, who subdued the Persian power, and did bear rule over all the earth,
and Gods people had liberty of conscience under the Greeks (that Brazen
Monarch,) but at last the Saints suffered great persecution for conscience
sake, Dan. 11. 16 2 M^^. 7. Heb. 11. 35 36, 37, 38,
under that power, and were cruely used, and exposed to much hardship, hunger,
cold and nakedness, in saving their lives, they wandered about in Sheepskins
and in Goatskins, and were destitute, afflicted and tormented, and although
they were such of whom the world was not worthy, for they were the sons of God
yet they wandered in deserts, and in Mountains and in dens and in caves of the
earth.

Then the Church of God consisting of precious Sains, whose conversation was in
heaven, was as a woman crying, traveling, in birth, pained to be delivered,
and longing for the coming of Christ Jesus the Son of God, to deliver them out
of the hands of their enemies, that they might serve him, without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him Luk, 1. 74, 75
all the days of their lives.

In time (before our Saviors birth) God raised up the Sons of Syon, against
Zac. 9. 13.
the sons of Greece, and made them fight valliantly, and do exploits, and they
Dan. 11. 32
were victorious, at several times, against their cruel bloody persecutors, yet
the remainder of their enemies were many and lively, and often times molested
them, so that the Saints could not be quiet to serve the Lord, but were still
in fear.

But God did in process of time, put down the Grecian power, and did set up the
Romans, who did bear dominion over all the world, under whose Luk, 2. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5. 1.
power Gods people the Jews lived, and had liberty to practice their Religion
publicly in their own land, but had no Authority to put any man to death, but
were subject to the Roman power, Ioh. 18. 31, Mat. 22. 19. 21. Mat. 17. 25 To.
23. 6. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Dan. 9. 25, 26.
unto whom they paid taxes, and Tribute, in Christ's time, which Christ himself
submitted unto, as his parents before him, (and his Apostles after) and in the
four hundred thirty and fourth year after the building of the wall of Jerusalem
by Nehemiah, Christ Jesus our Lord was crucified, and dyed under that Roman
power.

But God the father raised up his son 1 Cor, 15. 4, Mat. 28, 18, 19.
Christ, on the the third day after his crucifying, And gave him all power both
in heaven and in earth, therefore Christ gave commission to his Apostles to
preach the gospel to all nations for their salvation, which wrought powerfully
and effectually, throughout the Gal, ^. 7. 8, Act, 22. 18. Rev, 6. and 9, 20.
and 13. and 16. 11, 13, 14. and 18. ^. Acts
world amongst Jews and Gentiles: But to this day the greater part of them
(have and do and will) stand out against it, to their own destruction, and
although multitudes both of Jews and Gentiles, have been converted to the
faith, yet since those primative times, there has been a great falling away,
and a general departure from the faith and Order of the 2 These, 2. 3. 2 Pet, 2.
2.
Gospel and men have given heed, and still give heed to seducing spitits and 1 Timothy, 4. 2. 3
doctrines of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscienses
seared with an hot Iron, forbiding to marry and commanding to abstain from
meats, against Gods commands.

And these days are the last days perilous times, wherein men are lovers of
their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to
Parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false
accusers, incontinent, fierce despisers of those that are good, Traitors,
heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, and yet these
miscreants, 2 Timothy, 3. 1, 5.
have a form (but not the very form or power) of Godliness, for they deny the
same in their conversations, from such (says the Apostle) turn away, although
they profess that they know God yet in works they deny him, being abominable
and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. These are not as Virgins;
but defiled, profane, open, wicked persons, poluted in their lips and in their
lives, though Tit, 1. 16.
they call themselves christians, they are Christ's greatest enemies, and make
the times more evil and perilous, and are worse then Heathens, Jews and Turks,
whose conversion they hinder, by their devilish doctrines, rediculous forms of
worship, and odious carriages, hard-heartednesse and impennetencie. So that now
at this time, in matters of Religious and spiritual worship,. The world in
general, consists of four parts. 1 Heathens. 2. Jews. 3. Turks. and 4.
Christians. The last of which (even Christians) are the least part of the
world, (but the 6th part say some writers) yet these christians amongst
themselves are greatly divided in matters of Religion, but they all conclude
against the heathens, Jews and Turks, and renounce and disclaim their
communion, esteeming them that they be the Church of the devil, the Synagogue
of Satan, and Luther says the Turk is the Body -- of Antichrist, yet are they
innumerable Rev. 9. 16. Rev. 20. 8, 9.
as the sand of the Sea, but they are all out of the way, and not so good as
one mortal Saint.

For the Heathens worship many gods, which by nature are no gods. The Jews in
express words deny that Christ is come in the flesh. The Turks, and almost all
others, do deny him, in their works, for although the Turks do acknowledge and
worship the true God, after a manner, yet do they serve Mahomet. And although
they protest against the worshipers of Images, (as Prote stants against
Papists) yet they worship God by a divised rediculous stinted Service Book, of
their own invention. contrary to Gods institutions.

Christian;, though divided greatly in opinion and affection, yet most of them
in humane traditions and divine (or rather divised) Services, are not untyed,
but entangled in each others principles and practices, Church ministry, worship
and discipline, like to like, Mother and daughter jumping together, in the
seeming circumstances of times and places, and many other matters; O how
heathenish are they in their common talk, and carnal Songs: Their speeches and
practices show, as if they had the Heathen gods and godesses and their Temples
in great esteem. Where the graves tombs and Monuments of the dead be, there are
their Temples for their Religious Isa. 65. 4.
worship. For their hearts remains there among the graves, and lodge in the
Monuments, (like the men possessed with devils, who came out of the Tombs
exceeding fierce, [their tipes,] for there was their dwelling, being driven of
the Mat. 8. ^8. Mar. 5. 3.
Devil,) which dolesom and Idolatrous places, in this land were, and in other
lands are, places of refuge and protection for wilful murderers. And these
miserable sinners, are strongly possessed with strange opinions, that there are
degrees of holiness in those Idolatrous Temples which were built for
heathenish and Popish services.

Yet these Christians (or rather Antichristians) are in continual variance
amongst themselves, Persecuting one another extremely, to the death, as they
have power and oppertunity, censuring one another as Scismaticks, and
condemning one another as Heretics, often Writing, Preaching, Praying, and
fighting against one another as mortal Enemies, (witness Spain, France,
Germany, and other places in Europe) living in hatred and hating one another,
for peace is taken from the earth, and the way thereof the world knows not,
therefore the Angel with his sharp Sickle is reaping them, and Rev, 14. 14
Rev, 14. 18 19, 20.
the Vine of the earth (even the false Church) with the clusters thereof shall
be cut down, and cast into the great winepresse of the wrath of God. For their
vine is the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorra, their grapes are the
grapes of gall, and their clusters are Deuteronomy, 32. 32 33, 34, 35.
bittet, Their wine is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel venim of Aspes, the
day of their calamity is at hand, and the evil things that shall come upon
them make haft. Yet the Roman Catholics say that they are the true Church, So
says the Prelaticall Church for themselves, and so say other churches for
themselves, But there is but one way of holiness in which all Christians ought
to walk as they hope for salvation, and that is the way of Separation, for the
Scripture says. What fellowship has righteousness 2 Cor. 6.
with unrighteousness? What communion has light with darkness? what concord
has Christ with Belial? what part has the believer with the infidels? what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? For the Church of God is the
Temple of God: wherein God has promised to dwell and walk, Therefore Gods
people must come out from amongst the Antichristian assemblies, and be
separate, and not touch the unclean thing. For the Church of Christ is set
forth by the Apostle Peter to consist of lively stones, built up a 1 Pet, 2. 5.
Spiritual house, they are Gods peculiar people, separated from the world, in
matters of Spiritual Worship. But the churches of Antichrist, consist of mixed
swarms of sinners, unrighteous persons, 1 Cor. 6. 9. 1 Pet. 4. 17, 18.
and the Scripture says the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God,
Be not deceived neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor coveteous,
nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of
God.

I know Antichrists Churches will labor to justify themselves by the
infirmities of others, The incestious person say they was suffered by the
Church of Corinth, but they should observe that that church upon admonition did
put 2 Cor. 7. 11,
away from amongst them that wicked person, They sorrowed after a godly sort,
it wrought in them carefulness, clearing of themselves, indignation, fear,
vehement desire, zeal, revenge, in all things they approved themselves to be
clear of this matter.

Now the churches of Antichrist consist of a mixed multitude of sinners, such
as are before mentioned, swarms of Fornicatos, Liars, Sabbath breakers, and and
Idolaters, eating and drinking and dancing about Dame Flora's pillars, Swearing
and cursing is common amongst them, yea swearing by the Mass (as Israel did by
the sin of Samaria) much used in the countries, yea the names of the Idol gods
are frequent in their mouths, not in contempt of them, but in praise, they are
the foretops and frontis-peeces of their Triumphals: Its a common thing for
them not only to revile one another in jest, and in earnest, but those who
reprove or convict them of sin, they maliciously reproach and slander, as the
heathens vilified the christians, in the time of the ten persecutions, which
does greatly aggravate these obstinate sinners sin, and manifests them to be
vessels of wrath, fitted for destruction.

The abominable sin of Pride, the deadly sin of flothfulnesse, the detestible
sins of drunkenesse and whoredom, opression and cruelty, does exceedingly
abound, and execrations of damnation and drinking healths directly and
indirectly against the Kings command, frequently used by Capital offenders, the
worst of men.

And yet all these call themselves christians, and say they believe in the
Catholic Church, and have forms of Worship answerable to their profession, but
their worship is in vain, as good never a wait as never the better, and the
nearer their Church the further from God, For he cares neither for them, nor
their worship, but hates such combustable stuff, and so do I, O Lord gather not
my soul with sinners, for I hate the Church of evil doers. Psalm. 26,


And if there by any (as I hope there are many) in their Church which hate
these iniquities and enormities, yet they are unclean while they partake with
such sinners in their Spiritual worship publicly or privately, for the
precious ought to separate from the vile, and must be holy in all manner of
conversation.

And although many of their Church members are Civil in their dealings about
common affairs, courteous, loving, kind natured, free hearted, true and trusty
in matters of account betwixt man and man; What of this? Do not the heathens
the same? And cannot the Turks say as much for themselves? Yet it does not
prove them to be the people of God, no more are these, They are of the world,
and therefore not of the Church.

But the Papists set down marks, (as unity, universaltity, and constancy,) to
prove that their church, is the true Church, but alas, This their plea is not
sufficient, It may serve as well for Turks and Heathens, who exceed them in
number, and are unanimous, and prosperous, constant, and conceited in their
ways.

But let the Roman Catholic church have her due, she says she is the mother
Church, And indeed she is the mother Church of false Churches, Mystery Babylon
the great, the Mother of harlots.

And the working of the man of sin, in the mystery of iniquity, is after the
working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders: So the Apostle
describes Antichrist. Therefore Miracles are not the marks of a true Deuteronomy. 13,
1, 5.
Church, nor of a true Prophet. And the throne of iniquity may have outward
Rev. 13. 7, Dan. 7. 21, 24.
prosoeritie, and wear out the Saints of the most high, and continue as
appears by the Scriptures.

But the Papists will not prove their Church to be true, by the Scriptures
[contemned and condemned by their general Counsells] but labor to prove se
Ainsworth against Ainsworth
their Church by their Church! The same by the same!

So the false Apostles measured themselves by themselves, which practice the
Apostle Paul condemned as irrational, and rational men count it rediculous. ^
Cor. 10. 12,


But they have an exceeding high estimation of their Sacrament of their Altar,
They say it is a Sacrifice, and the bread, they say is the real body of Christ,
after that is done which they call consecration, but it is execration, for they
kneel down before it, and worship it, and then eat it up. And because they hold
the Mass to be a Sacrifice propitiatory for the quick and the dead, they have
of their own divising erected an Office of Priesthood, here on earth to offer
it up. And the Priests of the Church of England, as well as of Rome, (a number
of sinful, mortal, infirm, and imperfect men neither of the Tribe of Levi^ nor
of Judah) are Ordained Priests by office, [without Oath] and so void, utterly
void by the Law, and by the Gospel. As appears in the Heb. 9. 24. and 12,
Epistle to the Hebrews Heb: 7. 12, 16, 18, 21, 23. 28. and 9. 10. and. 10 1.

But the proper Office of Priesthood is in the heaven it self, wh^^e the Lord
Jesus Christ the only high Priest executes that Office at the right hand of
God, not on earth, for the Scripture says if Christ were here on earth he
should not be a Priest. Heb: 8. 4.

But when Christ ascended up on high he gave gifts unto men, some Apostles Ephesians.
4. 11, 12.
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists and some Pasters and Teachers, No
Offices of Popes, Cardinals, Abotts, Monks, Archbishops, Lord Bishops,
Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and such like [false Priests, false Christs] who hold
an Office of Priesthood among themselves by a succession, to offer up at their
Altars the supposed flesh and blood of Christ.

And they have made seven orders of Priesthood, and the Priesthood belonging
thereunto, are the seven heads of their monstrous Beast, having the names of
blasphemy upon them, and they are called seven Mountains, for bigness, for
they are many, upon which the great whore of Rome (even the great City)
sits, Reigning over the Kings of the earth, And one of his heads was as it
Rev. 13. ^.
were wounded (...) death, says the Revelation, and his deadly wound was
healed, but their end shall be eternal destruction, for that Beast and the
false Prophet that works miracles before him, shall be both together, cast
alive into hell.

And there is likewise an Image of Rev. 19. 20
that beast, the particular National Prelatical convocations, as Wilkinson
makes it out, in his learned Exposition upon the 13th chapter of the
Revelations,

But they say they have the marks of a true Church of Christ, The Word truly
Preached.

To which I answer: That Balam the the false Prophet Preached Gods Word truly,
in Balaks Assembly, but that could never prove them to be a true Church, nor
did the people of God go to hear him, but slew him. Josh: 13. ^2. And they say
that they have also the Sacraments duly administered. And so the Papists say for
themselves, But these are but their bare words at the best, and its better
disprove them then believe them.

But the common Protestants say their Church of England is true, because they
hold justification by faith only, and seem to blame the Parents, and disprove
their Church, for h^^^ing justification by their own works; and yet they hold
the like, (if not the same,) erroneous opinion, of saving virtue, in their own
works, as if they conferred grace, as appears in the second answer in their
Common Catechism, concerning Baptism, an inferior work, which they prefer above
the the Lords Supper, although the Apostle Paul held (and has showed) Baptism
to be so inferior, that he thanks God that he baptized none of the Christians
but Crispas and Gayus, and the household of Stephanus, and remembered not that he
baptized any more, and says, Christ sent him not to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel. But indeed the Papists have an exceeding high opinion of outward
Baptism, that it washes away Original sin, and saves them from being damned.
They cross their children on their foreheads, and have Godfathers and
Godmothers, So have the Prelatical Party, but they do not spit in their
mouths, as the Popish Priests do, (as King James says, in his Book to all
Christian Kings and Princes) But they are conceited, (if not more grossly
deluded) as if their Baptism made them members of Christ the children of God,
and inheritors of the kingdom of heaven, And this Doctrine they prescribe, for
all their members to believe and profess, before they come to their
confirmation. vizt. That in that Baptism, (by which they were baptized with
Godfathers and Godmothers) they were made members of Christ, the children of
God and inheritors of the kingdom of heaven, which I have good ground to deny,
and they can never prove it, the Scripture is clear against this their vain
conceit.

For the Apostle Peter says, It is not the outward baptism, (or washing away
of the filth of the flesh) which saves, but the answer of a good Conscience. 1
Pet: 3. 21. And the way of the Gospel is to baptize such only as are the
children of God and members of Christ before.

And the Apostle Paul says not, that they are the children of God, by outward
baptism, but by faith in Christ Jesus, And faith does not come by baptism, Gal.
3. 26.
but by the word of God. And their baptism which they receive afterward is no
more but an outward seal administered upon them, of the righteousness of the
faith which they had before baptism, as Circumcision was to Abraham and Romans 4.
11,
Isaac, as the Scriptures testify, and none ought to be baptized, but such as
give sufficient testimony before, of their holiness, Or that the Lord
testifies for them.

So he testified of St. Paul, and St. Act, ^. 15, 17, 18. and 10. 47,
Cornelius was baptized upon this ground, that he had received the Holy Ghost
before.

And whosoever has not the spirit of Romans 3. 9, 2 Cor. 13, 5,
Christ is none of his. Therefore the common Protestants are in a great error
in this point of Baptism also.

For they should know that the Infants 1 Cor. 7. 14. Romans 11. Ezekiel. 18. 4 Luke
19. 9,
of holy Parents are holy as their Parents.

They are as blameless as their Parents in their whole Spirit Soul and body.

The same grace, gracious promises, Act. 2. 39 Deuteronomy. 29. 11 2 Cor. ^0. 3,
and spiritual privileges belongs unto them, as well as to their Parents,
Yea, The kingdom of heaven it self, And Mat. 19. 14.
if the greater then the lesser. For as touching eternal Election, they are
beloved Romans 11. 2^
for the fathers; That is, peculiarly chosen of God for the love that he Deuteronomy.
4. 37. Ezekiel. 18. 4. 20.
had to their fathers, and shall not dye eternally for the sins of their
fathers, Rom, 2. 11. and 8.
which they never committed, for herein God is no respecteer of persons, merely
as they are persons, and who can lay any thing to their charge, sin remitted
shall not be imputed unless irritterated, and their parents righteousness, is
theirs by imputation, as it was with Abraham and 2 Timothy 1. 5. Heb. 7. 9. 10
his seed, before they were circumcised, so it is with the Christians and their
seed before they are baptized. Yea, the children of holy Patents are perfect in
their ways, before they are baptized, Ezekiel. 28. 15.
even, from the day they are created, until iniquity is found in them; Such a
perfection have they, which is oposed to iniquity, And the Scripture says,
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin, and in whose Spirit Psalm.
32. 3, 5.
there is no guile. Their nature of Creation is sanctified by the spirit of
regeneration, which dwells in them so that they are not imputed sinners of
the world, but clear, as the Scripture says of the natural Jews, who were
Christians: For although the children Gal. 2. 15.
are partakers of flesh and blood, as well as their Parents, Christ himself
also in like manner took part of the same, and died for them all, (not to free
them from temporal, but) to save them from eternal death, though they should
dye before they are baptized with water.

And therefore the Infants are not the Children of wrath more then their
Parents, but the vessels of mercy, as Jeremiah and John the Baptist were, And
so it becomes them to esteem of them all and to speak honorably of them,
before, (as well as after) their outward baptism which Baptism makes not for
the Isa. 22. 24.
being (but for the better being) of a Christian, Therefore I cannot find in my
heart to say that they are the children of wrath, and therefore ought to be
baptized, but because they are not under the wrath of God, nor under the curse
of the Law, but under the promise and grace of Christ, who never sinned, and
yet was baptized, by John the Baptist.

Therefore they ought to be baptized, though they have never committed actual
sin, but sinned in their Parents as Lvey paid tithes in Abraham.

What though David declares his Romans 5. Heb. 7. ^, 10.
Original sin (or sin of inclination) the ground of his actual sin (or sin of
apprehension) as it is written, In sin has my mother conceived me? yet, until
he committed actual sin, he was no more guilty of sin, then his mother, nor was
Isaac a child of wrath, more then faithful Abraham and Sarah.

Original sin takes no more hold of the Infants to damn them eternally, then
of their parents.

And touching actual sin, they are clear as their Parents, though their
Parents are as righteous as Noah, Daniel and Job. And therefore they have as
much right to Baptism, as their Parents. And in this blessed condition are they
before they are baptized with water, And are not in the state of damnation,
though they die in their Infancy before, but shall be eternally saved. And the
contrary Doctrine is very unsound, eronious uncomfortable and destructive.

But Antichrists Church professes the contrary openly; And teach their
children to say that they are made members of Christ in their baptism with
Godfathers and Godmothers, So then it is remarkable, that they are their own
judges that they baptize none but such as are not members of Christ before
their baptism. It follows then by their own words, that they are members of
Antichrist, and in the state of damnation before (and until) outward baptism be
administered upon them, which to affirm of the Infants of Godly Parents is an
Antichristian error, destroying the foundation and hope of the faithful, and
how can that Church be the true Church of God, who are so corrupt, and whose
constitution (manifested by such their eronious profession is so destructive,
openly to baptize such as are not members of Christ. To conclude, by their own
ground, their Church members, are not members of Christ before their Baptism,
and I have proved, that they are not made members of Christ by their Baptism
after;

Much less can any of them truly say, as each child of theirs is taught to
say, that, In my Baptism I was made [the] child of God

So James Nayler said, I am [the] Son of God.

This dignity belongs only to the holy child child Jesus Christ the Son of
God. To whom be Glory and Dominion for ever. Amen.

Here follows A New and true Christian Creed, built upon the old foundation
of the Holy Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone.
I Believe in God the Father Genesis 1. Ioh. 1. 14. Luke 1. 35. Mat. 1. 25. Job.
19. 33. 42. 1 Cor. 15. 3. 4, 5, -- 20. Ioh. 20. 17, Mat. 2^. 26 Mar. 16. 19
Act. 1. 11. Joh. 5. 29. 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52. 1 These. 4. 15 Joh. 14. 16 17, 26. 1
Cor. 12, 3, Romans 8. ^. 2 Timothy 3. 16. Act. 17. 11 Romans 15. 4. Rev. 22. 18. 19.
Mat. 18. 17. -- 20. 1 Pet, 2. 9. Phil. 1, 5. Rev: 8, 3, 4 Mat: 12. 31* 32, 1
Cor: 15, 1 These: 4, 14 Joh: 3, 16,
Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, And in Jesus Christ his only Son our
Lord, which was conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin
Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate. was crucified, dead and buried, The third
day he rose again from the dead, he ascended into Heaven, and sits at the
right hand of God the father Almighty, from thence he shall come to judge the
living and the dead.

I believe in the holy Ghost.

The holy Scriptures.

The holy Church.

The Communion of Saints.

The forgiveness of sins.

The Resurrection of the body,

And the Life everlasting.

Amen.
London Printed for the Author. S. C. 1673.


