THE CASE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD: OR, The sad Dilemma that all the Members
thereof are put to, either to be perjured, or destroyed.
Jn a Letter sent from thence to Mr SELDOM, Burgess of the University.

ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS
SAPIENTIA ET FELICITATE blazon of the University of Oxford used as a printer's
device

Printed in the Year, 1648.

SIR,
THe case of the University of Oxford is by the diligence, and dexterity of
those men who were sent down by the two Houses to visit, brought to a very
short issue; and in that present posture I can now, without giving you any long
divertisement, or such which is unsuteable to your employments, offer you a
clear, and distinct view of it, (so far as may render that whole Body, whom
you in the House of Commons do represent the object of your kindness and
compassion) and then only ask you this farther question, Whether the
destruction that now has made its approach so near to us, the Axe which is
now laid so close to the root of the Tree, and is already fallen a hewing, may
by no reason, or remorse be averted, or removed from us.

The only question which is by these men proposed to every single person in
the University, is, Whether we will submit to their Visitation, or to the power
of Parliament (as they call it) in this Visitation.

That without the Personal Consent of the King to this Commission, (as far as
it respects the University in General, and us as members thereof) we cannot now
submit to any Visitation, without incurring the guilt of manifold perjuries. In
reference to our University Oaths, we have long since given an Account by way
of Plea to these men: That our particular Local, or Collegiate Statutes,
(which define us particular Visitors in our particular Colleges) bind us
(under the same most evident Perjury) to submit to no other Visitation, but
that which the Statutes of each have defined, has been also the Plea of the
Heads of our Colleges, in the name of their several societies. And for this,
and nothing but this, that is, (in plain words) because they have (with all
civility to the two Houses, and to the persons sent by them) refused to incur
that damning sin of Perjury, (which has already helped to bring such heavy
judgments upon this Nation) the Governors of the University are displaced,
and some imprisoned, and Master Reynolds a Visitor put into the office of
Vice Chancellor, and into the Deanary of Christ-church, two places of the
greatest dignity, and power) one of the greatest profit in the University. And
in like manner the Heads of the Colleges, and the Prebendaries of
Christ-church, have many of them already fallen under the same punishments, (and
the rest expect their turns) and several of the Visitors also are put into
their places. And now the slaughter hastens to the door of every of the
ancientest, or youngest Student, Fellow Scholar, Commoner, or other member of
the whole University and the speed is so great the pursuit so vehement, that
four whole Colleges have been in one day summoned to appear before them,
without any delay, to give positive Answer to this one Question, Whether they
will submit, or no. By this it is apparent to us, that as the state of things
now stands, we have an easy, though unhappy choice proposed to us, viz.
Whether we will prefer the preservation of our Estates, or of our Souls by
admitting perjury or ruin. (And in the making of the choice God has given the
whole University such an uniforme constancy, and contempt of the world, that we
hear not of above three men that have considered their profit so much, as to
yield this submission) And that it may be also apparent to all others, that
this is the choice, I shall give you the plain words of our Oaths, by which we
are withheld from submitting, that the Honorable houses may judge, if they
please, whether it be probable that Conscience has by us been hypocritically
pretended to destroy our selves, as it has sometimes been made use of by
others for their visible advantages. This I shall set down first, as far as our
obligation is founded in our Oaths to the University, and then to our several
Colleges.

The Oath of the University to every man is this. Tu jurabis te observaturum
omnia Statuta, libertates, Privilegia, and Consuetudines istius Vniversitatis.
Thou shall Swear to observe all the Statutes, Liberties, Privileges, and
customs of this University. The Scholar answers, Juro, I Swear, and this he
renews, and repeats as often as he takes any degree in the University. From
hence we conclude, that for any man wilfully to betray any one of the
Privileges, or Liberties (as well as to break the Statutes or Customs of the
University) can never be excused from the guilt and charge of downright
Perjury; for which we must be banished the University, if ever we be called to
account for it by any just power. And that one of our Privileges is, that we
be Visited by none but the King, or those that are sent by Him, as we are
verily persuaded, so have we never heard of any other title, or pretension of
any (which is thought even by our enemies to have any show of Ground in our
Charters, or Customs against our Plea) save only that of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Metropolitan; to which our Answer is so clear, and punctual,
( viz. that in the vacancy of the Archbishops Sea, all power that can be
thought to belong to him, must needs be acknowledged to divolve to the King the
fountain of his power, and so the Archbishop having been long dead, this power
of Visiting us (if any such belong to the Archbishop) must now needs be only
in the King) that we profess never to have heard of any word of satisfaction
that has been offered to this enforcement of our Plea, but are rather told
that the Commission for this Visitation coming under the name of our
Sovereign Lord Charles, etc. is a Commission issued out by the King; which as
it seems to us an acknowledgement of the truth of all our pretensions; so is it
the imposing upon us the belief of that which we know to be otherwise, having
certain knowledge that the King never consented to the issuing of this
Commission, and so having no excuse of ignorance, in case we should yield
submission to that Visitation (as proceeding from him) which is acknowledged by
all to involve us in Perjury, if it come not from him. To this we may add one
obligation more, that as it is one of the Universities Privileges to be exempt
(without all controversy as long as the Archbishops Sea is vacant) from all
power but that of the King, so it is one of the Kings Privileges and
preheminencies to have this full, and (at this time) sole power over us. And
then that branch of the Oath of Supremacy that obliges all Subjects in these
express words, [to assist, and defend to our power all Privileges, and
Preeminencies, and Authorities granted, and belonging to the Kings Majesty, or
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Kingdome] does certainly bind us to
defend this, as far as it is in our power to do it.

For the obligations of Colledge-Statutes which name us particular Visitors,
and exclude all others from that employment, I shall shorten your trouble, and
yet not fail in giving you, and all men a perfect satisfaction, by setting
down a few plain words out of some of them. In the Statutes of New Coll:
Magdalen Coll: Corpus Christi, and St. John's (in each of these without any
considerable alteration) these are the words; Statuimus, ordinamus, and
volumus, ut liceat Dno Episc: Winton: Dioc: qui pro tempore fuerit, and nulli
alii, nec aliis, etc. per se, vel suum Commissarium specialem, quem duxerit
deputandum (praeterquam per Cancellarium Vniversitatis, seu ejus Commissarium
generalem, seu procuratores Universe: oxon: etc. ac praeterquam Custodem, aut
aliquam personam nostri Collegii, aut alios quoscunque in Vniversitate per unam
quindenam anno proximo cum visitationem praecedente Students, etc. per quos,
aut ipsorum aliquem haec nolumus quomodolibet exerceri) ad Collegii hujus
visitationem libere accedere, and Custodem ac alios singulos socios, etc.
nostri Collegii in Sacellum ejusdem convocare.

From whence these few things are distinctly concluded by the Statutes of those
Colleges. 1. That the Bishop of Winchester by himself, or some body deputed by
him is the only lawful Visitour of those Colleges; and all other person or
persons in direct words (nec alii nec aliis, and praeterea nemini) are excluded
by the Statutes. 2. That it is not lawful for the Bishop himself to depute any
of those persons which are there excepted, viz. the Chancellor or
Vice Chancellor or Proctours of the University, the Warden or President, or
any person of the said Colleges, or any Student in the University, that has
been commorant there fifteen days in the year preceding the Visitation; by
which exception all those men, which have lately been the only actors in this
business (having now resided ('it is to be supposed studied) here for some time,
and now one named, and by them reputed to be Vice Chancellor, others to be
Governors of particular Colleges) are made utterly incapable of that
employment. I shall not need to mention any more, it being clear that these men
are not deputed by that Bishop, and as clear, that if they were deputed by him,
they are not qualified according to the Statutes, but expressly excluded by
them. Now what is thus ordained by those statutes, every member admitted into
those Colleges, is by Oath obliged to observe, and not only involved in
perjury if he do not, but where other penalties are not named (as in this
matter there are not) is liable to the pain of perjury, that is, deprivation of
all benefits of his College; which is now become the punishment of none but
those who will observe them.

Besides these Oaths which particularly and directly look to the grand matter
of the Visitation, There be many other branches of our Oaths Academicall, and
Collegiate, which are most nearly concerned in the present transactions. The
Statutes of the University, to the observing of which our Oaths distinctly bind
us, prescribe the manner of Election of Proctours, (of calling and meeting in
Convocations, etc.) And therefore whenever Proctours have bin removed by the
KING, the Vniversity-statutes have taken place in appointing the Successors;
and those (as the Vice Chancellor also) are obliged to take Oaths, for the
discharge of their places according to statute. But all is now done directly
contrary to all this. And therefore herein no sworn member of the University
can think fit, without professing despite to Conscience or reputation, to
join with them. And so in particular Colleges, the Statutes are punctual,
that after the departure or a motion of any Governor, the Fellows must
proceed within such a time to the election of a new, and he and none but he
shall be reputed Warden, President, etc. who shall be chosen by a major part of
the Electours. And then he that is chosen must take several Oaths
particularly to govern according to Statute, before any of the muniments of the
College may be delivered up to him, or before he enter upon the Government, to
act any thing in it. And this is established by several positive statutes, to
the observing of which, all members of Colleges are precisely sworn. And it
is evident and acknowledged that no man can be made Deane or Prebendary of
Christ-Church (nor ever was since the foundation of the Church) but by the
KING's personal consent, and nomination under the Privy Seal, and Broad
Seal, by which he is installed; And to him that is thus possessed of that
Deanary, every Student of that Church is by plain words of the Oath of his
admission, bound to perform due obedience, etc. All which being now most
clearly violated by not only Sequestring, but removing the former, and putting
in new Governors by force, without Election, or taking of Oaths to the
Colleges, it follows that no sworn member of any College can acknowledge any
such Governors without wilful un-excusable perjury. The only thing that has
yet been offered to us to answer the Force, and urgence of all this Plea (and
at the presence of which, all mention of our Oaths must vanish presently) is
the pretended Sovereign power of the two Houses to make and abolish Laws and
Obligations; which having interposed here, is consequently said to quit us of
all these engagements, which formerly lay upon us. But this is so far from
removing our scruples, that it is it self a scruple much more hard to us to
digest, then the former. For by our having taken the Oath of Supremacy, we have
acknowledged that to be only in the KING; and by our education in this
Kingdom, have been brought up in a firm belief (grounded on the known Laws and
Customs thereof) that the power of enacting, and repealing of Laws, belongs
not to the two Houses exclusively, but to the KING, with the Consent of the two
Houses; and we do now profess, never to have heard any thing to the contrary,
before these times; nor since these times, sufficient to alter our judgments in
this particular. And therefore whatsoever question be made of this truth by
other men, yet we, whose hearts assure us, that we make no question of it (and
consequently acknowledge, that we do not yet conceive our selves to be freed
from any one branch of any of these Oaths) cannot imagine what color it is
possible for the Tempter to put upon this required submission, by which to
persuade us, that it might be reconcilable with a good Conscience now, or with
any degree of excuse to God or men, or of quiet and tranquillity within our
own breasts at the hour of death, in case we should, on such terms as
these, submit to this Visitation. And as I think I might safely appeal to any
Divine in the world as to a Confessor, or Casuist for the stating of this
Question, Whether it were lawful for us to submit, supposing our many Oaths
confestly bound us to the Contrary, and that we are verily persuaded, that
those Oaths are in full force upon us, and as confident that the two Houses
could not dispense with them, nor take off the obligingness of them; So would
I likewise appeal to any man living that ever pretended to assert either the
Libenty of Conscience or propriety of goods, Whether we ought in this case to
be turned out of our free hold, to the utter undoing of so great a multitude
for no other crime but this of not submitting, when that is nothing else but
the following the dictates of our Consciences informed and regulated by the
known Laws of the Land. Having given you this short view of our state, which
(as it is told us assuredly by the Visitours) is suddenly to bring a perfect
vastation on this University, I cannot but think it my duty to the public
(which is now so disabled from meeting in a body, that it cannot make any
formal address to you) to lay this representation before you, and to desire
by your assistance it may yet be resumed into consideration, Whether it will be
for the honor of Christian Religion, or of the Pretestant profession, that our
bare demurring or refusing to submit our selves to the grossest and most
unquestioned perjuries, should be voted by your Committee to be an high
contempt of Authority of Parliament, and such punishments assigned thereto,
which, if inflicted impartially, must necessarily leave no one Scholar of what
quality soever in this University (which is of age to have taken Oaths of
admission to the University, or to any particular College) which shall not
appear to all men avowedly and confestly perjured, and liable to all the shame
and penalty, that by Law belongs to that crime, whenever any man shall be
willing to prosecute it against him. We hope this representation may produce
some other counsels; if not, we shall most cheerfully perish in our integrity.
And in the mean time, in the name of our broken Body, these few lines are
designed to acknowledge your favor, and to subscribe our selves

Your etc.

FINIS.

