(...). OR, A TRIAL OF THE COVNTER-SCARFE, Made 1642.

In Answer to a scandalous Pamphlet, Entitled, A Treatise against
superstitious Iesu-Worship: Written by Mascall Giles, Vicar of Ditcheling in
Sussex.

Wherein are discovered his Sophismes: and the holy Mother our Church is
cleared of all the slanders which he has laid on her*

By the Author of the (...).

CANTICLES 1.2. Thy Name is as an Ointment powered forth: therefore the Virgins
love thee.

Vtilitas Proximo: Gloria Deo.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Purslow, for Andrew Crook, at the Green-Dragon in
St. Paul's* Churchyard. 1643.

To The WORSHIPFVLL WALTER DOBELL Esquire; my respected Brother.
SIR,
WHat you desired is done. I examined, and in ten days of August last Answered
the Treatise against Superstitious Jesu-Worship. Encouraged, not altered since,
its now come the Kings Highway unto you. Not to flatter, it knows no sinister
end; nor to insinuate, it feels no disjunction. As you are religious, a
Gentleman, and a Scholar, value it in no relation to me. J shall not then lose
by you, nor you by my gains. Grant my request, and call the work yours. To
be yours is enough mine. Deny this and me

The faithful Observer of your worth THO. BARTON.
December. 31. 1642.
Animadversions to my Reader, on Mascall Giles Epistle unto his.
Where I meet with a Gentleman, or a Scholar, I dare be bold: and if I must
Apologize, it shall be carelessly short. Though I have bin in Aristippus
School, I gained not his Art. My pen never added to my Purse. And if I seen
to follow Zeno, 'twas over-galled ink forced me to acerbate mine. That Is all.
My Fr^ends I doubt not, the enemy is in the field, and I am one in Front. But
what he feared I saw not; he is wheeled about, and falls foul on a Canon. How
he can get off you shall see, and when he retreats, He charge him home.

Whom there he fights against are double fortified, with the Text, and with the
Church: the one commands, the other presses the performance. I perceive no
indifferency, if the great Chalenger can show any, I will be set at his will.

A plain injunction I find by the Letter of the Text, an outward duty too,
and both so in the sense of the Church. Enough thi^ to make his disobedience to
God, and Gods Ordinance, inexcusable,

A ceremony, who can tell any thing, knows it to be: but to be or not to be
any thing, I know not who can tell. If many hold it principally by humane
institution, in their submission they keep the divine precept. Without this
Thrasos lists I hear of none that leave or take.

Two sorts he describes, the first I am in, the second he is upon, Upon whom he
is, their ground is the Text and the Canon: the Text to warrant, the Canon to
bind.

This Iesu-Mastix calls that ridiculous. I say it is not. For if the Text do but
warrant, it cannot bind. If it warrant, the Canon is in force; because the
Church has authority in, not against, nor beside the Analogy of the truth.

The truth then for its dignity, holding diverse senses, and none repugnant,
the same may appear a command to some, to others a warrant, and yet neither be
wrong, though both reach not home.

A command is more then a warrant, a warrant is not against a command, and he
that is not against, is with us: but if the Church see the Command, which every
one does not, her authority makes that a Command to them, to whom it seemed a
bare warrant,

There is no denying this, without denying the first precept of the second
Table, Yet she is not above the Scripture, but sees that a duty be not lost,
Where two ways go to the right, she takes care that we miss not both,

The danger is, if she should inhibit what is a command to me, and a warrant to
another, If she do, obeying Gods command, I will endure her mulct. Whom I
cannot inform let him look to himself. As I will oppose contempt, I shall
never justify ignorance, nor negligence.

His comparison of the Canon and order, is a gin for a gull, a daring
anticipation, and Fathers that on the house of Commons, which was never begot
in the Christian World. Wilful blindness shall never make me graceless to my
mother.

The Epistolers descant on the Canon, remembers thee of, and confutes the 14
scandalous lines in his dedication.

When the Lord Jesus shall be mentioned, due and lowly reverence shall be done
by all persons, are the words of the Canon, he confesses: and I trow due and
lowly reverence is neither superstition, nor innovation: does neither pester
the Church, nor grieve the well-affected: Is neither forbidden by any religious
order, nor upheld by pride and shame: Is no malignant principle, nor polluteth
the peoples judgemen^^; is not more specious then religious; no monster of many
heads; no point of popery; no producer of dangerous conclusions, nor contrary
to the Text.

Beware Reader! the mind is wicked, that runs at his riot. I had rather err
with the Church, then be singular against the truth: But err I cannot, whilst
the Canon is made good in the Text, and not the Text inferior by the Canon.

What occasioned him to publish his Treatise, if ambition did not? For the
particulars he recounts viz. the Archbishops urging the Canon; Divines
preaching damnation to the wilful refusers, might have caused him to distrust
himself.

To the rest: That his Parishioners staggered, think it was upon his own
doctrine. That he found empty stuff in the upholders of our practice, impute
to his false judgment. That it has no foundation on the Text, attribute to his
will. That he was styled Factious and Schismatic, hold it justly, and his
own glory. That he received muddy teasons of some, and railing above measure,
deem the fairest gloss on himself. That we have no Scripture for our
opinion, bid him bite his tongue for the report.

Against whom he maliciously inveighs, if I mind the same Gentleman, he is a
very religious, reverend, learned, discreet, temperate, and orthodox divine.

If he accounted this Challengers arguments light, I tell thee, they are but
froth. If he would not admit one of his Parishioners to the conference, it was
his wisdom because the opponent is exceeding heady. If he denied some other
demands, I know his worth such that he might not yield to them without
disparagement to himself.

But that he appeared not in this practice before his Grace of Canterburies
time, and that he studied more hours in the question, then others had done
minutes, are so suitable to Mascall Gyles Chipps, that I dare say they came from
his own block.

To satisfy thee thoroughly, the worthy Theologue has endured such obloquie
from this malign one that amends cannot be made him without some public
recantation. Yet I hope to beg his pardon: because in the marginall notes of
his Epistle he is more wild then wily:

At last he is returned where he began. And now Buccae noscenda est mensura
suae, the wide of his mouth shall be known. His clawing at first, that my
opinion is not so absurd, nor so gross, at the last, as the former, I will
mind when my back wants rubbing.

It Is confessed that four Syllogismes I received, and be it known that the
answer I promised he had. The sum whereof is this. The Syllogismes were false
in form and matter, their proofs very weak, fallacious, inconsistent, and
much tending to Arrianisme. His note of no reason, and all railing is expunged
thus. If he can show me any irrational, or railing Line under my hand I will
not only pardon his ill tongue, but give it leave to rail at me ever.

The reader by that which follows may judge whether I gave a boast beyond the
Victory; whether great reproaches necessitated him to challenge the Field,
clear himself, and try the Valor of our Kind; whether it be possible for
his Forces to help them that stagger and are missed, whether he prove that
bowing at the Name of Jesus has no command, no not the least warrant from
Phil. 2.9.10. Whether answer be not made to the whole, and grounded on the
Scriptures; read and forbear if thou can to deem him (...), one no less
unwise then vain* Put on, and let no Errata frighten. Correct them with thy
Pen as thou go. Thy pains shall be compensed in mine,

T. B.

AN ANSWER To A TREATISE Against SVPERSTITIOVS JESV-WORSHIP.
A Treatise against Superstitious JESU-WORSHIP.

Answer.

IN the Title of your Book is no small piece of Antichristianisme. Our
honoring of Jesus, is Superstitious; that is it: for Jesus is the genitive, and
cannot there be merely nominall in any case. Indeed the Word Superstitious
makes it specious; but what if it appear that the superstition you mean, is
an Euthusiasme of Confessor Prynne, or Father Burton, etc. fathered on us by
their pupil Giles? Will you recant? or dare you undergo their forfeiture? If
you will not the one, I can spare you my Voice to further you in the other; and
the rather, because I know that contrary to your own knowledge, you charge us
with syllabicall worship: for my self have often in the presence of many
Divines, Gentlemen, and others, told you, that we take not the Name of Jesus at
Phil. 2.10. without the sense.

THis Treatise I divide into two parts. In the first part the true sense of the
Text is laid open, and from thence sundry Arguments are raised against bowing
at the Name Jesus.

In the second part are answers to the pretended Reasons for that opinion.

PART I.

Four things are necessary here to be sifted and cleared.

Fi st, What is meant by the high exalted Name of Christ, signified in these
words; Name above.

Secondly, What is meant by the Names subjected to this highest Name signified
in these words; Every Name.

Thirdly, What is meant by these words; Every knee shall bow, and, Every tongue
shall confess.

Fourthly, What is meant by those wo^ds; In the Name of Jesus.

Answer.

In the division and parts of your Pamphlet, you undertake to set forth more
then you lay open, the true sense of the Text: Multa videntur quae non sunt,
seeming to sift, you clear nothing; nay, like the Sive, holding the corse, you
let go the sine, and that you so do, shall first be seen in your first
Section.

SECTION I. Wherein it is to be considered what is meant by the exalted Name of
Christ, signified in these words, N^me above.
BY Name above every Name, Name above ^ry Name, ^at it is not.
cannot be meant a bare proper Name, for these reasons.

Answer.

In your Epistle to the Reader, I found a great distemper in your animal
parts: at the very entrance of this Section. I see the disease, Melancholy it,
and such as tends (...). The Symptom is this: what you suppose to be, must
be as you suppose. You think it, therefore we say it. Were you compos mentis,
and would you put this lie upon us in Print? viz. That we Iesu-Worshippers
divest the name above every Name unto the bare elements only of Letters and
syllables.

Who reads your first line knows your aim, and every one in our practice can
remember you of Ignorantia elenchi; in the whole section, and throughout your
book you are ignorant of, or would beg the Question.

The question is not, whether the Name above every Name be a naked Name; but
whether the Name above every Name be the Name of Jesus? or if you will,
whether the Name Jesus in sensu, not in elementis only, be the Name above
every Name?

Your Question we hold negatively, affirmatively ours: Against your own you
go, and so do we, but not by the recommendation of your Arguments.

First, It is no way necessary so to understand it, because (Name) is not
generally, or for the most part so taken in Scripture, but in other senses*

Secondly, Because this phrase (a great Name made or given) is never taken in
Scripture for a bare proper Name.

Thirdly, Because this phrase (Name above another made or given) is never taken
in Scripture for a bare proper Name, above another such Name.

Answer.

Your first is nothing; and your reason as little. You say it is no way necessary
so to understand it; because N^me is not generally so taken. We affirm it
cannot be so taken: because a Name without a thing is nothing: the second
notion subsists not, save in the first: the Name of Jesus is not his without
him.

Your second and third be coincident and included in the first.

Fourthly, It is not agreeable to the analogy of the Text, so to underst^nd it:
My reason is this, because the subjected Name in the Text, must have of
necessity, a correspondent Relation to Christ's advanced Name, otherwise the
sense cannot be Logical. If then the high advanced Name of Christ in the Text
be a proper Name, it will follow necessarily, that all the subjected Names must
be proper Names also. Yea themselves refer the Name Jesus, to divine Names,
preferring it before the Titles, Christ, Son of God, Jehovah, etc. And if it be
so understood, though the sense be Logical, yet is it not sound, for this it
will be: The Name Jesus is a greater Name than the Name Christ, Jehovah; and so
consequently above the Name F^ther, or Holy Ghost; above the Names of men, as
John, Thomas, Henry, and so above the Names of all creatures and things, which
will make a most absurd sense, which yet cannot be avoided upon these men's
grounds. Again, seeing it is evident, that all the subjected Names in the
Text, must bow to the Name above every Name, If the said Name be understood of
a proper Name, they not excepting divine names, the sense will be this: The
names of Angels and Devils, the n^mes of all things and creatures, the names of
men, as Richard, Thomas, William, yea, divine Titles, as Lord, Christ, Jehovah,
must bow to the Name of Jesus; and how senseless will this be? Seeing then,
that the Names subjected to he Name above every Name, are not the Names of
creatures, and things sub^e^ted (for they are referred in the Text to knees, of
things in heaven, things in earth, and things under the earth, not to Names)
but the powers of things and creatures subjected, as I shall demonstrate
hereafter. Then cannot the Name above them all be a proper name; for then the
sense will be this: The Nam^ Jesus has dominion over eve y thing and creature,
and every thing and creature must bow knees to the Name Jesus, which will be
ridiculous. L^stly, seeing the names subjected to the Name above every Name,
are meant the powers and virtues of things and creatures, they excepting not
divine Names, they must understand it also of the power of God, then the sense
will be this: The Name Jesus is above God, and that God himself must bow knees
to the name Jesus, which sense will be horrid and blasphemous. Answer.

Here Is mickle a do and nothing done; the reason is, your Logic holds no
sense, a plain non sequitur at first, and this it. If the high advanced Name
in the Text be a proper Name, it will follow necessarily that all subjected
names must be proper N^mes also; prove the consequence if you ca^: till you
do, I tell you, that if you understand by a proper Name, as before, a Name
separated from the sense, your inference, a non existente, is most absurd: but
if you mind the Name in the sense of the Name, be it the highest, not of
proper only, but of common also: above Muscall and Giles, etc. above all
below, all above, I except not, no not I, the Name of God. See my
Antiteichisma, page 18, and there your inferences in this place will appear,
tanquam puerorum naenia, or like any thing that may please children.

How the Name of Jesus is, and why exalted, shall come at your next sixthly, and
afterward often. What is intimated by every Name under super, in the second
section, and as occasion is offered in the progress.

To your lastly, I say every one knows we are no Anthropomorphites, and if any
would know whence your horrid blasphemous conceit of Gods bowing knees to the
Name Jesus proceeds, Physicians will teach them, that when the humors of the
brain are over servent, by their agitation, men's in falsa traducitur,

Secondly, If it were necessary to understand (Name above every Name) for a
Name or Title, yet may it not be understood of the Name or Title Jesus; for
these Reasons.

First, The word (Jesus) does no where in the whole new Testament signify the
bare name Jesus, but only then when it was promised by the Angel at Christ's
Conception, Mat. 1.21. and given unto him at his Circumcision, Luke, 2.21.
where necessarily it must so signify.

Answer.

At your concessum in this second place, the six reasons have not web enough to
entangle a fly; so insufficient they, that your negative proposition will no
more be, then be supported by your word.

The first is, the word Jesus does no where in the whole new Testament signify
the bare name Jesus, therefore Name above every name, as a bare name, may not
be understood of the Name Jesus, as a bare Name.

Here is stuff for an Antagonist; who ever conceived save you* that the word
Jesus does signify the word Jesus? and do you in earnest affirm i^ at Mat.
1.21, Lu. 2.21. I never read it so there, nor elsewhere. But if this might be
granted, why should not the Name above every Name be spoken of Jesus? (...) the
Name is Jehovah in the old, and may not (...), Name above every Name be Jesus
in the n^w? look again, and you shall often find a Pariphrasis of that Name,
and Name often used for Jesus, Act. 5.41.

Secondly, This phrase (...), Name of Jesus, is never, taken in all the New
Testament (where only it is used) for the name Jesus, or any other titles of
Christ, but in others senses. If any shall think, that it is meant of the name
Jesus in this place, making the word (...) to be the Dative case, and to agree
in opposition with the word (...) because there is no Article before it; I
answer, in sundry places of the New Testament the self same phrase is used
without an Article, and is never put in the Dative case, but alw^i^s in the
Genitive, and does no where denote the ba^e nam^ Jesus; as in these places
amongst others. Act. 2.38. Act. 16, 18. Act. 4.10. Col. 3.17. Answer.

Secondly, (this phrase (...), Name, rather the Name, of Jesus is never taken
in the New Testament for the Name Jesus) that is, the Name in the sense, if I
understand you, is not without the sense. Therefore Name above every Name, as a
bare Name, may not be understood of the Name Jesus, as a bare Name.

If our Worship were thus metaphysicall, could any Logician overthrow it with
this argument? Infer the Enthymeme, and when I am such a Word-worshipper you
shall convert. Here Is no more required of me till you have rendered me more
reason.

To your next supposition (if any shall think that (...), you would say,
(...), is meant of the Name Jesus by apposition, because no Article is prefixed
to (...)) I answer; if I should say so, all your skill in Grammar cannot
disprove it; but the phrase being usual, and (...) not prefixed, it is argument
enough to me, that it must be the genitive. The genitive it shall be, and so
much the stronger against you. For the genitive being the first intention, the
dative cannot be the same: as in your cited places, Act. 2.38. etc.

Thirdly, The Name above every Name, is incommunicable to any creature, being
the only prerogative of the Son of God: but the name Jesus was communicated to
others, as to Ioshuah, which is the same Name with Jesus, Heb. 4.8. etc.
Therefore it is not sound what bishop Sermon on Phil, 2.9.10.
Andrews, and Master Justification of vowing, page, 49,
Page from him do affirm, that the Name Jesus is incommunicable, which though
it were given by men, yet they say, it was not given of God, who appointed none
this Name save Jesus Christ, and therefore they say that it is greater than the
Name Christ, because many were called the Lords Christ's by Gods own allowance,
as Kings and Prophets. For to this I answer: The Name Jesus was not given to
some at least without a special providence of God, as to Ioshuah, who was a
great Savior, and type of Christ. Thus has learned Vrsinus Catechis. page 196.
, Atqui inquis Parents Ioshuae, etc. But thou will say, says he, that the
Parents of Joshua when they gave him this Name, could not imagine, that God
would deliver Israel by him: He answers, At Deus scivit and voluntatem little
direxit: But God knew it and directed their will. And some are no more called
the Lords Christ's, than others are called the Lords S^viours, as Neh. 9.27.
These Saviors there are called the Lords gifts, which is al one as if it had
bin said, the Lords Saviors. And whereas the name Jesus was a common name to be
called by, generally allowed, and never reprehended in any: But for the Name
Christ, howsoever some were called the Lords Christ's, as Types of Christ, yet
no man might take the Name Christ as an ordinary Name to be called by without
horrible blasphemy, Mat 24.23.24. Answer.

Thirdly, The Name above every Name, is incommunicable. Therefore Name above
every Name, as a bare Name, may not be understood of the Name Jesus, as a bare
Name. And your reason is because the Name Jesus was communicated to others, as
to Ioshuah. Heb. 4.8.

This is as the worst, and may do you some pleasure, when you have learned of
Confessor Prinne, or Father Burton that the Name Jesus, which is Jesus his Name
at Phil. 2. is attributed to another. But whither will not impudency? When
ignorance may challenge such religious, and learned men, as Bishop Andrews,
and D. Page, Atheism is at hand. Have you forgot, or did you never read
Chilo's (...), Heed it now, Iuvenal. Sat. 11.
and say with the Poet, e caelo descendit. Had you published your Pamphlet
under the hands of ten learned Divines, as you promised, I would have exceeded
my self in the vindication of that honor, which can never be at loss by your
Pen. What there they affi^me I avoid, and you may see how far in my
Antiteichis. page 22.23. I will only look upon your answer, and let the world
view the extent of your folly.

Bishop Andrews, and D. Page say, the Name Christ is communicated by him to
others, namely to Princes: So is not Jesus. That Is one reason of diverse.

In r^pel^ing this you have overturned your self. (Some are no more called the
Lords Christ's, then others the Lords Saviors; therefore the Name Jesus is
communicated.) It Is true that God in his great mercies gave the Israelites
Saviors; Neh. 9.27. (...), Salvatores, yet not one of them to be, (...), as
Jesus is a Savior. And if there be any surreptitious taking, it is no
communication of it. Your quotation of Vrsinus is not ad idem, and you may
learn of others, that Joshuah received that Name by Moses, not of his parents.

But may no man bear the Name Christ, as a Name ordinarily to be called by,
without blasphemy? Is this your tenet, and the way to super-exalt the Name
Christ? What think you then of Christopher? Why do you confess that Kings
are Christ's? Nay are we not all (...), and denominated Christians? Do they
and we blaspheme, because we, and they be so called? Mat. 24.23.24. inhibits
not the usurpation in that sense, but our impropriation of it in the highest.

Fourthly, Because the Name above every Name was given to our Savior at his
exaltation, according to the plain words of the Text. But the Name Jesus was
given to him in the beginning of his humiliation. To answer here, that give
signifies to advance, I reply, it is not agreeable to the sense of this word
in other Scriptures, and it mars the phrase and sense of the Text here, as I
shall hereafter demonstrate. Answer.

Fourthly, This Name Jesus, was given to him in the beginning of his
humiliation. Therefore the Name above every Name, as a bare Name, may not be
understood of the Name Jesus, as a bare Name.

This is the fourth inconsequence, and answered in my Antiti. page 13. 14. 15.
Where you may know that the Name is the same before and after. What you promise
here to demonstrate hereafter, shall be answered then.

Fifthly, Because Jesus was advanced after his Resurrection to be Lord and
Christ, Act. 2.36. And it is considerable that the Evangelists do usually call
him by the Name Jesus, only in the time of his humiliation. But in the
Epistles of the Apostles, He is most commonly called Christ, not near so often
Jesus: And when he is called Jesus, it is very commonly with the addition of
Lord, or Christ, as Lord Jesus, or Jesus Christ, or both together, the Lord
Jesus Christ, An argument, that Lord, and Christ, be Titles of his honor, and
so cannot be less eminent than the Name Jesus. Answer.

Fifthly, Jesus was advanced after his resurrection to be Lord and Christ, Act.
2.36. Therefore the Name above every Name, as a bare Name, may not be
understood of Jesus, as a bare Name.

This and the preceding consequence smell of Arrianisme. As if Jesus were not
before, what he was declared to be after the resurrection, Lord and Christ.

That which is so considerable with you, as the reason, viz. that the
Evangelists do usually call him by the Name Jesus only in the time of his
humiliation, is more then inconside^at y ven^ed by you. Because there he is
more often called by the N^m^ Jesus, then any other Name. After his
resurrection, in the 4. Eva^g lists, and in the first of the Acts, you shall
find Jesus forty five times, and Christ but twice.

Your second observatum, that in the Epistles he is most commonly styled
Christ, is nothing, unless you had said Christ Sejunctim, and not Jesus. But
that you cannot, yet if you could, and the first and second were true, you
might infer no more, then that Jesus who once was decryed, is now cried up Lord
and Christ.

Sixthly, It is against the Scriptures to prefer the Name Jesus above other
divine Titles, because God in subjecting all things to Christ, did yet except
himself, 1 Cor. 15.27. And when the Scriptures do enter into particulars,
Christ's Name is specified to be advanced only above created Names, as above
Angels, 1 Pet. 3.21. above Kings, Psalm. 87.27. above Prophets, Heb. 3.3. above
Priests, Heb. Chapters 7, 8, 9, 10. above all other creatures and things, Heb.
2.8. His name is never preferred above Gods Name. Answer.

Sixthly it is against the Scripture, to prefer the Name Jesus above other
divine Titles: therefore the name above every Name as a bare Name, may not be
understood of Jesus as a bare Name: your medium to uphold the antecedent is,
that God in subiecting all things to Christ, did yet except himself. 1 Cor.
15, 27.

What Is this to the Name? but here you do, petere caelum Stultitia, even what
you can to overthrow the gracious dispensation of God. As if the three equal
might not choose one through, by, and in whom all would be reconciled, known,
and honored all. Is it against the Scripture that the Son was humbled, and
not the Father nor the Holy Ghost? Why then should the exaltation terminated in
the person of the Son, and not of the Father, nor of the Holy Ghost be against
the Scriptures? This advancing of Jesus does show that our salvation consulted
by the three Persons, and undertaken only by the second, is equally to the
glory of all. The doctrine is frequent in the new Testament, and the more the
more desperate your opposition. It Is not the saying, that God excepted himself
when all things are subjected unto Jesus, or that at 1 Pet. 3.21. Psalm. 87.27.
etc. Jesus is advanced over creatures only, will exeme him from the high
sublimation, wherein the glory of the blessed Trinity is; and no where else
refulgent. The Father not subjecting declares equality, and the Sons eminency
his Fathers excellency. He and the Father are one. See my Antiteich. Tract. 9.
Page 87.88. etc.

Did I now maintain the opinion that you persuade the world I am in, your ten
arguments would be too senseless to evict me. How I stand, my Antiteich.
declares. And once again I protest, that if it be superstition to honor our
Savior in the sense of his Name, I will, by the grace of God, contend to be so
superstitious still.

But here, I pray, tell me, who are they that do extol the bare Name? Not the
Protestants I am sure, nor the Rhemists; men in the Moon perhaps; or else it is
a Chimaera of your own brain. What is Christ's, should ever be handled with
respect: His Name therefore; for that is his, and may not be separated from him.

Seeing then, that the Name above every Name, Name above every Name, what it is.
cannot be the Name Jesus, I understand it of the supereminent Glory and Power
of Christ, and that upon these Reasons: Answer.

Your transition unto the positive Thesis has at the words (seeing then etc.)
an epilogue of what you have showed: and what have you? Even the reeds that
Mydas Barber filled full of words. The Name above every Name may, for ought you
have said, be a bare Name, and so honored. And because you cannot prove any
thing against your supposall, permit, I pray, our brethren to give the Name a
sense, and Worship too, as the Name of Jesus. That you will a man would think;
For now you understand it of supereminent glory, and have reasons store for
what you understand.

First, It is no way contrary to the analogy of faith so to understand it; for
Name is used for Glory and eminency familiarly in Scripture, as Genesis 11.4. and
in common use of speech, as we say, Such a one has a Name for wisdom and
learning, when we note him to be eminent and potent for the same. Answer.

Nihil occultum te latet, behold, what Eagles eyes have you got?

(It is no way contrary to the analogy of faith so to understand it. Therefore
it is so. Your reason is, because Name is used for glory, Genesis 11.4.)

The sight is very dim that will be darkened with such a mist. By the same
argument it may be the worship, or service of God. For so, (...), Name
signifies. Mat. 28.19. If you stand to this, this is as strong against, as for
you. But it comes again with fresh supply at thirdly, and fourthly, and will
be discussed then.

Secondly, Name of God, etc. in Scripture does commonly denote the Power,
Majesty, and Glory of God; and that two ways; Either implicitly, or
expressly.

1. Implicitly, when the Person of God, because he is glorious, and full of
Majesty, is only denominated properly and evidently, as Psalm. 5.11. Let them
that love thy Name be joyful in thee, that is, Let them that love thee. So
Psalm. 9.2. so Act. 3.16. even as we say to great men according to their degrees
of honor, Your Majesty, your Grace, your Honor. So accordingly the Saints of
God have usually spoken of God, and to God, and Christ, in, and by the Title of
his Majesty, (Thy Name) because Name, Glory, and Kingdom are properly his.

2. Expressly; when the Power and Glory of God is particularly and evidently
manifested by the word Name, as 1 Samuel 17.45. I come unto thee in the Name,
that is, In the power of the Lord of Hosts, So Romans 9.17. That my Name, that
is, My Glory may be declared: So Act. 4.7, By what power, or in what Name:

Answer.

At secondly you bring no more then I give you, viz. that Name is (...), and
still the analogy is as proper for our sense as evident for yours. For though
(...) and (...) Name, and the Name be (...), the Lord; yet (...) the Name
pronounced is no less among the Hebrews, nor ever otherwise in any other
dialect.

Thirdly, It is more agreeable to the analogy of the Scriptures so to
understand it, than otherwise, for first, a great Name does every where
signify the great glory and dignity of the Person, Secondly, Name above
another, does every where signify the Glory and Dignity of the Person having
that Name, above others whose names are not so great. Answer.

Nihil veritas erubescit nisi solummodo abscondi, Tertul. Valent.
Truth fears nothing more, then not to be in public. Abscondat se serpens
quantum potest, yet me thinks your oversight at thirdly and fourthly should
make you blush. This is it. Having at first understood the Name above every
Name to be the supereminent power, and glory of Christ, here you say, it is more
agreeable to the Text so to read it then otherwise. For first and secondly, or
if you will avoid the tautology, let both your reasons be this one.

A great Name does every where signify the great glory and dignity of the
person.

To grant this is to vanquish you. If it signify the glory, and the dignity,
then it is not the glory, and the dignity. For Signum non est signatum, the sign
is not the thing signified.

Fourthly, It must be so understood here, and not for the Title Jesus, because
in this sense it fits the words of the Text answerable to other correspondent
Scriptures; for thus I reason.

Whatsoever Name is the gift which God gave Christ when he exalted him, is the
Name above every Name in the Text: for so the words of the Text are, God highly
exalted him, and gave him a name above every name.

But Power and Glory is the gift, which God gave Christ when he exalted him,
according to these correspondent Scriptures, Mat. 28.18. All power is given me
in heaven and in earth; and 1 Pet. 1, 21. God raised Christ from the dead, and
gave him glory.

Ergo, Power and Glory is the Name in the Text above every Name. Therefore not
the Name Jesus.

Answer.

Must it so be understood, and not for the Name Jesus? And is that your reason,
because power and glory is the gift which God gave Christ? Mat. 28, 18. 1 Pet.
1.21.

It Is true, power there and glory are given unto him: but power and glory are
not the Name given him; though his Name be the Name of power and glory. Your
Minor therefore is false; for if the gift be power and glory, the Apostle does
Idem per idem agere, and the exaltation of the person and Name must be both
one. Or if the gift be power and glory, I would gladly know whether created, or
increated? Created it cannot be, and be a Name above every Name. If increated,
it is Arrianisme to say it was then given him.

To escape this Dilemma you have no way save with the Fathers, and with us, to
confess that given there is manifested. His Name was declared to be the Name
of power and glory, that every knee might bow, and every tongue confess, that
Jesus Christ is Lord. See my Antiteich. Tract. 3. page 14.15. etc. and the
Syllogism will be thus:

The Name ever which is highest advanced, is the Name above every Name.

But the Name of Jesus is the Name highest advanced.

Ergo The Name of Jesus is the Name above every Name.

The Major and Minor are in the Text Phil. 2.9.10.11.

What will you do? here is nothing for you to act, save the Colier, and that
you may in denying the conclusion.

Fifthly, It is proved by the scope and coherence of the Text, for there is
opposed the exaltation of Christ's Person to the humiliation of his Person; not
of the name Jesus to the name Jesus, or any one Title to another. The
conjunction (Wherefore) declares a correspondency of Christ's exaltation,
according to the distinct branches of his humiliation. For the sufferings of
Christ in the Text are reducible to two heads: The pain of feeling, and the
pain of loss: The pain of feeling, in these words; He humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even unto the death of the Cross: The
correspondent honor follows in these words; Wherefore God highly exalted him.
The pain of loss, that is his departure from his Name and Glory; which is
amplified in two respects. 1. In regard of the excellency of the person, that
left his Glory: He that was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to
be equal with God, he became of no reputation: An extraordinary matter, that
God should become Man, that the Lord of Lords should become a servant, that the
God of Glory should receive shame. 2. It is amplified by the measure of the
Glory which he laid down, for the words are (...), He emptied himself of his
Name and dignity, He left as it were no Glory remaining, according to Isa.
53.3. He became not only man, but a servant, not a servant only, but the most
despised of all servants, for he was reviled from the Prince to the abject. 1
Cor. 2.8. He was numbered with Thieves and Malefactors, Mat. 27.38. He had a
name of repute beneath all names and reputes; for Barnabas the murderer was
preferred before him, John 18.40. See now how the conjunction (...), Wherefore,
answers to this, for it follows, God gave him a name above all names, that
is, Power and dignity above all created powers and dignities whatsoever. It
answers expressly to the name of power and Glory, not at all to the name
Jesus. Thus then I argue: Answer.

Fifthly, you reason from the humiliation to the exaltation; and because your
fancy vanishes, without taking from; or adding to the Text, the Name of Jesus
is denied to be humbled, lest it should prove exalted. You do well in
observing (...), but you might have done better in joining (...). For,
wherefore also does demonstrate what you care not to see, viz. That he whose
Person was so aviled, and his Name put out by an accursed death, is
superexalted in both; and in both, by the union, and for our salvation. See my
Antiteich. Tract. 1. page 4.5. etc.

You have a great deal of the humiliation here, and go a great deal further
then you should. For I cannot find, where Christ veiling his glory ever
departed from it; nor can you prove it, without being an Heretic.

A Person there is humbled, and, in your way, declared how. I will but ask a
question or two, and you shall be condemned from your own mouth. Who was the
Person so humbled? you must answer, the Son of God, made man. What was his
Name? you answer, Phil. 2.6.10. his Name is Jesus. Then Jesus was the Name so
humbled, and by consequence the Name so exalted. For, from the humiliation the
argument is good unto the exaltation. See my Antiteich. Tract. 3. page 16, 17.
etc.

In respect of what Name Christ by this Text suffered in the time of his
humiliation, in laying it down, and emptying himself of it: in respect of
that Name God his Father when he exalted him, gave him a Name above every Name.
But Christ according to this Text, in the time of his humiliation, suffered in
respect of his reputation and glory, in laying it down, and emptying himself
of it. Not so in respect of the Name Jesus.

Ergo, God his Father when he exalted him, gave him a name above every Name,
according to this Text, in respect of glory and dignity, not in respect of the
name Jesus.

It will thus therefore follow from the premises, that seeing the Name Jesus is
not the Name above every Name in the Text, it cannot be the Name in which every
knee should bow: and seeing Christ's Name of Power and Glory is that Name, all
knees must bow in his Name of power and Glory.

Answer.

The Minor of your imperfect Syllogism is not ad idem secundum idem, unless
you intend that Christ in his humiliation suffered in the Name of his glory;
but if it be as you have taken it hitherto, exclusive, it is false: Nor are
you, nor all your Helps, by all their Sophistry, able to justify it. See my
Antiteich. Tract. 3.16. etc. and the Syllogism will be thus.

Whatsoever was the Name most abased, that is the Name above every Name exalted.

But the Name of Jesus is the Name which was most abased:

Ergo, the Name of Jesus is the Name above every Name exalted.

The Major and the Minor are in the Text, Phil. 2. I know for whose sake you
will not deny the inference: and be it known also, that you have brought
nothing in the negative part of this Section, save falsa supposita; nor other
then (...), and those very dangerous in the affirmative. Our assertion
therefore is still good.

The Name of Jesus, or the Name Jesus, in the sense of the Name, is the
powerful and glorious Name, or the Name of Power and Glory, super quod non est
super, above which, there is nothing above.

SECTION II. Wherein it is to be considered what is meant by the subjected
Name, signified (every name) which are referred to things in heaven, things in
earth, and things under the earth.
Sundry Expositors do refer these Names to rational creatures only, but
upon my poor judgment, yet submitting my self to better information, they
are to be referred to every creature and thing, both rational and irrational,
without exception of any. For it seems to me, that the Kingdom of Christ set
forth in this Text, is not only his Kingdom of Mediatorship, but also his
natural Kingdom, which from all Eternity he enjoyed with his Father, to which
Kingdom he is advanced to by his Father, according to his humane nature: and
this seems to agree with many paraled Scriptures; as 1. with Job. 17.4.5.
where Christ prays after this manner; I have glorified thee on earth, I have
finished the work that thou gave me to do: And now O Father, glorify me
with thine own self, with that glory which I had with thee before the world
was. 2. It is proved from Heb. 1.2. God has in these last days spoken unto us
by his Son, whom he has made heir of all things, by whom also he made the
worlds, that is, God has advanced his Son, according to his humane nature, to
be partaker of the Glory of his Divine nature, who made the worlds, and all
things therein, now to be inheritour of all things. Therefore says Mr. Calvin
on that place; Hic honor jure debetur, etc. Calvin o^ Heb. 1.
This honor is rightly due to the Son of God, that he should have power over
all things, because by him all things were made. 3. It is confirmed from that
parallel place of Col. 1.15.16. 4. It is evident from 1 Cor. 15.27. where God
having excepted himself, that did put all things under Christ's feet, it is
plain, has excepted nothing but himself. 5. It is manifest from Heb. 2, 6,
7.8. in which place the Apostle apply's the eight Psalm to Christ, where is
specified the subjection of irrational creatures; yea the Apostle says
expressly there, that God having put all things under Christ's feet, has
excepted nothing that is not put under him, 6. Seeing that it is manifest, that
this Text of Phil. 2.9.10. shall not be perfectly fulfilled till the day of
judgment, we shall find that other things besides rational creatures shall
be subject at that day to Christ, for the Apostle shows 1 Cor. 15.26. that he
shall destroy the last enemy, which is death, and Rev. 20.13. The Sea shall
give up the dead which are in her, and death and hell shall yield up the dead
which are in them. 7. It may appear from Rev. 5.13. a place correspondent in
phrase and sense to Phil. 2.9.10. where the Holy Ghost having spoken before of
all rational creatures, how they praised Christ, speaks there of irrational,
both sensitive, and insensitive, and refers them to every creature, in heaven,
in earth, and under the earth, and in the Sea, which creatures groaning now and
traveling in pain for the sin of man, do long for the day of redemption, at
which time they shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God, and now in their kind they praise and
glorify Christ in hope of it, but at that day shall their fullest praise and
subjection be. So that it seems to me, that no creature, or thing, is
excepted, but that all must bow to Christ, yea, indeed the Text of Phil. 2.9.
seems to me plainly to infer it, for the Apostle speaking of all knees of
things in every part of the whole universe, as Heaven, Earth, and under the
earth, seems to except nothing from bowing to Christ. On Phil. 2.9.10.
And this appears to be the judgment of Mr, Calvin, Omnia a coelis, etc. God
has subjected all things from heaven to hell, to the rule and dominion of
Christ: And of this opinion are plainly Origin and Hierome, as Bishop Babington
cites them: In his Work Page 245. 246.
and thus judges Mr. Edward Gurnaie, in his Vindication of the Second
Commandment, Page 72. Answer.

Here you show an Aesculapian temper; though you have read much, yet your great
Reading will submit to better: but your Mercuriall wit has mangonized a
Gigantean fury with an humble hue. For by whom you pretend to be guided, you
look on with a sinister eye, and oppose them with all your might.

Let me premise that by Names in your first line must be understood every Name
under (...), above. V. 9. or else the question is changed. This done, your
argument stands thus.

The Kingdom of Christ in this Text is not only of Mediatourship, but
natural also. Therefore every Name must be referd to all creatures without
exception.

The antecedent is false. For though they seclude not one the other, as,
opposita, yet when the Oecumenicall is spok^n of, the essential is not
intended. For the Natural is Christ^ (...) Son of God: the personal his
secundum (...) (...) ^y dispensation only, as he is (...), God and Man. This
the Apostle minds and the administration of this here, and hereafter. This is
it at the three parallel places, Isa. 45.23. Romans 14.11. Phil. 2.10. as the
ancient and modern Divines, heeding the context, have necessarily inferd. See
my Antit. Tract. 6. page 53. etc.

The Texts are very quiet among themselves, if you could permit them their
senses. They do not all which you have cited, speak of the Natural Kingdom
only: But if they did, may not Phil. 2.10. be understood of the Personal?
Does not the Apostle here say, that every knee and every tongue shall confess
that Jesus is Lord, or made Heir of all things, as to the Hebrews he writes,
Heb. 1.2. How made? He ever was Heir, and never not Heir as the Son of God.
Made then he was, gratia dispensationis, and by the Union as God and Man. As
then the Church is in the Commonweal, yet is not the Commonweal; so here
this Personal Kingdom is within the Natural, yet not the Natural; and as in
the one, so in the other; what is spoken of the one, is not of the other.

Your forcing of several Texts, to force on this Text the sense of the
Natural Kingdom, makes me fear you are enclining to Eutychisme: Not
distinguishing how Christ has any thing in a singular manner, you apprehend
all things his by nature only, and according to humane nature also, in your
first and second proof. Indeed, Christ-man has the essential Kingdom, but
not as man, for then every man should have it also; and where were subjection
then?

Though therefore whatsoever is in, or of one or the other Nature, may be
spoken of the whole person, yet not otherwise then limitate, according to that
nature whose propriety it is. Christman has the essential glory according to
his Divine nature, not according to the humane; the humane nature receives of
the Divine by grace in fruition, not by real participation. There is no more
proved at Ioh. 17. Heb. 1.2. nor more in the subsequent citations, then that
the Son of God having taken upon him in our nature a personal Kingdom,
holds still his natural. And so much does M. Calvin, Calvin. in Heb.
whom you urge, say at Heb. 1.2. and not more at Phil. 2.9.10. Whether the
Fathers determine it so, or no, you may ^ee in my Antiteichisma.

I might now pass unto your third Section, had you not insinuated (...), every
Name, to be all creatures only.

With what intent looked you on the Text? Minded you to pervert it, that you
might miscarry others? Or did your (...) deceive your sense? Shore up your
eyes, and try whether you can discern a Colon, or no, at (...), every Name?
Can you not, and yet see to make a Comma there, and another at shall bow? Is
not this to add and diminish? Strive whilst you will, your own snare has
caught, and shall hold you, till your heart have cried your Pen mercy. Shall I
be plain with you? you have taken this of a very false hand: for I am
persuaded, that your vaunt of knowledge cannot be ignorant, Isid. Orig. l. 1*
c. 18.
that Colon is membrum quod intellectum sensui praestat. The understanding then
being satisfied at the Name in the Colon, goes not to the next for that it
has, but for more: Namely for the duty, that the Name having full regard, God
who gave the Name may have his full glory. For this purpose are Commas, Colons,
and Periods kept, that there being no confusion in oratione, there may be no
distortion in sensu.

I have been bold, and will be more. This you say, God has given Christ a
Name which is above every Name (here you give a loose, and take part of the
next verse) of things in heaven, and in earth, and under the earth; and so
leave the rest, that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, to a Colon by
it self.

If you have no better course to express the meaning of the Holy Ghost, the
world will soon know, judge, and conclude, that M. Gyles being very lame, has
deserted the question. Who desire more, may see my Antiteich. Tract. 3. page
17. 18. 19. 20. etc. and the Syllogism will be this.

That Name ever, above which there is no other Name of God, is the Name above
every Name.

But the Name of Jesus is that Name above which there is no other Name of God.

Ergo, The Name of Jesus is the Name above every Name.

The Major is undeniable, the Minor is in the Text plainly demonstrated in my
Antiteich. and is always intended de nominibus, non de modis rei, not that the
relation Son of God, as a Son, is a greater Name then God the Father, as
Father; but of all the Names of God, the Name of Jesus is the greatest
signifying Name of might poured forth in mercy.

Jesu, per Nomen tuum dulce, fac mihi secundum nomen tuum. Aug. de contrit.
cord. c. 5.


SECTION III. Wherein it is to be examined, what is meant by bowing every knee.
BOwing the knee cannot be here taken plainly and literally for the bowing of
that member of the body, which is called the knee; Bowing every knee, what it
is not.
for these Reasons:

First, If it be not so taken, it is not contrary to the Analogy of Faith; for,
1. Bowing is applied to the souls of men, which properly cannot bow: Psalm.
44.25. Our soul is bowed down to the dust: 2. It is applied to mountains and
hills, Hab. 3.6.

Secondly, Knees are taken figuratively and metaphorically in Scripture, for
strength, power, and ability, as Ezech. 7.17. where God threatens, that when he
shall arise to destroy Jerusalem, he will make all hands to be feeble, and all
knees to be weak as water, that is, he will turn all their strength into
extreme weakness. So when God promises to give strength and salvation to his
people, Isa. 35.3.
he bids them to strengthen the weak hands and confirm the feeble knees:
because by the hands and knees the strength is manifested; the knees being at
it were the Basis of the whole body, which being feeble, the body sinks:

Answer.

I fear not, but the weight of your reasons will show your arguments light.
The first and second hold nothing. The first is this, if bowing the knee be not
here taken literally, it is not contrary to the analogy of faith. To this your
second must come, or I, gone thither, shall have no appetite to return unto
the first. Recocta crambe fastidium parit. First then, and Secondly, if you be
right, there is no (...) in making the knees, and bowing in the Text Phil. 2.10
metaphorical. Is there not? No more then is there at the second Commandment;
nor Psalm. 95.6. nor Isa. 45.23. nor Romans 14 11. nor Ephesians. 3.14. nor any where.
Because Knees and bowing are somewhere figurative, as Psalm. 44.25. Hab. 3.6.
Ezech. 7.17. they shall be no where proper. Hell is sometimes taken
metaphorically for the grave, therefore there is properly no hell: and could
you make it good, that because God in Scripture is sometimes attributed, (...),
to Idols; sometimes, (...), unto Magistrates; therefore there is no true God,
you might safely be as great a Libertine as any.

Thirdly, Because the most of the Creatures, which here must bow knees, yet
have no proper knees to bow: as Angels, Devils, many sensitive, and all
insensitive creatures. And seeing that the Apostle begins with things in
Heaven, where in the highest Heaven are the Angels, and the souls of just men
made perfect; In the second Heaven, Stars and celestial Orbs; In the lowest
Heaven, mists, dewes, and clouds: it were senseless to imagine, that God in the
first place should command these to bow proper corporal knees, when they have
no such knees to Bow. Hence I argue: Whatsoever bowing is expressly required
in the Text, shall be performed by every creature.

But bowing of proper corporal knees, shall not be performed by every
creature, yea, not by most of the creatures.

Ergo, Bowing of proper corporal knees, is not expressly required in the Text,

Answer.

Most of the creatures, which here must bow, have no proper Knees to bow. Ergo,
etc. Prove the antecedent if you can. What if Angels, and devils have no
Knees, yet most of the creatures, which are reasonable to account, have. I know
you will not say, yet if you should you cannot justify, that there are more
Angels good, and bad, then men elect and reprobate. The Speech then may be
proper in the greater number, which yet is analogicall in the less. But may
not Angels have their Knees, as well as their tongues, as their faces? Tongues
they have, 1 Cor. 13.1. faces they have, Rev. 7.11. and Knees too, (...), they
stood, they fell down, standing, falling insinuate Knees, and if we add two
words more, (...), and (...), they adored, they spoke, we have full proof of
their outward expressions, Rev. 7.11.12. and that is enough for those that can
be satisfied with reason. All insensitive creatures, as Stars, Clouds,
Vegetables, etc. in your Calendar, are without the Apostles Scope, as not
having any faculty to this reasonable service of God: See my Antiteich. Tract.
6. page 53. etc.

The Major and Minor in your Syllogism are both false. Gigni de nihilio
nihilum, Pers. Sat. 3.
of nothing nothing's got.

The corporal Bowers at the Name Jesus, do give this answer, which indeed
cannot satisfy: They say that those creatures which have not corporal knees,
yet have something correspondent to knees, and therefore do bow after their
kind and manner. I reply. 1. I would feign know how it is, that they bow after
their kind and manner, except it be by their obedience and subjection, will
they nill they to the dominion of the Lord Jesus. 2. However they bow, surely
they do not bow corporal knees, therefore if such bowing be expressly
commanded in the Text, how shall they fulfill the Text? Seeing then that the
most of the creatures can fulfill the Text without bowing corporal knees; it
is manifest that bowing corporal knees is not expressly required in the Text.
Surely it would aruge want of wisdom in God, or great injustice, if he should
command his creatures that duty, which they cannot perform. (To illustrate it
by this simile) if a great King should send out an Edict to tax every one of
his Subjects both great and small, with a tax of twenty pound a man, when he
is not ignorant, that there are thousands in his Dominions, that are not able
to pay twenty shillings a man, would not this argue want of wisdom and
justice? In like manner, this would argue the like imputation in God, if he
should injoyne all creatures and things to bow corporal knees, when the most
of them have no such knees to bow. If it should be said that those Subjects of
such a King cannot pay, where it is not, it is sufficient that they pay what
they are able; but let them that are able, pay the whole sum. I answer, this
had been reasonable, if the Kings command had been so; but how shall this
excuse the King, that against his knowledge shall command all his Subjects to
pay alike, as well those that are not able, as those that are? So to say in
respect of this bowing, let those that have no knees, pay what they can, but
let those that have knees pay knees; It were fair indeed, if God should leave
it so at liberty, But how can this acquit God of want of wisdom and justice,
if he should command all creatures and things to bow corporal knees, when he
knows that the most of his creatures, and things, have no such knees to bow.
Answer.

What Is there, is little to the purpose. Vnde habeas, quaerit nemo.

If some have said, I do, that Angels have (...), to our Knees. They have no
Knees visibly corporal, as ours are, yet invisibly corporal they have in
analogy to ours. Your Simile therefore of a great King, etc. argues no want of
wisdom, or injustice in God, but presumption in you: that not knowing the
reason of all things dare so argue; and contempt in you, that have Knees, and
will not bow. For the creatures which God has bound to this duty, have
potentium obedientialem for the performance. See my Antiteich. Tract. 6.

Seeing then that bowing of the knee cannot be taken literally, I understand it
of subjection, and so it is taken, Genesis 27.29. Thus Isaac blesses Jacob, Let
people serve thee, and Nations bow down to thee, that is, let them be subject
to thee. So Pro. 14, 19, etc. So in common use of speech, when one says to
another, that he will make him bow, he means that he will make him yield. The
same subjection is signified, Psalm. 2.12, by the word, Kiss, where Rulers and
Judges are commanded to kiss Christ, that is, to yield their subjection to
him. If then the word Kiss in that place, cannot be taken properly but
figuratively, why should it be thought unreasonable by any, to have bowing the
knee here to be understood figuratively?

Now that bowing here is meant of subjection, many correspondent places do
evidently prove it, as 1 Cor. 15, 27, Heb. 2.8. Ephesians. 1.22. testified by the
most judicious Primitive Fathers that write upon the said Text, as also by our
most eminent modern Divines, as that worthy and famous Confessor of Christ
Master William Prin, largely evidenceth in his learned Appendix against bowing
at the Name Jesus, to which I refer thee,

By bowing every knee of things in Heaven, things in Earth, and things under
the Earth, is understood the subjection of all things and creatures, with all
and every one of their powers, faculties, virtues, and abilities, will they
nill they to the dominion and government of Christ. There is not the least
ability in the nature of man, Vindication of the second Commandment. Page 72.
says M, Gurnay, but must find a knee to bow to Christ; our least muscles, and
knuckles, inclinations, and dispositions: The like may be said of every
creature, they must bow the strength they have in every part of them, to the
power and dominion of Christ. And in this general sense, the knee of the body
properly so called, is not excluded; but in a proper and literal sense it is
not enjoined.

Answer.

What you cannot prove not to be, you will to be something. For Genesis 27.29.
bowing is subjection, so is it Prove. 14.19. so is Kissing, Psalm. 2.12. so 1
Cor. 15.27. Heb. 2.8. Ephesians. 1.22. all things are subject unto Christ.

Hoc est, quod palles? Did the study for this make you pale? And did it make
Master William Prynne a worthy and famous Confessor too? I have known men at
loss by their pains; if you are conscious, be more careful, or no more
public.

I have in earnest searched all your quoted places, and find not the Hebrew
word (...) at Isay 45.23. or Psalm. 95.6. nor (...), at Romans 14.11. or Ephesians.
3.14. or Phil. 2.10. used in any of these places. And I affirm, that (...)
inferres such a bowing as yields an outward expression, and that (...) does
intimate no other: nor does Master Gurnay, in your citation, gainsay this.
Your Crack of the most judicious primitive Fathers is but a Crack. See my
Antiteich. Tract. 5. and cry out upon your Creditors.

Secondly, it is to be considered what is meant by the confession of every
tongue.

By the Confession of every tongue; is not meant properly and literally the
vocal confession of that member which we call the tongue, because every Name
under Christ's Name, which must bow the knee, must also confess with the
tongue, which for the most part want tongues as well as knees.

By the confession with the tongue, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, is meant the
expression and yielding forth of the several parts, functions, gifts, powers,
and abilities of every creature, both rational and irrational, to the glory
and praise of Christ the highest Lord. 1. That it is understood of all kinds of
creatures, it is evident from the fore-quoted place of Rev. 5. verse. 10. where
the four Beasts, and the four and twenty Elders, by whom are understood
rational creatures, as Angels and men, are said to extol and glorify Christ.
And it follows verse 13. that John heard all the creatures in Heaven and
Earth, and under the Earth, and in the Sea, and all that are in them, to say,
Praise, glory, and honor be to the Lamb, etc. which creatures there, are all
irrational creatures, which have no proper tongues to speak, and yet are said
to speak the praise of Christ. Even as the Heavens and the Earth are said,
Psalm. 19.1.2.3. to speak in all languages the praise of God their Creator: So
now they shall praise Christ the great Lord and Redeemer. And secondly, that
every part and parcel of the creature shall praise the Lord, it appears from
Psalm. 103.1.2.3. where the Prophet David calls upon his Soul, and all that is
within him, that is, all the vigours and powers that are in every part of him,
to praise the Lord, As David in every part of him praised God, and the Messiah
to come, so shall every part of every creature either willingly or unwillingly
praise and extol the great Name of the Lord Jesus being come and advanced; and
in this general sense the proper tongue of man is not excluded. And thus at
the last day the Friends of Christ with their wills, and his enemies against
their wills, shall call Christ Lord, Mat. 7.22. Mat. 25.37.44,

Answer.

Secondly, to uphold your Utopicall subjection, by the confession of the
Tongue, may not be meant a literal and vocal confession of that member: And
why? Does not the Apostle say, that with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation, Romans
10.10. The Heart and Tongue, Soul and Body, make a full subjection. The very
Angels have their outward expressions, and we must have ours, or else God has
not all his.

What you urge at Rev. 5.10.11.12. is strong against you: but you find a
Prosopopaeia in the 13. verse, and that Psalm. 19. and 103. all mute creatures
are induced, speaking the praise of God; therefore the reasonable must be
tongue-tyed. A non esse ad esse non valet argumentu^: But if your conclusion
be, therefore the reasonable must suo modo confess, as the irrational do
their way; then as they with all their might, we do with ours, not only
inwardly yield, but outwardly also, by Tongue and Knee, etc. show forth our
obedience. This you ought to mind, or in your general acception of subjection
you contradict your self: for all the Virtues appear not, if any Knee or
Tongue be excepted. See my Antiteich. Tract. 4. page 28. and Tract. 5. page 43.
44. etc. and the Syllogism will be this:

Whatsoever bowing is expressly required in the Text, ought to be performed by
every creature enjoined it.

But corporal bowing is expressly required in the Text.

Therefore corporal bowing ought to be performed by every creature enjoined it.

The Mayor and the Minor are in the Text, and you in your subjection general
and general confession yield as much. Do what you can, you can but obscure
the truth, (...), to the ignorant people. Others find, before they seek you,
and will shame you, unless your timely recantation be more fortunate then your
miserable Art.

SECTION IV. Wherein it is to be considered what is meant by this phrase, In
the Name of Jesus.
THe Bowers at the Name Jesus, to make their opinion and practice good, do
thus understand in the Name of Jesus to be at the mention of the Name Jesus.
But I infer, that this interpretation is senseless and absurd, having for it no
ground or warrant from Scripture. For 1. as I said before, this phrase, Name of
Jesus, is never taken for the Name Jesus, or for any other Titles of our
Savior. 2. Therefore, In the Name of Jesus, can never be taken for at the
mention of the Name Jesus any where. 3. This phrase, In the Name, prefixed
before any of the Titles of the Deity, as in the Name of Christ, Lord, God,
etc. is never taken for at the Naming of any of these Names in any part of the
old and new Testament, but if any shall fasten such a sense upon it any where,
it will mar and murder the sense, as indeed it does the sense of this Text by
that exposition. To instance but in two places amongst many. Psalm. 118.10. All
Nations compassed me about, but in the Name of the Lord I will destroy them;
would not it be a wild sense to say, At the Naming of the Lord I will destroy
them? So Act. 9.29. Saul spoke boldly in the Name of the Lord Jesus; were it
not infinitely absurd to say, that he spoke boldly at the Naming of the Lord
Jesus? Thus ridiculous will the sense be made everywhere, where this phrase is
used according to this exposition, try it who will.

This exposition which they make of the Text is one of the maine pilars of
their cause, which did they not make, they should lose a maine and principal
ground for this their opinion and practice, and therefore this faling them all
fails them: I know they are not able to bring any one Scripture for to warrant
this exposition. They have no vision for it, therefore they are naked, It is
built upon the loose Sand of vain opinion, and not upon the Scriptures,
therefore it falls to the ground. All the warrant they have for this exposition
is this, that (in) does often signify (at) or (to) I answer, this is nothing,
except they can bring any Scripture for the whole phrase, viz. that in the Name
does signify (at the mention of the Name) which they cannot do: For my part,
I refuse not to take the Preposition (or) as they would have it taken, and so
it shall make for me, and not for them: Let (in) be as much, as (to) or (at)
and so, for as much as I have showed before, that Name of God or Christ, does
denote the Power and glory of Christ, either expressly or implicitly, I take
it, this phrase In the Name of Jesus, may be indifferently referred either to
the Power and glory of Christ expressly, so the sense will be this: Every knee
or Power shall bow at, or to the Power and Glory of Christ, or rather to the
person of Christ, implicitly enfolding his Power and Dominion; and then the
sense will be this; Every knee shall bow at, or to Christ. And thus it agrees
to this phrase in Psalm. 63.4. Thee will I bless while I live, I will lift up
my hands in thy Name, that is, I will lift up mine hands to thee, or I will
worship and adore thee, and agrees fitly also with Isa. 45.23. which is applied
to Christ, Romans 14.11. As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me.
So that according to the meaning of the Preposition (in) in their own sense,
the whole phrase being expounded according to the Analogy of Faith, makes
against them, and not at all for them.

Answer.

The Bowers, say you, at the Name Jesus, to make their opinion and practice
good, do understand in the Name of Jesus, to be at the mention of the Name
Jesus. But I infer, that this interpretation is senseless, and absurd.

So do I, and having done, need say no more. But I must tell you, that the
Devil is a liar, cunning, and obstinate. Do we, your derided Bowers, bow at
the naked Name Jesus? Do we interpret the Text at the mentioning of the Name
Jesus? How often have you heard of this false suppositum? Even so often, that I
could easily have believed your head before this time had been purged with
Helebore, your brain crammed with more wit, and your mind with conscientious
notions. But I see what color you have lost, and wish that none else might see
wherewith you are intinct.

Yet my good will to you may not endanger me for your Vizard: Look to it, I
have already loosed it, and when this string is untyed, it will drop off.

First, you say this phrase Name of Jesus is never taken for the Name Jesus.
Here is petitio principii, and where before you said it, it is answered before,
Sect. 1.

Secondly, in the Name of Jesus can never be taken for the mention of the Name
Jesus. You must put in and out what you please, or will be pleased with
nothing. In your phrase is (...), which permitted will delude. At the mention
of Jesus say we, and so it is ad idem secundum idem.

Hither comes your thirdly, where is idem per idem, a mere dilatation of the
second. It is never, etc. that is, it is no where in the Old and New Testament
so taken, was your sense before, and it is no other here.

But will you yield, if I take from you your own Weapons? Psalm. 118.10. All
Nations compassed me about, but in the Name of the Lord I will destroy them.
What is your sense here? Even, that it is wild to say, at the naming of the
Lord I will destroy them. Were you well when you printed this? Can there be
intended mo^e by in the Name of the Lord, then the bringing of the Lord in
medium, into the midst, as Master Calvin Calvin in loc.
says, between himself and his enemies? And is there any other way to do
that, then by the faithful mentioning of his Name? Your ancient hold is down,
and your new falling to the ground.

At Act. 9.29. Saul spoke boldly in the Name of the Lord Jesus s you hold it
infinitely absurd to say, that he spoke boldly at the naming of the Lord Jesus.
Is this absurd, and infinitely? We all know, that Saint Paul was a zealous
Professor; and might he be stout in professing Christ, and not bold at the
mentioning or naming of Jesus? He is very stoutly preached, whom we fear to
name. Where is this great Challenger? Were Anteus he, he should never rise
again.

Places are frequent in the Bible to maintain this: The third Commandment
admits it: For there we are enjoined not to mention Jehovah in vain, if
Expositors may be credited. The Name of the Lord may not be heard, written,
spoken, any way handled, without due respect. Joh. 16.23. Whatsoever ye shall
ask of the Father in my Name, that is, by faith mentioning me as the Mediator,
he shall give you. Act. 5.40. not to speak in the Name of Jesus, is, not to
make mention of Jesus, either by Preaching, or otherwise, to his glory. At our
invocation, even the Name of Jesus is a faithful naming, or mentioning of him,
not inwardly always, but by heart and tongue also at times unto God, Ephesians.
5.20. etc.

No Christian ever denied this, and yet this with you is wild, absurd,
ridiculous, quicquid tibi suggesserit splendida bilis, what your humor
pleases. When the Dog-dayes be past, a time may be found to purge you of this
Choler; the while, your Neighing and Wincing gets nothing but Spur-gaules. And
let that serve for your eight frothie Lines, of our building on the loose sand
of vain opinions.

What you desire next, is showed before, that one sense of in the Name of
Jesus, is in analogy to other Texts.

The signification of (...), though questionable, you grant to be at: who doubt
it, may see my Antit. Tract. 4. p. 29. 30. where (...), is declared by (...),
and in the Name of Jesus is as much, as in the naming of him, or when he is
named. And this periphrasis is usual in the old and new Testament. Genesis 1.1.
In the beginning, is when the beginning was. 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. In the coming of
our Lord, is when he comes.

Your sense I grant to be true, viz. That every knee shall bow to Christ, and
unto his glory, if you exclude not the literal. For beside bowing to the
Person, and in glory of the Person, terminus a quo, the whereat, or bowing at
the Name is expressed. See my Antiteich.

Nor is there less to be minded in the words of the Prophet, Psalm. 63.4. I
will lift up my hands in thy Name; that is, when I call upon thee, at thy Name
unto thee will I lift up my hands. At the hearing of a Voice, we find the
Disciples fell on their faces, Mat. 17.6. And of Isa. 45.23. Romans 14.11. the
Text at Phil. 2.10. is the full exposition. See my Antiteich. Tract. 4. there
it is resolved, and the Syllogism is this.

The literal sense, not against, nor beside, but in the analogy of the truth
is to be observed.

But the bowing at the Name, or mention of Jesus, is the literal sense, not
against, nor beside, but in the analogy of truth.

Ergo, The bowing at the Name, or mention of Jesus, is to be observed.

The Major is a perpetual canon; the Minor out of your own Quotations is
demonstrated before. And for helping me where you endeavored to wound me most,
I remember you of a short sentence in Isocrates, Isocrat. Ora. ad Demon.
(...).

SECTION V.
THus having opened the Text, I will briefly gather the sense together,
according as it has been opened, and show the meaning of the Text, and
compare it to the exposition, which they make of it, and then let judgment
pass upon it.

The sense then will be this: Our Lord Jesus Christ being in the form of God,
equal with God, made himself of no reputation, (that is) laid down his Name,
and Dignity, and received a Name beneath all Names, and being made like unto
Man, and taking upon him the form of a Servant, humbled himself to death,
even to the death of the Cross: Wherefore God highly exalted him, and gave him
a Name above every Name, that is, Glory, Renown, Dominion, and Dignity, above
all things, and creatures, created Powers, Dignities, Dominions, that all
things, creatures, powers in Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth, should
subject themselves, and all their strength, virtues, and abilities, either
willingly or unwillingly to Jesus Christ, thus glorified, and advanced, and
that they should express, and show forth, that Jesus Christ is Lord in the
glory of God the Father, for so I take it that (...) must be understood, (...)
being often used for ((...)) and thus this branch Christ's exaltation will fully
answer to that branch of his humiliation, mentioned verse 7, where it is said,
that He took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of
Man, but now being exalted, he shall be manifested to be Lord in the Glory of
God the Father. Which shall be fully declared in the great Day of judgment,
when he shall appear in his Glorious Name of Power and Glory: And of this
opinion are Ambrose, and Hierome, and other Fathers, and Calvin, and Zanchius,
and Piscator, besides sundry other modern Expositors do allow of it: Though
the other expositions be sound, viz. To the glory of God the Father, because
the honor of the Son is the honor of the Father.

Answer.

In the fifth Section, having undertaken to give us the meaning of the Text,
you desire judgment, and let it pass.

You say our Lord Jesus Christ, being in the form of God, etc. laid down his
Name and dignity; and received a Name beneath all Names.

I challenge you in these words: For though it be true that he veiled his
glory, yet he laid not down his Name: What he ever was, he remained still the
Son of God. Nor did he receive a Name beneath all Names, though he and it were
by sinners handled beneath all degrees of baseness.

You go on thus; Wherefore God highly exalted him, and gave him a Name above
every Name, that is, glory above every creature.

Here you dealt not fairly with your Reader, you say the Name given is glory,
must not then the Name under super above, be glory too, and the sense thus? He
has given him, (...), glory above all glory. If you look into S. Chrysostom,
Chrysostom, in Loc. Phil. 2.
greater Scholars then your self kept that analogy. Nor do the Learned,
except the Arrians, make glory a Name which Christ had not before; but say, God
then did set out his glory in the highest, that Jesus, which was a Name of
scorn among men, might be the highest Name in Power and glory. Nay, Power and
glory are the essential virtues of his Person, but the Name given him, or
illustrated his, must denote who, and what the Person is.

It follows, that all creatures should subject themselves willingly or
unwillingly with all their abilities, to Jesus Christ thus gloryfied, and
express, that Jesus Christ is Lord in the glory of God the Father.

Here you enlarge the Text and shorten it. For first, all creatures are not
capable of this adoration. Secondly, you obscure by generals, what the Apostle
expresses in particulars. Not denying geniculation, nor open confession, you
wrap them up in the virtues to be expressed by creatures. Thirdly, not
subscribing to the manner and time of the duty, you make (...) at the Name
redundant. As if you were now afraid to let the people know, that when the wind
shall turn, you will maintain outward worship and and open confession lawful
and necessary.

The observation that (...) is often used for (...), is true, and what I say of
it, is in my Antiteich. Tract. 9. Page 87.

Your showing also, how Christ's being in the glory, does answer to his being in
the form of a Servant, is very good. I will only tell you, what I said before
( Sect. 1. at the last fourthly) you would come to; even to confess that,
Given, is manifested, that the Name above every Name, is the Name of Power and
glory; and so you have in plain terms, viz. But now being exalted, he shall
be manifested to be Lord in the glory of God the Father, which shall be fully
at last, when he shall appear in his glorious Name of power and glory.

There is first a manifesting of what he had, no giving of that he had not.
Secondly his Name is of Power and glory: Power and glory is not his Name. And
of this opinion are the Divines, ancient and modern, which you have named, and
others, see my Antiteich. Tract. 3. Page 15. 16. etc.

Now this exposition is full and easy, making the sense clear, but the other
exposition, which they make, makes the sense rugged, and is not agreeable to
the scope of the Text, nor sense of other correspondent Scriptures. For thus
they reason; Jesus Christ being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to
be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, etc. Wherefore God
highly advanced him, and gave him a proper Name, or Title above every Name,
that when the Name Jesus shall be sounded out in the Church, in the time of
prayer or preaching, for there and then, say they, is the place and time of
this duty, all things in Heaven, and Earth, and under the Earth, should bow
corporal knees: A most absurd and senseless exposition. Answer.

Having done your exposition, you give it this gloss. It is full easy clear.

You might have said, short, hard, doubtful: Short, chopping off the visible
part of Gods Worship; Hard, making the whole Text figurative; Doubtful, not
only contradicting what you said before, but opposing axioms in divinity
also, and bringing in those creatures that come not within the compass of the
precept. Were your mind right, your meaning would be (...), uniforme, and not
involved.

To make all sure, you insinuate into the Reader, that our interpretation is
rugged, not agreeable to the scope of the Text, nor sense of other
correspondent Scriptures.

One said, men are most like unto God, cum vera loquuntur, Sphinx Theolog.
Phil. c. 24.
when they speak the truth; though he were an Ethnic, Pythagoras spoke like a
Christian.

Take it not ill, I say you here degenerate from your common profession, though
not from Puritanisme. Do not you know, that the literal is the plain and
even sense? How then can ours be rugged? Yours are conscious; and in my
Antiteichisma, who will read, may see that ours goes home with every tittle:
where then fails it in the Scope? And you have been taught the correspondence
with other Texts: why then is it private, or si^gular?

The sum of our Tenet is this: The Lord Jesus, by the Union, and for our
Salvation, was humbled; wherefore also God super-exalted him, and set out the
Name of Jesus above every Name: that for the Union, and for our Salvation,
every rational creature should bow at the Name of Jesus, and every tongue
confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

Is this it you term absurd and senseless? A good Souldior will not forsake
his Hold, for the barking of a Dog; nor a true Christian desert the truth, for
the scoff of a Separatist.

You disdain, that the Name of Jesus should be the Name above every Name: Is
not this Semi-Arrian-Socinianisme? Were you thoroughly sifted, would it not be
found among your Traditions of Purity, that Christ suffered merely to
confirm his Doctrine; and we, righteous only in the imitation of him, shall
for our own works be exalted into glory? What is the Name, and that it can be
no other then the Name of Jesus, is at large in my Antiteichisma.

Next, you charge us for maintaining, that at the mentioning of Jesus in the
Church, at the time of Prayer, or Preaching, all things in Heaven, and in
Earth, and under the Earth, should bow corporal knees.

This was hammered at your own Anvill. We Will admlt your sense so far as it
may concern us; we in our times and places, the other in theirs: And that we
are limited by the Church, is no injury to the Text, Doctor Page, if you
would remember, taught you this by a Rule of the Schools; D. Page Iustificat.
of bowing. Page 11.
That affirmative Precepts, though they always bind from doing the contrary,
yet do not bind us to all times, and to all occasions.

So for Prayer and Fasting, the Scripture leaves them at large, and for
Prayer, does seem to bind us to it always. For Saint Paul says, Pray
continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. which is well expounded, not of every time, but of
every opportunity. If then we may truly and justly limit a substantial duty
of Gods service to some certain times, though the Text seem to enjoyne it at
all times, much more may we limit a circumstantiall duty belonging unto God,
especially when the Text leaves it more at large. At all times be the Name used
reverently, but in our devotions, private and public, we are strictly tied.
Add this; the day of the Resurrection is the day which the Lord has made, and
every seventh day after is the day we sanctify in remembrance of it: Whose
Person therefore and Name God on that day highly exalted, we on that day and
the other show the superexaltation of his Name and Person.

I will note here a few absurdities, which they make in the sense by this their
interpretation, in comparison of the cleerenesse of the former exposition,
leaving the most material absurdities to be considered of hereafter.

First then, To understand Name above every Name, for Glory and Power above
all, hereby is evidently set down, what Name it is, that God gave to Christ,
viz, the Name of Power, and Glory. But to understand Name for a proper Name to
be called by, it is not manifested what Name it is: they say, it is the Name
Jesus, but the Text does not say so in that phrase as they understand it. And
expounding it of the Name Jesus, what absurdity is this to say, that God gave
his Son that Name at his exaltation, when he received it at his Circumcision?
This is to make God to dally wi^h his Son: To give, and take, and to give
again; For it is plain, that if now he had it given him, it was not then in
his possession.

Answer.

Now you seem to show how absurd we are, by opposing your own opinion to our
expression.

First, if Name above every Name be Power and Glory, it is evident what Name it
is that God gave unto Christ, viz. the Name of Power and Glory.

You heard before, that the Name cannot be Power and Glory. Secondly, the
consequence is naught, Notum per ignotius, it makes the plain obscure.
Thirdly, you contradict your first mind, Sect. 1. in that you express the
Name which God gave Christ to be the Name of Power and Glory. For, if it be the
Name of Power and Glory, Jesus is it, whose Virtue the Power is, or else you
do (...).

But to understand Name for a proper Name, it is not, you say, manifested what
it is, etc.

No? Read the Text, and in the tenth Verse it is the Name of Jesus. Nor is it
absurd to hold, that God gave his Son that Name at his Exaltation, when he
received it at his Circumcision: For, the giving of the Name is the manifesting
and declaring of the Name, as before; and you have so expounded it in this
Section.

Nor does this make God to dally with his Son, to give, and take, and give
again, unless you will deny the gracious dispensation of the Lord. But for
your profane boldness with God and his Word, I will not dally with you.

Your reason of your affirmation is, in your own words, this: For it is
plain, if he had it now given him, it was not then in his own possession. You
cannot avoid Arrianisme, take it how you will: If of the Name of Jesus, then by
your saying, Christ was not Jesus before the Exaltation; if of Power and Glory,
then Power and Glory was not in his possession before. Take heed, you know
whose bowels the impetuous blasts thrust forth.

Secondly, When we understand Name, for the Power, and Glory of Christ, and
bowing of subjection to the Power of Christ, or to Christ himself advanced, it
is showed to whom this bowing shall be performed, viz, to Christ. But by
understanding Name for the Name Jesus, and the bowing to be done at the sound
thereof, they only set down a time, when the bowing shall be done, but they
declare not to whom it shall be done: This they say, at the sound of the Name
Jesus, every knee shall bow, but they do not manifest the Person to whom these
knees shall bow, Answer.

In your sense, there is nothing at all showed. Not Bowing: for, as you have
handled it, it is an invisible any, or every thing, a general yielding without
expression. Not the Time: for how know we when to bow, if the power be not
signified by some Name, or sign. Not the Person: for he is out of our sight.

But to bow at the mention of Jesus; not, as you would, to the bare Name Jesus,
notes the Time, when Jesus is named; points out the Person, at the Name of
Jesus; and declares the subjection full; outward and inward. See my Antiteich.
Tract. 4. and 5.

Thirdly, In taking (in the Name of Jesus) to be at the mention of the Name
Jesus, as they do not plainly apply any honor to the Person, so neither to
the Name; but it must stand but for a cipher, or watchword, to give notice
when the bowing shall be performed; but according to this their exposition they
cannot give it any honor; and it is absurd to have this Name to be so highly
advanced above all Names, and yet not to give it honor. But they will have
honor to be given it, therefore they will have (in the Name) to be understood
to the Name at the mention of it. And so Bishop Andrews the Oracle of that
opinion understands it, yet hereby is not the Person of Christ properly
denominated, because so the exposition refers the whole bowing to the Name,
none at all to the Person, and themselves confess, that to bow to the Name,
and not to the Person, is Idolatry. Answer.

Here you are aviated, and say you know not what. What? do we neither respect
his Name, nor his Person? Are we Jews, think you, to bow the Knee in derision
of him? Or were not you of Protagoras sect, when in derision of our bowing at
the Name, you told some of your Parishiones how the boy that was whipped cried
out Jesus, and made his Master kiss his posteriours.

The defacing of the Image is the disgracing of the Prince: and the mocking of
the Christian is the scorning of Christ. Irrisor non poenitens! Lycurgus King
of Thracia, despising Bacchus, chopped his leg asunder, as he lopt his Vine. Take
this till more comes.

Now I may tell you that we make not the Name a cipher. For in the Name we
behold the circle of perfection, in it a Unit, in that Unit three angules, and
in the middle two natures, and of these but one Person, Jesus Christ.

Nor yet a mere Watchword. Indeed the naming gives notice that it is our
time, but the Name carries us in our adoration unto his Person. The Name has
regard, and the Person the duty. In the sense of his Name, no otherwise do we
honor him.

And so does Bishop Andrews* the Oracle of his time, not of this opinion, as
you term him, understand it. But suppose he had been the first in it, I
should rather confide in his judgment, then in Mr. Prin, Mr. Burton, Mr.
Gyles, and all the Arrians, Socinians, Anabaptists, Brownists, Separatists in
the Kingdom. Nor can you persuade the world that bowing at the Name we mind
not the Person. Nor are you able to prove that in this way of worship there can
be Idolatry, unless the Disciples were Idolatrous when they fell on their
faces and worshipped at the hearing of a Voice. Mat. 17.6.

But they say, it is done to the Person, by bowing to the Name. I reply* (to
pass by the censure of such a kind of worship; for so says Bishop In his
Works, page 245.
Babington, an Idolater may excuse his Idolatry by this distinction of
concomitancy) What they say is one thing, and how they expound the Text is
another; according to their exposition of the Text, they cannot make that sense
of it, except they add to the Text: so that according to their own grounds,
they must make the worship either vain or Idolatrous.

No marvel therefore that that judicious and learned Dr. Whitakers reckning
up sundry absurd interpretations, In his Answer to Sanders demonstration
concerning Antichrist.
which the Papists make of the Scriptures, concludes with this their
interpretation of this Text, from whom our superstitious-Iesu-worshippers had
it, as the most absurd and grossest of all; and no marvel that famous Bishop
In his Works page 24^^
Babington, censures such to be justly given up of God to delusions, to believe
lies, because they will not search for truth, Now I come to handle sundry
Arguments against bowing at the Name Jesus.

Answer.

What Bishop Babington B. Babing. upon the 2 Co^man. p. 20.
says, you meant not your Reader should see. Had you named in which Work of
his, I might have found it. But in his Works Printed, 1637. in Folio, there is
no such thing as concomitancy to be found in any 245. Page. Whether it be among
his Questions and Answers upon the Second Commandment I know not, nor had I
time to search. There it is most likely, and what he produces there of
Idolaters excusing their Idolatry, by saying they worship not the Image, but
God in and under the Image, is nothing against us. For here is no Image graven,
or that can be pensilled, unless you can, as Sir Edward Deering Sir E. Deer.
Sect. 11. p. 86.
spoke, bring the object of one sense to fall under the distinguishment of
another. When I see a voice, or a sound pictured, I shall be of your mind.

We go no otherwise by the sound unto our Savior, then by the hearing of the
Word unto God. If we may worship God in his Word, why may we not honor Jesus
in his Name?

Bishop Babington B. Babing. on 2. Arti, p. 196.
whatsoever you say, says nothing against this sense, where he reproves the
superstitious use of the literal word Jesus.

Doctor Whitakers denies not this reverence at the Name of Jesus, but would
have it done to the Name of God, and Christ also, says Doctor Page. D. Page
Iustifi^ of how. p. 22.


And here again let me put you in mind of your altering the Text. If the
Reader observe it well he may prognosticate the downfall of your edifice. For
at the foundation, and throughout the building, you turn the genitive case in
the Text, into the case of the Name, and read it, at the Name Jesus. Thus you
have played the Juggler, stole the sense from the Name, beguiled the people,
and put the theft impudently upon our Church.

I have been large in answering your exposition, that when I shall hereafter
labor to be brief, I may not be obscure to the Reader. See my Antiteich.
Tract. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. and the Syllogism will be this.

Where the face of the Text which literally is in analogy of the truth is most
changed, there is most probability of error.

But in interpreting the Name above every Name, Power and glory; at the Name of
Jesus, to the power of Jesus; and bowing of the Knee, to be vertuall, the face
of the Text, which literally is in analogy to the truth, is most changed.

Ergo. In that interpretation there it most probability of error.

The Major is according to the rules of interpretation; the Minor is before
demonstrated.

And here let me conclude that you have not conferred your undertakings and your
strength, Senec. de Jran. c. 5.
Oprimat onus ferente majus.

SECTION VI.
EVery true interpretation of a Text, especially an obscure Text, must be
warranted by Scripture, speaking of the same matter, or in the same phrases.

But to affirm that the Name Jesus in the Text of Phil. 2.9.10. is the Name
above every Name, not only created but divine, and that therefore w^ must bow
at the sound of that Name, is not warranted by any correspondent Scriptures,
speaking often of the same matter: Or to expound these phrases, Name above
Names, made or given, to be the advancement of a naked proper Name above such
Names, or (...), the Name of Jesus, to be the Name Jesus, or (...), in the
Name, to be at the sound of the Name. None of these expositions are warranted
by Scripture, speaking often in the same phrases.

Ergo, Not one of these expositions which these superstitious Iesu-Worshippers
make the ground of their opinion and practice, is a true expositition.

Let the Minor be disproved if it can.

The Major is proved from Romans 12.6. If any Prophecy, let him Prophecy
according to the proportion of faith. So 2 Pet, 1.20. No Scripture has any
private interpretation. It is an infallible rule set down by Divines for the
understanding of the Scriptures. Thus says learned Zanchius; Zanchius de
Scriptura, page 422.
Altera interpretandi Scripturas regula est, etc. Another Rule, says he, of
interpreting the Scriptures, is a diligent and accurate comparing of the
Scriptures, which are of the same thing one with another, that is, that we
expound the more obsure Scriptures by those that are more evident and clear;
for the Scripture is an interpreter of it self, than which a better cannot be
found. And thus says Austine, Non ita esse interpretandum unum locum, ut cum
multis alijs pugnet, Aug. de Doctrina Christiana.
sed ut cum multis alijs consentiat, We must not so understand one place that
it disagree with many others, but that it agree with many others. This then
their interpretation above mentioned, agrees with no place, but disagrees with
all; it is therefore none of Gods Truths.

Answer.

Your Major is false; must an obscure Text be warranted by Scripture speaking
of the same, or in the same phrase? Suppose there be no more Texts of the same;
may it not be known by examining it by the moral truth? What else intends the
Apostle, Romans 12.6. which you have induced for your self? If any Prophecy,
let him Prophecy according to the proportion of Faith. In the Greek it is
(...), which some render the measure, others the rule of faith.

In the one the Apostle meets with the fault of these times: He would not
have one man seem to know all things, but every one to keep within his
proportion.

In the other sense he teaches the perfect canon of interpreting, viz. that
examination be made, ad Christianae fidei axiomata (...), Bez. in Annot.
according to the axioms of the Christian faith, which of themselves are to be
believed.

And what other rule does Saint Peter 2 Epistle 1.20. prescribe? Were they, the
first, and this, observed your Enthusiasmes would not have broken forth among
so many to help break the peace of the Church.

But will Zanchius allow your assertion? His second rule is, Vt obscurae
Scripturae per clariores interpretemur, that we should interpret the obscure by
the more clear. Or will Saint Augustine, in saying one place may not disagree
with many other, confirm your proposition? Nay, and that you have urged, makes
against your self. Your Authors will have the hard explained by the more
easy, if more there be; if not, by the analogy of the universal faith.

Your Minor is refelled in your former Section, and in my Antiteichisma.

In your conclusion is (...), and because you there show your Sophistry in such
profane language, let your patience know that the Hebrew Proverb, Drus. ad lit.
Vav.
(...), Vae malo, and vae illis qui adhaerent ei, secludes not you.

SECTION VII.
WHatsoever bowing is required by the Text, shall be necessarily performed by
every Creature in Heaven, in Earth, and under the Earth.

But bowing at the Name Jesus, shall not be performed by every Creature in
Heaven, in Earth, and under the Earth,

Therefore Bowing at the Name Jesus, is not required by the Text.

The Minor is plain, for to omit now to speak of Angels, Devils and dumb
creatures, Bowing at the Name Jesus, shall not be performed by the most men;
for many Nations know not Christ, therefore cannot so bow all their life, famous
Churches do not so bow. If this then be the true bowing, I would feign know,
how, and at what time they shall perform it, that in this life perform it not.

To deny the Major is absurd; for the Text is plain, that Christ is advanced
to so high a Name, that every creature should bow to him in that name. 2: It is
such a bowing, as there is also a demonstration that Christ is Lord, therefore
if any creature shall be exempted from the bowing in the Text, Christ should
not be their Lord, which would be derogatory to Christ's honor, and contrary to
evident Scriptures; as Mat. 28, 19. Where all Power is given Christ, in Heaven,
and Earth. And Heb. 1.2. where Christ is called Heir, that is, Lord of all
things, Whereas then some answer that though every one shall not bow at the
Name Jesus, yet every one is bound to do it, they ought to perform it. I
reply, if that bowing be the duty of the Text, every one of necessity must and
shall do it. To affirm then, that the duty of the Text should be done of all,
though it shall not, is all one as to affirm that Christ should be Lord of
every creature, and it behooves him so to be, though he shall not, If then
bowing at the Name Jesus shall not be performed of all, it is manifest, it is
not required by the Text, for all Expositors hold generally, that the Text
shall willingly or unwillingly be fulfilled of all.

Answer.

Your Major is true if by every creature you understand angels, men, and
devils, as the Fathers have expounded it. See my Antiteichisma.

But if you intend it of all rationalls, sensitives, vegetatives, insects,
mineralls, all whatsoever, you bring in more then comes within the scope of the
Apostles doctrine.

The Texts you urge for proof, were cited to the same, and to as little
purpose before. Sect. 3. Where I declared that the Hebrew word, at Isa. 45.23.
and the Greek, at Romans 14.11. Phil. 2.10. for bowing, are not in these Texts.
And my Answer is, that if in your citations an universal subjection be
expressed, in the three parallel places a special duty is enjoined. I said,
that if, for I question your sense very much of Heb. 1.2. Because Saint
Chrysostom Chrysostom. in Heb. 1.2.
interprets (...), of all Nations, But be it as you will, you are answered,
till it is proved that bowing at Phil. 2.10. is not a sign of our reasonable
submission.

Your method is distorted; for you have brought the rest to the Major, which
might have been an anticipation at the Minor. Thither I go, and there is
amphibolia in the subject. You mind the bare Name, and we, according to the
Text, the Name of Jesus. In this sense all reasonable creatures, and they only
shall perform it.

The objection you make is answered in my Antiteich. Tract. 5. page 47. 48. and
Tract. 6. page 58.

But you have in the supply of your Major proposition saved the labor. You say
in our behalf, and to make way for a reply, that every one is bound to do it,
though everyone shall not do it.

I thank you Sir, and now give me leave to do something, per (...) I will,
for you.

Be your ambition, for your piety, honesty, and learning, advanced to a
Patriarch-ship in some Terra Florida, where ignorance of evil shall do more
good then knowledge of virtue.

Our answer is, all ought to perform it, though all do it not. The Text is a
fulfilling now, but at last shall, by all voluntarily, or involuntarily be
perfectly accomplished.

The (...) was your own, and being it was, your reply is lost.

When Mercurius had deprived Typhon of his subtlety, he then lay weltring in
his blood. All he could do was to send his winding brood to infest those
weakelings, that were newly brought forth of the Eggs, that the Eagle laid in
Jupiters lap. One of them I am sure is in the next Sect. for it runs out of his
very veins. See it the^e.

SECTION VIII.
WHatsoever Bowing is required by the Text, shall be performed by every
creature at the day of Judgment.

But bowing at the Name Jesus shall not be performed by every creature at the
day of Judgment.

Therefore bowing at the Name Jesus, is not required by the Text.

The Major is confirmed by evident parallel Scriptures, as, Romans 14.10.11. Why
do thou judge and condemn thy brother? We shall all appear before the
Judgment seat of Christ: As it is written, Every knee shall bow to me, and
every tongue shall confess to me* So Heb. 2.8. The Apostle affirming there,
That all things are put in subjection to Christ, yet says, We do not yet see
all things put under him, that is, perfectly, which perfection shall not be
till the last day. The Jews shall then be fully subject to him, that now
scorn him. Infidels shall then perfectly be subdued to him, that now know him
not. Devils and Reprobates shall then feel their fullest destruction. Cor.
15.26*
Death shall then fully bow, being overcowe in regard of the Saints, and it
being it its fullest vigor in regard of Christ's enemies. The Saints shall then
wholly bow, yielding themselves perfectly to the honor of Christ, which now
they cannot do by reason of corruption, Rev. 20.13.
Hell, and the Grave, shall then bow by yielding up the dead: But what need I
further illustrate this Truth, it is generally acknowledged by the most and
best Expositours, both ancient and modern. Confessed also by the Champions for
bowing at the Name Jesus, as Sermon. on Phil. 2.9.10.
Bishop Andrews, and Page 48:
M. Page, who in his Treatise of Justification of bowing, understands the Text
of the general subjection of all Creatures to Christ at the great day of
Judgment, and is forward to allege many Authors for it, as Theophilact,
Anselme, Aquinas, Illyricus, Hunnius, and Hyperius, Salmeron, Zanchius. and
Estius, and tells us that he could cite twice as many more, if he pleased, The
Major therefore is undeniable.

Answer.

Here is Petitio principii, a Syllogism of the same matter, form, and
circumstance with the former. The difference only is in words. Instead of
every creature the exegesis is fallen upon the copula, shall be performed.

I grant the Major with the limitation of the former. Your first proof is
right: And, me thinks applying Romans 14.10.11. to this Text you should not vary
from the sense of Christ's oeconomicall Kingdom, which he holds by
dispensation. At Heb. 2.8. 1 Cor. 15.26. Rev. 20.13. contrary to your rule of
interpretation, Sect. 6. you go from the phrase and sense of Phil. 2.10. For
the question is not whether all shall be subject, but whether all of the three
ranks celestial, terrestrial, and infernal, shall, at the day of Judgment,
bow the Knee, or make outward expression at the Name of Jesus?

The Texts 1 Cor. 15.25. Mat. 8.29. and the Authors D. Page cites conclude a
full subjection: But neither does the Reverend Bishop, nor D. Page infer all
manner of creatures sensible, and insensible, at Phil. 2.10. Your flout, of
Champions, is but a flurt of your envy, and for it takes this, Omnibus
invideas, invide nemo tibi.

For the Minor, I never read any yet in Print to affirm, that we shall all
bow at the Name Jesus at the day of Judgment. Master Page indeed coasteth
toward is, but speaks not out plainly. For thus he answers the Argument
taken from the day of Judgment: Justification of bowing, page 95. and alibi.
Though all shall be subject to Christ then, yet shall not we be subject before
we needs must? and declare our subjection by our bowing at the Name of Jesus,
for subjection does not exclude but include bowing. It shall be true of all
knees then, but it must be verified of some knees now.

I agree with him in this, that there is a present equity of the Text: I
consent to M. Calvin, who says, though the Kingdom of Christ be not perfect
till the day Judgment, yet it is begun already, and increases daily Regnum
Christi crescit in dies, perfectio vero non constabitante ultimum diem. Calv.
in Phil. 2.^.10.
. Christ has now all things under his feet, and all Creatures are at his Rule
and beck, and must and shall fulfill, not their own will, but the will of
Christ, though they shall not be perfectly subdued till the last day. But yet
M. Pages inference is not to the purpose, for to affirm that because we must
be all subject to Christ at the day of Judgment, therefore we must declare our
subjection by bowing at the Name Jesus, is all one as to affirm, because
servants must be subject to their Masters, that they must show their subjection
by bowing at their Masters Name; or because wives must be subject to their
husbands, therefore they must make a cursie at the Name of their husbands, But
if M, Page will speak to the purpose, he must say thus; Because all creatures
shall declare their subjection by bowing at the Name Jesus at the last day,
accordingly we must now witness our subjection. This inference is right, if he
can prove his ground; but that lies upon the proof: Of necessity our present
bowing must be according to the future: the parts must be according to the
whole; the perfect bowing must regulate the imperfect; therefore if bowing at
the Name Jesus shall not be performed at that day, it concerns none so to bow
now.

Answer.

In the Minor you keep a foot the amphibolia, the Name Jesus, for the Name of
Jesus. I am sure you never read any in Print till these last times, that ever
translated the Name of Jesus like you.

But what if you have not yet read any, save D. Page, who coasteth toward, as
you say, but speaks not out plainly that we shall bow at the Name of Jesus in
the day of Judgment: must it not therefore be? Can you show me any one of any
antiquity, that writes against it?

You can agree with D. Page, that there is present equity of the Text; and with
M. Calvin, that the Kingdom of Christ is begun, and increases daily, though
it shall not be perfect till the last day. Is there a present equity; shall it
begin here, be fulfilled hereafter, and is it not a duty at the last? A perfect
(...), your luck is better then your art, if you reconcile these.

Nor does your saying that servants show not their subjection by bowing at
their Masters Name, nor Wives at their husbands infringe the learned Doctors
tenet, but makes you ridiculous. Is their any comparison between the highest
Name of God, and the Name of sinful man? Yet a good Servant will honor the
Name of his Master, and a loving Wife the Name of her husband. In what high
esteem then ought his Name to be, that gave himself to save sinners?

But you will teach D. Page to speak to the purpose, will you? very well: yet
you understand not what you speak. He said, as you express before, It shall
be true of all knees then, but it must be verified of some knees now. You
affirm that beca^se all creatures declare their subjection by bowing at the
Name Jesus at the last day, accordingly we must now witness our subjection.
This is right to you, and not the other. Would you have all men say in Saint
Egidius? Have you done any more, then put the same sense into other, and more
words? See here is nothing, save, (...), the fallacy of a babbler. And your
babble runs to make the more ignorant believe that the duty shall not be
performed at the general day, and therefore ought not to be regarded now. Yet
I can tell you that faith shall not be in life eternal, yet who will come
there, must believe here.

Some to whom I have put this Argument, and finding it too hot for them, stand
to it to affirm that bowing at the Name Jesus shall be fulfilled at the day of
Judgment, but they cannot prove it otherwise than by seeking shelter at this
Text. If any such assertion shall ever come in Print, Affirmanti incumbit
probatio.
I am confident that every judicious Reader will smile at it, if not grieve to
see the wilfulness of such men, that rather than they will yield to the truth,
will justify such dangerous Paradoxes. I will therefore by Gods assistance
encounter with it, and I think I shall upon better reasons disprove it, than
they can ever prove it. Answer.

Have you put it to some; who are they? But if you have, are you sure it was
too hot for them? What? too hot, because they take shelter at the Text? Is not
this enough, whilst it is (...), in, with the moral truth of the third
Commandment, and our Lords first Petition? If there were no more to be said
then this, this would be opprobrium negantis, and make the impartial Reader
imbase you for your peremptory denial. You have the congruence of the phrase,
Sect. 4. and if you would have more, see my Antiteich. Tract. 6. p. 61. 62.
When this is compared with that, it will be so clear from the hazard of a
dangerous paradox, that any man, save he that loves wrangling, will say you are
jurgii seminator.

You think you shall disprove it: do, if you can, and when you cannot, let
your excellency be seen in petulant denying most.

First, There is no Scripture for it, and it is in no wise to be imagined that
so many clear Scriptures speaking so fully and plainly of the Judgment day,
and of the deportment of those that shall then appear, should say nothing of
this ceremony of bowing at the Name Jesus, if it were then to be done. Answer.

Is there no Scripture for it? No? Is Phil. 2.10. no Scripture? And are there
not many Texts in congruitie with it? See 2 Thessalonians. 1.10.12. where it is said,
That in the Day of Judgment the Name of our Lord Jesus shall be glorified in
us, and we in him. All Expositors understand, Isa. 45.23. Romans 14.11. of the
general Day too: and in both those places, the very same word is used; in the
first, by the Septuagint; in the second, by the Apostle, which is here. But if
there were no other Text for it, can any be produced against it? Any, or nigh
so clear, as there are many for it? If there be, I will yield all.

Secondly, To what end shall the Name Jesus be sounded out at that day, that
all shall bow at the sound of it? When he shall then appear in his most
glorious Name of Power, and Glory, when he shall not come as a Jesus to the
most that shall then bow, but a Lord to all, and so shall all call him. Mat.
25.37.44. Answer.

Is this a Disproofe? a Demand rather. Be it what you will: it seems you are
ignorant, and would be informed. Read the 11. Verse of Phil. 2. and there it
is plain, that every tongue shall confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
glory of God the Father. That is the end, and there is open confession, I Will
warrant. For the word is (...), and signifies speaking out. See my Antiteich.
Tract. 7. and Tract. 9. That Is the utmost end, and the other is in respect of
our selves; because there is no other Name wherein we are saved, Act. 4.12.

Your argument, That Christ shall come as Lord to all, therefore not as Jesus,
is very false; and the simple people are abused by your misapplying the Text,
Mat. 25.37.44. For, who is Lord, save Jesus? And Jesus, being the Savior of
us, is the confounding Jesus of his and our enemies.

Thirdly, It is absurd to imagine that the Holy Ghost would describe the
perfection of Christ's Kingdom, only by such a gesture as a child can perform
at the mention of his Father. Answer.

You are very childishly absurd in your asseveration. We are not of those
Heretics, to whom, as Saint Chrysostom says, the bowing of the knee was
(...), the full glory of Christ's Kingdom. This is of, not all the perfection
it has.

Fourthly, Bishop Andrews, On Phil. 2.9.10.
the late Father of the co^porall bowing at the Name Jesus, will confute it by
a saying of his. He is exalted, to whose Person knees do bow; His Person is
taken out of our sight, all that we can do, will not reach to it, but his
Name he has left behind him to us, that we may show by our reverence and
respect to it, how much we est^eme him. If then we must now bow to the Name,
because the Person of Christ is out of our sight; then it follows that when
Christ shall manifest his Person, there will be no time, or place, for bowing
at the Name. (But by the Bishops reason, seeing he acknowledges the fulfilling
of the Text at the day of Judgment, it will follow that Christ, shall send out
his Name at that day, to have it sounded out, that all should bow at it, and
not come himself in Person, or else if then he come in Person, he must leave
his Name behind him, and so the duty of the Text shall not be fulfilled.
Again, It is very absurd to affirm that our worship will teach to the Name,
but not to the Person of Christ; for shall veneration and honor reach to a
bare Name as it is sounded out by the breath of man, who is less than nothing?
Isa 40.17. And can no worship reach to the Person, who besides that he is in
the glory of the Father in the heavens as man, also is every where present by
his infinite Deity, and especially present in and among his Saints by his
Spirit?) Answer.

The Reverend and learned Bishop Andrewet is the late furtherer, if you please,
no late Father of the corporal bowing at the Name of Jesus. He gives a reason
why, at the Name; because his Person is out of our sight, that we respecting
his Name, might show our high esteem of him.

Does it therefore follow, that when Christ appears he shall be without a
Name, or his Name not acknowledged his? By the same argument, all his
Attributes of chief Glory shall be taken from him. You found the same
inconsequence in it, or else would have prosecuted it, as you use, where a
Sophister may hide himself.

Another you have, and this is it: If the Bishops reason be good, then Christ
shall send out his Name at that Day to be bowed at, and not come himself in
person; or if he come in person, he must leave his Name behind him.

What Chymicall nonsense is here? More worthy of the hiss, then a Pen. He
shall neither send his Name from himself, nor come himself without his Name.
He calls himself by that Name now he is in glory, Act. 9.5. Rev. 22.16. and
with that Name will come in judgment. For, the Day is the revelation of the
Lord Jesus, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.

In your third absurdity, you abuse the Reverend Bishops phrase, applying the
word reach to worship, which he applies to the sight. And the answer is,
Christ's person is out of the reach of our sight, not out of the reach of our
worship.

M. T. Cic. pro L. Cor,
What advantage you have of the Learned, I pray hold: Est huius seculi labes
quaedam, and macula virtuti invidere; and it is your infirmity, or deformity,
to envy his worth.

Names be signs, and a kind of Images of things or Persons represented by
them. An Idolater bewes to an Image, which he does see, because he deemes that
it represents unto him the Person, whom he adores, which he cannot see; whereas
if the Person were present before him, he would never bow to the Image. The
Name Jesus is as it were the sign or Image of our Savior, it would be
therefore worse than Idolatry it self to bow to Christ's Image before his own
face. Answer.

Names are metaphorical Images, not material. Being forbidden to worship God
in the likeness of any creature by the Second Commandment; we are commanded
to honor him in his Name at the third.

I know not what Idolaters would do, if the Person were in presence of the
Image; but sure I am, your argument is profane. viz. Idolaters would not bow
to the Image, if the Person were in presence, therefore it is worse then Idolatry
it self to bow at, and confess the Name of Jesus before his face. Had you
spoken thus of Jehovah before a Jew, he would have thrown a stone in your face.

If any shall yet infer, that though all other Scriptures say nothing for the
bowing at the Name Jesus at the Judgment day, yet it is enough that it be
specified in one Text, as (viz.) in this present Text of Phil. 2, 9.10. I
answer, it is utterly against reason to imagine, that if bowing at the Name
Jesus were to be done at the Judgment day, that the holy Ghost would omit to
specify it in so many clear places, treating of the Judgment day, and would
set it down in an obscure Text (that treats not plainly of the Judgment day,
but as it must be enlightened by other clear Scriptures) and that in such
words, and phrases, that are different in sense to all those words and phrases
in other Scriptures, though often therein used.

Oh! It highly concerns us in season to provide Oil in our Lamps, that we
may meet Christ with comfort at that great day, and not to be like children,
(as Bishop Babington B. Babing. in his Works, page 246.
well notes) playing with letters, and syllables, and adoring Titles with that
honor, which is due to the Person. I^ is Satan's policy to exercise men with
trifles, that he may steal away their hearts from that which is necessary, as
woeful experience proves too true in such as are addicted to this will worship.

Answer.

What Is here was before at first; and there answered. The Holy Ghost as it
pleased him expressed the duty in this Text; and so, that he who has a will
may run, and read. What need of cleerer places, when none can be more plain.
Plain in the letter, and the letter sure in the analogy; no way dissonant,
firmly grounded on the fudamentall truth.

Oh! It highly concerns you who have spread abroad your Papers in defiance of
the Church, and against the plain Text: It concerns you to search into your
self; Oh search, and what by weeping you cannot do, by public recantation
undo what you can. It is treason to clip the Kings Coin; and is it a light
matter to alter Gods? At the Name of Jesus, you have hitherto read at the Name
Jesus: and like one of the children, tha^ Bishop Babington notes, played with
the word till you have lost the sense.

To this, I will subjoyne two other Arguments.

Whatsoever bowing is required by the Text, shall not be fully perfected till
the day of Judgment.

But bowing at the Name Jesus may be fully perfected before, for many can now
make a perfect low courtesy at the sound of that Name, even almost to the
ground.

Ergo, Bowing at the Name Jesus, is not required by the Text The bowing which
the Saints shall perform at the Day of Judgment, is their perfection, for
then the image of God shall be perfectly restored to them. Hence it will
follow, that if bowing at the Name Jesus be that bowing, seeing the Saints in
this life must strive toward perfection, that all their striving must be, how
to make the fairest Cursies at the Name Jesus.
.

Whatsoever bowing is required in the Text, is already begun by every
creature, as I have proved before.

But corporal bowing at the Name Jesus, is not practiced in the least degree
by the most of the creatures.

Ergo, This bowing is not required in the Text.

Answer.

In the first, omitting the amphibolia, the Minor is false. The same was at
thirdly before, and there answered. The Marginall note is a dicto secundum
quid, ad dictum simpliciter; and being added to your conclusion, makes the
fallacy there plurium interrogationum also.

In the second the Major is false, and not yet proved true, nor will be by you.

To the Minor I answer, if you understand by creatures, all sorts in the
Creation, it is not required. But if you mind rational creatures only, it is
answered before, that if it be not begun it ought to be, and you confess it is
by some.

Hitherto your great labor has thrived ill. Faber in cippo sedet quem sua
manu fecit.

SECTION IX.
WHatsoever exposition of a Text will infer an inequality of worship between
the three Persons of the Trinity is false.

But so to expound the Text, as before mentioned, will infer an inequality of
worship between the three Persons of the Trinity.

Ergo. It is a false Exposition.

The Major is plain, because the three Persons being co-aquall, ought to have
a co-equall worship, agreeable to John 5.23. Every one must honor the Son as
they honor the Father.

The Minor is plain, for they by their exposition of the said Text Phil.
2.9.10. do infer a bowing at one of the Titles of the Son, which they do
not practice at the Titles of any other Person.

Answer.

The Minor is false. Bowing at the Name of Jesus does not infer an inequality
of worship.

In your proof you go fallaciously to work. Not distinguishing the Name and
the relations, or not minding one essential Name of the three, you insinuate,
that the bowing at the Name of Jesus makes the Son more honorable then the
Father.

If it were the Name of the relation we bowed at, there might be some ground
for you, yet, if you would learn to consider the dispensation, not much.

Know then, that one God is the Trinity, and that this S. Trinity, which is one
God, nec recedit a numero, nec capitur numero, neither recedes from, nor is
contained by number: Not from number; because the Persons are ad invicem; and
in that they are in se, they are without number. So one essential Name
pertaines to this Holy Trinity, which cannot be plural to the three Persons.
This is the determination of the Council of Toledo. Council. Tolet. 11.


The answer given to this reason is twofold. First they affirm, that they
worship all alike in Spirit and Truth, and that the word (...), translated
(even as) in John 5.23. does intend only a trueness of worship, not every way
an equal correspondency. I reply, that the Persons being equal, must have an
equal worship; and the word (...) must be there taken for the selfsame
worship in likeness and kind, because praise, and glory, and honor, is due to
God, Romans 11. last. If to God, then to every Person in Trinity, because every
Person i^ God. We are to serve God with our bodies, as well as with our souls;
outward honor is true honor as well as that which is inward. If then all
honor both outward and inward be to be done to God, not any honor must be
performed to one Person, that must not be performed to another; therefore if we
be bound to honor the Son by bowing at his Name, we are also bound to
honor the Father by bowing to his, but if we be not bound so to honor the
Father, neither are we so bound to honor the Son. For the exposition of the
word (...), (even as) in John 5. (...) inquam i. e. pari eodem plane honor,
qu^ and omnes patrem honorant, and paulo ante. Quibus aequalis imo modis
omnibus idem debetur honor. Zanchius de tribu^ Elohim part priore. l. 4. c, 2.
p. 93^
Zanchius says thus; Even as they honor the Father, that is, (I say) says
he, with the like self same honor plainly, wherewith all honor the Father:
and a little before, to whom, says he, an equal, yea every way the self same
honor is due. Answer.

See now whether the answer, which I made, when you propounded the question
first to me* though suddenly given, do, and and ever will, stand right or no?

This it was: The Son ought to be honored, (...), as the Father; that is,
with one and the same worship, as truly and perfectly as the Father is: and
this I told you was Orthodoxe. Said I more, or said I less.

Your reply was then, that you would write your mind; and so after three years
studdy in the question you have. What ere it is, a Monster it, that was so long
in hatching. It seems beautiful in the face, Horat. de or. poet.
Sed turpiter atrum desinit in piscem.

You confess, that the Persons being equal, must have an equal worship, and
the word (...) must be there taken for the self same worship, outward, and
inward. Because every Person is God. Whence you infer, if we be bound to honor
the Son at his Name, we are also bound to honor the Father by bowing to his.
If not the one, then not the other. For (...) is with the self same honor
plainly.

Here is (...), you have changed the principle, and are gone from the Name to
the relation. The question is not whether we are bound to bow at the Name of
the Son, that is when the Son is named, or at the Name of the Father, that is,
when the Father is named: We may do all if we please, for not being expressly
commanded, it is no where forbidden.

But the question is, whether bowing at the Name of Jesus the Persons be
equally honored, or no?

You cannot prove they are not, I Will show you how they are.

Compared ad invicem they are three, in se one. The essential Name, being not
plural to the three, is one and the same to every one, and all. Our worship
then of any one makes no inequality among the three, which are so one in
themselves, that one cannot be another save in relation one to another. For he
that honors the Son, honors the Father, and who honors not the Son, honors
not the Father, as in the same verse, Ioh. 5.23. and 12.45.46.

You have therefore slandered us here egregiously, in affirming with
impudency, and nonsense enough, that we intend by (...), a trueness of
worship, not every way an equal correspondencie. I tell you once more, and
remember it always, That our not bowing at the Name of the Father, nor at the
Name of the Son, nor at the Name of the Holy Ghost, but at the Name of Jesus,
shows, that they, being three one to another, are but one in themselves, and
that our Salvation was wrought equally by them three, though terminated only
in the Son. See my Antiteich. Tract. 9. p. 93.

Secondly, They answer, that they do not put a difference between the Three
Persons, for by bowing at the Name Jesus, they worship all the three Persons in
one, because they cannot be divided. I reply: Though they cannot be divided,
yet they may be distinguished, and that in their worship too; else that place
of John were to no purpose. S. Steven calls upon Christ personally, and
distinctly, Act. 7.59. So does S. Paul upon the Father, Ephesians. 3.14. And the
distinct Names of each Person, do not personally denote the other Persons, as
when I say, J believe in God the Father, I do not in that Article say, I
believe in God the Son. If then these men say, that they honor every Person
alike personally at the Name Jesus, which they must say, if they say any thing,
they confound the Persons: For the Person of the Father is not in the Person of
the Son, nor the Person of the Son in the Person of the Father, etc. but
the Persons are distinguished: Every Person is in one Divine Essence, and the
whole Essence in every Person: Therefore the Name Jesus being a proper Name to
the second Person, and not the Name of the first, or third Person, cannot
denominate, but only the second Person, And it is plain, that the Name above
every Name in the Text, is only proper to the second Person, because the
second Person only was humbled, therefore the second Person only received
this Name. Answer.

To that answer you reply thus: Though they cannot be divided, yet the Persons
may be distinguished, and in their worship too, Act. 7.59. Ephesians. 3.14. True,
they may; yea, they must be distinguished: yet Saint Stephen, calling on Christ
personally, and distinctly, minds him essentially, as that God which is the
blessed Trinity. And so does Saint Paul, bowing his knees to the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

But you say, that the distinct Names of each Person do not personally denote
the other Persons.

Do they not so? Where is your Logic? Where your Metaphysics? Have you
forgot, that what a Father, as a Father is, he only is in respect of his
Son? So a Son, as a Son, is that he is in respect of his Father. The
Father therefore cannot be conceived without the Son, nor the Son without
the Father, nor the Holy Ghost without them both; nor any one without another:
because what every one is, is in relation to one another. Yet one is not
another; that is, the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Holy Ghost.
Naming then the Father, I confess a distinction of Persons, but apprehend not
the one without the other.

And here I tell you, that you, saying you do believe in God the Father, and
not saying you do believe in God the Son, must insinuate the Son, or else
you are a Tritheite.

Your inference next that we honoring every Person alike, at the Name of
Jesus, confound the Persons, shows that you never read, or would not heed the
Orthodoxe rule of ascending the glorious Trinity by his Son. Who ever saw, or
ever shall see the Father, save in the face of the Son? Ioh. 14.7.10. Heb.
1.3. And I pray, what face is next to us save his Name? The Jews in the Name
of Jehovah adored, and by the same gracious dispensation do we at the Name of
Jesus honor God.

Nor does this make the Person of the Father in the Person of the Son, as you
boldly argue, but declares that God, who is the blessed Trinity, will, and no
way else, be worshipped according to his good pleasure in, and through Jesus
Christ. Nor does this (...), as the Fathers say, whereby the Father is in the
Son, and the Son in the Father, seclude distinction, but disjunction.

In that you say every Person is in one divine essence, you seem to be a
Triformian. For if every Person were in one essence, there would be, ter una,
thrice one essence: yet this is true that the whole essence is in every Person.
You should therefore have said, every Person is in unity of essence.

Nor does it therefore follow, that the Name of Jesus being proper to the
Second Person, and not the Name of the first, or third, can denominate but the
Second only. For the Name is not proper to the Second Person, (...), sed per
(...). But if it were, do not relations denominate ad invicem, the Father the
Son, the Son the Father, the Father and the Son the Holy Ghost? The Name
then proper to the Second, (...), as terminating the work of the salvation in
him, distinguishes all, and declares all to be one, Nor will this seem
strange, if you recall that God did ever discover himself in the Person of his
Son. Deny it, and you deny the whole Worship of God.

From whence I argue, look as the Son is personally honored, so must the
Father be.

But the Son is personally honored by bowing at his Name. Ergo, So must the
Father be. Or the Father is not personally honored by bowing at his Name.
Therefore the Son must not be so honored.

I grant, that the honor of the Son is essentially the honor of all the
three Persons, because every Person is the selfsame God; according to Ioh.
5.24. But here the Question is of the Persons, not of the Essence: But let us
reason from the Essence it makes against them.

They that honor the Son, as they honor the Father, must so honor the
Son in the Father, as they honor the Father in the Son.

But when they honor the Son in the Father, they do not bow at the Name of
the Father. Therefore when they honor the Father in the Son, they must not
bow at the Name of the Son; for if they do, how do they honor the Son, as
they honor the Father?

Answer.

Your two Syllogismes be false; in the one are quatuor termini, the other is in
quarta figura, and (...) in both. All the force you could make to uphold these,
were cut off before. And to do it, I must confess, you constrained me to
climb where I tremble to think. The direction I took, was from the
Scriptures and the Church. If I have mistaken, I shall not blush to learn. Qui
legit, Aug. de Trin. l. 1^ c. 3.
ubi errorem suum cognoscit, redeat ad me; ubi meum, revocet me. Let the
Reader, where he finds his own error, return to me, where mine, recall me.

SECTION X.
GOd will not require that duty of any of his creatures, to whom he has not
created power of performance: I say created, to prevent an Objection.

But if corporal bowing at the Name Jesus, be enjoined of God to all the
creatures, he should require that of the most of his creatures, to whom he has
not created power of performance.

Therefore it is none of Gods injunctions.

The first part of the Argument cannot be denied without blasphemy, by imputing
cruelty to Almighty God.

Answer.

Your Syllogism is in quarta figura, and that is sufficient answer to it.
Howsoever you have tumbled it forth, this is it.

God will not require that duty of all his creatures, which most have not power
to perform.

But most of his creatures have not power to bow at the Name of Jesus.

Ergo. To bow at the Name of Jesus, is not required of all his creatures.

Here is prae. sub. the medium is the praedictate in the Major, and the subject
of the Minor, and therefore concludes against nature. Beside, ex puris
negativis vi formae nihil concluditur.

If this be not, you shall have enough. To the first part therefore I answer.
God gave to all of whom he requires. If any fail, look they to it. He that
pleades excuse multiplies his fault. Yet it is no Blasphemy to say that God
requires* where he gives not special grace. No cruelty Sir, but his austere
justice. Luke 19.21.22.23.

The second part is also very plain. For what power have mere sensitive and
insensitive creatures, to bow at the Name Jesus, as Sheep, and Oxen, Stones,
and Minerals, Trees, and Plants; which neither have knees to bow, ears to
hear, hearts to understand when Jesus is named. What, shall not these be
subject to Christ, till Jesus be named? or shall it be greater then, than at
another time? how senseless will this be? The true bowing, which is the bowing
of subjection, as I have showed, is already performed in some degree, by all
the creatures together at once. But bowing at the Name Jesus, cannot be done by
all at once; suppose we understand it only of rational creatures; for how can
the Angels, and glorified Saints, understand when Jesus is named on Earth? How
can we on Earth hear, when Jesus is named in Heaven? How can those under the
Earth know, when Jesus is named in Heaven or Earth? How can those in Heaven and
Earth know, when Jesus is named in Hell; or could it be known, were it fit
then to bow? Yea, how can we hear, when Jesus is named in another
Congregation? But grant it be referred to one particular place, how can it be
done? How shall things in Heaven bow at the Name Jesus, when they have the
Person of Christ with them which by B. Andrews assertion, before specified,
would be unseasonable to be the^ performed. Answer.

The first demand at this second part is answered before Sect. 3. No creatures
are called to this account, save those which have a faculty thereto.

Secondly, I deny not the subjection of all creatures, but aver that (...),
the bowing of the Knee in the Text is peculiar to the reasonable only. See my
Antiteich. Tract. 6. p. 53.

Thirdly, we men perform it, or ought in our circumstances; the rest in
theirs. Sect. 5.

Fourthly, the heavenly having the Person with them, bow in the sense of the
Name. His Name is on their foreheads, and they in full subjection unto him. See
Sect. 8. and my Antiteich. Tract. 6. p. 62.

How shall deaf men bow at the Name Jesus, who cannot hear it pronounced?
What, shall not they fulfill the Text as well as others? Seeing no creature is
excepted. Is not Christ Lord of them as well as of others? How shall young
Infants bow at the Name Jesus, to whom Gods Kingdom belongs as to others?
Answer.

This is the fifth, and I retort it. How shall deaf men hear the Word, or
Infants be taught it? This then concludes that we are but in the way unto
perfection, and no more.

How shall things in Hell bow at the Name Jesus? To speak first of Devils
which come into our Congregations, how if they had knees, shall they bow at the
Name Jesus? These Devils tremble, say some, because of Jesus, but trembling is
not bowing. 2. Shall they tremble more at the Name Jesus, than Christ, or
Jehovah? It were senseless to imagine it. How shall the damned Souls in Hell
bow at the Name Jesus? After what manner shall Jesus be named in Hell? There is
no Church there, no divine service there, which is the place and season, these
men say, of this bowing. There is nothing in Hell, but blaspheming, what shall
they blaspheme, and then bow, if they had bodies? most ridiculous; what shall
they not fulfill the Text in Hell, and be under Christ's power, until Jesus be
named? then they might ease their torment by forbearing the mention of that
Name; Seeing in hell they can do nothing but blaspheme, how shall they bow?

The Bowers at the Name Jesus do maintain, that when men swear by Jesus,
Page Justification of Bowing.
it is no time and place for bowing, yet the worst manner of naming Jesus on
earth, is better than the best in hell; therefore there is no time and place
for it in hell; yet must things in hell fulfill the Text, therefore it cannot
be the meaning of the Text, to bow at the Name Jesus.

Answer.

Here is a sixth Quaere, and it is found thus. The Devils shall bow, as they did
confess, Mat. 8.29. Act. 19.15. and tremble most at that Name wherein they
were conquered. Nor is it a trembling only; they lie bound flat on their
faces, and in fetters of his eternal wrath.

Seventhly, though in Hell there be no Church, nor Divine Service, yet without
repentance, the blasphemers of God, his Church, and Divine Service, shall in
that Dungeon of Slaverie answer his justice. Tarditatem supplicii gravitate
pensat, he that delays, if there be not amends, strikes home at last.

Eighthly, Bowing there and blaspheming will consist. For they blaspheme,
because it cannot otherwise be, but they must so bow.

Sphinx Theologico. philos. c. 38.
Lastly, as Bias said to the Question, Quid apud inferos esset, quidque ibi
ageretur? so do I, Nec ego eo unquam ivt, nec cum quoquam illinc reverso sum
collocutus; I know not, nor ever shall, I hope, how the Name of Jesus is
blasphemed in Hell; most despightfully sure: and I am sure it is on your side
too profanely handled often. And though here be not Hell, hellish acts are
here; and unhappily at, not in them, we may have a heart to honor Jesus, when
our knees cannot bow without a Scandal. The duty is well done on our part, if
we reprove the faulty, or avoid the company.

SECTION XI.
THe aforesaid exposition of the said Text, will make us serve God in bondage.
Therefore it is an untrue and false Exposition.

The Consequent is plain, for Christ has brought us to liberty, and made us
free, Gal. 5.1. in which freedom we are commanded to stand fast.

Answer.

Your consequence I deny not: but in your way of proof there is anguis in
latebra.

The Text Gal. 5.1. is, (...) etc. Pers^st in that liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free. What freedome's this? Libertinisme? No: then we should be
free from Christ. He is an easy yoke. Mat. 11.30.

Is it from obedience to Authority? you would this; but this cannot be. The
Apostle wills every soul to be subject unto the higher powers. Romans 13.1.

Is it from conformity in Gods service? This, this is it: Your bondage, your
burden. Yet S. Paul commands all things to be done decently, and in order. 1
Cor. 14.40.

Gods Spirit contradicts not himself. There is something else we must stand
in, and unto, even to ascribe our justification, Chrysostom. in loc. August. in
Evang. Ioh. tract. 41.
to the only merits of Christ. For verse 4. it is so expounded, As many as are
justified by the Law are fallen from grace. And so the Fathers, S. Chrysostom,
S. Augustine, etc. understand it. Servi eramus sed redempti sumus, to our
redemption we stand and fast in this.

That it will bring us again into bondage it is plain, for it will tie the
service of God to every man's will, be they never so vile, for whenever Jesus
is Named by whomsoever, if this exposition be true, we must bow; yea therefore
it will bring guilt of sin upon the souls of every one, that shall at any time
hea^e this Name Jesus Named, and not bow. By this means Christ shall bring us
into greater bondage, than the bondage of the Ceremonial Law, from which he
delivered his Church. To this I will subjoyne another Argument. It will bring
the Spirit of God into bondage. Therefore it is a wicked opinion. I prove it
from John 3.8. The wind blows where it lists, i. c. The Spirit of God
works when and where he pleases, and not at our pleasure. All the holy
actions of a Christian are wrought by the Holy Ghost, therefore by this
exposition, the work of the Holy Ghost will be enthralled to the will of every
man, yea of vile men also. Answer.

Your antecedent does miscary. The foresaid exposition brings us not into
bondage. Outward acts are limited by circumstances, and according to the
Scriptures, the Church has set them well. Sect. 5. And the outward being
nothing without the inward, that including this, the inward may be performed,
even when we hear the Name of Jesus profaned. Sect. 10.

Yet if any, when it is upon good occasion, show respect unto it, Iustif. of
bowing, page 11.
D. Page will not mislike it, nor shall I. Pearls should not (...) cast before
Swine, but Swine may be driven from them. The reverence then is to rebuke, or
to avoid, and this comes within the compass of bowing the knee too. For that
gesture may imply any outward. See my Antiteich. Tract. 5. p. 47. If this be
bondage we must give over the service of God. Because we cannot live here, and
not live among sinners. And yet living among them we partake not of, unless we
live in their sins. There is no bondage then, there can be none in the duty,
nor would the reverence be held cheap, if such, as you, were more sparing in
the light use of the Name.

The argu^ent which you subjoyne, were it of force, would fall by that which
goes before. Ioh. 3.8. The wind blows where it lists, the holy Spirit is
free; therefore bowing at the Name brings the Spirit into bondage.

It Is true, all holy motions, and actions are from the Holy Ghost; and, I trow,
it is no unholy thing to show even outwardly our dislike of the vile usage of
Jesus. And if this be bowing also, how is the Holy Ghost enthralled? or is not
he obeyed, when his will is followed? Nay, you enthrall the Holy Ghost, or you,
unless you may be, ad placitum, without the control even of the Holy Ghost
are enthralled.

The answer which they give to this, has no weight in i^; they make use here
of this Rule, Precepta affirmativa, etc, Affirmative Precepts do always bind,
but not to all times. Therefore say they, we are not bound to do it, but when
the Church orders it, viz. In time of Divine Service and Sermons. I reply, this
rule holds in those Precepts, the time of performance whereof is not determined
in the Word, but it cannot hold in this place; For as these men expound the
Text, the time is appointed when this bowing shall be performed, viz. At the
mention of the Name Jesus. Therefore it is a sin at any time to name it, or
hear it named, and not to bow, Gods unlimite^ Commands cannot be limited,
therefore the Church limiting it to a time, could not ground it on Gods
Command. The Name Jesus is the same Name at one time, or place, as at another,
It cannot be proved in the whole Book of God, but when God determined a time
of doing any thing, but that it bound ordinarily at that time. When a Master
shall say to his servant, at my calls you shall answe^, and give attendance.
When his Master shall call, and (...) give no attendance, is not he
disobedient? Would it be a good excuse for (...) to tell his Master, That he is
not bound to wait upon him, but only (...) the Table: So if God shall say, At
the sound of the Name Jesus you shall bow; (...) they hear is often mentioned,
and will not bow, do they not break (...) ^^mmand? Will it be a tolerable
excuse to plead, that they are not (...), but only at Church.

W^^n Nebuchad^e^zar made a Decree, Dan. 3. that at the sound of the Cor. (...)
etc. a l should fall down and worship, did not he intend, that this (...) all
times, when these Instruments should be sounded (...) the people of the Land
judge Shad^ach, Meshach, and (...) of the Kings Commandment, when having (...)
not bow? So if God should say, At the sound of (...) Na^ Ies^s, you (...) all
bow. It is a manifest breach of the Com^^^, when (...) is hea d, and no bowing
performed. Therefore when Gods Commandment is plain, and unlimited, and they
say, the Church must (...) it, they give the Church authority over Gods Word.
They cannot deny (...) they must be always internally reverent at the Name
Jesus, according to the third Commandment, which injoynes inward reverence at
all times, when we m^ntion any of Gods Titles, or else Gods Name shall be taken
in vain. If then expression of outward reverence at the Name Jesus, be also
Gods command, it must be performed at all times when it is mentioned, or else
the Name Jesus will be profaned, unless they will have the Precepts of the
Gospel, less obligatory and binding, than the Precepts of the Law. They may
therefore with as good reason affirm, that we are not bound to be internally
reverent at all times, when we mention the Name Jesus, or any other divine
Titles, but only in the Church, as not to express outward reverence at all
times when the same Name is mentioned, but only there.

Answer.

Your reply to the rule of affirmative precepts is answered, Sect. 5. Yet,
because you shall know the time of performing the duty is not limited by the
Church alone, who I believe has the Spirit of God, I will show how the time is
set by the Holy Ghost himself. Phil. 2.10. the duty is enjoined, at the Name
of Jesus, that is at the mentioning of Jesus: In the next verse is declared the
extent of that time. And that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ
is Lord, to the glory, of God the Father. Do you now know the time? You are
then beholding to the conjunction, (...), and When we are openly to confess,
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father, then it is required
of us, and no man will deny that the time of divine Service is the special
time for confession. Then when it may be done to the glory of God, when God
speaks to us, and we unto God, should this duty appear, then we may be sure
of it.

And then, if you will have your own Simile of a Master and his servant hold,
you should perform the duty your self, or else you do then as truly break
the decree of God, and Canon of his Church, as the three Children did the Law
of Nebuchadnezzar. For though grace be in the Gospel, yet the precepts thereof
are binding as the Law, yea they fulfill the Law. In the very performance of
this one duty is expressed our observance of the first Table; a faithful
acknowledging of the true God, an humble worshipping of him a reverent usage of
his holy N^me, and the sanctifying of his Sabbath in due obedience. See my
Antiteichesma.

Secondly, I reply, If we are not bound to perform the duty of the Text, but
but by direction and command from the Church. By what authority shall the
damned in hell do it, who must yet fulfill the Text as well as we? there is
no Church government in hell; or will they have them do it by direction from
the Canon? into what unspeakeable snares do these men run into by this
opinion? Surely devils and reprobates will be beholding to these men, if they
can make their opinion good, for unless they should fulfill the Text, they
should not be damned, and they have no canon to make them to do it, and they
are very fools if they will make a canon to damn themselves.
Answer.

The Church reproves the contempt of the duty, directs the more ignorant in the
true sense of the Text; but it is the Text that commands all. And this all
commanding makes it not a precept of the Church, but shows that it is her duty
to look to the performance on her part. She goes no further then she by her
warrant ought, to rebuke the negligent and contemptuous.

You would seem witty, but indeed are more then idle, in demanding by what
authority the damned bow, and what Church-goverment is in Hell. Take heed of
jeering; Scorners God will laugh to scorn; the same power compells the damned
that saves us; and if you are curious to know what Church Government is there,
you may go and se^. For I know not who can tell you: For whosoever descends
thither, Greg. Moral. 9.
nequam ulterius ad hanc lucem redibit, comes no more hither. Go play your
Master piece, preach your poltie unto them, our Church expatiats not her own
bounds; the Canons she makes, not against, nor beside the Text, may not be
resisted without damnation. Romans 13.2.

Your marginall scoff is imputed to your silly impudence. For he, that
catches vain things, has ever the face to cast them forth as vainly.

Again, they make the Church a perpetual Person, the duty never to be ended by
this their exposition, For these two clauses, of bowing the knee, and
confession with the tongue, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, are coupled together
by a conjunction copulative, as duties to be done together, both must be done
in the Name of Jesus; Therefore as they understand (at the Name Jesus) and
und^rding bowing the knee plainly and properly, they must of ne^essity
understand confession with the tongue, that Jesus Christ is Lord, plainly also,
and literally. See then what work they will make of it.

The Naming of Jesus, will call for a bowing of the knee at the sound of it,
and also at that time a vocal confession with the tongue, that Jesus is the
Lord. In which confession, Jesus being again Named, will call for a new bowing
and confession, and so it will come over and over again, never to be ended:
this snare they cannot possibly avoid by their so expounding the Text.

Answer.

You come again, and against your self again. Can humility make the Church a
Prison? Bowing is the ceremony, and were it more in use, would no more captive
us, then putting off the hat, or uncovering the head did, the Corinthians, 1
Cor. 11.4. Your Confessor M. William Prinne has granted this to be a duty of
the Text; and as this has its time, the time of praying or prophesying, so
has the other, as before.

And had you dealt conscionably with your Reader, the reason you give would
confute your self. Take the whole Text, and you shall be judge. The bowing of
the knee, and confession of the tongue, ought to be at such time, wherein God
may take his glory of knee, and tongue. Either of them in such a time, but not
alway^s both together, when they may, the better.

Here then is no ill work, no snare. The tongue is not bound to speak out,
whenever the Knee does bow, though when the tongues confession it, That JESUS
CHRIST is Lord, the knee may, and ought to insinuate the same to the glory of
God the Fa her. You may see my Antiteich. Tract. 7 p 66. and be satisfied
there; Laert. l. 6.
if you will not, as Diogenes said to the boy casting stones at the Gibbet, I
do to you, Eugo, continges aliquando sco^um.

SECTION XII.
WHatsoever Exposi^ion of a Text shall diminish, weaken, and Eclipse the Gl^ry
and Majesty of Christ's Kingdom is false, blasphemous, and abominable.

But the aforesaid Exposition does so. I will prove that it does in sundry
respects.

First, When we understand Name above every Name, for the Power and Dominion of
Christ over all creature^, and things; by this Exposition the high Dignity of
Christ, specified in these words; God highly exalted him, is amplified, and
enlarged, and thus it answers o her Scriptures, as Ephesians. 1.20.21. where in the
twenty ve^se, the high honor of Christ is set down in these words; He raised
him from the dead, and set him at his right hand in heavenly places; which
words answers to these words in Phil. 2.9. God highly exalted him. Then it
follows, verse. 21. Far above all principalities and powers, and every name
that is named; which is a farther amplification of Christ's Honor: and fitly
answers this phrase in Ephesians 1.21. God gave him a Name above every Name,

Again, This answers pa^ly to Daniels advancement, who was a type of Christ,
Dan. 2.48 Where it is said, that the King made Daniela great Man, and gave him
great gifts; which is as much as if he had said according to the words of Phil.
2.9. He highly exalted him. Then it follows, that he made him Ruler over the
whole Province of Babylon, and chief of the Governors of all the wise men in
Babylon, which is an amplification of Daniels honor, and it is as much, as if
it had been said, he gave him a Name above all the Names of the wise men in
Babylon.

On the other side: By understanding Name above every Name, for the Title
Jesus, the honor of Christ is rather diminished; for they give him in effect
no Dominion and Power at all; for his proper Name Jesus, which others had as
well as he, does not properly denore Power and Authority; but his Power
consists in his command and dominion over all, as he is King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords, Rev. 19.16.

Answer.

The Minor is denied, and your proofs fall short.

For first the high dignity of Christ is not enlarged by expounding Name above
every Name for dominion. Nor does Ephesians. 1.20. 21. prove more then that Christ
has power over all things, nor is it parallel to this of Phil. 2.9. unless we
will shorten the Text. For he may have power and not be Jesus. But if we will
have salvation, power must be poured forth in mercy. The Name then that shows
might, and mercy, that must be i^, and this we are sure is Jesus. See my
Antiteich. Tract. 3. p. 21.

Your again, Dan. 2.48. infers no more, then that Daniel was made a chief
Magistrate in Babylon. What you can wrest hence to make the Name above every
Name, to be power, and glory only, no expositor declares, nor can I, nor any
man else, I believe, find. Your much talk argues you are not to be t^usted
much.

Where you are on the other side, your mind is like the Anakims of the world.
Nothing takes it save power and dominion. It Is the Name of mercy that God
delights most in, and in Jesus all his mercies are poured forth. They are all
in him, and yet his mercies are full of might. Sum up all the glorious Titles
of God, Rev. 19.16. Lord of Lords, King of Kings, etc. they are all included
when I say Jesus. But I cannot perceive why you should press your sense on the
Text, unless you believe that Christ redeemed, Vi potenti, only by a
powerful hand, and not by price. You would make the world dream that Christ's
sufferings were to confirm his doctrine, and not to sanctify us through the
effusion of his precious blood. 1 Pet. 1 19. Are you not a Socinian? If not, as
like one as ever I saw.

Secondly, The Text according to the true meaning thereof, makes Christ Lord of
every creature, from whose government and dominion, none can be exempted. The
other Exposition robs Christ of the honor and duty of the most of his
creatures, which cannot possibly perform their duty to Christ, as they
understand it; as I have p oved; so that it makes Christ Lord but of a few of
the Creatures, who is Lord of all. Answer.

It Is true, Christ is Lord of every creature: and does our exposition wherein we
give him the highest Name of God ascribe less? Or do we deny him any command
of other creatures, when we yield that all reasonable creatures should
acknowledge him by knee and tongue? Nay, it is argumentum a majori, if he be Lord
of us, for whom all other creatures were made, he is Lord also of those
creatures which he made for our use.

T^i^dly, The Text truly understood gives to Christ the honor of every knee,
Christ will have all the abilities of every pa t and parcel of every creature
to bow to him: every knee of every facul^y of the Soul, and part of the body
m^st bow: he will be honored with all our strength, Now whereas Christ will
have all knees, they give him only by this exposi^ion, the knee of the body
properly so called, or a low courtesy, and no mo^e. ^ mighty purchase indeed
Christ shall have obtained by this exposition, after his extre^me humiliation
and suffering, to have nothing but a ceremony done him at the mention of his
Name, as these men call it, and distinguish it from a substantial and
necessary duty. Page Justification of bowing. page 6. 7. If it be a ceremony to
us, it is also a ceremony to all the creatures: no marvel then if these men
affect ceremonies so much, seeing they by their doctrine do make every
creature, yea all Angels and glorified Saints, to be altogether in practicing a
ceremony.
Answer.

Thirdly, we deny not Christ any knee: But say that Christ does here require
our knees, and tongues, and literally these, though not these without the
heart. These must be enlived by it, or their expressions will be hypocrisy.
The obedience of the whole creature is employed in them, and that you will have
p^yd according to every ability; If according to every one, you contradict your
self, when you deny the Knee. As therefore very ungracious you in denying
Jesus your knees, so very discourteous to us in saying we give the knee only.

Your Asteriske dilates it, after your fashion, for a mighty purchase, and you
have purchased much at Cambridge, if you think our doctrine of obedience so
pharisaicall, as to give the out si^e only unto Christ. No bare ceremony, not
the sign without the signified.

Your taxing D. Page, for distinguishing a ceremonial duty, and a
substantial, is very like your self. He shows you plain enough how it is a
ceremony and a duty. A ceremony as signifyi^g, and a duty as enjoined. Nor does
it follow, that being a ceremony unto u^, it must be a ce^emony unto all
creatures, that come not within the compass of religious worship. Nor do we
practice, or mind it otherwise then an outward worship commanded by God ought
to be observed. Nor do we charge the Angels further then the Scriptures have
expressed, and they being known in their postures your taunts shall never
disorder us.

Fourthly, The Text in the true meaning thereof injoynes the bowing therein at
all times and places, every creature will they nill they are subject to Christ,
and we are bound to bow continually all our strength, all our gifts and
endowments, all our natural and spiritual abilities, as faithful servants to
the will, dominion, and pleasure of Christ our highest Lord. The other
exposition ties this duty not to every place, but to one place, viz. The
Temple; and not at all times, but only one day in a week ordinarily, The
Lords Day, and not at all times in the said day, but only then when Jesus is
named, which amounts in all but to a few minutes in a week; So that they will
make Christ Lord but for a few minutes in one day of a week: It is a poor
honor that they will allow to Christ from this Text, and indeed, it is all
that the most of them can afford him, or are willing to give him, allow him two
or three courtesies once in a week, and all their time else dishonor him by
their scandalous lives. Answer.

Fourthly, the Text injoynes it not at all times, and in all places, was
before. And though the outward be not performed without the inward worship, yet
the inward is not the whole. Nor may we without Sacrilege take the outward
from God at any time, though at all times we cannot, may not, outwardly bow to
him.

It Is very right, the whole man ought ever to submit unto Christ, and whilst it
does, it makes him ever Lord. Yet, I believe, that on the Lords Day, we should
be fuller in the Lords service, then on the other. At that time it is specially
set, at that time then, and at other times when God may take his glory.

What you allow Christ does not appear; that we respect him is expressed.
Though not so well as heart does wish, yet with less hypocrisy then the
practices of your Sect will permit.

Whose scandalous lives trouble you I know not, your terms are general: Are
all that observe the Text and Canon, and none of your side scandalous? For such
and your worse lines take this. When, (...) is set on them, fire will soon be
their end.

Fifthly, Whereas Christ is Lord and King, especially of his Church, which
amongst men are only his true and faithful subjects, for whose sake he will
bring down all adversary Power; this their exposition robs Christ of his true
Subjects, and thrusts upon him, for the most part, the members of Antichrist.
For the most famous Divines of all times, and of all Churches, are against the
said exposition, The best Churches and Christians, because they understand Gods
Word, practice it not, and who do practice it as a duty of the Text, (a few
simply mislead only excepted) but a sort of ignorant, superstitious lewd
scandalous persons, or mere men-pleasers, and servers of the times, which are
enemies to Christ; yet this opinion fo^eeth these on Christ, to be his true
subjects, and thrusts going his own people, purchased with his blood; and
what an unspeakeable indignity is this to Christ? If a ceremony be the sole
honor due to Christ by this Text, and done him only generally by such as
these, surely then God has highly advanced his Son to a very great purpose.
Answer.

Fifthly, the faithful only are of the invisible Church, and of them Christ
is the g^acious Lord. Gracious to his, and Lord to confound the devises of all
the Malignant. But will this exposition rob Christ of his true Subjects? I have
learned of him that none shall snatch his out of his hands. Ioh. 10.28. How
then are they removed, and members of Antichrist thrust on him? You cannot
tell, nor can you name one famous Divine of any time, or Church, before T.C.
that ever wrote against this interpretation.

And because you are conscious of your own inability, you have now dipped your
Pen in virulence. Your full intent is, confusio in proximo, by raising
scandalls on their Persons, to blast the fruit of their labors. A sort of
Ignorant, Superstitious, Lewd, Scandalous Persons, or mere men-pleasers, and
servers of the Times, which are enemies to Christ, practice this as a duty of
the Text. Sen^^. de Vit. be^^. c. 18.
This is yours, and commonly obj^cted per malignissima capita, and optimo
cuique inimicissima.

For my part I can tell you what Tacitus said to Metellus, and that is enough;
Valor. Maxim.
Tu didicisti maledicere, ego conscientia test didicimaledicta contemnere, you
have learned to speak evil, and my conscience testifies that I have learned
to contemn your evil speakings.

How Ancient and Modern Divines agree in practice, see my Antiteichisma. Nor
does this opinion force us as you say, on Christ, but because we are his, we
have such faith in him, that he can never be too high esteemed of us. If any
fly off for it, they were not well informed, or are not ingrafted in him. Who
feel the want of a Savior, his very. Name is sweet to them. Your Asteriske
points out that only, which was idl ly done before.

Sixthly and lastly, The opinion of these men deprives Christ of his honor and
glory at the great day of Judgment. For 1. It puts no difference between his
Kingdom now begun, and his Kingdom made perfect, for by their exposition of
the Text, they cannot avoid it, but that they must make the bowing at the Name
Jesus, to be the true bowing at the great day of Judgment, as I showed before.
Answer.

Sixthly, this was before, Sect. 8. But does that deprive Christ of his honor,
which if he have not, he has not all his? And though this bowing at the Name
of Jesus be the true bowing at the day of Judgment, it does not follow that
there is no difference of the Kingdom of grace and glory. Difference there is,
but not essential. The same duty now in hand, shall be in perfection then.

And 2. What an abasement will this be of Christ's honor at that great day: For
whereas he shall then appear in his great and glorious Name of Power and
Glory, accompained with his Mighty Angels in flaming fire, 2 These. 1.7.
who shall then yield unto him their fullest service and subjection which is
the bowing, that they shall willingly perform unto him at that day; To the end
that he may make all his enemies to tremble, that they shall lick the dust,
and become his footstool, give them a full and final overthrow, thrust them
into the bottomless pit, which is the bowing in the Text, which they shall
perform to Christ against their wills; and that he may wholly free his Saints
from the corruption of their natures, and renew them perfectly, Romans 8.22.
according to his Image, and reward them with everlasting bliss and
happiness, which is the bowing that they shall willingly yield unto him; and
that he may renew the creature, which now groans, and traveileth in pain by
reason of man's sin. This their exposition makes it to be nothing else but a
Seeing these men hold it not necessary to obey the Text, but by direction of a
Canon. I wonder what they will do for a Canon to command the Ceremony at the
day of Judgment.
Ceremony, a corporal bowing at the title Jesus, which will be a poor honor
to Christ, a poor affrightment to his enemies, a poor advancement to his
Friends. It will make this glorious day of the Lord, to have no glory in it;
yea, it will make Christ's Kingdom in the height and perfection of it, to be
but a ridiculous mock-Kingdome; such a Kingdom in effect as his enemies
ascribed to him, Mat. 27.29. Who plated a crown of thorns, and put it on his
head, and bowed the knee before him, and mocked him. Yea these in some sort
deal worse with him than they; for they dealt thus with him in his extreme
humiliation, but these do it in the greatest height and perfection of his
Kingdom. This opinion therefore darkneth, diminishes, yea overthrows the
Kingdom of Christ, therefore it is a blasphemous opinion, not to be endured.
Answer.

And will this be an abasement to Christ, to have that performed perfectly,
which here can be but in part? I grant he shall appear in Power and Glory, not
that his Name will be Power and Glory: He shall have the same Name he here had.
For the Day is usually called, the Day of our Lord Jesus. So in your Quotation,
2 These. 1.7. and at verse 12. the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ shall then be
glorified in us.

We grant then as full subjection as you; but hold not, that in our perfect
renewing this outward expression shall be left. For the four and twenty Elders
fall upon their faces, and worship, Rev. 5.14. So do the Angels, chap. 7.11.
and we in the humblest way shall like them, show forth the great glory of the
Lord.

It was before, that bowing is not a Ceremony only. At the Note in your
Margin you suppose, which I never yielded, that bowing is only necessary by
the Canon. But if it were, may not bowing be a duty of the Church Triumphant?
Not by humane injunction, by the eternal Canon of the Lord it shall. And if
outward expression seem poor to you, why are the Seraphins set forth covering
of their faces, Isa. 6.2. and the Saints and Angels in their humble Cadencies,
Rev. 3.10. and 5.8.14. and 7.11.12? And is this poor advancement? Against the
glory of God, a ridiculous mock-Kingdome? A derision worse then that of the
Jews, when they had condemned our Savior; and a blasphemous opinion? What
strange Pride attempted this horrid Blasphemy? Are you minded to go to
Heaven, who write this in earnest? Had my Pen said so, I would, by the grace of
God, make that Hand openly recant, which made it so speak, and in such
Characters too, as might testify true remorse. The more humble we are, the
more God is glorified; and it will be our highest glory, that we shall ever be
humble in his presence. Who mind not so to be, will never be exalted thither.
Indeed, Pride was first brought forth in Heaven, sed velut immemor qua via
ceoidit, illuc postea redire non potuit; Hing. de anima. l. 1.
but as if it had forgotten the way it fell from thence, it could never find
the way to return thither.

SECTION XIII.
THe bowing at the Name Jesus, is neither typified nor prophesied of in the old
Testament, therefore it is no way probable, that it is a due honor to Christ
in the new Testament.

The consequent is proved by these places, Act, 10.43. Act. 3.24. What is there
any thing material concerning Christ, but it was foreshewed?

Yea, the Law has jots and tittles concerning Christ; Mat. 5.18. Hos. 11.1.
Mat. 2.23. Mich. 5.2. Psa. 22.18. Number. 9.12.
small matters of him were foretold; as his flying into Egypt; his bringing up
at Nazareth; his birth at the Town of Bethelem; the Soldiers casting Lots for
his Garments; the not breaking of his bones. But this honor in the Text, is
the honor of Christ's Kingdom, which indeed is foretold according to the true
meaning of the Text, as Psalm. 2.8.9.10.11.12. Isa. 45.23. But whereas all other
honors concerning Christ, both external and internal, are foretold,
corporal bowing at his Name is not foretold: and seeing jots and tittles
concerning Christ are foreshewed, and bowing at the Name Jesus (if it were the
Evangelicall honor of Christ) not foretold, it would lay an high imputation on
the Majesty of God, and impute that crime to Gods change, that our Savior
justly laid to the charge of the Pharisees, Mat. 23.23. Who tithed Mint and
Cummin, and neglected the weightier matters of the Law.

Answer.

The antecedent is very false, if you could cast aside your supposition of the
bare Name, yet were that true, your argument is not right. For a truth may be
in analogy, and not typified, nor prophesied. Neither of the places Act. 3.24.
and 10.43. speak of the typifying and prophesying of every particular, but of
Christ in general terms. Nor does Mat. 5.18. teach more then that not one jo^
or tittle of the Law shall not fail till all things be fulfilled.

But how if it be found in type and prophecy? will you still preach it
damnable superstition? Is it not shadowed Genesis 37.9. I dare believe S.
Augustine before you, and he says, Aug. quaes. sup. Genesis 123. l. 1.
that dream was fulfilled, in the Person of Christ, according to that of the
Apostle Phil. 2.9.10.11. So was it in Moses on the Mount, Exodus 17.11.12. Where
he beholding the typical deliverer does homage to the substantial, and there,
quia illic nomen Domini Iesit dimicabat, because the Name of the Lord Jesus did
skirmish there, says Tertullian. Tertul. adv. Mars. l. 3. c. 18.


I have showed it foretold by God himself in Exodus 3.15. by the Prophet David,
Psalm. 75.1. and 111.9. by Isaiah, Isa. 45.23. See my Antit. Tract. 4. page 33.
If satisfaction be not given there, I shall say of you as S. Augustine did, De
Chatechizandis rudibus, Omnia contemnit, qui non solum quantum potuit, sed
etiam quantum voluit habere contemnit, he contemnes all things, that not only
contemes as much as he could, but as much also as he would have.

SECTION XIV.
THere is no example for bowing at the Name Jesus in the whole New Testament,
therefore it is not probable, that it is a commanded duty. The consequent is
plain; for what necessary duty is there, but there is sufficient light in
Scripture, that it was practiced. We read of the often meeting of the Church
together in the New Testament, of their Prophesyings and Prayers, with the
several gestures of them; but there is not the least intimation in the
Scripture, that ever bowing at the Name Jesus was practiced. As there must be
offenses for the hardening of the wicked, so God will have Examples for the
benefiting of his people, Mat. 18.7.
and for the leaving the wicked without excuse. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6.2.
That the Saints shall judge the world, that is one way of their judging of them
by their virtuous examples. God was ever mindful, that there should be
examples, John. 1^.15. Phil. 2.5.1 These. 1.7.2. These. 3.9. 1 Timothy 4.12. The
Apostle having spoken Heb. 11. of the faith of Gods Worthies, and of the
singular fruits thereof, concludes Heb. 12.1. Seeing there is such a cloud of
witnesses; let us run with patience the race that is set before us. There are a
cloud of witnesses for other duties, nor one witness for this bowing; What,
will God have us run in other duties, and stand still in this, it is
impossible, if it were of his appointment? Seeing then there is neither
example, nor show of example in the whole Book of God, for bowing at the Name
Jesus; it is a strong convincing Argument, that it is none of Gods appointment.
Answer.

Take the Name in the sense, and the antecedent is false. Yet if there were no
example, your consequence is naught. For there may be sufficient Light for that
in the Scripture, whereof there is no president for the practice. As in Sect.
4. and 8. and 13.

And though it be no necessary duty at all times, as an outward ceremony,
yet in its circumstances, when it ought to be expressed, the contempt is
desperate. It is not the saying, it was not practiced, will serve: Show me an
example of any man's putting off his Hat in the time of Praying and Prophesying,
if you can; yet that I hope is a duty of the Text.

But we do read of several Gestures there, among which Bowing is more then
intimated, and at the Name of Jesus too, if you will give the Name a sense. At,
and in the sense of the Name, Moses spreads his hands before the Lord on the
Mount, Exodus 17.11, 12. King David will have us worship Bowing, Kneeling,
before the Faces or Memorials of Jehovah, Psalm. 95.6. And is not the Name of
our God his Memorial for ever, and the Principal, Exodus 3.15. Psalm. 135.13?
The Disciples fall on their faces, and worship at the hearing of a Voice, Mat.
17.6. And you shall find Saint Stephen, Act. 7.60. Saint Peter, Act. 9.4.
Saint Paul, Ephesians. 3.14. And the whole Church, Act. 20.36. in this practice.

But you will reply, there is not bowing at the Name expressly.

I answer it is ever employed when we go unto God, or else our labor is in
vain. For he that comes unto the Lord, and not in, or at the Name of Jesus,
goes into a consuming fire: and that is the reason why the Precept, Ask in my
Name, is so frequent in the Evangelists.

And what, I pray, do any of your Quotations prove, save that there are
sufficient examples of faith, and manners? Your inference is so far from
those Texts, that it had been as good if you had cited no Texts for your
inference. We may not lose a Truth, because we have it not illustrated
according to your Whirles. If you could hold your self, as in the Scriptures
you ought, ad sensum, medullam, and radicem rationis, Hier. sup. Epist. ad Ephesians
c. 1.
as Saint Hierome says, if the Book be his, to the substance of the letter in
the sense, and ground of reason, you would conclude, that there is a Cloud of
Witnesses, not for patience only, but for this very practice also in the
Scriptures. See my Antiteichisma, Tract. 4.5.6.

SECTION XV.
THis opinion and practice was not known in the purest of ancient times, yea
it was not known within seven hundred years after Christ. I might go yet a
great way further, as some do. It is the usual wont of these men, to boast,
that generally all the Fathers are on their side, whereby they deceive poor
simple souls. But they must not think to carry it away with big words of
ostentation, but they must prove what they say, and not bring halting proofs,
but full to the purpose. Generally, On Phil. 2.9.10.
says Zanthy, the Fathers do understand the Name above every Name either of
the Name of God or the Name of the only begotten Son of God, and some of
Christ's glory; how then could they expound the Text, as these men do? If three
or four Fathers may be brought to make the Name Jesus the Principal Name;
which are either not the most ancient, or most orthodox; they are nothing to
the general stream of the other, more ancient, or more orthodox, that do not
make the Name Jesus the Principal Name: Yet these three or four as Master
Page confesses, do not say that adoration must be done at the sound of the
Name Jesus; yea he affirms, that there is no full authority for bowing at the
Name Jesus from the Fathers.

Answer.

You are a rare Antiquarie, and in time may merit a Pillar of Marble among the
Worthies. Do you think the Apostle spoke per antiphrasin, and positively
commanding, meant the contrary? Was it not known a great way further from the
purest times, then seven hundred years? Prove you that, and show who broached
it then. It Is you deceive poor simple souls by your broad Phylacteries: the
Fathers are generally on our side; and not you, nor any man else that ever I
heard of, can produce one against it. This is no ostentation, the Thrasonicall
part is yours, and your sesquipedalia will not make one ynch.

What Zanchius Zanch. in loc.
says, is against your self: Praeter Graecos Latini quoque Patres de Nomine
Dei and Filii Dei unigeniti hunc locum interpretantur; beside the Greek
Fathers, the Latin also interpret this place, viz. Name above every Name, of
the Name of God, and of the only begotten Son of God. Are we off here? Is
not Jesus the highest express of God, or the only begotten Son of him?

Your opinion, that Name is Glory, which was brought forth, but not known by
whom, he says Theodoret rejects; and who took it for a bare Name were
Heretics, and so say we.

I doubt you cannot name who understand it of the Name Jesus and show where;
nor prove they are not very ancient, or not very Orthodox But if they be no
more then three, or four, they are more then you, or any are able to bring
against it. For taking it, as we do, de Nomine cum re conjuncto, of the Name
with the thing, none controvert it; it, says learned Zanchius, is Catholicall.

You charge Doctor Page, but note no place: for confessing, that the three or
four do not say the adoration must be done at the sound of the Name, and that
it has no full authority from the Fathers; I believe you intend it, where
your credit can gain no repute, viz. page 133. in his Answer to M. Prinnes
first Quaere. His words are these: I have brought many Fathers to prove, that
by Bowing in that Text is meant not an inward subjection only, but also some
outward expression of bodily reverence: and likewise I have brought many other
Fathers and Writers to prove, that the Name in the Text is meant the Name
Jesus. So then put both these together, and they will make up that Conclusion
and Exposition which you refuse. But I can find but few that join both these
together; for those that speak of Bowing, commonly say nothing of the Name;
and those that tell what is meant by the Name, usually say nothing of bowing
the Knee. He says further, that none of the Fathers cross it; and He that is
not against, is with or for us, Luke 9.50. especially in Rites belonging to
Gods service. Nor is this any disparagement to those glorious Lights, that the
Church now should see a little farther into a Text then they did.

What Is in all this against us? You should have answered the Learned Doctors
Quaere, and produced some ancient Fathers or Authors against our custom of
bowing at the Name of Jesus, and then you would be the farre-seeing Dwarf
sitting upon the Giants back. Till you do, all men will say, you are but on
the ground, and it is strange presumption for you to over-looke.

Some Divines do conjecture, that this custom was brought up first to
testify Christ's divinity against Arrius, but they neither prove it, neither
can they; and if it were so, it overthrowes these men's grounding it upon the
Text: The best instance, which these Bowers bring from the Fathers, is that of
S. Hierome, whom yet they do pitifully wrest. This Father commenting on Isa.
45.23, shows that this Text is now fulfilled in Christ. For, says he, Moris
est Ecclesiastici Christo genu-flectere, It is an Ecclesiastical custom to
kneel, or bow the knee to Christ. But Hierome speaks of Christ, not Jesus. He
does not say, that this kneeling or bowing should be done at the Name Jesus. It
is also the manner of Christians to bow to God, do they therefore bow at the
Name God? And indeed what Hierome says, is now verified by every true
Christian, who humbly pray to God in the Name of Christ, and is not this to bow
to Christ? Now that Hierome consents not unto them it is plain; for when he
entreats on Phil. 2.9.10. the place in controversy, he says there no more but
this, according to the judgment of other Authors, that all Creatures should
adore Christ: An evident Argument that Hierome was not of these men's opinion.
Answer.

We hold it not a custom taken up by men, but an institution Divine, to
insinuate, and against all (...), that Jesus Christ is Lord. We go not to
prove, that it was first in use against the Arrians; but being then, that
practice shows it was in the Primitive times. And that it was then used,
Zanchy, Whitegift, and Hooker, more Learned then any you can bring against us,
affirm.

The place of Saint Hierome is very good, and far better then any you can
retort. But he is not the first, nor do we force him to us. His words are
plain at Isay 45.23. where he expounds, Every knee shall bow to me, Hieron.
in Isa. c. 25.
by this Text, Phil. 2.10. In quo perspicue significatur populus Christianus:
moris enim Ecclesiastici est Christo genu flectere, quod Jud^i mentis superbiam
demonstrantes omnino non faciunt: In which place, says he, the Christian
people are signified; for it is the custom of the Church to bow the knee unto
Christ, which the Jews, showing the pride of their mind, do not at all.

Where bowing of the knee must be taken literally: or else how does it appear
that the Jews did not bow. And 'twas a custom too of the Church, not any
private devotion like yours. And what though he say Christ, does he exclude
Jesus? Or was it not granted, that the Name must be Jesus? Or was not Jesus
Christ?

But he does not say, that this Bowing is at the Name Jesus. What though he
does not? If you mind the sense of the Name, he intends it as the Text does,
and the Fathers before, and after him hold themselves to the very Letter, in,
or at the Name of Jesus. See my Antiteich. Tract. 4. And do not you think it
the manner of Christians to bow to God, and at the Name of God to do it? Your
apprehension, I confess is far beyond my reach. For I could never yet find
how to go unto God, but at, or in, or by his Name: Nor at any time dare I
adventure toward him, before faith has mentioned Jesus in my heart; at that
mention of him I do, and will at any time.

You confess that what S. Hierome says, is now verified by every true
Christian: But how? By humble praying to God in the Name of Christ. And can it
be known that you pray humbly, when you have no humble expression? That Is the
reason I ever took you for a proud, and scornful man. Now I cry you mercy
Sir; And tell you, that when your virtue shines before men, God shall have
glory also of them.

But indeed is that S. Hieromes meaning? Then first you make him contradict
himself: For on Phil. 2.9.10. he says, Vid. Rob. C^e. Censu. Scrip. veter.
If I may ascribe it to S. Hierome, that all creatures should adore Christ, and
I have been taught that there can be no adoration without an outward act.

Secondly, you overthrow your former doctrine, viz. the subjection here is the
subjection of all creatures, and shall all creatures pray to the Father in the
Name of Christ? I had thought the damned would not, and the irrational, and
senseless could not. You may sum up all your absurds before, and take them
to your self here.

The truth is, the Fathers are wrested, not one is for them. If any one in
answer to this Argument will produce Fathers, I pray them to produce them to
say, not only that the Name Jesus, is the Name above every Name, but also to
say, that by bowing in the Name of Jesus, is meant bowing at the mention of the
Name Jesus, If they bring none to speak thus full, let them spare their
labor, for otherwise their Testimonies will halt, and not be worth a rush.
Answer.

Now you are tell troth: you say what is amiss, and what must be done for
amends. First, the Fathers are wrested. By whom? not by you it seems, you read
not, you care not for them. But how can they be wrested where no word nor sense
is changed? See my Antiteichisma, and supervise me.

Secondly, that I must produce the Fathers to say etc. that is to speak
English, mean you so? In their languages the Name of Jesus is above every
Name, and the bowing in the Text is the bowing in or at the Name of Jesus. If
you dislike the translation of Nomen Jesus, by Name, you may use mention. For
nothing else can be so rightly understood. Not power or glory, was showed
before. Not Person, for (...), to him in the ninth verse is his Person, and the
sense would be, God has given his Person, a Person which is above every
Person. There must then either be a periphrasis in (...), and in the Name of
Jesus, is when Jesus is named, mentioned, etc. or Nomen must be translated
mention, and so it will reach kneeling at prayers, and bowing at other times.
In, or at the Name all the Fathers that I have seen do say, and not one any
thing that may be forced against it. See my Antiteichisma, and for your labor
here I return an Epigram of Martial.

Nil recitas, and vis Mamerce Poeta videri;
Mart. l. 2. Epig. 38.
Quicquid vis, esto, dummodo vil recitas.
SECTION XVI.
THe Visitors at their Visitations in the late crazie days, though then they
grounded the bowing at the Name Jesus, not only upon the Canon, but also upon
the Text of Scripture, yet did at that time give leave to some Ministers, that
scrupled the sole bowing at the Name Jesus, (though it was very unwillingly
granted) to bow at other Divine Names, so they would bow at that, and not only
so, but at that time, they used veneration, and suffered it to be done at
humane Names. For at the Metropoliticall Visitation at the Cliffe by Jews in
Sussex, in the beginning of July 1635, The Visitor entering into speech of the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, as soon as ever he named William, he put off
his hat, and the greater part of the Ministers then present made low obeisance:
This is true, and thereof there be many witnesses. Answer.

Hic labor, hoc opus; In your Epistle you tie me to answer every thing, or you
will take no answer to any thing: and here is that I never heard of, and verily
believe, never was, as is expressed in your terms.

In the late crazie, you say, and say it in the loose days now. If there might
be a revolution of them, these are more abhorred then in have to be recalled.
In the late it was, and before the late the days were too remiss, or these
had not been now.

Now they are, and now we hear the Visitors at their Visitations gave leave to
some Ministers, that scrupled the sole bowing at the Name Jesus, to bow at
other Divine Names. This I remember, that M. Maynard of Mayfield being
questioned upon the Canon, had nothing to say against it, but that he would bow
at other Divine Names too. The Visitor answered, that all the Names and
Attributes of God were to be used reverently; but this was commanded, or to
that effect.

Whether entering into speech of his grace of Canterbury, at the Name of William
he put off his Hat, and the greater part of Ministers then present made low
obeisance, I know not. I was not then in presence, if I had, I should have
been so civil as you could wish I would say. And if all you write were thus,
there was not, there could not be, I should think, more in all, then a token
of obedience.

I contend now, that this toleration, and this practice, does contradict this
opinion of bowing at the Name Jesus. As for the second instance, if any now
shall distinguish between divine and civil worship; and affirm that this was
but civil worship. 1. I reply, I could question the distinction See M. Gurnay
Vindication of the second Commandment, from Page 54. to 107.
, but though I should grant that this distinction may be admitted elsewhere,
yet cannot it be admitted here, for if the Name Jesus, be the Name above every
Name in the Text, it must have proper relation to Names and Titles; then if the
honor of the knee be the advancement of the Name Jesus above other Names, no
honor of the knee whatsoever, may be performed to any other Name, for thou how
shall the advancement of the Name Jesus above other Names appear? Again,
though it should be granted, that the civil worship of the knee may be given
to the Names of men, which yet is not to be granted upon these men's grounds,
yet no divine worship of the knee, upon the said grounds can be given to any
Name whatsoever. Therefore no Names of God, besides the Name Jesus, can be
adored with the worship of the knee. For whatsoever is divine, is only capable
of divine worship. Then, if any other Divine Names may be indifferently bowed
unto, they giving the pre-eminence above them all to the Name Jesus, it is a
plain contradiction, for then they make them as high, and as honorable, as
the Name Jesus. But if other Names of God, besides the Name Jesus, shall not be
bowed to, as these Superstitiou^ Iesu-worshippers never do, by their bowing at
or to the Names of men, it cannot be avoided but they give the pre-eminence to
the Names of men, above the Names of God, which shall have some honor done
them, all the honor that they are capable of, but the Names of God shall have
none at all; for bowing the knee in the Text, does denote pre-eminence. To
conclude, if all Divine Names may have divine honor done to them, when they
are named, and humane Names have civil honor done to them, call it what you
will, Iam sumus ergo Pares, what prerogative or super-eminency of honor shall
the Name Jesus have above other Names? Then the Text of Phil, 2.9.10. as these
men understand it, shall stand but for a cipher; For if all Titles both divine
and humane, be of themselves capable of the honor of the knee, then was the
Name Jesus capable of this honor* if it had never been advanced. To what
purpose then did God so highly advance it to receive this honor? Answer.

You contend, that this toleration and this practice do contradict our opinion
of bowing at the Name: and because you do contend you could question the
distinction of Divine and Civil worship. You could: could you also question
the first and Second Table? You may do the one as well as the other. When I
meet with M. Gurnay, I Will follow your direction, in the while I shall try
whether, rem poteris servare tuam, you can maintain your own?

You say, that distinction cannot be admitted here: for then how shall the
advancement of the Name Jesus above other Names appear?

Very good: you will give no honor to the King, that the honor of God may the
more appear. Here is Manicheisme, and Anabaptisme, with a witness. If such
Doctrine be preached, be printed, no marvel that the contention is so hot for
paritie. Have you forgot the similitude our Savior taught between the first
and second Table, Mat. 22.37, 38, 39? I will remember you, it consists in
quality, both sincere; in analogy, both from love; and in punishment, the
violation of both has the guilt of eternal damnation. Herein is the great
difference; the first, is immediate worship of God; the second, mediate. The
second then is not (...), fraudative, but (...), completive, (...), so
appendent, that he which loves not his neighbor, does much less love God, 1
Ioh. 4.20.

The Divine worship goes not to man; our bowing to Superiors, or at the Name
of the King, etc. has reference to the Ordinance of God. There is no
inconsistence then between the bowing at the Name of Jesus, and bowing at the
Name of Charles: for that shows the immediate honor of God, and this other
his mediate.

At your again, you get as little: For all the Names of God being Divine,
ought to be religiously handled; and if any man bow at the Name of Jehovah unto
God, if not in contempt of the Name of Jesus, I Will not forbid him. But let him
do it at the Name of Jesus above all, because above all it is commanded; and
why he should, in my Antiteichisma, Tract. 3. are reasons many. Nor does this
imply any contradiction, because Jehovah is the Name of God; yet he that bows
at Jehovah, and minds not Jesus, is a Jew.

And though every Divine Name be alike Divine, yet all Divine Names are not set
forth alike to us, wherein we should worship God. Jehovah, of all, was most to
the Jews, Jesus is to us. And though we may, and sometimes do, put off a Hat
at the Name of, or bow the knee to a Superior, yet we part not with any Divine
worship, as this Jesu-prophaner falsely charge us. We only signify our love
and high esteem of him, as Gods Vicegerent. Bare Names are not capable of any
honor, nor do we give them any. Charles is our Supreme Head, next under
Christ; and therefore King Charles has, or should have the highest respect of
us on Earth. But Jesus is the Supreme of all Supremes, and therefore to him, as
the Head of the Church, give we the greatest super-eminencie. Non sumus ergo
pares.

If any shall yet object, that though God have advanced the Name Jesus above
every Name, that every knee should bow to it, yet other Names may be ^owed
unto, because the bowing of the knee, which is due to God, who is Lord or all,
and so to every Person of the Trinity, is also allowed to be done to man. I
answer, 1. No Text puts differen^e between the Persons of the Trinity, but they
say that the Text of Phil. 2.9. puts difference between Names, in preferring
the Name Jesus above other Divine Names. Therefore, upon their grounds, Divine
Names must not be honored alike, (though the Persons of the Trinity must)
because, Genesis 41.45. Genesis 33.3. 2 Samuel 18.28. 1 King. 1.16.
say they, the Name Jesus is above them all. 2. God has commanded the bowing
of the knee to be done to men, and there be examples for it in Scripture. But
he has no where commanded bowing of the knee to be done to Names, either
divine or humane; neither be there any examples in Scripture, that either the
one or the other was ever practiced: Therefore if it be true, as these men say,
that bowing at the Name Jesus is Gods command to be done to it upon so special
a reason, that it is the Name above every Name, there being no command, or
example of bowing at any other Name besides, nothing can be more certain, but
that the Name Jesus is selected and culled out among all other Names, to have
the honor of the knee peculiarly to be done to it. Therefore to give this
bowing to Divine Names is evil, but intolerable presumption to give it to the
Names of men; for this cannot be done without horrible profanation of the Name
of Jesus, This will necessarily follow, if bowing at the Name Jesus be grounded
upon the said Text. Answer.

First, In your reply you go on with your old mistake, that we separate Names
from Things: and once more I inform you, that Jesus is by dispensation the
only Name, wherein God, and all he is, in Persons and Attributes, receives
due and equal honor.

Secondly, God has commanded bowing unto Names, if you can understand the
Things under the Names, and without Names I know you understand nothing. Of
this you have examples in the old and new Testament very frequent. But you will
say, that is to the Name and Thing as the object, not at the Name to the
object. Even so too, you see Sect. 4. and 13. and Mat. 17.6. the Disciples are
found in the very practice.

But is it not sufficient, that God commands you to bow at this Name,
Justification of bow. p. 31.
and has not laid the like command on you to bow at any other of his Names?
Doctor Page affirms, and so do I, that his command is reason enough to
obedient Christians, who find the reasons of his commands are sometimes secret,
though always just. Yet we know some reasons for this, and you may read them
in my Antiteichisma, Tract. 1. 2. 3. 4.

I have no more to say unto you here, but that as your Section began
untowardly, so it goes out vilely. For though there be no express command for
bowing at all Divine Names, yet it is blasphemy to make it evil to bow to them
in their sense. Nor do you a little blaspheme our Church, in saying that she
gives this bowing unto the Names of men. God forbid, that we should make men
equal with him, or all men equal. Such profaneness dares much. It will not
permit, iracunda Iovem ponere fulmina, the Almighty God to divert his heavy
judgments.

SECTION XVII.
THis exposition of the said Text, will bring a scandal upon the Church of
England; for though an injunction passed in the days of Queen Elizabeth, to
authorize this Ceremony, and a Canon was made for it in the beginning of King
James his Reign, (though the words of the Canon are not plain for it) yet was
the execution of it generally neglected. No man was urged, or compelled to it.
The learned Worthies of our Church were suffered to confute this exposition of
the Text as a Popish error, as Bishop Alley, Bishop Babington, Doctor Airy,
Doctor Whitakers, Doctor Fulke, Doctor Willet, with sundry others. Yea, those
Ministers that were suspended for Ceremonies, were never called into question
for this. Yea Master Eccl. Polit. li. 5. sect. 30.
H^^ker, pleading for our Ceremonies, calls bowing at the Name Jesus, an
innocent harmless Ceremony, which none, says he, is constrained to use: It
appears that by his judgment none ought to be compelled to it. But the
Governors of the Church have constrained Ministers all along for the most part
to use the rest of the Ceremonies; but the other was generally neglected, and
not u^ged, till the days of this late Archbishop. Therefore if this be a duty
of the Text, it will accuse the Church of England of gross hypocrisy, in
urging mere Ceremonies, and neglecting to urge a necessary duty: It would be
a preferring of her own traditions above Gods Commandments: It would make
then, that the Church failed in sincerity, till this late Archbishop came.
Answer.

You are very bold still with the Text and Church. Indeed there must be
offenses, but woe unto the man by whom they come. Mat. 18.7. If there be evil,
will the Scripture make the scandal? The duty is neglected, and therefore
this literal exposition of the Text offends the Church.

Again, some men do not observe the injunction, o^ Canon, according to the
Text, therefore the Church is in fault for making such a Canon. Here you do
Machiavalize among the people to some purpose. This is it has spurned the
religious, and learned into the very Channel of filthiness. God has
permitted, and they that are approved shall be known. 1. Cor. 11.19.

But suppose, Bishop Alley, Bishop Babington; and will you take authority from
a Bishop, that have cried down Bishops as Antichristian, greedy Wolfes,
hungry Lions? take it whence you can, I care not much: From Doctor Airy,
Doctor Whitakers, Doctor Fulke, Doctor Willet, if you have no other, your
strength is not great.

Bishop Alley I have not seen, but not one of the other determine against any
more then the Superstitious abuse of the Name Jesus.

Yet suppose some, or all of these, or more refused this exposition, did not
the two Universities, in the days of Queen Elizabeth, and of King James of
blessed Memory, and the Synod begun at London, 1603. hold as learned and more
Worthies, who concluded this a duty necessary to be performed. See my
Antiteich. Tract. 4. page 38.

Suppose again, that no man as Master Hooker says, was constrained unto it: I
will suppose no man was so mad as to contemn it. And suppose Ministers
suspended for other Ceremonies, were never questioned for this: I will again
suppose they were not complained of. All then you say does no more make it not
a duty of the Text, or accuse the Church of hypocrisy, then your not
administering the Lords Supper, but as, and when you please, does. One
particular destroys not the general: Nor does the not punishing every neglect
of a duty make it less a duty.

It may often happen, as now it does, that the Church has little or no power
to punish. But had she power, and were not the Canons within the Churchwardens
inquiry? Did they, or any other ever Present the default, and it passed
without blame? Bishops though they be eminent inspectors, are not Omniscient.
If the offenders be not made known, whom shall they correct?

The Scriptures has prescribed this, Non sit dubitandum, Aug. Epist. 110. ad
Ianu.
quin ita facere debeamus, No doubt we ought so to do. The Church therefore
questions not every neglect before she finds the contempt. And the less,
because she holds it a part, insolentissimae insaniae, of most insolent
madness to dispute Gods command.

SECTION XVIII.
LAst of all, I may bring this as a reason against them; the most of them, and
some also of the chiefest of them, that ground it on the Text, yet hold their
opinion very uncertainly: they pass to and fro betwixt the Text and the Canon:
When they think that the Authority of the Canon is not altogether sufficient
to make the people to practice it, they flee to the Text, and when they are
afraid that the Text will not bear it they flee to the Canon. And if this be
not halting between two opinions, for my part, I know not what is, I will
instance but in one; Master Page in his Treatise of Justification of bowing at
the Name Jesus, does confess, that when he first went about that Treatise, he
did not think that it could be so directly proved from the Text; a plain
evidence that he went about it doubtfully; for he was to encounter with an
Antagonist, that held it no duty of the Text; and would he go about to
contradict him, when himself was fearful that the Text would not bear it?
but he affirms that when he had read Bishop Andrews on Phil. 2, he could not
but condescend to his Page Justification bowing, P. 4.
opinion; yea though he brings many Arguments, such as they are, to prove it a
duty, yet thus he closes with his Antagonist; Though I am not so peremptory,
says he, that it is a duty of the Text, as you are it is not; Nevertheless,
if the Text fail me, I will ground it upon the Authority of the Church.
Answer.

Whom you here mean I know not, some and some of the chiefest they are, and in
their opinions uncertain they. Because what you think you say, and care not
what. Sir, if you will understand, what, I fear, you study to contemn, this
Orthodoxe truth, you must go from the Text to the Canon, and from the Canon to
the Text.

Thus, if you will from the Text to the Canon, as to the Hypereticall or
Ministerial Diction of the Sentence; and then from the Canon to the Text, to
examine it by the Decisive of the Scripture. This course I first took, and the
Scripture has so determined it in my Conscience, as I write.

Consider once more the Text, and the Canon, and this Ceremony is a Divine
duty, and a Humane. As commanded in Scripture, it is a Ceremonial duty
Divine, or of the Text, Iustifi, of bowing, P. 8.
says Doctor Page; and as commanded by the Church, it is also a Ceremonial
duty Humane, or of the Canon.

Who then ask, how I am sure that this is the Truth? Answer is, the Church
has so expounded it: If demand be, how is this Opinion of the Church
discerned? Answer is, by the Letter of the Text, and in the analogy of the
Truth.

Nor is this all: I am bound by the Text, and by the Church; if I will not
observe the Text, God will punish me for disobeying the Church also: And this
we find in the Scriptures he does more grievously, then sins immediately
committed against himself.

So to look we ought unto the Text, and to the Canon. And if this be halting
between two opinions, you must halt in many things, or be very ignorant; and
because you will not be stayed by the Church in any thing, you stumble often as
you go.

And now are fallen heavy on Doctor Page, whom a good man, having blessed God
for him, will honor for his worth, and thank for his pains.

Ambros. sup. beati immacul.
Ordinis ignorantia conturbat negotiorum naturam, formamque meritorum; and you
have done what thereby you could to crack his credit, which still increases by
your contempt.

You note him for halting, where his judgment is most sound. I Will express his
words, because you have chopped them to spoil his sense.

I must confess, says he, that when I first entered upon this business, I
thought it could not be so directly proved out of the Text.

But when I had perused that Learned and judicious Prelate Bishop Andrews upon
these words, who conquers where he goes, etc. I could not but condescend to his
opinion.

Not that I am so peremptory it is a duty of the Text, as you are that it is
not; but I am persuaded now, that it may be very probably defended even out of
the Text.

Wherein notwithstanding, if I fail, the Cause in hand is no whit prejudiced,
being principally defended upon the Churches Authority.

But for ought I perceive yet, you must bring better Reasons then any you yet
alleged, before you persuade me that it is no duty of the Text.

What see you here, save a modest and free confession of his first thoughts?
His care and course not to err, his submission to the Authority of the
Church, and his confidence, even at the sundry insults of his Adversary, that
it is a duty of the Text. He doubts, he searches, he finds, he stands
to it. Here is no despising of Prophesying, but an examining of all things, a
holding fast that which is good; and this is Apostolical, 1 Thessalonians. 5.20.21.

Will you be remembered now? The time was, when you held it lawful to be done,
and since writ to me, that it was an indifferent Ceremony. But now, in this
great Loose, you have preached it Damnable Superstition: Damnable you will have
it.

Is not this, (...), worse th^n doubting, even fraudulent, and base playing on
both sides. Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.

Yea throughout the whole Treatise, he is content with any testimony or proof
from any Author, that may give the least signification that it is but a thing
indifferent, yea which is to be noted, that those Authors, that are evidently
against him, and understand bowing the knee in the Text, of subjection; because
they say that this subjection is signified by bowing the knee, he takes to be
for him; he may as well affirm, that because Kings and Rulers are commanded to
be subject to Christ, Psalm. 2.12. which subjection is signified by the word
Kiss; therefore they are bidden in an express and literal way, directly and
plainly to Kiss Christ. Answer.

Certainly you have a Worm, and cannot be quiet. Let any Scholar, with an
impartial eye, peruse the Learned Doctors Book, and he will deem that you
either know not Authority, good from bad, or mind not what you read.

I have looked into most of the Authors themselves, and must testify unto the
World, that you have taxed him falsely.

What though he say, that Bishop Babington confesses, by bowing the knee is
meant subjection, Iustifi. of bowing, Pa. 22.
whereof bowing the knee is a sign, and we desire no more?

Is this any thing? Yes, very great against you; for he is the maine Pillar
you fly too: B. Babing. in his exposi, of the Catho. Faith. p. 197.
and affirming the bowing of the knee there to be a sign, he overthrowes you.

Your paralelling the Bowing with the Kiss, Psalm. 2.12. holds not: for his
Name we have with us, to bow at, his Person we have not directly and
literally to kiss.

A strange thing, that a man should write so largely as he does, and yet not be
sure of his own grounds; what is this, but to ensnare the Consciences of his
Readers, to make them practice a duty, yet they shall not know upon what ground
they practice it? they shall not know whether they obey Gods Commandment, or
Man's only. To state and preach this opinion so uncertainly, as many Ministers
have done, what is this, but to bring upon the consciences of their people a
necessity of sinning, and so great peril of damnation? for whatsoever is not of
faith is sin, Romans 14.23. I say to all these men, as Elias said to the
Worshippers of Baal, 1 Kings 18.21. Why do ye halt between two opinions? If
God be God, follow him, but if Baal be he, follow him: So I say, If you will
ground this bowing upon the Text, follow that, or if upon the Canon, follow
Though they have no fast footing upon either.
that; you cannot ground it upon both, and yet make it a thing indifferent; for
if you ground it on the Text, you must make it necessary, and always, and at
all times, and places, continually to bind. Answer.

A strange rudeness to be so lavish of Pen: but you are put to it, and having
ensnared, know no other way to uphold your Gin. It Is ever your ultimum refugium,
when arguments are convincing, to play the Huckster. A loose tongue
countenanceth your own by depraving others.

It Is infallible, whatsoever is not of faith is sin. But observes he not this
Canon, who following the letter of the Text, keeps the analogy of faith, and
obeyes the authority of the Church?

Had you descended unto Zanchies seventh and eighth rule of interpreting the
Scriptures, Zanch. de interp. S. Scrip. C. 2. p. 423.
you might have seen the Doctors judgment.

First, in containing himself intra terminos tam reales, quam etiam verbales,
both within the real, and verbal terms of the Text.

Secondly, in searching the interpreters, Iustifi. of bowing, p. 5.
and not yielding unto authority without reason. And this is the cause, says
Learned Zanchy, that we attain not the true sense; some contemn the learned,
others will read none, save there affected; with the former, I doubt, you are
an Anabaptist, with the other, a Papist.

And in his wisdom Doctor Page has so certainly stated the question, that
you cannot maintain your assertion without being in contempt.

Avoid this Dilemma, and I will set you free.

If it be full subjection, as you and your side contend, then it is not full
without the bowing of the knee. For that is one faculty of man, an humble one
too, and a real, and verbal term of the Text.

If mental only, as some times you say, show your mental subjection without
an outward act, for all outward may come within the bowing of the knee, and I
will show you that my ears see, and my eyes hear. One is as true as the
other. If you cannot demonstrate it, how does your light shine before men, that
they may glorify your Father which is in heaven? Mat. 5.16.

You are much out in your citation, 1 King. 18.21. God and Baal are repugnant,
God and his Church are not. Our sooting is fast, it is you serve not God right,
that obey not his Church in the truth. In this obedience we follow him; nor
hold we it an indifferent thing so to do, but necessary always. Always to
be morigerous, though not at all times, and in all places, necessary to
express such outward acts of obedience.

I Will now take leave of the first part, and leave it the first part of an Ode.

Horat. l. 2. (...). 13.
Ille and nefasto te posuit die,
Quicunque primum, and Sacrilega manu
Produxit arbos, in nepotum
Perniciem, opprobriumque Pagi.
PART. II. Wherein are Answers to Reasons pretended for bowing at the Name
Jesus, from Phil. 2.9.10.
SECTION I.
OF all the R asons that I have hitherto met with, I profess I have not found
any one that is truly grounded upon the Text, or any other correspondent
Scriptures, but merely upon the fantasy of the brain. Only there is a show
of a proof by reason that In the Name, is translated at the Name, which they
press upon their People in this wise; The Text, say they, is as clear as the
Sun for this practice, does it not say expressly, at the Name of Jesus every
knee shall bow? Can there be any thing more plain? There is a great difference
between these 2 phrases, In the name of Jesus, which is the Power of Jesus, and
at the Name, or appellation Jesus, as there is between these two, In the Name
of the King, that is, the Kings authority, and at the Name King.
I have already answered this, therefore I will be silent now; only here I
seriously admonish these men, to unteach such vain doctrines. I answer them,
there is nothing more obscure and senseless, than such an Interpretation;
making In the Name of Jesus, to be meant at the mention of the Name Jesus; for
I have proved before, no Scripure can warrant this Exposition. But if they will
needs have it so meant here, I will produce a Text that may make as much for
adoration at Gods Name, as this Text for the Name Jesus, Psalm. 63.4. Thee will
I bless while I live, I will lift up my hands in thy Name: What Name this i^,
the first Ve se shows, it is Gods Name; If then In the Name of Jesus be meant
at the naming of Jesus, what reason can be given why In the Name of God, may
not as well be meant At the naming of God? If then by this exposition we be
bound in the one place, to bow the knee at the naming of Jesus, we are as well
bound by the other place, to lift up our hands at the naming, of God. But it be
not meet so to understand the Psalmist in the one place, it is not meet so to
understand the Apostle in the other place. Answer.

Here are pretended Answers indeed, and can be nothing save pretenses. We
reason not for bowing at the bare Name Jesus, but for the bowing at the Name of
Jesus. Yet, what have you got by this dealing? See what? You keep the genitive
case in your title of Superstitious Jesu-worship, to show your impiety: and in
your discourse change it, to make the world believe that we are Idolatrous.
Both has hitherto bin visible to every eye, and will be more in the end. And
that it will, let the Reader note how you oppose, answer, and reply in this
second, for and against, as the Spirit moves you.

Your profession in the front of your first Section, I answer with a profession
that I know not what you have met with all, but this I see, that where you met
with any thing that we own, you were either blind, or would not read it, or
possess^d with a fanatike fury, that makes all things seem other then they are.

A show of proof you confess, because, in, is read, at; But are you not like
the man, who so hated the light, that when the day appeared, the Windows must
be shut to keep him still in darkness?

Who say the Text is as clear as the Sun for this practice, you do not
Name, I am sure our practice is by, and in the light of the Sun. If the
context be animadverted, no cloud does interpose. See my Antiteichisma. Your
Asteriske, or marginall note, is answered in Part 1. Sect. 1. and 4. and 15.
and ever where you are remembered to join the Name and the sense.

Your admonition^ to unteach such vain^ doctrine, is worth as little as your
proof: this is refelled before, and that rejected now. For the T xt you urge,
is st^ong enough to confirm us. Psalm. 63.4. Thus will I magnify thee all my
life, and lift up my hands in thy Name. Is here no outward act with the inward?
Is it not in the time of confession, when the Psalmist prayed, and praised the
Lord? And is it not in and at the Name of the Lord, that is, when in his heart,
and with his tongu^, he magnified the Lord by and in his own Attribute? This
was the custom of old: Moses praying, spread his hands unto the Lord, Exodus
3.29, 30. Solomon praying, stretched out his toward Heaven, 1 King 8.22. It was
the Ceremony of the Priest, Vid. Schind. ad rad. (...).
when he blessed, or called the Jehovah on the people, to lift up his hands.
Our Savior at his departure lifting up his hands, blessed his Apostles, Luke
24.50. And in the Primitive times, when the Name of God was used in prayers,
Tertul. (...) orat. c. 12.13.
and praises, outward humility was seen. It ever was, and will be the use,
when Gods Name is in hand, to show some token of inward submission.

For my part, I will ever, either by uncovering the head, or by bowing, or by
lifting up the hands, some way or other, at the Name of God, whilst the Name
is in hand, in preaching, or praying, or praising, express my inward
subjection.

For the translation, though I do not question it, yet in my poor judgment,
if it had been translated In the Name, as it is in the Original, the same
phrase being never translated at the Name in any other place of Scripture, but
in this place only, (though in as hard places as this) it would have prevented
that great offense which ignorant men have taken by it for the practice of this
will worship, and mueh restrained superstitious Teachers from pressing it upon
the consciences of their people, by reason of this translation. But certainly
such Teachers have much to answer for, for teaching such doctrine, when they
cannot but know, that no Scripture will bear them out in such an Exposition.
Answer.

You are much deceived, it is not the translation of (...), at, makes this a
will worship: 'twas in practice before, either Beza, or any other had
translated (...), in this place, ad. Your correcting-judgement of our
translation, makes your cause the worse, and teaches the people, who have
thought well of your great reading, that you cannot justify the slanders,
wherewith in this very argument you have laden the Church of England in your
Pulpit. You have your time, that God may do his Work.

-- (...) Hesiod.

(...).
But we will again, by the help of God, discuss the cause uprightly.

SECTION II.
Another Reason is this.

THe Name Jesus, say they, Zanchius on Phil, 2.9.
was the most despised and contemptible Name. Therefore God will have it
honored, when it is mentioned, above other Names. Page Just. of bowing, P. 42.
I answer, Jesus Christ the great Rabbi and Doctor of his Church, has no where
taught them to reason so: The Text cannot with any sense bear this Reason; for
as I have showed before, the Apostle argues from the humiliation of Christ's
Person, to the advancement of his Person, not from a Name to a Name. The
Apostle does not say, that the Name Jesus was humbled, therefore he does not
mean that the said Name was exalted. Therefore, because it has no light from
Gods Word, this answer might be sufficient: but because it is a reason much
relied upon, and ignorant men that know little else, have learned it exactly
from their Teachers, I will encounter with it, and make it manifest, that there
is no strength or soundness in the said reason. Answer.

Though there needs no reason beside the command of the Text, yet because you
should not, nor any else think no reason can be given for it, Zanchy and
Doctor Page render this for one, viz. it was an humble Name.

Iustifi. of bowing, p. 32.
It is not with God as it is with men: we exalt for Greatness, he for
Goodness: we magnify men for Power, and Majesty; he for Poverty, Humility,
and Mercy. That Is his reason for his so reasoning, and ours too. See my
Antiteichisma, Tract. 1. 10.

Christ taught us so to do, howsoever you seem to thwart the great Rabbi and
Doctor of his Church: 'Twas his Doctrine, L^k 18.14. He that humbles himself,
shall be exalte^. Of it he has given himself an example, Ioh. 13.15. and he
has made it a Law, Math. 16.24. who will go to him, must obey it: and the
Apostle wills here, Verse the fifth, that the same mind be in us which was in
Christ Jesus, if we, like him, will ever attain glory.

The Consequence speaks plain, whilst your Reason stands mute.

The Apostle does not say, say you, that the Name Jesus was humbled; therefore
he does not mean that the said Name was exalted.

But he does say, that Jesus was humbled; and being he was humbled in that
Name, (...), for this cause his Name also was exalted, as before, Part 1. Sect.
1. See my Antiteichisma, Tract. 3. Page 16.

Encounter whilst you will, the more you do, the weaker you.

First then I deny the Antecedent; the Name Jesus did not suffer above other
Names; It cannot be well proved, that this Name suffered at all; For no man
denied Christ this Name, but both enemies and friends gave it him; It was the
Person, not the Name that suffered, neither did Christ suffer for this Names
sake. When Joseph and Daniel, Types of Christ, were abused and persecuted, can
any say, that their proper Names suffered? neither can it be truly said, that
the Name Jesus properly suffered, when Christ himself suffered.

Their maine proof of this Reason they produce from Ioh. 19.19. Where Pilate
set up Christ's title over his head upon the Cross, Jesus of Nazareth the King
of the Jews. This, they say, was done to him in scorn, so that his Name Jesus
was made an execration say they, I answer, it cannot be proved that this Title
was set up at all in scorn. Judicious Master Calvin on that place, is of
another mind, For thus he says; Pilaticonsilium fuit etc. It was Pilates
policy says he, that he might revenge himself of the Jews, who by their
obstinate importunity had forced him to punish an innocent Person, to condemn
the whole Nation in the Person of Christ. So by his judgment this title was a
reproach to the Jewish Nat^on, rather than to Christ. He adds yet further,
Atqui in Christo hoc extraordinarium fuit, quod sine ignominia titulus
opponitur, This was extraordinary in Christ, that without any reproach hi title
is set up.

Secondly, The off^nce that the Ch^efe Priests of the Jews took at this
Title, proves it not to be scornful to Christ, who were displeas^d with
Pilate for it; which if it had been reproachful, they burning in malice
against our Savior, would have liked it well enough. Thirdly, Had it been set
up in scorn, it was not in any quarrel to the Name, (...) ^o the Person.
Fourthly, Had it been to a Name, yet was it not to the Name Jesus, but the
Title King of the Jews.

Answer.

You may deny what you will; If you prove no better then by denying, you shall
never be beleev^d by me. It Is true the Jews denied not Christ this Name, though
they acknowledged not the virtue in him. But they did deny the other, Lord,
Christ, etc. and therefore the argument is against your self. He was not
reviled in them, but in this. Y^a they made it a Name of Scorn; cut off the
last letter thereof, that it among them might not signify a Savior; and for
(...), in derision they say, (...). Schind ad rad. (...)


Your evasion next is very poor: For it is most ridiculous to say that Joseph
and Daniel, being abused under a Name, were not abused in the Name, under which
they were abused. Under what Name Christ suffered, in the same Name suffered he.

Suppose next, and I think, it cannot be proved, that Pilate did set up the
Title on the Cross in scorn of him; yet, I believe, that by Divine Instinct,
he did it to upbraid the Jews. And this the Reverend Bishop Andrews has
observed to be a kind of Omen, or presage of the exalting his Name.

Master Calvin therefore might well call it, Extraordinarium in Christo; For
acquitting Christ, Pilat thereby showed that Jesus blood was upon the head of
the Jews, Nor is this all, Pilat wrote the Title in the three principal
Languages, and by this praeludium you might have known, Calvin in Ioh. 19. v.
19.
if you had well heeded Master Calvin, that the Lord declared the time to be at
hand, quo filii sui Nomen ubique innotesceret, wherein the Name of his Son
should be every where lifted up.

Cast up your gains now, and see if this will prove the Name not hateful to
the Jews. No; it will not. For this was Pilats act not theirs, and they
opposed it withal their might. Ioh. 19.20.21.22.

Your Secondly, Thirdly, and Fourthly, are nothing: For we do not say that
Pilat caused the Title to be apposed in scorn of him; but rather to the
ignominy of the Jews, who crucified one Innocent, and their own King. This
you should prove, that the Name of Jesus was not a laughingstock to the Jews,
Scorned, Vilified, despited by them, this you cannot do^.

But the truth is, the most Glorious Names of our Savior; as God, Son of
God, Page Just. of bowing, page 42. and alibi.
Christ, Jehovah, suffered rather in him than the Name Jesus. The reason that
M. Page gives to prefer the Name Jesus above these Names, does not satisfy,
for, says he, these Names are glorious and lofty Names in themselves, and
therefore need no advancement; but the Name Jesus was an humble and lowly Name,
therefore God advanced it, I say, this Reason is not satisfactory; for the
Question is not; what these Names are simply considered in themselves, but what
they were in Christ in the time of his humiliation; As the Question is not,
whether we are to bow at the Name Jesus simply considered, but at that Name in
Jesus Christ, I contend then, that these aforesaid Glorious Names were more
humbled Names in Christ, than the Name Jesus, For Jesus was his proper Name
given him at his Circumcision, but these Names are Titles of his honor: As
Henry and King; so is Jesus and Christ, says learned Bishop Babingion. Works,
Page 245.
Christ in respect of these Glorious Names suffered exceedingly; For (...), He
emptied himself of the Glory of these Names. The Jews generally would not
give them, nor suffer them to be giv^n unto him. Whosoever did but once open
his mouth to ascribe any of these Titles of honor to our Savior, presently he
suffered for it, for whosoever did but confess him to be the Christ, was put
out of the Synagogue, Job. 9.22. When at any time he did but take the due
honor of any of th^se N^me^ to himself, they immediately intended mischief
against him. Ioh. 5.18. The Jews sought to kill him, because he said God was
his Father, making himself equal with God: So Ioh. 10.33. For thy good
works, say they, we stone thee not, but that thou being a man make thy self
God So Mat. 26, 65. As soon as he had conf ssed that he was the Christ, The
high Priest cried out against him, that he blasphemed. So that it is evident,
that our Savior suffered the pain of loss, in respect of these Glorious
Names, not having the honor of them, and not only so, but he suffered also
the pain of feeling in himself and his members, when at any time, he or they
did but ascribe the honor of these Names unto him. Now that these Names, and
not the Name Jesus, are suffering Names, I will illustrate it by this Simile.
Suppose the Subjects of some King, whose proper Name is John, or Henry,
suppose, I say, his own Subjects should hate him, rise up against him, and at
length kill him, not because he is called John or Henry, but because he will be
their King, as indeed he is. I would fain^ know in respect of what Name this
King suffers, his Name Io^n, or Henry, or his Title King; no m^n can say it
is for his proper Name, but for his Kingly Title, which they will not give unto
him: In like manner our Savior, whose proper Name is Jesus, which Name others
had as well as he, he is God, he is Christ, he is King. The Jews never
question him for his proper Name, but they will not give him his Ti^les of
honor, they will not suffer him to reign over them, Luke 19.27. but because
he takes this due honor to himself, they ^eproach him, and kill him; in all
reason therefore, these Glorious Names are suffering Names, and not the Name
Jesus. Answer.

You do but say, that other Names suffered most in him; and if you have no
more ground, your purchase is not great.

Doctor Pages reason does not satisfy you; you can prove, that God proceeds
not from Humility unto Glory, can you? That Is it you have undertaken: but I
believe you will leap off like a Hare in the Snow, for fear of the Hunter.

Your own may direct you; and the question is, in, or under what Name Christ
was most derided? We did not, we will not take the Name simply in it self, but
in its sense; and in the sense, he could not suffer by any other: For none of
his enemies acknowledged any of the other in him. Jehovah, or Lord, Elohim, or
God, were Names highly reverenced by them; and in the Name of Messiah, or
Christ, they expected the Kingdom. They scorned not these, but scorned to
attribute them unto Jesus. And because you cannot prove, that they were abased
by the Jews, you will that he made them vile himself.

For, say you, (...), he emptied himself of the glory of those Names.

Mistake not: you are from your purpose, unless you dare say, he cast away his
glory.

His emptying of himself, was only the voluntary assumption of our flesh. And
this he might do, and did, and was still Lord, and Christ, and King.

But the Jews would not give them unto him: unto whom? unto Jesus: Then they
did not scorn them, but disdained that Jesus should be Lord, or Christ, or
King.

Your several places, John 9.22. etc. confirm no more, then that they did
not, would not, acknowledge Jesus Lord and Christ. And so the Skorne was still
at Jesus, that he should be Lord, Christ, King. 'Twas he had the pain of Loss
and Feeling; they hated nothing more, then that he, that Jesus should be
Superintendent.

Your Supposition therefore is false: For that time was not as ours. You do
but suppose, because you like not a King, that the Jews would have none. It Is
not so; they would not have this man to reign over them, Luc. 19.14. This man
they hate, this Jesus shall not be King, whosoever be.

The evil that was, was at the Person under his proper Name: And therefore the
Jews desired Pilate not to write the King, but that he said, I am the King of
the Jews. They express no ill against the Dignity, but could not endure that
Jesus should be so glorious.

Answ. 2. I deny the Consequent; We are not bound to bow the knee at the sound
of that Name, which is the most suffering Name. Neither can this Text, or any
other Scripture, make good this reason; there is nothing in the Text spoken of
a bare Title, but only of the Person of our Savior.

2. The reason will be more evident (if it were lawful to reason without
book,) for bowing at the Names, God, Christ, or King, etc. than the Name Jesus;
for thus I reason:

Look what Names Christ, in the time of his humiliation laid down, and at the
mention of which received disdain and reproach, it is meet, that in the time
of his exaltation he should receive honor at the mention of those Names,
rather than at the mention of that Name, which he laid not down, and at the
mention of which, he received no disdain and reproach.

But Christ in the time of his humiliation, laid not down his Name Jesus, but
he laid down his Glorious Names, as Lord, God, Christ, King, and at the
mention of these he suffered disdain and reproach, not at the mention of the
Name Jesus. Therefore it is meet, that Christ now in the time of his exaltation
should be honored at the mention of his Glorious Names, Lord, God, Christ,
King etc. rather than at the mention of the Name Jesus. So we see plainly, that
if there were a reason in the Consequent, it makes not so much for the Name
Jesus, as for the Names above-spoken. If it be replied, that Christ having been
humbled in his Name Jesus, it is therefore necessary, that he should receive
honor in that Name, being exalted. I answer, if their meaning be this, that
because Christ was called by the Name Jesus being humbled, therefore he ought
to be bowed to at the sound of that Name being exalted, it is a senseless
reason without any proof, consequent, or ground, therefore let them prove it,
or cease ever to mention it. If this were necessary, why were not those
Worthies Joseph and Daniel, Types of Christ's humiliation, as of his exaltation,
by a special appointment of God bowed to, when they were advanced, at their
distinct Names of Joseph and Daniel, being so called when they were humbled? In
another sense it is true in Christ (though it be not an ever-binding rule) for
he shall be always honored by the Church in that Name, which shall not be
laid down.

Answer.

You have proved nothing against the Antecedent; and we shall see as little
against the consequent. You are still upon the old foil; there is nothing, we
know, spoken in the Text of a bare Title. Who talks of a bare Title, save your
self? Can you endure our Savior should have a Name, and mind him in the Name?
If you can, then do what you can, you shall never arrogate what you list.

But it seems lawful for you to reason without book. For I see here, first
that you know not what is the Name, whether God, or Christ, or King, etc.

Secondly, you care not which it be, so it be not Jesus.

Thirdly, that you confound the Titles of honor, with the personal N^me.

Fourthly, that you will not believe the Text, which says that Jesus was
humbled, and Jesus is exalted.

Fifthly, that you contradict your self in your first part, where your maine
contention is that the Name is Power, and Glory.

Sixthly, that you oppose the Text, introducing a Plurality of Names, where is
Speech, but of one.

In your Syllogism is (...), and (...), a changing of the question, and a
bringing in of many. The six before are all in this.

But an other answer you must have, and this is it.

You were told before that Christ laid down no Name: He kept all that ever he
was, though in a peculiar manner he by dispensation veiled his Glory. A Name he
received, and that is his personal Name Jesus.

That does reach him fully, Christ does not: For God could not be anointed.
Nor is God his full Name; for he is man also.

Jesus does both; His full Name therefore is his proper Name.

What occasion then soever was taken at his other Attributes, which moved the
Jews, their hatred came still to Jesus. They disdained that he a Carpenter,
Son should be called Lord, or God, or Christ, or King. Those Titles offended
not them, but at them they took cause to be off^nded with Jesus. Disdaining
that he should be such a one, they deadly hated him, when he was called such a
one.

Now I Will tell you what here appears, even a composition of Syllogismes.

In the Major of two, is, Confusio terminorum, and, falsum suppositum too.

You suppose that Christ laid down his Names, Lord, God, etc. Which, if you
mean, as the Soul was laid down from the body, is Arrianisme. But if you
will mollify, laid down, by veiling, concealing etc. as I wish it might by
all be understood, then the question is changed, not only from Name to Names,
but from the Name scorned, to the Name veiled. The question is not of Names
most concealed, but of the Name scorned most.

There is also false composition a been conjunctis ad male divisas. For, what
mean you by, at the mentioning of these, Lord, God, etc. but that when he was
called Lord, or God, etc. he suffered disdain? And so it is true in the
conjunction, not in the division. True, in composito, he was Scorned, when
called Lord, God, etc. but that therefore the Name Lord, or God, etc. was
Scorned in simplici termino is false.

And thus your own argument is strong against your self. When Jesus was
called Lord, or Son of God, or Christ, etc. the Jews hated the very Name of
Jesus. Not deriding the Name Lord, or Christ, etc. they could not endure either
in composito; that is, that Jesus should be Lord, or God, or Christ, etc. So
Jesus, not Lord, nor God, etc. was still the Name of contempt.

The reason that you subjoyne, for bowing at the Name, they own it, that will,
I do not. The reason that I give, is, because God has highly exalted it by
the Union and for our Salvation. And one reason, that it is highest exalted, is
because it was lowest humbled. See my Antiteich Tract. 3. p. 16.

Your inference from the Type is not against this. Yet you may know, that when
Joseph and Daniel were advanced, they were advanced in, at, and under the Name
of Joseph, and Daniel.

And I may tell you that if, in the foot of this Section, by Church you mean
the Triumphant also, you contradict your self, where you said that Jesus should
not be mentioned hereafter Sect. 8.

For ought therefore that you have here brought forth, I may close this Section
with that of Erasmus, in his Preface on this Text, that unto Christ, for his
humility famous, was given the Super excellent Name, Vt iam ad Jesus illius
consputi and crucifixi Nomen, se flectat, and submittatomne genu, that at the
Name of that Jesus, on whom the Jews spit, and whom they Crucified, every knee
should bow and submit.

SECTION III.
THirdly, Thus they reason, We receive more benefit by the Name Jesus, than by
any other Name; for it signifies our Savior: And in this sense they prefer
it above other Names, yea above Jehovah it self. Some have openly taught this
stuff, Jesus is more excellent then Jehovah, because Jehovah delivered the
people from the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, Iustifi. of
bowing* p. 47.
but Jesus delivers us from the wrath to come. Yea, Master Page himself
speaks very meanly (in comparison) of the Name Lord, which is the same with
Jehovah, (for every where, where the Septuagints find the Name Jehovah, they
translate it by the word (...), Lord.) Yea, though he do acknowledge, that the
Name Lord does betoken the Dietie. For thus he says, What tell you me of Lord,
give me a Samaritan, that may bind up my wounds. And in other places he
preferres the Name Jesus, before Christ and Lord. Answer.

I am heartily sorry that obedience will not be, unless a reason be seen of
what God commands. And, if any reason would serve, methinkes this is the reason
of all reasons, that Jesus is our Savior,

How his Name is, and how above other Names, to God, to us, and in it self, is
at large in my Antiteichis.

Some have indeed taught this doctrine, what stuff so^ver you count it, that
Jesus is a farther expr^ssion then Jehovah, ^o have I, and justify it in my
Antiteich. Tract. 3. Page 20. And if I said, that God in the Name of Jehovah
delivered the people out of the house of bondage, say I not more, in saying,
that he in the Name of Jesus delivered us from the tyranny of the Devil?

I doubt you love not Jesus, that love not those who so advance his Name, that
every Attribute of God is advanced in it. For the glory that God has of us by
all his Attributes, is given unto him in the Name of Jesus. He has so
appointed, and we should so do.

Doctor Page then does not speak meanly of the Name Lord, when he says, that
in the Name of God, is no comfort without the Name of Jesus; but the comfort
that Christians have, is that our God is a Jesus. No fear of diminishing Gods
honor by the exalting of his Son. For it is both Gods will that he should
be so exalted, Phil. 2.9. and To the glory of God the Father, that he is so,
verse 11.

Answer 1. I desire to know, what they mean by this reasoning. If this be
their meaning, that the Title Jesus did more for us than the Titles, Christ,
Jehovah, or Lord, it is most ridiculous; yea it is Idolatry to attribute our
Salvation to bare names, or titles, which our Savior himself wrought for us.
But if this be their meaning, that the Person Jesus is greater, and did more
for us, than the Person Christ, Jehovah, or Lord; this is as senseless as the
other, for First, this will divide Jesus from Christ, and make Jesus and Christ
two Persons. 2. I^ will separate Jesus from Jehovah, so making Christ, no^ God,
or above God; and so in effect deny him to be a Savior; for if he had not
been Jehovah, he could not have saved us.

2. It is an absurd kind of reasoning to attribute temporal deliverance to
Jehovah, and Salvation to Jesus only, for as much as Jehovah is the Author of
all good, temporal, spiritual, and eternal; yea our Salvation in Scripture
is specially ascribed to Jehovah, or Lord, as Isa. 43.11. I, even I, am
Jehovah, and besides me there is no Savior. So Verse. 14. This says Jehovah
your Redeemer. So Isa. 12.2. The Church shall say, Behold, God is my Salvation,
I will trust, and not be afraid, for the Lord Jehovah is my strength, and my
Song, he is also become my Salva^ion. So Deuteronomy. 33.29. Psalm. 84.11. Isa. 26.4.
And in very many places besides. It is therefore beyond measure absurd, to
prefer Jesus above Jehovah, and to ascribe Salvation to Jesus only; for if
the Name Jesus be above Jehovah, of necessity it must be above the names God
the Father, and God the Holy Ghost; and so either way the second Person will be
made greater than the first, or third Person.

Answer.

To your demand I have often made answer, that we take not the Name without the
sense; nor do we make comparisons between the Persons; nor hold we that Jesus
is one, Jehovah another, Lord another. We do distinguish the Essential Name,
and the Relations, and not divide the essence, nor separate the Persons. And
distinguishing between Names and Titles of the same Person make not Christ two.

If we did, as you do here insinuate, and, in your third rank of absurdities
at the tenth, do openly charge the Church, we should by your first reason be
Nestorians; by your second Arrians, Socinians, as impious as your self.

To your second answer I reply, that you are very absurd to think we attribute
temporal salvation to Jehovah, and not eternal. But this we affirm, that God
was in the Old Testament, known by the Name of Jehovah, but in the New more
fully by the Name of Jesus. Yet not as if Jehovah were aliud, and aliud Jesus,
one thing and another, but the same essentially. For the one-most God is the
three Persons; and so Salvation is the work of the whole Trinity.

The places you cite are plain for us, the same, Jehovah Elohim, Lord God,
which is the Father and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, is our Savior, our
Redeemer.

And because hitherto, unless you would be conceived a Tritheite, you have
writ nothing to any purpose, I Will tell you something, if you will promise me to
remember it, to great purpose. This is it. Though our Redemption be a work of
the whole Trinity, yet by the eternal Counsel, it was terminated only in
the Person of the Son of God. He therefore is set forth, that in and by him
the other Persons with him may have the glory.

For thus I Reason:

Whosoever has a Name greater than others, is therefore more excellent than
those whose Names are not so great.

Therefore, If the Name Jesus, which is a Name peculiar to the second Person,
be a greater Name than Jehovah, which he has common to him with the other
Persons, or grea^er than the name God the Father, or God the Holy Ghost, it
will follow expressly, that the second Person is greater than the first or
third Person.

The first part of the Argument is p oved from Heb. 1.4. where the Apostle
proves that Christ was better than the Angels viz. because he had obtained a
more excellent name than they. This is also confirmed by the Analogy of the
Scriptures; for I have showed before, that Name above another, does always
denote the excellency of the Person above another, that has not so great a
Name; as Deuteronomy. 26.19. The Lord promises his people that will keep^ his
Commandments, that He will make them high above all Nations, in praise, in
name, and in honor. So Isa. 56.5. The Lord promises to the Eunuchs that will
keep his Sabbaths, a Name better than of sons and daughters, that is, he
will bestow upon them a greater excellency and honor, than those that have
sons and daughters, viz. in that respect, or they shall be more excellent by
that name that he would give them, than they should have been by having sons
and daughter^,

Therefore to affirm that Jesus is above Jehovah, does expressly sight
against this Text of 1 Cor. 15.27. where God having subjected all things under
Christ's feet, has yet excepted himself, that did put all things under him.
Seeing therefore he has excepted himself, and has not subjected himself to
Christ: by the selfsame reason he has not subjected his Name to Christ's
Name, for if he had, by the reason above-specified, he had also preferred his
Son above himself.

Answer.

I first tell you, your supposition is false: It was never, nor ever shall be
granted by me, that the second Person has a greater Name then the first. If
your argument then be against me, it is turned to nothing.

But aim at whom you will, I care not, my Secondly shall be as you expect.
Your antecedent holds only, where there may be the relation of Inferioritie
and Superiority; not, in divinis, where one is all, and every one in se the
same. You may therefore conclude nothing hence against us, unless you can
prove, that the Holy-Holy-Holy Lord is not one God, and that the Name of Jesus,
by special dispensation imposed on the second Person as incarnate, is not
essential:

Remember now, what but now I bad you remember, viz. It was the eternal will
of God, and to a singular purpose, namely, that he who being in the form of
God, and was made man, might not be held inferior unto God.

Add this, that the second Person was ever the Person which dealt for us, in
whom God manifested himself unto us, and through whom only we have access
unto the Father. Bring these together, and it is most evident, that the higher
we advance Jesus, the more we glorify God. No fear of setting him too high,
who cannot be sufficiently honored, unless he be at highest. For he is set at
the right hand of the Throne of God, Heb. 12.2. Chrysostom. in Loc.
This that Christ is, (...), as the Father, is the highest demonstration of the
Fathers glory, says S. Chrysostom. See my Antiteich. Tract. 2. p. 7. 8.
Tract. 9. p. 89.

To the proof of your antecedent I answer, the excellency of Name argues
Superiority of Persons, that by Nature may admit subordination; not where
every one is the same in the unity of essence, and are equally honored in and
at the super-eminent Name.

Nor can this contrary that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.27. For we meddle not
with the Persons, with the significant Name we do. Yet I may safely and will
say, that as the Son of God was humbled in our nature, and not the Father,
nor the Holy Ghost, so was he exalted, and yet neither inferior to the Father
in the Humiliation, nor in the Exaltation superior, as in Part 1. Sect. 1.
This cannot be denied, unless you dare deny the other.

The Answers which I have received to this Argument, are these three, yet none
of them sufficient in my judgment.

First, it is said, that the ground and rule above-specified, holds between
Christ and the Angels, and so it will hold between Christ and all the rest of
the creatures, where ^here is a manifest difference, but it will not hold
between the Persons of the Trinity, because they are equal, and cannot be
made unequal. This answer is very frivolous; For the Apostle gives this reason
why Christ is better then the Angels, viz. because he had o^tained a better
Name than they, which argument had been weak and uncertain, and he could
never have made good what he affirmed, if his ground and rule could ever have
failed, A true rule is a perfect rule, or no rule at all.

2. True it is, that it is indeed impossible, that the three Persons should be
made unequal, yet may one be preferred before, or under valued beneath another
by some men's opinion, or practice. For as Arrius under valued the Son beneath
the Father, in that he attributed unto him a Name below the Name of the Father:
And as we prove against Arrius, that Christ is God equal with the Father,
because of the identitie, and samenesse, and equality of his names, and
attributes with the Father, being called Jehovah, Son of God; called
omniscient, eternal, etc. So it will be evidently proved by necessary
consequence, against these men that hold that opinion, howsoever they
positively deny it, that they are in some degree in an extreme with Arrius,
preferring Christ above the Father, because they attribute unto him a Name
greater than the Name of the Father.

Answer.

Answers you have received, and insufficient three; from whom you might have
said, that they might have done something for themselves.

The first pertaines to that which I gave before. How weak it is, your Reply
will show. Weak, said I? Nay, frivolous yours: For the blows you made, have
sunck you to the ground.

You say before, the Apostle proves, Hebr. 1.4. that Christ is more excellent
then the Angels, because he obtained a more excellent Name then they. The Rule
then is permanent, whereof it was made a rule; and the argument as strong, as
he was mightier then the creature. Had the comparison been, if I may speak
it, between the most equal three, it must have held where it was a
comparison; but 'twas not, could not be there. Yet I may tell you, that the
Name of Jesus is the highest manifesting Name of God, which was by dispensation
put upon the Word Incarnate, and made proper to him, in whom only God was to
be, and is, and shall for ever be most highly manifested. He then is the
highest manifested Person, God be thanked, he is, or we should have no peace
with God. Mistake me not, in forma visibili, I say, the highest manifested in a
visible form, yet all are co-equall and co-e^ernall all. No disparagement this
to any of the Persons, they take glory all in this. See my Antiteich. Tract. 9.
p. 92. 93.

In the second reply to the first answer, you do again show your ill winding
Art. Here you would intimate an error, Dang conseqence in 2. Resp. 3. in 3. R.
8.
and among your dangerous consequences, note us twice for advancing the Son
above the Father.

Was this ever heard of among Christians? Or how can this be done? For the more
the Son is glorified, the Father is glorified the more, whilst the Father, is
not, cannot be honored, save in the high advancement of the Son. A very
dangerous consequence sure, that is without all possibility of danger.

He is at the brink of Arrianisme, that under-values the Name of Jesus, beneath
the Name of Lord. The Scriptures maintain the equality of the Son, with the
Father, by giving him the Inheritance, and you his inequality, by taking away
the Birthright of his Name. I never read of an Heresy on our hand, but you
are on the other, where Arrius falling, was condemned.

Secondly, They answer, that the second Person, though of himself he be equal
with the Father, yet in respect of us he is greater, because of the work of
redemption which he has wrought for us. I reply, This is a strange answer, and
very unsound: for First, the Scriptures do every where as much extol the love
of God in giving his Son, as the love of Christ in giving himself. Secondly,
This answer does not agree with the Text, for the Text injoyneth the bowing
therein, not only to us men, but generally to all creatures, over whom Christ's
Name is advanced, for therefore is every knee of every thing to bow to Christ,
because he having a Name above every Name, has also a Name above their Names,
Therefore if the Son have a Name above his Fathers Name, by the same reason
the Father must bow to the Son.

Thirdly, By this answer they contradict themselves, for when they be
challenged that in bowing at the Name Jesus only, they honor the Son above
the Father, they deny it, and affirm, that they honor all alike at the Name
Jesus, which indeed they cannot affirm: if the second Person be greater to us
than the other Persons, then we to whom he is greater, must honor him more
than the other, that to us are not so great. Even as to the supreme Magistrate
in a Kingdom, we give a greater honor than to those that to us are not so
great as he.

Answer.

Your second answer received, I believe, you know not whence, shall not by me
be in terminis abetted.

This is all I have owned, or will, that though the Father and the Son be
equal, yet the Son is the Person set forth unto us; that in whom our
Redemption is terminated alone, in him the other may be honored only.

This, your first reply will not reach. For it makes no discrepance of will,
but shows that the love of the Father is declared in his Son.

Your second is answered before Sect. 3. and 5. and 7. and 10. so often as
often it came.

The inference that follows there, is on a false supposition. For we give not
the Son a Name above the Father, the highest Name of God we do, and in a
peculiar manner, as God by dispensation gave it him, Aug. Epist. 274.
in whom our redemption is completed. Hoc Nomen ex dispensatione misericordiae,
susceptaque humanitatis assumptum est.

In your third reply, I must again put you in mind that our dispute is about
the Name; which is the highest Name of God? not the Person; which is the
greatest? Yet I vary not the dignity of any, in saying that the Son alone
is, principium and terminus, with the Father, and the Spirit preparing, the
efficient, but in satisfying, the subject of our redemption. Redemption
therefore is, (...) by excellency his. He was deputed to it by consent of the
glorious Trinity, and therefore we are bound to acknowledge the right his, to
the glory of God the Father.

Thirdly, Thus it is answered, that the Name Jesus is a common Name to every
Person in Trinity, and therefore though it be above other Divine Names, yet it
does not make inequality between the Persons, and in bowing at that only,
they honor all alike. Now thus they go about to prove their Assertion. God
say they, was called Savior before Christ was incarnate, and Jesus and Savior
is all one, therefore the Name Jesus denominates every Person of the Trinity.
First I reply, If Savior and Jesus be all one; why then do they not bow as
well at the sound of Savior, as Jesus, for their reason is the same for both?
Secondly I affirm, that they are not all one: the word Savior indeed, before
Christ was incarnate, showed what God would do in the fullness of time, viz.
send his Son to be our Redeemer; but it is no proper Name; Jesus is a proper
Name, never appropriated ^o the second Person till Christ was incarnate: and
some good Authors affirm, that it is the Name of his humanity only, because
given him upon his Incarnation, and he being called generally by that Name in
the days of his flesh; and sundry men being so called as Types of Christ,
though (if it be so) it do denominate unto us his whole Person, God and Man,
Sermon on Phil. 2.
because of the inseparable union of the two natures. But Bishop Andrews
assertion here is very strange, who affirms that the Name Jesus, is the proper
and chief Name of God; but how can it be so, when it is not the proper Name of
Gods eternity? but was given unto the second Person in time by reason of man's
fall. But the Name Jehovah, denotes Gods eternal Being, and therefore is the
proper and chief Name of God indeed. And, how does the Bishop agree with
himself in that place? For thus he says, The Person is taken out of our
sight, all that we can do, cannot reach unto it, but his Name he has left
behind to us, that we may show by our reverence, and respect to it, how much we
esteem him. For if the Name Jesus do denominate the Person of Christ, as
taken out of our sight, then it denominates only his humanity, which only
was in our sight, for the Deity was never in our sight: But if it be true, as
he says, that Jesus is the proper Name of Christ's Deity, then in this sense
he is not gone from us, but is with us always unto the end of the world, Mat.
28.20. and lives and dwells in the hearts of his Saints, Ephesians. 3.17. Answer.

The third received answer, if from me, you had it thus, Jesus is an essential
Name, though not attributed to God, till in the fullness of time God put it on
the Son of Man, and at his exaltation, declared it the highest, and the
Person to be the Lord God, which is the blessed Trinity. Being therefore the
highest expression of God, it cannot make one higher then another: because one
is all, and every one the same God. See my Antiteich. Tract. 9. p. 94. 95,

To your first reply, I answer, that Savior is, expositio Nominis, an
exposition of, not the Name.

The second is not against my assertion. I confess, the Name was given in type
to Joshuah, not imposed on the second Person till the Word was incarnate. But
with your Good Authors, I shall not affirm, that the Name of Jesus is a Name
of the Humanity only. If you be so inclined, it is no marvel that you slight
the Name, and them that honor it. Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Bernard, etc. thought otherwise.

Nor need you think it strange, that Bishop Andrews calls it one of Gods own
Names, and the Chief: for it being given in time, it is not the less, nor the
less his. Jehovah, in former time given, is yet the Name of his Eternity;
Jesus in the latter, the Name of his eternal Mercy; and of all the Chief,
because all other Names of God are poured forth in it. See my Antiteich. Tract.
3. p. 21.

He goes beyond his own Reading, take it how you will, that will undertake to
make the Bishop contradict himself. It Is wantonness in you to challenge him.

The Name of Jesus, does denominate his Person taken out of our sight; and yet
it does not follow, that then it denominates his Humanity only, unless you
can make the Humanity his Person only. If you be, as you show, a Nestorian,
or a Christolite, you may: I doubt you are a Gnostick, a Cerinthian, and can
separate Jesus from Christ.

You were told, and from Saint Augustine too, that this Name is a Name of the
whole Person, and so made by Dispensation: Will you then say, that the Person
of Christ is with us, in, within us? You are b^side the Text in the cited
places; for his Spirit is in us, not his Person: and so you should have said,
unless you intend to raise a new Sect of Egidians. Christ's Person, not his
Humanity only, is out of our sight, though his Spirit be in our hearts.

Secondly, It is absurd to affirm, that nothing we can do can ^each to
Christ's Person, because it is out of our sight: by the same reason, nothing
that we do can reach to God the Father, or the Holy Ghost, because they are
invisible, then farewell all Religion: If nothing that we can do can reach to
Christ's Person, then the whole bowing can reach but to ^he Name, none to the
Person, and to worship the Name without the Person, is gross Idolatry by their
own confession. And how can these men affirm, that they honor the Three
Persons alike at the name Jesus, when nothing they do can reach to the Person
of Christ?

Thirdly, By the Bishops reason, if we must bow at the Name of our Savior,
because he is not present, then we must not bow at the name Jesus, which name,
says he, signifies the Deity, which is always present, but at the name
Christ, which says he, though without ground, is the name of the humanity
only, which is gone from us.

Answer.

Here is diversorum praedicamentorum confusio, a fallacious applying the word
reach to worship, which the Reverend Bishop does to the sight. The full answer
is, Christ is out of the reach of our eyes, not out of the reach of our Faith.
This was in Part 1. Sect. 8.

The next consequence was reproved before in Part 1. Sect 8. We bowing at the
Name in Christ's absence, bow not at it, because he is absent; but because it is
his, and we are commanded so to do, and by it reach the Deity. And though God
be every where, yet he is no where visible save in Christ.

Secondly, If Jesus be the proper and chief name of God, then should all those
that were called ordinarily by that name (besides Christ) be called by the
proper and chief name of God, which without horrible blasphemy could not be
yielded unto. It is Antichrists impiety to call himself God, 2 These. 2.9.
Yet worthy men were called Jesus, and never took any offense at it, and were
never blamed for it. Seeing then the name Jesus was given to the Second Person
only upon his Incarnation, it cannot be the proper* and chief name of God, or
of every Person in Trinity; and it no where denominates any other Person, but
the Second Person only, therefore it is a name peculiar to the Second Person
only. Answer.

This was answered in the first Part, Sect. 1. and now is again thus. The
son of Nun, etc. had it in type: the shadow they, but Christ is the substance.

It Is Antichrists impiety indeed, to exalt himself against all that is called
God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. So was it Arrius his Blasphemy, to detract from Jesus, and
Menanders to be called Jesus. 'Twas otherwise with them, who in the Scriptures
are styled Saviors, or Gods; (...) these; but Christ is Jesus really,
substantially.

Nor does the imposing of it at such a time, hinder it from being the Chief
Name of God unto us, no more then Gods telling his Name Jehovah unto Moses did,
from being the greatest N^me unto the Jews. And that it does denominate the
second Person only, is by Dispensation only.

Lastly, This answer overthrowes their own ground from the Text, for if the
name Jesus, be the name of the Three Persons, then cannot it be the name above
every name in the Text, for that Name is proper only to the Son. For first,
God gave him this Name, and that after his humiliation, therefore was it not a
name naturally inherent in him as a Person of the Trinity, because he had it
not before. Secondly, the Person only in the Text that suffered, received this
Name, but neither the Person of the Father, nor the Holy Ghost suffered, but
the Son only. Therefore neither the Father, nor Holy Ghost, received the
Name above every Name, but the Son only. Answer.

You are still put to shift, and here pitifully: For by the same Reply you
make, your maine Pillar in Part 1. Sect. 1. is fallen. I argue thus:
Super-eminent Power and Glory is not the Name above every Name, because the
three Persons have super-eminent Power and Glory. Will you deny your Answer
here, or your Thesis there? The Reason is the same against you, as against us:
For the Name above every Name is still proper to the second Person: What will
you do? Either you must come home to me, and yield that the Name of Jesus is
made by special Dispensation proper, or destroy the whole force you have.

And this I Will prove first, by your own First. For God gave him this, and that
after his Humiliation; therefore it was not a Name naturally his, as a Person
of the Trinity. That Is yours.

The like is mine against you. Be the Name above every Name super-eminent Power
and Glory, as you have hitherto contended, and given after the Humiliation;
then super-eminent Power and Glory was not naturally inherent in him, as a
Person of the Trinity* Here is the very height of Arrianisme; and if you fly
not to the gracious Dispensation, there is no avoiding the sixth Anathematisme
of the Council of Ephesus.

Secondly, by your Second, the Person only that suffered received the Name
above every Name, which in your Tenet is super-eminent Power and Glory;
therefore neither the Father nor the Holy Ghost, for neither of them suffered.
Here again you confirm my opinion of you; and there is no way to help,
unless you will confess, that the super-eminent Power and Glory was made
Christ's by the gracious Dispensation. And if you may, deny not me my ground,
viz. that Jesus, the highest Name of God, is, gratia Vnionis, by the Union, and
for our Salvation, without dislike, or inequality to any, made the proper Name
of the second Person.

The Reader sees your Game, and smiles at your Contention, to out-leape your
Shadow. Such toys do but toil; Non enim relinquis, sed tecum semper
circumsers absurditates: for you leave not, but still carry with you
absurdities, and those very remote from the Truth.

SECTION IV.
But the reason is naught, why they prefer the name Jesus above other Divine
names, for signification sake, because it signifies our Salvation. For who
taught them to reason thus, have they received it from the Doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles? If they have, they must show where: It is abominable to
teach for a doctrine the fantasy of the brain; but there is no show nor
shadow for this reason punctually in this Text, or any other Scripture: This
is answer sufficient, but by G^ds grace I will further encounter with it, and
shall prove it a reason without reason indeed, and to be of a very fearful
and dangerous consequence. Answer.

Here are two Lines at first, that show the rest are to waste Ink and Paper.
The Name Jesus cannot be preferred for signification take; no, that it may not.

Did any of the Prophets or Apostles say so? I will then believe you. But how
if I prove what you deny? Shall none of your followers trust you any more?

Look you in Exodus the 3.15. where God having told Moses his Name, says,
This is my Name for ever, and this is my memorial. Is not there a N^me for
signification preferred? Matthew. 1.21. Thou shall call his Name Jesus. Why? For
he shall save his people from their sins: and there the Name is preferred for
signification. Throughout the Old and New Testament, this is the ground; the
highest sense makes the highest Name. See my Antiteich. Tract. 3.

It Is this preferres the S. Scriptures: and if any man can find a Name that
signifies nothing, worth any thing, you shall have all the Reason, and I none.
Till you do, I and all men will laugh at your fearful and dangerous
Consequence. But let me see how you encounter with this my abominable Fancy.

First, If we must bow at the name Jesus, because it signifies our salvation,
then we must rather bow at the name Christ, because this Name does more fully
and expressly signify our Salvation, than the Name Jesus, (now these
Iesu-worshippers do not bow at the name Christ.) Thus says learned Visinus;
Catechis. p. 202.
Jesus est proprium nomen Mediatoris, etc. Jesus says he, is the prope name of
our Mediator; Christ as it were the Surname, For so is he Jesus, that so he is
also Christ. i. e. a promised Savior and Messiah: By both names his Office is
designed, but by the Name more summarily than expressly; by the Surname more
clearly and expressly; for the Surname Christ, does denote the three certain
parts of his Office, as namely, Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly.

I will illustrate this further by this Simile.

If we should hear of some Potent King, that he is become a great Conqueror,
has achieved a noble Victory, and has made a great conquest of his enemies,
and has wrought a great deliverance to his Subjects: this news indeed is
something; but yet this general relation does not so much satisfy, we desire
further to hear of particulars; therefore if it shall be declared unto us, how
the Battle was ordered, how he disposed his Army, and how the Victory was
wrought; when particular Circumstances of the Conquest shall be fully related,
by this means the Victory is more clearly manifested, and we rest better
satisfied, and contented a great deal more this way than before, by the
general signification of it.

Thus it is concerning the Names Jesus, and Christ. The Name Jesus does but in
general show Christ to be a Savior; But the Name Christ does in particular
make known, how he wrought Salvation for us; For it denotes him to be a Priest
to have offered up himself a Sacrifice for us, and to make intercession for
us, it denotes him a King to subdue and conquer the enemies of our Salvation,
and to rule and reign in our hearts by his Spirit, It denotes him a Prophet,
to teach and instruct us, and to make known Gods will unto us, whereby he does
apply his purchased Redemption unto us. In all reason therefore the Name Christ
does more fully and clearly express our Salvation than the Name Jesus; and by
this their reason is rather to be bowed to than the Name Jesus, Secondly, if we
must bow at the Name Jesus, because it signifies our Salvation, why then do
not they bow at the word Savior, (which they make all one with Jesus,) which
does as plainly, yea more plainly denote our Salvation than the Name Jesus,
being better understood of all.

Answer.

I answer, we, Jesu-worshippers, I thank you for leaving out Superstitious,
and now the Superstition is gone, I hope you will learn to worship Jesus.

We have the Name of Christ in as good esteem as you, yet we minding the
command, commonly set Jesus before it. And indeed, Iustifi. of bowing, p. 171:
Tertul. adv. praxe. c. 28. Chrysostom. in Joh. c. 1. hom. 2.
as Doctor Page said, I can hardly call this Attribute Christ, a Name: You may
more truly call it a title of honor. Vestitus Nominis, it is the clothing of a
Name, So Tertullian; an appellation, a dignity, Christus and Dominus non
substantiae Nomina sed dignitatis, Christ and Lord are not substantial Names,
but dignities: So Saint C^rysostome.

What though Vrsinus term it cognomen, a Surname? be it so: So he and you will
let, Jesus, be praenomen, the Forename. I can give you both leave to make the
exposition, whilst Jesus is the Text.

The Name, Christ, does but show how he came into his Office by Unction, and if
we look strictly to it, does denote his humane Nature only. For God is not,
cannot be anointed. But Jesus signifies him that is God with us, the full
Person, and our perfect salvation. Whilst we keep to it we are sure to miss
nothing. See my Antiteich. Tract. 3.

Infer what you can from the example of a potent Conqueror, there is nothing
gained more by the relations of the several Battles, then has bin granted:
unless you can make the circumstances of the Conquest more precious then the
Conqueror.

We Will take the sum of your application, and grant that the Name Christ does
relate his investing into a threefold dignity* of King, Priest, and Prophet.
I ask now, who is this King, this Priest, this Prophet? Is not Jesus he?
Whatsoever is declared must be had there. The declaration of a thing is not
more worthy then the thing. And this is the reason, why bowing at the Name of
Jesus, we bow not at the Name of Savior: Because it is not the Name, but a
metaphrase thereof.

SECTION V.
TO hold that we must bow by the Text at the Name Jesus, because it signifies
our Salvation, will admit this dangerous consequence, for either it will
overthrow the bowing in the Text by Angels, Devils, Reprobates, for they cannot
bow at the Name Jesus in this sense as they say we must bow; for the Name Jesus
cannot signify to them, that he is their Savior, seeing the Angels never
sinned: To the Devils Christ was never promised; and if they must bow, and
fulfill the Text, as certainly they shall, they must bow also upon the self
same reason as we must, for the reason in the Text is the same for all: then
they must bow also in this sense, that Jesus signifies their Salvation also,
which is an unspeakable absurdity. Yea it will overthrow Christ's conquest of
sin, death, and the grave, whose destruction is their bowing to Christ in the
Text, and it will make Christ their Savior in stead of their destroyer.

Page Just. of bowing, page 48.
It satisfies not to answer that the very Devils could call Christ by the Name
Jesus; for so they might call him, because it was his proper Name, by which he
was commonly called, but if they bring their reason right, they must prove that
Angels and Devils bow to Christ as he is their Savior, (which they can never
do) for so they say we must bow, and the reason of the Text is the same for
all. It is plain then the Nam^ Jesus cannot be the Name in the Text in which
every knee must bow, because it concerns elect men only, but that Name must
concern all things and creatures alike, which is the Name of Power and Glory,
as is above specified.

Answer.

If you take Salvation here, as I understood you before, (...), for (...), Luc.
2.30. Him which does save; bowing at the Name of Jesus, because it signifies
Him, can admit no dangerous consequence.

Your instance of Angels, Devils, Reprobates, was before, Sect. 8. Part 1.

All shall bow willingly, or against the will: Willingly the Good Angels; for
though they never sinned, yet are they elected in him, 1 Timothy 5:21. He is their
Jesus, jure conservationis; for by his grace they adhering to God, (...),
immoveably, are sure from all danger of falling. In him preserved, they
voluntarily fulfill the Text to him. See my Antiteich. Tract. 6. p. 53, 54, 55.

But the Devils and damned bow against the will, as Jesus is our Savior, and
their confounder. For the Text is, every knee should bow. The Vulgar and Arias
Montanus say, flectatur, if it will not, it shall be made to bow. As Captives
under the Conqueror, or the Condemned under the severe Judge, forced they are,
and bow they must. Not our way; no such matter. For though the Text be for all,
yet the sense of Salvation is not to all. If you will understand this Text of
all in one way, you may by another Text, We shall all stand before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, Romans 14.10. conclude that we shall all fare alike.

Would you this? Your fierce driving toward Origens error will hardly suffer
me to suspend my censure. And hardly, because answers of the reverend and
learned will not suffice you.

Doctor Page, where you slight him, cites nine Authors, and says, he could
have named twice as many. But had he named none, the Text Mat. 8.29. (The
devils cried out saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of
God) would suffice me. For if they can call him Jesus, and acknowledge him to
be a Savior, though not to themselves, says the Doctor, yet to others, why
may they not, say I, in the same sense bow also?

When you can prove that the reason in the Text is the same to all, they shall
bow alike all. And here it is plain, you are as much out, as before; the duty
concerns not elect men only: See my Antiteich. Tract. 6. All shall give an
account of it, and as their account is, receive all. Insignis ipse and
praeeminens, Prudent. Cathem. Him. 11.
meritis rependet congrua.

SECTION VI.
THe bowing at the Name Jesus, because it signifies a Savior, and not at
Jehovah, is a preferring our Salvation above Gods Glory: Now to do so is
abominable, therefore it is a false opinion, and an unlawful practice.

The Consequent is very plain; for the Glory of God is the end of all his
works, Pro. 16.4. So it must be the maine end of our works, 1 Cor. 10.33.
Moses and Saint Paul preferred Gods Glory above their own Salvation, Exodus
32.32. Romans 9.2.3. He that loves not or serves not God for Gods own self, but
for his own benefit, is but a false and mercenary worshipper of God, and shall
surely miss what he seeks for. Now that this practice will make that we
prefer our Salvation above Gods Glory, it is evident, for Jehovah is the
express Name of Gods Glory, Isa. 42.8. I am Jehovah, (says God) that is my
Name, and my Glory I will not give to another. This Name is called Gods glo
ious and fearful Name, which whosoever will not fear, God will make his
plagues wonderful, Deuteronomy. 28.58. But the Name Jesus is the Name that signifies
our Salvation, therefore it will plainly follow, if it be necessary to bow at
any Name, if we will bow only at that Name, that signifies our Salvation, and
not at that Name that signifies Gods Glory, we love our selves above God, and
regard our own benefit more than his Glory.

Answer.

Your antecedent is false: for the Text says, that the bowing at the Name of
Jesus is to the glory of God the Father. See my Antiteich. Tract. 9.

The endeavor to prove the consequence is lost, when that is granted which is
desired. He that serves not God for Gods own self, shall miss the reward.

Yet you and I may as well be Donatists, Anabaptists, if we be careless of the
means thereto; and Simonians, Saturnians, if we should think that we serve
God for nothing: as Marcionites, in deeming Gods works unworthy of him; or
Cainies, in denying the God of Abraham the glory of his Creatures: Gods glory
is the utmost end. One of these, or these all they must be, that hold our
practice of bowing does prefer our Salvation above Gods glory.

I should have concluded contrary to you: but let us see your ground.

Jehovah, say you, is Gods terrible Name, the express Name of Gods glory, and
God will not give his glory to another. Therefore we may not bow at the Name of
Jesus, who is our Savior, is your direct argument.

Is Jehovah and Jesus, aliud and aliud, not one and the same God? Here you are
an Arrian, or a Tritheite, choose you whether. And do you in earnest prefer
the fear of God, that proceeds from the sight of his terrible Judgments,
before the love of him, which is from his goodness? I hope you are not an
American, that making two Gods, one good, and another bad, will not regard the
good, because he dreads the bad. Who are Sons, love God for his goodness,
and therefore will obey him; but Slaves they, which fear him only for his
severitie. To come close unto you, the Name of Jesus is set forth unto us above
any other Name, because all the excellencies of God are poured forth in it. See
my Antiteich. Tract. 3. p 21.

It availes not to answer, (as some do) that Jehovah is comprehended in the
Name Jesus; and therefore in bowing to Jesus, they also bow to Jehovah, and so
glorify God. For it is absurd to say, that the Name Jesus does generally
include the Name Jehovah; for Jehovah is of far larger extent than the Name
Jesus. The Name Jehovah is the Name of Gods eternity, it signifies God to
have life within himself, to be an everlasting being, and was before the Name
Jesus: The Name Jehovah, betokens Gods incomprehensiblenesse, his Omnipotency,
his Omniscience, his Wisdom, his Goodness, and all his Holy Attributes, and
that essential^y in himself: It betokens all Gods works, his work of
Predestination, not only of Election, but Reprobation, by which he will be
also glorified, Pro. 16.4. It betokens not only his work of Redemption, but
also his works of Creation and Providence, for which works sake, The heavens
and earth do praise him, and speak his praise in all languages, Psalm.
19.1.2.3 And for which works sake, we must also praise him, Psalm. 100.2.3,
Psalm. 147. It signifies not only his mercy, but also his justice, for which
also we must rejoice, and praise the Lord, Psalm. 58.11.12. True it is, God
shows his Glory abundantly in becoming a Savior to his people, yet the Name
Jehovah goes beyond the Name Jesus in the extent of his Glory: It denotes Gods
Glory essentially in himself, and generally in resp^ct of all his mighty
works. The Name Jesus denotes his Glory only part^cularly in respect of the
work of Redemption, and only by way of relation to us, whom he has redeemed.
Therefore the reason aforesaid remains inviolable, that if we will bow only
at that Name, that denotes Gods Glory particularly only, and that does only
respect our own benefit in the work of Redemption wrought for us; and not at
that Name that betokens his Glory essentially in himself, and that which has
relation to all his Attributes, and to all his mighty works; or if we will
bow only at Gods saving-Name, and not at all at any of his commanding-Names, I
say, the reason stands firm, we love our selves above God, and regard our own
benefit and salvation, more than his Glory or Soveraignt^e over us. As if a
Subject will not bow to the King, but only in regard of some great
extraordinary benefit bestowed upon him, it is evident, that he regards
himself more than his Majesty. Answer.

It is not from the purpose to say, that Jesus contains Jehovah. For if it
do, as diverse Interpreters hold, then the Name of Jehovah cannot fare the
worse for our bowing at the Name of Jesus.

The extent of the Name Jesus in the New Testament, gives full scope to that
sense. For who there is Jehovah, (...), Lord, or Elohim, (...), God? Is not
Jesus? He is King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and judges the whole Earth.

I yield, that (...) is as is interpreted, Rev. 1.4. (...), which is, and which
was, and which is to come. As if it consisted of three Tenses, (...) ens, (...)
suit, (...) erit, thereby denoting the Eternity and Incomprehensiblenesse of
Essence, Power, Wisdom, Goodness, or what else, unto Election, Reprobation,
Creation, Providence, Redemption, as you have expressed. All this I yield; yet
this is not enough: we must find a Name in which all are in execution, and
that is the Name of Jesus. For all the works of God, either of Creation or
Redemption, are to set out the glory of his Son, Col. 1.16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Of all the mighty Works, you shall find Jesus the Author, Ioh. 1.3. And the
Work of all Works is terminated in Him only, Mat. 1.21.

Bernar. in Cant. Ser. 15.
His Name then is not of short content. Oleum effusum, Cant. 1.3. it is Oil
that is poured forth, aliisque liquoribus supernatat, and as Oil it swimmes
above all Liquours. The Power, Mercy, Justice, etc. of God run forth in this
Name.

This Name shall spread throughout the whole World, and at the great Assize of
the quick and dead be cried up on both sides; by the Blessed, with acclamations
of joy, Rev. 5. by the Damned, in gnashing of teeth, and gnawing the tongue,
Rev. 16.10, 11.

I confess it appeared an humble Name, but Humility and Glory must consist, or
our hope is lost. He that is Jesus is Jehovah, or our Redemption is not
wrought: for man only could never be victorious over Death.

Had you not a little Socinianisme within, you would never think our Savior
the less glorious by his undertakings for us, nor God to have the less glory
by us, for acknowledging our well-being in Jesus.

Your similitude may decipher you, it shall not us. We bow not as flatterers to
their Princes, whose only aim is their own end: But knowing whose receivers
we are, will not forget to be thankful, nor to be humble, when we sue unto him
for any supply. Who do otherwise, detract from God; and how then is he
magnified, by being called Jehovah by us?

Secondly, The Angels, which by the Text must bow as well as we, upon the same
reason of the Text, cannot have respect to the benefit of Salvation. They serve
Christ for his Glory sake, and as he is their Lord.

Thirdly, And lastly, Seeing Devils and Reprobates must fulfill the Text as
well as we, and that also upon the same reason, by these men's grounds, they
shall be more sincere in their service than we, for they must bow to him
gratis, and as he is their Lord, but we must not bow, but upon a particular
benefit, that Christ is become our Savior.

I do ingenuously confess, that this reason that Christ is our Savior, is a
very strong reason to move us to glorify God to the utmost, with our bodies
and souls, being redeemed by so great a price, 2 Cor. 6.20. And seeing now
that Christ for suffering death is crowned with glory and honor, Heb. 2.9. and
is now glorified God and man with that glory which he had with his Father
before the world began, Ioh. 17.3. It highly concerns us to glorify him now
God and Man, with the glory and honor wherewith we now glorify the Father;
yet it is no reason to prove, that we should honor the Son more than the
Father, or the Title Jesus, above other Titles of the Deity.

Answer.

Secondly, What benefit the Angels have by Christ, is before, Part 2. Sect. 5.
They serve him, for preserving them in that estate they have, unto his glory.

Thirdly, I must here tell, blame me if you will, that you are the greatest
under-valuer of our Redeemer, that I ever knew, or thought to know of our
profession. You will have Devils, all Rep^obates fulfill the Text, as, and as
well as we, if we bow at the Name of Jesus as our Savior. That is your
inference, and can be no other; who will look back to your Enthymeme, and then
go to your sixth rank of absurdities, in the fourth and fifth, may see.

Nay, if we so bow, the Devils service will be more sincere then ours: O
Blasphemy against God and his Church! Unto what Times has God reserved us?
For the valuing of Salvation, we are ranked among, and brought beneath the
Devils; Deus omen avertat, this portends no good, God for his mercy avert the
judgment.

But what is the reason of such base thoughts? This is it. The Devils, say you,
must bow to him gratis, and as he is their Lord. Look unto their pride, and
Hellish practices, on their deprivation of grace and glory in Hells torments:
Is it for nothing they suffer, and do they suffer nothing? As freely as they
serve, I had rather not be, then be such a servant. You see why, and how they
bow, for their evil, and in horror. There Is nothing sincere, where is no will
unto good.

What Is your Antithesis to this? A very desperate one, viz. But we must not
bow, save upon a particular benefit, that Christ is become our Savior. Here Is
your complaint, if both be joined. The Devils bow for nothing, but we must bow
for our Salvation. My Eyes dropped in the Reading, and my Hand trembled at the
Writing of your But.

Is our Savior and our Salvation at so low an ebb with you, that a knee may
not bow, to show thankfulness unto him for such a benefit? Fl^ctere si nequeas
superos, Acheronta movebis, if God will not leave his Commands, you will move
Hell against him. Oh take heed; you know who was forced to cry out* Vicisti
Galilaee.

And you at last confess, ingenuously you say, pray God you do, that this
reason, Christ is our Savior, and that now he is Crowned with Glory and
Honor, is a very strong reason to move us to glorify God unto the utmost.

You do ingenuously: But do you it faithfully? If you do, why then say you,
it is yet no reason that the Name Jesus should be the highest Name of God?
Damn your conceit of our honoring the Son more then the Father, and you
will mend much. The Son is no more advanced by our giving him the Name, then
the Father, whilst the Father so appointed it, and has the glory of it, being
so, Phil. 2.9.11. See Part 1. Sect. 9. and my Antiteich. Tract. 9.

Of our Salvation, Gods glory is the end; and if this be his, he cannot have
this, but in and through him who saved us. The Church ever held so, and I will
never begin to decry her practice. Per benedictum Iesum sit Deo laus, honor,
virtus, gloria in secula seculorum. Amen.

SECTION VII.
MAster Page gives this reason, why the Name Jesus has the p^eferment above
other Names to be bowed to, Answer to second Reply, p. 157.
viz. because above all other Names it signifies Christ's dying and suffering.
I cannot say Jesus, says he, but presently I am put in mind of dying.

Answ. First, I deny that the Name Jesus is a Name, that above all other Names
puts us in mind of Christ's sufferings; For this Name in the plain
signification of it, does not directly signify dying. Many called God their
Savior in the old Testament, yet few did suppose that God should dye. Many
were called by the Name Jesus, and many Saviors God stirred up, and yet dyed
not as Saviors, Christ's Disciples knew him all along by the Name Jesus, yet
thought he had raved, when he once put them in mind of his death, Mat. 16.21.
But indeed the Name Christ does more fully put us in mind of Christ's
sufferings, than the Name Jesus, for Jesus signifies a Savior, but Christ
signifies Anointed; it denotes him not only a Prophet and King, but also a
Priest, whose office was to shed blood, therefore it directly signifies dying.
God if he had pleased, could have showed his mercy without his justice, but he
would not. He could have been a Jesus without becoming a Priest, but he could
never have been a Priest, unless he had been a Jesus.

Answer.

The Question Doctor Page has there in hand, is, whether of these two Names,
Jesus, or Christ, do lead us most of all to his Suffering and Sorrows? He
affirms the Name Jesus does, you deny it.

1. Your first Reason is, that the Name of Jesus, in the plain signification
of it, does not directly signify dying.

Doctor Page choakes your argument thus: He was called Jesus, because he shall
save his people from their sins, Mat. 1.21. How is this done? Go to another
Text, and that will tell you, that without shedding of blood there is no
remission, Heb. 9.22. You see then, that near of Kin is Jesus, and shedding of
blood; and therefore you may perceive, that this Name Jesus leads us directly
to his bitter Death and Passion. I can no sooner say Jesus, but presently I
think of dying. And that you may know how near Jesus, and dying, saving and
suffering are, the Psalmist will tell you, Psalm. 68.20. He that is our God, is
the God of salvation; and unto God the Lord pertain the issues from death.

Aug. de civ. Dei. l. 17. c. 18. Aug. in Psalm. 67.
And Saint Augustine does say, that it does there appear, that he, moriendo
salvos esse facturus, must save us by Dying. Domini exitus non alius, quam
mortis fuit, The Lords Exodus was no other then of death.

It Is not the bare saying, that many called God their Savior, but few supposed
that he should dye, will make good your words.

Could it be so promised, Genesis 3.15. so figured, Numb. 21.9. and so prophesied,
Isa. 53.1^. so often, and so fully, and not be supposed? Was there any other
substantial Faith for the Patriarchs, Prophets, and people of God in the Old
Testament? Could they believe, that by Death, Death should be overcome, and not
suppose Salvation would be by dying? What though other Saviors dyed not as
Saviors? That argues they were Temporal Saviors, and saved by his power who
should dye to save them.

I may tell you, that the Heathen, in their sacrificing men, had an instinct
hereof: For they believed, pro vita hominis nisi vita hominis reddatur, Caesar
de bell. Gal. l. 6.
non posse Deorum immortalium Numen placari, that the Power of the immortal
Gods could not be appeased, unless the life of man be given for man.

Salvation by dying, was never so strange in the World as you dream, that it
might be supposed only by very few. The Disciples indeed had, till the
Resurrection carnal thoughts of Christ's Kingdom; but after they received the
Holy Ghost, they preached nothing more then Jesus crucified.

What you say of the Name Christ, is full against your self. For Christ
denoting a King, signifies one that is ready to Rule; denoting a Priest, one
about to offer Sacrifice; and denoting a Prophet, one that can foretell things
to come. All these are active and honorable Names, says the Learned Doctor;
in all these I can perceive no sign of Death.

You say well, and that is all you can say; a Priests Office was to shed blood,
but not his Office to shed his own blood. 'Twas Christ's as Jesus, not as
Christ, to lay down his life for sinners.

To your Sorites, that concludes nothing, I answer; God can do any thing which
contradicts not his Will and Being. No question he could have saved us
otherwise; but who justly condemned man by the sin of one, would have man by
the obedience of one be delivered justly, Isa. 1.27. He could not therefore
show his Mercy without Justice. And he could never have dyed, unless he had
been Jesus.

Secondly, The Consequent is to be denied, for if the Name Jesus should above
all other Names signify Christ's death, it will not follow, that therefore it
is the principal Name to be bowed to. First, Because they have no ground of
Scripture for it, Secondly, Because it contradicts the Text; for the Name above
every Name is the Name that leads us to Christ's exaltation, and not to his
suffering; For God exalted him, and then gave him that Name, yea he is become a
perfect Savior by his Glorification. What profit had it been to us, if he had
not overcome death? therefore it is said, We see Jesus crowned with glory and
honor, etc. Heb. 2.9.

Thirdly, If this reason be good, Quicquid convenit tali, quatenus tali,
convenit omni tali.
then we must bow at the Name Jesus written upon a wall, or in a Book, or when
it is thought of; for so it will put us in mind of dying as well as when it is
heard. Then also we must bow at the Name Christ, heard, seen, or thought of;
because this Name does better put us in mind of dying, than the Name Jesus: yea
we must bow also more especially when we read in a Chapter, or hear the
sufferings of Christ preached to us; yea at every breaking of the bread in the
Sacrament, or pouring out of the wine, we must bow, because Christ's death and
sufferings are better so notified to us than by the Name Jesus. So that there
is no weight in this reason.

Answer.

Secondly, Your first Reason against the Consequence, is gone by your own Rule.

1. The Exaltation is according to the Humiliation. If it were lowest, and
there be a Name to be exalted, that will be exalted highest. For from the
lowest to the highest is the highest advancement ever, says the Reverend
Bishop. And that God proceeds from Humility unto Glory, is plain in the Text.
See my Antiteich. Tract. 1.2.10.

2. The second is against the order of the Text. For the Apostle says, Let the
same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.6. He is our example; if
we look unto him for Glory, we must first look on him as the example of
Humility: For by Humility, and no other way else, go we into Glory. Mind
we that Satisfaction he made on Earth, who will have comfort through him
glorified in Heaven.

3. In the third is ignorantia elenchi, you proceed not secundum idem ad idem,
and so have changed the Question. The Question is not, whether we must bow at
it, because it remembers us of dying; but whether it were not the most humble
Name; and fittest to be exalted highest? We do not bow at it, because it puts
us in mind of dying, but because it was the Name so humbled, and is now
exalted above every Name. This is one Reason, but the Command is Chief; and
therefore we do it only when, and as it is commanded.

The rest, if, as the Question is stated, you will turn it at me, shall by
your own Marginall Note recoile. Quicquid convenit tali quatenus tali,
convenit omni tali; That which agrees with such a thing as such a thing, agrees
with every such a thing.

If then you ask, why we do not bow at the Name Jesus written on a Wall, or
at all times heard, etc. answer is, it is not, tale quatenus tale, such a
mentioning, as such a one, which is prescribed and to be observed in the time
of Confession, as in the first Part is declared. Sect. 5.

Take heed M. Gyles, lest you appear to be one of those that Tully upbraids,
M. T: C. de nature. Deo. l. 3.
Qui rationem bono consilio a Diis immortalibus datam, in fraudem, malitiamque
convertunt. The four Syllogismes you sent me, being compared with this work
of yours, are very forceable to persuade me into such a fear.

SECTION VIII.
SOme reason thus; The fullness of the Godhead dwells in Christ bodily, Col. 2.9.

Ergo we must bow at the Name Jesus.

Answ. I deny the Consequent, for if the fullness of the Godhead should so
dwell in Christ, as that the rest of the Persons were st^ipped of the Godhead,
which is blasphemy once to imagine, there might be some show for this reason;
but the whole fullness of the Godhead dwells in every Person, in the First and
Third as well as in the Second Person, Ioh. 14:11. But only here is the
difference, that the fullness of the Godhead dwells in Christ only bodily,
because he only had a body ordained for him, that he might be a pe^fect
Savior, Heb. 10.5. And because he is now glorified in that body. So that there
is no reason for that opinion from this place, but if there were a reason in
this place, it makes as much for bowing at other Titles of Christ, as Jesus,
yea rather at the Name Christ, which is only named in the Text; for the whole
fullness of the Godhead dwells no more in Jesus than in Christ.

Answer.

You are at your some again; and by that time you come to some say again, I
hope you will not find much more to say.

You deny the Consequence, and your argument is, The fulness of the Godhead
dwells in every Person: therefore it cannot follow, unless we bow at every
Person, or strip the other Persons of the Godhead.

I know every Person is God, and one and the same God. The Father is in the
Son, and the Son in the Father, (...), essentially. The Son then being
honored, the Father also is, Part 1. Sect. 9. and equally, because they are
one; and fully, because he will not be honored otherwise; and he will not,
because in the eternal Decree he has appointed his Worship to be exhibited
through his Son. We honor no Person, if we honor, not all in Jesus.

Nor does this make as much for bowing at the Name Christ as at Jesus: For our
Savior has the fulness of the Godhead, as Jesus, not as Christ. Christ is
the accidental Name, signifying his Anointing: Jesus the substantial, noting
the Person Anointed. That you had before.

To your Objection of Christ specified in the Text, you mean, Col. 2.9. answer
is: Thus distinguishing, I do not divide Jesus and Christ, like the
Corinthians; but only declare, that Jesus is Anointed. Sive Jesus solummodo,
intelligitur and Christus; Tertul. adv. prax. c. 28.
Wheresoever then we read Jesus alone, Christ is employed; and where Christ,
Jesus is understood.

But they press it farther, thus, Christ man brings us to the Father, and we
could never have conceived rightly of the Deity, but by the humanity of
Christ. I answer, Christ man only did not bring us to the Father; but Christ
Mediator; God and Man; and though by Christ we are brought to the right
conceiving and true knowledge of God, it is senseless to infer hence, if the
consequent were good, that therefore we must bow solely at the Name Jesus,
except they can prove that Jesus brought us to the Father, and not Christ.
Answer.

What you say they press, I believe you press further then ever they did.
This I affirm, we could never have conceived rightly of the Deity, save by
the Person of Christ, And though in our worship we can apprehend three
subsistences, and one substance, yet without our Mediator this is nothing. Nor
resting on our Mediator may we consider his humanity Seorsum, apart, but in
the Person God, and Man, adore the Deity in a holy consideration of the
Blessed Trinity. See my Antiteichisma, Tract. 9.

That way I own, by the humanity to climb up unto the glorious Trinity. And
whatsoever you think, I hold this no ill reason why we should bow at the Name
of Jesus. Show me how the Father will accept my worship, and not in and at the
Name of Jesus, and I will bow at the Name of the Father, and not at the Name of
Jesus. And show me where bowing is expressly commanded at the Name of Christ,
as we do you, that it is at the Name of Jesus, and I will follow your
direction.

Some say, that Jesus signifies Christ's Person, but Christ his Office,
therefore we must bow rather at the Name Jesus than Christ. I answer, I have
proved already, that Jesus signifies the Office of our Savior as well as
Christ, though more summarily, and I affirm again, that the Name Christ does
every where denote Christ's Person, as well as the Name Jesus, and if this
distinction abovesaid, could be proved true, that Jesus signifies our Saviors
Person, Christ his Office, yet it will be an ill Consequent to affirm, (if it
were necessary to bow at Names) that we should bow only at that Name that
signifies Christ's Person, and not at that name that signifies his Office,
seeing by his Office he brings us to God, and makes known unto us the Father.
Therefore this reason is without ground, and without any light from Scripture.
The only Consequent that the Scripture gives signification of upon this ground
is this: Because Christ brings us to God, and reveals to us the knowledge of
the Father, therefore we must pray to the Father in the Name of Christ, but it
does not say, that therefore we must bow at the Name Jesus; and upon this their
ground, it may be as well inferred, that we must pray to the Father, by
mentioning of the Name Jesus only, as bow to the Father, at the mentioning of
this Name only. Answer.

Here is another some say; viz. that Jesus signifies Christ's Person, but Christ
his Office; therefore rather at the one, then the other: I say so too.

But you answer, that Jesus signifies the Office of a Savior, as well as
Christ, as you have proved.

Have you? I know not where: But if you have, you have by so doing, cast your
self. Remember you, that throughout your whole Book, Jesus is a proper Name,
and here you say it is a Name of Office: if then it be both, it is more
excellent then that which is the Name of Office only.

You reply that the Name Christ does every where denote the Person.

It Is confessed before, that it does imply the Person; but not that it is the
proper personal Name. This is not proved by you, nor ever will be.

That there is no Scripture for this practice, has been urged, and answered
often.

You yet reply, that Christ brings us to God, therefore we must pray the
Father in the Name of Christ, but Scripture does not say, that therefore we
must bow at the Name of Jesus.

There is Scripture for both, and whilst neither oppose other, set both stand.

Nor does it follow, that if we bow, at the mentioning of Jesus, to the Father,
we must pray to the Father, by mentioning the Name Jesus only. For praying,
you know, is one duty, and bowing another. Prayer is our substantial worship,
and bowing an outward duty, signifying the hearty submission unto God. We
mention Jesus carrying him before us by Faith, in our prayers to the Father,
but do not think that the mentioning of Jesus is prayer.

CONCLUSION.
I will shut up all with this Argument drawn from the Premises.
EVery Exposition of a Text, which does advance the Glory of God, and of
Christ, and does clear the Truth, without any ambiguitie, and absurdity, is to
be preferred before such an exposition, which derogateth from the Glory of God,
and of Christ, and produces many ambiguities, and dangerous absurdities. But
this exposition of Phil. 2.9.10. To understand Name above every Name given to
Christ, of the Power, Glory, and Dominion of Christ above all creatures, and
things, created Powers, Dignities, and Dominions, Gods Name and Power only
excepted, and to understand bowing of every knee in the Name of Jesus, of the
subjection of every creature, thing, dominion, and power, to the Glory, Power,
and Dominion of the Lord Jesus, advances the Glory of God, and of Christ, and
cleeres the Truth, without any ambiguitie and absurdity.

But on the other side, To expound Name above every Name in the Text, of the
advancement of the Name or Title Jesus, either absolutely or relatively, above
not only all created Names, but also above all Divine Names, and Titles; and
secondly, to understand, bowing every knee, of things in heaven, things in
earth, and things under the earth, in the Name of Jesus, of bowing of express
corporal knees, when the Name Jesus is sounded out. These expositions do
obscure the Text, do deface the Glory of God, and of Christ, and produce many
dangerous Consequences and absurdities.

Therefore the fotmer interpretation of the said Text, is to be preferred
before the other, yea is true, when the other is false.

Answer.

I now perceive your three years croppe is unlading in your Barn. Infaelix
lolium is the grain, he that eats with you, is like to have a giddie head.
You have bound them up in one Cart, and intend to turn them off in violence to
smother me at once.

But look you to your self, my defense is made. The two Minors are false;
what inconsistences arise from the first, have been fully discovered before.
The dangerous Consequences, which you pretend to follow the second, were as you
produced them, ^epelled in order. And now the false acont^^ which you have
given, shall ^ under the particulars of your charge, ap^ea^e.

The dangerous Consequences, which the second opinion does produce, are noted
in the Premises to be these.
Answer.

IN the first and second part, until you came unto the foot, dolose latebas,
you covered your self with all the Sophistry you and your friends could make.
Here in the close, aperte saevis, your rage is open. With what, before you
vainly supposed, you now most impiously charge the Church. And so impudently,
that had I answered all your reasons with no, I would have said to your
absurdities nothing. For the very recitation of them is sufficient refutation.

But there are a sort, that look only at the head and foot, or having seen
the Front and Rere, care not though the body be of Puppets.

To make them more wary, I have broken your forces hither, and will not
desist, till these Vipers heads, that eat their way out of the mothers sides,
be crushed under my feet.

1. In respect of the whole Trinity.
1. IT confounds the Persons of the Trinity. Part 1. Sect. 9. Part 1. Sect.
1.
2. It will make all Names and Titles of the Trinity and Deity, as Lord, God,
Christ, Jehovah, Father, Holy Ghost, to bow knees to the Name Jesus.
Answer.

1. Bowing at the Name is the evident token that not seperating any Person, we
distinguish every one in the Sacred Trinity. Not dividing one into three, we
discern three in one. 2. It shows that the Name of Jesus is the fullest
expression of God unto us, not that Names make knees where none are. Who have
knees, and know the Name, should observe a time and how.


2. In respect of God the Father.
Part 2. Sect. 3. Part 1. Sect. 20.
1. It makes him inferior to his Son, and to bow to his Son. 2. It accuses
him of cruelty and injustice, in appoynting such a worship to most of his
Creatures, in whom he has not created Power of performance. Part 1. Sect. 13.
3. It makes him to regard things of less importance, and to neglect the
weightier,
Answer.

1. 'Twas never, nor ever will there be an error, that shall set the Son
above the Father. The Father, and the Son being one, the Father cannot be
highly advanced, save by the high advancement of his Son. 2. This duty
reaches no more then are capeable thereof. Angels and men, good and bad, have
the obedientiall faculty, that way to declare Gods exceeding Mercy, and his
severe Justice. 3. It does not make God do any thing: but shows that he, who
cares for the greater, leaves not the less to our wills. He will have the
whole man, or no part of him.


3. In respect of God the Son.
Part 1. Sect. 12.
1. It attributes unto him a Name, which they say, is above every Name, yet
without power and authority, making it only the proper Name Jesus, which
others had as well as he. Part 2. Sect. 5.
2. It overthrows the duty of the Text, to Angels, Devils, and Reprobates,
or else it will make Christ a Savior to them, yea it will make Christ a
Savior to Hell, sin, death, and the Grave, which must bow as well as other
things, as appears by the Premises. Part 1. Sect. 12.
3. It deprives Christ of the honor of the most of his creatures, which cannot
possibly perform the Text, as they understand it, so that it makes Christ Lord
but of a few of the creatures, who is Lord of all. 4. For those that can
perform it, Part 1. Sect. 12.
it gives to Christ the honor only of one part of the body, when he will be
honored with the whole body and soul, so that it makes him Lord but of the
knee only. 5. It gives him this honor but one day in the week ordinarily,
Part 1. Sect. 12.
and that but now and then in that day, and but in one place ordinarily, when
he will be served at all times and places. So that it makes Christ Lord but for
the space of a few minutes in one day of the week, and that but in one place,
6. It depriveth Christ of his true Subjects, Part 1. Sect. 12.
and forces upon him the members of Antichrist. 7. Part 1. Sect. 12.
It depriveth Christ of his honor and glory at the great Day of Judgment, and
makes his Kingdom in the height of it to be extremely ridiculous, 8. It
advances the Son above the Father. Part 2. Sect. 3. Part 1. Sect. 9.
9. It gives greater honor to the Son, than to the Father, and so makes
inequality between the Persons of the Trinity. 10. It attributes our
salvation, either to the bare Name Jesus, Part 2. Sect. 3.
and so it is flat Idolatry, or else it divides Christ from himself, making
Jesus and Christ two Persons, and from Jehovah, making him not God, or above
God, and so it is flat blasphemy.
Answer.

1. It attributes the Name unto Him, in which all Power, Wisdom, Goodness,
etc. is manifested. No man ever had it so, as he, nor ever shall. 2. It
maintains the Duty of the Text, declaring, that the good acknowledge Jesus
their Savior, and the bad their Confounder. Hell and the Grave, in their
proper sense, come not at this service; figuratively they, that is, all that
are there, do. 3. It deprives Christ of no Honor. That Honor he therein
requires, the reasonable pay, none else are bound thereto. And (...) your Tenet
be not absurd, we may lay by Preaching, because ^rees have no ears. 4. It is a
token of the whole man's obedience, within, and without. The outward, without
the inward, is Hypocrisy. 5. It gives him his Honor so as is prescribed to
the glory of the Father. At no time the knee may bow to any other, which
according to the circumstances must bow only unto him, when he may thereby be
magnified. 6. It demonstrates whose we are. None can deprive Christ of his, nor
force other on him. 7. It does not detract from Christ's glory, but fully
expresses it at the Great Day. Not that it is the whole of his glory, but to
his glory all, and sets his Kingdom at the height. 8. It advances not the
Son above the Father, but the Father by the Son. In him only shall the
glory of the Blessed Trinity be refulgent. 9. It honors the Son as the
Father, and makes the Father and the Son equal. The honor of the Son is
the Fathers, and no other his. 10. It attributes our Salvation unto the Person
of Jesus, declares that he is anointed thereto, and that he being Jehovah, is
the express Character of his Father. This it does, and he that said the
contrary, spoke Blasphemy.


4. In respect of God the Holy Ghost.
Part 2. Sect. 3. Part 1. Sect. 11.
1. It makes him inferior to the Second Person. 2, It brings his work into
bondage at the will of man, yea sometimes of vile men.
Answer.

1. It argues not inequality, but inferres the incomprehensible Order of the
glorious Trinity: The Son in and of the Father, and the Holy Ghost in and
from them both. 2. It performs his Work as he has instituted, Vile men
subject it not to their will: they are reproved, or avoided, for blaspheming
it, and the duty is done in that.


5. Concerning the Church.
Part 1. Sect. 11.
It gives her authority over Gods Word. Answer.

It gives her no Authority over Gods Word; but shows, that she follows the
Word of God. She does nothing against, nothing beside the analogy thereof.

6. Concerning our selves.
1. It brings us into bondage, Part 1. Sect. 11.
by making us to perform Gods worship at every man's pleasure, and so it
enthralls Gods worship to every man's will. 2. It makes the Church a perpetual
prison, Part 1. Sect. 11.
and the bowing of the knee never to be ended. 3. It makes us to respect our
own benefit more than Gods Glory. Part 2. Sect. 6. Part 1. Sect. 8:
4. It makes us to serve Christ more corruptly than Devils and Rep^obates. 5.
Part 2. Sect. 6.
It will make the Saints at the day of Judgment worse than Idolaters.
These dangerous, and for the most part, blasphemous Consequences, besides many
other senseless absurdities do necessarily arise from this opinion, therefore
it is insufferable and not to be endured.

Answer.

1. It brings us not into bondage, but does manifest, that we abuse not our
Christian liberty. Being freed from the bondage of the Law, we are not free
to do as we list. The Church, according to Gods Word, must discipline us. 2.
It makes not the Church a Prison, unless it be a slaverie to serve God. The
bowing of the knee has but its time, and being a subordinate duty, burdens
not the worshippers of God. 3. It declares, that our Salvation is to the great
glory of God. We express our thankfulness by it, and ascribe the whole
benefit unto his grace. 4. It is a full argument, that we confess Jesus to be
our gracious Redeemer. So to glorify God for such grace, can be no error, much
less, more then Devilish corruption. But it is high impiety in you, to abase
our bowing unto Jesus beneath the blasphemies of the damned. 5. It expresses
in whom the Saints at the Day of Judgment triumph. But it proceeds from the
Devil to say, that it is worse then Idolatry to extol his Name, who
delivered us from the Devil.


I have done; and for your hard-hard Censure of us, tell you, that if your
Book come not to a violent end, God has permitted, bonis male evenisse, evil
to betyde the good. I left with the first Part of your Book the beginning of
an Ode, and I will with this, ^orat. Car. l. 3. ^. 2.
the end of another.

-- Saepe Diespiter
Neglectus incesto addidit integrum:
Raro antecedentem scelestum
Deseruit pede poena claude.
(...)
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 23. read fine. p. 4. l. 33. r. Mascall. p. 7. l. 17. r. avowe.
l. 27. r. (...) p. 11. l. 24. r. (...) p. 16. l. 39. r. opposita. r. ibid.
Oeconomicall. p. 18. l. 4. r. (...). p. 21. l. 31. r. justice. p. 27. l. 17. r.
our. p. 31. l. 9. r. y^u. p. 34. l. 21. r. amated. l. 25. r. Par^shioners. p.
38. l. 15. r. ^bscuras Scripturas. l. 18. r. Nay, all. p. 41. l. 34. r. take.
p. 43. l. 15. r. insanit Egidius. p. 90. l. 36. r. called Jehovah. p 98. l. 7.
r. divisa.


