LOGOS AGONIOS; OR, A SERMON OF THE CHRISTIAN RACE, Preached before HIS MAJESTY
At Christ-Church in OXFORD, May 9. 1643.

By THO: BARTON Master of Arts, and yet Rector of Westminston in Sussex.

Whereto is added an advertisement to his Countrymen, who being misled
disaffect the Royal cause.

1. COR. 9.24. (...) Vtilitas proximo: gloria Deo. Printed by L.L. 1643.

TO The Right Worshipful THOMAS COVERT LIEUTENANT COLONEL of a Regiment of
Horse in His Majesty's Army at Oxford.
SIR,
I Forget not to pay the Honor left due unto your Ancestors. Your emulation of
their loyalty, and prowess calls for an account from me. Nor can I make a full
one without an euge to your inflection toward the royal Mine. Persist then,
and be eternized in the justest cause of God and the King. You shall not loose
in such zeal, nor I by the divine fuel that maintains it. Both will be
gainers. You may get enough, and J keep in store to finish an everlasting
monument. Thereto subscribing, I am engaged before the World, and, delivering
this to remember you, enabled to acquit my self

No less faithful then affectionat THO: BARTON.
Iun. 2. 1643.
HEB. 12.1. (...) Let us run with patience the race that is set before us.
THe first word of this verse brings on, from the former Chapter, our
resolution thus. We have Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Sarah, Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph, Moses, Rahab, Gedeon, Barac, Sampson, Iephthe, David, Samuel, the
Prophets; in sum, of whom the world was not worthy, a cloud of witnesses.

Whereof there be such and so many Martyrs none may doubt the practice. Who do
not, enduring oppression, will not abide depressures. Exonerated of so much
evil to our innate affliction is the corrosive.

The more then we suffer, we are furthered the more. Swifter our speed, our
constancy greater, easier our race.

Tria sunt omnia; our Pace, our Patience, our Path. Let us run with patience
the race which is set before us.

(...) Let us run. (...) admits no Cessation. A violent motion and continued.

Man is borne unto labor, Job. 5.7.
as the sparks fly upward. That preceds, and there is no other way to rest,
Action is the life of Christianity, as obedience of service.

On we must; too soon we cannot: delay we may not. Occasion slipped is hardly
recovered. Want of expedition is often the loss of great designs.

Naturally all run so, from life to death. Criminally ill men do, from grace
to sin. Spiritually true Christians only, from sin to grace.

Who are of the second, I advise to amend the fault, and with the third prevent
the first.

1. The first is like the course of a Ship under sail. The body being once
animated, the whole man is suddenly transferred. Our days out run the post.
Job. 9.25. 2. The second as running of water into the Sea. So sinners are by
the eddy of humors carried unto the Mare mortuum of iniquities. Their feet run
to evil, and they hasten to shed blood. Prove. 1.16. 3. The third, Secundum
motum primi mobilis, like that of the Sun. The just, they, cease not to run
in the exercise of virtues.
1. First toward the West, in a holy consideration of their natural
corruption, daily falls, and death the catastrophe of all.

2. Secondly toward the East, subliming their thoughts, and forcing all the
faculties of soul and body to be conformable unto the will of God.

Who wait upon the Lord renewing their strength mount up with wings as Eagles.
Running they wax not weary, nor walking faint. Isa, 40.31.

Runners indeed: nothing behind withdrawes, nothing on the right hand
inveagles, and on the left nothing burdens them. Avoiding all things that may
hinder, they be in heaven before the worldling is aware, or themselves go
hence.

Yet so zealous, keep, and affectum, and intellectum, both will, and wit. Both:
for will without reason runs to a precipice.

We need not range abroad for instances: there be too many thousands in this
Kingdom, God enlighten them, that they may see, whilst he enables us to
withstand their folly.

Understanding, and affection, these right produce zeal, and zeal pleases
God as love delights men. No variable, or halting, or Snaile-like, or
Laodicean motion: yet neither furious nor remiss. A Lion cannot stop, no
Circean dreg, nor Orphean note divert it. Among risings and fallings the same
still.

As the Hound after the Heart, or the Hawke after the Partridge, she is swift to
know, to practice swift. Always devout, but at occurrences most fervent. David
derided by Michal, 2. Sam. 6.16. Judge. 16.30.
will be more vile for the Lords sake. And Sampson ever vexing the Philistims,
slew more at his death, then in his whole life.

Four things be little on earth, the Ant, the Conie, the Locust, the Spider,
yet are exceeding wise, Prove. 30.24, 25. Silly creatures condemn idle men, and
disorderly. Statute-Protestants then and the lawless may go to Heaven when
the Pharisees come from Hell.

Our Savior said, I must work, Ioh. 9.4. How excellent is it for the Disciple
to be as his Master?

I am much taken that the Ministers of the Lord are busy in Sion, and bold for
the truth. Nor is this all: the people learn to leave any thing save their
obedience. That Is it, that makes my exultation full.

So let our first love ever appear, and faith being tried the Gospel will
shine. Prisons are shaken with devotion, and it is the nature of Christianity to
flourish under the Cross. Rest was Moabs ruin, but the Ark of God did safely
pass through the swellings of Jordan. If we enjoyed the former without
holiness, the latter may sanctify us unto happiness.

It may, if we stand not when God bids us go; nor walk another way, when he
says come; nor lie down, when he commands us to run. But who run, and
run from him, on them, ira effundenda, the vialls of his wrath are ready to
be powered.

On the Heresiarchs, whether Arrians, Eutychians, Nestorians, or who ever run
desperately against the fundamentalls of Religion.

On the Schismatics, whether Brownists, that wilfully run to profane the
Temple, and consecrated things therein: or Anabaptists, that insolently run
to spit defiance in the face of Gods anointed, and every one dignified under
him: or Aerians, that run headlong to demolish the Apostolical structure of
the Hierarchy.

On the Libertines that run any way; on the Neuters that run no way; on the
Atheists that run from God to Nature.

But my charity much pittieth the simple throng, that, captived in a
Smictymnuan snare by Iesuited Priests, run with a blind zeal to the effusion
of their brethrens blood, till they welter in their own.

Lord, convert their leaders in thy mercy, or to thy glory confound them in
thine ire.

True Christians we know the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence. Forcing
therefore into it our motion from the first term to the last is impetuous. Not
to one side, nor to another; not forward now, and then backward; but straight,
even, vehement. Whose footsteps are preposed we tread them to perfection. Not
believing we are before all, earnestly contend not to be behind any. With
unwearied bodies and undaunted spirits every one does, (...), so strive as he
may not come short of glory. Perpetually moving, and strongly, whose Orb is
Celestial. Whom no worldly allectives may deceive, no fond opinions distract,
no adverse fortune frighten; who can be pleased to part with life and all in
the cause, we, we will run. And let us run with patience.

(...) with Patience. (...), is so much as the stout susteining of an incurse.

Some therefore, per periphrasin adverbii, translate it constantly. As if to
set forth with full speed, and afterward fall off, were shamefully to be
frustrated of the promise. Happier is it not to be, then to be worst in the end.

Others read, per tolerantiam, with durance. As i^ Christians were (...),
Theatrized, or brought forth on a stage of affliction. Heb. 10.33. S. Paul
describes how: by reproaches, imprisonments, stripes, labors, by perils at
home, and abroad, by perils. 2. Cor. 1^.23, 24. The way of Israel through the
Red Sea and Wilderness; 1. Sam. 14.5.
or that of Jonathan and his Armor-bearer between the two sharp Rocks Botzetz
and Seen typified no less.

Join both, and here is meant the willing and constant bearing of the cross
in this life, for the hopes sake, which is laid up in heaven.

And if whom we suffer with, we shall also reign with him, 2. Tim. 2.12. then
there is great use of such patience, that, after the will of God is done, we
may receive the reward. Heb. 10.36.

Not only he, which takes not up his cross, but who also follows not, is
unworthy of me, says our Savior, Mat. 10.38. For how shall that virtue enjoy
the inheritance, which fails before possession may be had?

Our translation therefore renders it, with patience rather then constantly.
Because there may be constancy without patience, but no patience without
constancy.

This I stand to, and my inference is thus, Dolor patientia opprimitur, si modo
est aliqua patientia, grief is quelled by patience, if there be any. Si nulla
est, quid Religione exornamur? if there be none, why are we palliated with
Religion? We are not maugonized Christians, but graffed into Christ.

To two things, that grieved the son of Syrach, he added a third, which made
him angry. A man of war, that suffers poverty: men of understanding which
are not set by; and one that returns from righteousness unto sin. Ecclus.
26.28.

His sacred Majesty may grieve for somethings, his indignation rise at other,
his justice command execution too in pity of the maine, yet be patient, and
merciful still.

Those passions proceeding from their just objects derogate not from such
excellency. And the amputation of a gangreened member is in piety to conserve
the body sound.

Let me not partake of Cassandra's hap whilst I tell the truth. The woe is to
them that have lost the virtue. For who wants her has no hope, and without
hope, what will we do, when the Lord shall visit us? Ecclus. 2.14.

The hand once put to, may not be taken off the Plough, Luke 9.62. To it we
must, and that, (...), daily. v.23. That is, ut dies diem consequitur, it a
crux crucem accipiat, as one day succeeds another, so one cross should receive
another.

This concerns every one, but Gods Vicegerent highly. For being solo Deo
minor, that he may be the more like Christ his tolerance is the more.

Naahs Arc, which represents the Church, was built of squared timber. Quadrati
lapidis similis debet esse Christianus, a Christian may not be round, but is
cut into that form, wherein he will be ever, and every way firm.

Firm to his profit, as the Merchant that regards not his pain. Firm to his
honor, as the Soldier that minds not a wound. Firm to his love, as Jacob,
that thought seven years short. Firm to his God as Job, that would dye rather
then forsake his Savior. Nothing can amate him, who runs, and looks unto Jesus.

There be two sorts of men unable to continue running, the feeble and the full.
The one for lack of strength, the other for want of breath.

Among the first S. Paul found the Galatians; who did run well, yet were
driven back. Gal. 4.9, 10. These whilst the wind is fair promise much
prosperity; but when storms arise, are tossed to and fro by the fury of the
gusts.

Among the other our Savior took a certain man. Mar. 10.17. And such a one, as
we might think would win the Garland. He wanted no strength, his bones were
full of Marrow. Mat. 19.20. His pace was swift, he came running. His course
steady, he kept the high way unto Jesus. His carriage humble, he Kneeled. His
desire earnest: Good master! what shall I do to inherit eternal life? Yea
when Christ had repeated unto him the precepts, it appeared that his life was
unspotted. For he answered confidently; all these have I observed from my
youth. Mar. 10.20. what lack I yet? Mat. 19.20. Whereupon Jesus looked on, and
loved him. Mar. 10.21. If this man failed, who then shall obtain?

Yet he was too soon out of breath: there being but one step between him and
home he gave over: (...), one thing thou lackest, says Christ, v. 21. Shall
one saying confound, one blow astonish, one thing discourage thee? Having much
thou must have something more: one gasp with one strain will reach it. This
one, and this thing only thou want. Go sell that thou have, give to the
poor, take up the cross and follow me. v. 21.

That set his wind; for he had great possessions, v. 22. He ran well indeed
had he held out, but being so full could no longer run with patience. Cursed
is the overplus, which by the reservation deprives a man of the inestimable
treasure.

These two have been common evils; and to cure them Gods work is strange.

The Memento of Lots wife, remember her, would not serve our backsliding
Ephesus. Luke 17.32.
Power and power superior and inferior, Lords and Pesants, Father and Child,
Brother and Brother, Master and Servant, one opposes another, that the sword
may be made drunk in Christian blond. Justice will be so satisfied, and the
truth approved so.

The unum necessarium, Luc. 10.42.
which he that has enjoyes enough, that has not, is nothing worth, could not
return our vain Cosmopolites. All must be sold, and in this case there is no
fear of being worse then infidells. Not that the price may be laid at their
Apostles feet, who stir up the dust to stifle the Monarchy. Cast it should
be into the Kings treasury to help support the high disparity between he
Scepter and the Coulter. Who will not go so far, ye may rate your vanities,
bring in so much, and the work is done.

This is one way I am sure to justify Gods most respected on earth; and every
one that fears the Lord, and honors the King will be so justified. A visible
means to uphold the truth, recover peace, relieve our families, and maintain
plenty. A sign too that we have our measure of grace here, and shall have full
happiness hereafter. The loss of temporalls in Gods cause fore-goes and
immense weight of glory in Heaven.

It Is plain, I favor not the Priscillianists, that wave this patience; nor the
Gnostics, that allow no patience for the name of God.

Nor intend I the desperate patience of the Patricians cutting their own
throats to be quit of evil: Nor the vainglorious patience of the Donatists,
incurring the displeasure of Magistrates to style themselves Martyrs. Nor the
compelled patience of transgressors, who in the hands of justice, will they;
nill they* must suffer. Nor the abused patience of the Papists, in their
voluntary superstitions of castigation, by flagellation, peregrination,
abstinence, etc. Nor the misled patience of our Catharists, Separatists,
Novilists, that most profusely expend their goods, friends, liberties, lives,
to infringe the sacred Authority of our Sovereign Lord the King, and our holy
Mother the Church.

The well informed patience I commend: that, and that only, whereof Jesus
Christ has given himself an example.

Thereto conformeus, Lord, and stay us there, so shall we be right. Equally to
thee at liberty, and in thrall.

True Christians, we inspecting the state of wicked men, take care to prevent
the like mischief in our selves. We are not (...), so mad to end in the flesh,
beginning in the spirit. With our increase of days grace grows in us. And
such is her virtue that all things are subject to her patience. Fire burning
other places builds her house: and death killing other things brings her life.
Gaudet patientia duris: we by that heavenly influence have the property to be
fatted with penury. In hazards best known, whose courage may not be abated by
difficulties. When the right object is before us, we are never impatient; most
violent always against the wrong. No obstinacy this: nor a will that follows
what it lists. We want not so much discretion, that our judgments should be
therein questioned. For run we do, and ever let us, with patience the race,
that is set before us.

(...).
The race that is set before us.
(...) signifies bickering, and a game, whereat one endeavors to surpass
another. Of this were five kinds, (...). In use, and in our dialect; Dancing,
Quo^^ing, Tilting, Wrestling, Running.

The last is here; and translated stadium, because a place where running is
exercised.

It Is the eight part of a mile, 125. paces, each pace five foot. At first
invented by Hercules, and called a stade; because he run i^ at one breathing,
and then respirasset, simulque stetisset, drew breath, and stayed.

Per metaphoram the life of a Christian, which Job terms (...), warfare. Job
7.1. (...), full of trials, outward and inward. (...), without fightings,
within fears.

The inward are exanimations, and temptations.

The first arise out of the infirmity of mind, or weakness of faith: as
sadness of heart, guiltiness of conscience, etc.

The second are inducements, or allurements unto sin: which according to the
diversity of princepall agents be three fold.

1. Of the flesh, the armies of lusts, that muster themselves to beleaguer, and
batter the religious fortifications of the soul.

2. Of the world, such as, under pretense of profit or pleasure, entice man
from himself, that Satan lying in ambush may surprise the hold.

3. Of the Devil, those, which be by his immediate insi^uation: as murmurings,
distrust, etc. These are like the mutinous in a besieged City, or the
tr^cherous, that by sedition, or otherwise would deliver it into the hands of
the enemy.

The outward agonismata, or trials, consist either in the affliction of the
body, as sickness, imprisonment, etc. Or in the loss of goods, by fraud,
extortion, etc. or in both, by persecution, Rebellion, etc. evils tolerated,
cried up, and under a supposed unerring Authority made familiar in these days.

They are so: but this is the misery of all: the grand plunders of our lives,
and livelyhoods turn the sword of the spirit against the spirit of truth, and
the sword of justice against the justice of the Law. As if the use of either to
defend both were against both in us.

Thus assaulted Christianity may be, justly (...), and we agonists. Some
therefore read, let us run to the fight that is set before us, Running,
Fighting, both imply much striving. Yea others in certamine, as if we should
run fighting, like those, that pursue their enemies in fight.

Ne Hercules contra duos, is old and rife. But every good Christian fights
against the Devil, the World, the Flesh, and their legions.

The first has innumerable spirits to overthrow, the second nets in every
corner to catch, and the third various concupiscences as flames of fire to
consume us.

Nor is it sufficient to grapple with them; we must, (...), be masters of the
field. For vincenti dabitur, Rev. 2.10.
though many run and fight, yet he only that conquereth wears the crown.

A strange course this, Ob.
and to be victorious impossible.

Impossible to carnal minds: Sol.
but if we look unto Jesus, who triumphed over Satan, made the World his
footstool, and subdued our rebellious flesh, it is, (...), an easy yoke,
(...), a light burden. Mat. 11.30. Believe and all things are possible.

First, resist the Devil (...), being strong in faith, 1. Pet. 5.9. and he
will fly. Iam. 4.7.

Secondly, precious, and very great promises are given us, (...), that through
them ye should be partakers of the Divine nature. 2. Pet. 1.4, 5.

Thirdly this is the victory that overcomes the world, (...), even our faith.
1. Ioh. 5.4.

But among so many enemies abroad, and such Rebels at home, no marvel if we
sustain some damage. We may, and gain thereby. For that loss discovers where
the traitor is, and he being cut off the officers sent forth by the
understanding and affections become more wary, and all our forces more valiant
for the future.

So wary, and so valiant that nothing may divide us from Christ-Not
banishment: we find the Evangelists in Pathmos. Not cutting in pieces: Isaiah
lay under the wodden saw. Not drowning: Jonah dived into the living gulf. Not
devouring: Daniel was in the sealed den among his terrible companions. Not
burning: behold the three children walking in the fiery furnace. Not stoning:
see the first Martyr under his heap of many grave-stones. Nor beheading: lo
there is the Baptists head bleeding in Herodias Platter.

Not the wedge of gold, the height of honor, nor the fill of pleasure; St Paul
esteems them loss, and dung.

Nor can Satan, unless we yield, nor sin without impneitence, nor any thing
without infidelity, separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.39.

Unto the worlds decipiam, the fleshes inficiam, the Devils interficiam apply
Christ's reficiam, and what was said of grief, we may of our race. Si longus
levis: si summus brevis. If long, light. If violent, short.

So short, that St James compares our life to a vapor, (...), vanishing in the
appearing. Iam. 4.14. And Job calls it (...), as passing like a puff of wind.
Job. 7.7.

If the Malignants might prevail, and we by strong destiny come under their
curious torments, what were this (...) of misery, to that eternal joy before
us?

Suppose the worst, you are unwilling to conceive, should happen, shall we
thereat storm? God forbid. For in us is cause enough of the one: and if we go
to the next words no reason may be had for the other. Because we are to run
the race.

(...).
Which is set before us.
Iobserve the participle only used in the new Testament, and translated
propositum, that is, ex Deo statutum, purposed and ordained by God for us.

The decree eternal, but the promulgation in time. In time preached and
practiced by the Patriarchs, Prophets, Christ himself, the Apostles, Martys,
and Fathers of the Church.

What is so constituted, by the grace of God we follow. For as before the
Conqueror he sets glory, before them that hope pardon; so certantibus proponit
gratiam, before them that run to fight, he sets grace.

The original word makes it good. Because in the execution of the decree are
contained as well governing, guiding, etc. as creating, making, etc. He that is
(...) to set forth this race, is also (...) to provide for the runners.

If God should appoint a race, and desert the runners, the race might be set,
fore-set, and set before us in vain. There is then a government, and therein a
conservation. Means extraordinary to feed the Israelites with Manna, and
ordinary to feed David with bread.

At the lowest ebb, blessed be God, I never found room for despair. Nor is it
presumption to Preach that one man may chase a thousand: and He, that seemed to
have no power, shall have all over His Subjects. No such offense certainly: For
Gods might is manifested in weakness, 2. Cor. 12.9. And as sure as S. Paul,
and S. Peter are right, every soul is bound to advance the Lords Christ next
unto Christ the Lord, Romans 13. 1. Pet. 2.13. If it be against any malign
proposition, so be it. The jewels I put into the peoples ears, taken out,
will not be turned into a molten calfe.

I see what is set, and feel my own pulse beat in (...). I have not then
digressed: For (...) and (...) make the emphasis full to every one.

That and no other. but what that is needs not be repeated. Before; not behind
to run back: nor on either side, so to run. Before us it is set, we are sure
of that. For in the way, permitted to our trial, all the malice, the Devil
and his agents can vent, is wrecked on us.

Yet we must run, and with patience we. Not as left to our selves, of our
selves we are not able. Romans 9.16. He therefore, Mat. 6.7. and 7.7
that knows what we want, commands us to ask. Strength is appointed for the
runners, and assistance for the fighters, if they running, sighting call for
strength and assistance.

God, purposing both the prayer, and the grant, decreed to grant when we
pray. Genesis 22.17. and 25.21.
Abraham was to be a father of many Nations, yet Isaac must pray before Rebecca
conceive. Providentia non to litt causas secandas, sedillis utitur,
Predestination is fulfilled by means, and the spirit provokes us by the same
to accomplish Gods providence.

Religion affords man his will in the Work, and God his work in the order. The
Soldiers fight, the General leads. 1. Cor. 15.10.
We run, Christ guides. God has his work: Draw me: man his will: We will run
after thee. Can. 1.4.

I would not torment your patience. As Christ faid unto his Apostles, I may
unto you, (...), the way ye know. It Is old and good, walk therein that ye may
find rest for your souls. Ierem. 6.16.

If this seem obscure, the Prophet Isaiah sends you unto the Law and Testimony.
Isa. 8.20. There Is the way we should, and the way we may not go.

If that suffice not, King David puts it out of question. I will run the the
ways of thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.32. The ways of the Lord are the works
of his Law; and the race set before is the Commandments he has given us.
Every sanctified thought, every gracious word, every good deed is a step in
this race. Unite these, be active in, and constant to them. Do, and, maugre
all opposition, endure. Let the Apostle have his desire, and you shall reap the
gain.

You, not the Simonians, that slight this race, as if the Amanuenses of the
Holy Ghost were fanatics. Nor the Helcesaits, that, as crosses come, and go,
leave or take the profession of Christ. Nor the Adamites; that, Cynically
abandoning modesty, admit every act of lust, even in the highest degree.

You, not the Messalians, that live, as if they would out doc the Devil in
Wickedness. Nor the Apostolicks, breaking the rules of Propriety, license all
manner of thefts. Nor the Puritans, that will have no peace on good conditions,
therein worse then the Marcionites, and eldest Anabaptists, refusing war on
any terms.

You, not the Marcites, who worship the Devil. Nor the Bardesanites, who
attribute all things to Fate, as the Valentinians did to Characters. Nor the
Nepotians, who dream of an eternity in earthly delights. Nor the debouched
Predestinates, who carouse their memory unto oblivion, and are more full of
Oaths then wise men will be of words.

But you, whom all the mischiefs in the world may inviron, not ensnare: you
possessing your souls in patience shall be crowned with everlasting happiness.

Lord, thy Pestilence could not prevent our evils; nor does the Sword stay
them: if the Famine must; take thou thy will of us, whilst we are imboldned to
expect relief from thee.

True Christians we are enriched with that Jewel, which in quantity, (...) as
the smallest grain, is, (...) of more value then the whole world. One of us
may therewith chase legions of enemies, and pass through the midst of Hell
into Heaven. With it we can level Mountains, and raise valleys; smooth rugged
ways, and make the crooked straight. With it deposing out burden of sin
under the cross we lay hold on high, and shall not let go, till we go into
glory. Thus established in our humility, are sure to be triumphant at last.
Though opposition cause our hearts to bleed, yet our cries are heard, our
tears boded, and precious is the blood of Saints. Not utterly destroying our
foes, we have not lost by our will. Faith tells us, that what we would shall be
accepted for the deed. Then on with courage: the Lords hand is not shortened. He
can yet save and prosper yet. Who gives so much virtue to us, in us will crown
his grace. Let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking
unto Jesus the Author, and finisher of our faith. To whom with the Father and
the holy Spirit be all power and glory for ever, and ever.

AMEN, AMEN.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT for his Countrymen who are misled, and therefore disaffected to
the ROYAL CAUSE.
SIRS,
AN error timely seen may happily be recalled. Who is not blind perceives that,
of the conquest aimed at, you will come short.

But can there be recovery at a precipice? yes; between the bridge and water I
found grace. You can best tell, I know not, how far ye are gone. Be as
pitiful to your selves as J am charitable unto you. Take heed: the point is
near. I had rather fall down before J come to then on, or over a Rock.

Who mind not that premonition shall meet a Lion, Wise, stately, strong in the
way: so closely followed too by the goodliest in the Forest, that he will
roar, tear, and devour where he is opposed.

But may you lay your Country wast, and be pious still? Or would you have no
posterity; or such a one as shall curse you, or be content to build, with the
ashes of your fortunes?

Think not to call it Destine, lest it be recorded your folly. Nor may you
plead Religion, not Christian Religion I am sure. Because ye twhart in your
course every precept, slight Christ's prayer, and contemn the Apostles Creed.

You may style us Egyptians, dumb-doggs, or what ye please: yet we speak the
same language with you, and shall bark, when yours will either sleep or lie
very still.

Be not mistaken: perturb'd we are, not dismayed. A great blessing visibly
hovers over, and will settle on the Crown.

It will and needs must. For his Sovereign Majesty is most Religious,
Merciful, Just. No Papist, nor Popishly affected; his mercy is over all his
actions; his justice values every scruple.

So mindful also of His Subjects that twice a day he prays, and constantly
for them. For the loyal that they may persevere, for the other, that they
might be undeceived.

J beseech you believe, and permit me to tell the men of your undoing Classes,
they are impudent and more then Jesuits. I shall not again introduce the
diametricall oppugning that God whom they would seem to adore. Their evomited
virulence against the Lords Anointed, and His Prophets is proof enough. Read
the 2. Tim. c. 3. unto the 10. verse, and know them by their Character.

Puffs may be trod under foot without danger of the eyes. But those are Wolfes
in Sheeps clothing, false and bloody No envy, nor malice this. A real
discharge of his conscience, whose heart groans under the heavy storms of
inhumanities raised by them.

It does: God enable me in the race to be patient among the runners, and of his
mercy return them and you unto us.

Thus praying for assistance, he never forgets their and your conversion,

Who is despised of both, for his fidelity to the King, and obedience to the
Church, T. B.
May. 16. 1643.

