THE CASE OF The Commission of Array Stated.
October: 20 1642
IT is a true saying, that a Case rightly put, is half adjudged: It shall
therefore be necessary to set down the true state of that great question which
does so much perplex men's minds about the Commission of Array, whereby such as
are doubtful may the better have satisfaction therein.

First then it shall be necessary to take knowledge of the Original of
imposing of Arms, and wherein latter times have varyed from that ancient
course.

Fortescue de legibus Angliae, Cap.13.
I conceive that the defense of this Realm does properly and solely belong
unto the King, who is to protect the persons and estates of all his Subjects
against foreign enemies: Qui ad tutelam corporis, and bonorum erectus est:
with which agrees the Myrror of Justice, pa. 8. in the new print. Estreint de
eux un Roy a regner sur eux, and governer le peuple de Dieu, and a maintainer,
and defender les persons, and les biens en quiet, per les rules de droit. The
King for his assistance herein, that he might the better enable himself to
defend his Subjects, granted Lands to men of eminency, to be holden of him by
Knights service, to some by Esenage, to others by Castle guard, and the like,
as he thought sit. Some of these held their Lands by one Knights see, some by
two Knights fees, others by three, some by the fourth, some by the hundredth
pare of a Knights see, according to the value and quantity of such Lands he was
pleased to confer upon him. He that thus held his Lands by one whole Knights
fee, was to attend the Prince in his Wars either in person, or by an able
man, forty days, well and completely arrayed for War. He that held his Lands
by three Knights fees, was to do the like service with three men. Such as held
by that fourth part of one Knights fee, was to attend one day furnished, as
aforesaid. And he that held by more fees, more, and by Jesse, less time,
according to the proportion of their Tenures. By these Tenants the Princes Army
was in time of War surnished with soldiers for the defense of the Realm.

Fortescue, fol. 108.
But such as held their Lands in Soccage, were not bound to warfare, they were
only such as held by Knights service. By this we now see that the Kings
auxiliary helps for defense of the Realmo, say searrered abroad in all parts
of the Kingdom, and it was a dissicult and intricate business, to know how
many Tenants the King had, who were thus bound to assist him, and to know every
Tenants proportion of Arms which he was to find, and for what time. Therefore
to facilitate this business, there was an Officer appointed in every County,
known by the name of the Feoder, who was to keep Rolls of all such as held
their Lands by Knights service, and by what quantity of Knights fees they were
held, and to return his Rolls into the Kings Court, that so he might be
informed how many fees he had in each County, that so upon all emergent
occasions he might require their services.

In former times these Rolls were constantly returned into the Exchequer,
there to remain of Record, where many of them are yet this day to be seen.
And in former times this State was so tender in preserving of these Tenures,
that in case any were alienated, whereby they might come into Mortmaine
(without special license of the King) those Lands so aliened, were forfeited
unto the next superior Lord of the Fee.

When the King had occasion to use his Tenants in the Wars, he issued out
Commissions to certain men, thereby giving them power to call all such his
Tenants before them, and to see them Armed and Arrayed according to their
several Tenures, by which they held their Lands. But you must remember, that
such as held not their Lands by such services, were not to be charged with any
Arms, as appears by the Statutes of 1 Ed. 3. cap. 5.25. Ed. 3. cap. 8.
Fortescue de legibus Angliae, fol. 108.

Now to apply this to the case in hand, A Gentleman holds Lands of the King by
20. Knights Fees, and he is bound by his Tenure to maintain twenty men for
the Kings service in his Wars for forty days: It will be granted that he
cannot perform all these services in his own person, for he cannot personally
perform the service but of one man. (and for his own person also, the Law
gives him power to substitute an able man in his room) So then the services
of the other nineteen men being defective in him, they must be supplied by
others at his charge, and they also must be such men as hold not by the like
Tenures, de suo proprio, i. e. in their own right; for if they should, then
their own services would be defective for their own Tenures, and the King
should be at a loss for want of their own personal services: for that man
which does serve with another man's Arms, would save that service of his own
Lands, which he himself does hold by the like Tenure. And this may be the
reason wherefore the person substituted must be such a one as has not Lands de
suo proprio. The Tenures and persons being thus completed by the
Commissioners, they had power to try, drill, and exercise them so, as they
might be made fit for service in defense of the Kingdom.

And this is the true use of the Commission of Array, so much talked of. And to
conceive that those Commissioners had by virtue of their Commission any power
to assesse Arms upon any man (other then as aforesaid) were to give an
interpretation directly against the Law.

Ass. 42. Pl. 5.7.
Dyer fo. 175. Scrogs Case.
For a Commission to take a man and his goods, has been by all the Judges
agreed to be illegal.

Fortescue de legibus, fol. 108.
And Fortescue, who lived about the time of the making of that Statute, which
is extended to warrant the Commission of Array now so much stood upon, and who
was chief Justice in the next succeeding Kings reign, says, that Soccage
Land is not bound to Arms, Et contemporaria expositio est optimus interpres:
Out of all which premises it may be concluded, that they who stand so much for
the Commission of Array, do not state the question aright, but do herein, as
they in the Case of Episcopacy; who argue only of the name, but not of the
thing in question. It will be granted that Commissions of Array have been long
in use, but not in that sense those men would have them to be, with a
Legislative power in the Commissioners to impose what Arms they think fit upon
the persons and estates of men at their pleasure; for they are only to see that
the King be not deceived in his Arms, nor the Commonwealth wronged for want
of defense and protection by the withdrawing of any services due.

It will be difficult to produce any authentical warrant to prove that the
Kings of this Realm have at any time legally exercised any power of imposing
of Arms by their Prerogative, but what Arms they have imposed, have been by
virtue of some Act of Parliament (Tenures excepted) And why by Parliament, if
the Kings of this Realm had by their Prerogative power to impose, cannot be
imagined? That Arms were imposed by Parliament, may be instanced for many
hundreds of years, both before and since the Conquest In Canutus his time, a
Satrapas was charged with eight horses, whereof four were with Saddles, and
four without Saddles, four Helmets, four Jackets, eight Lances, eight
Bucklers, four Swords, and two hundred marks in money. The Thanus Regius was
charged with half that proportion, but if he were but a common Thane, he was
only charged with one Horse, and Arms, and this imposition was by Parliament.

Lamb. Saxon Laws, fol. 120, 135, 125.
So likewise were the impositions of King Edward the Confessor, and William the
Conqueror by Parliament. For the times since the Conquest, it may be instanced
in the Statutes of Westminster the first, Anno 3. Ed. 11. ca. 7. Stat. of
Winchester, 13. Ed. 1. Stat. 33. H. 8. cap. 5. And by 4. and 5. Phil. and Mar.
cap. 2. All former Laws made for imposing of Arms were repealed, and another
kind of imposing of Arms, viz. According to men's estates, either in Lands or
Goods, ordained; and the same year, viz. 5. Mar. c. 3. A Statute was made
whereby they were compellable at Musters to show these Arms, and for the
Mustering and Trayning of them: but this Statute of 5. Mar. for imposing of
Arms, being repealed, it may (and not without some reason) be conceived that
the Statute of 5. Mar. ca. 3. for Mustering of them, is now also repealed,
being only a shadow that waited upon that body. It cannot be denied, but that
the King has had aid of the Subject toward his Wars, as the ninth Lamb,
and the ninth Fleece, for two years, but this was by grant of the Subject, (
Stat. 14. Ed. 3. cap. 20.) not by virtue of any imposition by Commissioners of
Array, or by Prerogative; And being a gift of the Subject, it may not be
produced for a President, to give warrant to Commissioners to impose Arms by
virtue of the Kings Prerogative, as some do surmise.

FINIS.

