THE CASE OF THE Governors of the HOSPITAL at HOXTON, of the Foundation of
ROBERT ASK, Esquire.
Anno Secundo Willielmi and Mariae, Regis and Reginae, etc.
BY Act of Parliament, the Master and Wardens of the Company of Haberdashers,
are Incorporated and called Governors of the Possessions of the Hospital at
Hoxton, in the County of Middlesex, of the Foundation of Robert Ask, Esquire

THAT pursuant to the Founders Will, they have Built and Erected the said
Hospital, and placed Twenty poor decayed Freemen, and Twenty poor decayed
Freemens Sons, of the said Company; where they have Maintenance and Provision.

THAT by Virtue of the said Act of Parliament, the Governors have placed
Officers suitable to the Occasions of the said Hospital, viz. a Minister who
Preaches, Reads Prayers, and Teaches the Children, a Steward or Manciple, a
Matron or Nurse, and Servants to dress their Provisions, make Beds, Fires, etc.

AND in further pursuance of their said Trust, the Governors have purchased
diverse Lands, etc. for a Perpetual Fund to answer the Ends of the said Charity;
which amounts to the Yearly Value of 923 l. 8 s. 4 d.

THAT the Annual Charge of Supporting and Maintaining the Twenty poor Men and
Twenty poor Children, with the Charge of the Minister, Manciple and Servants
thereunto belonging, at a Modest and most Frugal Computation; and other the
Incident Charges belonging to the said Charity, does amount Yearly to the Sum
of 383 l. 18 s. 4 d. so that the Surplus of the whole Revenue, does amount to
but the Sum of 39 l. 10 s. over and above the Yearly Charge of Maintaining the
said Charity.

THAT in regard the said Lands so Purchased as aforesaid, have hitherto been
made liable to pay Taxes, it has Yearly deducted out of the Annual Rent, the
Sum of 150 l. for the payment of Taxes, etc.

Beside, THAT some part of these Purchased Lands are Lease-hold, and renewable
every seven Years; and upon every Renewal, pay the Sum of 200 l.

BY all which it appears the said Governors have only the Sum of 39 l. 10 s.
to defray the loss of Rents, Repairs, and the standing empty of Farms, etc.
which often happens.

Which necessitous Condition of the said Hospital, is with all Submission laid
before this Honorable House, humbly craving that out of their Charitable
Consideration they will be pleased for the future particularly to exempt their
said Charity by Name, from paying of Taxes for the future, for otherwise the
Governors will not be enabled by the Revenues arising from their said Lands,
to Support and Maintain the Constant Charge that arises from the said
Benefaction, etc.


