A CAVTION TO KEEP MONEY: Showing the Misery of the want thereof.

I. In a State or Kingdom, to supply War. II. In younger Brothers pawning
their Lands, to redeem them. III. In Shopkeepers wanting Stock to Supply.
IIII. In Handicraft-trades by negligence. V. In Handsome and honest Maidens,
wanting Portions.
Declaring their slight neglect and scorn in these hard and dangerous Times.

London, Printed for G. Lindsey, and are to be sold by F. Coules, I. Wright,
and T. Bates. 1642.

The Misery of the want of Money in this Age.
SIr Thomas Moore of famous Memory when he was to be carried prisoner to the
Tower, filled his pockets with Gold, saying that whetherfoever he went he
loved to have his friends about him: If he could say so then, I believe verily
were he now living in our miserable and remiss times, he would turn all he
had, yea his very Library so dear unto him into money that he might find
friends in these days; true friendship being now like unto Homers Moly, an
Herb so extremely rare, that it is hardly or never to be found, wherefore
next unto the Divine Providence, account of your money as of another Mother to
breed you and feed you, another Mistress to make your heart merry with her
looks, another Maid to keep clean your House and linen, to buy your meat
in the Market, to attend you in you sickness, and perform all other duties
befitting you: For without her you shall find nothing in the World (as the
world goes now) but scorn and contempt, not only of Strangers, but of your
nearest kindred; I know want of Money to be an Epidemicall Disease raging like
the sweating sickness of late years) over the whole land, all from the
highest to the lowest feeling the miss of it, which causes other Monied
Nations and our Enemies to smile at us. For m^st true it is, that In se nil
infoelicus paupertas habet, quam quod homines ridiculos facit, the worst
property poverty has in it self is, that it makes men laughing stocks. It
makes men moreover vicious and dissolute, prone to commit all enormities,
abusing and making the gentlest and very best natures to be bad, and to take
all manner of ill courses: Oh mala paup^rtas vitii solerisque ministra, says
honest and plain Nantuan, which were they put and maintained in an honest
course of Trade or Study their wants being by friends supplied, they would die
a thousand times rather, then yielding to necessity which is durum telum,
run into those lamentable errors as often times they do, I have known many
young Gentlemen of prime and hopeful wits, who being cast off young by base
Parents or miserable friends, for saving a charge has been driven to seek
their fortunes in the world with some small some of money in their purses, and
the first place they come into is the City, where for want of experience, they
are either cheated of their money, fall into ill company, and so drawn to all
manner of vice, or are constrained to beg up and down the streets, then are
pressed either for Soldiers, or to serve in Newgate and Bridewell, and the
number of them is not a few, who at this day are utterly brought to ruin
through ths base penutiousnesse of hard and miserable Parents and friends who
rather part with so many children never to see nor hear of them again, then
with as many groates out of their Purse.

The Misery of a Stase or Kingdom wanting Money.
I Remember when Phillip the second King of Spain, had his West Indies and
silver fleetes so plundered by the English and Hollander, he was driven to that
necessity, that he was feign to break, and to pay his Soldiers with brass
money, whereupon grew such mutinies and revolts among his Soldiers, that his
enemies gained more of him at that time then in many years before.

The Suizzers serving a great Prince in the field when they should fight, began
to call for their pay, and would not strike a stroke till they had it, but
there was no money to be had, and and notwithstanding their Captains and
Generals satisfied them as well as they could with good words, their wrings
off from their own fingers, their gold chains, jewels, and such as they had,
but all would not serve turn, they would not fall on, hereupon Guicciardine
says truly. Impossible a marmegiarli Suitzari Senza infiniti denari: It is
an impossible thing to manage or rule the Suisse without infinite store of
Money where a State or Kingdom wants money as it often does through many
occasions, as expense in wars, transportations of moneys into foreign
Countries, as into the East Indies and other places for feathers, china dishes,
silks, carpets, and the like, extreme taxes and impositions upon a Country,
upon colorable and necessary seeming pretenses, the allowance of base
Monopolies, the too too lavish bounty of Princes in their gifts to servants
and strangers the multitude of outlandish and foreign inhabitants underhand
transporting our money, and enhauncing the some in their own countries, with
many other the like occasions, there are discontents, murmurings, oppositions,
seditions, talking and preaching libells, backwardnes in yielding to any
necessary course to rectify what is amiss, and in a word a general torpor
or cold numbednesse to any good for the Country.

Pecunia nervus b^lli, Money is the Sinnew of war, which goes lamely on
without it, wherefore the wisest Common wealths as Genoa, Venice, etc. will
always keep full coffers, able not only to help themselves but their
neighbor Princes and friends, as Genoa the Spanyard, Venice the French, and so
all others, for in Cities where money is wanting, there trading cease,
Citizens breaking, trafique by sea decaies, and in a word they easily become a
pray to Tyrants and foreign enemies.

Leaving this general inconveniene of want of Money, let us take a view of the
particular misery of every private man that wants it, as well in regard of his
livelihood as scorn and contempt in the world. Solomon says, it is better to
die then to be poor, for poverty takes away or eats even the heart of a
man, with hourly grief and care, as neither knowing what nor where he shall
eat, neither what he shall put on, for wanting clothes he is subject to all
injuries of the weather, and by consequent to continual sickness, he is
counted a disgrace to other companies, he is iear'd and laughed at, forced to
go alone by himself, take long and teadious journeies on foot, and if he goes
far to visit friends they will hardly bid him welcome.

Nay, though he go in good clothes and has been known to be necessitous he
shall be slighted, if he be invited to a Rich man's Table, he must be contented
to take his place at the nether end, to be carved to the last, and of the
worst, and if sometime the Mistress of the feast shall offer him the first cut
as of Brawne, Venison or the like it was that that lay at the bottom of the
souce tub, if venison his piece was either tainted, or bruised in the carriage,
if his bread be given him of the first cut of the loaf let him be assured it
was either mouldie or Mouseaten, when others discourse he must be silent, or at
the most whisper in his ear who sits next him, or to the waiter, if he want
drink or any thing else, arrise and leave his stool at the coming in of the
Basin and Ewer, with a thousand more inconveniences and miseries which ever
amate and accompany the want of Money.

Many reasons to show and prove that they who live in this our Age, are far
more miserable, and in worse condition then they who lived formerly, and in the
time of our Fathers, and first of the estate of Scholars.
In the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory,
learning was advanced and admired, no poor Scholar (though but meanly
learned) but could get preferment, yea many times were sought unto and
entreated to take void livin^s, the Ministers of the word were then had every
where in great reverence, and welcomed of Noblemen, Knights, and gentlemen to
their houses, there being then no rent or Schism in the Church, except now and
then such brainesick fellows as Penrie, Brown, Coppinger, and some few other,
who by night sowed their cockle in holes and corners, when Pluralities were
hardly known or heard of, then witty book and Poems were published and high
esteemed of and admired, rewarded In these days we find the contrary of all.
A poor Scholar now in want shall now never come to any preferment whiles he
live, he shall find neither countenance nor entertainment among our great
ones, without the help of monied friends, Noblemen and our Gentry then took
the dedication of books as honor unto them now no better then a begging, then
was there, amongst us, Cor unum via una, but now our hearts and ways are
divided, as many several opinions, as several faces, a Broom maker or
Cobbler shall have as much respect as a Scholar, and a base Ironmonger shall
dare to affront the most learned Bishop and that impune.

Most miserable is the estate of such in these days who by their unthriftie
courses have made away or sold their lands and fair estates, the time was when
such have afterward been relieved and kept from want and begging by the
purchaser of their said estates, but now woe be unto them if they have neither
land nor money left in these days, they must do as the Heirs of Holland in
Lincoln shire, when they have made a way to catch Pickerells in Dike, keep a
blind Alehouse, or turn foulecatchers in the fennes, or hang upon their
friends for relief as long as they live; and of all sorts of poor these
deserve the least to be pitied, yet some times they shall be gathered for in
Churches, and at other public meetings, where God knows they got in these
times of so much employment for money, but a small pitrance, for except in
great Cities there is left little charity elsewhere.

Some having been undone by crafty knaves whom they have employed as their
Stewards or Bailies (who like young cuckowes grow many times to that greatness
that they are ready to devour their feeder) have been feign to stand to their
courtesy for a poor maintenance all their lives after, and I have known some
of these.

Others make themselves contemptible and mere beggars by marrying beneath
their ranks and degrees, which in time they being sensible of, they care not
what they spend or give away to knaves and parasites that hang about them, as
one gets a lease of too or three hundred by them, another house and land for
nothing perhaps for an hawke, a hound, or an horse upon Mounsieur Acolastus,
and if he or such a one comes to misery, especially in a strange Country
there is none more miserable then he, by reason of his estate and riches he
would never give himself to learn or follow any as is the manner for the most
part of our English breediug, that turn but himself and a common fiddler in
their doublets and hose to seek their fortunes in anothey Country: the Fiddler
in a very short time would starve the Gentleman, as having no art to earne his
bread, whereas in other Countries the Gentry are able to live without their
hereditarie means by some profession of the mind, or manuell trade or other.
Rodolphe not long since Emperor of Germany, could set stones in Jewels, and
was an excellent watchmaker. Soliman the great Turk, practiced the trade of
making Arrows heads. Mauris late Lantgrave of Hessen was an excellent composer
in Music have made near forty several Sets of Meeters or Church Songs, which
upon festival days he himself would play upon the Organs, others have been
rare Painters, other excellent Chyrurgians and so of others in other Aarts and
Sciences, so that in dispite of hard fortune and misery they can never be
brought to extreme want, as knowing the greatest Princes to have fallen from
their Royal dignities, even to the meanest slaverie, as Se Sostris, Bagazet,
and diverse others.

Some so surfeit of their fortunes, especially if unexpectedly they fall unto
them, that they have not the grace to use them as they ought, but consumed them
upon drink, drabs, or plays, and after to have fallen into that misery (even
in our times) that they have ended their dies in ditches, country barnes, the
Counters and such like places.

The time has been when to have had a place in Court was esteemed the Achme
or highest pitch of preferment in the land, he was the prime man in the Parish
where he lived, he was welcome in a vacation to all the gentlemen and his
neighbors he had power in every office in the Court to bid his friend
welcome, as the Pantrie Beer and winesellers he could though but of the Guard,
have commanded a piece of boyld Beef for a breakefast, but Tempora mutantur et
ie junamus in illis, he might formerly have obtained some suite of his prince,
it is well if he can but get his own due in money, which while he wants his
case is hard and to be pitied, keeping as many do great charges in the
country.

The Tradesman now has not half that employment, nor is so readily and well
paid for his commodities as in former times, there being little store of money
by reason of so many and so huge sums disposed of this and that way, that the
land it self is welnigh drawn dry, the pipes must needs be stopped that
should derive it to the City, so Tradesmen are compelled to trust, whereby they
loose nor a little.

Tenants in the Country have their rents so raised through scarcity of money,
and so many levies to the King and Country, that they can hardly subsist to
help themselves or relieve the poor in their parish, hence beggerie is become
an Epidemicall disease reigning over the whole land.

Servingmen in timns past have lived as well as their Masters, gotten good
leases and farms under them, they could have go^e to ehe Kitchen of Butterie
and bidden their kindred or friends welcome, but the pride and covetuousnesse
of our age has turned both them and their Masters good housekeeping out of
doors, so that they are constrained to verify the old proverb, a young
Servingman, and an old Beggar. What multitudes of beautiful and honest maids
in this Land which the world cannot match again for good qu^li^^es and
handsomeness, are undone for want of portions to prefer them, for now genus
and formam regina pecunia donat, they are constrained to turn druges and
slaves so long as they live, except God in his Providence takes not care of
them.

If a stranger comes to the City or any other public and pop^lus place, if
his money fails short, he were better to be a Galley-slave and ^ive with
bread and water, water he may get at the Cundit, but not a bit of bread except
he paieth for it, such is the tharity of our miserable Age.

So for a conclusion, let no man cast himself upon friends, or the wide world,
but endeavoring by all honest means to live, and to be chargeable to as few
as he can, let him refer the rest to Gods Providence, who never failed those
who sincerely served and put their trust in him.

FINIS.

