THE Schismaticke Sifted THROUGH A SIVE of the largest size: BUT Is now more
purely dressed. WHEREIN The Chafe, the Froth, and the Scumme of Mr. JOHN VICARS
his Siftings and Paintings prove him to be a lame Draughts-man, a smearie
Washer, his Colors falsely mixed, and his Pencill as course as his Colors.

Collected out of his own words, and under his own hand.

By T. C. a Well-willer to Truth and Peace.

For Sions-Sons sake I cannot hold my peace. Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by R. A. for S. W. 1646.

To the impartial Reader of these few Lines.
Ingenious Reader,
IF ever it was a time to speak a few words in behalf of Truth, and those that
sincerely profess it, now is the time, when under a fair pretense of honor
done to God, such a cursed Treatise should be vented, which speaks worse
language then the Devil, for he durst not bring railing accusations: but the
Author forementioned brings false accusations: but the Devil does all by Gods
permission, and so does he.

His plea is, he does it to stop their mouths; and it is to be feared, he would
stop their breaths also, could he obtain his design.

He would have an orderly confusion, and yet will not be content therewith,
unless all swim down his stream. This his valor for Truth, clothed in so
black a habit, Truth will never own.

My desire is therefore to all that love the truth in sincerity, to take notice
of this whole Work, which is made up of nothing but raiing reviling vilifyings
of those godly, faithful, zealous, dissenting Ministers of the Gospel,
purposely to open the mouths of the foul-mouthed multitude against them; as
also (if it were possible) to make way for a stream of vengeance, filled up
with malice, to overwhelme these faithful men, who are as much interested and
engaged in Englands sad condition, as also the other Kingdoms, and have
expressed as much faithfulness toward God, and performed all their relations
both to Powers and Kingdoms, as any Presbyterians whatsoever; and therefore,
as through pride and envy this contention was raised, so undoubtedly it will
receive a speedy downfall.

The Schismaticke sifted; OR HIS Shifts discovered: by way of Reply to Mr. JOHN
VICARS.
Worthy Sir,
I Have ever much respected your gravity, knowing the gray head is an honor,
when found in the way of righteousness; and I persuade my self, you would
never have gone so far out of that way as you have done at this time, had not
your interest out-swayed your judgment.

Thus to sift out, or rather to shift out such a filth and froth of scummie
disgrace, against those whom God has preserved abroad, and honored at home,
for their faithfulness; insomuch, as all the wiles of envy could never yet
really produce one unjust act committed by them.

You add to Sion, baseness, instead of beauty, and acknowledge truths which
you afterward gainsay.

And now to come to your Charge; and had your Witnesses been as ready as that
is, I had been silent; it is a very ridiculous thing to bring in a Charge,
before the Witnesses are either known or borne.

1 Page 2, 3.
But say you, Many godly Presbyterians dare not think ill of them, because they
preach sound Doctrine: Of whose mind I also am, as not derogating from the Rule
of Scripture, and right Reason.

But Schismatics (say you) Salamander-like, love to live in the fiery heat of
heady disputes. Page 3.


Shall I grant, they would rather dispute it out, then rail it out, I think
no wise men will gainsay that disputation.

But, say you, Independents spread their false Doctrine by their licentious and
unlimited Government.

Which of the two, Independent Congregations, or Parochial, in conscience
(think you) are the most licentious? should you have the examples given in you
would be ashamed to own the Parallel.

It would prove a harder task for you to prove sound Doctrine and Sacraments
purely administered in your Parishes, Page 4.
then you take it to be, where children of near a hundred years old may be
found with more ease, then able selfe-examining men.

But your judgment is more infallible then Scripture or right Reason, should I
take your word for what you say.

O say you, Let not this trouble you; but stride over this difficulty with me,
and behold what false doctrines they teach, and how they broach their damnable
plea for toleration for all.

Sir, For all? what all do you mean? If by all you mean all of contrary
judgments to them, that is false.

But if by all you mean all truths grounded upon Scripture-foundation, which
is their endeavor, I also am of that all.

But Sir, What do you mean by their damnable doctrine? is it because they teach
not so sound Presbyterian Government as you?

2 Your second stumbling-blocke is their piety, Page 6.
which (you say) causes many to think well of them: but you remove this as
easily as the former, and upon as good a ground; for, say you, This is Satan's
old cloak, with which he covered Arrius, Pelagius, and Arminius, who were men
of extraordinary outward holiness, and admirable for their parts.

But say you, The Devil does not show his horns and cloven feet at first.

You might as well have said, The Bishops and Popes of Rome did not act all
their power at first.

But where is your Witness? these men are Arrians and Pelagians: either recall
your Inference, or produce your Witness: But this is the devils method, where
he cannot fasten a blemish, there he will lay a reproach.

But say you, Page 7.
holiness of life is a false touch-stoneto try men by.

This you prove out of these words of Paul Be ye followers of me, as I also am
of Christ; upon which place says this learned Expositor, follow me no farther
then I follow Christ, in sound Doctrine, and Holiness: First and principally
sound Doctrine, and then Holiness to strengthen that.

Learned Sir, does Paul here set himself out as an example, or Christ whom he
here mentions? if Paul mean himself, then you shall find him a chosen
Vessel, before he ever preached sound Doctrine, but if Christ be his example,
then he was ever perfect in both.

But you undertake to justify, Page 8.
That it is more safe and sweet for a soul to love, like, and to follow and
imitate a Pastor sound and Orthodox in Doctrine and Judgment, though subject
to much weakness and humane infirmity, then him that seems to be most exact
and strict in his outward walking and conversation, if he premed tatedly
(against all perswastions and convictions) go on in public profession of Error.

Sir, what do you mean by this sound Doctrine?

If a servant in seven years apprenticeship attain more perfection in his
trade then his Master, will any be so ridiculous as to say, he is a false
workman, because he works better then his Master.

The Scribes and Pharisees in their seeming holiness and perverting of the
Law, Page 6, 7.
were always as ready as you have been at this time to vilisie, rail at, and
oppose all those new Doctrines then, whose sincerity outstript their formality.

And if you have attained such a perfect sight in your last age, that you can
see through many godly men, to be meare dissemblers, and sly deceivers, your
perfection is a miraculous work.

But we know now miracles are denied, and therefore I shall conclude with
denial of the same, because you would have seen to have written a far more
moderate work, had you been so quick-fighted, or rather none at all of such a
nature as this is.

But in a word you say, Page 7, 8.
Soundness of life is not so much to be noted as soundness of Doctrine; for,
follow Christ in his Doctrine, and let holiness of life strengthen it.

What need you set the cart before the horse, were not your design in this, to
draw backward?

For will you lay a stumbling block where never yet any lay? where throughout
the whole Word of God was real holiness, a stumbling block, but that he that
does sincerely the will of God, he chiefly shall know the Doctrines of God;
Christ promised blessedness to the doer of his Word.

You say, Page 9.
He that desires to hear a Sermon which is Satan's music, let him go hear M.
Peter's: But well now may it be said, he that will read a book that speaks the
Devils language, let him read M. Vicars his Schismaticke sifted.

You thought much M. Peter's should say, the picture of Independents was all
naught; but certainly now your very friends will have cause to say, this is
all worse then naught.

And shall I tell you, notwithstanding such requitalls as you return him, yet
has God honored him so far as to be an instrument of much praise to sound
in Sion.

Thirdly, you proceed according to your former method, concluding before your
proof, passing sentence before the Judge, that Independents are no Christians
by two Scripture Characters.

1. To speak all the truth from their heart. 2. Having promised or sworn
though to their loss, yet not to break their covenant.
Now to this I say, make good your charge, which you do as well as you can.

And thus you proceed, That they are notorious dissemblers, and deceivers, for
in their Apologeticall narration they call themselves Gods poor exiled and
banished ones, Page 1, 2.
whereas they went into the very fattest part of all Holland and could spend
two or three hundred a year, and better: but where is your witness?

M. Edwards says so:

But neither he nor you proves the contrary. Herein the good pleasure of God
being manifested unto them that as he called them out into a strange Land, so
he showed himself there to be their God alsufficient.

Further, Page 12.
but say you, In their Apologeticall Narration, they acknowledge the
Congregations in England where they were converted, the true Church and Body of
Christ, and Parochial Ministers true Ministers, never judging them
Antichristian, but now they separate from us, as Antichristian.

Quaere. Why may not they now separate from you, since you have now separated
from them; were not these men nearer to your affections, while they were in
exile, which you then acknowledged and prayed for their return, how could you
thus affect these men who were famous for God in a strange Land, and now thus
endeavor to estrange them from that God in their native Land, in the enjoyment
of his pure Ordinances?

They little thought so many faithful Ministers left behind in England under
Episcopal Tyranny, when they should come to have power in their hands, they
would have proved so violent for so poor a formal way, had they the equal
power the former had.

But further, Page 14.
you say, They resolved deeply not to vent their own opinion through pride,
and singularity, which you say, M. Buroughs, M. Simson, and Master Bridge has
done.

Where is your witness? M. Edwards says so in his excellent Work.

Are you not both afraid and ashamed to speak so great an untruth? is the
Word of the eternal God become man's opinion, has God showed them his Word and
his Will, and that more especially in a strange Land, where they were not ill
entreated, although they followed the rule of that Word there, and shall not
they be as free to close with God at home? o strange mystery of iniquity!

4. Now to your great Charge, Page 16.
or to the chief chafe of your siftings, wherein you seem to carry all on
your side, to the disgrace of the forementioned Independent-party, taxing them
disgracefully of breach of Covenant, which was confirmed (say you) by an
Instrument, or Writing subscribed by both parties, left by their consent in the
hands of M. Calamy for a Witness at all occasions to see: but say you, M. Nigh
borrowed the said Writing of M. Calamie under pretense to view it, but never
would return it, pretending he left it behind him at Hull.

And first give me leave to deal piainly, since you deal so wisely, and
declare plainly who was the first contriver of this defigne.

Secondly, why was the agreement left wholly in one man's hand, and he no
moderator? but a chief opposer of the dissenting Party, who as yet have ever
been on the weaker side, in reference to earthly powers: For although you say,
you have not stirred, yet you have stirred up others for procuring a power
which you have got; witness, the ground you have got of your dissenting
Brethren.

5. Page 8.
Say you, The Inependent party have often been desired to give in their Model,
but they have refused and delayed it time after time, both to diverse abroad, as
well as to us at home.

Well Sir, here is your charge again, but did not M- Edwards say this also?

Why should it seem so strange, that their form is not so soon ready as
yours? truly the Reformed Churches never did so much for them, as they have
done for you; there is more power upon their spirits, then ever yours in its
dead letter can attain; why are you so earnest to see all of that, a part of
which you so cry out against? witness Mr. Buroughs, Mr. Simson, and Mr.
Bridge, for their discovery in their Expositions and Sermons, which truths
have so shaken your desired government, that a farther discovery certainly
would yield you but small comfort; for Gods design is to make Christ glorious
in his Kingly Office, who is the only King of Saints, Churches, and Kingdoms:
and when he shall possess himself of his royal Sovereignty, all powers
shall be subjected and subdued to him; and then shall the glory of all other
powers under him appear.

Farther, Page 22.
you tax Independents, saying, They were opposers of the powers of Parliament
until the late Election of new Members, which (say you) they think has set
them upon the wing of hope, to attain their desire, that either the Presbytery
shall not be settled, or if it be, their power shall be so clipped, as it shall
do them no harm.

Sir, in what work have these good men sought to hinder the Presbytery,
farther then they have endeavored to deprive them of their Liberties? and let
me tell you, that if your Presbyterian friends countenance this your work,
and approve of your languages therein; it is very well for them that you thus
vilify, that their enemies have not so much power, as some wish they had: for
in the whole story of the Bishops tyranny, there will not be a work of 39.
pages found out to parallel this, written by any Sophysticall Chaplain, or
Papal Priest, to stir up all powers then against the strictest Puritan of
those times.

But blessed be God, you cannot prevail, and the blessing of the eternal God
be multiplied upon them that have power in their hands, and reserve that power
in their hands, to those that merit such an exercise of it from them.

But you further proceed, Page 16.
taxing these Independents, saying, That they make the solemn League and
Covenant a snare to your consciences, by their subtilty, saying, the literal
sense is not to be taken.

Sir, I would feign be resolved in this doubt, concerning which I have not
thought a little.

Quaere. Whether the literal sense of the Covenant, without any private
presumed interpretation, be not fully as much to strengthen the Parliament and
the Kingdoms in their just Rights and Liberties, as the establishing and
furnishing of the Governors and Government of the Church with their desired
power?

The Reason of this Proposal is, because many are so violent for the Church,
that it is to be feared, they neglect the State.

If all things be well considered, when this happy Parliament began first to
sit, was not the current of Justice more stopped up by far, then the current of
Discipline? and has not the settling of Justice, the Power of the Parliament,
and the Liberty of the Subject, proved far more difficult then ever any
Government in the Church can be; the Privileges of the State and Kingdom
being so opposed by the Sword: but (praised be GOD) now something near
overcome? whereas the other may speedily be moderated, and sweetly concluded,
by the good Word of God, that safe and unerring Rule.

Some of those that suffered great persecution in the Bishops times, have
confessed that it was not so much for opposing Prelacie as Tyranny, which the
Prelates (by their incroaching upon the power of the State) proved themselves
the chief disturbers of the Subjects Liberty.

And I appeal to all the truly godly, whether the design of our
bloud-thirstie enemies yet up in arms, be not more to establish a tyrannical
Government in the State, then an Ecclesiastical Discipline in the Church.

And thus I leave to your considerations the design of those that stir more
for the Government, then the distressed three Kingdoms settlement in a blessed
peace, with all their Privileges.

But I find a light here that much offends your eyes, it is a strange light to
you, as well as a new light; I persuade me, it is a hot light also, and you
love a middle temper: I would fain know what light enlightened you so far,
Pa. 34, 35.
as to be for a Reformation that should be very glorious, are your eyes now
grown weak with looking too steadfastly, insomuch as your desire is now to
leave one old light, and take another? or because one small candle is burnt
out, will you light up another of the same size?

And now to draw up a conclusion, Page 38.
he that is righteous, let him be righteous still, though taxt with deep
dissimulation. And he that is a railer let him not be a railer still: And he
that is holy let him be holy still, though he be accounted never so unholy;
For behold, he that is to come, will come quickly and his reward is with him to
render to evrie man accordng to his work: then shall he discern betwixt the
righteous and the wicked; betwixt him that serves God, and him that serves
him not.

FINIS.

