THE CAVALIERS CATECHISM, AND Confession of his Faith, Consisting in four
principal Heads, viz. 1. His duty toward God, [and confession of the holy
Trinity] 2. His duty toward his KING, [and Superiors, Spiritual and
Temporal.] 3. His duty to his Neighbor in general. 4. His duty to [and
opinion of] the Sacraments.


All familiarly explained (by way of question and Answer) between A Zealous
Minister of the Gospel, and a Gentleman who had served his Majesty in the late
unhappy War, being very useful for all sorts of people to Practice.

Ezra 7. verse 26. And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God and the law of
the King, Let Judgment be Executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death,
or to banishment, or to consiscation of goods, or to Jmprisonment.

27. blessed be the Lord God of our forefathers which has put such a thing as
this into the Kings beart to butifie the house of the Lord which is in
Ie^usalem.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Burton, 1647. March 15th

THE CAVALIERS CATECHISM.
Mini. WHat is your Name?


Sold. Cavalier.


Mini. Who gave you that name?


Sold. They who understood not what they did when they gave it; For it was
intended to my infamy, but it proves to my dignity, a Cavalier signifying a
Gentleman, who serves [or has serv'd] his King on Horseback.


Mini. Then it seems you have been for the King?


Sold. I Sir, and am still, withal my heart to wish his honor and safety, and
I hold it my duty to do so.


Mini. Well let that pass till anon, but [in the interim] I pray you tell me
what Religion you are of, for it is generally reported of you Cavaliers that
you are all most infamous Livers, Atheists Epicures, Swearers, Blasphemars,
Drunkards, Murderers, and Ravishers, and (at the least) dapists.


Sold. To these and the like scandalous aspersions, I will only say thus, (in
brief Sir) that as I cannot excuse all of our Party (no more then you can all
of yours) so I cannot but in Conscience (according to my ability) be bound to
defend and vindicate the Major part of us from such malicious, and fraudulent
Calumniations, therefore give me leave, Psalm. 118.22: Mat. 21.42: Act 4.11.
Ephesians: 2.20.
Sir, to quench your first (and greatest brand Athiesmy, in Answer of your
question of my Religion, which I dare avouch to be the true Religion builded
upon Christ and his Apostles, whereof he himself is the head cornerstone as
was both Prophesied and testified by himself and his Servants.


Mini. What is God?


Sold. God is a spiritual substance, inteligent, eternal, all seeing,
everliving Creator, and conservor of all things, infinitely good, wise, just,
and merciful.


Mini. How many Gods are there? Deuteronomy. 6.4. Isa 44:6. Isa. 45.5. 1 Cor: 8.4.
Ephesians. 4.6. 1 Timothy 2.5



Sold. There are three Persons but only one God.


Mini. How prove you the unity of the Godhead?


Sold. Hear O Israel the Lord thy God is one Lord. I am the first and the
last, and besides me there is no God. I am the Lord thy God, and there is none
else, there is no God besides me. For an Idol is nothing, and there is none
other God, but one God and Father of all who is above all, and through all, and
in you all.

For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men: the man (as man)
Jesus Christ.


Mini. How many Divine Persons are there?


Sold. There is only one divine essence which is distinguished into three
Persons, viz. the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.


Mini. What is signified by this word Person, in the Godhead?


Sold. A Person (in the Trinity) is a substance individual and inteligent.


Mini. How prove you that there is three Persons?


Sold. By Christ's own Mission given to his Apostles, saying, go teach all
Nations, Baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; Math. 28.19 Math. 16.15 Math: 3, 16 1617
thus these three Consubstantiall persons. Also when John Baptized our Savior,
the Holy Ghost descending in the form of a Dove, alighted on him, when
immediately a voice from Heaven said this is my beloved Son etc. Lo here the
Father testifies of the Son to the Holy Ghost who came to confirm the
Sacrament of Baptism begun in (and by) our Lord Jesus, moreover, as it were by
way of interchange, our Savior promised his Disciples to send the Holy Ghost
the comforter to remain with them for ever, John 14.
and to teach them all truth.

Lastly there are three which bear record in Heaven (says St. John) the
Father, the word, 1 Ioh. 5.1.
and the spirit, and those three are one; here the second person is called
word. Ioh. 1.1. etc.



Mini. What signifies (the same) St. John, when he says: In the beginning was
the Word, and the word was with God, and God was the Word.


Sold. The Evangelist by calling it the word, means the Son of God, the second
person in Trinity; So that this Sentence, In the beginning was the word is as
much as to say, the Son of God, (even God himself) was in the beginning, being
from (and to) all eternity.


Mini. You have sufficiently cleard the Divinity of the Father in our first
discourse, and also given such examples of the Son and the Holy Ghost, that may
satisfy any Sober Christian, yet seeing (the mor's the pity) that there are
such a hellish sort of young Alians Aerians, and Antistrinitarians risen up in
this pestifferous age: 2 Timothy 3.
whereof Saint Paul forwarnd Timothy. I pray you let me somewhat more hear
you. Illustrat the Godhead of the Son and the Holy Ghost and first of the Son.


Sold. Who ever unles, his eyes be shut against al truth, shall but read the
very last cited place, which is John 1. and scan it all over may see as clear
as the Sun in his Meridian on a Summers day, v. 3. v. 10. Heb. 11.3 ibid.
the Divinity of Christ, as all things were made by him, and without him was
nothing made that was made: he was in the world and the world was made by him;
and the world knew him not. Also Saint Paul says, by him were all things
created that are in Heaven, Colos. 1.16, 17.
or that are in the Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones,
Dominations, Principalities or Powers, all things were created by him, and for
him: and he is before all things, Colos. 2.1^
and by him all things consist; if Creator of the World, surely God also, for
in him dwells all the fulness of the godhead bodily: Saint Paul says to
the Hebr speaking of the Father. And the Son; by him (the Son) the world was
made. John 17.5.


I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which thou set
me to do. And now O Father glorify me with thy self, with the Glory which I
had with thee before the world was.

Saint Thomas when (by feeling he had found his error cried, out my Lord and my
God, John 20.28. Romans 9.5
thus much of Christ who is eternal, God blessed for ever, Amen.

I hope, Sir, you are satisfied in this point.


Mini. Very well I protest, now I pray, Miui.
prove the deity of the holy Ghost.


Sold. The testimonies before mentioned, Sold. Math. 28.19. Mark 16.15. Mat.
3.17
as where our Savior bids Baptize in the name of the Father and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, etc. here is unity in Trinity, and Trinity in unity, For
they were not to Baptize in the name of the Father or of the Son, etc. but and
of; making of three Persons one God. Also in the Baptism of Christ, the Son
was apparent in humane shape, the Holy Ghost in the figure of a Dove, and the
Father only distinguished by a voice from heaven, says, this is my beloved
Son; now this voice of the Father was of his Son Christ; there is two distinct
persons, the Holy Ghost, the apearing in the Species of a Dove was neither the
Father nor the Son; therefore was it and ever shall be the third person of the
holy and individual Trinity; all three in one Coessentiall, Coequall, John
14.6.
and Coeternall.

I will pray to my Father (says our Lord) and he shall send you another
comforter (meaning the Holy Ghost) note here, etc. I pray you: The Holy Ghost
must be sent from the Father through the means of the Son, therefore from both
proceeding is consubstantiall, and a like equivalent with both, Pet. 1.10.11.
of which salvation the Prophets have enquired and diligently searched: who
prophesied of the grace that should come unto you searching what, or what manner
of time the spirit of Christ which was in them did signify when it
(beforehand) testified the Passion of Christ, John 5.7
and the glory that should follow.

But I Will conclude this point, and I hope sufficiently, with what has bin
spoken before out of Saint John, there are three which bear record in heaven,
the Father, the word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one, that is to
say, the the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are three distinct persons and
one eternal and everliving God to whom be all honor, glory, dominion and
power now and for ever Amen.


Mini. Are Kings and other Magistrates of divine institution?


Sold. Yea questionless as it is apparent by many and sundry places. Sold. Romans
13.^ Prove. 8.15. Prove. 21.1
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no power but
of God, etc. By me Kings Reign and Princes execute Justice, says God. The
Kings heart is in the hands of the Lord; as the Rivers of water he turns it
whither soever he will.


Mini. May this honor and service extend only to good Kings or to all both
good and bad?


Sold. Even to the bad as well as the good, for in St. Paul's time there were no
Christian Princes to obey the Apostle imposing this obedience even to the
heathen Tyrant Nero who then persecuted him and afterward cut off his head,
exhorting also his disciple Timothy in these words even for Nero and this life.

I exhort therefore first of all, that supplications Prayers, intercessions,
and giving of thanks, 1. Tim: 1.2
be made for all men: for Kings and for all that are in authority, etc.

So Saint Peter; 1 Pet: 2:13.14
submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake whether it be
to the King as supreme: or unto Governors as to them that are sent by him,
etc.

Wherefore ye must needs be subject not only for wrath but for Conscience sake.
Romans 13.5



Mini. Is it not lawful then to resist a King that rules according to his
Lusts, turning the Ordinance of God into Tyrany?


Sold. That which [hath been and shall be] spoken hereafter proves plainly
the contrary.

David resisted not Saul though a wicked King, a Tyrant and his persecutor, but
on the contrary spare him twice when it was in his power to have slain him.

First in the Cave at Engedi where he came so near him that he cut of his
skirt, 1 Samuel 24:31.4, 5, 6,
his men beginning to exult, saying this is the day wherein the Lord has
delivered thine enemy into thy hand to do with him what thou will, but what
answer made loyal David to al these? God forbid that I should do this thing
unto my Master the Lords anointed: to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing
he is the anointed of the Lord, etc. The whole Chapter is worth reading.
Another time David found Saul sleeping with his Spear pitched on the ground, 1 Samuel 26. p. 9. etc. 2. Sam. 23.18. 1 Chro. ^^ ^0.
and a Pitcher of water at his bolster, Abishay (one of David's worthies) said,
God has delivered thine enemy into thine hand, now therefore I pray thee let
me smite him with the Spear to the earth at once I will not smite him twice,
and David said unto Abishay, destroy him not: For who can stretch forth his
hand against the Lords anointed and be guiltless, etc. Mat. 2.14 15.


Also our blessed Savior [whose holy humanity we should all strive to
imitate] though by his divine power (as being King of Heaven and Earth) he
could have destroyed Herod, and all his wicked confederates, Ier. 27.6.7 8.
yet for (exemplary) obedience he flies into Egypt til the storm of
persecution is over. was not Nebuchadnezer a wicked King, a Tyrant, a Pagan,
and Idolater, and yet he by whom Kings Reign, Prove. 21:1
(as he was King) vouchsafes to call him his Servant that Nation or Kingdom
[saith the Lord) that will not put their necks under the yoke of Nebuchadnezer
(King of Babylon) my Servant, that Nation will I visit with the sword, Ier.
29.7.
Pestilence, and Famine, until I have destroyed it by him; the same
Nebuchadnezer having carried Captive into Babylon, Iechoniah King of Judah with
his Queen, eunuchs and Princes of Judah, the Prophet Jeremiah writes a letter
to his Countrymen in Captivity exhorting them to obedience, bidding them to
seek the peace of the City Babylon, wherein they lived, and not to stir
rebellious insurrections, and to pray unto the Lord for it, for in the Peace
thereof [saith he] you shall have Peace, the Prophet Daniell told the same,
Nebuchadnezer thus, thou O King art a King of Kings: Daniel 2.7.
for the God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, Power, and strength and
glory, by what clearer testimonies then these can any truth be ratified? here
it is plain, that not only the best but even the worst of Kings, as they were
ordained of God, So were they obeyed by men, that Kings (in general with out
exception, are not to be resisted, no not so much as thought, mucklesse)
spoken evil of, is manifoldly proved by the word of God. where the word of a
King is, there is power, who may say unto him what do thou, Eccl. 8.4. and 20.
says Solomon? and in the last verse of the same Chapter he says, curse not
the King, no not in thy thought.

These directions of Gods holy spirit are slowly followed in this too hasty age
of wickedness where not an evil but a good not a Pagan but a pious Christian
King: not a Saul, a Nebuchadnezer, nor a Herod, but rather, a David, a
Hezekiah, or a Josiah, is most vilanously traduced, scandalized, and
traitorously calumniated, not only in private Bed-chambers, but in open and
public Assemblies, too shamefully for any loyal Subject to hear patiently.
Reg. 21.3.


It appears by the story of Ahab, Iezabel; and Naboath, that they who could be
proved to have spoken Blasphemy against God or the King, or both, were to be
stoned to death, but if that Law [at this time] were put in execution in
England, I think that the Streets of London and other Cities and Towns in the
Kingdom must be feign to deliver their Pavements into the executioners hands.

So soon as ever the young Prophet had executed his Commission in anointing
Iehu King over Israel, 2 Reg: 9.13.
the rest of the Captains [from whom he was called aside] understanding [but
only by his own bare word] that he was anointed King, they made have [though
before they were so rude to tell him he spoke false] to lay their Garments
under him on the top of the stairs, blowing with their Trumpets, and
proclaiming him King. Lord how much was an anointed King then esteemed, and
how much is the same Ordinance of God contemned now? Is it fit to say to a King
thou art wicked, Job ^2 4:1 Acts 23. Exodus 28 Prove: 1^ 14:15.
or to Princes ye are ungodly, said Elihu to Job, mark this all you my
Countrymen who count it nothing to question your Kings small imperfections. I
wist not (said Saint Paul) that it was the Lords high Priest, for it is written
thou shall not speak evil against the Rulers of thy people.

The wrath of a King is as Messengers of death, but a wise man will pacify it.
In the Light of the Kings countenance is life and his favor is as a cloud of
the latter Rain. Not many years since these sentences did sound well in
Egland, but now a days too many, who think themselves wiser then Solomon,
count them but little better then Chaucers Cant. tales, or nonsense


Mini. You have said very well in all the Premises, now in conclusion what is a
Sacrament?


Sold. It is a sign of the divine promises, instituted by God, consisting in
words and Elements, that set forth unto us a memory of the promises.


Mini. How many Sacraments are there?


Sold. Two, Baptism and the Lords Supper, having in them the promises of the
Gospel, of remission of sins;


Mini. What is Baptism? Math. 28, 19



Sold. It is a sign or Ceremony, instituted by Christ, that is to say, washing
or ablution by water, to which is ordained words which testify our receiving
and reconciliation to God.


Mini. Where do you find the institution of Baptism?


Sold. In the Gospel of Saint Matthew and Saint Mark.


Mini. What think you of the Baptism of Infants, denied by the Anabaptists?


Sold. Christ says, Sold. ^ohn 3.5.
except a man be borne again of water, and of the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. This sentence is universal belonging to all that
will be saved, that it behooves all that are borne into the world to be borne
again by water, etc. that is by Baptism, therefore there is a necessity for
Infants to be Baptized, unless we exclude them from salvation; also the
command is general, baptize all Nations, and are not Children comprehended in
the Nations, therefore Children ought to be Baptized that they may be saved.


Mini. Well answered, What is the Lords Supper for we will be brief?


Sold. It is a Sacrament and seal of grace to our souls, Math. 26.26. Mark
19.22. Luc. 22.19.
when under the external elements of bread and Wine, using our Saviors words
at the institution, the true body and blood of Christ is exhibited for (and by
us) to this end that having faith in the words and promise of Christ (who dying
gave himself for us) we may live through grace in him, being nourished by this
holy Sacrament, (whereof the Jewish Manna was a figure) unto eternal life as
himself says: Your Fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness and are dead:
John: 6.49 50.
this is the bread that came down from Heaven of which he that eats shall
not die, etc. All the chapter.


Mini. Since this Sacrament of Sacraments promises so much grace to the worthy
receiver, how ought you to deport and behave your self when you receive it.


Sold. If fifty thousand, 1 Samuel 6.19. 2 Samuel 6.6 7 1 Chronicles: 13.10
three score and ten men of Bethshemesh were smitten with death by the Lord for
their curiosity in looking into the Ark; if Vzah through ignorance touching the
Arc, (as he thought to keep it from falling) provoked the Lord in anger to
kill him, what may many people of this present wicked age expect, that presume
without any reverence, devotion, or examination of themselves to participate of
this divine Sacrament, going to it in the same posture, (as they do to a
Tavern, banquet, some standing, some sitting, none of them if they can be
suffered) kneeling, 1 Cor. 11, 28, 29 1 Cor. 10 ^6;
eating, and drinking to themselves Condemnation, as not discerning the body of
our Lord. The Cupof blessing which we bless says the Apostle, is it not the
Communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? who then can or dare (if all grace have not
left him) come toward these holy mysteries, but with grace, reverence, and
examination of conscience, that he may worthily receive the fruit thereof to
salvation, and not to eternal damnation? Which God the Father that created us,
God the Son that redeemed us, and God the Holy Ghost that sanctified us, three
persons and one incomprehensible, and everliving God, grant unto us all, that
by the dolorous and bitter passion of our Savior (from whence the Sacraments
take their effects and virtue) we being many may be one bread, and one body:
being all pertakers of that one bread, who is the bread, that descended from
Heaven; whether I beseech him to bring us who bought us with his own blood,
Amen.


FINIS.

