A CATALOGVE of the Right Honorable and Noble Lords, Earls, Viscounts, and
Barons, that have not Absented themselves from the high and Hon: House of the
Peers of Parliament, and do stand for the good of the KING and Kingdom in
the Parliamentary Privileges; and yet not gone to his MAJESTY at YORK.

Also a true and perfect Relation of the particular Passages at York on
Heworth-Moore, on Friday the 3. of June. 1642. With the Names of the Dukes,
Marquisses, Earls, and Lords, who are now with his Majesty at YORK. Likewise
an Order from both Houses of Parliament, concerning the Ordering of the
Militia, directed to the Deputy-Lievtenants of the respective Counties
throughout all England, and Dominion of Wales.

Ordered that this be Printed and Published.

Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed by T. Fawcet, 1642. June 8.

A Catalogue of the Right Honble, and Noble Lords, Earls, Viscounts, and
Barons, that have not absented themselves from the high and Hon: House of the
Peers of Parliament, etc.
Earl of Northumberland. Earl of Bedford. Earl of Pembroke and Mountgomerie.
Earl of Essex and Ewe. Earl of Lincoln. Earl of Suffolk. Earl of
Leicester. Earl of Warwick. Earl of Holland. Earl of Bullingbroke. Earl of
Peterborow. Earl of Stamford. Earl of Manchester.
Lord Viscount Say and Seyle.
Lord Dacres. Lord Hastings. Lord Cromwell. Lord Paget. Lord North. Lord
Chandois. L. Willoughby of Parham Lord Wharton. Lord Hunsdon. Lord Saint-John.
Lord Spencer. Lord Stanhope. L. Gray of the North. Lord Roberts. Lord
Mandevile. Lord Edward Howard Lord Brook. Lord Fielding.
Other considerable Peers, some for Age and Youth, and some for other Reasons
and Infirmities not commonly coming to Parliament.
Duke of Buckingham. Earl of Darby, aged. Earl of Danby. Earl of Mulgrave.
Earl of Rutland. Earl of Bridgewater. Earl of Huntingdon. Earl of Kent.
Earl of Oxford. Earl of Sussex. Earl of Excester. Earl of Notingham. Lord
Harvey.
Yet other Peers.
Earl of Bristoll. Earl of Portland. Earl of Cleeveland, Lo. Wentworth his
Son. Lo. Herbert of Cherbury. Lord Powys.
And for all these aforementioned Lords, we cannot say, any of them are Recusant
Popish Lords, who we conceive have no Votes in PARLIAMENT.

Die Sabbati 4. Junij. 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the
Deputy-Lievtenants of the several and respective Counties within the Kingdom
of England and Dominion of Wales, that are not Members of the House of Commons,
be hereby required and enjoined to be present at the days, and places which
are, or shall hereafter be appointed by the Lord Lievtenants, or their
Deputies, for the Training, Mustering, and Exercising of the Inhabitants of the
said Counties, according to the authority given unto them by an Ordinance of
both Houses of Parliament. And it is further Ordered, That all
Deputy-Lievtenants, as well those that are Members of the House of Commons, as
others, shall give such dispatch by preparing of Warrants, Commissions, or
Letters, and subscribing of the same as the service shall require; And that
such as shall refuse, or neglect so to do, that their Names be certified unto
us by their fellow-Deputies, or any one of them that shall or do perform the
said, Service.

And it is further declared, that it is the intention of both Houses, for the
better encouragement of so good a Work, so much conducing to the safety of his
Majesty's person and Kingdoms that some of their Members at the times and
places appointed, or to be appointed for the execution of the said Ordinance,
shall be sent down to give their personal attendance upon the said Service.

Ordered to be printed

Hen. Elsinge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

A True and perfect Relation of the particular passages at York, on Friday the
third of June. 1642.
HIs Majesty having summoned the Freeholders of the County of York, to
appear before him on Heworth More, on the day above said, to satisfy them
concerning his intentions, many of them did appear together with a great
multitude of Laborers and poor people, as also diverse of the Inhabitants of
the County of Lancaster, in all according to the estimate of my self, and
diverse others (judgment) about the number of seventy thousands upwards, they
came not in any warlike way, not p^^ themselves into any posture or order,
neither was ^ third part of the Freeholders and Farmers of Yorkshire there.

His Majesty had appointed 800 foot completely ^^med to guard his Petson, and
about 11. of the cl^^ came to the Field or Moore accompanied with a g^^^ number
of Lords and Knights of great quality.

The Prince also led a troop of Horse consisting of 150. Knights, Esquires and
Gentlemen, some whereof had four, some three, and most two men a piece, which
made another Troop.

As soon as his Majesty came near the Moore, the people did entertain him with
a very loud shout, and being come into the Moore, and as much silence made as
could be, his Majesty made a Speech, therein declaring his constancy in the
Protestant Religion, and his great affection to that County, intimating that he
resolved to recide amongst them in those parts to keep the Country in peace.
His Speech being ended, he rode round the Moore, and about the number of 65000.
followed him, crying all the way (God bless the King) but the rest which were
about 5000 all Freeholders separated themselves to Petition to his Majesty,
and had their Petition ready to present to him, the effect of it, was to
beseech his Majesty to come to the Parliament, etc. but their Petition was
intercepted by the Lord Savill, who carried himself very strangely in that
particular, and in a forcible manner, suffered them not to deliver the same;
His Majesty having rode round the field, all the people brought him off the
Moore with a great shoute, and there many left him, but 20000 accompanied him
to the Court gate, and saw him safe at Court, and with a great shoute left him.

A great multitude of the people never came at the Field, but staid in the
City, and others came but into the Moore, when the rest came out. And having
thus made their appearance about eight of the clock at night all were returned
out of the Field.

A Catalogue of the Names of the Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Lords, that
Absented themselves from the PARLIAMENT, and are now with his Majesty at York.
THe Lord Keeper. Duke of Richmond. Marquess of Hartford. Marquess Hamilton.
Earl of Cumberland. Earl of Bath. Earl of Southampton. Earl of Dorset.
Earl of Salisbury. Earl of Northampton. Earl of Devonshire. Earl of
Carlisle. Earl of Clare. Earl of Westmorland. Earl of Monmouth. Earl of
Lindsey. Earl of Newcastle. Earl of Dover. Earl of Canarvan. Earl of
Newport. Earl of Thanet. Lord Moubray. Lord Strange. Lord Willoughby. Lord
Longavill. Lord Rich. Lord Andover. Lord Faulkconbridge. Lord Lovelace. Lord
Paulet. Lord Newarke. Lord Coventry. Lord Savill. Lord Dunsmore. Lord Seymor.
Lord Capell.
FINIS.

