To the Reader.
AMongst all the Miseries that attend our Humane Frailty, there is none to be
so much bewailed, as the stupidity of our minds, which renders us worse then
beasts, and deprives us of that felicity for which we were Created, which was
to fill up the glorious places of the Lapsed Angels, and so have been happy to
all eternity: the verity of this will plainly appear, when we consider the
madness of this our present Age, where People suck in Error, as Children do
Milk from their Mothers Breasts; and unadvisedly repel Truth, as one would do a
Serpent that attempts their ruin; they hiss at those that invites them to
Happiness, and hug the Preachers of their Misery, that embrace all kinds of
Novelties, and kick against ancient verities; that cry out the Bible, the
Bible, and yet believe nothing in it, more then their own Fancies dictate to
them: Now that these people (of which there is too many) may a little see, and
know their own Errors, I shall in this following Discourse, prove that their
own Bibles, which they pretend to confide in, both is, and shall be, their
assured Judge, to condemn their erroneous opinions, as also their guide (being
rightly understood) to the knowledge of the Truth; as also make it appear, that
all the chief points of Religion, which Protestants deny, and Roman Catholics
practice, is found and commanded in their own Bibles; by which will appear with
what partial eyes they have looked upon Scripture, that read it over so often,
and cannot see those places which points Gods Church, and the Faith thereof
so plainly to them; for it is indeed with these kind of people as it is with
the Jews to this day, who though they read in the Old Testament the Prophecies
which plainly foretold Christ's coming, his Life, and dolorous Death, yet are so
blinded with unbelief, that they cannot understand the same; so all that are
now out of Gods Church, read and tumble over the Old and New Testament, and yet
cannot see the plain places, which all Christians are bound to believe, under
the peril of damnation; and all this is, because men have presumptuous minds
in trusting to their own understandings, and will not rely on Gods Church,
which plainly shows them to her Members, when none else can, because she only
is guided in all truth, by the Holy Ghost, to the end of the world. All
therefore that I shall desire of every Protestant Reader, is only this, that
he mind and look closely to every Text of Scripture here quoted, and what is
said, with an impartial eye, and observe well how Scripture and reason concur
in the truth of what is treated of, concerning our Faith (which is so much
slandered by their teachers and others) for though it be lightly made on by
some, yet they shall one day find, that the diligent search after truth was
one of the main things for which we were sent into the world: which truth being
practiced in Gods Church, is here plainly proved; which though not delicately
dressed with crafty Sentences, but in poor and simple style, may I hope produce
the desired effects, for which it was intended; that is, that all deceived
people may find the way to Gods Church, that all Ignorance and Errors may be
banished, and Truth take place; that true Religion may flourish, as a green
Bay Tree, and Heresies and Factions wither as Plants without rain; that living
all our lives in communion with Gods Church, we may at last enjoy that blessed
end, for which we were created.

THE Catholic Mirror.
Chap. 1. This is to prove the Verity of the Blessed Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of our Savior, and that it is really so, contrary to Protestants Opinion.
THe Misbelief of these times is such, that it may give a just astonishment to
all true Christians; especially when they consider how little Faith many have
in this most Blessed Sacrament: and that there is no one thing our Blessed
Savior did so much inculcate to us (in his whole life) concerning any point of
Faith as this; he very well knowing the greatness of the Mystery, and the
smallness of our Faith: it is in Holy Scripture often mentioned to be really
his Body and Blood, because we may plead no excuse by any mistake of one place
alone; and first you shall see how this Blessed Sacrament was prefigured to us
in the Old Testament, by the holy men of God, and his Prophets, as in Exodus
16.15. concerning the Manna which came down from Heaven to the Israelites to
feed their Bodies; so that foretold of this Spiritual Manna which feeds our
Souls: for should not this Blessed Sacrament be of greater value then
Protestants make of it, who say it is barely Bread, and a Figure only of
Christ his Body, then this Manna, which was indeed a Figure, would be of
greater validity then that which it prefigured, which is very absurd to think.
A second Figure we find in Scripture, is that Holy Bread of Proposition, Exodus
25 and Lev. 24. v. 5.6, 7.
or Shewbread; which because it was a Figure of this most Holy Sacrament, was
to be made and eaten with such purity, that none but sanctified persons was to
eat of it; to show with what purity and reverence we ought to approach these
Holy Mysteries. The third Figure in Holy Writ is the Paschal Lamb, Exodus 12. v.
3.4, 5, 6, etc.
an eminent Figure of this Sacrament; wherein you may observe what Ceremonies
God exacted from the Jews in the eating of it, although but a Type of this:
from whence we may gather, that this which Christ has Instituted is to be had
in a far higher esteem amongst Christians, as requiring greater Faith in the
believing of it, and reverence in the receiving. The fourth Figure was the Ark,
Exodus 25.10.11, 12.
whereof the Holy Doctor Saint Thomas says, 1.2. q. 102. ar.
That even as the Ark was made of the Wood of Sethim, that is, of pure and
shining Cedar; even so the Body of our Lord consists of most pure Members.
Again, the Ark was gilded both within and without, the which gilding signifies
the Wisdom and Charity of Christ our Lord. In the Ark were three things. 1.
There was a golden Pot, wherein was kept Manna, and was a figure of the Soul of
Christ, which contains all plenitude of Sanctity and Divinity. 2. There was
the Rod of Aaron, which signified the Priestly Power of Christ; and as the Ark
stood in the Tabernacle covered with a Vail, even so Christ lies hidden in
this Divine Sacrament, under the Forms and Accidents of Bread and Wine, which
we must discover with the eyes of Divine Faith, according to Saint Paul, That
Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. 3.
There was in the Arc the two tables of Stone, to signify that Christ should
be a Lawgiver; and this being one of his greatest Laws, to believe in him, let
us take him at his word, and thank him for so great a good, as is this pure
Sacrament of his Body and Blood. I shall now begin to forsake the Shadows, and
let the Sunshine of our happiness appear, in clearly proving by the Holy Word
of God, that we now enjoy in reality what they did but prefigure to us. And
first from the words of Christ himself, by Saint Matthews Gospel, Mat. 26. v.
26.27, 28.
where he says in private to his twelve Disciples only; Take, eat, this is my
Body, and drink ye all of it, for this is my Blood; he names here no Figures,
but in plain terms, This is my Body; and had not our Blessed Savior meant
what he here said, he would have expounded his words, both for the benefit of
his Apostles, and all us besides, who have no better assurance in any thing
(for our salvation) then his word, which is truth it self. The second Text is
from Saint Marks Gospel, where he says, Christ took bread and blessed it, and
said, Take, eat, Mark 14. v. 22. 23, 24.
this is my body, which shall be given for you; and so of the Cup, he said to
them, This is my Blood of the New Testament which shall be shed for you; now I
leave it to all reasonable Christians (that are not partial to their own Souls)
to consider, whether Christ did only in Figure give his Body to dye for us,
and his Blood in Figure to be shed, or his real Body and Blood; if he gave them
really for us to death, he says here, that this is that Body, and that same
Blood in this Sacrament; so that to deny this, is to give our Blessed Savior
the flat lie; and in refusing of Christ's words here, may as well shake hands,
and bid adieu to all points o^ Christian Faith; for that Saint James his
Apostle says, That he which break^ one Commandment is guilty of all, meaning,
in the not believing of one, he may as well not believe any. Our Savior to
confirm to us, what he told us by the two precedent Apostles, has inspired
Saint Luke to publish this great mystery, Luke 22. v. 19, 20.
where in the Text you may find the same words recited, as was before by Saint
Mark; but above all, you shall find the beloved Disciple more ample in
declaring the words of his Master, John 6. v. 50, 51, 52, etc.
where he says, That the bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will
give for the life of the world: now the Jews wanting faith (as too many now
adays do) said, as Heretics now do, How can this man give us his flesh to
eat? not understanding what manner Christ meant to bestow it on us. Our Savior
who came into the world to lead us into all truth, would have opened
undoubtedly his meaning to them, if he had had any other; but he was so far
from showing any other meaning of his words, that he reiterates them over and
over again, saying, Except you eat the Flesh of the Son of man and drink his
Blood, ye have no life in you; and so proceeds in the confirmation of what he
said before: and which is very remarkable, his Disciples which followed him,
and had frequently heard his Doctrine could not comprehend how this great
mystery should be brought to pass; so distrusting his Godhead, Ver. 60, 61.
(wherein his power lay to accomplish it) They went away (says the Text) and
walked no more with him. By which every Christian may easily understand, that
if our Savior had not meant what he said concerning this Sacrament, he would
not have suffered his Disciples which he loved so well, to have gone away and
left him; but would have then, as he did at other times when he spoke parables,
expounded the meaning: but you see he had no other meaning, for he sweetly
complains to the others, and will ye also go away; Ver. 67.
but St. Peter answers for them that stayed, To whom shall we go, Ver. 68.
thou have the words of eternal life: so that we may understand that they
believing in his words, stayed behind with him, and would, not leave our
Savior as the rest did; therefore it concerns every Christian, as they tender
their salvation, to consider what has been said by our Blessed Savior
concerning this grand Mystery of Christian Religion, and not any more to
question Christ's meaning: for since we know, he has often said, it is his Body
and Blood, and we likewise know that it was in his power to make the Bread and
Wine so, by his Divine Benediction: there remains nothing for us to doubt, but
to humble our Spirits, in submitting to our Blessed Saviors Doctrine, and to
say as Saint Peter did, Lord, thou have the words of eternal life. And that you
may in this great point of Faith, receive further satisfaction, I shall reduce
to your memory the opinion of Saint Paul, who you shall see verifies what has
been said before; for faith he, The Cup of blessing which we bless, 1 Cor. 10.
v. 16.
is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ; and the Bread of blessing
which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ: he names no
Figures here, nor fancies of we know not what, but of Communion of Christ's
sacred Body and Blood: who came into the world to abolish all Figures, and out
of his immense goodness to leave us his divine self for the consolation of our
souls. And for our further assurance, Saint Paul in his next Chapter treats
more amply and tells the manner of the institution, 1 Cor. 11. v. 24, 25, 26,
27.
as you may read in the places cited in his Epistle, where likewise he says,
That by frequent partaking of the Body and Blood of Christ, we show forth the
Lords death. Perhaps some will answer, it is meant for a remembrance of his
Death; and of them I would demand, what better memorial can there be of any
person, then to have the said person present: for example, when our Savior
appeared to Saint Thomas, and showed him his sacred wounds, then he remembered
him, and cried, Thou art my Lord, John 20. v. 27, 28.
and my God? and so it is frequently amongst friends, that has been long
absent, that are forgot one by another, till frequent conversation reduces to
their memory the knowledge of each other, and do commonly say in such cases, O!
now I remember you. So by frequent Communion with Jesus Christ in the
Sacrament, we have the best memorial his goodness could leave unto us. Again,
he says, That whosoever eats and drinks these mysteries unworthily, eats
and drinks his own damnation, not discerning the Lords Body; so that by these
words it is plain, there is a Body to be discerned by the eyes of our Faith;
and as plain, that damnation would not follow by eating bare bread and Wine.
From these so evident places of holy Scripture, I hope every good Christian
will be induced to the belief of this great Sacrament, and no more question the
works of God, but conclude with that holy man, Thomas de Kempes, That if the
wonderful works of God were to be understood by our reason, they could not be
said to be wonderful and unspeakable. Thus have I showed the truth of this
Sacrament by the Protestants own Bible, which though it work not my desired
effects in the belief of it, yet I hope it will reduce them to a more
charitable opinion of us, who think our selves bound to believe it, because it
is inserted in Holy Scripture; according to that of our Savior, Search the
Scriptures, for therein you shall find eternal life.

Chap. 2. Proving Sacramental Confession, both by Holy Scripture, and Reason;
against the Opinion of Protestants.
HAd we the prudence of our Predecessors, in submitting our Judgments to Gods
Church, both as concerning this verity, and all others; we should not have so
much peevish wrangling continually as we have, in points of Faith; but
contrariwise we should join hand in hand in one uniform Doctrine of Christian
Religion: but being far from that happiness, in this age we are possessed with
quite contrary, for every one will be his own Judge, and pass sentence, though
it be against Scripture and Reasont too: and this will plainly appear, when we
consider that Confession has been the practice of all Ages since Christ to
this day. I shall not need to produce the Authority of every Age, (which might
easily be done) it being out of my design; because it is so plainly commanded
in Holy Writ, which ought not by any that professes himself a Christian to be
denied: and if not so, of necessity to be put in practice. The first place I
shall prove it from, is out of the Gospel of Saint Matthew; who speaking of
Saint John's Baptism, Mat. 3. v. 5.6.
says, They came from Jerusalem, and Judea, and were Baptized of him,
confessing their Sins. Now to evade this Text, the Protestants say, That the
people confessed themselves in general to be sinners. But how poor this shift
is, let every one judge, that has a mind to know the truth; for St. John
knew, and we all know, that every man in general is a sinner without their
saying so; but the Text says, They confessed their sins: which plainly argues
every ones particular sins. Again, you shall see what another Evangelist says
to the same purpose; Mark 1. v. 5.
And there went out to him all the land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem, and
were all baptized of him in the river of Jordan, confessing their sins. It may
justly bring an asTonishment on the souls of true Christians, to consider that
those people which say they will believe nothing but the Bible, yet when they
come to the touchstone of it, will believe never a word more then what their
own fancies please. But now as I have shown you how this was practiced amongst
the Jews in our Saviors time, so now you shall be shown how Christ's Apostle,
from him, does command the same. Saint James says, James 5. v. 16.
Confess your sins one to another; and in all reason and duty, since it is thus
commanded, we are bound under the penalty of damnation, to do all the commands
of the New Testament, at least, to believe them to be lawful. Many examples of
this practice have we in the Old Testament commanded by God himself, as in
Numbers, he says, Numb. 5. v. 6.7.
That if any man or woman had committed any sins, that then they shall confess
their sin, and he shall recompense his trespass committed. So David used
Confession to Nathan the Prophet; 2 Samuel 12. v. 13.
and if there were no Scripture at all, Reason might tell us, that it is a
Divine Institution: First, in regard of the goodness that is in it self; for we
find nothing more repugnant to our corrupt natures, then to confess our sins
to a Priest: from which we may gather, that the more it is against our frail
natures, the more it has conformity to Gods will; in regard, by sad experience
we all find, how difficult it is for us to comply with Gods will, in those
things that concerns our salvation. Secondly, The thought of confessing our
sins to a Priest oftentimes hinders our design, in committing sins. Thirdly, by
confessing our sins to a Priest (to whom God has given our souls in charge,
Heb. 13. v. 17.
and must give an account for them) he knows what sins we are infected with,
and knows the better what Doctrine to preach to us, for the remedy of our
spiritual distempers: And can any reasonable man think, that if it were not a
Divine Law, that so many Emperors, and Kings, and Princes as are, and have
been, would stoop on their knees to a poor Priest in a gray course Gown, to
make their Confession? No, we may well imagine they would not (being men that
commonly follow the dictates of their own will) did not their consciences tell
them it was from God, and not of man's invention. Now by this you may plainly
see what reason the Catholic Church has to propose Confession to her
Children; and likewise what madness it is for Protestants and others to impugn
so naked a Truth, and so good a principle of Faith as Confession is. My advice
therefore is to all, that enjoy not this benefit, That they would beseech the
giver of all goodness, to unite them in communion with his holy Catholic
Church, and make them obedient Members thereof, if they expect salvation from
his hands; according to that of Saint Augustine, That he that will not
acknowledge the Church for his Mother, cannot lawfully call God his Father: and
that out of the Catholic Church there is no salvation.

Chap. 3. Proving Purgatory, or a temporal satisfaction to Gods Justice for our
sins committed here, against the Belief of Protestants.
DId we not by the irregular passions of our minds throw down Reason, the
Queen of our souls, and set up an Idol in her place, called Opinion, we should
with much facility embrace this verity so long practiced by Gods Church; though
it were for no other reason, but because it is practiced there: but since
nothing but Scripture will serve the turns of many in the world, I shall
plainly set it forth by that rule, that they may have no excuse to deceive
themselves: But first it is necessary to let you know, that as God has these
two Attributes, (to wit) Mercy and Justice; so he is to have them both
satisfied. As to the first he satisfies himself in pouring down his Spiritual
and Temporal Blessings into our Souls and Bodies, for the good of both. And the
second must be satisfied, either in our doing or suffering according as our
sins deserve. Agreeable to this truth is that satisfaction which God has
required in Scripture so often: for example, Genesis 3.
that of our first Parents; for so soon as they had abused the mercy of God,
which placed them there, presently his Justice expected satisfaction by
repelling them from thence; and yet for that sin, many thousands have, and
shall be damned: and for the sins of the world, we know Gods Justice was so
urgent for satisfaction, that he drowned the whole world, except those in the
Ark: he satisfied his Justice also many times in the punishing of the
Israelites in the desert; and for the sins of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, we all
know what satisfaction God gave to his Justice, Number. 16. v. 31.32.
when he caused the earth to open and swallow them up alive. Now is it not
strange to think how little reason we have to flatter our selves as we do, and
think we shall get to heaven in a dream, without any satisfaction on our part
at all. If we did but truly consider our own state, we should not have so good
an opinion of our selves as to think God should punish so many to satisfy his
Justice, and we should escape scot-free: Nay, those whom he dearly loved, as
Moses in depriving him of entrance into the land of Promise. 2 Samuel 12. ver. 10.
But more to our purpose is that of holy David, where for his sin with
Bathsaba, God told him the Sword should never depart from his house. Now here
David's sin was pardoned (as to the eternal punishment) but yet Gods justice
requiring from him this temporal satisfaction, as the sword cleaving to his
house, and the death of of his Child. Ver. 14.
A plainer place cannot be to prove what is here treated of, and I hope it is
good Scripture: But to let you see further, that you may be totally undeceived,
conform to this place, is another concerning the same man; where for his sin in
numbering the people, 2 Samuel 24. ver. 14.15, 16, etc.
though God told him (by the Prophet Gad) he had pardoned him his sin; yet he
to satisfy his Justice caused his Angel to destroy seventy thousand of them,
which to David's heart was a hot Purgatory, or temporal punishment. Thus you see
many times God has been pleased to be so favorable to some of his dearest
friends to purge them here (by the fire of tribulations) as Adam, Moses, and
David, with many others which might be shown; but this to reasonable men will
suffice, since it is so plain by the holy word of God And now it will concern
me to show you (by the fame word) that there is a temporal punishment, or
Purgatory after death: I will only give you this reason for it before I quote
my Text, which is, that since there be many servants of God which dye
unpunished here in this life, for their sins committed, and so have not
satisfied Gods Justice, must of necessity do it, by being purified before they
can go to heaven; for the Scripture says plainly, that no unclean thing can
enter in there; and if so, we may easily judge, how unclean thousands are which
dye Christians, and in communion with Gods Church, but yet not jump just to
heaven, but are purged by fire.

And to satisfy you in this, you must observe what Saint Paul says in his
Epistle to the Corinthians; 1 Cor. 3. v. 12.13.
where first he tells us the different sorts of works, by the similitudes of
Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Wood, Hay, Stubble, and then how this fire shall
try them; for says he, Every man's works shall be made manifest, and the day
(of our Lord) shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the
fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. Again, says he, Ver. 15.
If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be
saved, yet so, as by fire; by which it is plain, that we must pass through this
fiery trial (before we get to heaven) either by great crosses here in this
life, or else in the purging place of the life to come. It would be worth our
time, did we but seriously consider, how that many persons which have been the
dearly beloved friends of Christ have had in this life the greatest share of
temporal punishment, as his ever Blessed Mother (though I will not say for her
sins) the twelve Apostles, and many thousands of Martyrs, which have satisfied
Gods Justice, with the loss of their blood; and yet we now adays hug our
selves in a sottish security, and think we shall be conveyed to heaven in Beds
of Roses; as if God were so partial to mankind to punish those that were good
and holy, and spare us that have much more deserved it. But now again to the
Scripture, to let you see what our Savior says, concerning paying our debts
to God, and remission of sins in the next life; as in Saint Matthew, he says,
Mat. 5. v. 27.
We should be at agreement with our adversary, lest he deliver us over to the
Judge, and the Judge throw us into prison, from whence we shall not get out,
till we have paid the utmost farthing. Now in respect of our sins, God is our
adversary, and if we agree not with him here; that is, to satisfy his justice
by Alms-deeds, tears, and suffering in this life, he will throw us into the
prison of Purgatory, till we have satisfied the debt there. Again, says our
Savior, Mat. 12. v. 32.
Whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost shall never be pardoned in this
life, nor in the world to come; by which it is plain, that as Gods justice is
satisfied here by the pardon of sins, so there is sins to be pardoned in the
life to come, which must be in Purgatory; for out of Hell is no redemption, nor
no expectation of pardon of sins. Did there not want a right understanding in
the hearts of men concerning Scripture, there could not be so much error and
blindeness in the reading of it as there is, for all those places which plainly
show Christian Religion, and the Catholic Faith, are past by, and no more
minded then if they had no relation to Gods word at all. If most Protestants
that happens to read this book, should but examine their own consciences, they
could not but confess that most places here cited (to prove our faith) was so
little taken notice of, that they knew not whether they were in the Bible or
no: And now after all these Texts here mentioned out of holy Writ to prove this
point, if any Protestant will or can show me but one place in all the Bible,
that any one went, or was conveyed to Heaven, as soon as they dyed, I do assure
them I will (as once I was) be of their Faith; but if they cannot, then are
they obliged in conscience to believe what is said, or be guilty of Infidelity
to God and his Holy Word: and to the intent that I may plainly discover the
error of those that believe there is, nor before Christ's coming was, any other
places then Heaven and Hell after death; it is my purpose therefore in the next
Chapter to prove that there is a third place wherein the Fathers of the New
Testament were, which could not obtain Heaven till Christ had shed his Blood
for them; according to that of Saint Paul, speaking of the Faith of those holy
men; yet he says, Heb. 11. v. 39.40.
All these having obtained a good report, by faith, received not the promise
(which was Heaven) God having provided some better thing for us, that they
without us should not be made perfect. But the common objection and deceit
against this, which takes so much is, that Christ has satisfied Gods Justice
for our sins, what need we do any thing at all; and this is the usual juggle
of those that teach against this point of satisfaction; but we are to consider
how far Christ's satisfaction extends to us, that is, he dyed for the pardon of
our original sins, and not for our actual transgressions, (though they be the
easier pardoned by the merits of his Death too) for if all our actual sins were
pardoned and satisfied for, by the Death of Christ, why then all Heathens, and
Turks, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Blasphemers should be saved; which,
Saint Paul says, Shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; so that this is
but a trick of our Adversaries making the people believe that they attribute
all to Christ, when indeed, if justly considered, they load his shoulders with
their actual sins, that has suffered enough already for our original ones; and
so they would fain free themselves from all kind of sufferings, here and
hereafter; when our Savior says, We cannot enter into life eternal without
much tribulation: but as I said, God is merciful to save, so he is just to
punish; and it is not good for us to presume too much upon hhis mercy, lest we
fall into a provocation of his Justice, and so perish everlastingly. And since
it is so plain both by holy Scripture and Reason, that there is a purging
place, or temporal punishments in the life to come (proportionable to every
ones sins) let every man consider what obligation he has, first, to believe it
to be so; secondly, to live so holily in this life, that God may be pleased to
spare us, by extenuating our sufferings in those purifying flames, agreeable to
that of B. St. Bernard; Sermon. 6. tribulat. in fine.
Oh would to God some man would now beforehand provide for my head abundance of
water, and to mine eyes a fountain of tears; for so happily the burning fire
should take no hold, where running tears had cleansed before.

Chap. 4. Proving that none of the Holy Fathers of the Old Law enjoyed Heaven
till Christ came, and that there was a distinct place where they waited for
their Redemption by his coming.
REason does tell us, and experience will justify the same, that all the
glorious and splendid things of this world are obtained with much difficulty
and travel, so that scarce the tythepart of men have the fruition of them: and
is it not to be lamented, that we have so poor and beggarly apprehensions of
heavenly glory, as to think it requires no difficulty, no patience, nor no
suffering to obtain that Kingdom; the contrary will plainly appear when I shall
prove by Scripture, that no soul from Adam till Christ dyed, enjoyed heavenly
Glory, but suffered with long patience and expectation, till they were redeemed
by the precious Blood of our Savior, and so freed from their long captivity;
conformable to Saint Paul, who writing of our Savior Christ, Ephesians. 4. v. 8.9.
says, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men. And again, Now that he ascended, what is it, but that he descended
first into the lower parts of the earth. Now I would from these words have
every Protestant consider these two things: First, to what place Christ
descended after his Death, and secondly, who they were that he led with him
captive at his ascension from that place. It is clear to all Christians that
Christ did not descend to the Hell of the damned, to release them from any
captivity; for as I said before, there is no redemption for them: what other
thing can be concluded, but that he went to release them which could not be
saved till then, for is it not madness to think that any people went to Heaven
before Christ had redeemed them with his precious blood: next you shall see
what St. Peter says concerning this point; 1 Pet. 3. Ver. 18. Ver. 19.
For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God, being put to death in the Flesh, but quickened by the
Spirit: by which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison. Now what
can be desired more plain then this, showing so plainly, that when Christ's
flesh lay dead, his spirit preached to those that were long in expecting of him
in a prison, to them that sighed so long for his coming: the same did the
Prophet Zachariah foretell, where speaking to Sion, Behold, Zach. 9. ver. 9.
says he, thy King comes, he is just, and having salvation, lowly, and riding
upon an Ass, and upon a Colt, the foal of an Ass: here he speaks of Christ's
coming; and in the other verse, Ver. 11.
As for thee also by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners
out of the pit wherein was no water: Now what pit can this be imagined to be,
but this place where these holy men were, in which he prophesies, that Christ
at his coming to Sion would deliver them out; and if we consider this point as
we ought to do, we shall find it to be an Article of our Creed; Article 4. of
our Creed.
which says, He descended into Hell, the third day he rose again: Now some
object, by this Hell is meant the grave, but how absurdly let every one judge,
that considers how ridiculous it is to think Christ's soul should remain in the
Grave; his Body we grant did so, but his glorious Spirit went to perform what
before had been said of him, according to his own most blessed words, when he
said, That as Jonas was three days and three nights in the belly of the whale,
so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth: so his body, as I said, was in the Grave, and his Soul in the other
place, which is commonly called Hell, (because it is believed to be under the
earth as the Hell of the damned is.) Now this place may suffice to any
reasonable Christian, yet I shall propose one or two things more to your
considerations, as first concerning Lazarus, John 11. v. 42, 43.
who was dead and buried four days, and was raised to life by our Savior: I
hope none will say he was in Hell with the damned; and had he been in Heaven,
you may be sure his Sisters had a better sense of that Glory, then to wish him
upon earth again; and if he had been in either place, we know there is no
coming out, as Saint Luke says, Luke 16. v. 26.
speaking of Dives and the other Lazarus; so that we must conclude his soul to
be in that temporal Hell, spoken of in our Creed, or no where at all: and Holy
David cries out to God, saying, Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, for Lord
thou love me, etc. Now this may be objected two ways against Protestants:
First (that if it meant the Grave) what should his soul do to be left there:
And secondly, if it means that temporal Hell (as undoubtedly it does) then it
plainly shows that his soul was there, because it says, Thou will not leave it
in Hell: We may gather much to our present purpose from the last Text mentioned
in Saint Luke, where Dives being in Hell lift up his eyes and saw Abraham afar
off, ver. 23.
and Lazarus in his bosom, which plainly proves Abraham and Lazarus not to be
in Heaven; for could the damned in Hell see the Saints in Heaven, it would be
no Hell to them, since the sight of Heaven is so glorious, it would take away
the sense of Hell, and so make them happy in that unhappy place. Again, if
Abraham had been in Heaven, according to Protestants opinion, they could not
hear one the other speak, being at that vast distance as Heaven and Hell is;
for they say how can the Saints hear our prayers on earth, much less (if not
so) could they hear them in Hell. We may again observe that the place where
Abraham and the Fathers were, was not far from the local Hell of the damned,
but (as St. Augustine says, The upper part, or over it some distance; where
holy Abraham says, ver. 26.
there was a gulf that separated the passage one to the other, because they
could both see and speak one to the other. And thus, having made it so
manifestly appear I hope none that professes the truth of the Bible will now
any more defile their souls with envy to the holy Catholic Church, which
teaches all truth, and nothing but the truth (if you had but as right an
understanding of all that is there taught as you have of this) but be rather
induced to the practice of it, and with Saint Augustine, to conclude, Who is
there but an Infidel, August. 99. Ep. in prin.
will deny that Christ was in (this temporal) Hell.

Chap. 5. Proving that Angels, and Saints in Heaven, do know what passes here
on Earth; and so consequently may be prayed to by us, for their mediation to
God in our behalf.
THe minds of men, being naturally inclined to search, and know the nature of
hidden things, does oftentimes take indirect ways to accomplish the knowledge
of them, and yet come short in their designs too: This thing as it was the sin
of our first Parents, so is it a great corruption in this present age, amongst
many thousands, which would make us believe they know on earth, what power and
happiness the Blessed Angels and Saints have in heaven, and will grant them no
more privilege then what their shallow brains can comprehend they have; quite
contrary to that saying of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 2. ver. 9.
Eye has not seen, nor ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of man, the things that God has prepared for them that love him: so
infinitely out of our understanding are the qualities of glorified souls, which
Angels and Saints are. But to let those people know how much they deceive
themselves in fostering such pernicious opinions, I will prove both by
Scripture and Reason that they do know all our actions here on earth, and that
it is agreeable to the nature of Angels to know them; my first place is from
Saint Lukes Gospel, Luke 2. ver. 13.
where so soon as our Savior was born on earth, the Angels came from heaven to
the Shepherds to anounce it to them, and singing with great joy; a little
before, one in particular told them, ver. 10.
that he preached to them great joy, for a Savior was born to them; by which
it is plain, that the Angel knew when he was in heaven, that he was born: so
likewise our Savior when he was in the Wilderness, after his temptation, the
Text says, Mat. 4. ver. 11.
The Angels came and ministered unto him; by which you may see how ready those
blessed Spirits are in all things and occasions to assist in our salvation.
Again, when our Blessed Savior was in his direful Agony in the Garden,
sweating drops of Blood for us, Saint Luke says, Luke 22. ver. 43.
There appeared an Angel to him from heaven, and strengthened him; from which
words we may gather, 1. That if Angels lent their assistance to strengthen
Christ, who is the God of strength, much more will they to us (by Gods
permission) who are of our selves nothing but weakness. 2. That if they knew
not what passes on earth, how could they so readily assist us, as we read in
many places of the Bible they have done, and as I shall prove hereafter: Our
Savior says likewise by the same Evangelist, Luke 15. ver. 13.
That there is joy in heaven of the Angels at the conversion of a sinner, by
which it is clear, that they must know when every sinner is converted; or how
should they know when to rejoice: So likewise in the tran figuration of our
Savior Christ, Moses and Elias appeared to him and talked with him; so that if
they (being out of this world) had not known of his being on Mount Thabor, Mark
9. ver. 4.
how should they have waited upon him: And again, our Savior says. That his
Apostles shall sit with him in judgment, Mat. 19. ver. 28.
and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel: and Saint Paul says, The Saints shall
judge the world, 1 Cor. 6. ver. 1.2.
which could not be, if they did not know what passes in the world; for in
reason, no Judge can or will pass Sentence upon any man before he knows what he
is guilty of: by all which it is as manifest and clear (as to see the Sun when
it shines in the Firmament) that Angels and Saints know what passes here on
earth.

Again, it is very much to our purpose, to consider what passed at the Death of
Saint Stephen, where the Text says, He looked into heaven, Acts 7. ver. 54,
55, 56.
and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, and
said, Behold I see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing at the right
hand of God; from whence it is evident and plain, that if Saint Stephen could
upon earth see into heaven, where God himself was, that he can now, being
glorified in heaven see and know what passes upon earth, in a far larger
measure, and so may be prayed unto for his assistance; Ver. 60.
for if he at his Death had so much charity to pray for the pardon of his
enemies, that did not desire it, we need not question but his charity is much
more now, and will be infinitely more ready to pray to God for those that are
his friends and Members of the same Church, which do heartily beg it of him;
and as we see his prayer then took effect with God, for the conversion of his
chiefest enemy, Saul, which was presently after; so we may justly hope, that
God will bestow his graces upon us, by his holy Intercession.

But for your further instruction, consider, what knowledge God gave to all the
Prophets of old time, to foretell all those great things that happened in the
world in our Saviors time, and since, which we know were all true; and if God
gave such power to men when they were upon earth, do we think that God deprives
Angels, or those Prophets that are now in heavenly glory, of that power; or
that Christ's blessed Mother, which prophesied that all generations should call
her blessed, Luke 1. ver 48.
does not know that she is so called by all generations; it were a madness
beyond compare to imagine such a foolish thing, which is so contrary to the
express word of God. I shall now conclude my discourse of this subject with one
example, which I think, had there been no Scripture to have proved what I have
said, would be of force enough, with any reasonable person to induce them to
the belief of it.

We all know by our faith, that the Devil was once an Angel of heaven, and
since his fall from that happy place, it is all his design to make us
miserable; and we all by sad experience know, that he knows all our actions, as
when we would do good he strives to hinder us, and when we intend to do evil,
he sets us forward in the performance of it: Nay, when we do not intend evil,
he puts it into our minds to do it, and all the sins we commit is from the
Devil; and I pray, how came he by this power, but only as he was once an Angel
of heaven? let us not think God gave him this power since he was a Devil of
Hell; or that God which dearly loves our salvation (as is plainly shown by him
in the Death of his Son for us) would give more power to the Devil to work our
destruction, then he does to the good Angels which desire and assist us in our
salvation; we know too well, that he leads thousands to sin at one time, and do
we not think the holy Angels endeavor the same to lead us to virtue; we know,
or may know to our costs, that he is watchful and diligent to bring us to
ruin, and do we not think the Angels are as careful to guard us from it; so
that for any one to deny this truth, must certainly be possessed with an
heathenish spirit, which will shut its eyes against all Christian verities. Now
what has been said chiefly of the Angels is the same of the Saints in heaven,
which are in the same place, and glory, and esteem with God, according to that
of our blessed Savior, speaking to the Sadduces about the Resurrection, Luke
20. ver. 36.
That they which should be worthy to obtain heaven should dye no more, but
should be equal to the Angels. Thus having as I think shown sufficiently the
truth of this point, I shall next proceed to show you how we may lawfully
(without derogation to Christ's Intercession) desire them to pray to God for us;
and with this conclude, that certainly God will never permit those the society
of Angels, that live and dye in so poor and beggarly esteem of those glorious
spirits.

Chap. 6. Proving, that since it is evident that Angels and Saints can hear our
prayers, we may lawfully pray to them as Intercessours for us to God.
IT is a thing not a little to be admired, when we consider that man which by
nature loves those things which may make him happy, should yet himself be the
only obstacle of his not being truly so; we all naturally desire heaven, but
through the corruption of that nature in us, we take the wrong course to obtain
it; for what wise man can think that they which hate society with Angels and
Saints whilst they are on earth, can ever attain that happiness in heaven,
since those that touch at the honor of them, touches the apple of Gods eye; as
our Blessed Savior said to his Disciples when they were upon earth, He that
hates you, hates me; and he that loves you, loves me: Mat. 10. v. 42.
And if any one give but a cup of cold water in the name of a Disciple, he
should not lose his reward; so dear are all his servants to him, and if so
while they are on this dunghill earth, sure they are much more dear to him in
his Palace of Heaven; and we can no ways bonour God more (next to the Worship
of himself) then by respecting and having communion with his heavenly Citizens,
whilst we are on earth; and besides it is an Article of our Faith in the Creed,
I believe the Communion of Saints, which we that are on earth can no ways do,
but by our praying to them, and their praying for us; and this is the true
Communion of Saints. Genesis 48. v. 16.
Agreeable to this shall you find in Holy Scripture, how Jacob, after he
blessed his Son Joseph, he invokes an Angel to bless Joseph's Sons, saying, The
Angel which redeemed me from all evil bless these lads; so here you see it was
the practice of this holy man, by which we may have the less reason to scruple
it: but observe what he says more, And let my name, and the names of my
Fathers Abaham and Isaac be named by them; which infers, that they should
invoke their names in the behalf of their obtaining any thing from God; and it
is frequently mentioned in Scripture of desiring mercy from God for Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacobs sake, and for thy servant David's sake; all this we know to be
true, and will it think you displease God to desire mercy from him, for the
Blessed Virgin Mary's sake, or St. Peter, or St. Paul's sake, Job 5. v. 1.
who were as holy persons as ever the other were: so we may see in holy Jobs
time it was practiced, for Eliphaz upbraiding of him, says, Call now, Zach. 1.
ver. 1.
if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou
turn? so in the Prophet Zachariah, we find an Angel praying for Jerusalem,
Then the Angel of the Lord answered and said, O Lord of Hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, against which
thou have had indignation these threescore and ten years: now what can be
desired more plain then these places are, if we are not wilfully blind. It
will cause every one both to the belief and practice of this sacred Communion
with those blessed spirits, which is in some measure an anticipation of the
fruition of heaven. But yet to make it more manifest (to the intent that either
you must deny Scripture or confess this truth) see what Saint Luke says in his
Gospel, that the rich man being in hell, prayed to Abraham, which I hope you
will say is a Saint, And he cried, Luke 16. v. 24.
and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip
the tip of his finger in water to cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this
flame; from which we may gather, that if this damned man prayed and hoped for
mercy, to be obtained for him by Abraham (to whom he chiefly applied himself)
is it not unreasonable to think that Christians which are in hopes of heaven,
and in the state of Grace may not do the same to Abraham, or any the other
Saints, Ver. 25.
with more hopes then he could have, and better success; and you may read here
that Abraham heard him (where ere he was) and told him it could not be done,
because he had enjoyed his pleasures in this world, and the other pains: so by
this we may see, that the practice of this Article of Faith is not grounded
upon weak foundations, but on the Infallible Word of God which cannot deceive
us, unless we deceive our selves by the misapplying of it.

Besides let every Christian consider what a great folly they are guilty of,
when they say the Angels do not know this, nor the Saints do not know that,
(and so must not be prayed to) when we do not know the nature of our own sinful
souls, that is within us, and yet will be so vain, as pretend to know the power
and nature of those glorious Spirits, who in knowing God do know all things;
and by our having Communion with them, we have fellowship with the Blessed
Trinity; by our praying to them God is so much the more honored, as they are
in Dignity and Desert above us; and as we know by experience that a King
grants sooner the desires of a mean Subject by the Mediation of his grand
Favorite; so in reason we may believe that the King of Heaven will do the same
to us, by the Mediation of his Saints in Heaven: The common objection by
Protestants and others is, that our Savior faith, Come unto me all ye that are
laden, and I will refresh you. This was Christ's goodness to invite us to come
to him; and how poor a shift this is for them to prove that we must not pray to
Angels and Saints shall appear plainly; for if because Christ invites us to
come to him, we must not apply our selves to any others, then we must not pray
one for another as Saint James commands us: Jam. 5. v. 16.
then why do we desire Priests, or Ministers to pray for us when we are sick,
and upon many other occasions wherein we have need enough? only because we
think their prayers to God is more acceptable then our own: now, all this is
done without derogation to Christ; nay, you know it is to his honor and glory
to pray one for another, and we all account it a great charity; and if it be
so, then there is no doubt but that we may desire the blessed Saints to pray
for us to God, through the merits of Christ, and it will redound more to his
glory then our praying one for another can possibly do. Rev. 5. v. 18.
One Text more I shall show you, and not of small concern as to this point; in
Saint John's Revelations, where he says, the four and twenty Elders fell down
before the Lamb (or Christ) having their harps and golden vials full of Odours,
which are the Prayers of Saints: by which it is plain that they offered up
their Prayers to Christ; Ver. 3.4.
for so Saint John expounds it himself, that these vials full of Odours were
the prayers of Saints: and in the eighth Chapter he says, And another Angel
came and stood at the Altar, having a golden Censer, and there was given to him
much Incense, that he should offer it with the Prayers of all Saints, upon the
golden Altar which was before the Throne; and the smoke of the Incense which
came with the Prayers of the Saints ascended up before God out of the Angels
hand: so by this it is apparent, that we may pray to them, and that they do
offer up our prayers to God, and pray for us. Now it will be necessary to clear
that mistake in Protestants, who think we make no difference between our
praying to Christ, and our Intercession to Saints.

It would be a great Heresy for any one to hold, 1 John 2. v. 1.
that the Power and Mediation of Christ should not be far above all that of
Angels or Archangels and Saints in heaven; Rhem. Test. on this place.
therefore we are to understand what kind of Mediator Christ is, and how he
is our Advocate to the Father; The Calling and Office of an Advocate is in many
things proper to Christ, and to him only it appertains to procure us Mercy
from his heavenly Father, by the general ransom, price, and payment of his
Blood for our delivery, as is in the Sentence following, He is the propitiation
for our sins, and not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world;
in which sort he is our only Advocate, because he is our only Redeemer; and
hereupon he alone immediately by his own Merits, without the aid or assistance
of any man or Angel in his own Name, and right, confidently deals in our
Causes before God our Judge, and so procures our pardon; and this is the
highest degree of Advocation that can be: by all which you may see that we
Catholics attribute to Christ in a more excellent sort his power in his
Mediatorship, then Protestants do, or imagine, who make poor ignorants believe
that none must mediate for us but Christ, thinking merely by a bare show of
zeal to Christ, to null all other mediations, when by that means they dishonor
him, by comparing or valuing his Mediation at no higher a price, then we do
Angels, Saints, and Men's. Now when we pray to an Angel or Saint, we desire them
to pray for us to God the Father, or the Blessed Trinity, that they would
obtain for us of God, this, or that favor, through our Lord Jesus Christ; so
that all is desired through the Merits of our Savior: And when we pray to
Christ for any thing, we ought to pray to him as he is God, and not to say O
Christ pray for me, (as we do to an Angel or Saint) for that were a dishonor
to him in making him of less power then the two other Divine persons of the
blessed Trinity, who is equal to both; and who in three persons makes but one
true and ever-living God, blessed to all eternity. Should I produce the
Authority and Practice of Gods Church, and the ancient Fathers, I might fill a
large volume to confirm you; I will only conclude with that of Saint
Augustine, Aug Med. 40.
where invoking the Saints, he says, O holy and Immaculate Virgin Mary, Mother
of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, vouchsafe to intercede for me to him,
whose Temple thou was deserved to be made, holy Michael, holy Gabriel, holy
Raphel, holy Quire of Angels, and Archangels, Patriarchs, and Prophets, A
postles, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, and all the Just; I humbly crave
that you would vouchsafe to intercede to God for me a poor Sinner, that I may
be delivered from the Jaws of the Devil, and from Eternal Death. Amen.

Chap. 7. Showing that in all Ages, Angels have been assistant to Man for his
good, and that we ought to reverence the Memory both of Angels and Saints, as
they are the chief Attendants on the living God.
IT is no wonder we are so little acquainted with those glorious Citizens
Angels and Saints, when we consider how the memory of them is slighted and
contemned in this our unhappy Age, and that men now adays desire no more
society with them, then they would do with those that designs their ruin: so
miserably has Satan depraved our natures, and suggested to us a slighting of
those. Blessed Spirits, to the intent he may draw us the more to his hellish
service, and so consequently to our utter destruction. But to undeceive a
little those that are thus corrupted with this principle, I shall plainly show
you many examples from holy Scripture, both of the great good they have done to
many holy men, and also what Worship and Reverence they have done to the Angels.

The first is from that of holy Abraham, Genesis 18. v. 2.
when the three Angels appeared to him, to let him know the good news of his
having a Son; the Text says, He ran to meet them from the Tentdoor, and bowed
himself toward the ground. The second place that of holy Lot; Genesis 19. v. 1.
And there came two Angels to Sodom at even, and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom;
and Lot seeing them, rose up to meet them; and he bowed himself with his face
toward the ground, and said, My Lords turn in I pray you, Ver. 2.
etc. Now here I may demand, why the holy Scripture should instance to us,
their bowing with their faces to the ground, but only to show us, that as they
are the heavenly Ambassadors that kind of reverence is due to them. Thirdly,
when the Angel appeared to Joshua by Jericho, Josh. 5. v. 13.14.15.
he demanded who he was for; and the Angel said, Nay, but as Captain of the
host of the Lord am I come; and Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did
worship; and the Angel bid him pull off his shoes, for the place where he
stood was holy ground. So here you see is, first the Angels assistance in
coming to fight for them; and secondly, a high worship done to him, and the
place where he stood, by pulling off his shoes: and yet so miserably blinded
are people now adays, to think and say that these kind of things are
Superstition, not at all considering that it ever has, that it is, and ever
will be the practice of all holy men, to do this homage to them. Fourthly, an
Angel appears to the Israelites at Gilgal, Judge. 2. v. 1.4.
and for their good, tells them of what things God had done for them; which
when he had done, all the people lift up their voices and wept. Fifthly, an
Angel appears to Gideon, to comfort and strengthen him against the Midianites;
Judge. 6. v. 12.22, 23.
and when he perceived it was an Angel of God, he was afraid he should dye;
till God told him he should not: by which we may see what a reverend
apprehension he had of the Angel Sixthly, an Angel appears to Sampsons Mother;
and tells her (being barren) the glad news of a Son: if you read the whole
Chapter, Judge. 13. v. 3.
it is much to our purpose, both to see how the holy Angel conversed with his
Father and Mother both; as also with what reverence they treated with him.
Seventhly, we read that the holy Prophet Elijah being a sleep under a
Juniper-tree, 1 Kings 19. v. 5.
an Angel awaked him, which brought him both to eat and drink in the Wilderness
where he was, and where no bread was to be had; and the Angel appeared to him
the second time, Ver. 6.
and he rose and eat what the Angel brought him; and by virtue of that went
forty days and forty nights on his journey. A ninth place is of an Angel
assisting the people of God, in the slaying of the Assyrians, Isa. 37. v. 36.
185000. men, which came against them, and Hezekiah their King. Again, in the
Book of Tobias we read of many good things done by the Angel Raphel, as to
young Tobias in guiding of him in his journey from all dangers, Tobit. 3. v. 17.
in chasing away, and binding the Devil Asmodius, in curing of old Tobias, and
many others of that kind; Chap. 12. v. 15.
and at last he tells him who he was, and how he was one of the seven Angels
that presents the Prayers of the Saints, Ver. 16.
and goes in and out before the holy One; then they were both troubled and fell
upon their faces for they feared; which trouble we may conceive was, because
they had not done him before the worship due to an Angel. I could produce many
other places out of the old Testament to prove this; but I will now proceed to
the new: and first of that most happy and ever blessed news of our Redemption,
where the holy Angel Gabriel was employed for our eternal good, to declare to
the Blessed Virgin Mary the Incarnation of the Son of God in her Virginal Womb;
Luke 1. v. 26.27, 28.
we may devoutly imagine there passed much reverence between two such creatures
as they, which were in so high esteem with God, the one to be his Mother, and
the other his Ambassador. Secondly, the same Angel came to Zacharias the
Priest, and told him the glad tidings of his Son John; yet when he saw him he
trembled, and was afraid, for very reverence to the Angel. So again thirdly,
two Angels appeared to St. Mary Magdalen, Luke 20. v. 12.
and the Disciples to tell them the good news of our Saviors Resurrection,
which was no small comfort to them; and after that an Angel visits St. Peter in
prison, and breaks his gives, and chains, and opens the doors, Acts 12. v. 7.8,
9, 10.
and the City Gates, and lets him free. Again, an Angel appears to Cornelius
and assists him, by counselling him to send for Peter about his salvation; Acts
11. v. 3.4.
and when he saw the Angel he was afraid: nay, when Saint Peter came he fell
down before him, as being a holy man; but his humility would not suffer him to
continue so. In like manner the holy Apostle Saint Paul was comforted by an
Angel, when he was in his Shipwreck, as he himself witnesses, Acts 27. v.
23.24.
And there stood by me this night the Angel of God, whose I am, and whom I
serve, saying, Fear not Paul, etc. by all which so plain and innumerable places
of Scripture, it is made so manifest, that I think no person that reads this
Book can for shame any longer resist so infallible a truth; for if he do, he
must lie under the heavy censure of an unbeliever; who, as St. Paul says, is
judged already. I hope that the consciences of those (which say they will
believe nothing but the Bible) will now fly in their faces, and blush for shame
and confusion, when they consider how little of it they practice, and pretend
to the Bible, barely for a show of Religion, to deceive themselves and others.
But further to prosecute this point (to the intent none but Heathens may deny
it) we will consider how Christ's beloved Disciple Saint John demeaned himself
to the Angel that came to him so often in his Revelations; Rev. 19. v. 10.
And I fell at his feet to worship him, and he said unto me, Do it not, I am
thy fellow servant; which words of the Angel, Do it not, is the main Argument
against this practice, which Protestants have: but how poor an one it is, shall
be seen; for I hope no man will think that Saint John, which was so great a
Divine, and so eminent with Christ, could be so ignorant as not to know what
Worship was due to an Angel, but rather conclude that the Angel said, Do it
not, because he knew that St. John was in as high esteem with God as himself
was; and besides, St. John did do it again to the Angel, Rev. 22. v. 8.
that is, fell down and worshipped him; which we may be sure he never would
have done, being told of it before, if it had not been lawful; for then he
would have been guilty of obstinacy, which I hope no good Christian will tax
him with: But this business between the Angel and Saint John, is just as when
two special friends meet, for they strive who shall give the greatest respect
to each other, yet will not seem to admit of any worship extraordinary from
each other: so we see by the first Text, that the Angel would not admit of
Saint John to worship him, because his humility thought him his equal, and as
he says, his fellow servant: and b the second Text we see St. John would not
forbear worshipping him, because his humility thought him superior. So hoping
that I have sufficiently satisfied the Christian Reader in this point, I will
now briefly show thee how vast a difference there is in the Worship that is due
to God, and in that which is due to Angels and Saints.

And first we are to consider that there is a Divine Adoration, and Worship due
to God, which if it be given to either Angels, or any thing created, it is flat
Idolatry; for since God is the Creator of us all, it is fit that he should have
a Worship given to him above all that he has created; and therefore it is a
most strange abuse that is put upon the holy Catholic Church, by those that
say (by our Worshipping Saints and Angels) Christ is robbed of his honor, when
indeed Christ is honored by it (as is before plainly proved) since we
acknowledge and give to him a far higher Worship then to all the Angels and
Saints in Heaven; for what Worship we give to them is as they are glorious
spirits, and have so near relation to God, which would plainly appear to every
ones experience, if once this subtle juggle of Satan were laid open to our
eyes, which is the bare pretense only of giving all to God, which takes much
with common understandings, without considering that God is worshipped by us,
in a far higher manner, and that Gods Worship is exalted in our respect, and
reverence to them: as for example, this now is plain to every ones experience,
that we reverence the Kings Chaires of State, his Chambers where they are, and
the like; now these do not receive this worship, because they are Chairs, or
because they be Chambers, but only as they have so near relation to the King;
and what we do to them is done to the King, and he that does not so is
accounted a villain, and turned out of Court as a contemner of the King; and if
this will happen for the contempt of insensible things, which have relation to
the King, what may we think will happen to those that live and dye in the
contempt of those glorious Creatures, which are so near God, praising of him to
eternity.

So not questioning but this that has been said, will sufficiently satisfy
every impartial Reader, and induce him both to the Faith and Practice of so
holy and reasonable a thing, that so at last he may enjoy the blessed Society
of the Principalities, Powers, Virtues, Dominations, Thrones, Angels,
Archangels, Cherubins, and Seraphins, with the holy Apostles and Disciples of
Christ and all the Saints in heaven, with whom we had society here on earth.

Chap 8. Proving that the Images of Christ and his Saints may be lawfully made
and reverenced, as they have relation to the first Figure, contrary to the
Opinion of Protestants.
AMongst all the bundles of errors that tumbles up and down in the minds of
men, and strives to stifle truth, there is none more maliciously and publicly
published, then is this against holy Images, whose bad Authors make too many
believe, that it is no less then Superstition to look upon them, much more to
show any respect to them: but to the intent that their eyes may be illuminated
that are blind for want of seeing them, I shall prove the quite contrary, as
that it is a holy and good custom, and very profitable to our souls: but first
I will clear that main objection, by which they say we are breakers of the Law,
and so Idolaters; which is indeed so buzzed in the ears of the common people,
that they have nothing more to say, but (Does not the Lord say; thou shall not
make to thy self any graven Image;) I could tell them, and truly enough, that
he never did say so; for though their Bibles do say, Thou shall not make to thy
self any graven Image, the Translator did but cobble it; for the meaning is
plain, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Idol, or painted, or any way
at all to adore it as God, for that were plain Idolatry and Heathenish; for do
we think that in the twentieth Chapter of Exodus, God would forbid Images, and
in the five and twentieth Chapter command them again to be made, as is plain to
be seen; where in the command that God gave to Moses, he says, Ver. 18 19, 20.
And thou shall make two Cherubims of Gold, of beaten work shall thou make them
in the two ends of the Mercy-seat. And again, God says to him, That there he
would meet and commune with him: now these Cherubims were the Images of the
highest Order of Angels, and sure they think God knew not what he did, in
commanding these Images, if he had forbid them before. And further, to show you
that absurdity, observe that God likewise commanded Moses to make the Image of
a Brazen Serpent, and set it up upon a pole, that those which were stung with
Serpents (as many were) should look up to that image and be cured; And Moses
made a Serpent of Brass, Number. 21. v. 8 9.
and set it upon a pole, and if a Serpent had bitten any man, he looked upon
the Serpent of Brass and lived: now one would think that this should be
Idolatry, so to look up to this Image, and be presently cured, or cause them
another time to do so, that were so prone to it, as the Jews were; but that
they are we know it was God and not the Image that cured them. But now I would
fain know from our Adversaries, who was the first commander of Images to be
made and set up? I hope they will say now that God was; for if they do not,
they must belie Gods word which must be truth, and their own Consciences which
may be false. It is enough to amaze a serious man when he considers the grand
cheat that is put upon thousands of poor souls, and the continual thundering out
of Pulpits against Images. Oh these Idolatrous Images! when God knows they
adore an Idol, which is their giddy fancy, by offering up their will, memory,
and understanding, on its profane Altar: for observe that if God had forbid
Images, why do they picture Deaths Image in their Churches, and Queen
Elizabeth's lying in her Tomb, and the Marble Statues and Tombs of Kings, and
other persons, with Flags, Streamers, and Images of some Benefactors, and the
like; let every Christian judge, were these better then Christ, or his blessed
Mother, or the Apostles; or were they better Benefactors to the Church then
Christ has been and his Discriples? for if it be no sin, nor Idolatry to set
up those in Churches, sure it is none to set up Christ's and his Saints Images.
But perhaps you will say, we do not adore them as Gods, nor pray to them, nor
trust in them; and I do assure you, that I will say, nor Catholics neither,
but do denounce a curse against them that do adore, or pray, or trust in them
as Gods; for can any but senseless creatures think, that we which adore God in
spirit and in truth, and confess him to be three distinct Persons, and one God,
can be so sottish as to think, that an Image or Picture can either hear, speak,
or see, much less to be trusted in as a God. Again, If Images were forbid, why
do Protestants, nay, the Ministers themselves desire to have their own
Pictures, and Wives, and Childrens, which are only for Vanity, and not for
Devotion at all, as Christ's and his Saints Images are? as I shall show
hereafter:) and besides, there is no Protestant of the Profession of Carving
and Painting, but will make an Image of Christ, and his Apostles, or any else
for money, and do daily sell them, as we all know; which if it were Idolatry,
then were you guilty for making, selling, and keeping them too, which is as
foolish to think as the other. And now having sufficiently proved the
lawfulness of them, I will now show what good use we have, and may have by
them: as for example, I would fain know why an ignorant person or any other,
may not receive knowledge and instruction, by seeing our Saviors bitter
passion painted, and plainly set forth, as to read it Printed upon Paper; for
in that way we receive our knowledge by the eye, and so do we by the Pictures:
and I am sure it is more dolorous and piercing to see the perfect manner of his
sufferings Painted, then to read them Printed; though both be very good:
besides many times when our minds are wandering after worldly business, yea,
in our prayers too often; then if we reflect our eyes upon those heavenly
Figures, as our Savior and his Saints, it reduces our strayed thoughts to God,
and heaven, and to what our Blessed Savior has suffered for us; and so they
are books to those that cannot read, and great helps to Devotion, to them that
can; and I am very certain, that if the greatest enemies of them in the world
did use and practice them the same manner as Catholics do, it would (as justly
it might) convert their hatred to a perfect love of them, and be much ashamed
that they have so long slandered Gods Church, and deprived themselves of so
great a good, by believing such abominable untruths, wherewith she has been
falsely charged withal; and therefore that I may totally root out of men's minds
those common aspersions cast upon her, I shall add a little to declare, how
and in what manner they are to be used, according to that of the Council, Coun.
Trent.
We command all Bishops and others who have the Office and care of Teaching,
that they diligently instruct faithful people, teaching them that the Images of
Christ, of the Virgin Mary, Mother of God, and of other Saints, are to be had,
and retained, especially in Churches, and that due reverence be given unto
them; not that there is any Divinity to be believed to be in them, or power,
for which they are to be worshipped, or that any thing is to be asked of them,
or that confidence is to be put in them, as anciently the Gentiles did in their
Idols: but because the honor which is done to them is referred to those who
they represent. Now by this alone you may see what this supposed Mountain of
Image Worship is come to, which is so untruly thundered out in Pulpits against
us; so that when we pray before an Image, we do not pray to the Image, nor when
we look with reverence upon them, we do not adore them: but as I said before in
the other Chapter, what respect is done to the Kings Chair of State, or Chamber
of Presence, or Picture, is referred to him and his Honor; so is it the self
same to christ's, and his Saints Images: and as no man would take him for the
Kings friend (but his enemy) that should contemn, break, or burn his Picture,
or his Mothers, or his Favorites; so justly may we think them to be Christ's
enemies that have done all that to his, and his holy Mothers, and Saints, with
as great scorn and contempt as might be, and all under the pretended zeal for
the word of God, by which they have deceived many thousands of poor souls; but
now having as I hope sufficiently proved the verity of our practice herein, and
the impostures of those that profess the contrary, I leave it to every
reasonable man to judge whether it be lawful or no, and so conclude with the
Council, Nice.
We do not offer worship to the matter, as Wood, or Stone, or painting in
colors, but through these, being brought to the person represented by them, we
give due honor to him, knowing accordingly that the respect to the Image
passes to him who is represented by it.

Chap. 9. Proving that Man has Free Will to do Good, or not to do it, contrary
to the Opinion of Protestants.
DId those men which deny this point of Faith, but admit (in the height of
their passions) either of reason or consideration, they would blush for shame,
when they showed them what Traitors they are to themselves in robbing their
natures of one prime quality which God has given them for an ornament to the
same; for take from man his free will, and you may turn him, like a
Nebuchadnezzar, amongst the beasts; for God (by Miracle) can make him do good
actions in that form and nature; but for the want of prudent considering the
actions of their lives, they run into as many disorders, as their giddy fancies
pleases to suggest to them: but this is the misery of most men, that when the
Devil tempts them to these evils they will not resist, but entertain all; and
amongst al his hellish deceits he has none that takes more with weak
understandings, then this sly trick of his seeming to attribute all to God, as
he tempts Heretics to believe, that Angels must not be reverenced, nor Saints
respected, nor prayed too, but all to God, which is his devilish slight, to
hinder that service to God (as I proved before) and that all men's good works,
done by Gods holy Grace, are sinful and merit nothing, only to hinder and make
men carefuless to do such good works; and that man has no free will, only to
make man idle, and not strive to employ those graces that God has been pleased
to bestow upon us: so that did all men but once discover these tricks of Satan,
we should easily see, that God is honored by these things, because they are
his gifts and benefits which he has been pleased to bestow on us to enrich our
souls, and make us more capable of serving him. The truth of this shall be as
plainly proved by Scripture and Reason, as any thing before treated of; that so
we may lay open the shameful hypocrisy of those that work their self ends,
from ignorant people, merely through the blind pretense of Scripture; which
being so done, you will find hem rotten at the very heat. And first of all,
concerning Cain, where God tells him, Genesis 4. v. 7.
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin
lies at thy door: so here it is plain, that God left it to his choice to do
well, or not to do it. Again, God said unto Moses, Behold, I will rain bread
from Heaven, Exodus 16. v. 4.
and the people shall go out and gather it every day, that I may prove them
whether they will walk in my way or no: now if they had not had a free will,
why should God say he owuld try them; so that you see God left them to their
free will, to see whether they would serve him better or no. Again, God says
to them in Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 11. v. 26.
Behold I set before you a blessing, and a curse: a blessing if you will obey
the Commandments of your God, and a curse if you will not obey. Now consider,
that as this is plainly and truly, Gods word, so plainly and truly does it show
free will to be in man. Again, God says to them in the same Book, Chap. 28. v.
1.2.
If you will hearken diligently to the voice of the Lord, thy God, to keep all
his Commandments, I will set thee on high above all the Nations, and so tells
them how many sorts of blessing he will bestow upon them, if they will keep his
Commandments; but if they would no, Ver. 15.
he tells them how many curses should light upon them. And in the same Book
again he says to them in a very strange manner, I call heaven and earth to
record this day against you, Chap. 30. v. 19.
that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore
choose life that thou and thy seed may live: I might justly stand amazed here
at these Texts of Gods word, and admire with what face men can say they believe
the Bible, and not tremble when they say so; considering how they deny this
free will in man (which God has given him) and other principles of Christian
Religion proved before; for here we see God himself lays it before us, and
leaves it to us; and what would we have God do more, unless he should work
Miracles daily, and we lie like beasts or stones and do nothing. The same did
God offer to David by his Prophet Gad, saying, 2 samuel 24. v. 12.
God and say unto David, thus says the Lord, I offer thee three things, choose
the one of them that I might do it unto thee: Now here, God would not execute
his Justice on David till he had chosen what punishment he would himself, that
might be most for his good. And to his Son Solomon God says likewise, 1 King.
6. v. 12.
If thou will walk in my Statutes, and execute my Judgments, and keep all my
Commandments, then will I perform my word with thee: by all which is still more
plain, that Solomon had a free will. Now though this that has been said might
serve sufficiently to convince those that have held the contrary, and desire to
embrace the truth of Gods word in reality; yet I will proceed for their further
satisfaction and knowledge of the truth in this point; and first out of the
Gospel of Saint Matthew, where our Savior cries out, Mat. 23. v. 37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered you together, as a hen
does her Chickens, but you would not; see here how Christ complains of them,
because they would not employ their wills in his holy service, as he would have
had them done; for says he, I would, but you would not. and in another place
he says, I thou will enter into life keep the Commandments: so that in every
place it is referred to our free will, to do and not to do any good action, as
is plain by all these places of Scripture; by which you may see what folly they
are guilty of, that say we have none, or that it takes away the honor from
God, which can no ways be; for since we say that free will in us is a gift
from God, and the good actions we do by that will, is inspired into us by God,
then is God the Original of all, and we only the instruments of doing it, or
not doing it; for we all know that God often inspires us to good actions which
we never do (to our shame we may say it) and that he would have us to do them
is clear, or else he would not inspire us. Now God having done his part in
inspiring of us, he leaves us then to our free-wills, to do it, or not to do
it; as Saint Paul says concerning his chastity, I could wish that all men were
as I am: but if men had not free-wills to be so, it were in vain for him to
wish any such thing. Of all the evil opinions that are held by men, there is
none so senseless and unreasonable as this; for I would demand of them that deny
it, wherefore they go to hear Sermons, if they have not a free will to do what
is there urged to them by the Preacher; and wherefore they read the Bible if
they have not a will to do what is there commanded (for it is not the bare
reading of it will save their souls) why do they chide and beat their Children
and Servants, for not going to Church, and serving God, if they have not a
free will to do it? why have they persecuted Catholics for not coming to their
Churches, if they had not a free will to do so; and to what purpose should God
give us his Laws to keep, and threaten us with damnation if we keep them not,
if we had no free will to keep them; and no man would think it otherwise then
unreasonable, if a King should command him to do a thing, and threaten him with
death if he did it not, and he had no will nor power to do it: But I would have
those men know, that God is too merciful in his nature, then everlastingly to
punish us, for that which lies not in our power to do, and that at this rate
they would make God a Tyrant over us, that is so infinitely good to our souls
and bodies. And lastly, why are men punished, and hanged, and quartered by the
Law of Justice for their evil deeds, if they had not had a free will to have
done otherwise, all these punishments would be unreasonably inflicted; and no
man deserves any punishment for the worst of crimes, if he had no free will to
do that which is good: and the greatest sinner in the world, might at the Day
of Judgment demand of God what reason he has to damn him for doing ill, if he
never had enjoyed a free will to have done good. And now having as I think
fully proved this verity, I shall proceed to another subject, as plainly
declared in Scripture as this, and so conclude with this truth, that certainly
God would never have commanded us to walk in conformity to his will, if we have
not free will to perform it.

Chap. 10. Proving that good Works done in the state of Grace are Meritorious,
contrary to Protestants Opinion.
WEre the minds of men to be searched into, and known one by the other, it
would plainly appear that the tongues of many speak far contrary then what
nature has imprinted upon their hearts, and that for some interest or other
they give their consciences the lie, rather then they will yield from their
obstinate opinions; for to contradict the merit or desert of good works,
plainly shows they speak against that which they would not be deprived of
themselves: so plainly is it agreeable to our natures to expect it, and in
Scripture often promised to us, as shall be made appear. And first from our
Savior himself in Saint Matthews Gospel, where showing to us how we should
deal our alms in secret, Matthew 6. v. 4.
And thy Father, says he, which sees thee in secret, himself shall reward
thee openly: so here is a promise of our Savior, that alms done in secret
shall be rewarded, if we dare to take his word for it; by which it is plain
that they merit that reward from God, yet not as they barely proceed from us
neither, for it is Gods godness to inspire the doing of them in us, and his
gift too in making them meritorious; and in the want of this distinction lies
the subtilty of Satan, and our adverries, who make poor souls believe that
Papists (as they call them) trust to their merits so far, as not having any
need of Christ's Merits, think to be saved barely by their own: but when such
untruths as these are be-preach^ to the people from pulpits (as my own
knowledge can verify, and many thousands more) it is no wonder the common
people have prejudicate Opinions against Catholics: But to undeceive them
again, I will set down the general Decree of Gods Church concerning this point;
Coun. Trent.
God forbid that any Christian should hope in trust in his own Merits, but in
the Merits of Jesus Christ, whose goodness is so great to mankind, that those
things that are his Benefits he will have to be our Merits: by which it is
apparent, that we do not, nor ought not to attribute any merit as they proceed
from us barely, but as being the gifts of God, which is pleased to accept of
good works from us, and out of his goodness reward them, as he has promised he
will. But now to Scripture, and see what we can gather more from thence; where
in Saint Matthew, our Savior showing how hard it was for a rich man to enter
into heaven, because he could not leave the things of this world, Matthew. 19. v.
27.28.
Saint Peter cries out, Behold, we have forsaken all, and when shall we have;
so that it is evident, he expected a reward from our Savior: and in the next
verse he tells them what their reward should be, That when the Son of man comes
to sit in his glory, they should sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve
tribes of Israel: and as this shows the bounty of Christ in rewarding them so
highly, so it shows likewise that their good works in following of Christ, and
suffering for him, had served it, so far as was possible in men to do. Again,
we read of St. Mary Magdalen pouring a box of Ointment on our Blessed Saviors
head; which being murmured at by his Disciples, he said unto them, Matthew. 26,
v. 7, 10.
Why trouble ye the woman, she has wrought a good work upon me; and then he
declares her reward, which was, that so far as the Gospel was to be preached,
Ver. 13.
should her fame be spread: conformable to this our Savior in Saint Marks
Gospel says to his Disciples, Mark 9. v. 41.
that whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my name, because ye
belong to Christ, Verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward. Now what
can be more true then this, when our Savior himself so often does promise
rewards for good works done in his name, and for his sake; and let every
Christian consider, whether they are not bound to believe him, before those
that tell them the contrary, who plainly contradict Christ and his holy Gospel;
and yet forsooth these men make you believe their zeal is so hot to Christ,
that they will give all to him, to make you believe they deny themselves: but
these are such, who as our Savior says, are ravening Wolves. But again, our
Savior says in Saint Marks Gospel, Mark 10. v. 29, 30.
There is no man that has left house, or lands, or Wife and Children for my
sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold here, and in the
world to come eternal life. Thus in many places is this truth made so clear to
us by Christ himself, that I hope none will be so much an Infidel as to
practice the contrary. But further to show you this truth, observe this notable
place concerning this point, where our Savior speaking concerning the general
day of Judgment, declares for what causes some are saved and some damned; for
to the just he says, Mat. 25. v. 34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you; and then
in the next verse he tells them for what causes they are made eternally happy;
Ver. 35.
For I was a hungry and you gave me meat, I was thirsty and you gave me drink,
naked and you clothed me, etc. And the reasons why them on his left hand
received the sentence of hell fire, was because they did not do these good
works which the other had done; Ver. 41, 42.
and so as the just by good deeds had obtained heaven, so the wicked by their
evil ones had obtained hell. Now I verily think that if a Heathen, or Jew
should read this Book, they would say it was rather made for instructing them
in the Faith of Christ, then for those that profess themselves Christians, and
to believe the Bible, and yet to deny all this thus proved by the Bible. Now
having proved this by the words of Christ, we will see what Saint Paul his
Apostle says, who I will warrant you is of the same mind, as you shall see by
his words to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.
Now he that planteth and he that waters are one, and every man shall receive
his own reward, according to his own labor: by which words it is plain, that
every man shall receive his reward, according as he has himself deserved. And
in the second to Timothy he says, I have fought the good fight, I have kept
the faith; Chap. 4. v. 7.8.
henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which God the righteous
judge will give me at that day, and to all that love his appearing. Now here we
see that Saint Paul knew his reward for those good works, and declares that all
that loves Gods appearing shall be rewarded at the last day. And more in his
Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 6. v. 10.
he speaks to the purpose in this point, That God is not unrighteous to forget
you work, and labor of love which ye have showed toward his name, in that ye
have ministered to the Saints. Now you may perceive St. Paul's Opinion, which
was, that it would seem unjust in God if he should not reward our good works:
but as certain it is that God cannot be unjust, so is it as certain that he
will reward our good deeds done in communion with his Church; which if our
works did not deserve or merit, we should receive no reward at all; but on the
contrary receive an eternal punishment. Again, Saint John Evangelist says in
the Revelation. Rev. 3. v. 4.
To him that shall overcome shall thus be invested in white Garments, and I
will not put his name out of the Book of Life, and I will confess his name
before my Father, and before his Angels. And again, Ver. 12.
He that shall overcome I will make him a pillar in the Temple of my God, and
he shall go out no more. And in another place he says, Ver. 21.
To him that shall overcome will I grant to sit with me in my Throne. I might
and could produce many more places out of holy Scripture to this purpose; but
they that will not believe these, will not care for ten thousand proofs made
against their perverse principles: but I will only advise those that have any
care of their salvation, to consider, first what Gods word (which is truth it
self) declares to them. And secondly, what the practice of our Church is in
this and other points of Religion, and how agreeable to the same word, as is
clearly shown: for in reason only, is this apparent to all Christians, that if
God (as he does) inspire us to do all our good works, then must needs those
works be meritorious, because God inspired them to be done, and has promised
to reward the doing of them, according to that of Saint John, Be thou faithful
unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life; Rev. 22. v. 12.
And behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man
according to his work.

Chap. 11. Proving that Gods Church cannot Err in her Doctrine of Religion,
and so may be trusted in by every Christian, contrary to Protestants opinion.
DID the Adversaries of Gods Church but consider with themselves, what
authority, and courage, and order it has exercised for this sixteen hundred
years, they would surely conclude that no government but that of Gods holy
Spirit could ever perform the like; for by its authority it has always
suppressed, and beaten down Heresies, and by her courage overcome all the
torments and sufferings, her enemies could invent to lay upon her; and by her
Order, has ever retained in her Members one uniform Faith and Obedience, in
all places where her Doctrine has been spread: which if it be granted, or can
be proved, that Gods Holy Spirit is at all times with his Church, to direct her
in her Doctrine, I hope none will deny but that then she is infallible, and so
cannot possibly be capable of Error; and that it is so shall be made
manifestly to appear, if you will believe Christ himself, who cannot deceive
us; where in Saint John's Gospel telling his Disciples that he must go to his
heavenly Father to prepare them places, at length he gives them and his whole
Church this Consolation, And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another comforter, that he may abide with you for ever. John 14. v. 16.
Now we all know that the Apostles were not to remain for ever upon earth, for
they are dead and gone; so that this promise of Christ was to them, and his
Church after them, which is to remain to the end of the world: and in the next
verse he tells them who this comforter shall be, Even the Spirit of truth, whom
the world cannot receive. Now I would fain know how Gods Church can Err in
what she declares to us of Faith, Ver. 17.
when Gods Holy Spirit is with it. And again, But the Comforter, Ver. 26.
which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach
you all things. Now we may be sure, that since the Holy Ghost is to teach the
Church all things, there can be nothing but Truth taught in the same Church;
and I pray then where will your Errors remain, but in your own bosoms. But see
further the truth of this, our Savior parting out of this world, tells his
Apostles, That he would be with them, even to the end of the world; so that we
have two Persons of the Blessed Trinity promised to assist the Church of God
for ever, Matthew. 28. v. 20.
besides God the Fathers Divine aid; and if this Church Err with their
guiding, then there can be no truth at all for us to be guided by; for this is
as clear as the Sun, that if the Church of God be guided by an Infallible
Spirit it cannot Err: And the Church of God is guided by an Infallible Spirit;
therefore the Church of God cannot Err. And though I have made this good
already, yet I will make it more plainly appear from Christ's own words, where
he exhorting Brethren to be reconciled one to another; which if they will not
do by reasonable persuasions, they should tell the Church, Matthew. 18. v. 17.
and if they will not hear the Church, let them be as Heathens and Publicans:
by which it is plain, that if the Church were not Infallible, Just, and free
from Error, our Savior would never have tied us to her Judgment in our Faith
and Manners, under so sad a penalty as being a Heathen, if we do not hear and
submit to her; and therefore it is very necessary for every one to submit to
Gods Church, which is infallibly true, lest they be Heathens in the esteem of
God, and Man; and consequently out-lawes to the Kingdom of Heaven. Again, see
what our Savior says to this purpose, in the same Gospel, And I say unto
thee, Matthew. 16. v. 18.
that thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church, and the Gates
of Hell shall never prevail against it: now if the Church could be erroneous,
then you must deny this Gospel to be true; for no Errors can be in the Church
but by the prevailing power of the Devil, which is meant by Hell-Gates, and
which our Savior says, shall never prevail against it: so by this we are
certain the Church cannot Err; and we may confidently confide in her in all
matters of our Salvation. But for your further assurance, if our Savior be not
enough, I will show you what St. Paul says concerning this truth, where he
confirms all that has been said of it, speaking to holy Timothy; 1 Timothy 3. v.
15.
But if I tarry long, that thou may know how thou ought to behave they
self in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and
ground of the truth. Now here I might stop and say no more, for Saint Paul has
said enough; for if it be the pillar, or support of truth, and the ground from
whence truth is derived, is it not monstrous to think of Error; and I would
fain know in what place Christians should ever be free from error in their
Faith, if not in the Church of God; and for to say that there is no way to be
free from it would be very strange, for then all men would grope in dark
uncertainties, which is quite contrary to the Qualities and Excellencies of
Gods Church, as was foretold by the Prophet Isaiah, speaking of the Church of
Christ; Chap. 35. v. 8.
And an high way shall be there, and it shall be called the way of holiness,
and fools shall not err therein; now if there be no possibility for fools to
err in it, certainly wise men cannot. But this is no small subtilty of our
Adversaries to hold this opinion, well knowing that their Church has been, and
is full of errors; and that the gates of Hell has prevailed against it, has
manifestly appeared, and does now appear, when all that they can do cannot
allay the furious spirits of one Kingdom, nor reduce them to any Obedience to
their Church; so that if they did not hold this Opinion as an Article of their
Church, all the world would see theirs was not the Church of God, because it
has errors, by which they are forced to maintain it as well as they can,
though it be against both Scripture and Reason too. Now that this Church of God
is only the Roman Catholic, is plainly shown already, by her conformity to,
and practice of Gods holy word, in all her points of Faith, which she teaches
Christians to believe; and therefore all her enemies wrong her and themselves
too, in saying the contrary; for where is they cry out the Roman Church was once
the true Church of God, but she is fallen from it: now as they never could
prove the time when, nor the occasion how, so is it impossible it ever should,
because (as I have already shown) Gods Holy Spirit guides and directs it, that
the Gates of Hell can never prevail to overthrow it, nor bring it to error.
And now having sufficiently proved the Infallibility of Gods Church, I cannot
but advise every one that has any care of their eternal welfare, to embrace
and believe what she preaches concerning the same, and so conclude with that
of St. Augustine, Many things (says he) with much reason, kept me in obedience
to the Catholic Church; the consent of people and Nations holds me, the
Authority of the same Church which is risen up by Miracle, nourished with Hope,
augmented by Charity, established by its Antiquity, the succession of Bishops
holds me therein; which beginning in the Sea and Authority of Saint Peter, to
whom God recommended the care of his Flock, is maintained to this present time:
lastly, the name of Catholic holds me in it; and adds, he would not believe
the Gospel it self, if he were not assured of it by the Catholic Church.

Chap. 12. Proving the Doctrine of Remission of Sins, as commanded by Christ,
and practiced by his Apostles, contrary to the Opinion of Protestants.
WEre not the minds of many men corrupted with imperious principles, they
could not be so evil as to question, yea deny the gifts both of Grace and
Nature, that God has given both to Angels and Men, when we have much reason to
adore and praise him, that he has so much esteem of any of our Nature, as to
bestow such prerogatives upon them: amongst which, this is not the least that I
am to treat of, concerning remission of Sins by a Priest: which though there be
a grand mistake in this Point amongst Protestants, and we are abused in it; yet
I shall by Gods assistance, and by his holy word, clear the mistake, which may
easily remedy the abuse: for in all Mysteries of Christian Religion, we are to
consult with Gods word, which (if rightly understood) cannot deceive us, and
not with our own shallow understandings which easily may: neither are we to be
led away with aerie fancies of our own, nor with a giddy multitude, nor ought
the slanderous tongues of men to be trusted in; but if you find it plainly
declared in Scripture, then are we bound to believe it: for this is a general
crime in this Age, that men think nothing can be true if their narrow
capacities cannot comprehend it; as if all the mysteries of our Faith were so
open, for every ones understanding to enter the knowledge of them; which if
they were so, then there were no need of Faith, because Faith is only required
in those things our natures cannot comprehend, and so might every Turk and
Pagan be as good a Believer as a Christian: therefore for the redress of this
evil we are to understand whether Christ gave this power to his Apostles or no;
for if they had the power to pardon sins, as being the Heads of his Church, the
same power must remain to their Successors in that Church; because otherwise
all succeeding Ages would receive no benefit by that gift, which our Savior
gave for the good of us all that lay hold of it. And to prove that they had
this power is plain and easy enough; first, from Saint Matthews Gospel, where
our Savior telling Saint Peter he would build his Church on him, he says,
Mat. 16. v. 18, 19.
And I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose
on earth, shall be loosed in heaven: by which it is clear, that he had a great
power given him to pardon or not to pardon, and that those which he did not
pardon on earth, should not be pardoned in heaven, which is the same in Gods
Church to this day; and therefore let every one consider what reason they have
to be members of it, by which consists our eternal salvation. Again, our
Savior tells his Disciples in general, saying, Whatsoever ye shall bind on
earth shall be bound in heaven, Mat. 18. v. 18.
and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven: by which it
is plain, that they had this power of remission of sins, and to deny the same
power to their Successors in Gods Church would in my esteem be very
unreasonable: And as in all other points of Faith, the contempt of them
proceeds from a want of a right understanding of them, as I have shown
elsewhere, so is it the same in this; for it is buzzed in poor peoples ears,
Can man pardon sins, or can Priests forgive us, or the Pope absolve us, without
any consideration of the nature of it at all; for if we rightly understood our
selves, or did but consult with reason, we should soon be undeceived in this
mystery: For in the first place know, that it is the gift of Christ himself,
and therefore not to be questioned by any man. Secondly, Priests cannot pardon
sins by any natural power they have more then other men, but by a supernatural
grace from God; we know and confess, that it appertains to God only by nature
to pardon sins; and so does many other things, as working of Miracles, and
casting out of Devils, and healing the sick, and the like, which power we know
God has given unto men, as well as the other, proved by Christ himself, where
he speaking of all that truly believed in him, says he, These signs shall
follow Mark. 16. v. 17, 18.
in my name shall they cast out Devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they
shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt
them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover: now it is
certain, all these excellencies appertains to God by nature; but if he is
pleased to give this power to men, what reason have we to question, or be
offended with it; which power is equal to that of remission of sins, and we see
are both given to men by God. Thirdly, we are to consider, that Priests do not
pardon our sins immediately from themselves, but Ministerially, as when they
apply the words of Absolution on us; God has promised to pardon us, otherwise
he will not, John 20. v. 23.
as Christ says, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted; and whose sins ye
retain, they are retained: so that you see this is plainly true, if you dare
believe Christ himself. Now that this may not seem strange to you, do but
consider that great virtue that is in Baptism; where by the application of
water, and a few words by the Priest, or Minister, the child is pardoned of
all its original sin: now it is not the Minister, nor Water, nor words, that
pardons the Child, but God himself, who is pleased by them, and that means, to
do it; and yet it is so far from dishonouring God, that he is honored by it,
because it is his holy will it should be so; and this all Protestants believe,
which is as great a gift of God to mankind, as is the other; and by all people
thus plainly understood, will not appear so strange and monstrous, as they are
made believe it is: now we may plainly see how far those kind of men are from
being in Gods Church, that do not only not practice this truth, but rail
against and contemn it, though it be published by our Blessed Savior himself,
for the good of the whole world Again, consider, if God had not ordained this
in his Church, how should we know that our sins are pardoned by God at all, or
when they are so pardoned, but that he has promised when they do it on earth,
he will do it in heaven; and this is our only assurance, and as it were, a
mark, by which we know our sins are pardoned, that we may thank his Divine Name
for it, which otherwise we should be very uncertain when to do. I shall
conclude this Chapter with that wholesome Counsel of St. Augustine, who
desires, That none make doubt of the Priests right in Remission of Sins, Aug.
No. Test. q. 53
seeing the Holy Ghost is purposely given them to do the same; in which case if
any be yet contentious, he must deny the Holy Ghost to be God, and not to have
power to pardon sins: And only add that of St. Ambrose, who says, St. Amb.
(lib. 1. c 7. de peuitent.)
Why should it be more dishonor to God, or more impossible, or inconvenient
for men to forgive sins by Penance, then by Baptism, seeing that it is the
Holy Ghost that does it by the Priests Office and Ministry in both.

Chap. 13. Proving the Churches Universality, and that no Church is, or can be
Catholic but the Roman, against the Opinion of Protestants.
OF all the great actions that God has openly done for mankind, there is none
that he has declared more apparently, then that his Church should be spread in
all parts and corners of the whole world: to the intent that all Nations
hearing the sound of the Gospel, there could be none that might plead any
ignorance in the not hearing of it. Now as this shall be proved by the words of
Christ himself, so I will first show it you by the Infallible Prophesies of the
Prophets of God, Isa. 2. v. 2.
and first of Isaiah, And it shall come to pass, in the last days, that the
Mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the Mountains,
Christ's Church.
and shall be exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it; so
here is one true testimony, that the Catholic Church shall be spread in all
parts, and all Nations shall partake of her holy Doctrine, and not to lie hid
in a corner, as in one Kingdom, or City, or Congregation, or this man's Church,
or that man's Church, as all Sectaries do: by which I shall plainly prove they
cannot be any thing like Gods Church. And again, the same Prophet says,
(speaking of the many benefits that we shall enjoy under Christ's Church) That
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, Chap. 11 v. 9, 10.
as the waters cover the Sea; Now as we know they are spread in all parts of
the world, so is the knowledge of Gods truth spread by his Church in the same
manner; which quality agrees to no other Church but the Roman Catholic. The
same Prophet declares further, Chap. 49. v. 22, 23.
That Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing Mothers; (and
to show the great reverence they should bear to this Church of God, (says he)
They shall bow down to thee, with their faces toward the earth, and lick up the
dust of thy feet. Now I would demand, what Church or Sect in the Christian
world, that has Kings and Queens for their nursing Fathers and Mothers, but
the Roman Catholic; and so by consequence cannot be the Church of God, but are
as wandering sheep having no true shepherd, and so are daily exposed to the
rage and fury of that ravening wolf, John 10. v. 12.
the Devil. Again, the same Prophet speaking how largely Gods Church should be
stretched forth under the Gospel, Isa. 54. v. 2, 3.
says, Enlarge the place of thy Tent, let them stretch forth the curtains of
thine habitation, spare not, lengthen thy Cords, and strengthen thy stakes; for
thou shall break forth on the right hand, and on the left, and thy seed shall
inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate Cities to be inhabited. Now let the
understanding Reader judge, where this Prophecy is fulfilled, in Protestants,
and Sectaties, or in the Roman Church, which is thus stretched out, and has
her Members in the West Indies and East Indies, in China, in Tartary, in Egypt,
in Assyria, in Africa and Asia, in Turkey, and all parts of Europe, as the
Empire of Germany, the Kingdoms of Spain, France, Poland, England, Dominions of
Italy: and every Land in Christendom, is either all, or a considerable part of
this Church, which none in the world can say besides, and so are very far off
from fulfilling this Prophecy. And in another place he says, Chap. 66. v. 18.
And it shall come to pass that I will gather all Nations and Tongues, and they
shall come and see my glory. Thus has this holy Prophet by Gods inspiration
foretold clearly the Universal or Catholic State of the Church of God in the
time of the Gospel; and Jeremiah the Prophet has not been silent in
Prophesying the fame, for says he, Jer. 31. v 37.
If heaven above can be measured, and the foundation of the earth searched out
beneath, then will I cast off the seed of Israel, and the measuring line shall
go forth from Gareb to compass about Goath; all which do declare the large
extent of Christ's Church. And for confirmation of these Prophesies, and what
else has been said, I shall produce now the words of our Blessed Savior
himself, who telling his Disciples of all the troubles they were to suffer for
his name before Kings and Judges; Ma k 13. v. 10.
but says he, The Gospel must first be published among all Nations; which
plainly shows that Gods Church must be Catholic or Universal: and I would fain
learn from our Adversaries, what Church has taken the pains to publish the
Gospel to all Nations (and so fulfill these Prophesies) but the Pastors of the
Church of Rome? for this may be urged to the shame of all Sects, that if none
took more pains in converting of Heathens, Jews, and Infidels then they do,
many millions of souls might perish for want of the knowledge of the living
God: but they instead of laboring to convert foreign Nations, and so make the
Church Universal lie at home in a corner of the world, jangling one with
another, and sleeping on beds of Down in Ladies bosoms; and yet by all means
theirs is the true Church, and they the only Pastors sent to convert the
world, and yet never intend to go about any such matter. It is a wonderful
thing to consider, that men that read the Bible, and all these Prophesies, can
be so ignorant to think that Gods Church should be pinned up in so narrow
limits as any one Sect, or Congregation: did Christ himself preach for that,
and command his Apostles to publish the Gospel to all Nations? who did so, and
lost their lives in that work? was all this done, I say, to have his Church
thrust up in a corner, and to be no where else? how then shall all Nations come
to know God, how shall they be Baptized, in the Name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost? how shall they partake of any Sacraments? how shall the Church hear
their differences, Mat. 18. v. 17.
and decide them, as our Savior says it shall? how I say shall all this be
done, if it were so straightened? but since she is a Catholic Church, she is
every where: and so all persons (inspired by God) in all places may receive, if
they will, the foresaid benefits, which otherwise can never be done. And thus
is plainly shown you that there is an Universal Church; and that it is the
Roman Catholic, is as plain in its agreement with Gods Word, according to
Saint Paul, who highly commends the same Faith, Romans 1. v. 7, 8.
in these words, To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be Saints,
grace to you, and peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ:
First I thank my God for you all, that your Faith is spoken of throughout the
whole world: from which words we may gather, that if the Faith of the Romans
was so enlarged in the world sixteen hundred years ago, that now it is much
more; for then Gods Church was but in her Infancy, and now she is in her
flourishing State; she was then under most cruel persecutions by Tyrants, and
now (praised be God) she is at rest with her friends: so that now we may
clearly see, that all those that are shut up in such narrow Corners, are merely
Sects and Heresies, and are clean shut out from the bosom of the Spouse of
Christ, which is his Holy Catholic Church; and so consequently are in a very
dangerous state, as to the salvation of their souls. Our Savior does further
demonstrate this extent of his Church by the similitude of a grain of
Mustard Seed, Mark 4. v. 31, 32.
which being at first very small, it grows to a great tree; so that the fowls
of the air makes their nests therein: even so the Church was at first very
small, but now it is so spread over the face of the earth, that all men may
make their nests, that is, come into her Communion, and be secure of their
salvation, living according to her holy commands, which you see are agreeable
to the Divine Word of God. Again, Christ says (speaking of the visibility of
his Church in the world) A City set upon a hill cannot be hid; Mat. 5. v. 14,
15.
neither do men light a Candle, and put it under a Bushel, but on a
Candlestick, and it gives light to all in the house: Now this light that Gods
Church was to give by this here spoken by our Savior, is not at all seen to
foreign parts, by any Church, but the Roman Catholic, who has the light of
her Doctrine as far extended, as the Sun has his beams; when all others being
but in Corners at home, can give no light at all to any; which clearly shows
none of them can be Gods Church, but of the Synagogue of Satan; for they have
none of the marks of the true Church, so plainly set down in Scripture as to be
Catholic or Universal, and to be visible in all Ages, to be at union and peace
one with another, to convert Nations, and several others, which they have none;
for instead of universality, and being spread all over the world, many of them
will not make ten Parishes in ten Kingdoms, and the best of them scarce a whole
Kingdom in the whole world: and instead of being visible to all ages, the names
of Protestants, Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, and the rest, were
never heard of a hundred and sixty years past: and as for their union in Faith,
which Christ left his Church as a mark, I leave to all people to judge, how
much that belongs to any of them, that have seen and known these twenty years
confusion about Religion; for Saint Paul says of the Church of God, If any man
be contentious we have no such custom. And for their converting of Nations, I
am sure they will not boast of that themselves, since they never did any. By
all this it is plain, that as the Roman Church has all these properties, so
she must be, and is this only true Catholic and Apostolic, (or none at all)
and from her must we receive our Faith, according to that of our Creed; I
believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church; so that they that deny
the Church to be Catholic, or the Catholic Church, do plainly deny their own
Bibles, and the Apostles Creed; which are the Articles of our Faith. But having
said enough on this subject for all reasonable people, I will conclude with
that saying of St. Augustine, Augustine. tract. 1. in Ep. Joan.
For albeit particular hills in one Country may be unknown in another, (yet
says he) a Mountain that passes throughout all Countries, and fills up the
whole world, (as Daniel Prophefied the Church of Christ should do) cannot but
be apparent to the sight of all men, Dan. 2. v. 44, 45.
but only of such as illingly shut their eyes from the sight thereof.

Chap. 14. Proving that Fasting on certain Days commanded by Gods Church to be
lawful and good, contrary to the Opinion of Protestants.
HAd Almighty God when he created man a reasonable creature, to do his will,
and to live in sobriety and temperance, made him an Epicure, and designed him
for no other purpose, he could not have lived either in more contempt or less
practice of this Divine Virtue, then the people of our Age do; who indeed look
upon all the rare Examples and holy Institutions of our Blessed Savior, as
things indifferent, and of no concern at all to them; nay, are so far from the
practice of them themselves, that they deride and scorn those that do; as if it
were a crime to be virtuous, or to follow the examples and, commands of our
Savior, who in many places of his holy word has exhorted us to the good work
of Fasting, as very necessary to subdue our sensual appetites, and to obtain
heaven. This will evidently appear, if you confult with Holy Writ, where we
shall first see our Saviors great example in fasting forty days and forty
nights; Mat. 4. v. 2
and I would gladly know wherefore he did so, if not for our example of a good
life; for he never committed sin, and therefore did not require to do any such
thing for punishment; and I think no man will say he did it for pleasure, by
which it is plain that he fasted for our example: but the common objection is,
can you fast as Christ did, if not, to what purpose is yours done? he fasted
forty days, can you do so? and thus people would fain slip their necks out of
the nooze: for I would ask them, wherefore was Christ humble and meek? why did
he pray, and watch, and weep? why was he patient, and courteous to all, but
only for our example, that we should imitate him; and shall we not strive to
do any of these virtues, but slight them all, because we cannot do them with
that perfection as Christ did them, is not this mere madness to think? but let
such people know, that as it is impossible for the best of us to do them with
exactness, as he did, so God does not require it from us; but to the utmost of
our powers we are bound to practice them, and so we are this Christian act of
fasting; the force and power of which, Mat. 17. v. 21.
as our Savior says, Casts out some sorts of Devils; which being so, we may
very well think that God cannot but be pleased with the doing of it; and we may
justly imagine, that the Apostles were strict observers of this rule: for Saint
Paul in his counsel that he gave to Timothy, bids him to mingle a little wine
with his water for his healths sake: 1 Timothy 5. v. 23.
which plainly shows, that he chiefly abstained from strong drink, drinking
only water: and so it is said of St. John Baptist, that his meat was locusts
and wild honey; which was very hard food for nourishing the body in any
delights, but rather served as they designed them, for mortification; and that
is the only cause that Gods Church commands her Children to fast and abstain
from meat that they may in some measure break their own wills, and mortify
their fleshly members, that they may be more conformable to Gods will, and
better disposed to his holy service. It would be too tedious to set down all
places of holy Scripture to prove this, as the often fasting of the Israelites,
and of King David, who mourned, and wept, 2 Samuel 1. v. 12.
and fasted until evening: and of Nehemiah that mourned and fasted certain
days, Nehem. 1. v. 4.
and prayed before the God of heaven; and in another place the Jews fasted and
prayed with earth upon their heads: Chapter 9. v. 1.
and as it was a practice by all our forefathers, so it is, and ever will be
in Gods Church. Again, we read that all the City of Nineveh at the preaching of
Jonas put on sackcloth, Jonah 3. v. 7.
and fasted, both man and beast: now in my opinion these proofs might have been
omitted, for the proof of this point, since reason and Christianity might
induce us to practice that which in it self is the occasion of much good, both
for soul and body: It has been so general a practice in all ages by Gods
Church, that Saint Augustine said, They were guilty of a mortal sin that did
not saft the holy time of Lent; and certainly there is none that is thus sick
of that disease, but those, that rely wholly upon kitching physic, and so
take so much care to preserve and feed the body that they totally neglect the
medicines and food for the soul. And besides, what has been said as to the
example of Christ, and the good it procures to our souls, let us consider what
holy intents the Catholic Church has in the keepign of some particular days
of fasting, and as for the time of Lent, she has ordained the keeping of it
forty days before the Passion and Resurrection of our Savior; first, to
imitate to the utmost of our power, his holy example. Secondly, that we should
by Fasting and Praying then, more then ordinary, have a dolorous resentment of
his bitter Passion, which he suffered for us. And thirdly, that we might with
true prepared hearts celebrate the happy time of the Resurrection of his
glorious body, and with reverence approach to the holy Sacraments of Gods
Church; and for our Fasting on Friday every week, it is that we may all cease
from the pleasures of our taste, that day our Savior tasted Gall and Vinegar;
and a little to punish our bodies by fasting, when our Savior suffered so many
dolorous wounds for us, in his tender and delicate Body, for the salvation of
the world. Now if any one can find any evil in these intents and practices of
the Church, let them quarrel with them still; but if not (as I am sure justly
they cannot) then are they bound in conscience to follow the practice of so
holy an Institution. I will a little digress from my first purpose, by quoting
an ancient Father or two for confirmation of this point, and so conclude this
Chapter; as first, St. Jerome, Elias and Moses (says he) by fasting forty
days were filled with a familiarity with God; In c. 58. Isa.
and our Lord himself fasted as many in the Wilderness, to leave unto us the
solemn days of Fast, that is Lent. And again (says he) We fast forty days,
Ep. 54. ad Marcel.
or make one Lent in a year, according to the Traditions of the Apostles, in
time convenient: And grave St. Ambrose says plainly, That it was not ordained
by men, but consecrated by God, nor invented by any earthly cogitation, but
commanded by the Heavenly Majesty: thus is it plainly proved that this practice
is no new invention, but what has been generally practiced by all holy men who
have been Members of the Roman Catholic Church, and so will it continue, as
long as God has a Church upon earth, which we are sure will be until the
consummation of the world.

Chap. 15. Proving that Scripture is very hard to be understood, and that we
cannot rightly know the meaning of it, but by relying upon the Church of God,
which is infallible; contrary to Protestants Opinion.
IT would not seem a little strange, did we but consider the folly of many men
who have such low thoughts of Angels and Saints, as that they know nothing; and
yet are so grossly arrogant of their own knowledge, that none of the grand
Mysteries of the Bible (as they think) are unknown to them, and that the whole
Church of God is less to be trusted in then they; and so by this demi Devil,
self-conceit, they wrong themselves, and strive to deprive Gods Church of that
privilege which Christ has given to her alone, with commands to us, to hear
and obey her in all things concerning our Salvation: but had these men been
acquainted with St. Augustine, he would have told them another story, who cries
out concerning Scripture, O wonderful profoundness of thy words, wonderful
profoundness, my God, wonderful profoundness, it makes a man quake to look on
it, to quake for reverence, and to tremble for the love of it; and those places
(says he) which I know not, are many more then those that I know: by which
every considerate man may judge with himself, that if this great Doctor and
light of Gods Church had this opinion of Scripture, and of his weakness in
expounding it, what little reason every particular man has to think it easy
for him to do, that never was so learned, and inspired of God as he was, as all
the Christian world knows; and that his opinion then, is agreeable to the
Catholic Church now; and that to Gods holy word, shall be made most manifest;
and first from St. Peter's own testimony, who though he was an Apostle of
Christ, yet apprehended Saint Paul's Epistles to be very hard in the
understanding of them: as also in all his Epistles (says he) are many things
hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as
they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction. And if there be
so many places hard to be understood, how many may be justly conclude there is
in the Revelations, where, as St. Jerome says, every sentence is a Mystery;
and how many in the Canticles, and in the Prophesies of Daniel, and many other
places; and I would know how any particular man can tell what Christ meant in
many Mysteries he spoke, and how he knows what the Angel meant when he revealed
those high Mysteries to St. John, and what Solomon meant when he declared these
excellent simiditudes of Gods Church, and what St. Paul meant when he writ
those hard places spoken of: if they answer me, Gods Spirit tells them the
meaning, and that they are persuaded it is so, let every one judge how poor this
answer is (which is common amongst them) for cannot every Sectary plead the
same; a Cobbler may allege that as well as a Doctor, and a Tinker as well as a
Divine: and this presumption of interpreting the Bible by private spirits, has
been the cause of all these Sects and Opinions that are now in the world, which
would rend the seamless Coat of Christ, which is his Church, in pieces if they
could. If God had ordered every one to be his own Interpreter, he would never
have caused Saint Paul in his Epistle to command us to obey our Pastors whom
he has placed to rule over us: and (says he) Submit your selves, Heb. 13.17.
for they watch for your sols, and shall give an account for you. It is a
wonder that this Text i^ not blotted out by all self-conceite^ people, or that
they do not deny it to be good Scripture (as they do many other places) for if,
as St. Paul says here, we must obey our Pastors, (that is those that teach
the true Faith of Gods Church) why then we must forsake our own fancies in
expounding hard places of Scripture, because God has given it in their charge
to do that, and put us into their charge too to be guided by them; for says
the Text, Submit to them, and how do we that when we scorn them, and submit to
none but our own will, quite contrary to Gods holy word, which one day will be
the only witness against such kind of men: and since Saint Paul tells us that
they watch over our souls, and shall give an account for us; who is it but
those that are blind, does not see that we are bound in conscience to submit
to their judgments. But the common peevish objection by many people is, shall
I pin my faith upon any man's sleeve, or cannot I know and understand the Bible
my self, it is plain enough: and thus poor souls are miserably cheated by the
subtilty of Satan, for this snare catches thousands; for it is the very same
that caught our first Parents; for he made them believe that they should be as
wise as God, Genesis 3. ver. 5.
to know good and evil; and so he leads these kind of men to their desruction,
by telling them they may be as wise as their Pastors, if they read the Bible
they shall know the meaning as well as they: and so these hellish suggestions
passes current with them, for the spirit that tells them the meaning of all;
for the Devil well knows, that if he possesses any with self-conceit, he has
done his work: And now I have discovered this great abuse that is put upon many
men, I will prosecute the remedy, and declare what we is best to be taken, to
know those hard places in Scripture, and the true sense of them; First, we are
to renounce our own judgments, which may easily deceive us, and resign our
selves to Gods Church which cannot; for since we are sure that God ever had in
the world a Visible Church, and that this Church cannot not err, as I have
proved before, because the Holy Ghost is the guider of it; what better way can
any man possibly devise, then by submitting his Faith to Gods Church, for if we
do so we do what God commands us, and then we discharge our duty; which if they
that are in the visible Government of it teach us any thing that they ought not
to do, they shall answer it it to God, and not we, for we are in their charge,
and they must give an account for us, as St. Paul before tell us; and let any
man in reason judge, (if there were no command for it by God) whether it be not
more secure to stand to the uniform judgment of one hundred thousand grave
Doctors in Gods Church, which all agree in one exposition of the Bible now, and
with all that has gone before, that were of the same Church, then with their
own private spirit, or to rely upon those that cannot agree amongst
themselves, but ar ein continual contest one with another. And for our further
assurance and security we shall have, by resigning our selves to the Church, we
are to consider, that as Gods Church is guarded by his power from the Gates of
Hell ever having any power over it, so we as Members of it can never fall from
our Faith, as long as we are so resigned, for till then we are continually
wavering and unconstant in our minds, as too many by experience finds it
true; but when we are so settled we have perfect freedom to serve God, in that
second principle of Christian Religion, which is good works. I shall only add
one thing to all serious peoples considerations, that is, why there is so many
sorts of Bibles amongst Protestants, and all Sectaries, and what their design
is in it: as for example, some have all the Books of Scripture, and some leave
out the Apocraphy (as they call it) some have Contents to their Chapters, and
some have not, and every translation differs in a thousand places at the least;
and the reason of it is clear to those that are not willing to be cheated in
their souls, because every Translator makes them dance after his Pipe; that is,
the Bible he translates, shall be sure to favor his pernicious opinions; and
being taxed with it, they all cry, the meaning is the same: but I would demand
of those presumptuous persons, how they dare to alter the Scripture, either by
adding or diminishing, since there is a curse pronounced against them that do,
Rev. 22. v. 18, 19.
by God himself: for since we are all surek, that the first Bible that we had
for our instruction, Deuteronomy. 4. v. 2.
was writ by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost; is it not a high presumption
for any man to vary from that, and then pretend that the meaning is the same,
when many times the altering of one Letter mars the sense of a whole Sentence;
much more when they alter a word, nay Sentences themselves, to work their own
designs; as if, what God ordained at first had need to be corrected by their
wisdoms: by which it does appear, that if every Heretic could have his will,
he would trust out of Scripture all places that make against his principles;
and yet it would (with them) be as good Scripture as any: and then to interpret
that by their own private spirits, must needs bring strange confusion, both in
the knowing which is the true word of God, and what the meaning of it is. If we
consult with holy David we shall find that he apprehended more difficulty in
knowing the word of God then these kind of men do; who says, Give me
understanding, Psalm. 119. v. 34.
O God, and I will search thy Law: sure he was as wise as any that pretend so
much of the Spirit, and yet he would not so much as search into those Mysteries
without particular assistance from God. So we read that the Eunuch which was a
man of great authority under the Queen of Candice, and so consequently of great
knowledge; yet when Saint Philip the Apostle asked him whether he understood
what he read out of Isaiah concerning Christ, he answered, How can I, Acts
8.30, 31.
except some man should guide me? and then Philip (whose charge it was)
declared the meaning to him; by which we may see that he, though a great man,
was not so presumptuous to interpret Scripture of himself, as many do now; and
yet might as well have pretended the spirit as they: since we see, he was so
well given, as to go so far from his own Country to worship God in Jerusalem,
and to read the Bible in his going home. In like manner our Savior meeting
with two of his Disciples going to Emaus, Luke 24. v. 27, 45.
after his Resurrection, it is said he expounded to them all the Scriptures;
and when they were altogether he appeared to them, and opened their
understandings, that they might know the Scriptures: from whence we may justly
gather, that if his Disciples and Apostles (which were so conversant with
Christ in his lifetime) were so ignorant of Scripture, as not to know the
meaning of the Prophets which foretold his Resurrection, the third day, and
other Mysteries of his Death and sufferings, what ignorance then have we (or at
least we ought to think so) that never had those large means that the Apostles
had: but such is the miserable state of these unhappy times, that many think
themselves more wise, and more holy, then the Apostles were, or then the whole
Church of God is now; and I think in time they will like Lucifer, suppose
themselves equal to God himself. Thus having sufficiently proved the difficulty
of understanding the Scripture, with the danger of expounding it, to our own
private sense; together with what course to follow in knowing the true meaning,
which is by adhering to Gods holy Church: I will conclude with that saying of
Saint Augustine, Augustine. l. 1. cont. Crescon.
Then do we hold (says he) the verity of the Scriptures, when we do that which
now seems good to the Universal Church, which the authority of Scripture
themselves do commend; so that forasmuch as the holy Scripture cannot deceive,
whosoever then is afraid to be deceived with the obscurity of questions, let
him therein ask counsel of the same Church, which the holy Scripture most
certainly, and evidently points and shows unto us.

Chap. 16. Proving the necessity of the Churches Divine Servince to be said in
the Latin Tongue, or in one Language, in all places of the world where it is
exercised; contrary to Protestants Opinion.
DId all Christians follows the counsel of our Blessed Savior in his
commanding us to submit and adhere to Gods Church, there would not be such
quarrellings in our minds, nor bad speeches from our mouths, against her holy
Institutions; which though sometimes have not an apparent rise from Scripture,
yet are ordained in the Church by the instinct of the Holy Ghost; who (as I
said) is always with her to direct her in all her proposals to us concerning
our Salvation: and as we may reasonably think, that as God has committed to
her charge the dispensation of the holy Sacraments to us, and other high
qualities, so he has invested her with power to Ordain, Constitute, and
Decree, any thing that may be to the good and benefit of the same Church; which
Decrees and Constitutions we are bound to observe, and without any difficulty
in Conscience may, so long as it is not against Gods word, but rather agreeable
to the same: amongst which things that are thus constituted by the Church, this
of the Latin Service is one, which I shall prove to be somewhat agreeable to
Scripture, and altogether to Reason, and the practice of the Church of God in
all Ages. First, we will observe something pertinent to this in Saint Lukes
Gospel, wheere he declares, Luke 1. v. 10.
that when Zacharias the Priest was offering and praying to God in the Temple,
for himself and all the people, that the whole multitude of the people were
praying without at the time of his offering Incense; by which it appears, that
they knew not what he said, nor understood any thing of it; which is now the
main objection against us in this point by our Adversaries: but to satisfy
these people, we are to take notice, that the public or common Service of Gods
Church, being composed of Sucrifice, Prayers, and Thanksgivings, is therefore
chiefly designed for the honor and glory of God, as being every day offered up
to him by the Priests, and not for the edification of the people; so much by
understanding it, as by the benefit they receive and partake of, being present
at it; for when the Priest says the service of the Church he offers it to God
for himself, 1 Cor. 14 v. 2. Heb 5. v. 1.2, 3.
for the people present, for the whole Church, or for any other necessities of
people that are absent; so that it matters not whether they understand him or
no, since they have as much benefit of his Prayers as if they did; for if they
heard him not speak a word it were the same thing, so long as God both hears
him and understands him, to whom it is offered and designed; for in Sacrifice,
Prayer, and Thanksgiving, the Priests spak to God, and not to the people: for
example, when any man lies sick, or in distress at home, he sends to the Church
to be prayed for, by the Minister and Congregation, now shall we think because
he hears nor understands not those which pray for him, that he has no benefit
by their prayers, this were absurd to think; for then we should be never the
better for our Saviors Intercession to his heavenly Father for us, whom we
understand not, nor know when, nor for what he intercedes to him, and yet we
all receive much good by it; and so we do in the Priest^ saying the Divine
Service, who represents the place of our Savior on earth to mediate for us;
and we are assured that the effectual servent prayers of a righteous man
prevails much, James 5. v. 16.
whether we hear and understand them or no: but yet to discover the folly of
those that impugn this practice, they may please to take notice, that the
Latin tongue is not so much unknown or understood, as it is thought it is; for
if there was any need to understand the Service (as I have proved there is not)
there be many thousands of our Church and others that understand the Latin
Tongue, and those people that do not, are so well instructed by the Church,
that with the instruction and the custom of hearing Mass, they know when to
kneel, and when to stand, when to pray, and when to give thanks; when to do
reverence, and when not: besides most of the Service they have in their English
Books, and may know any part of the rest when they will, if there were any
need, as there is none; so that it is not said in Latin because the common
people should not understand it, (as Heretics falsely report) but for a great
necessity and convenience in the Church (as I shall suddenly prove:) but first
it is observable, that though the common people in England read th Bible in
English, yet they understand not half of it; nor which is worse, are never made
to understand it; yet Protestants will say they must not therefore leave the
reading of it quite, because the understanding of some parts is beneficial to
them; so their Common Prayer being read and sung in Cathedrals and other
places, is not understood by many of the wiser sort, much less by the common
people, and so is all one, as if it were in Latin; yet if there were any
benefit to be had, it would be never the less to them, because they understood
it not; since as I said before, it is offered to God only for all the Church,
and not to us. And since it is so in these practices amongst them, I hope they
will not but think that those that are ignorant amongst us, may, and do receive
much comfort by our Churches Service; since by being so often at it, and good
instructions from Priests, they come in short time to the knowledge and meaning
of it: but perhaps some may object, that since we cannot understand them
perfectly, why should we go to Church to hear the Servince? to which I anser,
that it is without complare better to go to Gods Church to offer our Devotions
by every ones praying to God, by being present at the Instituion of the Blessed
Sacrament, by seeing devout people receive it, with true devotion: besides,
none but Atheists will deny, but that it is better to do any act of Devotion in
a Church dedicated to Gods holy Service and nothing else, then in a profane
house, which is chiefly designed for temporal business: but indeed, as
Protestants do their Devotion in Churches, there is no great difference, who
sit on their tails, staring about them when their Common Prayer is said, and
have more regard to the manner, then to the matter performed. But it is far
otherwise with Catholics in the Church, for there every one is on their knees,
praying to God for such things as they stand in need of, and the Priest prays
for them all; so that were it in the Mother Tongue it signified nothing more,
and if they heard him not speak a word it were the same: for why? the Priest is
bound to say the Divine Service every day, if there were no person present but
himself; and yet we may receive benefit by his Prayers too, that neither see,
hear, nor understand him, because the prayers of any good man prevails with
God, though the persons prayed for were a thousand miles off. This now that
has been said may suffice any moderate person, as to the belief that there is
no necessity of understanding the Common Service (as there is in the hearing of
Sermons, for those are always preached in the Mother Tongue to common people)
because when the Priest says Mass, or Divine Service, he speaks to God, and
when they preach, it is directed to man only. But now I will show the reason
why it is said in Latin in all places of the world, and the convenience of it:
First, we are to consider that the Catholickd Church is not pinned up into one
Kingdom, or Dominion, as other Churches are, that say their Service in the
Mother tongue; for which reason, since that all Nations from her receive one
uniform Faith, so they have all one Service, in one Language, which has many
conveniences with it (and no incommodity at all) for by that maeans Priests
that are sent into Foreign Countries, where they speak never a word of the
Language when they come there, yet may do that for which they were sent and
commanded there; that is, say Mass and administer the Sacraments, as well as if
they did, and those in those Countries where they are sent, can as well
understand them as their own Priests they had before, being Natives: Besides
many thousands of Catholics travel from one part of Christendom to another,
and come where they will in any of their Churches, they understand and hear the
same Service that they do at home; which if it were not said in all places in
one Language they could not; for since the Catholic Church is composed of so
many Nations, and are continually traveling and mixing one with the other, it
would be barbarious to all strangers to hear that Service which none of them
understood: (If there were any necessity for the understanding of it) as for
example, the French, Spaniards, Italians, Dutch, ^^sh, etc. come all at one
time to our Service, here in England; now were it said in English, it would be
barbarous to them all; but being in the same Tongue, as it is in their own
Countries, they understand it as well as if they were there: so that the
discreet Reader may see what necessity and convenience the Church has in using
the Latin service; which if it were confined to so narrow limits as others
are, would use none but the Mother Tongue as others do: so that all Christians
may, see the integrity of Gods Church, which in this and all other points,
orders every thing for the good and convenience of all her Members; and which
is done with so much wisdom and prudence, that it plainly appears to be guided
by the Spirit of God: as also the malice of our enemies is shown, who make
people believe that Papists are kept in gross ignorance, and must not read the
Bible, nor must not understand the Common Service, because they shall not (as
they say) know what the evil of it is: and such fooleries in continually buzzed
in their ears, but bow slanderously let every Christian judge. Now that this
has been the practice of the whole Church for this sixteen hundred years, and
the belief of all the ancient Fathers, our adversaries themselves know
sufficiently, yet for the love of their large Revenues will not discover it
(nor other points as true as Gospel) to the people that want understanding; for
which one day they must be sure to give a severe account to God, whom they
cannot deceive. And for to bring in the Sentences of the Fathers to prove this,
would swell this Book into a larger Volume then is designed; I will quote them
where they are to be found, that every one may know their practice in this
point, (and first see Saint Cyprian, Expo. orat. domn. 13. Saint Gregory, Lib.
7. Ep. 65. Jerome, Prefat. in Psalm. ad Sophron. Chrisos. lib. 2. c. 13.) and
conclude with Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 11. v. 16.
that if after all this that has been said, any man be contentious, we have no
such custom, nor the Church of God.

Chap 17. Treating in general of both Churches.
NOw having plainly proved all the chief points of our Faith by the Protestants
own Bible, I shall proceed a little to speak in general concerning both
Religions, that all men may consider and see, by their Antiquity, Rise,
Practice, and Proceedings, which is the likeliest to be the Church of God, if
it had not been, or were not to be proed by Scripture: for in the first place
we shall find all Religions (but the Roman Catholic) so like innocents for
Age, They are all Novelties in comparison to Gods Church.
that they have not yet left their Cradles, that is, they are rocked up and
down by their new opinions, and so far from being settled, that it is to be
feared they never will; for what wise man can be so much an enemy to truth, as
to think Gods Church was not spread in the world before Henry the Eighths time,
or Martin Luthers, or John Calvin's, The rise of all Sectaries.
who were the first bringers in of all Religions, but the Roman, (as every one
knows which has read any thing) and for such men who were known to be lewd,
and evil livers, to pretend new lights, and discoveries from God, for the
alteration of Christian Religion, who sees not, but that it was preposterous
(as it has proved) for I would demand, why did our Blessed Savior preach
Christian Religion, and send his Apostles and Disciples to preach the same to
all Nations in the world, that they might plant true points of Faith, and they
did do it, and watered it with their Blood; was this done for nothing, that
when these pretended Reformers came, they must make the world believe, that God
would undo all again (what had been practiced so long in all Christendom) to
have new Religions of their making set up; sure these men thought, that either
God knew not what he did, when he planted the first, or that all people but
themselves were very simple, to receive a second Faith from them, of their own
inventing, as plainly appeared soon after, and does still; for no sooner were
they severally grown to any authority with silly people, but they began to rail
and revile one against the other just as we see their succeeding followers do
to this day, (which indeed is proper to all Sectaries and Heretics to do)
which showed then, and now, of what far distance their doctrine was from
pleasing God, who is the God of peace, and hareth contention; as also far from
being of his Church, since there is no such custom (as Saint Paul says) and
yet we see by woeful experience in this Kingdom, how these Sects (which are
the spawn of Heresy) still grow more and more amongst us; and in their
increasing are still more monstrous then at first, in their opinions against
God, and Christian Religion; and yet they say (as the first of them did) that
God has sent them to convert and purge the world, and bring in new Relgions;
and so all Heretics that come after this Age will say the like; and so it
seems by them that God will never settle any, but have every Age a new
Religion. And thus we may see what a tempestuous sea Heresy is, which tumbles
them up and down that follow it, and never are at rest here, till they imbarque
themselves in the secure Ship of the Catholic Church, where God himself is the
Pilot; from whence those unhappy souls that went out (and were the cause of
these prodigious storms) have suffered shipwreck on the quicksands of their
own giddy fancies. Again, let us observe further, how monstrous these Heresies
and Factions are, and how destructive both to men's souls, and to Monarchy, in
the Civil Government of our Bodies: First, we may easily perceive what ruin
it has brought to many souls, Their bad practices and proceedings
when they are taught to deny all these Principles of Faith, proved in this
Book by the word of God, and other high points by some of them, as the Godhead
of Christ, and the Holy Ghost, is denied by Antebaptists, and Quakers, and too
many others, and Baptism of Infants: and amongst them altogether, is practiced
such a furious contempt of Gods word, and all the Sacraments and Divine
Mysteries of Christian Religion, as never was yet known or heard of in the
Christian world before; so that some people are even distracted, and know not
where to go for to find rest for their souls, because so many Sects pretend
for the truth, and are all false; because as Saint Paul says, there is but one
Faith, one God, and one Baptism; and the Catholic Church is the only Haven
for all those troubled spirits (that seek for truth) to find repose in. And
how destructive they are to Civil Government, I need not quote any Author to
prove it, since our King and Kingdom at home, as well as others abroad, have
felt the hellish hands of Heresy and faction, in such sort, that Rebelling
against our (deceased) lawful Sovereign, they did not only spill his Royal
Blood, but thousands of his Subjects, and this under the appearance of Religion
too as well as any: but they that see not these to be snares and pits of the
Devil, deserve to fall into them, since none but those that are wilfully blind
can be caught in such visible ginns.

And now as I have briefly shown you the rough and stormy Seas of Heresy and
Factions, so I will open the gate to let you see the smooth and pleasantest
Waters of Gods Church, which runs through every vein of the world peaceably,
without noise or disturbance, agreeable to his Word, woe said, My peace I leave
with you, and that you love one another as I have loved you; which words of our
Savior is no where observed (as I have shown by the malice and contentions
that is amongst Heretics) but in the Catholic Church, The Churches Antiquity
and rise.
which has had this peace which Christ left ever since he left it; and as it
began then in his time, and the Apostles, to be a famous Church throughout the
world, so has it continued in the same splendour and purity to this day, as is
plainly seen; first, by her being so conformable in her Doctrine she now
teaches, to the true and infallible word of God (as I have proved.) Secondly,
in her continuance of her lawful Line of Pastors. Thirdly, in her Apostolical
care for the Conversion of Nations, that know not God, which otherwise might
perish. Fourthly, The Churches practice.
by her Miracles famed throughout the world, as our Savior said, who ever did
believe truly in him should have power to cast out Devils, Mark 16. v. 17, 18.
and take up Serpents, and drink poison and not hurt them; so his Church which
has only truly believed in him, has only had many Members that has truly
done those Miracles (as many Protestants themselves confess.) Again, if we
consider the different order that is in both Churches, it may justly amaze all
reasonable men; the Priests of the Catholic Church never marry, nor enjoy any
great Estates, that so they may be freely divested from the worlds interests
(as the Apostles were) to attend wholly to perform their charge in Gods Church,
and the conversion of souls; on the contrary, the Ministers of all other
Churches do generally marry, and enjoy very great Possessions, and Riches; by
which they are so encumbered with the world, as very few are more, as we daily
see by their continual Suits of Law, and griping cares to advance themselves
from one great Benefice to another; not at all considering, that if they were
true Pastors, they should feed Gods Sheep; that is, go preach in remote places
of the world amongst Pagans that know not God, as the Apostles did, and as
Catholic Priests do to this day; and as all must do that follow the examples
and commands left by Christ, or else they cannot be of his sending; by which we
have very great reason to suspect all these new teachers that lie at home at
ease and pleasure, and are so far from taking the toil and pains of converting
Pagans, This is too truly proved by many that dye and never have either
Sacraments nor any other comfort from them in their agony of Death.
that many of them will not stir to a poor person that lies a dying, because
they cannot receive a golden Recompense. Again, in the Catholic Church there
be many thousands of her Members that are Royally and Nobly Born to great
Possessions, that quit them all to serve God in strict courses of Religion; as
Fasting, Watching, Praying, giving Alms, and many other bodily Mortifications,
in Religious Houses, where nothing but the Service of God is exalted. The vast
difference of the two Churches practice.
Now I would fain know from whence the doing of so much good does proceed, but
from the inspiration of God; and for to find one now of any other Religion,
nobly born, or of mean quality, to forsake an Estate for the Service of God in
their way, would be such a miracle, as was yet never heard of amongst them, nor
never will be: but on the contrary, all people of all conditions take their
full career in doing what they please themselves; for they will not hear the
Church, nor Fast, nor Pray, nor receive the Sacrament but when their fancy
pleases, and so are let run in a negligent state never to give an account for
their sinful actions to the Church at all; (as God commands we should) and so
by it is means the flood-gate of all evil is opened, for all manner of people to
plunge themselves over head ad ears in misery and utter calamity. I could
enlarge my self in showing the vast difference in many other practices, as the
beauty and ornaments of Catholic Churches, when others are like Barnes in
comparison of them; the Reverence and Devotion of the Catholic people in them,
who on their knees adore God whilst others sit at ease, some gazing, and some
asleep, with many other practices of the like kind: but this may, and will
suffice (for all those that desire to entertain truth, and to mind the
salvation of their souls) to show clearly which is Gods Church, and which is
not; so that which the Prophet Isaiah foretold is here made good, that the
Church of God should be a plain way, and a direct way, so that fools could not
err therein; so that all those that itnend at the last day to be separated
from the goats, must now in this life graze with Gods Sheep; that is, they must
enter into communion with his Catholic Church, whereof Christ Jesus is the
Head.

The Conents of the Chapters.
Chapter 1. Proving the Blessed Sacrament. page 1 Chap. 2. Proving Confession
to a Priest. page 11 Chap. 3. Proving Purgatory. page 16 Chap. 4. Proving that
none went to Heaven before Christ dyed. page 25 Chap. 5. Proving that Angels
and Saints know our actions on earth. page 31 Chap. 6. Proving it lawful to
pray to them. page 39 Chap. 7. Proving it lawful to worship them. page 52 Chap.
8. Proving the lawfulness of Images. page 59 Chap. 9. Proving Free Will in Man
to do good. page 67 Chap. 10. Proving Good Works to be Meritorious. page 76
Chap. 11. Proving that Gods Church cannot Err. page 84 Chap. 12. Proving the
Churches Authority in Remission of Sins. page 91 Chap. 13. Proving the Churches
Universality. page 98 Chap. 14. Proving the lawfulness of Fasting. page 108
Chap. 15. Proving the difficulty of understanding Scripture. page 114 Chap. 16.
Proving the necessity of the Churches Service in one Tongue, in all Kingdoms.
page 126 Chap. 17. Showing in general the vast difference of both Churches.
page 137
FINIS.

