A CATALOGUE of the BOWS, OF The Town, or the Hunters after Fortunes to be set
by AUCTION.
Catalogues will be distributed by the Sentries of the Park, etc.
ADVERTISEMENT.
ON Tuesday the 14 of this Instant July, will be exposed to Sale in the
PlayHouse pit, in Bridges-street, a Choice Collection of Bows, who have a
mind to dispose of themselves to the Ladies that bid most, their Estates as
well real as personal, being worth from 500 l. to 2000 l. a Year; They may be
viewed by any Lady in S. James's or Hide-Park, between the hours of six and
nine in the evening.

All Ladies that will be accepted must subscribe to these Conditions, and give
Bonds with Judgment for performance. First, That she be contented with the
Peticoat, and not desire to wear the Britches. 2ly. That she never indict the
Man in Venus's Court for Matrimonial omission, nor ever complain thereof to her
Goshops, 3ly. That she never present him with the Horns. 4ly. That she never
engage him in a Tonguebattle.

If any Lady object that these Conditions are too Strict, and say, it is
impossible to keep a Cat from playing with her Tail: To satisfy such, I will
in the next procure a Catalogue, of some good natured Men, that will allow them
liberty of Conscience.

The CATALOGUE.
l. 1 ONe pretty handsome Man, his Head some what of the Emptiest; 900 2 One
comely proper Man, in Suffolf-street, who has an Estate worth per Annum 800 3 A
middle size Man, barbary shape, who is worth in Jewels, besides those 5000 4 A
superfine well trimmed Bow, not a hair of his Wig a rye, his Face some 1000 5 A
young brisk dapper Man, in Chacery-lane, whose title to his Estate 500 6 A
young Countrey-Squire, in Long-acre, who in time will be justice of 2000 7 A
delicat, neat, well timberd Man, Baby-face, keeps his Coach, some 1700 8 A
young puny Man, who lost the Generative faculty; but is so reasonable Coadjutor
to perform marriage duty 1000 9 A thin lean Skeleton, in Lime-street, his Face
fair enough, by useing a per Annum 500 10 An accomplished young Gentlemen, in
the Strand, Swears by God Spring-Garden, James's Park, worth a Year 600


