A Catalogue of sundry Knights, Aldermen, Doctors: Ministers and Cizens, who
denying to contribute Money for the public safety, and other misdemeanors,
are in custody in Gresham College, Crosby house, and other places in and about
the cities of London and Westminster, by authority from the Parliament.
THere is nothing does more discover the inclination, then to part with that
whereunto men have oliged their affections: for such is their natural love to
riches, that they prefer it before honor, reputation, nay even Religion. The
Commonwealth shall be exposed to any danger, and suffer under the violent
fury of an enemy, rather then they will contribute any thing for the general
good of the Kingdom. And it were no wonder, if there were but some few of this
opinion; but when they which should be more grave and weighty in judgment, by
many thousand pounds then others, shall refuse to assist the Parliament with
sums of money proportionable to their estates, it shows that they do little
regard the public good, or their own private safety. Whereupon the names of
certain most eminent rich men of the City, being certified unto the
Parliament, and they knowing that they might easily spare such sums of money
as were of them demanded for the supply of the present distracted occasions of
the Kingdom, they ordered it upon mature deliberation, that they should be
compelled to satisfy the Parliaments just desires, which they had formerly
refused to do: And thereupon by order from the Parliament, diverse Captains of
the city, with some of the trained Bands, came on Saturday night last to the
houses of these wealthy Citizens, every Ward not searching in their own
Precincts, but in another liberty, to avoid the common enemies to justice,
fear or favor; and so without admitting of any excuse, they took some at
supper with many guests at their Tables, others were raised out of their bed,
and still as they found them, they took them away by authority from the
Parliament, and forthwith carried them to prison, where they remain for their
contempt of the Parliaments demands concerning money to be issued for the
defense of the King and Parliament in these mutinous times: And that those rich
men who are so cold in their affections to the cause wherein the Kingdom is
engaged, may be discovered, their names well known in the City, are here
likewise inserted.

Die Mercurii, 2. Nouemb. 1642.
WHereas We the LORDS and COMMONS have Ordered, That it be referred to the
Commitee for the safety of the Kingdom, To prepare Heads of an Humble Address
unto His Majesty, composing the present Differences and Distractions, and
settling the Peace of the Kingdom, and to present them to the House

To prevent all Misconstructions or Neglects, whereby our just Defense may be
hindered, We do Declare, That the Preparation of Forces, and all other
necessary means for the Defense of the Protestant Religion, the Priuledg of
Parliment, the Laws and Liberties of the Subject, shall be prosecuted with all
vigor.

Henry Elsinge Cler: Parl. D. Com.
Sir Kenhelme Digby Sir Henry Garraway Sir Georgc Whitmore Sir John Cordwall
Sir John Jacob Mr Rogers Mr Baker Captain Beale Mr Dole Mr Fish Mr Shaw Mr
Dudley Mr Gardener Mr Bradworth Mr Vivian Mr Garraway Mr Middleton Mr
Hollingworth Mr Osbaston Mr Topham Mr Alden Mr Brogram Mr Wingor Mr Acton Mr
Kendall Mr Langhorne Mr Ludiner Mr Newton Mr Walcot Mr Clerk Mr Grimes. Mr Ward
Mr Pettiward Mr Withers Mr Green Mr Heather Mr Harwicke Mr Bacon Mr Smith Mr
Davenport Mr Shaw Mr Holme Deputy Nedel Mr Barks Deputy Web.
DOCTORS.
Doctor Holdsworth sent for. Dr Hacket Dr Shelley Mr Shoot Mr Squire Mr Udall
Mr Swadlin Mr Stone Mr Griffith. Mr Gross Edward Dobson, alias, codpice-Ned,
Bookseller near Newgate.




FINIS.
Printed for John Iackson, G. Green, and F. Smith, and are to be sold in the
Old Baily, 1642. November. 7.


