A Catalogue of Batchelors, Attenders on the Women's AUCTION; BEING Chapmen for
the Ladys Lately set to Sale in Diverse Parts.
6. July. 1691.
Procured by one of their own Sex.
1 MR. Courtant Bravoes, a Commission Officer, full of Courage, brim full of
Honor, a well Proportioned Man, and very beautiful, and yet wants Money: A
good Match for the Vintner's Widow. 2 Sir Dainty Fidget, a Country Gentleman,
who has a delicate Seat between 20 and 30 Miles off London, he is one that
pretends to Wit and Poetry: A good Match for the Painful Teachers Daughter. 3
Mr. Bredwel, the Son of a Rich Linen-Draper, near Cornhill, a very Pretty
Genteel Man; his Father a Man of a very good Estate: A good Match for the
Orphan, whose Fortune is on Board the Streights Fleet. 4 Mr. Courtley Nice, a
Ginger-bread-Baker, near Abchurch-Lane, a Man of a good Trade, besides some
Estate, ties Cravat-string admirably: A good Match for the Pretty Young Lady at
her own disposal. 5 Mr. Squeamish Fourbin, a Millinear, near Cheap Side, very
Genteel, but no Conjurer: A good Match for the Non-Con's Daughter. 6 Master
Sentwell, a Hosier, near Cannon street: A good Match for the Widow of 1000 l. 7
Esquire Valet, a Coffee-Man, well lined with Gold, wants a Bar-keeper: A good
Match for the Coffee-Man's Daughter of 2500 l. 8 Mr. Gayman, an Indian Gown
seller, near the Old-Exchange: A good Match for the Mercer's Daughter of 2000
l. 9 Mr. Feeble Fainwood, a Perfumer, near the Exchange, of a very considerable
Estate, besides a great Trade: A fit Match for the Worthy Painful Teacher's
Daught^^. 10 Mr. Anthony Waitwell, a Diminutive Bookseller very difficult in
his Choice (...) Usurer's Daughter of 5000 l. proves a Temptation to him. 11
Captain Noisey, a Vintner, near Fleet Street, a Pretender to Wit, but very
T(...) and Factious: A good Match for the Kidney Mercer's Daughter. 12 Davy
Dunce, a Barber in Fleet street, an Impudent Railing Fellow, that pretends to
Learning: A fit Match for the Islington Milk-Wench. 13 Mr. Matt. Drawcansirs,
near the Temple: A fit Match for the Widow, near Black friars. 14 A
Bookseller's Son, near St. Paul's, an Extreme Genteel Man: A fit Match for one
of the Salter's Daughters. 15 A Goldsmiths, near the Exchange, a Widower of a
very considerable Estate, besides a great Trade, will make a Joynter, and
perhaps keep a Coach: A fit Match for the Lady whose Fortune is on Board the
Streights Fleet. 16 Sir Jolly Jumble, two pair of Stairs in G -- Inn, 2000 l.
per Annum when Father dies, besides likely to have hopeful Practice. 17 Count
Canaile, a very pretty Diminutive Genteel Spark, three pair of Stairs in the M
-- T --, the Grand-father's Darling: A good Match for one of the Girls at
May Pole in the Strand. 18 Sir Padagogy Single, two pair of Stairs in the I --
T --, the Father's Darling, a Proud busy Spark. 19 Monsuur la Roch, a Rich,
overgrown Citt, near Walbrook: A fit Match for the Tally-man's Daughter. 20
Sir Timothy Clack, two pair of Stairs in -- Inn, a Young Fop, very Noisie and
Factious: A fit Match for the Barrister's Daughter. 21 Sr Patient Treat-All, a
Proud Noisey Credulous Fop, who keeps a Bully as his Vade Mecum. 22 Sir Gentle
Golding, an Impudent Amarous Pragmatical Fop. 23 Sr Foplin Sparkish, one that
Combs Wigs, and ties Cravat-strings admirably well, a great pretender to Wit
and Poetry. 24 Mr. Jasper Flutter, a Milliner on the Exchange, much admired for
his handsomness and Gentility. 25 Mr. G^rtrude Traffic, a Young Merchant,
whose Estate lies on the Caribbe Islands, if his Cargo misses the French Fleet,
he makes a good Jointure.

