A CATALOGUE Of THE MONEYS, MEN, AND HORSE, ALREADY subscribed unto by several
Counties of this Kingdom, and undertaken for His Majestyes service August the
Fifth 1642.
Horse. THe Nobility and Privy Council pay for three Months. 2150. Yorkshire
does Raise, Arm, and pay for three Months. 500. Leicester shire, Levies,
Arms, and pays 400. Lincoln shire, Pays, Arms, and Levies four troops or
300. Diverse Gentlemen of the Commons House of Parliament have voluntarily
subscribed to pay three months 465. Notingham-shire, Levies, Arms and pays
three months 200 Herefordshire, Raises, Arms, and pays fix months 100 The
Kings Domestique servants pay for three months 169 The total of the Horse
4284. Sir Bevill Grimfeild undertakes for Cornwall 500 The Bishopprick of
Durham has subscribed to contribute in money 3000 pounds, hoping to make it up
six thousand 6000 Newcastle are subscribing also with great cheerfulness.
Herefordshire has sent in money 3000. l. Flintshire, Glamorganshire, and the
whole Principality of Wales has likewise subscribed for great quantities of
Horse and money. 0000 Kent has subcribed for 1000. l. The Universities of
Oxford and Cambridge, have already sent his Majesty a Voluntary sum of
16000. l.

These were subscribed unto, by the Gentry of the said several Counties, who
was summoned by His Majesty, to meet at York on Thursday last, Where the
King and the Lords sat in the Chapter House, And the Gentry in the Deanery,
being the 4. of August 1642.

The Names of the Counsel of War are these following
LOrd Duke fo Richmond. Lord Marquess Hartford. Earl of Linsey Earl of
Cumherland Earl of Lath Earl of Southampton Earl of Dorset Earl of Bristoll
Earl of Carnarvan Earl of Newport Lord Savile Lord Vicount Falkland Lord
Vicount Grand^sson Lord Willowby of Ersby Lord Seaymor Master Secretary
Nicholas Sir John Culpepper Master Comptroller Colonel Henry Wentworth
Colonel Wilmott Colonel William Vauasor Colonel Feild^ng Colonel Lunsford
Sir William Vuedall Sir Jacob Ashley Sir Thomas Glensham Sir Nicholas Byron
First Printed at York and now reprinted at London, for John Thomas, 1642.
August 9th


