A CATALOGVE OF THE NAMES OF The new Lords created by the King, since the Great
Seal was carried away from the PARLIAMENT by the Lord Littleton.

Together with Major General Poyntz his Summons to Shelford house, with the
Governors Answer.

ALSO, A true RELATION of the Kings escape in the night from Newark, with a
party of Three hundred Horse.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed by John Field, Nov. 10. 1645.

The Names of such Honors and Dignities as have been granted since the great
Seal was carried from hence.
James second Son to King Charles, created Duke of York. Prince Rupert created
Duke of Cumberland and Earl of Holdernesse. The Earl of Worcester, created
Marquis of Worcester. The Earl of Newcastle created Marquis of Newcastle. The
Earl of Kingston created Marquis of Dorchester. The Lord Spencer created Earl
of Sunderland. The Lord Dunsmore created Earl of Chichester. The Lord of Forth
created Earl of Branford. The Lord Savill created Earl of Sussex. The Earl of
Arundell created Earl of Norfolk. The Lord Goring created Earl of Norwich. The
Lord Herbert Son to the Marquis of Worcester, created Earl of Glamorgan by Bill
Signed. The Lord Barnard Stewart, the Duke of Richmonds Brother, made Earl of
Lichfield by Bill Signed. The Lord Faulconbridge created Viscount
Faulconbridge. Sir Rich. Newport Lord Newport. Io: Craven, Brother to William
Lord Craven, created Lord Craven of Ryton. Henry Percy Lord Percy. Henry Wilmot
Lord Wilmot of Alderbury. Sir Thomas Leigh Lord Leigh of Stonely. Sir
Christopher Hatton Lord Hatton of Kirlby. Sir Ralph Hopton Lord Hopton of
Witham. Henry Iermyn Lord Iermyn. Henry Hastings Lord Loughbrough. Sir Io:
Byron Lord Byron. Sir Rich. Vaughan Earl of Carbery in Ireland, created Lord
Vaughan in England. Sir Charles Smith Lord Carrington of England, and Viscount
Carrington of Ireland. Sir William Witherington Lord Witherington. Sir Humble
Ward Lord Ward, Married the Lord Dudleys Heir. Sir Io: Culpeper Lord Culpeper.
Sir Jacob Ashly Lord Ashly. Richard Boil Earl of Cork, created Lord Clifford.
Sir John Brook Lord Cobham, restored into his Ancesters place, and a creation
withal. Sir John Lucas Lord Lucas. Colonel Bellafis second son to Viscount
Faulconbridge, created Baron Bellasis. Sir Lewis Watson Knight. and Baronet,
created Baron of Rockingham Castle in the county of Northampton. Reed one of
the late Ambassadors of the States, created a Titular Baron of England. Sir
Charles Gerrard Lord Gerrard. Sir Francis Hawley Lord Hawley. Sir William Ogle
a Viscount of Ireland. Sir Henry Beard a Viscount of Ireland.
SIR,
YOu may perceive I am not only clear Master of the Field, but you are also
without any expectation of Relief; I do therefore require the delivery up of
the House and Garrison of Shelford under your command, for the use of the King
and Parliament; which if you shall refuse to do, you must expect the strictest
rigor of a resolved Enemy, for though it fall out to be with some loss, my
number is so considerable, that I shall not leave the place till (by Gods
assistance) I shall compel you thereunto, you have half an hours time to
return Answer to

Your Servant Sidenham Points.
3. November. 1645.
SIR,
I Keep this Garrison for the King, and in defense of it I will live and dye,
and your number is not so great, nor you so much Master of the Field, but that
I am confident soon to lessen your Number, and see you abroad; and for Relief,
we need none: Therefore desire you to be satisfied with this Answer from

Your Servant Phil. Stanhope.
November. 3. 1645.
SIR,
SInce my last, God was pleased to deliver the Garrison of Shelford into our
hands; Being advanced from Southwell toward Nottingham, Col. Rossiter joined
with us, whereupon my General clapped down before that House, and took diverse
Prisoners in Shelford Church, and among them a woman-corporall: This day being
prepared for a storm, my General sent in Summons, where he received a
peremptory Answer, both which you shall find enclosed: Whereupon, we stormed
their works on all sides with much resolution, and were gallantly entertained
by the Enemy; but within half an hour we beat them out of their works, and
the Sword soon gave them their reward, for of two hundred, there is not above
forty got quarter: The young Governor, Son to the Lord Stanhape, was stripped
for dead, but some pitiful Officer perceiving life in him, got him away, and
it may happily be a means to recover body and soul, for what he utters is full
of repentance: Most of them were the Queens Regiment. We took three Horse
colors, one Dragoon colors, and two Foot Colors. To morrow we do intend
against Werton House, a mile from this place, whereof the Genesis hopes to give a
good Account; he wants but more foot to visit Newark: The forces generally
behaved themselves gallantly, the London Brigade and the Nottingham Foot,
performed their duty with much valor: The King is still at Newark, the Genesis
left a very strong party of Horse and Dragoones to attend His Motion. This is
all for News, The rest assures you that I am,

Your affectionate Brother to serve you, John Hughes.
Bingham 3. of November. 1645.
SIR,
SInce the taking of Shelford Garrison, News came that the King on Monday in
the Evening got away with three hundred Horse, twixt Belvoyre Castle and
Colonel Rossiters Guards, which way is not certainly known. But to prevent
relief to the Enemy at Chester, the General presently ordered Col. Maynwaring
with the London Brigade, and four Regiments more of Horse and Dragoons under
his Command, forthwith to march to Sir William Brereton for to assist the
leaguer there: He is now drawing against Werton House, which in few days he
hopes to reduce; He has Orders, and four thousand five hundred Foot Ordered
to him for the siege of Nevvark, they are to have their Rendezvous at Grantham
and Southvvell on Friday next, and then the business will not be long
deferred. I am Sir,

Your highly engaged Friend to serve you John Hughes.
Bingham 5. of November. 1645.
FINIS.

