ARCHERIE REVIVED: A Poetical Essay, Penned upon occasion of the intended
Muster of the Company of Archers in Scotland, June 11. 1677.

-- Hae Nugae seria ducent. printer's or publisher's device

EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. 1677.

To the Most NOBLE and POTENT, JOHN MARQUESS of ATHOL, EARL OF ATHOL and
TVLLIBARDIN, LORD MVRRAY and GASK, etc. LORD KEEPER Of His Majesty's Privy Seal
in the Kingdom of Scotland, and one of the most Honorable Members of His
Majesty's Privy Council; one of the Commissioners of His Majesty's Thesaury and
Exchequer; Captain of His Majesty's Lifeguard of Horse: And Captain of the
Noble and Generous Company of Archers in that Kingdom.
My Lord,
THE great Blessing of Peace being the Improvement of Arts, and that of War, so
long as this Mass of Earth continues in its Fabric of Creation, beyond all
Dispute most useful; To cultivate this Art in time of Peace, is no less the
Interest of Mankind, than it is in Summer to provide Food and Raiment for the
Winter; Peace and War succeeding each other by short Intervalls, so naturally,
and almost with the Motion of the Sun in the Zodiac.

The Practice then of this Art, since first Man begun to loose the Reins of his
Choler, (continued through a long Tract of Ages to this hour) having rendered
it no less honorable than its first Institution was necessar, it cannot but be
agreeable to the Genius of Mankind, to prosecute an Art Necessary, Useful, and
Honorable.

Nor is the use of Arms (even the length of an Imaginary War) to be intermitted
in the highest Crisis of the most serene Peace, unless the one half of the
World resolve to become slaves to the other; Liberty being situate like the
Brain, which though it rest secure in the immediate embraces of a P^a Matter,
yet if not guarded by the triple Contravallation of a dura Matter, Scull and
Pericranium, the first being a very tender Membrane, were not able of it self
to protect it from Injury: So Peace, if not fortified by a continual Guard and
a constant Exercise of Arms, is not able of it self to preserve it self, nor
maintain the Liberty of the great Monarchies or smallest Estates and
Republics; as the jealous Practice of Luca, Geneve, Ragouse, and many other
States do fully evidence; nor do I think that Nation worthy of Peace, who
neglects the use of Arms, when they have attained it.

Besides, my Lord, if I were Vmpyre in the Quarrel betwixt those two famous
Rivals of the World, Peace and War; I could almost declare the First more
injurious to the Latter, than the Latter to it; War both procuring and
preserving Peace: But Peace (somewhat ungrate) in a few years ofttimes
destroying its Rival, rendering the Spirits of Men by soft ease, and its
consequences, so unapt for War, as by this subtle insinuation of Peace, like
that of the Serpent in Paradise, Nations have on a sudden forfeit their
Liberty, Honor and Peace it self. This Consideration made the Poet justly
exclaim of the state of the Roman Empire in his time, Nunc patimur longae Pacis
mala, saevior armis
Luxuria incubuit, victumque ulciscitur Orbem.


The repose of a few months in Capua made soon an Army that had jumpt over the
Pyrences and Alps, as though they had been Mole hills, sweep'd with their very
breath their way to Cannae, and from thence cut out a passage to Rome; and
became so terrible, as Fame it self could hardly represent the Valor of it in
her magnifying Glass: This same formidable and well disciplined Army, a few
months ease made no less contemptible and ridiculous than a Company of drunken
Boors at a Low Dutch Fair. Whereas the Practice and Use of warlike Exercises in
time of Peace, preserves and maintains it firmly; no Nation being more secure,
than that which is perfect in the Art of War.

The Conquest of the soft and peaceable Eastern Nations, was but the business
of an ordinary Compagne or two, to the meanest of the Roman Generals; those
effeminate Gallants hugging so their Delilah of Peace, as they permitted her to
cut their Hair, and deprive them of both Strength and Courage: But, to disturb
the peace of the Western or Northern Nations accustomed to War, was a Province
only for a Caesar, a Germanicus, an Agricola, or the like, Nec facile vincuntur
vincere, (non vinci) assueti.

Pray, what did all the Romans huffings upon the Rhine for some hundred years
produce? when they thought forsooth they had secured that vast Continent
betwixt the Alps and the German-Ocean, what says their Noble and Ingenuous
Historian? why after he has reckoned up a great many Consuls, Generals,
Emperors, affronted, disgraced, and defeat in subduing those stubborn
Warriors, many Legions cut off, much Time and Treasure spent, Germani (says
he) magis triumphati quam victi sunt; they were forced for honors cause, to
rest contented with an imaginary Conquest of that warlike Nation; a virtue so
transmitted to their posterity, that how dear the Germans yet esteem their
Liberty, may appear by our weekly Gazetts. Nay this very day we know, that the
Turk having found the Business with the Stern and Martial Pole too hot, has
now tacked about, and is forced to turn his conquering Arms against the more
peaceable and soft Russian, whom if not assisted by the other Europaeans, he
may bring in some Distress.

To relate how much our Nation, (however traduced by our unkind scribbling
Neighbors) has maintained its Liberty against a^^ Assailants, and though
sometimes overrun by powerful Armies, yet never losing Courage, or embracing
the title of Conquered (as those who brag more of their valor have done) but
still rallying and recovering their ground, not to be conquered by Arms, but a
glorious Succession only; were, my Lord, to make an History of an intended
Epistle Dedicatory, and therefore rather to be pointed at, than tyrannically
to impose the Patience upon your Lordship of an ample Rehearsal: which should I
in this place attempt, the same might be said of this Piece, as the Stoic said
of the city Mindas, the Ports were so big, and the Town so little, he was
afraid it might escape out at the Ports.

Upon these grounds then, my Lord, having endeavored to prove that the
exercise of War is the only Bullwark of Peace; I do now subsume, at least
presume, that amongst all the methods of War known in History, that of
Archery, being since the memory of Man universally practiced (though now by the
use of firearms almost only reserved for sport) is the most noble and useful,
and by consequence the most necessary to be cultivate, whilst now we are
blessed with Peace, that we may be in readiness for War; the Bow having been,
before the invention of Guns, the only received weapon, and if well used, I am
confident of equal force in Battle, though not of so much noise, as the
Musket, now only in use amongst those, whose Predecessors excelled in Archery,
and the use of Bow.

Since then, my Lord, your Lordship has thought it worth your pains to revive
in this Nation, the almost extinguished Art of Archery, and by your own Example
(worthy of one descended of so Noble and Ancient a Line of Ancestors, Famous
both in Peace and War) to encourage all the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of
this Kingdom, to resume the Exercise of an Art so much hitherto neglected. As
the whole Nation with one voice do own the Obligation to your Lordships
generous Endeavors, hoping that from your Lordships Original, many thousand
Copies may be quickly dispersed, and transmitted to Posterity. So I having the
honor to be of that worthy Society, of which your Lordship is pleased to
recieve the Title of Captain; and not in good capacity to attend your Lordship
in the Complement of Parade (being yet but a bad Proficient in the Art) am
ambitious by another Art (in which I pretend to some smattering Knowledge) to
demonstrate in the ensuing Poetical Essay, how much in the general Concurrence
of the Nation, a particular Person may express himself,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and most Devoted. W. C.

Archery Revived.
TO rake the Bowels of Antiquity,
In se^ting out the Praise of Archery;
Or rouse our valiant Predecessors Ghosts,
Of whose bold Actings grave tradition boasts,
Only to show us how in every Age
Our Archer did excel, in Martial Rage;
Or state the Question 'twixt the Bow and Gun,
Which of those Champions have most Honor won?
Or which o'th two in Field most useful are,
To carry on the Motions of a War?
Were a brave Subject, such as might infuse
Thoughts, worth the Labor of a Nobler Muse
To mould in Verse, than any I pretend
To be of my acquaintance; And if penned
By one whose envied Leisure does license,
With what in others we can scarce dispense,
Though done in fashion of a scantling Proeme,
Would bear the Name of an Heroic Poem.
But I who am allowed by sullen Fate
To live in silence, 'cause our wits do hate
All Native Product; and with pain do read
Ought that derives its Birth from this side Tweed,
I cannot safely trade in such a Theme,
Unless I entered in a strangers name,
And so perhaps it may procure Esteem:
For where our own will strictly surveyed be,
A strangers would at least pass Censure-free.
Yet maugre all those counter-checks of Fate,
I Will venture on it, and expatiate
A little on the Subject: 'specially
In honor of a brave fraternity:
Whose joint endeavors might with ease contrive
A better Art then this, far more revive
An Art scarce yet extinct, an Art which all
Once practiced; an Art Epidemicall.
Yet will I not extol this Art so high,
As with it is rivalls may beget envy:
Decrying Wars inventions of late;
No, I Will not bend my Bow at such a rate:
Lest while in praise of Archery I sing,
The Bow too much bent may un-nock the string.
Nor will I give directions for the Bow,
That were to teach an Art, I do not know:
But modestly i will comment on the Game,
In praise of all who bear an Archers name.
"For many one do talk, (as all men know)
"Of Robin-Hood, who never shot in his Bow.
If Arts perfection do consist in that,
We thereby nature strive to imitate:
And every Art derives it is excellence
From it is proximity to nature; thence
Archery may be termed the noblest Art,
Which humane genius ever did impart.
It so approaches nature it is the same,
And differs from't in nothing but the name.
The Bull wi^h horn, the Lion with his paw
Defends himself, and fights by natures law,
And man by the same rule his Bow does draw.
The Bow so ancient in it is prim^tive use,
As it appears, Dame nature did infuse
The knowledge of it, to be learned by naught
But proper instinct: and so cheaply bought,
As those, who never were blessed with knowing Art;
Yet, in this knowledge, have been f^und expert.
Witness those Heroes, who practiced the Game,
Before invention did receive a name.
Before the race of man yet understood,
What 'twas to bath their shafts in humane blood:
Before their choler did advance so far,
As to engage them in a civil war.
These only used their Bows to purchase food,
So much as frugal nature then allowed;
Fierce in the sport, and eager in the chase,
Of all alive, save their own species.
Yea, when the race increased, and private jarrs
At first d d squander into open wars;
The Bow did chiefly serve them, to annoy
Each other, which before they did employ
In sports more innocent: and with such force
They Would use their Bows, as neither Foot, nor Horse
Could then sustain their fury: nothing more
Destructive of mankind: and where before
Through Herds of beasts their Arrows would make way,
They now were forced to fight themselves at bay
Against each other: whilst the Birds and Beasts,
(Who looked upon men's battles as their Feasts,)
Would stand aloof, until the angry Bow
Had done it is office; and revenged so
Their quarrel, then they would advance apace,
And feed upon the bleeding carcasses,
Tearing the bowels of the yet half-dead
Of such as on their Ancestors did feed:
These were the only Victors, of the prey
These Masters were, who ever had the day.
Plump with such food, they would to the Woods resort,
Where man pursuing of his native sport,
Would kill those Conq'rors; and so feed upon
His own flesh in a piece of Venison.
Thus did the active Bow make sport and war,
Assisting man, in what he e're would dare
So fortunately, as it soon became
The proper instrument of a VVarriors fame.
When bold Columbus plough'd the western Seas,
And with rude keele disturbed natures ease;
Approaching gently to that happy shore,
Which never had seen Masts, or Sails before;
Some thousand Indians, with their Bows in hand
Appeared to dispute his descent on Land;
Those naked varlets, who no art did know,
Pray who did teach those Lads the use of Bow?
From the other World by Seas so separate,
As amongst some it has begot debate,
How these came thither from mount Ararat:
From Afric then, Europe, or Asia
Had they this Art? no, sure, by natures law
They learned this Art at first, for self-defence,
From which the art of War did soon commence.
Nor can we think that from those savages
This noble Art to our World crossed the Seas;
Since ages, before that discovery
Each part of the World practiced Archery.
All this kind nature taught then, t'evidence
Her care for man's food, and his self-defence:
She generously taught her Sons to know
No other weapon, but the nervous Bow;
Of which the constant, and delightful use
Did soon the art of Archery produce;
An Art so grac^full, as does plainly show
What pleasure nature takes in the Bow
Strong nerves, straight joints, a daring, constant eye,
Are requisite for complete Archery,
All which a complete nature do imply.
The Bow does courage, health, and strength improve,
Refreshes nature, gently does remove
Noisome distempers, purifies the blood,
Increases natures heat, digests the good
And wholesome nutriment: expells the bad,
Cherishes jovial minds, revives the sad
Dejected spirits, who at any price
Should much frequent this generous exercise.
In fine, this Art with nature so complies,
It has the same friends, the same enemies:
Who e're loves health, and strength, will love this Art,
Practice it often, hugg it in his heart;
And who loves neither, but desires to dye,
Is both this Art, and natures enemy.
This Art our Ancestors so well did know,
How both in war, and sport to use the Bow;
That when their rage did cool, and softer peace
Allowed their wearied spirits some small surcease
From wars consuming toil; least idleness
Might damp their courage, and perhaps oppress
Their active Vitals: they would still foment
Their generous sports with the same instrument.
Each Youth with Bow, and Quiver furnished
With store of pointed Arrows, mustered
In time, and places ord'red by the Law,
In select Bands, This fair Militia
Would with such art, and vigor use the Bow,
And of their action make so goodly show:
Such flights of Arrows at one lusty draught
Of brauny arms, whom exercise had taught,
Would pierce the trembling azure altogether,
With such a force, as one should scarce know whether
Those sprightly Archers loved best peace, of war,
Making those sports only preliminar
To bloody conflicts. For when th'exercise
Of The Bow, had made them gallantly despise
All battel-hazards, then with such delight,
With Bow in hand they would march up to the fight,
As if they were in Butts to snoot at white.
Who then had viewed our armies, would have said
He see the pride of nature there displaid;
To see whole Squadrons of tall Archers stretch
Their joints at once, as if they meant to reach
Their enemies with fists: and then advance,
With graceful pace as if they were to dance;
Full stretched nerv's, and bodies full erected,
With cheerful aspect, which they much affected:
Then letting fly their Arrows all at once,
They Would make the welkin whistle for the nonce.
Rebounding strings such music would afford,
As did Arion, when thrown over board.
Which had Pythagoras heard, he had declared
That of his Planets naught with this compared.
These gallant VVarriors fought with such a grace,
Their bodies falling covered the place,
Where e'rst they stood, and now depryv'd of breath,
They yet appeared even graceful in their death.
A feathered Arrow in each bleeding breast
The valor of our Archers would attest.
The winged shaft did seldom miss its aim,
Such was the cunning of the noble Game.
What brave exploits have been performed by Bows,
Who has but tasted history, fully knows,
They Are famous in the mouths of every Boy
Who has at Schools rehearsed the siege of Troy.
The Amazonian valor to this day
Famous in history plainly does display
How much this active Art was in esteem,
By which a few Girls did procure the name
Of brave redoubted VVarriors; and it is known
How terrible the name of Amazon
Was to the Eastern Nations; and how far
These Lasses did extend their fame by war,
Against the greatest Monarchs then in power,
Whose guards one would ha'thought, might soon devour
Such troops of naked Sluts: yet by this Art,
(In which 'bove others they were then expert)
They have brought strong and numerous Armies low,
And made the Sword and Lance stoop to the Bow.
The Parthian Archer in his cunning Flight,
Would with his arrows so renew the Fight,
As those, who did pursue their Victory,
Were conquered by this subtle Archery.
The Scythian now by name of Tartar known,
Has won great Honor by this art alone;
Fighting on Horse back with his Iron-bow
Great Armies he does quickly overthrow,
And to this day the archer Scythian
Is terrible to the Pole and Russian.
The English Monarchs in their wars of France,
Did by the Bow their Honor much advance,
In three great Battles famous to this hour,
Of Cressie, Pottiers, and of Agineour:
Whose grave Historians do confess they owe
These Successes entirely to the Bow.
Nor has our Nation less practiced the Game,
And by the Bow deserve their share of Fame;
VVitness our wars with Romans, Picts and Danes.
Whose Memory in Marble yet remains:
Where the brave Archer often did overthrow
Well ordered Legions, with his faithful Bow:
By this our Kings their Crown and Scepter held,
By this the English Force we often repelled,
Maintaining stoutly those in^umane Jarrs,
Scarce by the Union yet made Civil Wars.
Since first the Balliols unhappy Case,
Umpyr'd by Edward Longshanks broke the Peace;
The two brave Nations, living formerly
In strictest Bonds of love, and amity,
Begun to bristle, and have ever since,
('Till become Subjects of one Glorious Prince)
Dispute the Case so warmly, as (God knows)
What slaughter on each side, by stubborn Bows
Have been performed: what Romans, Saxons, Danes,
And Normans spared, that Blood, on British plains,
By British hands, so prodigally spent,
Shows that our Bows in vain were never bent,
From Trent to Tine, from thence to th'Banks of Tweed,
Forth, Tay, and Clyde, who cannot plainly read
The History of our Islands wars, and thence
May understand both Nations Excellence,
In knowledge of the Use of warlike Bow,
Better than from Speed, Hollingshed, or Stow;
Who by their bold writing Prerogative,
Do always place us on the Defensive.
Though some of their own VVriters do averr,
The one as often as the other Vanquisher.
But as our Difference one Succession wrought,
So has another to this Island brought,
A fair Atonement, making Quarrels cease,
And (save in words) has bound us to the Peace.
All these were Feathered Wars, and justly claim
No small proportion in the VVings of Fame:
Our Nation in the Bow did much delight,
Whether they were for Sport, or meant to fight.
Though now with use of Firearms so indu'd,
The Bow has almost gone in Desuetude:
If so the ancient Scots, who still remain
In their first Love, did not yet entertain
This Princely Art, which else would sure expire,
If like the Embers of an evening Fire,
The Northern Climate had not all this while,
Cherished this Art, and keep'd it on the File;
Glenlivet Battle, where Historians say,
The Arrows did obscure the light of day
For some good space, does openly declare,
How much in this art the bold Highlander
Excells; to those, to those alone we owe,
The Relics of th'almost extinguished Bow.
Hence a most Noble Hero much inclined,
Yet to revive this Art, has now designed
T'erect again the Arms of Archery,
And counterballance bold antiquity,
In a most flourishing Society.
To whose Endeavors, since the Nation owes
The now received Exercise of Bows:
Were I as knowing in Thalias art,
As these are in the use of Bows expert,
I Would sing the boistrous thundering Cannon dumb,
In the Clarind of their Encomium.
Yet I am hopeful by this rude Essay,
I may to quainter Muses show the way,
And usher in, of some more happy Brain,
The richer Fancy, and excite their Pen.
And now, though I did promise formerly,
I 'de not wars late inventions decry;
Yet warm in the Subject, I cannot refrain,
But must a little on our Times complain,
Who have caressed these late Inventions so,
As they have too much neglected the use of Bow.
Pity then, such an Art should be outdone,
By th'airy Fanfara's of Monsieur Gun,
That roaring Gallant, who the world does choke
By his continual Storms of Fire and Smoke.
That flaming Hector, whose asiduous Use,
Has made the world a mere Vesuvious.
Proud of his Conquests, over the generous Bow
In Brazil, Peru, and in Mexico;
Where with his (there unheard of) Smoke and Thunder,
He broke the Archer-squadrons all assunder.
On him do all now dote, and plainly show
A general Contempt o'th Noble Bow.
Our Gallants now in Gun do so delight,
As they their worthy ancestors do slight,
Upbraiding them for their so mean a choice,
As that o'th Bow, an Exercise for Boys,
Compared with their Monks-Brat, that Spurious Rogue
By heavens anger only now in vogue:
Who does derive his Genealogy,
From an officious Piece of Chemistry,
Conceived without Nature or Arts Consent,
And thrust into the world by Accident.
Yet has this Monster gained so great applause,
As both to War and Peace he now gives Laws;
Yea at this time, our Gunners possibly
Do look upon this Show of Archery,
As a mere formal piece of Pageantry.
Well, Gentlemen, who knows but in the Nation,
Th'old-fashion'd Bow may yet become in Fashion;
This is but its first Trial, and we hope
Our Archers shortly may the Gunning-fop
Out-ballance; nay perhaps ere all be done,
He Will quash the roaring Language of the Gun.
"Mean time speak good of Archers, and be low,
"For all your Fathers shot once in a Bow.
FINIS.

