A Catalogue of Plates, The Prints whereof are useful for Gentlemen, Artists,
and Gentlewomen, and School-mistresses Works, Sold by ARTHUR TOOKER, Stationer
at the Globe over against Salisbury House in the Strand, where you may have
choice of Maps, and also Italian, German, and the Low Country Prints, Indian
Ink, Abortive Skins, all sorts of Paintings, and all Stationary Wares.
Plates of Arnold de Jode his Graving.
An Almanac Border with Boys, and the Seasons of the Year, invented by Mr.
Isaac Fuller. Ars Pictoria, being the best book extant in English for Drawing,
collected by Mr. Alexander Brown. Four Stories of Ovid in several Plates, viz.
1. Phaeton, 2. Venus birth, 3. Ulysses and the Sirens, 4 Sisyphus. One Plate
containing 7 of the Nobilities Heads.
Plates of Mr. Gaywoods Etching, invented by Mr. Barlow and others.
Two Badges or Choice of Signs for Bars and Rooms. Titian and his Mistress. A
Cunnie-berry. Saint GEORGE. Madam Kirck. A Cats Head. A book 24 Leaves, of
variety of Beasts, Birds, Flies, Fruits, and Flowers. A book 24 Leaves, of
variety of beasts in their postures and actions. A book 9 Leaves, of variety of
birds in their several actions. A book 27 Leaves, of several Stories of the
beginning of the BIBLE. A book of Pearcies Foldage, 12 Leaves. A Prospect View
of Lynn. A large Sea Fight.
Several Plates Etched by Mr. Gaywood, Mr. Place, and Mr. Holler.
A small Sea Storm. A book 5 Leaves, of Sea Havens. A book 6 Leaves, of Round
Sea Havens. A book 6 Leaves, of Landscape. A Sea Haven. Rochester Castle. Hurst
Castle. Cowes Castle.
Several sorts of Plates by diverse Authors.
Eight Plates of the King and Queen, Duke and Duchess of Monmouth, Engraven by
Van Hove. Eighteen Heads of Drollery and Anticks. Three Plates, viz. 1. Christ
taken from the Cross, 2. A Friar, 3. Saint Jerome. A Perpetual Almanac in a
large border. Sixty Stories of variety of Landscape and Ovals with neat borders,
and variety of Beasts, Birds, Hunting, Trees, Worms, Fruit, Flowers, Fishes,
etc. Colored fit for Cabinets, Dressing-boxes, Powder-boxes, Baskets, Skreens,
etc. Four Plates of Little boys. Saint George on Horseback. The Queen on
Horseback. The Duke of Monmouth on Horseback. Actaeon.
FINIS.

