THE CATHOLICS PETITION TO PRINCE RVPERT.

Showing The ground of their Grief. The force of their Constancy. And their
hopes of Recovery.


With a Draught of a Proclamation presented to his Highness, for the more
speedy Recruting his Army, destroying the Protestants, and gaining a Crown.

four Roman Catholic gentlemen and a monk present a petition to Prince Rupert

Prince look about thee, here is much ado,
It Is time to look, and lay about thee too;
Send obstinate Offenders to their graves,
That neither will be Catholics nor slaves.
Printed according to Order for G. B. August 1. 1644.

The Catholics Petition, TO Prince RVPERT.
Great and Gracious Prince,
WE your poor and humble suppliants, the Catholic and other well-affected
Subjects of your Magnanimious Uncle CHARLES, sole Monarch (under God and his
Holiness) of Great Brittane, do (as in duty bound) render unto you from our
yet sad fowls, all possible love and thanks for your so timely and willing
assistance, in a cause so highly concerning the perpetual prosperity of the
true Roman Catholic Religion, and the reestablishing of his Holiness ancient
Authority in these his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, which for many ages
past, has made the Commonwealth prosperous, and the Crown glorious. But great
and grievous have our miseries and afflictions now of late been, we have had
wonderful burdens laid upon us for these many years, and yet we have born
them with unparaler'd patience. Our Abbeys have been demolished, our Prieries
pulled down, and all our memorable Monasteries either defaced, or converted to
profane uses; Our Masses have been scnff'd at as ridiculous, and our Priests
and Jesuits executed as Traitors; Our holy Beads have been taken from us, that
we might not be able to render to our Lady a true account of the number of our
Prayers: we have been forc'dito go to Church before any dispensation granted
by his Holiness, and since we have gone willingly, they have took away the
same prayers in English, that they would not suffer before in Latin; But that
that herghtens the sorrow of our souls, is the general abuse of that Name
that ought not to be mentioned without wonderful reverence; his Holiness has
not only been dispitefully reproached and railed upon amongst the common
people, but they have touched him with unhallowed hands, and soiled him with
poluted tongues, even in their Pulpits; No marvel though Preaching were cried
down by the Bishops, when Peter's suceessor (their head) was cried down by
inferior fellows in their Sermons: But besides this, we must (forsooth)
neither worship our Lady, nor make use of our Ladies Psalter, but still they
have threatened to punish our bodies, for seeking to save our fowls; we must
go new ways to work and entertain a new Faith, and Doctrine, they would
feign make us believe that we cannot merit heaven by giving Alms, but we
must hear Sermons, and every one make his own Prayers, or pray by the spirit,
and so take a great deal of pains more then we need, to learn that we need
not, and forsake the old Religion we are acquainted with, for a new one we
understand not. After we had thus suffered a great deal of persecution, with a
great deal of patience, perceiving our resolution to be immovable, they began
to lay new crosses upon us by taking away our old ones, no corner was left
unsearch'd for Crucifixes and other Pictures, our Altars were thrown down, our
Candlestickes turned into Coin, our Coapes into Cushians, our Surplices into
Smockes, and that we might take the less pleasure in our devotions, our
Singing-boyes, Ho-boyes, and Organ-pipes were doomed to eternal silence. Alas,
before this we went to Church as well as best of 'em, and took as great
delight in the Service, nay sometimes we sat out a whole Sermon: for indeed
upon the discharge of Reverend Canterburles lest Canons, the tide began to
turn, and many learned men preached good Roman Doctrine, sin and hell were
mentioned with less violence, and judgment with more mildness, great faults
were little aggrevated, and small ones altogether winked at: we had liberty
from their own mouths to use honest recreation on Sundaies, and though for
fashion sake (and to keep ordinary judgments from apprehending their drifts)
they spoke against Popery, yet we know their minds well enough: but alas
others (soon) knew 'em too well, they were quickly found out, accused and
condemned, but (being Cannon proof) a hundred of 'em are still living with
near a Living amongst 'em. These being suspected to be of our side, because we
were perceived to be on theirs, were thrust out of the Church, and a company of
Round heads put in that will not give his Majesty his old title Defender of
the Faith in their prayers. But Heroicke Prince our greatest grief of all
arises, from the voting out of the Reverend Bishops, the only upholders of our
hopes, this has blasted all our comforts, and driven us into despair of ever
recovering, unless it be by the sword.

Mighty Prince we make humble tender of these our grievances to thy veiw,
that the consideration of our calamities, may raise thy high spirit yet a
little higher, and put a new edge upon thy valor: for we cannot but be
confident that our rising or falling lies upon thy sighting or flying. Thy
valor we doubt not, but be pleased to let us persuade thee to perform
principal actions at principal seasons, fall not to plundering Prince when
thou should be a fighting, this is an error we suppose thou see not in
thy self, and therefore make bold to acquaint thee with, that thy noble
endeaours hereafter may prove more successful. O dear Prince, (for dear
thou have been to England) now show thy valor for the Catholic cause, let
thy sword fly like lightning in the head of thy Army, be true to the Roman
Church, and as salse as thou will otherwise, play the man when thou art in the
battle, and the thief when thy leisure will serve thee and spare not: for
thou shall become famous for that too, as well as for killing, thy names up
already, thou art seldom called Prince, but Plunderer is added as an addition
to thy Honor. Follow thy fortune still Prince, purchase yet more wealth and
more titles, let them call thee at their pleasures, and do thou rob them at
thine, borrow their horses, their plate and money, and if they demand
restitution pay 'em with thy Polax. Thou art a Prince of the Blood-Royall, let
them not catch thee and they cannot question thee: but sweet Prince keep out
of their clutches by all means possible, if occasion serve make use of thy
horse, and force him to make use of his heels; stand not altogether upon thy
strength, nor too nicely upon thy honor; run rather then be taken, thou
had better be called a coward behind thy back, then a prisoner to thy face,
if thou come once within the reach of the Roundhead, look for little mercy
and less manners; if they rip not up thy body, they will rip up all thy faults to
thy face. O thou shall sinde them terrible fellower. They Will upbraid thee with
all thy valiant exploits and enterprises, and make them (if it were possible to
appear odious in thine own eyes. They Will say thou art an impudent young man to
rob that country so shamefully, that has paid for thy nutsing and breeding
so carefully; they will tell thee that theft is a bominable, rape execrable, and
murder damnable. They Will do their best to make thee believe, that it is felony
in England to burn houses and steal horses, and that Turks and Infidels would
have shown more mercy, and less cruelty then thou have done here. They Will
persuade thee (if they can) that villainies committed in this world, must be
answered for in another; that there is a God above before whom thou shall one day
appear, that will make no difference at all betwixt the greatest Prince, and
the meanest peasant; and that there is a place cared Hell prepared of purpose to
torment bloody Tyrants and cruel Persecuters. And thus by degrees (if thou
should but give ear to them) they might perhaps stir up remorse in thy
conscience, and repentance in thy foul, And where were we then? What would
become of our religion that has cost so much blood in Christendom if thou
should fall from us? Though we have wasted our brains and hazarded our lives
these many years past in plotting the ruin of these Round. heads in vain,
though our great expectations that the Popes absolute dominion should have bin
resotti'd here, by the powerful assistance of the great 88. Armado were
utterly frustrate, though our failing of blowing up the Parliament House blew
up all our hopes of ever prospering by any powderplot, though all our former
endeavors to have poisoned and stabbed Queen Eliz. came to nothing; yet we
were never daunted nor dismar'd, but still kept up our spirits, and held up our
heads; but if we fail now we fall utterly, this is our tallest and our
strongest building, if this decay no more Babels, nor no more builders, no more
Catholics nor Catholic Commanders, the glory of Rome must lie r'the dust for
ever. But Heroicke Prince stick thou close to us, keep can faith above our
fears till this brunt be over, and all is our own. Nor that your Highness may
go on with the more courage, we humbly present unto you these Considerations.
Note illustrious Prince, that in former times we had always a King or a Queen
as well as a State to oppose us, and yet though we fair'd we never fainted:
but now we have a King to countenance us, a Queen to encourage us, politic
Councellers to instruct us, and two or three great Armies on foot to fight for
us; besides the brave and resolute Irish (already bloode'd in the quarrel) to
assist us, and is this ods nothing? shall we be discouraged now, or suffer any
conceit of a nearer cut to heaven then we are acquainted with, to cut off the
legs of our resolutions, in the middle of our journey? No Prince, we know
(being embarked) thou wilt not strike sail though the wind be against thee, and
we are resolved to venture the vessel, if thou't hazard thy person; here is
Sea-roome enough, though there are some Shelves and Quicksands, Rocks and
Remora's, and thou can nor sail a League but thou shall meet with a Prize. O
it is a brave thing to be a thief when a man has authority to bear him out
in it, and a fine easy thing for a multitude of Armed men to rob a few naked
people. Men were wont to take purses, and break houses in fear. Stand and
deliver were dangerous words; but now the case is altered, he that was a thief
before, is now better then a true man, and he that's a true man now is worse
then a thief, Thou have many such brave blades in thy army Prince, that
deserve to be of thy Lifeguard, they are so near thee in spirit and
condition, it is fit they should be near thy person, make much of 'em. We dare
not but acquaint your Highness with the great noise that flies about the
kingdom of an overthrow you had at York; but we admire what Kings reign
'ewas in, for King Charles and his Council at Oxford made Bonefires at the
same time for the same victory; and shall we believe his Majesty will turn
Round, or make less fires then of whole Towns, for the glory of the
Roundheads? No, we will believe that news near the more for their ringing,
and new-made holy day at London, it is nothing but a trick to discourage us; but
the truth is we should be loath to believe it though we know it to be true: Yet
noble Prince if thou have received any loss, if they have killed and taken
more of thy Men, Horse and Arms then thou can well spare, thou know how
to help thy self quickly, here are men enough in England, and thou have ways
enough to win them; fly abroad again, range the Countries, try all thy
friends in the North, make use of thy own Dukedom, force all such as call
themselves Protestants, to fight for the Protestant Religion; and yet where
good words will prevail, use no violence, set thy Engineers on work to try
their tempers and discover their humors, that according to judgment they may
incurage the fearful, flatter the foolish, and threaten the obstinate, till
all are become sufficiently persuaded they shall fight for the honor of the
King, the preservation of the Laws and the Liberty of the Subject; and then
tell them Stories of preferment, and promise them wealth and honor, that they
may be earnest and eager in the battle; and for their greater glory set them
still in the Front, and put them upon the Forlornehope, that their friends and
they may kill one another valiantly, whilst we keep safe r'the Rear, and
laugh to see our enemies die so willingly for the security of us and our
Religion, This is the depth of the plot Prince, carry it closely, you may be
sure there will be no Catholics against you, and therefore fear not to kill
them, and such as are on your side endeavor to preserve them, for why should
we hazard our persons against an enemy that will undergo the danger himself
and do our work for us: But that your Highness may recrute your Army with
the more facillitie and celeritie, we have made bold to present you with the
draught of a Proclamation, that perhaps you may be pleased to make use of for
that purpose.

The Proclamation.
ALL brave and generous Protestants that are desirom to purchase wealth and
honor by ventring their lives for the preservation of their Laws, Liberties,
and Religion, Let them with all expedition repair to the Quarters of the
Magnanimous Prince Rupert, Duke of Cumberland, General of all his Majesty's.
Forces in the North, where they shall receive present entertainment as
follows (viz.) Every man upon his entertainment is to accomodate himself
with a Horse, which he is to take where he can find him, either in the Stable
or Pasture, with bridle, saddle, and all other furniture fit for his own
riding, and his Highness Scrvice; which Horse and Furniture to be paid for at
his Highness price as soon as the Rider shall be Knighted by his General for
his good Service. Secondly, Thatt every Soldier upon his March, or otherwise,
shall have free Quarter in all places, as the best lodging and victual the
Country can afford without one penny pay, only his Highness does pass his
Princely Word to see all discharged, upon his first peaceable possession of his
Dukedom of Cumberland. Thirdly, that every Soldier that shall want wearing
clothes or linnin may lawfully at all times, and in all places take what will
serve his turn, from such as may best spare it (Catholics only excepted)
Nevertheless his Highness out of his zeal to Justice, does oblige himself
by his inviolable promise to see restitution made when the Protestant Religion
he fights for shall again flourish in England. And lastly, though the Soldier
shall want no money to spend, by reason of the free Quarter, yet for his better
encouragement, and that if he shall outlive the wars, he may have a
computencie as well of wealth as honor to support him, it shall be lawful for
all Officers from the Collonell to the Corporal to take with them what Company
of Soldiers they shall think fit, and upon search made, to seize upon all
such Jewels, Plate, or Money as they shall find, the one half whereof to be
divided amongst them, and the other to be disposed of by his Highness.
Notwithstanding all such Money, Plate, and Jewels so found and taken away are
to be likewise restored to the proper owners within one whole year after his
highness solemn Coronation in Ireland.

But for your soldiers meddling with women, or killing of men, we altogether
leave that to your Highness own disposure, none knowing better than your
self how to order your men 'ith affairs of flesh and blood, we are confident
that the publishing of this or the like Proclamation will be a means to
animate diverse that have not yet tasted the sweetness of your Highness
bounty (at the cost of the Kingdom) in the way of war to come into your
assistance: for which we have thought it our duties to give you this hint.

This way (if any) will raise men quickly, and make your Highness able to
recover York again before we shall be able to believe it is lost: But there is
another report Prince of a sad disaster befalne thee, They say the Parliament
Dog-killers have knocked thy Spaniell of the head; this we are loft to believe
to, being so well acquainted with thy Dogs courtlike and warlike behavior and
condition, he has done many exploits, been in many fights, and escaped many
dangers, and being Musket proof as well as thy self, we are confident he is a
living Dog to this hour, and will still be a help to thee in dangerous
expeditions: But thou best know his breeding Prince, make use of him, if he
has any more wit then a dog get it out of him, and employ it for the
advantage of the cause. Consider Prince the great work thou have to do, and
the wages thou art to receive, and fall to it hard; the Irish now help thee,
and Ireland expects thee, do but ruin this kingdom, and thou shall have that
for thy labor. O thou't be entertained and embraced there by a people
according to thine own heart, a warlike Nation, noble spirited, right Roman
Catholic subjects, such as will be ready at all times to loyne with the
Spaniard against the Holland, English and Scottish Protestant Rebels, Therefore
good Prince dispatch, do that thou came for, spoil all here as fast as thou
can, make an end of the Protestants in England quickly, and we shall not only
think our selves bound to pray for your Highness long life and happy Reign in
Irland; but also be ready to venture our estates and lives in your service, till
we shall see that rich Diadem impale your victorious brow.

FINIS.

