Colonel VVELDENS Taking of Inch-House Near PLYMOUTH: Four piece of Ordnance
taken there, with the number of the Arms, and all their Bag and Baggage.

Together with the Articles of Conditions, and a List of the Names of the
chief of the Lords, Knights, and Colonels of the Princes Army disbanded in the
West, and to what places they are severally dispersed.

Also Sir Thomas Fairfaxes advance against EXETER and BARNSABLE to take them in
for the Parliament.

Printed by the Original Papers, and published according to Order of
Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke, 30 March, 1646.

A Copy of a Letter from the Generals Quarters.
SIR,
THe opportunity of sending by this Bearer moved me to write a word or two unto
you: Inch-House, near Plymouth, was last week surrendered to Colonel Welden
with four Minion Guns, 90 Muskets, and all their Bag and Baggage taken
therein; those in it to go to their own homes. Saturday we marched from Truro
to Bodman. The Plymouth Regiment of horse, one troop of each Regiment, Col.
Hamonds, Col. Fortescues, and Col. Ingolsbyes Regiments are to block up
Pendennis and the Mount, and secure the County. We shall now march apace
Eastward, Exeter will be (I doubt not) soon in our possession. My employments
here are so many, that I have little time for necessary refreshment. Remember
me to all our friends. I remain

Bodman March 24. 1645. Your assured friend W. C.

A Letter from the Scout-master Generals Quarters.
SIR
Colonel Hammon goes on in the blocking up of Pendennis Castle by Land, his
number we find by view of the place to be sufficient both Horse and Foot, they
within being out of all hopes of relief; fortifications are to be raised upon
the Istmus, which is so narrow that we doubt not but to faciliate it. All their
hopes are within, that they think when they have seen the utmost of what the
King will do, that then they will accordingly deport themselves; and these
Punctileos of honor sway with some there, though others as desperate in their
resolutions as in their fortunes, will try the utmost of Malignant opposition;
but if there be but as great care taken by Sea as we shall by Land, they may
soon be weary of their design. Michaels Mount, that is thought on also by the
care of the Cornish Gentlemen, there are Forces to be drawn out of the several
divisions of the Western parts of the County to keep the Enemy in, or force
them out and take in the Garrison: And least that we should leave too much upon
the Country before they are put into a settled posture (for we hear that some
of the Enemies Soldiers are killing in the furthest parts of Cornwell
therefore) two hundred Horse are drawn out, and sent to scour all the Country
of them, that so none of them may remain to breed ill blood when we are
advanced. And besides, there are some that have debauched away better Horses
then some that were offered, on purpose to deceive us, but those two hundred
Horse are to make enquiry after them also. We are now at Bodman, on our way to
our old Quarters; we hope they in Exeter, and also in Barnstable (for we shall
divide to both places) will neither of them now much delay us, but if they do
we shall not dally with them, but shall (God willing) suddenly give an account
of something. There is nothing come to us of the Princes going from the Isle of
Silly, where (for any thing we can learn) he still is; we thought Hopton and
Wentworth would have passed immediately into France, but it seems they first
visit Silly. The General has taken great care to cleanse these parts of the
Enemy from resting in knots together when we are gone, and the Militia is so
settled, that I presume (through Gods blessing) they will be a free Country. I am

Bodman, March the 24. 1645. Your humble Servant. N. T.

The Copy of a Letter to an Officer of note.
Honored Sir:
THe General with the body of the Army is now come to Bodman, having left
Colonel Hammon with a sufficient strength of Horse and Foot to block up
Pendennis by Land, which will be easily done by raising Fortifications upon the
Istmus, which is very narrow; The Mount is to be kept in by the Country of the
West parts of Cornwall who have undertaken it. We have sent two hundred Horse
toward the Lands end to fetch up what straglers of the Enemy stays behind, and
to find out what Horses they have hid, or otherwise disposed of in those
parts. To morrow the General intends to advance toward Barnstable, and thence
to Exeter, which we hope will neither of them hold out against us; and God
being pleased to prosper our designs, we hope to be (sooner then I will
speak) in the midland parts. The Prince is said to be still in the Isle of
Silly, whether Hopton and Wentworth are gone to him; those of the Cavaliers
that are not yet gone are to be conveyed by Parties of Horse to Chard, there to
be dispersed and scattered, which is that we most desire. Sir, you will please to
excuse my abruptness who am in haste, yet advisedly remain

Your obliged and affectionate servant. J. G,
Bodman, March 24. 1645.
A List of the names of the Lords and Chief Officers of the Princes Army in
the West, and how they are severally dispersed.
Prince Charles in the Isle of Silly, and with him there are these; LOrd
Hopton, General Earl of Berkshire Lord Wentworth Lord Capell Sir Edward Hide,
Governor of Silly Isle 100. Officers and Gentlemen.


Goring is still in France, and thither are gone these; LOrd Culpepper Sir
Rich. Greenvill Sir Nicholas Chrispe Major Genesis Taplane Fifty Officers and
Gentlemen.


The King is still at Oxford, and these are gone to him; LOrd Miller Major Genesis
Webb 40. Officers of Note


Col. Arundell is in Pendennis, and with him are SIr Henry Killegrew Sir John
Digby Sir Abraham Shipman Col. Slaughter Many more.


Other Officers have Passes to go home. MAj. Genesis Wagstaffe Lord Mohun Sir
Richard Prideaux Sir Francis Mackworth Sir James Smith Col. Charles Goring Col.
Macus Trove Sir John Greenvill Colonel Berd Col. Jordan Bovell Col. Thomas
Pantor Col. Edgcome Sir John Trelawny Sir Nicholas Lowre Col. Trelawny Col.
Stukley Col. Hunningham Col. Slingsby Col. Hopert Col. Gettings Col.
Champernoon Col. Collens Col. West. Col. Stielly
And many others.

Disbanded in all nine Brigades.
1 Col. Taplanes 2 Lord Wentworths 3 Sir James Smiths 4 Lord Clevelands 5 Major
Genesis Webbs 6 Col. Bovels 7 The Lord Gorings 8 Prince Charles Lifeguard 9
Greenvils Reformadoes 30 Regiments in all 30 Major-Generals and Colonels 80
Lieutenant Colonells and Majors Hundreds of Captains and other Officers And
many Knights and Gentlemen 1000. good Horses 500. Horses of a worser sort 1000.
exchanged Horses 1000. led Horses, and others worth little.


FINIS.

