THE CAVALIERS Catechism: OR, The Reformed Protestant catechizing the
Antichristian Papists, Malignants, Incendiaries, and other ill-affected Persons
under the name of Cavaliers.

WITH Their distinct Answer thereunto.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Watson. 1643. May.3.

The Cavaliers Catechism.
Question. WHat is your name?

A. Cavalier.

Qu. Who gave you that name?

A. My seducers and deceivers, in my innocence, wherein I was made a member of
the Church of Rome, and consequently a limb of Antichrist, an enemy to all
goodness, the child of the devil, an inheriter of the kingdom of darkness,
amongst the infernal spirits that rule in the air of this terrestrial globe.

Qu. How were your Witnesses denominated?

A. Lack-wit and Ignorance: for if they had wit and knowledge, they would not
have given the title of a Gentleman to a clown or Corydon.

Qu. What did your Witnesses promise you should perform when you came to
maturity and ripe age, when you received your name?

A. That I should forsake all Piety and godliness, all virtue and purity, the
true and Apostolic Religion, grounded upon the verity of Gods word, that I
should persecute all professors of the same, envy all goodness and good men,
promote the Romish Religion and Kingdom of Antichrist, by any manner of means
whatsoever, be it by treasonable plots against Princes or States, or by raising
public War and sedition in Commonwealths, and the like.

Qu. Art thou able to do these things of thy self, that were promised for the?

A. No verily, but by the help of the rest of my fellow members received into
that Congregation, I doubt not to be enabled and strengthened to perform all
that was promised on behalf.

Qu. What is meant by your name Cavalier?

A. Knighthood, very unfit for me, for as I am told, it was a name first given
to Gentlemen as an augmentation of honor, by the Frenchmen in the Wars, the
word being derived of the French word Chivall, a Horse, by which Troopers or
Horsemen in battle were called Chevaliers, by corruption of speech in the
process of time, called by the English Cavaliers, now Cavallers, or Cavaleers,
but by the better sort Cavaliers, by all which these particulars, may be
collected, that as the world is now degenerated from the true pronunciation of
the original word, so the natural disposition of men are degenerated to the
word now in use, Cavallers, or Cavaliers, for in our actions there is no
solidity, nor in our speeches sobriety, nor in our hearts integrity, but all
our arguments are maintained by cavelling, and our actions defended by
bestiallity, and rude disorderly behavior, like unto untamed horses, from
whence we received the first denomination, whose order is altogether to
disorder and confound the warlike Rancks in Battle, and to bring to confusion
and destruction, is the only sense they have of their present actions.

Qu. Do you conceive that the way you have been trained up and educated in
from the time of your birth to this present, is to be defended by those means
as you have bin taught?

A. Yis truly, for these reasons, 1. In respect of the Commandments I have
received from the Church* wherein I was received a member. 2 In respect of the
danger I am told I shall fall into, and punishment I am worthy of, if I desert
the service of that cause to which I have been devoted, and which my Witnesses
engaged themselves for me in my infancy, that I should uphold and maintain when
I should come to age?


Qu. What are the commandments you have learned, and that you conceive your
self bound to observe and keep?

A. These following. 1 That I should observe the will and pleasure of his
Holiness of Rome in all matters touching salvation, without the use of the
Scriptures, they being by him counted deficient, and have not sufficient
instructions contained in them to lead a pious life, and bring to future
happiness. 2 To commit treason against Kings that oppose his Holiness, and
reject his doctrinall traditions. 3 To commit fornication, adultery, rapine,
and the like. 4 To reject the Christian Sabbath, and prefer the Jewish. 5. To
admit of no less then seven Sacraments necessary to salvation. 6. To swear,
and forswear, for the defense of the Catholic cause. 7. To cozen, deceive,
and circumvent, our Neighbors for our own advantage. 8. To acknowledge no god
greater, or more to be reverenced, and worshipped, then the Pope of Rome. 9. To
worship and adore Images, as much as Christ himself. 10. To bear false
witness against our neighbor, for any occasion whatsoever. 11. For all which
the Popes indulgent pardon is sufficient to preserve from damnation. 12. That
there is no greater damnation, then the Popes curse, and excomumcation.


Qu. Do you believe all these precepts?

A. Yis, and have and will to the loss of my life and fortunes, (if I had any)
observe and keep them.

Qu. What is a Sacrament according to the instruction of your Church?

A. It is a sign of a thing signified, which we cannot discern with the Eye,
but by the sign.

Q. Explain the same, according to your sense and knowledge?

A. Then thus, by the sign of the Cross is signified the cuncifying of, by
the picture of the Virgin Mary, we are taught that she was the Mother of (...)
and queen of heaven, by the picture of the Apostles, we are taught to remember
that they were the founders of the Church, and of that sanctity and power, that
they are now in heavan able to cure the diseases of living Saints on earth, as
they did when they were on Earth, and therefore we are us much bound to pray to
them for help upon any ocasion, as to God, they knowing our wants, by a fellow
feeling of our miferies when they lived with us, many other examples I could
give, by which you may understand what we mean by Sacraments,

Q. Then every Image or Picture, whether of Saints departed, Patriarchs,
Prophets, or Apostles, are Sacraments, and to be sacredly observed and kept?

A. Yis verrily, and as much in esteem as the two Sacraments of Baptism and
the Supper.

Q. Are these the things you now take up Arms for, against your Country, and
seek to bring the same to utter confusion and destruction?

A. Yis, and will never give over so long as life lasts till we have restored
the use of these things in the Church of England, or loose our bodies in the
enterprise, for our souls we have assured hope to have them saved after we
have felt some small time of punishment in Purgatory, and his Holiness, our
chiefest hope and defense, come to heaven before us as a great Saint, and by
his mediation and intercession, redeem us from that place of pain.

FINIS

