A Glass for the Times

By Which According to the Scriptures, you may clearly behold the true
Ministers of Christ, how far differing from false Teachers.

WITH A brief Collection of the Errors of our Times, and their Authors Names.
Drawn from their own writings.

ALSO Proofs of Scripture by way of Confutation of them, by sundry able
Ministers.

Collected by T. C. a Friend to Truth.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Ibbitson. 1648.

The Gospel Minister gifted, and made an able overseer, and sent, Romans 10.11.
For,
HIs great labor is compared to a Steward; As good Stewards, etc. 1 Cor. 4.1.
To a Shepherd, John 21.16. Peter feed my sheep. To a Watchman, Ier. 6.17. They
watch for your souls. To a Prophet, Matthew. 10.41. He that receives a Prophet.
To an Apostle, the 12.28. His abilities are answerable; To explain the word.
To convince the soul. To reach the affections. To build up, nourish and
cherish Christ's members by Application, Information, Exhortation, Reproof and
comfort. Having the light of knowledge, heat of zeal, and influence of virtue
in life and doctrine; being filled with zeal for Gods glory, and zealously
compationate toward poor lost souls.

The Word delivered by such a Minister, is a sovereigne salve for every sore;
Compared as follows,
To a Medicine for the wounded, Psalm 119.10. To a Lantern for the ignorant,
Psalm. 119.5. To a Guide for our feet in the way of peace, Luke 1.79. To a Bit
to curb the unruly, James 1.26. To a two-edged sword for the Christian
soldier, Heb. 4.12. To a Treasure. 2 Cor. 4 7. We have this Treasure in, etc.
To a Key or Inlet to glory; Matthew. 16.19. To Wine, to revive and cheer the
heart, Matthew. 19.17. To water to wash the defiled, Heb. 10.21. Revel. 22.17. To
Fire to warm the frozen hearted, Luke 24.32.12.35. To Salt to season the
unsavory, Matthew. 5.15. To Rain, Isa. 55.10.11. As the rain upon the Earth,
etc. To Milk for babes, Luk 9.54. To Honey, Psalm. 19.10. Doubtless no honey in
my mouth, etc. To everlasting Food, John 6.27 Its meat that perishes not.
Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that which endures to
everlasting life.
The entrance of thy word gives light,
Psalm. 119.130. False Prophets not gifted, unable, and not sent; For their
deceitful and soule-murthering opinions may be compared as follows,
TO seducers, 2 Timothy 3.13. To corrupters. To deceitful workers, 2 Cor. 11.13.
To raylers and wresters of Scripture, 2 Pet. 3.16. To hypocrites. To liars,
Revel. 2.2. To Antichrist, 1 John 2.18. To belly-servers, Romans 16.18. To
pernicious false teachers, 2 Pet. 2.2. In the 2 Timothy 3.8. They are called men
of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith. To cunning crafty creepers
into houses, 2 Timothy 3.6, 7, 8, 9.

The Doctrine delivered by such, is compared,

To the doctrine of devils, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. To damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1.
To fained speeches. To a pernicious evil. To perverse disputings, 1 Timothy 6.3,
4, 5. To fables, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. To windy doctrine, Ephesians 4.14. Thus teaching
things they ought not, speaking lies in hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4.2.

From which corrupt fountain proceeds these pernicious errors mentioned; in
the Testimony of the London Ministers, viz.
Against the Divine Authority of the holy Scriptures. Against the Nature and
Essence of God. Against the Trinity of persons in unity of Essence. Against the
Deity of the Son of God. Against the Deity, and the divine worship of the Holy
Ghost. Against Gods eternal decree of Election and Reprobation. Concerning
original sin, and Christ our Mediator. Touching universal or general
Redemption. About natural man's freewill, and power to good supernatural.
Against the true nature and ground of Faith and Justification. Touching those
that are in Christ, in reference to the moral Law to sin and perfection.
Errors against the Ordinances of Christ in general. Against the Lords day,
Sabbath, against Baptism. Against lawful oaths, touching Marriage and divorce
Against the souls Immortality, and the being of Heaven or hell now. About a
general Toleration, promoting all kind of error and heresies under the
pretense of Liberty of Conscience.
A collection of the Errors of our Times.
Together with the Authors names, drawn from their own writings.
To which is added proofs of Scripture by way of Confutation of them, by
sundry able Ministers.
THe error of Laurence Clarkson cited in Londons Testimony. page 5. That the
Scriptures in the true Manuscript is but humane, and so not able to discover a
Divine God. Confutation, Exodus 31.18.32.16. John 5.39. Romans 3.2.

Error of J. G. 1 That no writing whatsoever, whether Translation or
Originalls, are the foundation of Christian Religion. Ioh. 5 46, 47. 2 To
believe the Scriptures in English to be Gods Word, is no foundation of
Christian Religion, Confuta. Acts 18.28.


Error of John Bidle. 1 To take God otherwise then personally, is to mistake
him. Confut. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Esa. 45.6. 2 To distinguish between Essence and Person
in God, is a wicked distinction. Heb. 1.3. Ioh. 10.3. 3 That the Holy Ghost is
a created Spirit among the Angels, and no more omnipresent then the devil, and
worshipping the Holy Ghost is not allowed in Gods word. Ioh. 3.5. Acts 13.28.
Romans 15, 16.


Error in Divine light in the book of Comfort for Believers. 1 That the
Father and the Spirit suffered in the Son. Confu. John 1.14.3.16. That more
then the Elect shall be saved. Acts 13.48. Romans 11.5.7. 2 That God has more
hand in men's sinfulness then they themselves, and is the author of his
peoples sinfulness. Psalm. 5.4. Hab. 1.13. Heb. 10.30.38.


Error of Paul Best, cited in Land. Test. 1 That God the Father is God
essentially, the Son visentiall; and 2 The Holy Ghost potentially. Confut. Acts
5.3, 4. Job 33.4. 3 That Christ is a mighty God, but not Almighty; John 4.42.
Matthew. 2.21. 4 That he is not truly and properly God; 2 Timoth. 1.10. Tit.
2.13. 5 That the better part of Christ's person is man. Esa. 45.21, 22. 6 That
to make Christ coequal with the Father, is to make a false Christ.


Error, In the fullness of Gods love by L.S. 1 That if the love of God be
limited to a few, its far from infinite. confut. Ephesians. 2.4. C. 3.8. 2 That it is
not suitable to God to pick and choose among men to show mercy. Romans 9.20, 21. 3
That the reprobate condition of men and Angels shall be regained. Confu. Romans
9.22. Matthew. 25.41.


Error, in man's mortality, written by R. O. Cit. in Land. Test.

1 That the soul of Christ was in the Grave. Mat. 27.50. Acts 13.29. 2 That
Christ ascended into the Son. Heb. 1.3. 1 Pet. 3.22. 3 That whole man is a
compound wholly mortal; Genesis 2.7. Mat. 10.28. 4 That the going of the soul
into Hell is a mere fiction. Confutat. Matthew. 22.32. 2 Cor. 5.4. 5. That the
soul is mortal, and sleeps with the body.
Error of P. Hobson, Cit. in Land. Testim. 1 That Christ was purchased by
love. Confu. Heb. 2.12. 2 That Christ did not purchase love for us. 1 Pet.
1.18, 19.


Error of H. Hammond, Cited in Londons Test. That Christ Jesus was given to
satisfy for all the sins of all mankind. Confut. Heb. 2.14. Philip 2.8.
Gal. 3.13.

Error of J. S. Cited in Londons Testim. 1 That the Father is a Sabbath
commanded to Christians. Confuta. John 20.19.26. Acts 20.7. 2 That every day is
a Sabbath to Christians. 3 That none ought to give Baptism, because they cannot
give the Holy Ghost with it. Matthew. 3.11. John 1.33. Acts 19.4.


Error of M. Web, Cited in the Testimony of London Min. 1 That John's Baptisine
ended at Christ's; Confutat. Matthew. 3.11. 2 That there must be another
institution of Baptism, or else it is of no weight. Acts 19.4. Ioh 1.33.
Matthew. 28 19.


Error of M. Bacon in the Testimony of London Ministers. 1 That Baptism is a
shadow of Christ; and must go out, as the substance comes in. Confut. 1 Pet.
3.21. Romans 4.11. Col. 2.12. Romans 6.4. 2 That the baptism of Infants is a great
delusion, and of as dangerous consequence, as any the man of sin brought into
the world. Romans 11.15, 16, 17. Mark 10.14.


Error of S. Gorton and R. Williams. 1 That it is forswearing to swear at
all; Confut. Ier. 4.1.2. 2 That it is unlawful to call a wicked man to swear,
or pray. Matthew. 5.39.


Error of E. Avery, Cited by the London Ministers. That there is no
resurrection of the natural body, but only mystical. That the bodies of
flesh belonging to the Saints shall be annihilated, and that the soul is God.
That hell is a nonentity. That no souls are yet in hell. That all torments of
men and devils are yet to come, that Beasts shall rise again. That devils
shall be tormented in the bodies of the wicked. Confutat. John 5.29. Job
19.25, 26, 27. 1 Cor. 15.12.13. 1 John 3.2. Col. 3.4. Matthew. 25.4.1. Jude 6.

These following are so gross, they need no further Confutation.
Error of M. Rand. and M. John Simpson. That the moral Law is of no use at
all to a believer, no rule for him to walk by; Nor to examine his life by, and
that Christians are free from the mandatory power of it.

Error of M. John Eaton in The honey comb. That the Law and Christ are two
contrary things, one cannot abide the other. By the Believers are nurtered for
heaven, and God fits them for service (...) the world by leading them into sins.

Another gross Error is this, by M. Randall. That he that believes that
Christ has taken away his sins, is as free without sin as Christ. That it is
as possible for Christ to sin as for a child of God to sin. That a child of
God need not, nay ought not to ask pardon for his sin; and that it is no less
then blasphemy for him, so to do, delivered and maintained by him.

Error of D. Crispe in his Sermons. That every elect person from the first
instant of his being, is as pure in the eyes of God, as he shall be in glory,
no more sin is reckoned to him now, then in heaven.

That the Lord has not one sin to charge on any elect person, from their first
conception, not so much as original sin to be laid on him, though he be in
the height of iniquity, and excess of riot, committing all abominations, God
has no more to lay to the charge of such a person then to a Saint Triumphant
in glory.

M. Simpsons Error. That if a man by the Spirit know himself in the state of
Grace, though he be drunk or commit adultery, God sees no sin in him, witness
Mr. Gattaker. That God does not chastise any of his people for sin, nor
punish the land for the sin of his people.

In the assertion of Grace by Rob. Town. That as well our works as persons
are perfectly holy and good.

N. Coulin an Officer in the Army. That a Saint in this life, without any
addition hereafter is perfectly just, perfectly holy, and completely glorious
in this life, and not capable of any addition after death.

M. Saltmarsh in the Smoke of the Temple. That the fullness of time is not yet
come for Ordinances, there is no Church, no Ordinance yet. They are to begin
with gifts and miracles, as in the Apostolic times.

In the book called, Little Nonsuch, concerning Marriage. The very next of kin
may join in Marriage by custom and command, for Sarah was Abraham's sister
whom he took to wife.

In the doctrine of divorce by John Milton. That unfitness or contrariety of
mind betwixt man and wife, from a natural cause which hinders solace and
peace are a great reason of divorce.

Errors concerning general Toleration, and Liberty of conscience in The
bloody Tenent, by Williams.

That Liberty be granted for every man to worship God in that manner as shall
appear to them most agreeable to Gods word, and no man punished, and that no
detriment can come to the Church or State by the toleration of Religion, and
why may not Papists be permitted.

That it is the will and command of God, since the coming of Christ, a
permission of the most Jewish, Turkish, or Antechristian consciences and
worships be granted to all men in all Nations and Countries.

By this it appears what damnable and dangerous errors and blasphemies are
sprung up amongst us, we have great need to take our Saviors counsel in
Matthew. 7.15. to beware of false Prophets, v. the 16. By their fruits ye shall
know them, 2 Pet. 2.1. There shall be false Prophets who privily shall bring in
damnable heresies.

For a conclusion and caution against errors, read 2 Timothy the whole third
Chapter.

Verse.
1 This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. 2 For men
shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, 3 Without natural affection,
truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that
are good, 4 Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures, more then lovers
of God, 5 Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from
such turn away. 6 For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead
captive silly women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, 7 Ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. 8 Now as Jannes
and Jambres withstood Moses: so do these also resist the truth: men of corrupt
minds, reprobate concerning the faith. 9 But they shall proceed no further:
for their folly shall be manifest to all men as theirs also was. 10 But thou
have fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering,
charity, patience, 11 Persecutions, afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch,
at Iconium, at Lystra, what persecutions I endured: but out of them all, the
Lord delivered me. 12 Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall
suffer persecution. 13 But evil men, and seducers shall wax worse and worse,
deceiving, and being deceived. 14 But continue thou in the things which thou
have learned, and have been assured of, knowing of whom thou haft learned
them. 15 And that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are
able to make thee wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus.
16 All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, 17
That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.
Look in the 2 Cor. 11.3. But I fear lest by any means, as the serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ.

2 John 8.9, 10. Look to your selves that we lose not those things which we
have wrought, but that we receive a full reward.

9 Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not
God: he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the
Son.

10 If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not
into your house, neither bid him God speed.

Matthew. 7.17. Ye shall know them by their fruits: Do men gather grapes of
thorns or figs of thistles? John 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall
know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self.
Prove. 14.12. There is a way which seems right unto a man: but the end thereof
are the ways of death. All the words of Scripture in confutation of them,
could not be contained at length in this brief Catalogue, if you turn to them
you shall find them pertinent, as a true touchstone distinguishing gold from
dross.

Let this serve for a warning piece to wise Christians, to take heed lest they
be corrupted with these notorious Errors of the times, and so fall from their
own steadfastness.

FINIS.

