A CATALOGUE Of the titles of several Books printed in Cambridge in the Year
1669.
In a large Folio. FIve demonstrations to prove that a Frenchifyed Englishman,
being a privy Counselor, may lawfully be a Pensioner to the Frence King.
Dedicated to the Earl of St. Albans. In a small Octavo. Crumbs of comfort for
the East-India-Company: wherein it is made evident that Goa, Dunkirk, and the
Nutmegg-Island are to be delivered to the English, when the Citradels are
rebuilt in Scotland. In a large Folio. Three Arguments to prove that forty
thousand pounds is but a small sum to play away in one winter in the French
Court by a Ierman Count. Dedicated to the House of Commons. In a large Quarto.
Reason and Justice in 3 Tomes: proving the impartiallity of our Age, viz. in
fetching the Lord Warreston out of France, and hanging him in Scotland; and
suffering Clarendon at his ease in France to do further mischief. In the
largest of Folios. Fifty unanswerable Arguments to prove Sr. George Downing a
worse conditioned Traitor against his Master Okey, than Judas against our
Savior, who, when he considered what he had done, went and hanged himself. In
a small Folio. Twenty Arguments to prove that never any Lawyer went to heaven
(except Sr. Thomas More) though a Christian, especially such as take fees on
both sides, and make no conscience of pleading in a bad cause. Dedicated to
Jack Fountain, Jack Maynard, Black-mouthed Jones, and Sr. Ambrosele Befe the
Butchers son at Smithfield-barrs. In a Duodecimo. A new way of paying old
debts, Written by Plutofurens: viz: That the debtor ought to beat the Creditor
if he trust a Courtier, and ask for his money. Dedicated to Howard the Mercer,
Dean the Woodmonger and Avery the Coachmaker. In a large Folio. A Dam-me way of
swearing and hectoring a Man out of life and estate: written in a black
character by Plutofurens, and Compeers Dobson, Priestman and Granger. Dedicated
to Alexander Fitton, Willi Carr Percival Heart and Blunden. In a small Octavo,
An excellent method of lying, or inventing lies, together with the Art of
Memory requisite for a Liar Composed by the 3 famous Authors Sr. Satan
Birkenhead, Sr. Thomas Gore and Sr. Giddy-brain Gerard. With the learned
Observations of Doctor Baber an exquisite Student and Practitioner in that Ar^
Dedicated to Coll. Noy. In a Quarto. Savill or the Vujust Steward; being a
Tragi-Comedy, Acted at the Kings house: wherein is presented the injustice of
the Steward in selling the Towns in Holland and Flanders. Dedicated to Queen
Besses Tomb. In a large Quarto. Articles of Agreement made in a tripartite
Alliance between the right Venerable Baud Benee, Madam Valeire and Madam
Castlemain: with the proposalls of marriage between the Highborn Bastards
Lew%% de Bourbonne Valeire, Charles Castlemain, and the 2. Mistress Iermins in
the Nunnery at Cullomb in France In Folio. Twenty Reasons written by the Lady
Benet, Damaris Page, Proserpine Civit and Madam Chiffins: with the Observations
of their Sister Wood deceased: wherein is a direction to Madam Russell, and all
other hopeful Ladies likely to trade at Court; That they, on pain of poverty,
diseases and old age, never offer to expose their Commodities to sale on trust;
but first secure a good stock of Money and Titles of Honor: for that there is
no trust in Princes or Sons of men: As for example, Mis at the Playhouse,
Roxellana, Warmsley, and other Whores of Honor. A new way of Institution and
Induction practiced on Doctor.... at the Fleece-Tavern in Holborn by
Archbishop Buckhurst, Archdeacon Sidley and Chancellor Blaney.
Jn a Duodecimo. The heavy Judgments inflicted on Sr. George Cartwright for
his ruining the valiant Seamen of England, and cheating the Nation in the
Exchequer: viz. to be confined Treasurer of Ireland for his miserable life. Jn
a Folio. An exact model and survey of the Great Ships built by the Ld. Gerard
and the rest of the Peers, according to the flourish they made at the burning
of the Ships at Chattam. Dedicated to the Court of Aldermen and Common Council
building the Loyal London; with a Motto. It Is for a Merchant to keep his word:
But for an upstart Lord a....
Jn a Folio. The English Interest firmly established in Ireland by outing the
honest Adventurers, and innocent English families settled 100 Years in Ireland;
and putting into their estates the known Irish Rebels. Dedicated to the Privy
Council in 40 Articles by Alderman Barker of London. Jn a Quarto. Alderman
Bolton's honesty to the poor burnt out of London comparted to the pissing out
the fire of London by wise Sr. Thomas Bludworth. In a Duodecimo. The Lady
Benet's Receipt for lost maidenheads presented to Madam Churchill, Mrs.
Warmsley and others, whores of honor. Jn a Folio. Sr. Poll alias Sr. Gilbert
Gerard; Hypocondria for the cure of his mad wife, and the rest of the mad
Daughters of Gutta Rosacea the Beast of Durham, Dedicated to the Bishops only
Son now a Pikeman in Russels Regiment. A rare Secret found out by the Beast of
Durham's Chambermaid, being an Antidote against pissing and shiting a bed when
drunk.... by taking Goats hoof or it is bladder burnt to a powder, and drunk in
the Collegiate cup at Peterburrow.
Jn a Quarto. Gutta Rosacea his logic, that, as the Beast of Durhaem is a
Prince Palatine he may lawful ly with his maid several years; and after,
marry her to his Man, by a License from Sr. Satan Birckenhead. Dedicated to the
Cobbler of Gloucester. The Milk-wife at Hackney her mistaken method of cureing
Doctor Smallwoods mad wife, in sending the Doctors Bastard in a Basket, in
stead of a basket of strawing herbs for his Church.
^n a large Folio. Vngratefullnes in 17 books, written by Monsieur Cadoule of
Mompelier. Dedicated to Blood-Frayser a Lousy Scot in that Town. A perite
Medicament for the Cure of Doctor Frayser's broken vertex, found out by the
Bailiff of Westminster: and dedicated to Sr. Edmund Godfrey. The sad complaint
of Royal blood with 200 other souls sent to the shade below, against Blood
Frayser-Dedicated to Mr. Read, Fraysers old Master.
Jn Octavo. Five Arguments written by Izard the Printer, proveing Doctor Baber
Pluto's Pimp, and Will: Cravens Cheatmaster General. Zanie or an Analeptica
for the Cure of the Arthritical; experienced by Hyde on the Lady Mordant at
Mompelier. Madam De rat's request to Justice Baber to make her a bill of what
she deserves for rubbing Clarendons shins every night in Mompelier. Sermons
noted useless by the Comedians of both houses, and Westminster-Abby; with a
Question put, -- Whether Pauls-Church ought to be built first, or the
Playhouse in Salisbury-Court, and which will be of most use for this Age?
In a Scotch Paper. The Frenchmens wonder, or the worlds astonishment, that
ever Clarendon should have brains enough to be Chancellor of England; being
judged, by such as discourse with him abroad, to be an ignorant lump of
Cornbury-gutts. A new way found out in Ireland for the making good Soldiers, by
nipping money out of each Soldiers days pay, for maintaining a Playhouse for
his Grace. The Tripartite Alliance of the Grand Senior, Devil and French King
sent to all the secure negligent Princes and States.
Jn a Quarto. An hoeterogeneous Remedy against Melancholy found out by C --
Lantherdail. Dedicated to Royal blood. Romes thanks returned to Clarendon for
his Kind endeavors in sending Sr. Richard Beling to the Popes holiness with a
Commission for Father Patrick to sit in the House of Commons. Dick Mason the
Avenior his gracious condescension to his poor old Father for the continuance
of his Alehouse, and living poor in Staffordshire: with the true relation how
Dick cozzened a poor old woman on pretense of Marriage. An excellent Receipt
against the sin of Sodom: by Phisiologer Bishop Dalben made in the Moonlight.
Justice Bales request to Docter Baber to prove Magna Charta a Chancery Lawyer,
and not a Statute, as the wise Doctor once affirmed it to his Clerck and an
ignorant Constable. An Action brought against Sr. Positive at all, Sr. Will:
Killegrew and Senior Tomaso by the Wites who wrote their Plays. Dedicated to
Judge Drayton and Gresham-Colledge. The blessed reformation in the supposed
Noble families of England, by resolving against a Puritanisme-life, and taking
up Heathenism.
Jn a Quarto. The Goodmans rest, or an Assurance that no miscarriages or cheats
shall every be punished by the Committee of Brook-house: With a consolation to
the troubled Brethren Gerard, Cartwright, brazen-faced Bronckerd, Pen, Peck and
others. with this in the title page, Qui peccat and non corripit alienae, facit
suae. Mr. Holders Remonstrance to the sober people in England; with 3.
arguments to prove that the valiant Christian Act of Sr. Robert Holms in
burning an innocent village in Holland, and robbing and cheating the
Guiny-Company was not the cause of burning London, and Ships at Chatham by way
of Lex talionis. Directions for any persons that are desirous to take Holy
Orders from Pope Clement the ix. or his Successors, to repair to the Monaestery
built at st. James, and at Castelles in Ireland.
Jn a small Quarto. The Lord Gerards advise to.... That the way to govern the
City of London and keep them from rebellion, is, to reduce the proud Knaves to
their blue Capps and leather points, and suffer no more Lord Majors or
Common Council, but make a good Citadel out of the Stones of Paul's in the
middle of the City, and make a Hectoring Governor; according to the example of
a Dam-me Lord who lost all Wales and all other places in his manaige. In a
large Folio. An excellent discourse called the Metamorphosis of old Jack
Vaughan; with the Dialogue between him and..... a worthy Commoner, who meeting
old Vaughan in Westminster Hall, saluted him with many congratulations, wishing
him joy of his Court-preferments; to which old Vaughan replied, Do you not see
my grey-hairs? Alas, Alas, I am too old to be a Knave; the Court may design
what they pleas, but they mistake the Man, I am resolved never to quit the
Commons jnterest: Yet with 6. hours this old man turned young, and nimbly
skipp'd to White Hall, where he made a Coupee, and from honest old Jack became
Sr. John, and with the Courant-figure became Sergeant John, and with a Caper
leapt into the Chief-Iustice seat in the Common Pleas; and is become an
Excellent Dancer after a Court-horn-pipe; which caused one to send him these 2.
lines to paint in his Coat of Arms, This is no wonder in such a Man;
One honest Lawyer show who can?
The French Kings thanks with his present sent to his Pensioners by his
faithful Ierman Count, for endeavoring to break the Triple Alliance; that
England and Holland may once more weaken the Protestant Interest, that the
French King may have the easyer passage to England through Flanders and
Holland. A true account given to the French King by Monsieur Colbert of the
whole charge in the purchase of Dunkirk, wherein is cast up what the new
hangings cost now hanging in the Louvre at Paris, wherein is the picture of
Dunkirk with a purse of money held over the Town: Also what the presents cost
that were given to the good old Gentlewoman and to Gerard for his officiousnes
in that affair.
Jn the largest of Folio's. Fifty Theses, wherein the grand quaestion is
stated, viz. Whether the abjureing Charles Stuart and a single person, or the
abjureing the Covenant has produced the greater plague on these Nations? in
which book are large Cutts lively presenting unto this Age, Kimbolton and other
Lords, with Jack Fountain, Sergeant Maynard, Judges Terrhel, Sr. Harbottle
Grimston, Doctor Hodges, Doctor Smallwood, and dissembling Ley, lifting up
their hands to heaven, and crying that heavy Judgments might pursue and fall
on the Violaters of that holy Covenant.

In another Plate is Genll. Monck at the head of his Regiment abjureing a
Single Person, and murdering all that would not do the same.

On 23d. Cut are presented the several Victories of the Commonwealth, where
may be viewed the King of Spain plucking out one of his Eyes to please the
English Ambassador; the French King with his breeches down, and Card. Mazarin
on his knees holding up the Kings shirt; the Portugal delivering his Ambassad:
Brother to be a sacrifice to appease the Peoples anger for affronting the
English Nation; the Swede offering Christian to be a Wife to any Son of the
Commonwealth; the poor Dane with his back bare, and a whole Regiment of German
Princes and Italian Commonwealths offering their services to Englands
Commonwealth; the Dutch claiming kindred and brotherly love; the Numerous Turks
round the Mediterranian humbly presenting to the Commonwealth all the English
Slaves in fetters of Gold, admireing Blake, and calling him a Son of the God
Commonwealth in England, and fearing that Blake would burn their Ships and
destroy their harbors, from the Citys of Argiers, Salee and Smyrna, the
Bashaws sending blank papers aboard the General to make his own Articles: And
on the backside of this Cut is to be seen Sr. Thomas Allen beaten by a few
Anchovy and Olive-boats, where is presented a feathered Captain with his Whore
tied to his back, and a bagg of money fastened to his nose as a leading-string,
with a Turk pissing in the Captains eyes.

And if you please to turn the other leaf, you will see a small Cut where is
pictured a hand out of a wall pointing at the Plague and fire of London, the
burning of the Ships at Chatham and Dutch-Warre; with a Turk whipping a Bishop
in his Lawn-sleevs, and calling him ignorant proud and drunken Priest.

A Prophecy found by a Cold-streamer in an Abbey in Northumberland, foretelling
that Oliver Cromwell and Genll. Monck should both die in their beds aequally
honest, and have sumptuous funerails, and be aequally exalted on
Westminster Hall for breaking their faith to their Masters. Tom of the Woods
Prophecy, being sent to Will Lilly from Schooters-Hill in Kent, with Tom's
desire that Lilly would give his judgment thereon unto the Lady Harvey. viz.
When Monck Shall die, we plainly See
That Monmouth General shall be;
Then James and Nan in a small flees
To New York fly they hold it meet.
Til Charles the Second takes his rest:
Then York and Monmouth shall contest
Who has most right to wear the Crown,
And so in blood each other drown:
The Commons then shall laugh and sing,
And banish quite the Name of King:
The Lords privilege quite out of doors;
Then every Peer must pay his scores:
Then Castlemain that Papist-Whore
Shall die a death as did Jane Shore:
And Drunken Shepherds run away;
Both Dogs and Flocks shall go astray:
The knavish Lawyers in disgrace,
And honest men put in their place,
Who shall with love make men agree,
And justice plead without a Fee:
The Cityzen and Countreyman
Shall lovingly go hand in hand.
Then Britain shall in triumph ride,
With peace and honor by her side;
Dame Foresight with her looking-glass
Showing what is coming and what is past:
Justice with her balance waits that Day
To even all that Strife can say:
Charity full-loaded with her store
Distributing Alms amongst the poor:
Victory with her Laurel-Crown'd
Spurning at Tyrants on the ground:
Heaven then shall pleased be
For seeing Love and Unity
Always waiting at the Gate
To keep out discord from the State.

In a large Quarto. Sr Satan Birckenhead proved to be a legitimate Child of the
Devil, viz. That when the poor people who had their houses pulled down on both
Tower-hills, Petitioned the House of Commons for satisfaction, The said Sr.
Satan stood up and affirmed to the Parliament, That to his knowledge His
Mai^tie had taken particular care to satisfy and pay every Man to a farthing
their whole damage; Upon which lie The House threw out the poor peoples
Petition, who are not yet satisfied, nor in any hopes of redress. The Jesuits
Conclusion and Arguments used to several Protestant Princes abroad, That the
Pope has a great Interest in England; For that, say they, you find the Lord
Taff E. of Carlingford, an Irish-Papist, Sr. Bernaed Gascoygn an Italian
Papist. and Harry Howard the Head of all the Papists in England, with other
Church-Papists employed as Ambassadors to several Princes Coures; as if there
were not Protestant Subjects enough capable of trust. Montagu's faint request
and Zeal in pressing the French King on behalf of the poor oppressed
Protestants in France; Together with that Kings gracious Answers, and value had
for the English Ambassadors desires; viz. making 49. fresh Articles be
published against the Protestants, which are such cruel Ones, that they are
judged by moderate Persons, to be hatched in hell by the departed Jesuits, and
printed to gratify their friends in England. A hot dispute between 2. young
Students at the University of Heidelbergh, the one a Frenchman, the other an
Englishman; In which the Frenchman by many unanswerable Arguments proves, That
as Queen Elizabeth promoted and defended the Protestants Interest in the
Low Countries, So on the contrary King James and King Charles of blessed memory
destroyed not only the Interest of Protestants in Cermany and France, but
everywhere else: One Demonstration whereof was, That King James, (to gratify
Gundimer the Spanish Ambassador) out of a fearful, base, cowardly Spirit,
sent orders to call home the Lord Vere and other brave English Officers,
commanding 8000 Men out of the Cittadell at Manham and Castle at Heidelbergh,
leaving those invincible fortifications to the plunder of the Duke of Bavaria;
the English having then had in Manham above 200 fodder of wine which contain
1200. hogsheads, and all other provisions in great abundance: Which Act was the
immediate ruin of that renowned Prince Palatine, and almost all the Protestants
in Germany. A second Demonsiration was, That when the Duke of Bukingham was
sent to the relief of the Protestants in Rochel, there were private
Instructions that they should land the English in the Isle of Rhee; and when
God by a Judgment cut off the Duke of Buckingham for his delaying to go with a
second relief, there were found in his pocketts instructions from the
Queen Mother, that the Duke should make good his premise to delay the time till
the Rebels and Rogues (as they were termed) were beaten before Mompelier and at
Rochel. So that the Frenchman concluded, That 'twas no marvel that Queen
Elizabeth prospered, and was a terror to the whole world, not suffering any
French-Pensioners in her Court, employing none but true-born Englishmen: and
that on the contrary, 't is no wonder, that so many Judgments, plagues and
disgraces have happened to England since her days, when you behold the
treachery of our Chieftains and Leaders. An Account dropped out of the
Privy-purse kept by Pimp-May, through Bridgmans carelessnes, and found by a
Parliament Man: On the folding of the outside of the paper was written, The
punishment of evilldoers; viz. Item, To the Lord Gerard (for continuing his Art
of swearing and ruining many poor Gentlemen, and other misdemeanors, and
abusing the old King at Newark; and for his Ladys employ in the room of the
Lady Wood) twelv thousand pounds; On condition that He quietly give his place
to the Duke of Monmouth. Item, Four thousand pounds to the Lord Mordant to
continue his practice of forceing Ladys, and abuseing Tailor and others. Item,
Five thousand pounds to the Lord Culpeper to render his place in the Isle of
Wight to Sr. Robert Holms. Item, To the Lady Castlemain, twelv thousand pounds
to furnish Barkshire-House. Item, Eight thousand seven hundred twenty five
pounds a year to the Lady Castlemain out of the Post-Offices. Item, For the
lying in of Mis at the Playhouse, and for children abroad at Nurse etc.: with
many Articles lying before the Accomptants at Brook-house; exactly cast up for
satisfaction; with this Inscription, Mobile mutatur semper cum Principe vulgus.

In a small Octavo. Sr. Philip Warwicks wise resolutions to wear little
breeches, and never to ask any employment; Provided he may enjoy the last Fifty
thousand pound shared with pocky Sr. Robert Long of the Excheqr, Dedicated to
the Commissioners at Brook-house. A Prophecy cried in the streets in Paris.
Being An Observation on a Dialogue between an English Gentleman and a French
Nobleman at the Crowning of King Henry the Fifth in Paris; at which time the
Englishman crowing and braying over his Prisoner, asked him, when a Frenchman
should be crowned King of England in London-city, as now an Englishman was
crowned King of France in Paris? To which the Frenchman modestly replied, Sr, I
will tell you, When Englands Sins are as great as the Sins of France are now,
you may then see a Frenchman, or some other strange Nation crowned in London:
Which makes the Frenchman bragg that the time is near at hand: But honest
English hearts do pray, and hope that England will return by a holy Repentance
to a merciful God that can prevent the fulfilling of this Prophecy. History
of Bell and the Dragon. Being an excellent piece practiced and experienced by
the States of Holland, in which is proposed to the Duke of Bukingham 3.
remedies in State for the prevention of the increase and growth of vermin and
caterpillars in England, viz. That the 400000 pounds a year in Rents, Fees and
emoluments devoured by Archdeacons, Deans, Canons, Prebends, Chancellours,
Commissaries, Officialls, Surrogates, Proctors, Gent-Apparators, Vicars,
Petty-canons, Singing-men and Boys, Choristers, Organists, Gospellers,
Epistlers, and Virgers and the rest of that joviall (and unusefull) Crew,
(besides the vast incomes of the Bishops) be employed for the maintenance of an
able and Godly Ministry, and preservation of the poor; Or laid out in a
Fishing- trade for increase of Shipping; Or as a Stock to defray the Public
charge, in the room of Excise and Hearth-moneys. Dedicated to the Author of
Omnia comesta a Belo, and the Cobbler of Gloucester.

Monks last and charitable Legacies bequeathed to Genll Lambert and Major Genll
Overton, whereby he has manifested himself to die a true Son of the Church of
England, according to the 40th Article, viz. Brethren forgive and love one
another.


