A Catalogue of the Names of so many of those Commissioners as sat and
sentenced the late King CHARLES To Death, Saturday the 27. of January, Anno
1648. in Tendency to the executing the said Sentence, which was accordingly
done on the 30. of the said Ian. 1648.
Of diverse Commissioners called, there appeared seventy two, whose Names
hereafter follow, viz.
John Bradshaw, Lord President. Oliver Cromwell. Henry Ireton. Sir Hardresse
Waller. Valentine Walton. Thomas Harrison. Edward Whaley. Thomas Pride. Isaac
Ewer. Lord Gray of Grooby. William Lord Mounson. Sir John Danvers. Sir Thomas
Maleverer. Sir John Bourcher. Isaac Pennington. Henry Martin. William Purifoye.
John Barkstead. Matthew Tomlinson. John Blakestone. Gilbert Millington. Thomas
Chaloner. Sir William Constable. Edmond Ludlow. John Hutchinson. Sir Michael
Livesey. Robert Tichburn. Own Roe. Robert Lilburn. Adrian Scroop. Richard
Dean. John Okey. John Harrison. John Hewson. William Goffe. Cornelius Holland.
John Carew. John Jones. Thomas Lister. Peregrine Pelham. Thomas Wogan. Francis
Aleyn. Daniel Blagrave. John Moor. William Say. Francis Lascells. John
Chaloner. Gregory Clement. Sir Gregory Norton. John Venn. Thomas Andrews.
Anthony Stapley. Thomas Horton. John Lisle. John Brown. John Dixwell. Miles
Corbet. Simon Meyne. John Alured. Henry Smith. Humphrey Edwards. John Frye.
Edmund Harvey. Thomas Scot. William Cawley. John Downs. Thomas Hammond.
Vincent Potter. Augustine Garland. Charles Fleetwood. John Temple. Thomas
Wait.
Painted Chamber, 24. Ian. 1648.
The Names of Thirty five Witnesses produced and sworn in Court, to give
Evidence to the Charge against the King.

Henry Hartford of Stratford upon Avon in Co. Warw. Edward Roberts of Bishops
Castle in Com. Salop, Ironmonger. William Brains of Wrixal in Com. Salop.
Gent. Robert Lacie of Nottingham, Painter. Robert Loades of Cottam in Com.
Nottingham, Tyler. Samuel Morgan of Wellington in Com. Salop. Feltmaker. James
Williams of Ross in Com. Hartford, Shoemaker. Richard Potts of Sharpreton in
Co. Northumb. Vintner. Giles Grice of Wellington in Com. Salop. Gent. William
Arnop of (...) John Hudson of (...) John VVinston of Dornorham in Com. Wilts.
George Seeley of London, Cordwainer. John Moor of Cork in Ireland,Gent. Thomas
Ives of Boyset in Co. Northampt. Husbandman. James Crosby of Dublin in
Ireland,Barber. Thomas Rawlins of Hanslop in Com. Buck. Gent. Richard
Bloomfield of London, Weaver. John Thomas of Langallan in Com. Denbigh. William
Lawson of Not. Maulster. John Pinegar of Dainer in Com. Darby, Shoemaker.
Humphrey Brown of Whitsundine in Co. Rutl. Yeoman. David Evans of Abergaveny in
Com. Monm. Smith. Kobert Holmes of (...) Robert Williams of (...) Samuel
Boorden of Lineham in Com. Wilts Gent. Thomas Read of Maidstone in Com. Kent,
Gent, George Cornwall of Aston in Com. Hereford, Forgeman. William Jones of
Vske in Com. Monmouth, Husbandm. Arthur Young Citizen and Barber Surgeon of
London Diogenes Edwards of carston in Com. Salop, Butcher. John Bennet of
Harwood in Com. Ebor. Glover. William Cuthert of Patrington in Holdernes in
Com. Ebor. Gent. Richard Price of London, Scrivener. Henry Gouch of
Gray's-Inne, Gent.
Painted Chamber; Monday 29. Ian. 1648.
This day the King being withdrawn from the Bar of the High Court of Justice,
the Court adjourned, and sat private in the Painted Chamber.

And Considered of the Kings Carriage upon the Saturday before, and of all that
then passed; and fully approved what the Lord President had done in the
managing the business of that day, as agreeing to their sense: And perceiving
what the King aimed at, viz. To bring in question (if he could) the juisdiction
of the Court, and the Authority thereof, whereby they sat; And considering,
that in the interim he had not acknowledged them in any sort to be a Court, or
his Judges; and through their sides intended to wound (if he might be
permitted) the Supreme Authority of the Commons of England in their
Representatives, the Commons assembled in Parliament.

After advice with their Council learned in both laws, and mature deliberation
had of the matter, they Resolved.

That the King should not be suffered to argue the Courts Jurisdiction, or that
which constituted them a Court, of which debate they had not proper cognizance,
nor could they, being a derivative Judicature of that Supreme Court which made
them Judges, and from which there was no appeal.

And did therefore order and direct, viz.

Ordered, That in case the King shall again offer to dispute the Authority of
the Court, the Lord President do let him know, that the Court had taken into
consideration his demands of the last day; and that he ought to rest satisfied
with this Answer, That the Commons of England assembled in Parliament have
constituted the Court, whose power may not, nor should be permitted to be
disputed by him.

That in case he shall refuse to answer, or acknowledge the Court, the Lord
President do let him know, that the Court will take it as a contumacy, and that
it shall be so Recorded.

That in case heshall offer with a saving notwithstanding of his pretended
Prerogative above the Iuridiction of the Court; the Lord President do let him
know, that the Lord President does in the name of the Court refuse his
Protests, and requires his positive Answer whether he will own the Court, or
not?

That in case the King shall demand a Copy of the Charge, that then he shall
declare his intention to Answer, and that declaring such his intention; a Copy
be granted unto him.

That in case the King shall still persist in his contempt, the Lord President
do give command to the Clerk to demand of the King in the name of the Court, in
these words following, viz.

Charles Stuart, King of England, you are accused in behalf of the People of
England of diverse high Crimes and Treasons, which Charge has been read unto
you. The Court requires you to give a Positive Answer, to confess or deny the
Charge, having determined, that you ought to answer the same.

THe true manner of proceeding to take off the Kings Head, according to the
sentence given as aforesaid.

Sir Hardresse Waller. Colonel Harrison, Commissary General Ireton, Colonel
Dean, and Colonel Okey, were appointed to consider of the time and place for
the Execution of the King, according to his Sentence given by the High Court of
Justice.

Painted Chamber, Monday Ian. 29. 1648.
UPon Report made from the Committee for considering of the i am and place of
the executing of the Judgment against the King, that the said Committee have
resolved, that the open street before White Hall is a fit place. And that the
said Committee conceive it fit that the King be there executed the morrow, the
King having already notice thereof.

The Court approved thereof, and Ordered a Warrant to be drawn for that
purpose; which Warrant was accordingly drawn, and agreed unto, and Ordered to
be engrossed, which was done, and signed, and sealed accordingly, as follows,
viz.

At the High Court of Justice for the Trying and Judging of Charles Stuart,
King of England, Ian. 29. 1648.
WHereas Charles Stuart, King of England, is and stands convicted, attainted,
and condemned of High treason, and other High Crimes, and Sentence upon
Saturday last was pronounced against him by this Court, to be put to Death, by
the severing his Head from his body, of which Sentence, Execution yet remains
to be done. These are therefore to will and require you to see the said
Sentence executed in the open street before White Hall, upon the morrow, being
the 30 day of this instant month of January, between the hours of ten in the
morning, and five in the afternoon of the same day, with full effect. And for
so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant. And these are to require all
Officers and Soldiers, and other the good People of this Nation of England to
be assistant unto you in this service.

Given under our hands and seals.
To Colonel Francis Hacker, Colonel Hunks, and Lieutenant Colonel Phray, and to
every of them.
Sealed and subscribed, by John Bradshaw, Lord President. Thomas Gray. Oliver
Cromwell. Edward Whaley. John Okey. Io. Danvers. Mich. Livesey. Io. Bourcher.
Hen. Ireton. Tho. Maleverer. Io. Blakestone. Io. Hutchinson. Will. Goffe. Tho.
Pride. Hen. Smith. Vincent Potter. Will. Constable. Rich. Ingoldsby. Will.
Cawley. Ioh. Barkstead. Isaac Ewer. Val. Walton. Peter Temple. Tho. Harrison.
Io. Hewson. Per. Pelham. Rich. Dean, Rob. Tichburn. Hum. Edwards. Dan.
Blagrave. Owen Roe. Will. Purifoye. Adrian Scroop. James Temple. Aug. Garland.
Edmond Ludlow. Hen. martin. Io. Alured. Rob. Lilburn. Will. Say. Anth. Stapley.
Greg. Norton. Tho. Chaloner. Tho. Wogan. Simon Meyne. Tho. Horton. Io. Jones.
Io. Meor. Hardresse Waller. Gilbert Millington. Chapter Fleetwood. Io. Venn. Greg.
Clement. Io. Downs. Tho. Wait. Tho. Scot. Ioh. Carew. Miles Corbet.
In all Fifty Eight.

Painted Chamber, 30. Ian. 1648.
The Commissioners met, and Ordered.

THat Mr. Marshall, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Caryl, Mr. Salway, and Mr. Dell, be desired to
attend the King, to administer unto him those spiritual helps as should be
suitable to his condition. And Lientenant Colonel Goffe is desired forthwith to
repair unto them for that purpose, who did so, but afterward informed the
Court, that the King being acquainted therewith, refused to conferred with
them, expressing himself, that he would not be troubled with them.

Ordered, That the Scaffold, upon which the King is to be executed, be covered
with black.

TheWarrant for executing the King being accordingly delivered to those Parties
to whom the same was directed, Execution was done upon him, according to the
tenor thereof, about Two of the Clock in the Afternoon of the said 30. of
January, 1648.

Counselors assistant to this Court, and to draw up the Charge against the
King are these.
Doctor Dorissaus. Master Ask. Master Cook. Sergeant Dandy, Sergeant at
Arms. Master Phelps, Clerk to the Court.
Messengers and Door-keepers are these.
Master Walford. Master Radley. Master Pain. Master Powell. Master Hull, and
Master King Crier.
The Names of other Persons that were summoned, to the Tryallof the King.
Major Genesis Skippon. Col. Rich. Ingoldsby. Sir Henry Mildmay. Philip Lord
Lisle. Sir. James Harrington. Sir. William Brereton. William Henningham, Esquire;
Thomas Atkins, Alderm. Col. Rowland Wilson. Sir Peter Wentworth. Col. Godsrey
Bosvill. Col. John Disborow. John Gourdon Esquire; Sergeant Francis Thorpe. Dennis
Bond Esquire; John Dove Esquire; John Fowks Esquire; Thomas Blunt Esquire; Thomas Boon Esquire;
Abraham Barrel. Nich. Love.
FINIS.

