THE Treaty for the Surrendering of EXETER TO Sr. THOMAS FAIRFAX.

By Commissioners on both sides, who met at Poltimore House on Friday last, and
how far they proceeded therein, with other news from the PRINCE, and diverse
others of his Lords and Gentlemen with the Flouts and Jeeres put upon them that
went over to Saint MALLOWS:

And other passages of all the affairs at Barnstable, Pendennis and the Mount.

These being true Copies of LETTERS Examined, and Printed according to Order of
PARLIAMENT.

London printed for Matthew Walbancke at Grays-Inne-Gate, April 9. 1646.

The Treaty for the surrendering of EXETER to Sir Thomas Fairfax,
SIR,
YEsterday J acquainted you with the Generals ^^sing of Exeter, and viewing it
round. I then s^^t you enclosed the Summons, Sir John Berkleys Answer, and his
Excellencyes Reply, how far both parties had proceeded in order to a Treaty,
and the names of the Commissioners on both sides. This day the Commissioners on
both sides met at Poultemore, at Sir John Bampfields house; I have enclosed
some papers which I desire may not at all be made public, at least not till
the business be finished, yesterday we had Intelligence by a ship that came
from France to Dartmouth, that Sir Richard Greenvill, the Lord Culpepper, Col.
Monk, Col. Fenwich, Sir John Munkley, and other Commanders landed the 26 of
March at Saint Mallows in France, they passed thither in the ship called the
George, Thomas May, and Richard Tealse Commander and Major. At their coming
into France they were hooted at, and jeered by many of the people, with that
they were ashamed to go forth of doors, and glad to take up an obscure house
in the Country for their residence. The Prince Hide, Goring, (for ought I can
hear) remain in Silly, and the Lord Hopton in the Mount. The blocking up of
those places. ( Pendennis and the Mount) are exceedingly managed by the
vigelancy of Col. Hamon. The General has given Orders for the disbanding of
Col. Fowels Regiment, and assigned the Soldiers under him to Colonel Rouse,
Governor of D. for the strengthening of his Regiment for further service,
which although it was not well digested at first, yet upon the Generals letter
of the occasion thereof, and testimonial of the fidelity and deserts of Col.
Fowell, and his Officers, many of the Soldiers are willing to got under
Colonel Rouse, The occasion of their reducement being in regard that the
Country is it no sort able to bear the charge of so many Soldiers considering
how those parts have bin impoverished. The General sent likewise to the Devon.
Committee residing at Torn^s to expect that work that so C. Rouse his Regiment
might assist before Pendennis, and Col. Hammond is thereupon to come to
Barnstable; that so Col. Cooks Horse, Colonel Fety-Jamses and other Regiments
may move Eastward, after Commissary General Ireton, who with those forces with
him as I certified you in my last) and to assist about Oxford. The recruits for
the Foot come down a pase, and are disposed for the completing of diverse
Regiments, so that we shall march Eastward with a full and gallant Army, fit to
be employed upon any service; I can (as yet give) you no further account of the
business of the Treaty then this, That upon the meeting this day at Poltemore,
nothing was fully concluded of, and a great part of the debate was about
circumstantialls. The Enemy insisted much upon the execution of the Clergy,
what they moved in a reasonable way, and which came nearest to our
Commissioners instructions was received, those demands which were too high
reserted. The instructions of Sir John Berkleys Commissioners being something
in sufficient, they promised to return with an ample and sufficient additions
and I doubt not but to morrowes debate will conduct to the near finishing of
this great work, so much tending to the good of these parts, and of so great
concernment to the Kingdom, of the further proceeding and result whereof you
shall (by Gods blessing) have as I shall find opportunity, from

Colump. John House April, 3. 1646. Your most humble Servant, W. C.

SJR,
THis day the Commissioners from Exeter, and our Commissioners met at Poltemore
house, at their meeting they had fair quarter on both sides, and were very
civil each to other, they met in a very convenient room in that house, ours
had very ^ull and exact Instructions, and were desirous to make short work of
it, but those from the Enemy were not so, they brought out from Exeter to our
Commissioners, A Copy of the Articles very high, in which there was very much
for the Clergy, and particularly for the Bishop, Deanes, Prebends, and the
rest of the Cathedral men, the dispute about which took up much time this
day, and there is also much pleaded for in those Articles in the behalf of
such as have adheered to the King to level the Parliaments proceedings
against, which is no wonder at all, for there r^in Exeter many notable
sticklers that have acted much for the King [and there are indeed, many
precious men that are there who have suffered much by them) but the Malignants
there may bussell, we hope they cannot hinder the agreement of the
Commissioners for the surrender of Exeter to the General, to the Obedience of
the Parliament. The E. of Bristoll and others who are there, that with the
Clergy labor to obstruct this great work, but will we hope be over powered by
those who will be not so far flattered by them as to undo themselves to
please a few; There are many Gentry, and much wealth in the City, which I
believe they will be loath to venture the plunder of, but for the Inhabitants
we are assured that they are weary of the league^ and desire generally to be
free, our Commissioners desired that much time might not be spent in
circumstances, but that they would come to the business of surrender, and to
debate of what was most material, declaring to them that what might stand with
the Ordinances of Parliament, and the good and safety of the Kingdom, they
would assent to preserve that City and prevent the effusion of blood which
otherwise might follow, They proceeded so far that the Commissioners from Sir
John Berkley, considering that we were resolved against delays, and that their
instructions were in some things imperfect whereby they were so bound and that
they could not give that satisfaction which was expected, and which they broke
off the further Treaty for this day, they prove sad (...) Commissioners that
they would return with such Instructions whereby they would be enabled to
satisfy our expectation one way or other, we apprehend no great reason to
fear any obstructions to hinder the perfecting of this great work by Sunday.
I doubt not but to be able to give you a fair account of their progress.
Pendennis is still stubborn, and Michaels Mount houlds out, the Prince is
still in the Isse of Sylly but diverse others of his great followers are gone
for France, the Prince did not pass over with them, and we hear not that he
went since, though I believe it is so.

The Gentlemen of these parts proceed well in the putting these Countries into
a good posture, we hope the Militia will be well settled in short time,
Barnstable I believe will fall with Exceter, and then we all return. The
General is resolved if they will not surrender to make a short work of it, but
the former is hoped, and most desired, and before this come to your hands I
believe it will be ours. If Bristol, and the rest be caught in the Net, I hope
it will be accounted a good piece of service, but we impute not the great
things that God has done, by us to the Arm of Flesh, but desire that praise
may be given to God that has made us Instruments to do our Country good, which
is the thing desired by

Your humble Servant N. T.
Colomb. John April 3 1646.
The names of the Commissioners appointed by Sir T. Fairfax.
Leiute. General Hammond Col. Sir Fardresse Vallers. Colonel Lambert.
Colonel Harley. Colonel Fry. Commissary Stane.
The Names of the Commissioners appointed by Sr Io. Berkley.
Sir Hen. Berkley. Mr. Will. Ashburnham. Sir. George Carry. Mr. John Were. Col.
Godalphin. Cap. Fitz-Garret. Mr. Robert Walker. Mr. Thoma^ Knight. Mr. Tho.
Kendall. Mr. Tho. Forde.
FJNJS.

