Trades Destruction IS Englands Ruin, OR Excise Decryed.

Wherein is manifested the Irregularity and Inequality of raising money by way
of Excise to defray the Charge of the Nation.

By W. C. A Lover of his Country.

May 28 LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLIX.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Must ingeniously confess I am so much an Honourer and Lover of the
Government of a Free State, (I mean such a Government wherein all men may taste
of Subjection as well as Rule) that I was almost unwilling in this juncture of
time (the Commonwealth being involved in a Laborinth of public debts,
contracted by the late General of the Army to maintain a proud Court, and to
subjugate the Commonwealth to the wills and interest of his family) to publish
the ensuing discourse. But finding a great inclination in some in power to
continue this unequal burden of Excise, and make it a standing Law, and a
condescending in others, for want of information of the evil thereof, I did,
and do account my self obliged in Love to my Country, and true affection to the
poor distressed Tradesmen of this Commonwealth, to proceed therein, being
confidently assured, that though it may displease some self-seeking persons,
yet those that are true Patriots of their Country upon serious consideration,
will not have just cause to be offended thereat.

THat the Major part of the people of England have their best and chiefest
dependence and subsistence by Foreign and Domestique Trade, surely I think no
rational unbyassed person can or will deny, and as the dependence of the
greater part relyes on Trade, so also it is undeniable, that the greatest
security of the Nation does and will rest and reside in the strength and number
of shipping and Seamen, which cannot be increased but by using all prudent ways
and means for the enlarging the Trade, by easing the burdens and vexations
which are upon it. Has not England the Dutch a near Neighbor so powerful and
ambitious, that if our State do not providently prevent their designs, this
Commonwealth will always be in danger if any advantage can be taken by them?
And surely there is no better course than to increase Shipping and Seamen.

Whilst the Romans were unprovided of Shipping, and so not able to match the
Carthaginians in Naval Battles, they were not capable either to invade or
subdue the Carthaginians; but when their Naval power was great, they soon
brought their Neighbour-Common-wealth to their terms, and at last to a perfect
Conquest.

It is true that England is large, and has many Lords and Gentlemen of Estates
dwelling in it, and their Lands require numbers of men to manure them; but see
and impartially consider, and you shall find, that those men that have nothing
but their labor to subsist on either by plowing, threshing, hedging, and such
like Country employments, are little better then slaves, let them be never so
laborious, their wages is so little, that they are never in all their lives,
able to lay up any thing for the subsistence of their Families after their
death; and therefore it generally comes to pass, that if Country-Labourers dye
whilst their children are young and unable to work for themselves, they must
unavoidably be relieved by the Alms of the Parish, which as the Laws are
executed, is a sad livelihood. But when Trade has been good heretofore, and
if God shall please to afford England that blessing, that it may be so
hereafter, then did, and so may do again, all Handi-crafts that are careful,
and Laborers five comfortably, and leave a maintenance to their Children.

This being proved, surely I cannot see any reason, but that this Honorable
Parliament, should, and indeed ought to reduce this Nation, to its pristine
Condition of freedom for Trade. I shall grant, that when the Excise was first
settled, they had reason and policy so to do: For the late King having the
Command of the Inlands, and the Parliament of most of the Seaports, they had
no better way then to put Excise on Goods, whereby their Enemies making use of
the said goods paid the Excise, and so the Parliaments Army: But now when no
Enemy hinders the improvement of Land, but that the price is far higher then in
ancient times, when our Noble Ancestors neither could nor would raise moneys
any otherwise, then by Subsidies, Tenths, and Fifteenths, besides a small low
Custom: Yea when they were never so much beset with danger, by Sea and Land,
by French, Scots and Spaniards: That our present Rulers should continue such a
great Excise, is a thing hardly to be imagined. Besides does not the fourth
part of Excise run out in Charges for collecting the same? and all this comes
out of the peoples purses.

Now surely if a Commonwealth be rightly constituted and uprightly governed,
all things either in Law, payments, etc. which are inconsistent either with the
case and safety of the same ought to be taken away, else how can it be called a
Commonwealth, or in plain English, a Common good; it is not the name of a
Free State, but the substance and power of a Free State, that either will
please or make the people happy.

Now as to the inequallity of the burden of Excise, laid on the Merchant,
observe what follows. The Excise on Spanish Wine, is 9 l. per Tunn, on French
Wine, 6 l. per Tunn, some of which costeth no more in France; on Salt 1 d. ob.
per Gallon, which costeth the first penny in France, etc. but ob. per Gallon;
on Tobacco 1 d. per Pound, which at Virginia and other English Plantations, may
be bought for 2 d. per Pound: Nay the cruel Laws made by the late Single
Person, are such, that if Wines are never so much decayed, they must pay 4 l.
per Tunn Spanish, and 2 l. 10 s. per Tunn French, Excise, although they will
not yield hardly the same. Now the charge on Goods being so great, those that
Trade in Wines, Tobacco, Salt, and other such Goods, must have double the Stock
that otherwise their Trade would require. It Is truth the Law that was (for
indeed I cannot say, is, there being none at present) for Excise, says, that
the first buyer must pay Excise, and this on some things in London is
practiced; yet herein comes an evil to the Importer: For he that buyeth,
pays down ready money for Excise, which should be paid to the Merchant, and
would discharge Freight and Custom; but in the Country Ports, no buyer there
ever takes notice thereof; so that the Excise of Wine, Salt, Tobacco, and all
Goods, are paid by the Importer, who often trusts both his Stock, disoursed
for buying the Goods in Foreign Parts, and the Customs and Excise on them,
and loses all, both principal and cost, by the failing or inability of his
Creditor: So that it is not to be denied, but that many, both Merchants and
Shopkeepers, by this means, that have but 400 l. or 500 l. Stock, to trade
with, pay more to the public maintenance, then Gentlemen of 400 l. or 500 l.
nay I may say 1000 l. per annum, Lands.

Now whether this be an equal way to raise moneys, let all unbiassed men judge.
And not only this; but there requires so much attendance, so much waiting for
Tickets, so much Obligation in Bonds, that none that has any full Trade, but
must keep a Servant more then ordinary to manage his business, whose food and
raiment must cost something. Besides this is that which does ruin Trade, the
extraordinary charges on goods, not only hinders the expense of greater
quantities, in regard of the great prizes; but also often enforces the
Merchants to sell cheaper, considering the charges on them, then otherwise they
might do; and not only so, but those that make little conscience of Oaths or
lying, that have little Estates to lose, and that are subtle and politic,
find ways to save the Custom and Excise, which is high, and so sell cheaper
then those that are able, and plain in dealing can do, when the said charges
are paid, which much spoileth the current of Trade. How many Brewers in the
Nation, and how many Merchants in the Country have paid great sums for Excise,
when their Debitors have not paid the Principle? Let the good old way and
practice of our Ancestors, be put in use in raising moneys; no Merchant, no
Shopkeeper nor Tradesman, that has an Estate, but will be willing to pay to
the height of their Estates, equal to all Landed men, let it be doubled,
trebled, quadrupled, when the urgent affairs of the Nation, for defense of the
same requires it: And why Landed men, whose Estates are certain, should not be
ready to agree to this, I know no reason; especially if they consider, that by
freedom of Trade they shall buy all Foreign Goods cheaper, and sell their
Wool and other Goods dearer; and also by a good trade will their poor be so
kept, that they will not be burdensome to them, for want of food and raiment
to support them.

To conclude, Take notice into what a desperate poverty, the late Ruler and his
Confederates have brought the Nation, by imposing burdens on Trade: Inquire in
all Ports, Cities, Towns, and Countries, and you shall find, there was never
such a calamity brought on the poor, generally throughout the Land, in the
midst of the late Wars, as is at present. Oh! that those who now God has once
again brought to steer the Ship of the Commonwealth, that is almost shattered
to pieces, by Storms and Tempests of a desperate, self-seeking Generation, may
so lay it to heart, and be so endued with Courage and Counsel, that they may at
last bring her into a safe Harbor, which is the hearty desire of all honest
men.

Postscript.
TO the Objection that some make, viz. That our neighbor State the Hollanders,
raise most of the Charge of their Country on Excise, is Answered, That the
Customs of Goods Imported and Transported from England, raise in a
proportionable way, far more then all the Excise of the Nether-landState, or if
you will, Noland State: For indeed that Commonwealth has little Land
belonging to it; and therefore its impossible, that the Charge on Land there
alone, could defend the said People.

FINIS.

