Certain and true NEWS From Somersetshire; with the besieging of Sir Ralph
Hoptons House, together with the valiant and manfully performed courage of Mr.
Arnold Hyward Gentleman, Soldier, and Lieutenant to the Troop of young
Captain Pym, Son to that worthy and well deserving Member of the House of
Commons John Pym Esquire.

Commanded to be printed and published.

Likewise the manner of taking Sir Edward Rodney, Sir Edward Berkley, and Mr.
Dugdale prisoners, and are now in the Counter in London til further examination.

Also a true relation of the sad and unfortunate mischance which befell our
hopeful Prince Charles, and the Duke of York by Wild fire, etc.

Printed at London for I. Underwood. 1642. October 15.

Certain and true News from Somersetshire, with the beseiging of sir Ralph
Hoptons house, together with the valiant and manfully performed courage of Mr.
Arnold Hyward Gentleman, Soldier and Lieutenant to the troop of young
Captain Pym, etc.
SInce the distractions of these times began, by the evil and unchristianable
incendiaries of the same, who like Spunges desire to be filled with their own
natural blood which n^ less appears in their Counsels, has not only
poisoned the clear head of the Spring, but likewise labors to spoil the
Ocean, in going to unsluce the Rivers into it, which God I hope at his good
time will stop, and point out with his singer their shames and punishments that
thus began in the disjoynting peace to open Wars full gap, which lets in
naught but red destruction on us, hand against hand, and one eye against
another to shake and ruin all the bodies Fabric, which we could wish might
stop, and that his Majesty's good thoughts would open to rescue our future good
intents toward him, his issue, and his future safety, and that this posture of
fence we stand in, is for his Royal safety, the protection of his Issue, his
Parliament and his Land, both against foreign and our homebred Papists, the
worst of worsts that can be, in whose opposition has amongst the rest his
Majesty's Western parts, as namely Wiltshire, Summerset, Dorset, and
Devonshire, harbor resolved spirits, will maintain those parts both for the
King and Parliament; Likewise those Cities with their adherent and adjacent
Towns, well fortified and Garrisoned with men, are by their brave Commanders
well instructed, and fitted for the present entertainment, either for siege in
managing of Forts, Ports, walls or Breaches, or meeting in Battalia face to
face in the open field their daring enemy, as now I am to express with duty to
his Prince and both the honorable Houses the ever re^dy, resolved, prepared
and undaunted ^^urage of Mr. Arnold Hyward both a Gentleman and a S^uld^er,
Leiutenant unto the troop of Captain Pym who h^ving certain intelligence
that at one si^ Ralph Hoptons house were a couple of Knights, the one named sir
Edward Rodney, the other sir Edward Berkeley, with a Minister named Master
Dugdale, Chaplain to the Marquess of Hartford, who were not only great
upholders of the Malignant party, or Cavalliero rout, but were themselves the
same, seducing and combining thereunto a larger link of power to knit against
us, and with their friends, their Ten^nts and Freeholders did therewith
fortify and strongly guard the house or Castle of the aforesaid sir Ralph
Hoptons, which being assaulted by some part of our Troop, they very hotly
began to oppose us, and sent us shot for shot, and well they might stand upon
daring terms, being immured in stone, knit with fast lime and hair, yet
thanks be unto God, their labor spent on us wasted themselves and their
mun^^ion with it, and they that time not only washed the Ae^hiop, but bathed
themselves in the^r own fruitelesse sweat; This skirmish yet continued, at
leng^h with a command I left my Troop that they should follow and maintain the
fight, who very careful were in the obeying, I espied their horsemen mounted,
which were the Knights and Priest I did formerly mention but how or which way
they could from the Castle make escape, outstrips my imagination, in a short
space my willing horse and I oretook them, the which when I perceived the one
to be Sir Edward Rodney, and the other Sir Edward Berkley, I bid them yield,
and I would give them quarter, which they in a dressed careless slight
disdainful manner seeing no more but I and my small Artillery, asked where I
were a soldier, who returned them yes, I was, and wished them to yield without
any more treat of words, whose answer thus to me straight returned, whose
soldier are you that with so hot a courage puts on confidence to talk of
yielding being 3 against one, my answer was, I am under Capt Pym, and wished
them not to dress the time out in discourse, for I resolved was for to set on
them and win them for my prisoners, or fall in the attempt of my ambition,
they then being confident my resolve was them, or death, wished me to call my
Captain, and they would yield to him, which so the more enflamed my wrath
against them, that I said they should yield themselves to me, with that
unespied by me, the one of them a pistol struck against me, but the fire took
not, for which I recommended them a token from my Carbine being ready in my
hand, but had the luck to miss, the other at me let fly, and I at both of
them, the parson stood Neuter) and so began a skirmish pretty hot, in the mean
time, my soldiers at the Castle did make a breach through a small postern door,
which they within perceiving their surprisall, more than half killed with
fear, for quarter cried, which soon was granted them, and strait were seized
their arms with all the Castles other Ammunition, which soon in Carts from them
was borne away. The other Knights that I held combat with, which I confess
were Gentlemen of courage, were both constrained to call to me for quarter,
and crowned me Conqueror of both their fortunes, which finished; I taking leave
of Captain Pym, brought my three prisoners to the Parliament, the Knights and
Minister along with me, where having welcome love and encouragement to follow
my future fortunes in the defense of the King and them, my p^isoners now
remain in the Counter, and I again preparing to my Captain and my Charge.

Witness the Prisoners hands, and my own testification as hereafter follow.

THE Manner of the taking of Sir Edward Rodney, Sir Edward Berkeley, and Master
Dugdale.
WHen I Arnold Hyward found them, I bid them yield and I would give them
quarter, they demanded whether I were a Soldier, and who was my Captain; I
told them I was a Soldier under Captain Pym, they desired me to call my
Captain, and they would yield to him; I replied I could not but would have them
yield to me: during our discourse a pistol of theirs struck fire but went not
off; thereupon I discharged my Carbine at them, then they a pistol at me, then
I a pistol at them, and they another at me, and I another Carbine at them.

While this was in doing, some others were breaking in upon them; whereupon
they agreed to yield themselves to me, if I would give them quarter, which I
did.

witness their hands, who are now prisoners in the Counter in Wood-street,
London. Edward Rodney. Edward Berkley. Ja. Dugdale.


A true relation of the sad, and unfortunate mischance which befell Prince
Charles and the Duke of York by fire-workes and Gunpowder, near to Shresbury
on thursday night last.
THe manner of this sad and unfortunate mischance was written in a Letter to a
Gentleman in London, which for certain truth was thus.

A French man who is an Enginere to his Majesty, and a very skillful contriver
of fire-workes, being desirous to have his skill known, appointed a convenient
time to show his Art, at which season the Prince and his brother James Duke of
York were present, who standing by, the Enginere having laid his traynes of
powder to perfect his work, and both these princes, as it were in the midst of
the traynes of powder, a careless fellow running too and fro with a lighted
match in his hand, there unfortunately and unluckeyly fell a spark of fire
from the coal of the match, and happened amongst the train of powder, flashing
up, fiered the Princes clothes, burnt his band and his face, and hurt the Duke
of York very shrewdly, in so much that it is thought he will loose one of his
eyes, to the great grief of his Majesty, the whole Court, and Country, and all
good subjects that hears of it.

FINIS.

