BALAAM'S WISH: A SERMON.

Wherein the vanity of desires without endeavors, in order to the obtaining
the Death of the Upright, and their last end, is opened and applied.

First occasionally Preached, and now at the request of some Published.

By an unworthy Messenger of Christ.

Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that
man is peace. LONDON, Printed by T. Leach for John Sims, and are to be sold at
his Shop near Gresham-Colledge-gate in Bishops-gate-street, and at his Shop at
Swithins-Alley-end in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. 1670.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND ELECT LADIES The Lady Anne Clinton, The Lady
Eleanora Holles. AND The Lady Diana Holles.

The Author wishes Grace and Peace.
Right Honorable,
IT is the Nature of the Blessed God, not only to give great things
bountifully, but also to accept of small things graciously: though he looks for
the Gift, yet he looks at the Heart: hence we read in the Law, that the
handful of Meal which the Poor man brought for an Oblation to God, was as
grateful to God as the whole Burnt-offering of the Rich: and in the first of
Leviticus, the Reach Nichoach, or sweet savor of rest, is added not only to
the Rich man's Ox, but to the Poor man's Turtle Doves; to show that it is not so
much how much, as from what mind a Sacrifice is brought to Gods Altar.

Your Ladyships have already in your Nobleness and Liberality to me, showed
your selves to be partakers of the Divine Nature, and in accepting this poor
Pepper-corn present will give a further testimony of your Likeness to his
Eternal Majesty: for your acceptance will evidence more the goodness of your
Ladyships, than the desert of this Discourse. Such as it is, I am humbly bold
to offer it to you, taking this public opportunity to declare my thankfulness
so far as I am able, though not so far as I ought. I bow my knees before the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, begging for you the mercies of his Covenant
and Kingdom: The great God lift up the light of his reconciled face upon you,
granting you assurance of his Love, and perseverance in his Truth in this
World, and a Crown of Glory in a better Life. No more but my earnest request
that I may obtain the favor and honor to be

Your Ladyships Humblest Servant, etc.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Christian Reader,
THou have here the Copy of a Sermon which was first taken from the Preacher's
mouth by the Pen of a ready Writer: the Person who was at the pains of
Transcribing of it, by his earnest desire has prevailed with the Author to
Review it, and to give him leave to Publish it. Here is nothing added to the
Discourse it self, only some things in the Margin, to which some passages in
the Sermon have relation. The Author declares he lo^es not to be in Print, and
that these few leaves had never been suffered to come abroad, had not more then
ordinary Obligations to comply with the requests of some, been laid upon him.

The Godly will not condemn the Work, because the subject is so serious and
profitable; for what can be of greater moment or benefit, than to teach men the
Lesson of an holy upright life, as that which paves the way to an happy and
comfortable death? or to describe the blessed advantageous death of the
righteous, as that which encourages to the gracious and heavenly life of the
Godly.

The Wicked will not blame it much, because it is so very short; let him that
is most displeased with it, turn over but a few Pages, and he will certainly
find something that pleases him, viz. the END.

The Author has endeavored to offend no man by this Tractate: for its his
design so to speak, write, and live, as first to please God as much as he can,
and then to displease man as little as he can.

If thou reapest any benefit by what is here set before thee, give God the
praise; for who should have the Tribute of all Glory, but he that bestows the
Treasure of all Grace? who should have the Fruit, but he that planted the Tree?
Magnify God for any good this Sermon shall do thee: for every good gift, and
every perfect gift, comes from above, from the Father of Lights.

Farewell.
BALAAM'S WISH,
Numb. XXIII. Verse. 10 The latter Part.

Let me Dye the Death of the Righteous, and let my last end be like his.


THis Chapter (with the foregoing and following) conteyneth the History of
Balaam's Journey, Sacrifices, and Parables; and in this Narrative there are two
things wonderful and extraordinary recorded, by the Man of God Moses; the one
whereby the passion, the other whereby the covetousnes of Balaam the false
Prophet was rebuked and restrained: first his passion was restrained by Gods
putting words into the mouth of his Ass, 2 Pet. 2.16. (...).
the dumb Ass, speaking with man's voice, rebuked the madness of the Prophet:
anger had put the man besides himself, so the Greek word there used signifies,
and so it is in all other persons; though Balaam were a wise man, yet when his
passion was up, his reason was down; Anger is that fever of the soul,
Lacholere est comme une fievre chaude, qui nous fait dire un infinite de chooses
ridicules and nous fait entreprendre beaucoup de sottes actions, don't neus nous
repentons, lors qu'elle est passee.
that makes the tongue talk idly, it is a short fury, it puts the mind into a
rage; you may see how he frets and fumes, and chafes and storms and as wise as
he was, had need to be admonished by an Ass,

2ly. His coveteousness was rebuked by Gods putting words into his own mouth;
and this was as great a wonder as the former, for though at first with some
kind of maiden blushes and shamefaced modesty he excused himself from the work,
yet he loved the wages of unrighteousness, in so much that in the 11 Verse of
the Epistle of Jude Jude 11.
he is called (in the original) the Balaam of Reward, (...)
a man who had no other soul but gain; so that he being such a person, it was a
great wonder God should so overruled him as to make his tongue speak that which
his heart did least love; Prove. 16.1.
thus the preparations of the heart are in man, and the answer of the tongue is
from the Lord, So in that speech of Caiphas we read of, It Is expedient says he
that one man should dye for the people; and this said he not of himself, but
being High Priest that year, John. 11.51.
he Prophesied that Jesus should dye for that Nation etc. and so here, the Lord
put a word into Balaam's mouth saying return unto Balak and thus thou shall
speak: Numb. 23.5.
behold how the Lord limits him and ties him up, to speak not his own words but
the Lords: Against the inclination of his coveteous heart his tongue must
speak: usually out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, but here
it was not so, but from the irresistible hand of God that was upon him, his
mouth spoke, the Lord thy God would not hearken unto Balaam, Deuteronomy. 23.5.
but the Lord they God turned the curse into a blessing because the Lord thy
God loved thee; God would not hearken to Balaam, but made Balaam hearken unto
God, and so tipp his tongue with blessings, though he had a poisoned and
envenomed heart, Saul went to Damascus to perseeute, and God converted him to
be a Preacher; and Balaam went to curse, and God changed his words into a
blessing; in the former God changed the heart. the latter God overruled the
tongue.

The latter of these, the speeches and parables of Balaam. is the context;
which is the first of his four parables; and indeed when we read this parable,
we may well say, who could have expected so sweet a breath, from so foul a
stomach, such heavenly notes, from so hellish an instrument, surely this is the
finger of God; And you may learn by the way, from Gods overruling this
Prophet, That God can deal with them, that deal with the Devil; they which are
most studied in the black Arts of Hell, must forget the language of that
infernal pit, and speak the dialect of Heaven, Psalm. 118.23.
when God will have them; this is the Lords doing and it is mavelous in our
eyes.

The text is the (...) the last conclusion and winding up the first parable of
Balaam, showing the blessed estate of Israel, by his desiring no other
condition for himself hereafter than that which they were to enjoy; but enough
for the contexture, or weaving together of the text with the other parts of
this History.

In the words themselves, observe, 1. Somethings generally and secretly
employed. 2 Somethings particularly and openly expressed.

1 Somethings employed, which are Two; First That all those that are pertakers
of humanity are subject to mortality: the common law of death is of an imperial
and impartial nature; it lays hold on all without exception, all without
distinction, bad and good, righteous and unrighteous; this Balaam lays down as
a foundation that the righteous shall dye, there is a death even to the
righteous. Even they that are freed from the sting of death are not delivered
from the stroke of death: they which are freed by it, John. 20.3.4
are not free from it; our life (like the race of the two Disciples) is toward
the sepulcher; as soon as we come out of the grave of the womb we hasten to the
womb of the grave: we leave the place where we received life to enter into that
where we shall find death; there will be a morning in which we shall not live
till evening, or an evening in which we shall not live till morning: this is
true of all in general so as to except none, in particular: the righteous not
exempted; nay we read the first man that ever dyed was righteous Abel: the best
(at that time) that lived, was the first that dyed.

2ly. This is employed, that there is a great difference between the nature and
consequents of death to the righteous and to the sinner, there is not only a
holy difference before death but a happy difference after death; Therefore
says he, let my last end be like his. And indeed this is a very notable
testimony of the immortality the soul, and of future recompenses from the mouth
of a false Prophet, these words show, that he held there was a reward after
death to the just; (...) R. Schelomoh. Hammel^ch in Michlal Yophi in loc.
else why should he here desire to be in their state. Man cease not to be at
death, but his soul survives the body, so that he insinuates thus much, that
though the righteous dye as well as the wicked, yet the wicked dye not so well
as the righteous: the righteous are taken away from sin, the wicked in their
sin; as to death it self there is no differenee, but in their death there is
a difference; therefore, as the Apostle in a like case. They do it to obteyn a
corruptible Crown but we an incorruptible, so they dye to be damned, 1 Cor.
9.25.
we to be saved.

Secondly here is something expressed, and so the words are a passionate, wish,
consisting of 2 parts, the concomitant security, and the consequent felicity of
a righteous man's death.

First he wishes the concomitant security in death; Let me dye the death of
the righteous, or as it is in the primitive language Let my soul dye the Death
of the upright. (...)
(Let my soul dye) the meaning of the dying of the soul is the parting of the
soul from the body: the phrase does not import the dying of the rational soul,
(which is incorruptible) but the removing of it out of the mansion of the body,
when it is translated by death.

(The death of the righteous) the word Yashar is used in opposition to that
which is warped bent, (...) Rectus
or crooked, Let my soul dye the Death of them that are upright and straight in
their principles and practices, and from this root it is you read that Israel
is called Jesurun, because of the sincerity and uprightness that should be in
them: Joh. 1.47
an Israelite indeed is one in whom is no guile; such whose Lives are straight
their Death is safe: though they are tossed upon the waves, yet they are
brought into a good and safe harbor by death. Death is the end of all humane
misery, and the beginning of all divine good to the upright; the Sepulcher is a
sanctuary, and death it self a city of refuge to them; therefore, Let me dye
the Death of the righteous: for that death which to others is the King of
Terrors, to the upright is the King of Salem, that is of peace: the same red
sea which was a grave to the Egyptians, was a place through which the
Israelites passed with safety, and the same death which conveys the wicked to
the belly of hell, carries the godly into the bosom of Abraham.

Secondly he wishes consequent felicity after death, Let my last end be like
his: last end, (...)
the word used in the Hebrew denotes sometimes posterity, Dan. 11.4.
and let my posterity be like unto his, and to this the Septuagint had an eye,
(...) Septuag.
when they render the words, let my seed become as the seed of these: so Balaam
in the former part of the wish, desires, happyness for himself, in the latter,
for his Children: this exposition is not contrary to the Hebrew, nor to be
contemned: yet above seven times seventy translators may be produced, who here
leave the seventy interpreters, and turn the word as we, Extremum, the last
end, the Arrears, or after Payment: and the meaning is, the Saints of God have
not their portion in this world; they have only a pension, there is a great deal
of Arrears the people of God shall receive at their death. So the same Hebrew
word is used the end of that man is peace, Psalm. 37.37. Prove. 24.20. Prove.
23.18.24.14.
the last end, the Arrears of that man. So there is no Reward to the evil man,
he has nothing to come in the other world, but what he has he has here,
Vtinam post hujus vitae exitum, felicitatem consequar his rectis repositam.
Jun. in loc.
but to the righteous there is an End, the best is behind: So Junius upon this
place. O that after my passage out of this life, I might obteyn the happiness
that is laid up for these upright ones: so that of Solomon, Pro. 14.32.
the wicked is driven away in his wickedness but the righteous has hope in his
death, the meaning of the place may be, either the righteous has hope in the
wicked man's death, that is, that things will be better when the wicked dye: or
else he has hope in his own death, because there is a reward to the righteous.
Psalm. 92.12. (...)
And indeed the happiness of the upright is not a flower that grows in the
garden of this world, the gold which enriches them is not fetched from natures
mine: it is at their last end they have their recompense: so the Jews note from
that of the Psalmist, the Just shall flourrish like the palm tree: Il savio
Salomone chiama nell' Ecclesiaste prositto vant aggio d'uno parolache significa
romanenteo varanzo percioche inquello che non rimane od advanza ma scorre ese
consuma non c' eguadagno, hor le cose transitor^epas^ano sono beni che corrono
e fuggono come se fossero alati per andarsene a volo.
the palm tree being a tall strait tree cast's its shade a great way off, from
the body of the tree; so say they: the giving of reward to the just is a great
way off, even in the world to come: whatever is on this side eternity is
fleeting and perishing, it cannot be of any great moment because it is but for
a moment, that is of no great value, that is but of a small continuance:
therefore such a reward will not content a righteous man; the Preacher when he
speaks of profit or gain uses a word in the Hebrew (...) that imports something
which remains or abides, to teach that that which abides not is no true gain or
profit: now because the upright find not this here, they stay for reward till
their last end, Turretin. Homil. 3 Supra Luc. 12.5, 6. etc.


But enough for the unfoulding the text,

Now considering together the Wish, the Person wishing and the success of his
wishing, we may gather this proposition worthy our observation.

To dye the Death and have the last end of the upright, may be the Wish and
desire of such, as for their wickedness shall never obteyn it.

You see Balaam a false Prophet, a Conjurer, one that dealt with the Devil, a
reprobate, one that is now fuel for unquentchable flames, to burn upon to all
eternity; wished he might dye the Death of the upright.

Such being guilty of damnable hypocrisy may go laden with all their wishes to
hell: Infernus plenus est bonis affectibus and desideriis Paradisus antem bonis
effectibus and operibus. Bosq Consol. Desper.
it is an expression of a learned (in this no) Papist, that hell is full of good
wishers but all the good workers they go to heaven: The Scripture is full to
this purpose, such were they that said, Lord Lord open to us, yet, depart from
me ye workers of Iniquity; such are all they whose works and wishes contradict
one another, or whose works run not parallel with their wishes. Now such persons
though they never so earnestly desire yet shall never obtein the death of the
righteous: and truly as the great God does not judge acding to our wishes, but
our works, so neither wise men; our endeavors are the pulse by which we may
learn the state and constitution of our wishes; though there be but one pulse
that runs through the whole body, yet the Physician feels it at the hand, and
so at the hand in our works we are chiefly to try wither our wishes are true
and effectual.

Now to explain this, there are 2 things would be looked into, First why is the
death and last end of the righteous desired by the wicked? Secondly how comes
it to pass that they do not obteyn it though they do desire it.

For the first of these, why is the death and last end of the righteous desired
by the wicked? To answer this, it proceeds from the conviction of the
happiness that the godly enjoy in and after death; that death finds and leaves
them in a good estate and lets them in to a better. This is that that is
rivited in the natures of all men, they believe it is a great deal better with
the godly at their death then it is with the ungodly: there is in the worst of
men a spark of conscience, by the light of which they may read that its more
safe to be in the estate of good men when death comes, then in that of the
wicked. Conscience is a practical Preacher in the bosoms of men that much
presses and applies this doctrine, if men did hearken to its instructions. We
need go no further to school, than into our own hearts where this lesson is
abundantly taught, conscience being the school Mistress: which made that
Atheist (when he was asked which he liked best, the licentious loose lives of
the profane, or the strict holy lives of the godly) to answer cum illis mallem
vivere, cum his mori, I had rather live with those, and dye with these: he had
said better, I would chose to live with them, which I would be willing to dye
with. The godly then are in and by death made happy in the very apprehensions
of the wicked.

In the following of which truth, let us consider, First the happy condition of
the Saints in and by death positively, 2ly. relatively.

First positively, now there are three things wicked men are convinced of, that
makes a godly man's death so much to be preferred and desired, First a total
cessation from suffering, and therefore it is called a rest, there remains a
rest to the people of God, Heb. 49.
a Sabbatisme, a keeping of a Sabbath; death unto the Godly is a full stop and
period to all the miseries of the present world: after their painful walk there
is a perfect rest: in this world we labor for rest, in that, we rest from all
our labors. We were made by God and can never be happy till we are with God,
we came out of his hands and can never rest till we are in his bosom; there is
a sweet calm from the storms of the world, a blessed silence from the clamous
of the world; an absence of all evil, Sorrow shall depart and sighing flee
away, Esaias. 35.10.
says the Prophet, and tears shall be wiped away, God (my friends) cannot so
much as afflict a godly man in the other world. I will speak a great word, that
God that can do all things, cannot do this thing, as he cannot destroy his
People in this life, so he cannot so much as aflict them in the other. It is
much with Gods people as with the stones that built the Temple, they were hewed
and squared at the Quarry-side before they were brought to it, and there was no
noise of Axes and Hammers in the Temple, So there is no disturbance in the
Kingdom of God, but a perfect rest after our painful walking, Now this being
upon the hearts of all men to know there is such a rest, the wickedest of men
cannot but desire it.

Secondly, at the death of a righteous man he obtaynes a perfect degree of
sanctity, a consummation of holiness, you know the greatest perfection we can
here attain unto, is this, an humble acknowledgment of the imperfections we
have, and endeavoring after the perfection we want; but now, though there be
never so much imperfection in our state of grace here, yet the death of the
body is the death of the body of death, the funeral of all our corruptions.
This exprerience teaches, that whilst the soul dwells in the body, sin will
dwell in the soul, the Saints may cast it down but they cannot cast it out,
Dejicere possunt non ejicere.
they may hinder it from having a throne in their hearts, but they cannot
hinder it from having a room there; do what they can there is no full
separation between sin and the soul, before a Separation between the body and
the soul, there it is that that which is imperfect shall be done away, as it is
with a man that has been under a long fit of sickness, though he be truly
recovered from his disease, yet he is a long while before he can come to his
full strength, (before he pick up his crummes) so its with the Saints here;
though they are delivered from sickness of sin that it shall not be to death,
yet not from sins of weakness until death. Or as it is with one that has layn
a long time in prison, though he be now really set at large, yet he may go
limping all his days by the hurt he received from thelrons when he was in
prison, so Gods people have so many corruptions as to make them go halting to
their very graves. in the new man there is enough of the old man to make them
continually greive and mourn whilst they are here; and God suffers this, that
his people may depend more upon justifying grace, and be quickened to look more
after sanctifying grace, and be longing after consummating grace,

Thirdly there is this in the death of a righteous man, that it is to him an
immediate passage to heaven, 1 It is a passage, it is that which brings us to a
happy journeys end; death is the ship that waft's us over to the shore of a
blessed eternity, it is that boat that is sent to bring us to the landing stairs
of our fathers house. Genesis 24.57.
Much like Abraham's servant that went to fetch Rebecca to be married to the son
of the promise; when they enquired at the mouth of the damsel, she willingly
and presently gives her consent to go with him.

So when death comes with his pale horse for a Saint of God, Genesis 45.27.28.
he willingly gets up behind him; or (as one) death is like the wagons, Joseph
sent to his father Jacob out of Egypt; when he saw the wagons it is said the
good Old-mans heart revived within him, and he cried out Is Joseph my son yet
alive, I will go down and see him before I dye, so when the Saints see the
wagons of death, their hearts revive, Jesus is alive, I will go to Jesus.

2 And as it is a passage, so an immediate passage, that is, there is no such
thing as a Purgatory, any place between Earth and Heaven where they are lodged,
Luke 16.22.
as soon as Lazarus was dead he was directly carried from dives his gate to
Abraham's bosom: as soon as the penitent thief was dead he was carried from the
cross on which he was crucified, to the Kingdom where he is glorified; This
day thou shall be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.23.
As soon as the soul is breathed out of the body, it is with God; there is no
temporal punishment held forth in the Scripture after this life, and therefore
there is no Purgatory. Purgatory derogates from the blood of Christ, which
purges us from all iniquity: 1 John 1.7.
If there be any such thing as Purgatory, (as the Papists dream) you must say
one of these two things.

Either Christ's blood does not cleanse from all sins, or not perfectly from
some sins; but both these are false, therefore it follows there is no such
thing. Yea what would become of those that shall be alive at the day of
Judgment, surely they will have as much need of Purgatory as others, before
they get to Heaven. Purgatorii dolores cum nec subiisse nec tolerasse legatur
Christus, qui tamen omne genus dolorum pro nobis pertulit cos fictitios esse
consequitur, nulli credentium pertimescendos: sequeretur enim aliquos dolores
Christum non tulisse nostra causa quod absurdum. Bucan. loc. com.
Besides, our Lord Christ bare all that misery and punishment which the Elect
were else to have suffered, but he never bore the dolours of Purgatory,
therefore its evident they are but feigned sorrows, and not to be dreaded by
Believers.

3. Its an immediate passage to HEAVEN; it lets the Godly into the Kingdom of
glorious bliss; it is janitor coelorum, the Porter that opens Heavens gate to
the Saints, that they may enter into the joy of their Lord: a joy so great,
that it cannot all enter into them, therefore they are said to enter into it: a
joy so great, that nothing shall be found in it but what is desirable, and
nothing can be desired in it but is shall be found. I may say of Heaven, the
portion of the Godly, what was said by the Queen of the South, when she arrived
at Solomon's Court: when she saw the magnificence of his Palace, the Liveries of
his Servants, the state of his Attendance, there was no more Spirit left in
her, but she breaks forth, the one half was not told me in my own Country; thus
when the righteous come to Heaven, when they behold the Palace of Eternity
bespangled with Sunbeams of light and glory, when they view the Robes of
Immortality, when they see ten thousands that stand at Gods Throne, and ten
thousand times ten thousands that Minister before him, they shall burst out
into admiration, and come to us Ministers saying, in the other life you did not
tell us the half of the glory now revealed in and to us: indeed if every word
we speak were a tongue, and every thought we think an heart, yet we should not
be able to speak or think how great that glory shall be: I shall therefore
spend no more time on this, but only put you in mind of the good old saying,
Let others study how great the glory is, but let us study how we may best
obtain, and be fittest to enjoy it.

But then Secondly, as we may consider the death of a righteous man absolutety,
so comparatively; compare the death of the righteous, with the death of any
sort of person you can name, and you shall see the death of a righteous man is
to be preferred, and that by the light of a wicked man's own reason.

To instance in particulars;

First, compare the death of the righteous, with the death of the Infant; there
are some persons that having considered the sin, misery, and vanity of this
present life, have said, That the best thing in the world is not to be born,
and the next best thing is to dye as soon as we are born; and truly the World
is like a stormy Ocean, or flame of Fire; now if you were to go over a
tempestuous Sea, you would not say your passage was too short; Non puo esser
troppo presto quello che e il migliore, anzi e sempre tardo il lasciar la vita
misera per la felice.
so if a man was to run through a flame, he would not stand lingering, but make
what have he could, and the sooner through the better: it is never too soon to
dye, but rather always late to leave a miserable sinful, for a happy sinless
life. Besides, the shorter our lives, the easier our account we are to give to
God; so that if some were to dye, they would choose to dye the death of the
Infant.

But alas, though our Infancy be the best time to dye in, because the Soul is
not stained with actual sin, yet our Infancy is a state of Death; we were born
Enemies to God, Children of Hell, Ephesians. 2.3.
Children of wrath by nature, and so obnoxious to Gods displeasure, and to be
Children under his wrath, which to endure is intolerable, and to avoid is
impossible.

The best of us all was born with a poisoned and infected nature, we brought
enough with us into the World to ruin us; if we should dye in our most
innocent estate, yet we are depraved by evil, and destitute of good; there is
enough of the Old man in the youngest babe to damn it; when you behold the
profaneness of the World, and see the profligate Impieties, Drunkeness,
Adultery, Murders, and other sins that are committed; when you hear the cursed
and damned Oaths, those dreadful imprecations of flagitious men, the nature
of an harmless Infant is the seed-plot of all this; so that a poor innocent
babes death, is more dangerous than the death of the righteous; we may hope
well of such babes, but we may believe better of the righteous.

Secondly, compare the death of the righteous, with the death of a Patient;
some persons you know they are often choosing in their discourses what kind of
death to dye, whether a sudden and violent death, or a death by the hand of a
long sickness; many persons would choose this latter, because, say they, they
have time to repent, time for others to pray for them, and have warning by the
languishing condition they are in: But alas consider, God may take this latter
time to judge thee in, because thou tookest not thy former time to seek him in;
he that has promised life to the penitent, has not promised repentance to every
one that is under a long sickness. It Is true, thy warnings are a mercy, but
better it is to dye the death of the righteous, though thou should dye
suddenly: If thou art righteous, thou art habitually prepared; but if thou
had never so long sickness, it would be very uncertain whether that would
contribute to thy preparation or not.

I have often thought a Minister could not have a better time to speak to, and
work upon a people, then when they are sick, but I find the quite contrary, and
that they that have neglected the things of their peace in the time of their
health, though they have had a great deal of time to prepare themselves, when
exercised with a lingering sickness, yet they have not improved it: Therefore
trust not too much to that.

Christians, If a man have many strong and able Beasts, and he should take the
burden off from these, and should have but one pitiful creature, that was
lame and scarce able to go, and should lay it upon this, would you not think
this a strange man? Thus it is with many men. O! the many strong and lusty
days men have, and yet lay the whole burden of their repenting and turning
unto God, upon the few languishing days of sickness; but this I may say, those
that forget holiness till sickness, seldom remember it in sickness; we see in
such sicknesses usually, when the Physicians have done, Vbi desinit Medicus,
incipit Theologus.
the Divine begins; a most dreadful delusion: Men desire a lingering sickness,
but the Devil knows there is not one of ten thousand lets his sin live long
with him, but his repentance dies with him; remember as God did not love a
blind Sacrifice, so not a sick Sacrifice.

Thirdly, compare the death of the righteous, with the death of the Honorable;
If many a man were to choose what death he would dye, he would dye the death of
a King, or some Great Person, that he might be magnificently entombed, and make
posterity to know his renown: But alas, Gods Tribunal and the Grave are no
respecters of persons; there is no difference between the Peasant and the
Prince, the Leather and the Velvet Coat, the Canvass Suit and the Tunick and
Vest, the Presbyter and the Prelate, even then the Kings of the Earth, are but
Kings of Earth; you know when Trees grow in a Wood all together, we can say
there stands an Oak, and there an Elm, and there a Cedar, and there a Shrub,
but when these Trees are burnt and turned into ashes, which of you can say,
this is the ashes of such a Tree, or such a Tree.

Death is that great Leveller that makes all persons equal: In the mowing of a
Field, though some grass be higher, and some flowers bigger than others, yet
when they are mowed they lie all flat upon the ground; an Earthen Pot though
never so great, is as subject to be broken as a little one. It Is a very
remarkable observation the Jews have of David, 1 Kings 1. per totum, compared
with 1 Kings 2.1. (...)
in his life time he is seldom mentioned in Scripture without some preface of
Honor, as King David, my Lord the King, etc. and so he is about forty times
called King David, and my Lord the King David, in one Chapter; but now see what
an alteration there is in the first verse of the next Chapter, When the days
of David drew nigh that he should dye; He that was my Lord the King so often a
little before, now he comes to dye is plain David; so that you see death makes
all equal. Do you then desire to dye the death of a Great man! Surely it is not
so good as to dye in the fear of the great God: and therefore Hezekiah a potent
and noble Prince, when he had a message of death, pleads not, Remember Lord
that I have been a King, that I have worn the Crown, and swayed the Scepter,
Isa. 38.3.
but Remember Lord that I have walked before thee in truth, with a perfect
heart, and have done that which is right in thy sight: its a poor thing in
death to have been saluted, Your Lordship, and Your Ladyship, Your Honor, and
Your Grace, Your Highness, and Your Majesty at every word, if we cannot see our
selves to be the persons whom the King of Heaven delights to honor.

Fourthly, another had rather dye the death of the Wealthy; many persons we see
in the World, they toil, and labor, and sweat, and if you ask them the
reason, it must needs be this, that they might leave something behind them when
they dye.

Christians, that is not our own, which we cannot carry with us into another
World; the rich man in this respect is like a poor man, that is invited to a
great man's Table; whilst he is there, he makes use of the Plate, and Silver
Spoons, and other things, but he must pocket up none of these, but leave them
behind him when he goes thence; so God gives him a great many things here to
use, but he must leave them all at death.

Or just as it is with Travelers, who make use of the movables of an Inn for
that night they lodge there, but the next morning they leave them, and go
onward in their journey; Job 21.13.
They spend their days in wealth and in a moment they go down to the grave:
Who would not choose to dye the death of the righteous, rather than of Nabal,
or the rich man in the Gospel? What a vain thing is man to desire to dye rich?
To leave a portion of Goods behind him, and not to have a good portion in
Heaven? Surely the wealth and accommodations of the World, do not make any
person the more fit or willing to dye. I remember a story, that when the Duke
of Venice showed Charles the 5th. at Venice his Earthly Paradise, stately
Palace, Haec sunt quae faciunt invitos mori. (...) Rabb.
Gardens, Riches, Furniture, Plate and Jewels, and asked the Emperor what he
thought of them; he does in a most Christian manner make no other answer but
this, These are the things that make men unwilling to dye: Another showing a
private Christian the like sight, expecting to be admired for it, drew this
speech from the Christian; Sir, you had need make sure of heaven, or else you
will be a great loser when you dye. He that has set his heart on these things
while he possesses them, they will go to his heart when he is torn from them,
he will be unwilling to dye.

Fifthly, let us compare the death of the righteous, with the death of the
Valiant; some would choose this: what large renown have many that have dyed
upon the place, in an engagement against the Enemies of their Country? How does
their fame shine in History, and the Chronicles of Nations embalm their Names
to posterity? Such as that glorious King of Sweden Gustavus Adolphus, Killed
but not Conquered; and that noble Captain Consalvo, who being counseled to
retire a little backwards from the Enemy, made this answer, Essendo egli
consigliato a voler retirarsi alquanto indietro, rispose, desiderare d'haver
piu tosto al present la sua sepoltura un palmo di terrerro piu avanti, che
col' retirarsi indietro poche braccia allungar la vita cento anni. Guicciard.
That he had rather at that time get a span of ground forwards, though he were
sure to find his grave there, then retreat a few yards to lengthen out his life
a hundred years. But though this may seem to be a brave and noble thing to dye
so, yet how poor comfort is it to their souls, if they be not Soldiers of the
Lamb, called, chosen, and faithful? What does it avail them to be praised
where they are not, and be tormented where they are? All their courage and
resolution, all their valor and magnanimity, what is it to their Salvation
without grace and piety? They are laudable Virtues, but not saving Graces: It Is
true, it is very honorable for a man to dye for his Country, but let me dye
the death of the righteous.

Sixthly, let us compare the death of the righteous, with the death of the
Learned; if some men were to choose what death they would dye, they would
choose to dye the death of a Philosopher; when they have read of Seneca, Plato,
Socrates, and others, with how much constancy and courage they looked death in
the face, they think it brave to dye like one of these; but one spark of Grace
is a better Lanthorn to lead you to happiness, than all the reason and wisdom
those men had; they were wise to admiration, and yet not wise to salvation. It
was the speech of St. Austin in his time, Surgunt indocti and rapiunt coelum,
etc.
Unlearned men arise and snatch Heaven away, whilst we with all our Learning go
laden to Hell. Therefore what will it profit to dye the death of the Learned?
I tell you, Solomon's repentance was better to dye with, than all Solomon's
wisdom; Learning is a poor cordial to a dying man; Scholarship is a rare
Ornament, but a miserable Comforter, when you come to dye; a good Handmaid to
Godliness, but a bad supplyer of the place of it when Godliness is wanting:
Therefore what will it profit a man to dye the death of the greatest
Philosopher that ever was, if that be all.

Seventhly, another it may be would choose to dye the death of the Ancient;
some say, if they might choose what death they would dye, they would wish to
dye in a good old age, to spin out the thread of their lives to a great length,
and to go away at last like a Lamp for want of oil; gradually to spend the
radical moisture of the body, and then without pain to yield unto nature: But
unless you dye the death of the righteous, the longer your death is deferred,
the greater will be the misery that will be inflicted; the longer a sinner
lives, the more wrath he lays up for himself; and therefore excellent is that
expression of the Apostle, Romans 2.5
According to thy hardness and impenitent heart thou treasurest up wrath
against the day of wrath: What is the meaning of the phrase? It Is just like a
covetous Miser that is making of a hoard, he is every day adding something to
it till it come to a great sum: So thou treasurest up wrath; the longer God
continues thee, the greater the wrath will be at last which thou must suffer.
Or as a man that every day is carrying a stick to a pile of wood, with which at
last he is to be burned; the longer he lives the greater the pile, and the more
formidable the fire will be: the longer God forbears thee, the more interest
thou must pay: he will be thy sorer enemy, because he was no sooner thine
enemy. If thou live to be an Old man, and not a Babe in Christ, thy case is
most dreadful: Old age in it self is not desirable; an Old man is an animated
grave, (...)
a Sepulcher with a little life in it; it is the refuge and anvil for diseases
to meet in and beat upon; and therefore they are called evil days in which
there is no pleasure. Eccles. 12.1.
It Is true, the hoary head (when nature has snowed Gray hairs upon a man) is a
Crown of Glory, Prove. 16.31.
but it is no Crown to thee, unless found in the way of righteousness:
Therefore the Text is thus read in the Holy tongue, (...) in fut. niphal.
The hoary head is a Crown of Glory, (of ornament, or comeliness) in the way of
righteousness let it be found, or it shall be found; it is either to be
understood as a promise, thus, in the way of righteousness the Crown of Glory
shall be found by the hoary head; or as a command, thus, that the Gray head may
be a becoming ornament to the ancient, let it be found in the way of
righteousness; it is necessary it should be found in that way. What do Old men
that are not good so long in the World? What is the advantage they get? Surely
only this, They live to see more evil, and to do more evil, and to deserve more
evil than others do, that is all the happiness of an Old man that is not
gracious; for it is not the venerable face that will commend to God, nor the
snowy head of the Ancient, that will make way for him before the Ancient of
days, but to dye the death of the righteous. To name one more,

Eighthly, compare the death of the righteous, with the death of the Martyrs;
all that dye for such, are not saved, but all that dye righteous they are
saved; there are many persons that may give their bodies to be burned, 1 Cor.
13.3.
and yet their souls shall burn in Hell; many persons that may be Martyrs in
our account, who are but Malefactors in the account of God: If we dye the death
of a Martyr, and not of a Godly one, it will be no profit; for it is not the
death, nor the cause only, but the heart that makes a Martyr.

Three things make a Martyr; there must not only be suffering, but a good cause
to suffer in, and a good conscience to suffer with; some Martyrs that seemed
nothing else to us, may really be nothing less, when as no righteous persons,
but they are happy: There are some persons that may seem to us, to dye for the
Lord, and yet do not dye in the Lord; but all upright men dye in the Lord, and
therefore you see, if we make the comparison here, the death of the righteous
is much to be preferred: And thus you have the first thing, the reasons why
wicked men when they come to dye, desire to dye the death, and have the last
end of the righteous.

The second thing is, How it comes to pass that though they desire it, yet they
do not obtain it. I would not speak now concerning the sins of wicked men, by
which they forfeit this desired happiness; if a man should never so much desire
health, and yet go immediately and drink off a cup of poison, death would be
his portion before health: if a Water-man should never so much desire to be at
Westminster, and yet row toward London Bridge, his desires would be but in
vain: Thus it is with sinful men, they contradict their desires in their
pratices, therefore their desires further them nothing in the way to happiness,
their practices carry them faster to Hell, than their desires can to Heaven.
But if you ask me, Why do those that desire it not obtain it? My answer is,
Because they do but desire it; they have nothing but faint velleities, which is
too sloathfull full a way to get these great things by; there are many means
conscientiously to be used, that this last end of the upright may be enjoyed:
the Lepers in the Gospel were cured not sitting still, but walking, Luke 17^ 14
as they went they were cleansed: we must be up and doing: we must be at the
charges and expenses, not only of many an earnest wish, but of many a salt
tear, and many a bitter sigh, and many a deep groan, and many a hard pull
before we can obtain this blessing: an happy estate in death, and a glorious
life after it, are commodities not to be had at so cheap a rate, as for a wish:
we can gain but a little of the Earth, though we take a great deal of pains for
it; and do we think to obtain Heaven with no pains? It was the saying of an
ancient Rabbin, (...) Rabb.
If thou can obtain but a little of this World which thou pursuest so much,
how can thou look for any thing of the other World which thou followest not
at all? We must then be working as well as wishing; Lam. 3. 41. Oratione
operatio and operatione fulciatur oration. Hieron.
therefore it is said, Let us lift up our hearts with our hands to God in the
Heavens; our hearts, in praying and wishing, our hands, in acting and doing: We
ought to support our praying with our working, and our working with our
praying, both these should go together; we must be as well in the operative
way, as in the optative mood.

I remember the Fable of the Country man, whose Cart stuck fast in the mire; he
falls a praying to Jupiter to help it out, but does nothing else; and Jupiter
bids him set his shoulder to the wheel, and then cry to Jupiter: so we must set
our hands to the work, and then desire to dye the death of the righteous.
Solomon's advice is good, Prove. 2.3, 4.
if thou shall cry after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding,
if thou shall seek for her as for silver, and search for her as for hid
treasure, etc. not only cry and lift up the voice, but seek and search: so the
Apostle counsels, Col. 3.1, 2. (...).
to seek the things that are above, as well as to mind the things that are
above: hence the Church prays in the Psalm, Ps. 67.1.
God be merciful to us, and bless us, and cause his face to shine upon us; the
Hebrew is,(...) and cause his face to shine with us; that is, his grace to
accompany our endeavors: Gods grace is to be desired, and man's endeavor not
to be spared.

Now this may be summed up in a few words; here are the two reasons why they do
not obtain, though they do desire.

First, They neglect the active obedience of a righteous life; they neglect the
performance of those duties that lead to this end; Obedience though it be not
the cause of Heaven, yet it is the cawsey to it; though it does not merit, yet
it is the means; when our wishes go without duty, then they are lame and out of
joint; there must be Faith, Repentance, Holiness, Ordinances, Obedience to the
commands of God, etc. it is by these we please God: Its said of the Ninivites,
and God saw their works that they turned from their evil way; (...) Seder
Maamadoth ex tract. Sabbath.
the Prophet says not, and God saw their Sackcloth and their Fasting, but
their works, that they turned from their evil way. Remember this, He that made
you without your assistance, will not save you without your obedience; and this
obedience is to be universal, not only to the easier duties, but to the more
difficult: Some are easy, as to believe we must be saved by an imputed
righteousness, to trust to another when we see our own imperfection, these we
are easily persuaded to; but then to love our enemies, to mortify our
corruptions, to pull out our right eye, and cut off our right hand, these are
hard sayings; men will not go to the cost of universal active obedience, and
therefore wish and wish, and do not obtain.

Secondly, they decline the passive obedience of a righteous life, and that
makes them miscarry; they would be willing to be saved by the Cross of Christ,
bit they are not willing to bear the Cross of Christ; they would be willing to
follow Christ to his Kingdom, but they would not follow him to his Cross; they
would follow him into the Garden of pleasure, but not to Golgotha the place of
Souls; they would be willing to eat bread with Christ at his Table, but are
loath to pledge him in his bitter Cup; they would be glorified with his Glory,
but not be baptized with his Baptism: There Is the great reason men do not
attain Heaven, they would be willing to dye the death of the righteous, but are
unwilling to dye the death for righteousness sake. Alas! (Christians) the Lord
Jesus Christ will be your head, but it is a head under a Crown of Thorns; God
will be your God, as he was to Moses, but he will appear to you in the burning
Bush; we must first enter into the sorrow of our Lord, before we can enter into
the joy of our Lord; there are first those groans that are unutterable, and
then those joys that are unspeakable: He that has not learned the lesson of
the Cross, has not learned his A. B. C. in Religion: The Scriptures teach,
first a suffering with Christ, and then a reigning with him: Now there are few
persons willing to suffer, and therefore it is that so few get to Heaven. Few
think themselves to be graced (as they in the Acts.) Acts 5.41.
when they are disgraced; few that count themselves dignified, when they are
villified for Christ; few that are convinced, that though they lose all for
Christ, yet they shall lose nothing by him; nay, that though they lose all for
him, yet they may find it all again, and more in him; few that are like the
ancient Christians, that were glad they had any thing to lose for Jesus Christ;
thus should it be with us all: we must neither neglect the active, nor decline
the passive obedience of a righteous life, if we would dye the death of the
upright, and have our last end like his. Thus I have answered the two
Questions; let me now conclude in a few inferences from the premises.

And first, this shows us the wisdom and happiness of those that make choice of
a righteous life; It Is the best wisdom, because they only take the right way to
ensure a blessed death; they have a prospect into futurity, they consider what
is coming, and therefore provide for it. And it is their great happiness,
because they make sure of a heavenly reward after death; therefore how
strangely do we argue, when we see a Worldling dandled upon the knees of
prosperity? we are prone to think,. surely this is one of the Favorites of
Heaven, the darling of providence, surely God loves that man, he makes him so
great and rich; and on the other hand, when we see the righteous afflicted in
this World, reproached, threatened, impoverished, imprisoned, banished,
martyred, we are apt to judge, surely this is not a person that God loves; but
it must be the end that must be regarded, and then it will appear who is the
happy man; Psa. 37.37.
mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
Peace; the happiness of life is to be esteemed of by the end and issue of it:
though the righteous man's way be affliction, yet his end is peace; that is, an
absence of all evil, and the presence of all good: the Hebrew word for Peace,
comes from a root which denotes perfection; his end is perfection of happiness:
hence the Rabbin tells us, (...) Rab. Shimson Ben Cholpeta misna okatzim sub
finem.
that the Holy blessed God finds not any vessel that will contain enough of
blessing for Israel, but the vessel of Peace, according to that of the
Psalmist, Psa. 29. ult.
the Lord shall bless his people with Peace: indeed this is ALL, therefore
Balaam himfelf, though a wretch and a reprobate, wished himself no more
happiness, then the righteous should enjoy at death, and in the other life.

If an unskilful man should go to an exquisite Limner, and see him draw the
rude draught of a Picture, he would wonder what he intended; but if he would
but stay till he had set to his ultimam manum, his last hand, and finished the
piece, he would see it to be excellent: Thus it is with foolish men, they look
upon the rude draught of a Godly man's condition in this World, and misjudge it;
but if they had but patience to suspend their judgment till God had finished
it, they would find it excellent; and worthy to be desired.

If a man had been present with God at his first days creation, when God began
to make the World, when in the tohu vabohu, (...) Genesis 1.2.
in the indigested Chaos, all things lay disorderly and confusedly jumbled
together, fire and water, cold and heat, light and darkness, dry and moist, if
a man had seen this, he would have wondered, what will the wise God make of
this piece of confusion; but if this man had staid till the end of the sixth
day, he would have said with God, Behold all is very good. Thus he that looks
upon the troubled estate of the righteous, may wonder what God intends with
them; but stay to the end, and you will see their condition blessed: wicked men
look no further then just before them, to receive their good things in this
life; but you know there are many persons that may be coached to Hell, when
others may be whipped to Heaven; nay many if they were not kept short of the
things of the Earth, would come short of the joys of Heaven. Does any person
think the Malefactor happy, because he may ride in a gilded Coach to the
Gallows? Or the Child to be unhappy, because the Father takes the rod and
corrects him? I remember one of the Popish Writers compares the righteous, and
the wicked, to the Hens and Hawks that are kept in Great men's houses; you know
whilst the Hen is alive, she is not suffered to come into the house, but to
scrape upon the Dunghill, and get her living there; but when the Hen is killed,
she is served in to the Masters table: whereas the Hawk whilst alive is kept in
the house with great attendance, but when it is dead, it is good for nothing, but
thrown out upon the Dunghill.

So here the wicked have it may be a great deal of provision, but when they dye
there is no more use of them, when as the Godly are preferred: Now I appeal to
you which of these is the happiest estate; surely that is the best that is the
best at last; none would be so mad as to desire first his happiness, and then
his misery: which would you choose of these two, either to go through a
pleasant Gallery, where are all sorts of Pictures, variety of sweet smells, and
all manner of delights, to run through this into a flaming fire; or to run
through a flaming fire, to come into a place of liberty, peace, and comfort?
See then the wisdom and happiness of those that make choice of a righteous life.

Secondly, we learn hence the necessity of looking about us, whether our
endeavors are suitable to our wishes, or else (as you see) for all your wishes
to dye the death of the righteous, you may dye the death of the reprobate.

Pray think of it, the time will certainly come, and may suddenly come, when
nothing but the life of the righteous will yield you comfort; the Physicians
they have left thee, the Minister he is to come, (but alas it is too late to
send for him, for thou art not capable of receiving any instruction) thy
reasonable soul, thy precious soul, thy immortal soul sits trembling upon the
threshold of thy lips, to take its flight into another World; go backward into
this life you cannot, stay here you may not, go forward into another World you
dare not. Now this is the time, and if have not lived the life of the
righteous, what a dreadful estate are you in then?

The soul of a man at death, is like a Prince beaten from one strong Hold into
another; the soul is first made to fly out of the lower parts of the body, the
legs and thighs, and then comes into the upper parts of the body; but the
disease besieges it there, and then it flies to the heart, (its last refuge)
and cannot hold out long there.

Upon this account it concerns us greatly, to ask every one himself, How have I
lead my life? Where are my Graces? What have I been doing nothing but wishing
for Heaven, and not laboring for it? O consider how much you should be
awakened and allarum'd by this! you ought to deal honestly with your selves; it
is high time to bestir your selves, you are upon the borders of Eternity; none
of you but desire to dye the death of the righteous, O labor that your
endeavors may be answerable: If there was but one of you that had been wishing
and not endeavoring, and so like to be excluded out of bliss, it might greatly
startle you all who this might be: When Christ told his Disciples, one of them
should betray him, they come and say every one, Lord is it I? and when we tell
you there are a great many in the World, that do not endeavor, but only wish
to be saved, and for this are in danger to be damned, methinks you should every
one say, Lord is it not I? If there was but one man in the whole World that was
to be damned, it might awaken us all, lest any of us should be that one man: As
if an Army was drawn into a Field, and a voice should come from Heaven, that a
Dart should strike one man of that Company dead, and not tell the man, would
not every one have cause to be afraid? So have we cause to entertain an holy
fear and jealousy, lest we should be of the number of such as shall fall short
of the Glory of God.

Thirdly, we learn hence the duty of adding working to our wishing, in order to
our arrival at the death of the righteous; and this we are to endeavor both
seriously, and seasonably: 2 Pet. 1.10.
1. seriously; Give diligence to make your calling and election sure; 1 Cor.
15. ult. Eccles. 9.10.
Abound in the work of the Lord; Whatever thy hand finds to do, do it with
thy might: Be in good earnest for thy precious and immortal soul.

And then 2ly. do it seasonably; because thou art so uncertain of the
continuance of a natural life, therefore be speedy in respect of a spiritual
life. Psa. 119.^.
We should make have and not delay to keep Gods Commandments: there may be
cases wherein its not only lawful, but laudable for him that believes to make
have; such a case is this of our souls, in which expedition is highly
commendable: It Is observed of Solomon, that he was but seven years in building
the House of God, 1 Kings 6. ult. -- 7.1.
and thirteen in building his own: (...) Miclal Yophi in loc.
R. Shelomoh Yarchi writes of it, that the Scripture speaks it to his praise,
that he was so quick in Gods, and so slow in his own work. It is much with us
in respect of our lives, as with men that are sailing in a Ship before the
wind, whether they sit or lie, work or be idle, walk or stand still, whatsoever
they do, yet the Ship is going forward toward the Port it is bound for: So it
is here, whether we repent or do not repent, pray or neglect to pray, believe
or do not believe, be holy or remain unholy, our lives wear away apace:
Therefore we had need look about us, and to quicken our pace in the path of
Godliness.

Men complain of the shortness of their lives, Non sumus vitae inopes sed
prodigi.
and yet live as if their lives were too long; O methinks there is enough in
the death and last end of the righteous, to persuade you to the way of the
upright! Be therefore adding working to your wishing; remember that of Paul,
Gal. 6.7, 8.
Be not deceived, God is not mocked; according as a man sows, so shall he
also reap: He that sowes to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but
he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. The
meaning of the Apostle is plainly this, that there is a consonancy betwixt a
man's life and death; such as his sowing is, such shall his reaping be.

Lastly, to conclude the whole, this may be the comfort of such as do live the
life, as well as desire to dye the death of the upright; that choose the former
part, as well as the latter end of the righteous; for as the wicked go from a
temporal life to an eternal death, Vita ad mortem sic impius vivit, mors ad
vitam sic pius moritur.
so the righteous go from a temporal death to an eternal life; their death is
both precious to God, and advantageous to temselves: The righteous may welcome
death, for death to a righteous man, though it parts two near friends, Soul and
Body, yet it unites two better friends, the Soul and its Savior to all
Eternity.

The Scripture records concerning Moses, in the last Chapter of Deuteronomy,
Deuteronomy. 34.5.
that Moses the servant of the Lord dyed according to the word of the Lord; the
words in the Hebrew are, (...)
Moses dyed upon the mouth of the Lord: The meaning is, say the Jews,
l'Empereur paraph. Jach. in Dan. p. 258.
Moses dyed kissing of God; surely so it is with the Saints of God, their
Father gives them a kiss, and so lays them down in the bed of the Grave;
therefore they that have lived righteously, may at death smile themselves into
a corpse; for the body of a Godly man goes to his Lords bed, and his soul to
his Lords bosom; the Grave is perfumed for his body, and Heaven prepared for
his soul. I may say of righteousness as Solomon, (in a case not much differing)
Prove. 6.22.
when thou go it shall lead thee, when thou sleep it shall keep thee, and
when thou awakest it shall talk with thee; that is, (according to the Gloss of
the Rabbinical Interpreters) (...)
when thou go it shall lead thee, viz. in thy passage through this World;
when thou sleep it shall keep thee, viz. when thou lie down in the Grave;
and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee, viz. when thou art awakened at
the glorious Resurrection.

Well then, (all ye that are upright in heart and life) I bring you glad
tidings of great joy; Psalm. 58.11. Eccles. 8.12.
Verily there is a reward for the righteous, and it shall be well with them
that fear God, that fear before him: it shall be so well, that none of you
shall desire to have it better; while the languid wishes of the wicked betray
them to the pit of Perdition, your holy and earnest endeavors shall deliver
you into the Mansion of Glory; 1 Cor. 15 ult.
your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord: God is too good to suffer
himself to be overcome in love; Dieu est trop bon pour se laisser surmonter en
amor.
it shall never be said, there is more love in man to righteousness, than there
is love in God to the righteous. Therefore comfort your selves with these
words, for you shall in this World certainly obtain a comfortable dissolution,
and in the other World a joyful Resurrection; You shall dye the death of the
righteous, and like unto his shall be your last

END.

