Certain Additionall REASONS To those presented in A LETTER By the MINISTERS
of London to the Assembly of DIVINES at Westminster, 1 Ian. 1645.

Of like power and force against the TOLERATION OF INDEPENDENCY Together with
some taken out of the Letter it self (of those Ministers in which their
Reasons are enclosed) which lay couched somewhat obscurely.

Quos perdere vult -- dementat. 2 Timothy 3.9. They shall proceed no further: but
their folly shall be made manifest to all men, as theirs also was.

Isa. 42.19. Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, as my messenger that I
sent?

Ioh. 11.48. If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him, and the
Romans will come, etc.

Ioh. 19.12. If thou let this man go, thou art not Cesars friend.

2 Pet. 15. Account that the Toleration of the Lord is salvation.

Lam. 4.3. Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their
young ones: the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the Ostriches in
the wilderness.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black spread-Eagle, at the West end
of Paul's, 1645.

THe Reasons under the first head, viz. That the desires and endeavors of the
Independents for a Toleration, are at this time extremely unseasonable and
preproperous.

1. The gap is not wide enough for the enemy to break in upon us, Therefore it
is at this time extramely unseasonable and preproperous, to make it up by
endeavoring a Toleration of Independency.

2. The Independents great service and faithful assistance in the rescue of
the Kingdom near lost, is now fresh in every ones eye, Therefore the desires
and endeavors of the Independents for a Toleration are at this time extremely
unseasonable and preproperous.

3. The State for the present has great need of the continuance of their
assistance, Therefore their desires to the State for a Toleration are at this
time extremely unseasonable and preproperous.

4. The Independents have hopes for the considerations mentioned, that if now
they move, their desires and endeavors may speed for a Toleration, Therefore
it is extremely unseasonable and preproperous for them so to do.

5. The Parliament have appointed a Committee to find out a way of
Accommodation and Agreement between the Presbyterians and Independents, and out
of our large experience of your Zeal of Gods glory and care of his afflicted
Church, and earnest endeavors to promote the complete Reformation of it, and
of your ready concurrence with us to improve any means that may be found
conducible to this end; We are persuaded through you it will come to nothing;
Therefore it is extremely unseasonable and preproperous for the Independents
to desire and endeavor a Toleration.

6. The Independents will not be persuaded, to join with us as some of the City
did in Petitioning the Parliament to alter their rule that we might be invested
with full power, and so to entrust us with their Liberty, Therefore it is at
this time extremely unseasonable and preproperous for the Independents to
desire and endeavor and Toleration.

Reasons under the second head, which is, That their desires and endeavors
after Toleration are unreasonable and unequal in diverse regards.
1. We are the Major number and have the Major part in the Kingdom adhering to
us even those that have no Religion, Therefore the desires and endeavors of
the Independents for a Toleration are unequal.

2. There is an exceeding great want of godly and learned Ministers to instruct
the people in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, so that many parts of this
Kingdom must be left destitute except the Independents be employed, Therefore
their desires and endeavors for Toleration are unreasonable and unequal.

3. A Toleration should be given the Independents without asking in
consideration of their good service (above specified) if no more, The King said
what has been done to Mordecay for this, the Kings servants said, There is
nothing done for him, Hest. 6.3. Therefore the Independents desires and
endeavors for Toleration are unreasonable and unequal.

4. The Independents are persuaded in their consciences, that the Order,
Discipline and Government, they hold forth, is of Jesus Christ, Therefore their
desires and endeavors for Toleration are unreasonable and unequal.

5. We do acknowledge the Independents, godly and and learned Brethren, and
such as God has received, Romans 14.3. Therefore do judge it unreasonable and
unequal to hear from them of dwelling in unity with them by a Toleration.

And this appears further from those Scriptures, Romans 15.1. Phil. 3.15, 16.
and Gal. 6.1. bear one another burdens, Therefore a Toleration is
unreasonable and unequal.

Also that Mat. 9.13. Go ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy
and not sacrifice, Therefore the desires and endeavors of Independents for
Toleration, and mercy in the different manner of sacrifice or outward worship
is unreasonable and unequal.

And that Scripture, Romans 13.10. Love is the fulfilling of the Law, which we
preach all of us against the Antinomians in such a way as do bear the name of
Legal Preachers. Now love bears long, and is kind, envyeth not, is not
easily provoked, thinks no evil, bears all things, believes all things,
hops all things, endures all things, 1 Cor. 23.4, 5, 7. Therefore the
Independents desires of love to be expressed in Toleration are unreasonable and
unequal.

6. The Bishops would never allow us a Toleration, Therefore the desire is
unreasonable, etc.

7. Many of us it is well known suffered with our Independent Brethren under
the Bishops tyranny, and groaned under sad burdens, then, Therefore we judge
it unreasonable and unequal, that they dissenting from us now, should desire a
Toleration.

8. All things are not to be tolerated, nor all men to do what they list, as
we in our ordinary preaching do plead against the Independents, Therefore the
Independents desire to be considered in the smaller matters of uniformity, is
unreasonable and unequal.

9. Your selves have undertaken to the Independents long since, namely in your
Considerations tendered Dec. 23. 1643. in these words, That no doubt the
counsels of the * Ego and Rex meus.
Assembly, and the care of the Parliament will be not only etc. but to preserve
whatever shall appear to be the rights of particular Congregations according
to the word, and to bear with such whose consciences cannot conform in all
things to the public Rule, so far as the word of God would have them borne
withal. Therefore it is unreasona le for the Independents to desire and
endeavor a Toleration.

Reasons under the third head, viz. That Independency is a Schism.
1. The Independents do depart from the corruptions of our Churches; therefore
Independency is a Schism.

2. The Independents do profess they cannot approve of all that we do or
would have established, nor join with us therein without sinning against
Christ, therefore Independency is a Schism.

3. The Independents by holding out their way, and by the success thereof, are
to us an occasion of envyings, strife, and division, so that we walk as men,
and appear to be carnal that should be thought to be spiritual; therefore
Independency is a Schism.

4. The Independents design is to divide and separate the Saints from the
World, which we would piece together, for the Churches coat may be of diverse
colors, as we say in the beginning of our Letter; therefore Independency is a
Schism.

Reasons under the fourth head, viz. Many mischiefs will inevitably follow upon
this Toleration, and that both to Church and Commonwealth.
First, To the Church.
1. God is now pulling down Antichrist, and pulling up the foundation and
stump of that Monster which lies in the Pride, Ambition and Worldliness of the
Ministry, which the Independents by their preaching are daily discovering and
rooting up; and the perfecting of this is a mischief that will inevitably
follow upon the Toleration of Independency. Now shall not Dagons stump stand?
shall the Saints proceed further against Antichrist then Antichrist can against
them? (the Lord still leaving them a seed;) therefore it is but time to cry
with that Watcher from heaven, Dan. 4.23. Leave the stump of the root thereof
in the earth.

2. Our Trade and living would by degrees fall to the ground by Toleration; for
either we must part with all the godly that will not endure mixture, or else we
must make a Schism, and displease the worldly party, and where is then our
subsistence? so that Independency endangers the cutting off of a Tribe in
Israel, not Benjamin but Levi; therefore Independency is a mischief to the
Church.

3. The Independents by their preaching and other deportment do insinuate into,
and gain upon the people the reputation of painful and humble spirited men;
so that they will in time cloathe themselves with the love of all that are but
civil and rational, and we the godly, painful and Orthodox Ministry of the
Land, if we shall proceed as is our desire to do, we shall not only lose our
maintenance, but our honor and esteem; therefore the toleration of these men
is mischievous to the Church.

4 The Independents do entrust the people in a Liberty which they say Christ
has given them, and cry up the Scripture for the only Rule, and that complete
and perfect, and exalt Christ in his prophetical Office, directing all men to
a dependence on the Spirit of Christ for deciding Controversies, and resolving
Doubts, and by this means Ministers and Synods will not have that Authority
they have formerly had, when the people shall examine their determinations, by
which they ought to be concluded. Therefore Independency is mischievous to the
Church.

5 Independents are not only against Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, etc. but
against all whatsover Prelacy of Ministers, (and so directly against that
Presbyterian power we would have established;) judging it a plant which God
has not planted, and therefore will root it up; therefore Independency is a
mischief to the Church.

6. The Independents will ever be looking for further light, and go on still
in Reformation, and would carry the people along with them to grow in grace and
in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. last, by which means things will
never be settled perfectly while the Church is militant, therefore Independency
is a mischief to the Church.

7. The Scripture says, Persecution shall always await the Saints in the
world as being appointed thereunto, 1 These. 3.3. Now if there be toleration,
there will be no persecution; and then this mischief will follow, the word of
God will fall to the ground, and the Church will want that glory of Martyrs
sufferings and suffrages to the truth, and trialls of Faith, and that glory of
Gods justice in executing judgment on such as will not see when his hand is
lifted up, whom yet he will make to see and be ashamed for their envy at the
people (according to that Scripture Isa. 26.11.) and the fire of the enemies
themselves shall devour them.

8. It is impossible the whole Land should be of one mind and judgment in all
the matters of Religion, be it never so much endeavored on all hands, unless
those that be contrary minded be destroyed; therefore toleration is a mischief
to the Church.

9 The tares are forbidden to be pulled up, lest the wheat be rooted up with
them, which danger will be avoided by a toleration; therefore toleration is a
mischief.

10 The Independents notwithstanding all our Declarations (both in Pulpits and
public places) and private suggestions against them, as that they are
Antimagistraticall, that they will not make known their way, that they cannot
suffer Presbytery, that they will in the end use the sword for themselves, that
they are the Authors of all the divisions, that Independency is the inlet to
all Errors and Heresies; in which we are credited by some, and notwithstanding
our endeavors to keep them and cast them out of Lectures, and to withdraw the
stipend from the Exposition Lectures; yet for all this they increase daily, and
whether they do draw it is sure enough the godly cleaves to them: Therefore this
mischief must needs grow by the toleration of them; and therefore how unequal
and unreasonable it is for them to desire such a thing?

2 Branch. Mischiefs to the Commonwealth.
1 In the multitude of people is the safety and honor of the Commonwealth: if
there be no Toleration, there will be a diminution of people; therefore a
Toleration is mischievous to the Commonwealth.

2 Gods blessing goes along with his people that truly fear him, and redounds
to the benefit of Families and Nations that entertain and che^ish them. I will
bless them that bless thee. Therefore the toleration of Independents is a
mischief to the Commonwealth.

3 The unthankfulness of a people to those that have bin the instruments of
their salvation, has brought judgments upon them, as in that instance of
Abimolech and the men of Shechem, between whom God sent an evil spirit,
whereby fire came forth to the mutual destruction of one another; and this for
not remembering the Lord their God, and not showing kindness to the house of
Gedeon, according to all the goodness he had showed to Israel, Judge. 8 34, 35.
Therefore the toleration of Independents who have bin instruments of so much
good to the kingdom, is mischievous to the Commonwealth. For which of these
good works do you stone me?

4 The honor and wisdom of Commonwealths is, to nourish those that are
peaceable and beneficial; therefore it is mischievous to the Commonwealth to
tolerate Independents.

5 The principles of the Independents carry them to suffer where they cannot
obey, though under those who owe their safety to them (in a great measure)
under God: therefore the toleration of Independents is a mischief to the
Commonwealth.

6 It is a Maxim or Rule in Policy, Make much of knaves, honest men will do you
no hurt: Therefore the toleration of Independents, is a mischief to the
Commonwealth.

7 The sight of those that have been so obliging as cannot be requited, is an
eysore: therefore the toleration of Independents is a mischief to the
Commonwealth.

Reasons explicitly drawn forth, that were but implicitly couched in the Letter
it self.
1 We are exceeding apprehensive of the desirablenesse of the Churches peace,
and of the pleasantness of Brethrens Unity: Therefore our Brethren the
Independents must not be tolerated.

2 Page 1 By reason of different lights and different sights among brethren,
there may be dissenting in opinion: therefore there ought not to be a
toleration of any opinion differing from us.

3 Page ^ad. The Churches Coat may be of diverse colors, yet why should there
be any rent in it? By Non-toleration it is de facto rent asunder: Therefore
there must be no toleration.

4 Page ead. Have we not a Touchstone of Truth, the good Word of God? The
Independents desire no other; holding it to be the only one, and will not admit
an Assembly of Divines into the place thereof: therefore the Independents are
not to be tolerated.

5 Page 2 The Independents will not unbosome themselves to us their most
affectionate Brethren. Now we being their most affectionate Brethren, cannot
permit any Toleration of them in such things, as we reckon the disputes
engendered about them to be but frivolous and vain janglings, as Reason 5,
under the first branch of the fourth Head.

6 Page 6 None should have more rejoiced then our selves in the establishment
of a brotherly, peaceable and Christian Accommodation, which can be attaind by
no other means then a Toleration: for our worldly interests and prudentiall
principles will not suffer us to go to them, and their Consciences will not
suffer them to come to us; therefore we cannot judge it reasonable they should
be tolerated; nay, we detest and abhor the much endeavored Toleration.

7 Page ead, Our bowels, our bowels are stirred within us, therefore they must
not be tolerated that have kept the sword out of our bowels, and preserved our
liberty of professing the doctrine of Salvation. O our bowels, our bowels, all
does us no good whatsoever we do enjoy or have in hope, so long as Mordecay
sits in the Kings Gate

FINIS.

