CERTAIN QVERES CONCERning the Book of Common Prayer, and diverse other
Articles of Religion.
WHether the book entitled The book of Common Prayer, allowed by public
authority in this Realm, is to be allowed in the Church of God, by Gods word
or no?

Answer. Before I give my answer to this demand I must entreat you to observe
this my Protestation, that I have never as yet preached against the use of this
book of prayers: and in mine own book extant in print, I have once spoken
openly, to the good allowance thereof.

Secondly I resort to Common prayers, and sometime being requested, I do
according as it is prescribed, say the prayers. If notwithstanding I shall be
urged to speak now, what I think, whereby I may seem to be called to a form
of inquisition, as there is no law by which God has tied me of duty to be my
own accuser: so I beseech you let this my answer rather witness my
saithfulnesse to your demands, then be prejudicial to my hurt and hinderance.
Which thing as I most humbly crave, so in persuasion of your favors, I will
answer boldly wherein I am enquired.

First the similitude that this book has with the form of prayer, which the
Papists used, I think declineth from the equity of those laws, Deuteronomy. 7. v.
25. The forma of the book of common prayer.
Deuteronomy. 12. v. 30. Deuteronomy. 18. ver. 9. Which thing our Fathers so much regarded in
the primitive Church, that their books are full of great complaints, against
all similitude to be had with the Gentiles: yea the second council of Braecca,
made at a decree, that no Christian should have either Bay-leafes, or green
Boughs in their houses because the Gentiles so accustomed. And at this day all
reformed Church in France, Polenia, Hel^itia Scotland, and other places, have
changed that form of prayers. Which prudency of all ages, if we shall
condemn, the rebuke of the Apostle. I think, will touch us, 1. Cor. 14. ver.
36. Came the word of God out from you or came it else unto you only?

Secondarily, we have the Psalms, Venite, Benedictus, Magnificat, Nure
dimittis, usual in our ministry, of which we can give no reason. Nor I see no
cause why we should more leave out the Aue Maria. And because of patting the
Scriptures again into the Epistles and Gospells (which was not heard of before
the days of popery) I dare not avow that this is that reverent handling of the
scripture and the right dividing of the word of truth, which S^int Paul
requires, 2. Tim. 2. ver. 15. Thirdly, the great inconveniency which has
followed this book, while it has maintained an unlearned Ministry, and made
it thought sufficient, to have the fervice read. Wherein we have made the
spirit of God to speak in vain. That the Minister of the Gospel, must be no
young scholar, but of necessity must be apt to teach. 1 Timothy 3. ve. 2. able to
exhort with wholesome doctrine, and able to reproove them that speak against
i^. Tit. 1. ver. 9. This is another cause why I can not freely (as I would
gladly) subscribe unto the book, that it has all things allowable by the word
of God. Some other particular things, the Bishops themselves do confess to
be faulty.

2. Quere. Whether the Articles set down by the Clergy in a Synod, and
allowed by authority, be according to Gods word or no?

Ans. I confess the Articles of faith and Sacraments (as I am persuaded) are
good. So I think of the Articles which are of traditions, of an Oath before a
Judge, of the civil Magistrate, of the Doctrine taught in the Homilies, etc.
Only that one, which is of consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, I can by
no means confess it godly, and according to the word of God.

3. Quere. Whether we be tied by Gods word, to the order and use of the
Apostles and primitive Church in all things, or no?

Ans. Whatsoever was the usual order of the Apostles, no doubt we are bound
unto it, when Saint Paul had said to Timothy: Thou have known what I have used
to do, he added straightly, Continue in the things which thou have learned, 2 Timothy 3. v. 14. And so he straightly charged the Philippians, to have care to
those things which they had seen and heard in him Philip. 4. ver. 9.

4. Quere. Whether there be any right ministry, or ecclesiastical government
at this time in the Church of England, or no;

Answer. If you mean right, having such a calling as the word of God
requires, (of which read 1. Timot. 3. ver. 2. Act. 1. ver. 23. Acts. 14.
ver. 23 1. A right ministry
Timot. 4 ver. 14.) I am sure you will confess it is not right. If you mean a
right ministration, as concerning Sacraments and doctrine, I humbly confess
and think, that no man ought to separate him self from the Church which God
has given us in this land. of regiment, read the seventh Article.

5. Quere. Whether that nothing may be in the Church, either concerning
ceremonies, or regiment, but that only, which the Lord him self in his word
commands, or no.

Answer. Such ceremonies as do not necessarily appertain to the Gospel of
Christ may be changed, observing always that which Saint Paul has commanded,
Philip. 4. ver. 8.1. Corint. 14. ver. 26.

Quere. Whether every particular Church or parish in this Realm of England, of
necessity and by the order of Gods word, ought to have their Pastors Elders,
and Deacons, chosen by the people of that their parish: and they only to have
the whole government of that Church in matters ecclesiastical, or no.

Answer. Where soever this government has bin, the ehoyce has bin by
certain, with the allowance of the people, for ought that ever I read. But
what were most requisite for this preseut time, I leave it to those whom God
has set in authority and at this time called for that purpose of the manner
of choosing I will not define: for the order to be had, it is manifest in the
Apostles time: and in the primitive Church it was the use. Neither any, man I
think, Elders ought to be in the church.
will deny it. After long time in some places, this order ceased, as Saint
Ambrose says, Superbia Doctorum, qui soli volebant regere Ecclesiam etc. Ambro
in 1 Timothy cap. 5. And therefore I think now there ought to be Elders as at the
first and as in Tertullians time, ut prasidiant probati quidam Seniores, qui
honorem istum non pretio sed testimouio adipiscantur, Tertull. Apolo. cap. 39.

7. Quere. Whether there is equality of all the Ministers of this Realm, as
well concerning government and jurisdiction as touching the ministration of the
word and Sacraments.

Answer. That all Ministers are equally called to the preaching of the word
and ministry of the Sacraments, no man I think will deny. As touching
government (seeing the holy Ghost calls them fellow Ministers, fellow
Elders, fellow Officers, fellow Soldiers, fellow laborers, fellow servants:
feing Saint Peter expressly forbideth to exercise Dominion over the Lords
heritage, 1. Pet. 5.3. seeing, Saint John plainly condemns the pride of
Diotrophes, for chalenging a Lordship to command and excommunieate of his sole
authority, epist. 3. ver. 9.10. seeing our Savior Christ, the God of Glory, No
superiority among Ministers.
and of the tribe of Judah, neither him self would be a King. John 6. ver. 15.
And when his Disciples did strive for superiority, he taught them plainly, that
the people of the Nation they had Kings, and amongst them were rulers, which
we called gracious Lords, but no such dominion should be in Ministry, Luc.
22. ver. 24.25.26.) I answer then, that the Ministers are worthy of double
honor, 1. Tim. 5. ver. 17. of singular love 1. Thessa. 5. ver. 12.13. of great
reverence, Heb. 13. ver. 17. yea of all humble duty. yet I dare by no means
make them Lords in the ministry, nor give to one of them authority above the
other, for fear of this sentence, which shall one day prevail, Regnaverunt
sed non ex me, Hosea. 8.4. They rule but not by me.

Quere, Whether the patrimony of ancient time given to the Church, for the
maintaining of learning, and the service of god and to maintain the estate
ecclesiastical as Bishops lands the lands pertaining to Cathedral Churches,
the gleebe lands and thithes, by order of law given to persons and Vicars, are
by right and gods word to be taken from them, or no.

Ans. Sic ea qua Caesaris sunt Caesari esse donanda, etc. is a perpetual rule
in things of the world, but yet with this caution unto every prince that
fears who is King of Kings: that first there be provision sufficient made for
the ministry: then that the poor may have relief for their necessity. last
of all, that Universities and Schools be well maintained, in such number, as
may still supply the want in the ministry: without which considerations, the
sp^^l of the church is most unnatural sacrilege.

9. Quere. Whether the Ministers of this Realm, of what calling so ever now in
place, allowed by the laws and order of this Realm, be lawful ministers: and
whether their administration, and ecclesiastical actions be lawful or
effectual, or no.

Answer. This ninth article, for ought that I see, is all one with the fourth
10. Quere. Wheither at a marriage it is not convenient to have a Communion and
convenient for the new married persons to communicate: and at a funeral to have
a sermon, or no.

Answer. I would have communions at such times, as the church appoints. In
which days if there be a marriage, it is meet the parties there commucicate.
For funeral sermons, they may be used: yet if there be in them any
inconveniencie, that the Church be hurt or offended, being at an extraordinary
time, they should be left.

11. Quere. Whether it is lawful for any man to preach, but he that is a
pastout: and he only to preach to his own flock or that any man may preach
without a license, or no.

Answer. Of licenses to preach.
None may preach but a Pastor or Doctor, and being requested upon just
occasion, he may preach out of his parish. But in his own flock if he have no
license to preach, sure he has no license to be a pasier.

12. Quere. Whether it be better and more agreeable to the Gods word, and more
convenient for the profit of Gods Church, that aprescript order of Common
prayer be used, or that every Minister pray publicly, as his own spirit shall
direct him, or no.

Answer. An ordinary prayer is very aecessary, that it may be made familier to
the people: but as every parish shall have several occation, so it is
necessary that the Minister be wise to pray in the congregation, for the
necessaties of his people.

13. Quere Whether that Children of such as be perfect papists, are to be
baptized: and whether insants are within the compass of Gods covenant, and
have faith, or no.

Answer. If the parents be obstinate, and (as they are here termed) perfect
papists, wanting nothing of all that spiritual wickedness and so accounted of
the church, then their children are not to be admitted unto the Sacraments of
the Church, Papish children not to be baptized.
although we do not remove them from the election of God. But if they be not
cast out of the church, we may admit their children not as having faith which
comes by hearing, but as being by grace in the covenat, I am their God and
the God of their seed.

14. Quere. Whether any ecclefiasticall person, may have more ecclesiastical
livings, than one, or no.

Answer. As the necestatie of the man requires, or the gists of God an mo^e
abundant, whereby through great resort they are the more charged: so they ought
to be more liberally maintained. But as for one man to have many Personages,
where he cannot possibly be resident, it is great wickedness And seeing Christ
has purchased his people with his own blood, whosoever does so enjoy them,
they consider little, the exhortation of Saint Paul: Of none nesidents.
Attend unto the flock of Christ, of which the holy ghost has made you
everseers, Act. 20. ver. 28. And therefore I humbly beseech the high Court of
Parliament to see it reformed;

15. Quere. Whether that one may be a Minister that has no peculiar flock
assigned unto him, and whether an ecclesiastical person may exercise a civil
function, or no.

Answer. A Minister can be no more without a charge, the^ a King without a
Kingdom, for exercising civil government, I say, Neme militans implicatur
vitae negotiis, ut ei qui se in militiam detegit, placeat, 2 Timot. 2. ver. 4.
And I am sure what person soever seeks after it, it is for want of that love,
that should most abound: especialy since we see our Savior Christ refused to be
a judge, or any medler in divition of lands, though he were required, Luke. 12.
ver. 13. yet will I not judge any other, who upon special occation in another
copye it is, might for a time do good unto his Country by means of entreaty
seeking to do good to his brother, does take that charg also upon him.

16. Quere. Whether all the Commandments of God, and of the Apostles are
needful for salvation, or no.

Answer. All the commandments given without limitt of person, place, or time,
are necessary for all men, ever to be observed, as all other were, to those to
whom they were given. And as Christ was a Minister, not of earthly things, but
of heavenly: so he gave no commandment but touching salvation. So that the
breach of the least of them (if it be imputed to us) has a just recompense of
eternal death.

17. Quere. Whether the King of England has authority over the Ecclesiastical
state, and in Ecclesiastical matters as well as over the civil state or no?

Ans. Let every soul be subjest to the higher powers and as Chysostome adds,
whether he be an Apostle, or Evangelist, or Prophet, or whosoever. This
subjection is not against his calling. Princes have full authority over all
Ecclesiastical and civil persons, and equally over both to punish the
offenders or to give praise to the well doers. Only this is the difference in
the soveraignity over both. First the Common wealth can not be without the
Magistrate, for it is noted a most horrible confusion when every man may do
what he list. Iud. 17. ver. 6. But if all Magistrates should fall away from the
Church, yet must we still hold this Article of our faith, I do believe the
Catholic Church: for Christ, and not: he Christian Magistrate, is the life and
head of it. Again, in in the common wealth the Prince makes or repealeth
laws, as he thinks the sasety of his estate and benefit of his people do
most require. But in the Church there is no law giver but Christ Jesus, James.
4. ver. 12. The Prince must desend the faith that he has taught, and reward
the good works that he has commanded, and see whatsoever he shall establish
by authority, be (...) sured by the rule that he has given, 1. Cor. 10. ver.
23. and 1. (...) 40. Philip. 4. ver. 9.

For God has made the King, though he were as great as an Angel, (...)
servant in his Church: Princes servants in the church.
in which respect the Prophet David preserreth it before all the glory of the
World to be but a door keeper in the house of the Lord, Psalm. 84.10. And when
the Lord himself describes the excellent (...) most noble Kings, he speaks
thus to his Church: They shall worship th^^, with their faces bowed to the
earth, and lick up the dust under why feate, Esa. 49. ver. 23. So this
conclusion is plain. The Prince rules in the (...) Wealth by law, and in the
Church of God sees that all be ruled of the Lord.

18. Quere. Whether the King of England be chief governor under Christ, over
the whole church and State Ecclesiastical in this Realm, or (...) Member of
the same, and whether the Church of England, may be established without a
Magistrate or no?

Ans. This is answered in the 17. Quere.

19. Quere. Whether the King of England be bound to observe the judi^^all laws
of Moses, concerning the punishment and remitting of criminal o^^^^ces, or no?

Ans. Of this we be most sure, that the Law of Moses unto the people of
Israel, was an absolute pattern of most perfect juftice, so that all laws
ought to be made according to the equity of them, in such proportion of
justice, a may best be applied to the country, where they are to be
established. For me to define of all particular causes, I dare not. Only this
I can say of that I read, because God has charged, Ye shall take no
recompense for the life of the murderer, Nomb. 35.32. And because God, both by
the law of nature, Genesis 38.24. Equity of Moses law
And by the Law of Moses has jvdged the adulterer to dye, Levit. 20.10. I dare
not avouch their pardon to be lawful. Further, because in the seat of Justice,
the man is but a Minister, and the judgment is the Lords, 2. Ch^^. 19. ver. 6.
Many learned men of our time have thought, that in so plain and express
cases, no Magistrate should spare the life of the transgressour, but rather
contesse, as it is in Job. cap. 34. ver. 31. It belongs to the Lord to say I
will pardon, I will not destroy. When God shall give me more understanding, I
will speak more boldly: in the mean season, I trust, I shall pray that God
would give unto the Prince the spirit of Government, to do faithfully his
^^ty whereunto he is called.

FINIS.

