THE ACCOUNT Audited and Discounted: Or, a Vindication of the threefold
DIATRIBEE, Of 1. Superstition, 2. Will Worship, 3. Christmas Festival.
Against Doctor Hammonds manifold PARADIATRIBEES. By D. C. Preacher of the Word
at Billing-Magn. in Northamptonshire.

Ephesians. 4.15. (...), etc. But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him
in all things, which is the Head, even Christ.

London, Printed by Ralph Wood, for M. Wright, at the King Heads in the Old
Bailey. 1658.

1. The Preface of D. H. returned.
1. THat Dr. Hamond has taken great (and needless) pains, to show me the
infirm parts of my threefold Diatribe, with, and against himself, of
Superstition, Will Worship, and Festivals, (which came abroad above a
twelvemoneth before.) I am now obliged to take notice, and to design a few
days (for which he has had months) to vindicate that little David from his
great Goliath, his Voluminous Discourse; which surely needed not, had not the
strength of mine been more, then he will willingly acknowledge.

2. His two former of those three Tracts, I had never seen nor heard of, till
the time I was referred to them in his third of Festivals, Page 425. where he
sends his Reader to them, and to his Practical Catechism, for Arguments against
the Superstition, and Will worship, charged upon his Festival: And what ever
his Design was, to remove (as he says) those two charges against the Church;
and what ever the success thereof was, I know not. This I am sure of, taking
those words of Superstition and Will Worship, in the generally received sense
of most Reformed Divines and Churches, he has not freed himself, and others
his Associates, from those charges, nor at all demonstrated them to be
Calumnies. The Church therefore may be discharged of those Accusations, though
he and some other of her Sons, do justly lie as guilty under them. I desire the
Reader (as he does) that he will but calmly and indifferently review the
Treatises on both sides, and then give sentence.

3. Particular Application of general Cases or Truths (its true) does stir the
coals: and then complaints and contentions begin, when the Salt is applied to
the raw and sorer parts. For this he might have had proof enough in his own
bosom, nearer hand. For till the Charges came home to himself, rather then to
the Festival; and his own opinion and practice were brought as proofs of his
Superstition and Will Worship, in observation of his Festival, all was quiet.
But when it was said, Superstition and Will Worship are of larger latitude then
he takes them; and that by his own confession, he is concluded guilty of them,
in other senses given by him; hence I fear arise this large Account, if not to
excuse himself, yet to obscure and hide his guilt, by dissembling and
concealing that particular charge, and all along answering nothing to it. As
for me, that which engaged me in this contest, was, not only my Tract of the
Sabbath, but a former Discourse of Superstition (with respect to Places) which
was abroad, I believe before the former two Treatises of the Doctors, and
inconsistent with his principles. And indeed, these three Tracts of his, by me
singled out from the rest, have such Affinity or Consanguinity each with other,
that I could not well deal with the last, but I must take in both the other.
For it is in vain to go about to fasten Superstition and Will Worship upon his
observation of his Festival, till we are agreed what those two are. It is not
difficult for me to reconcile the Festival, with my Grounds for the Christian
Sabbath, one in a week, by the fourth Commandment. For I can and do allow upon
just occasions, a Day, or Days to be set apart by Superior Powers, with due
Cautions; as is held out, both in Sab. Rediv. and in page 198. of my last
Diatribe: yet cannot but abhor the Superstition and Will Worship introduced
into his Festival, together with the Riot thereon attending.

4. And this my sincere endeavor might have been for good, had it met with a
spirit willing to yield to truth discovered. For the Doctor (I desire he may
take notice of it) is by some of his own friends and admirers, held to have
pelidae stomachum, cedere nescii: must and will (say they) have the last word.
And this I observe in this Account, when he is forced by better Reason to
relinquish some notions as not consonant to truth of Scriptures; he does it so
favorably to himself, as that there appears some reluctance of spirit to
acknowledge himself mistaken; I may give instances hereafter. For my part; I
did but with a spirit of Meekness (with all due respects to his worth and
person) show him some doubts and difficulties, and (as I thought) Weaknesses in
his Discourses, with my Reasons rendered thereunto: (which his Alex:
Aphrodisaeus would have taken for a great favor and honor) and he does not
only slight my person, calling me commonly, the Diatribist; but my pains also,
and professes, p. 4. n. 2.
[He is not by all my Diatribe so instructed, or improved, as to discern one
real misadventure in those Discourses, and finds it impossible for him to be
edified by my Charity.] Of his Misadventures, I shall give him an account in
due time and place; this is his great Miscarriage, that he returns me hatred
and scorn for my good will; sharpness for meekness, and reproaches instead of
thanks; as shall appear hereafter.

5. As we must be careful, [not to be affrighted from our obedience to
Superiors upon every pretense of Superstition, etc.] so we must not be allured
into Superstition, etc. upon every pretense of disobedience to Superiors: This
latter is of greatest concernment, because no Authority can justify us in the
least corruption of the Worship of God; God himself having severely threatened
such, as under pretense of Love to him, 2. Commandment
and his service, do indeed hate him, by introducing Worship to him, which he
never commanded. As for those things [ of a more sublime consideration, (as he
speaks) the Free-will-offerings, well becoming a Christian to bring to Christ,
and rewardable in an high degree, such as the highest Charities, Devotions, and
most heroical Christian practices] we shall be far from degrading or defaming
them, when they are clearly discovered and rightly distinguished. But how the
Doctor insinuates secretly an opinion of his Adversaries, (which is utterly
false, and the (...), all along his discourse) [That they conclude every thing
to be criminous, which is not necessary; and all uncommanded practices
unlawful,] which they say only of uncommanded Worship.

6. My impartiality in examining what he wrote, was not with respect to his
person, but to the Truth it self, which I thought I saw much obscured, if not
oppressed by him. My end was the same with his, [The seasonable checking and
reformation of some Vices (viz. Superstition and Will Worship) or the
confirmation and increase of Virtue, to the glory of God, etc.]

7. But I dare not be so confident, as he is, to boast in a manner, [That this
has been the only aim of all hitherto published by him; and so fully satisfied
in himself thereof, that he doubts not to approve it to any that can make
question of it.] What? even to God himself? Is not the heart deceitful above
all things? Did not Paul think he aimed at Gods glory in persecuting the Truth?
Do not the Advocates of Rome confidently pretend the same end, with him, in
propagating their Errors and Superstitions? Is not the Doctor himself a man,
animal gloriae? Does not much learning and knowledge puff up? and cause the
owners to start up new marks of self-reputation and vainglory? But this I can
freely grant, [That in such Doctrines (as these before us) which have immediate
influence upon practice, it is charity to endeavor the disabusing of all, and
not to suffer any fruitful and noxious Error upon my neighbor,] which (if my
heart deceive me not) was one ground of my undertaking his three Treatises.

8. As for his Discourse of Infant Baptism, both what he has written, and what
he intends to publish more, I shall wish it good speed: but I fear it will
little prevail with his adversary, who is tenacious of Scripture evidence, but
little moved by Customs of the Church, either Jewish or Christian. And his way
of proving it ( waving the Scripture grounds, whence it may fairly be deduced)
may tend to weaken those Arguments of Scripture, and in the end, may serve to
strengthen Traditions wherein the Scripture is silent. And this, I fear, was
the Doctors Design in his first Quaere for Resolving Controversies.

9 He does very well to wish the Reader [the ease of a spectator, that it may
be his lot to live peaceably and quietly with all men.] But I am sure this will
not be long of him, who does what he can, to give some of his Readers (my self
and some others) the labor of some months, if not years, (if our Replies be
prolonged to the measure of his Answers) wherein how ambitious soever they be
of Peace, it is violently wrested from them, by his drawing out the Saw of
Contention by multitude of words.

10. That he has fortified himself (with what patience I know not) for the
present undertaking, is visible enough, by the bulk of his Book, which will
make it but little supportable to his Readers: For though he have not
transcribed the several Sections of my Diatribe's, (which had been equal and
fair to have done) but rather omits to take notice several times of four or
five leaves together, where it was too hot or too heavy; yet has he poured out
a flood of words (as the Sepia her inbie stuff to delude the Fisherman) to
drown a poor little Tract of fourteen, with well nigh forty sheets of paper. If
I should hold proportion in my Reply, the volume will swell so big, that we may
write upon it, Quis legethaec? Only this may be added; That (as if he wanted
employment to set himself on work, and to trouble his Reader) he catches at
every little oversight, See his Superst. sect. 32. intention, or, extention.
whether of my self or the Printers: as for instance, sometimes he complains of
Figures, too many or too few; sometimes the mistake of a Letter, Intention for
Intension, etc. whereof I shall give him an account in due time, by showing the
same mistakes in his own; saying only now, It becomes not so grave a Doctor to
catch flies, having so much greater work to do.

11. Lastly, This I thought good to give the Reader notice of, That the Doctor
has obscured the business, by a new obstruse method of answering, both
concealing my particular Sections, which he might easily have followed (...),
as I did his; and also devising a new method of Chapters, Sections, Numbers;
that his Reader must needs be put to much trouble to find out mine, and more
to compare them with his: Whereas, if he had followed me, Section by Section,
as I did him, every thing had been visible in its place, and easier to judge
of. I shall not trouble the Reader to go seek for Chapter, Section, Number, in
his discourse, but only point him to the page, and number, where he may
readily find what is excepted to. Only first, I am engaged to follow him in
his Chapter that concerns my Title Page, (for that has not escaped his
censure) and then that which takes notice of my Preface; and with all due speed
to come to his Animadversions upon my particular Diatribe's.

2. Of my Title pages.
1. HE spoke before (in his Preface) of my little partiality in examining his
Tracts: page 1. n. 1.
but himself is more scrupulous in examining my very Title Pages; and the
Scriptures themselves, by me prefixed, are called to Account, for standing
there; especially that of Col. 2.4, 8. as intended for an Antidote against that
Philosophy, etc. which Paul forewarns men there to take heed of. To which I
shall only say, that I see no reason, why it might not be as lawful for me to
set this Scripture before my Tract of Superstition, as for him to set the very
same Scripture after his Tract of Superstition; for so it is, [Take heed that
no man deceive you with vain words,] no doubt intended for a Antidote against
Philosophy, etc. And what unkindness to, Number. 2.
and jealousy of Philosophy, I showed therein, was the very same, which
himself showed in his; yea, [the same which Saint Paul then had amongst his
Colosians.] Not, I suppose, the Gnostics Divinity (who were not then hatched)
but that Philosophy (...), of False Apostles, risen newly out of the Sects of
Philosophers, whom the Devil stirred up to corrupt Religion, with partly
Phylosophycal notions, and partly Judaical genealogies, and Fables; as almost
all Interpreters, besides himself, do understand those texts by him cited: n. 3
page 2.
And how conveniently this text was accommodated to any, to all my discourses,
will be discerned by my answer to his 4 questions. 1. The text had no relation
to Gnostick principles; and therefore none of theirs, are charged upon any of
his Tracts: But enticing words, and subtle persuasions, with Phylosophycal
notions and reasons (wherewith (many say) the Doctor is as well furnished, as
any man) may there be found. 2. Thereupon it is not charged upon him, [as
Heretical, or Heathenish, or as Gnosticisme, to maintain the celebration of
Christ's Nativity, to have nothing criminous in it.] But this is charged upon
him, [To make that day more holy, and a part of worship] (as some, with the
Doctor have done, and is not yet denied in all this discourse of his) is justly
censurable as criminous, either under the Head of Superstition, or
Will Worship, or both. 3. No blameless Institutions of the Church (no not of
Rome it self) are charged by any (that I know) for Despoiling of Christians, or
Sacriledges, keeping them within Scripture bounds: But when they are made parts
of worship, imposed as necessary, held as efficacious, as Gods own
Ordidinances, or more strictly exacted than Divine precepts, etc. Then they
will prove to be Despoilings of Christians, and sacrilegious; being but
Tradition of men, in opposition to (...), as the Apostle speaks. 4. Rational,
probable, demonstrative discourse, is not in the least averred to be deceit and
beguiling, (which the Doctor uncharitably would have his Reader believe of me,
not without a secret scorn) But then only (as the Apostle intended it) when
Reason takes upon her to dispute against Religion, in Doctrine or worship, upon
Phylosophycal notions, and carnal principles. And thus his four questions are
answered; n. 4.
and now I hope, I am (with his leave) [qualified to justify the
charitableness of my Title Page, and the propriety of my select Scripture] and
I think no Reader found to question either of them.

2. Page 3. n. 1
The like exceptions are taken to the Scritures, put in the Title Pages of the
other Tracts, and the Latin sentences added thereunto: As first, that of
Matthew. 15.8, 9. is questioned, as not commodiously affixt to the Tract of
Will Worship; because [it speaks of their urging some inventions of their own,
as under obligation by Divine precept, etc.] Which whether they did or no, is
under debate, (the contrary rather appearing in the Text being called, the
Commandments of men, and Traditions of the Elders) and falls under
consideration more fully hereafter. This we are sure of, they made those
Inventions of men, Parts of the Worship of God; for that is charged expressly
upon them; [In vain do they worship me, etc.] And in this respect, this text is
commodiously affixt to the Tract of Will Worship. Secondly, Gal. 4.9, 10. is
quarelled for standing before the Discourse of Christmas: [being restrained to
Judaical Sabbaths and Feasts, etc. and no more applyable to the prejudice of
the yearly Feast of the Nativity, then to the weekly of his Resurrection.] The
text is not restrained only to Judaical days, but extends to any days made
holy by men, and parts of worship, as those Judaical Feasts, for certain were.
Neither can nor will the Doctor say, the observation of those Feasts, is
absolutely unlawful and forbidden by that Text; as matters of Order, or Times
of worship, (for then how can be justify his Easter, etc.) but only as they
are accounted parts of worship, now abolished. But welfare his Good will to
the Lords day! From the beginning to the end of his Discourse he is very
careful to levil and equal the weekly Sabbath, the Lords day, with his
Festivals; when he confesses a palpable difference, that the Lords day is of
Apostolical (and so, Divine) institution; when his Christmas, is but An
Ecclesiastical constitution, page 294. n. 8. n. 3.
Ecclesiastical. Thirdly, the Latin sentences cannot escape his Inquisition:
yet he is forced to dismiss them, with a full concession of the main question
between us: For thus he professes; [We design no other worship of God upon
Christmas day, but such as we are sure he has commanded at all times, that of
prayer and thanksgiving, etc. and that the incarnation of Christ was a
competent reason to found the custom of commemorating of it, after this
manner.] And why should we not now shake hands and agree? If this were all, the
controversy were ended. For we have granted often, that any day, may upon just
occasions, be set apart, and employed in prayers and thanksgivings, etc. Will
this satisfy the Doctor, I doubt not. For first, this were to villifie and
depress his Christmas Festival, to any common day, when prayers and
thanksgivings are tendered. 2. This confutes himself, who makes and finds other
worship of God upon that day; making it an Oblation to Christ, an Holy day, a
part of worship, as great a sin to labor upon it, as on the Lords day, etc. as
was fully charged upon him in that Diatribe: which how he will avoid, or rather
evade, we shall take notice hereafter. This is the sum of what he has said to
my Title Pages: only he forgot to take notice of one particular; See Willw. S.
1. the Reverend and learned Doctor.
viz. my respective Titles given to himself, [The Reverend and learned Doctor
Hammond. Doctor Hammond, The Doctor all along, not one word or title
unbeseeming him to receive, or me to give.] But after once or twice giving me
my Name, his common Title is, (which some think has a little scorn in it) The
Diatribist: but for my part, This Diatribist. often.
I pass not, what he calls me; I will not retaliate, by calling Him, as I
might, The Accountant, etc. but shall with due respects, give him rather strong
reason, then the least ill, or unbecoming language.

3. Of my Preface.
MY Preface, friendly and lovingly intended, to show him the grounds of his
mistakes, is not very friendly taken, but rejected, either as false or useless;
and for [a brief return to it I am beseeched to reserve my discourse of causes,
p. 4. n. 2.
till the effects shall be so visible as to call for it.] I am sorry that I
have spent so much labor and love in vain. My good will however was to be
accepted, and acknowledged. I took it for granted, as well as proved, (and so
others think) that I had showed him his Diseases and Mistakes, in the Tracts
themselves. My method perhaps was not so proper to show the causes in a
Preface, which might better have come in a Postscript, when the Disease was
discovered. Let him forgive me this wrong, and when he is convinced of his
mistakes, then consider, whether I have not hit upon the causes thereof. That
he [should not discern one misadventure in those discourses, is to me very
strange; when I can show his acknowledgments, of four at least; 1. He had said,
Superst. s. 12. [That Festus had put Jesus under the vulgar notion of a (...),
or dead Heroes, so meaning the worship of him, by (...)] which being charged by
me, as a criticisme strained; he answers, p. 63. n. 7. I shall not, because I
need not make it a controversy with any: yet pretends to give a reason to
incline him to that sense, Will-wor. sect. 7.
but how unsufficient it is, see my Animadversion upon that p. 63. n. 7.2. He
rendered (...), in Col. 2.23. by [some real matter of Piety in them, or some
what of Piety in them] (which sense he often in this Account, would gladly fix
upon it.) But fairly retracts it as false, (that it is but a show of wisdom,
not a reality) p. 111. 10. and often elsewhere, see p. 117. n. 10. and my Notes
upon that place. 3 He had said, Will-wor. s. 27. [The main crime that defamed
the Pharisees, was their proud despising of other men.] But here p. 171. n. 4.
he says, [Hypocrisie was the Pharisees chief crime, and the fuel to their
pride.] 4. Another mistake charged on him was, his changing the word (...),
into (...). This he acknowledges to be his presumption, and desires my pardon.
p. 121. h. 20. I might add another of his glosses, of (...), to be meant of
Paul's superstition, not of the Jews; p. 63. n. 6. Yet in part, though faintly,
retracted, p. 65. n. 10. These are enough to conclude that he might, if he
would have seen more then one misadventure in those discourses: But who so
sick, as he that thinks, and says, he is well: such a patient will rather
complain his Physician does him wrong then acknowledge his sickness. Just so
the Doctor deals with me; ostrado illi lutum, aspergit me luto. I labor to
show him his mistakes, and he charges me with four at least, and calls them no
less then Injustices: which are these, First, n. 3.
[That I compare Superstition and Will Worship (the subjects of his discourses)
with Heresy; when as superstition, the worshipping of Demons, is worse then
heresy, etc.] I shall only remind him, that I was then speaking of
Superstition in general, and in the worst sense; and that is confessed to be as
bad, yea, worse then Heresy: yet surely, as some superstition is not so sad,
as some heresy; so some heresies are as bad as the worst of superstition; As
the Arian and Socinian error against the Deity of Jesus Christ, will not be
denied, I think, to be as bad, as worshipping of a Demon. Gods truth, is
equally as dear to him, as his worship; and the violation of them equally
criminous. How, and why, Superstition, and Will Worship, are as abominable to
God, as profaneness (and I may add, as heresy,) Superst. Superst. Preface.
I have elsewhere discovered, to which I refer the Reader. But I did not charge
these crimes upon our Church, or upon her Rites and Festivals, as they were
intended by Her, (though the Doctor would infuse this opinion of me into his
Reader.) I said [Some men account them rather their virtues, then their
crimes,] not our Church: I meant it of Papists first, and then of some of her
Sons, who outran and dishonored their Mother, by corrupting her Doctrine, on
the one side, and her Rites and Ceremonies on the other; making them parts of
worship, with a stricter observance, then of the Institutions of Christ, or his
Apostles, etc. It is therefore a first Injustice in him, to tax me, [for
stiling uncommanded Rites or Festivals, with the name of Superstitions: or
accusing them to be as bad as heresy.] And to say, [That Will Worship, in that
one place where it is used, has no manner of ill, but good character set upon
it,] is now nothing but a begging of the question, as well as contrary to the
Judgment of most and best Interpreters as shall appear hereafter. Yea though
joined with humility in that place, where Humility (in the sense there) is by
them held as abominable, as pride and heresy is.

Secondly, p. 5. n. 4.
the next Injustice is found in my parenthesis, (some men account these their
virtues, rather then crimes) [which if applied to him, or any Prostant living,
is very unkind and unprovoked, etc.] But this charge is easily removed; I speak
still indefinitely of Superstition and Will Worship, in the worst sense; naming
neither him, nor any Protestant living: yet sure of this, that besides Papists,
some men, and Protestants do count that devotion their virtue, which other men
(taking it for superstition, etc. in the worst sense) do account their crimes;
which how it can be made good, shall be considered hereafter. In the mean time,
this is his second Injustice, to think I shall apply that to him, which I
intended only to the guilty; which now he discovers.

Thirdly, n. 5.
my next Injustice is, [That I have no where demonstrated Will Worship, to be
as criminal as Heresy.] To which I say, there is but a little difference
between Superstition and Will Worship; the latter, in the bad sense,
(acknowledged by the Doctor himself, page 96. n. 6.) being but a species of the
former: If Superstition be (as it is) demonstrated to be as criminal as
heresy, Will Worship will partake with it in that viciosity. I have no more to
say to this section and number, n. 5.
but to note a figure of one, (1.) without a second; which after he taxes me
for.

Fourthly, p. 6. n. 1.
another mistake is, that I charge him to affirm, [That a man cannot be too
Religious in intension, or degree, or extension and number of Ceremonies, Of
Superst.
etc.] First, for intension; this he affirms, sect. 33. [I shall without
scruple deny, that there is any such thing as Nimiety or excess in Religion;
there is no possibility of being religious, in too high a degree: and this no
man can deny, who knows that all his faults are omissions and defects, but
never excesses of Piety or Religion;] this he adds to justify what he had
said before. But first, does he not expressly confess the charge? He denies any
such thing as Nimiety or excess in Religion, in regard of Intension, or degree:
how then was I mistaken in charging him with it? 2. His reason rendered is as
strange; [Because all our faults are omissions and defects, not excesses of
Piety.] Does not the Doctor prevaricate here? First, by varying the words, from
(in Religion) to (of Religion,) There may be excess in Religion, (which yet he
denies) though speaking properly, there is no excess of Religion; so the great
Schoolman explains himself; [Not that in true construction, a man can give God
too much, but rather too little, in not giving him what he requires.] Yet he
says, [Superstition is a vice contrary to Religion in the excess,] that is, an
excess in Religion. Then secondly, in saying, [all our faults are omissions and
defects, not excesses of Religion.] For if he acknowledge any superstition in
Religion at all, that must be an excess in Religion; or else what differs
superstition from no Religion, or profaneness, which is a defect? And again, to
make all our faults (in Religion) to be omissions, he denies any sins of
commission in the first Table: The extremes are on our sides, superstition; on
the other, irreligion. p. 16. n. 28.
and so the old distinction is lost: is there no difference, between
Polytheisme, having many Gods, and Atheism, in having none? are both these
defects and omissions in Religion? and so of the other Commandments. In a word,
is it not an ordinary English phrase, to express an excess in any thing we
overdo, to say, Such a man is too just, too wise, too frugal, etc. and why not
also too religious, when a man will tender more worship to God then he
requires. This is but a Logomachie, and we shall meet with it again.

But as if he wanted work, n. 3.
and had measured the former objection, he starts another, which I thought not
on, from Eccles. 7.16. and gives his answer, or rather his own gloss, [Be not
righteous over much, be not over much wicked: The answer is obvious, the former
words are the worldlings objection, taking that for excess of duty which brings
any damage; and is answered in the other words; The fears and, hence, impious
practices of worldlings, are the readier path to ruine] There are other senses
given of these words, by others, and as obvious as this of the Doctors; this
for one; [Be not righteous over much, neither make thy self over wise (wiser
then God) in making more Commandments, or duties, then God has made: Be not
over wicked neither be thou foolish; to make fewer Commandments, or lesser
number of duties then God has made; both ways thou do but hasten thy own
destruction.] The Doctor came very near this exposition, when page 16. n. 26.
he glossed that text of Deuteronomy. 4.2. forbidding all Additions to the word; thus
[the meaning is most evident, That they were to perform uniform obedience to
God; not to make any change in Gods Commands, either to pretend more liberties,
or fewer obligations: or again, more obligations, and fewer liberties to be
delivered them by God, etc.] But let him abound in, and hug his own sense; yet
this advantage I make of it, that it need not here be strange, to say, Too
Religious, or Religious overmuch; when the Scripture uses the parallel phrase,
of righteous over much, and over wise, etc.

For extension, p. 7. n. 5.
or number of Ceremonies, the Doctor, is not so peremptory and express, to deny
excess therein; but gives his vote, [That they be few and wholesome.] And then
adds, [That not the Rites, but only the multitude of them is superstitious:]
But does he not again deny this, when he says; [If they be wholesome tending to
edification, then there is little reason to accuse them of excess, etc.]
Multitude of Ceremonies, if wholesome, are no excess, nor superstitious: yet I
said, even the multitude of Ceremonies, are prejudicial to the simplicity of
Gospel worship; and so Superstitious; to which he says nothing here nor there.
Rites or Circumstances, are absolutely necessary to Religion. p. 7. n. 5.
Ceremonies only. n. 6. Circumstance of time, or place, or gesture. p. 99. n.
15. Ceremonies, and unco^manded worship. p. 36. n 12. which seems to make
Ceremonies, worship.


But before we go any further, it will be requisite, that we clearly
understand, what the Doctor means by Ceremonies, for he is confused enough in
this whole discourse; sometimes he speaks of Ceremonies, sometimes Rites and
Ceremonies; otherwhere Circumstances and Ceremonies, and sometimes
Circumstances alone, as if he promisouously used them all for the same thing:
now Circumstances of worship, some time, some place, etc. are absolutely
necessary to Religion; so he of Superst. s. 34. So I said, Superst. s. 28. and
therein we are agreed: But for Rites and Ceremonies, to be brought into the
worship of God (besides what are commanded) there is no necessity; and it is
controverted, he knows whether any such may be instituted, and added in the
worship of God: There is usually a difference put by Divines betwixt Rites and
Ceremonies on the one side, and Circumstances in Religion on the other. I
desire therefore to know, what the Doctor means by Rites or Ceremonies; if the
same with Circumstances, there is nothing more to be said, but that the Doctor
is confused and ambiguous: if distinct, then let him tell us, 1. What he
intends by Rites and Ceremonies, giving the definition of them; 2. Whether
there be any distinction of Ceremonies in Religion, of which some are lawful,
others unlawful. For the first, a Ceremony has generally by all Religions,
been held to be an external part of Religion; thus among heathens the
School-man tells us, Aq. 12. q. 99. a. 3. Cicero: speaking of Religion, says,
Cultum Ceremoniamque offert. Ib. as all one. In Exodus Tom. 1 p. 148.
Ceremoniae vocatur, quasi munia, i. e. dona cereris: ad significandum cultum
divinum apud Latinos. Amongst the Jews, Ceremonies were certainly parts of the
worship of God. And amongst Papists, they are so esteemed. Hence that
definition of Tostatus; [A Ceremony is a certain observation, or special manner
of worshipping God determined by the sole command of the Lawgiver;] And that
of Salmeron the Jesuit is to the same purpose, Ritus colendi Deum: A Rite of
worshipping God; cited p. 147. n. 24. In this sense, a Ceremony or Rite, and a
necessary Circumstance in Religion, are at a vast difference; and should the
Doctor take it in the ordinary sense, he will be confuted by himself, p. 11. n.
11. and p. 12. n. 13. unless he can help himself, by some distinction; De
effect. Sacr. l. 2. c. 29.
Bellarmine and his fellows, will help him to one; [Ceremonies are either
natural, or instituted; natural, as to look up to heaven, to lift up our hands,
and to bow our knees, when we pray unto God.] These the Doctor acknowledges,
when he speaks of significant Ceremonies: Superst. s. 36. [When a Ceremony
naturally signifies the thing I am about, and properly flows from it.] Of
such there is no question between us. Instituted Ceremonies, are such, as are
determined by the sole command of the Lawgiver: as Tostatus said before. Upon
which account, Ceremonies will again be distinguished, by the Authors, the
Lawgivers; that is, they are instituted, either by God, or the Church. Those
of Gods Institution, are lawful and necessary; as those appointed the Jews, and
our Sacraments, which may be called Ceremonies, and fall under the definition
given, as Rites, or Modes, of worshipping God, in the Gospel. And these are
Substantial parts of worship; as well as Moral worship is: For it must be
remembered, that the worship of God is either Moral, (which is the same with
Natural worship,) such as, to Love, Hope, Trust, Fear God, etc. or Ceremonial,
(which is the same, with instituted worship. Vbi supra.
The School-man said well, Ordinatur homo in Deum, etc. [Man is ordered toward
God, not only by the inward acts of his soul, (as those before) but also by
some exterior works, by which he professes his service of God; and those works
are said to belong to the worship of God; which worship is called a Ceremony,
etc.] Now of such Ceremonies, as are instituted by God, there is no
controversy: The question then will come to this issue, whether the Church may
institute any Ceremonies in Religion: which the Doctor so much declined to
speak to, when it was by me twice propounded: once in my Preface, and again of
Fest: but hither he must come, will he, nill he; for of Ceremonies the
judgment of the Romish party is this, [That all Ceremonies are superstitious,
which are not of divine Authority, either immediately, or mediately.] Thus the
Jesuit Salmeron; Omnis ritus colendi Deum, qui a Deo non est, nec a Spiritu
Sancto per Ecclesiam traditus, etc. [Every Rite of worshipping God, that is not
delivered from God, nor from the holy Ghost by the Church, but is invented by
the will of man, is superstitious.] Now if we take out but those words, (by the
Church) which is the very question betwixt them and Protestant Divines, betwixt
the Doctor and me; whether the Church has such authority to institute
Ceremonies: unless the Doctor will agree with them, that the Institutions of
the Church are from the Holy Ghost, and Divine; (which yet he has not
asserted, though he comes very near it, as we shall hear below) the former part
of those words, will conclude him guilty of Superstition, in the judgment of a
Jesuit; [Every Rite of worshipping God, that is not delivered from God, but
invented by the will of man, is superstitious.] Let the Doctor himself then
state the question: p. 99. n. 5. The controversy belongs only, to the
Circumstances of time, place gesture, of the Churches appointing or voluntary
observing.
thus he does it; p. 85. n. 7. [Whether every devised Rite or Ceremony, not
commanded by God, be superstitious.] The affirmative whereof, a Jesuit has
asserted for me; and unless the Doctor equivocate in the words, Ceremony or
Rite, and say, he understands it of a Circumstance only, he cannot possibly
escape the guilt of Superstition. And this, I foresee will be the only
Loophole whereout he will creep; either making all Ceremonies but Circumstances
of worship: or all Circumstances of worship, to be Ceremonies: partly because
it is true, that some in themselves considered, Circumstances, were by God made
also Ceremonies, or part of their Ceremonial worship, as the Temple, and
Festivals; and partly because I find him thus evading hereafter, p. 87. n. 13.
[The time or place, when instituted by God himself, is as truly a Circumstance
of worship, as when instituted by man, etc.] Of which more in it is place: at
present I say, Time and Place in their own nature, are but mere Circumstances,
it is the Institution of God that makes them Ceremonies, or Ceremonial worship;
but I think the Doctor will not say so of the Institutions of the Church; or if
he do, he will be self-confuted: grant them, that some Ceremonies are also
Circumstances of worship; yet are not all Circumstances, also Ceremonies; which
they must be, if the Doctor take them both for the same thing; and this
discovers his Ambiguities, Equivocation, and confusion in the several terms, by
him used, of Rites, Ceremonies, Circumstances, as Synonyma's in this discourse.
A second miscarriage here is, that he takes for granted by his Adversaries, [
That the use of Ceremonies when they are Significative, may be allowed among
Christians.] For so he says; p. 7. n. 5.
[ If the Disputers will but yield this, that even when they are significative,
the use of Ceremonies may be allowed among Christians, I shall then give my
vote, that they be paucae and salubres, etc.] Which he knows, or may know, they
peremptorily deny; except in such cases, as I expressed; sect. 29. of
Superstition: To which the Doctor says just nothing, having so fair an
occasion offered him. And if he take the word Ceremony, for a Rite of
worshipping God, that is in the ordinary language of Divines, for a part of
worship; as any one instituted by men, will prove a Nimiety, Excess and
Superstition, (and not the multitude only, as he often asserts) so in that
notion, by a part of worship, himself has renounced every Ceremony of man's
devising and adding; 3. n. 6.
By granting they ought to be few, one would think he granted, there may be too
many Ceremonies in a Church (in Religion) and then an excess in Religion, and
so the observers too Religious: [No, (says be) this is no way a yielding a
possibility that a man may be too Religious; but when too many Ceremonies are
accompanied with inward neglects, there is not too much, but too little
Religion, etc.] And why not both? too much Religion, in multitude of
Ceremonies, (contrary to the Simplicity of Gospel worship) too little, in the
neglect of inward duties; certain it is, those many Ceremonies, are made
Religious; and are used in Religion, the worship of God; therefore the
observers are too Religious: and there may be, and is an excess in Religion; as
his insectile Animals, have too many legs, but too little blood; and so no
calumny proved; For, for want of a distinction, he hides himself in equivocal
terms; in one sense he cannot be too Religious, in another he may. 1.

To which purpose, p. 8. n. 1.
I gave a double distinction, which he calls rather a perplexing, then clearing
the way. I wonder with what eyes the Doctor looks upon other men's distinctions?
does it not seem a paradox, that a man may be too Religious, in his Service of
God, to whom all is due? needs it not an explication, or distinction to clear
it? Did not the great School-man distinguish upon this proposition, [That
Superstition, is an excess in Religion:] Is not my first the same with his, at
least in sense? A man cannot give God more worship then he deserves, but he may
give him more then he requires, and his Will is the Rule of our worship. But he
excepts [The two last members of both his distinctions are the same] and so too
much a Tautology, n. 2.
and that is a Nimietie. The Doctor was disposed to be merry and to show his
wit: but sure there is no great wisdom in this exception: For 1. Are not both
the distinctions true in themselves; considered assunder? if the former parts
of them be distinct, and not the same, (as they are not) the distinctions are
distinct and clear enough. 2. The second proceeds by way of gradation upon the
former; that worship which God requires, is either natural, and there a man can
hardly be too Religious; or Instituted, and there a man doing more then God
requires, may be too Religious: that is, [In uncommanded worship, the least
addition of worship, is too much, and such a man may be said to be too
Religious;] which are my words: is not this plain enough? The third and fourth
number are spoken to already. The next exception is, [His difference betwixt
natural and instituted worship, p. 9. n. 5.
in this respect of Nimietie, is perfectly vain and useless, etc.] I pray, why
so? is there not a difference between Natural, and Instituted worship? As also
in respect of Nimietie, that there can be no excess (or very rarely) in natural
worship, as in love, filial fear, trust in God, etc. but in Instituted there
may; a man may add worship of his own, to that which is commanded by God. But
his exceptions are useless and needless, being but a strife of words; First he
says, n. 6.
[ Prayer is as properly a branch of natural worship, as love, or fear, or
trust; being first inseparable from trust. 2. A necessary and natural means of
acknowledging Gods fullness and our wants. 3. Containing under it thansgiving,
etc.] Here are mistakes enough, For first prayer is not as properly, that is,
as fully a branch of natural worship as love, etc. For this is evident, that
there may be natural worship of love, fear, etc. where there is no use of
prayer; as in the blessed Angels and Saints: Of Super. s. 27. I say, prayer is
natural, and prescribed worship.
and besides prayer, public prayer at least, is a part of Instituted worship:
2. Hence, it is not inseparable from trust, love, etc. for they continue when
prayer shall cease: 3. Prayer and praising do also differ in themselves,
(though we usually say, praises or thanksgiving is a part of prayer) and are
not inseparable: for prayer shall cease in heaven, no need of prayer, because
want nothing, 1 Cor. 13. last.
but praises shall continue for ever, because have all things in God. 4. Faith
and Hope, are natural worship as well as (if not more then) prayer yet they are
not inseparable from love or prayer; but shall cease, (with prayer) when love
and praises shall continue for ever: the Doctor made this Exception, to take
occasion to empty his note book, and to show his Reading, for no use at all of
it otherwise, unless it were, in the close, to vent a secret jear; in these
words; [Perhaps such evidences as these (out of Naturalists) are the Philophy,
against which the Reader was to be forewarned in the Title page,] As if no body
had ever read them, or understood them but himself.

But he excepts again; p. 10. n. 7.
to show the uselesness of my distinction, [That it is as possible to exceed in
trust, in fear, in love, as in prayer.] Let him not equivocate, n. 8.
and then make this out: [Thus, he that so trusts, in God, as not to fear; he
that so fears, as not to love; n. 9.
he that so loves, as not to fear, etc. is an exceeder in trust, fear, love.] I
pray now, first, does he not grant, (what equivocally he has denied) that a
man may be too Religious, by excess in natural worship, trust, fear love. [Such
a man, is an exceeder in trust, in fear in love?] 2. Hear his reasons: [He that
so trusts in God, as not to fear him etc. is an exceeder in trust, etc.] Which
is, as if he had said; He that trusts not in God, (for such is he that fears
not God) is an exceeder in trust; and so of the rest: for this is certain, he
that fears not God, or loves not God, does not trust him; and vice versa, he
that trusts not God, etc. does not love him. These graces are inseparable in a
gracious heart, and many more. And if he speak of saving trust, true filial
fear, and love of God, there can be no Nimietie or excess in them. A man may
pretend to trust, to fear, to love God, and do none of these, in true
Interpretation: Saint John has told us, That [he that loves not his brother,
loves not God,] let him make what pretenses he please. so it is said of some
hypocrites, [They feared the Lord, and served their own Gods:] 2 Kin. 17.33.
and in the next v. 34. [ They feared not the Lord;] they feared him with a
slavish fear, v. 25. because of the Lions, but they feared him not with a
filial fear, which only deserves the name of the Fear of God: say the same of
trust, he that pretends to trust God, and fears him not, neglects means, etc.
This man presumes, but trusts not: so the Doctor, [We are wont to express it by
presuming.] But then, I pray, is not presumption, an excess of hope? as despair
is the defect; so is presumption an excess in Religion, in a part of natural
worship; as despair is the defect, in the same worship, and so a man may be
said to be too Religious. Though it be true also in another sense; those that
so pretend to trust, fear, love God, and do not; are so far from being too
Religious, that they are not Religious at all; and that is indeed a defect. What
need then all this contention about nothing, if the Doctor would but understand
my meaning, etc. The sum is this, He that in Religious worship, adds any
worship of his own devising, is too Religious; this is an excess in Religion:
And this is [ no perplexing, nor leading the Reader into Maeanders, and needs
no Oedipus] to resolve it.

Let Us hear how he will clear, p. 11. n. 11.
what I have clouded; he asks me a question; [Doth be mean in these words
(more, and addition) any new Species of worship, neither prescribed by the law
of nature, nor instituted by any positive Law of God? or does he design only
some Circumstance, or Ceremony, which is not particularly commanded of God, or
the Word, the rule of worship? as time, place, gestures, etc.] I answer
clearly, I mean it not of Circumstances named, but of new Species or parts of
worship: (I observe only how he joins Ceremony with Circumstance, which ought
not to be confounded, as I noted before.) But what then? Before he take my
answer, he runs away with this error, n. 14.
(the grand mistake of his whole book) that I mean it of Circumstances, and not
of new kinds of worship; and thereupon expatiates for many sections, to fasten
absurdities upon me, (to make me ridiculous to his Reader) which will now
revolve upon himself; as one that wilfully mistakes and perverts the question,
and fights with his own shadow: he knows, and hereafter confesses more then
once; that I profess against this sense, of the question; what absurdity and
Injustice then is this, to fasten it upon me? Yea here, n. 13. he says; [If I
mean it of Species, or sorts of worship, then he never doubted to affirm with
me, that all uncommanded worship, is an excess, if he please (an error he
should rather say) a setting up that for worship of God, which is not worship.]
Now I appeal all Divines, and indifferent Readers, whether the Doctor has not
yielded the whole, and main question between us? My whole scope and intention
being, to beat down only uncommanded worship, not uncommanded Circumstances of
worship; no nor all Rites and Ceremonies, unless they violate Scripture rules;
of which hereafter. 2. Does not the Doctor here affirm with me, that
uncommanded worship is an excess, an excess in Religion, which he before denied
so peremptorily? Let him call it, error, if he please, (there are errors in
Religion, in excess, as well as defect) this I call an excess in Religion. 3.
Yet fain he would evade all this, by saying; [Setting up that for worship of
God, which is not worship, nay, perhaps quite contrary to worship.] If it be
not worship, then indeed, it cannot be called an excess in worship: But is not
this a prevarication? Is not false worship, worship as well as true? how else
is worship distinguished (by all, and by himself) into true and false? do not
the Species (so he spoke of new sorts of worship even now) partake equally of
the nature of the genus? Indeed in true construction of God, false worship, is
no worship of him, [In vain do they worship me,] yet they worshipped though.
The Doctor may consider his Logic or Divinity here: which he often jears me
for hereafter.

But (ex abundanti) if the Doctor will understand the question, not of
Circumstances, but of Ceremonies added to the worship of God, (and thereby say
some, made sorts, or parts of worship) I have, I suppose, proved, that he, with
others, does make some Ceremonies, as Festivals, etc. not Circumstances, but
sorts and new kinds of worship; the charge whereof, he never goes about to
remove.

It will be needless now to follow him, in prosecuting his absurd inferences,
having removed the Antecedent, whence they must proceed; that I do not mean it
of Circumstances unprescited, but of uncommanded worship: yet some things
deserve to be taken notice of, and some questions answered.

As 1. For prayer; p. 12. n. 17.
[ What has the Rule of Scripture, prescribed concerning the time of prayer?
as morning and evening: and that both positively and exclusively? If so then by
the standard of this Diatribist (this Diatribist, as this Publican) David's, or
Daniels praying three times a day, must be criminous and abominable, etc.] and
so he goes on with absurdities upon absurdities: But whom do they fall upon?
but upon himself, who knows, I mean it not of Circumstances, but only of
uncommanded worship: and yet goes on to scornful language enough; [If he cannot
produce any such Scriture, then is my Censor the guilty person, the very
Dogmatizer, that teaches for Doctrines, or commandments of God, his own
Dictates; and the doing so, I cannot resist to be a Nimiety, but not of
Religion, etc.] I will not recriminate, let the Reader judge, p. 13. n. 18.
who deserves the name of Censor, or Dictator, in Religion most, the Doctor, or
I.

A second question is; [How many set days, to be consecrated to the worship of
God, for Fasting or Prayer, every week, or year, has the rule of worship
prescribed? law or Gospel? His answer to those will involve him in intricacies
enough:] I answer clearly; 1. For every week ordinarily, but one day in seven;
extraordinary are left to Christian liberty, and occasions. 2. Both by Law and
Gospel, one day in a week, By the Law, in the fourth Commandment, requiring
one, and but one in seven: and by the Gospel designing only one, the Lords
day, as an holy day, and a part of worship: all other Jewish days, being voided
by the Gospel. 3. By what words of the New Testament is the weekly observation
of the Lords day commanded? I answer, for the number one in seven, the fourth
Commandment resolves it; for the particular day, the first Apostolical
Institution; which he has often confessed to be of Divine obligation. 4. The
observing of other days, as Easter, and Pentecost, with the other Festivals,
if made parts of worship, are expressly forbidden, Gal. 4. If as Circumstances
of worship only, they are besides the question: And note this by the way, that
it is no way probable, the Apostle would cry down the Feast of the Passover, and
set up Easter, in it is stead; or Pentecost, and set up Whitsuntide; as parts of
Worship, I say, for so they are by some made and accounted. He that will
resolve these questions any otherwise, will find himself involved in
intricacies enough, as I have elsewhere showed.

His other demands, p. 14. n. 19, 20, 21.
concerning gestures in Prayer, in Fasting, in Almsgiving, what proportions or
degrees, as also, duties in the second Table, etc. they are all beside the
question; the three first, as being but Circumstances of worship; the last, as
being also no worship at all, of which our question is. But having thus
digressed, to give him satisfaction if he will take it; we now return to
consider what is said to my proofs of this proposition; [That a man may be to
Religious, or exceed in Religion.] The first is; If addition may be made to the
Rule of Religion, then a man may be too Religious: the consequence is proved,
because, Addition to the Rule, is excess in Religion: the Antecedent, from
Deuteronomy. 4.2. where all Additions to Gods Commands are forbidden: what says he to
this? He n. 22, 23.
says, I prove Idem per Idem: absurd enough if it were true; but he must be
reminded, that the question was, whether a man might be too Religious; which he
denied, and after my explication of it, by distinctions, I proved by this
argument before; which whether it be to prove idem per idem, n. 24.
let Logicians judge. As for the matter; he says, [The major is false, in
stead of clear.] If it be false, it is in his sense, and not in mine; and if
not clear, it is by his obscuring it; taking Addition to the Rule of worship,
for adding some Circumstance of worship, which I meant, for Addition of worship
it self: and he confesses, [That he indeed that introduces any new part of
Divine worship, is a presumptuous assumer, does more then be should, because
that which he should not do.] Just the same that I maintain. Let him say, [He
is too bold, that does so.] I and others say, he exceeds in Religion, and is
too Religious; presumption in the worship of God, by adding worship to it,
being an excess

But my Assumption is also questioned (upon the same willful mistake, I fear)
and my Scripture called to the bar, Deuteronomy. 4 2. [Doth he that prostrates himself
in prayer, add to the word of God? p. 15. n. 26.
then sure, he that walks in the garden does so too, etc.] How often shall he be
told, we speak of adding uncommanded worship, not of observing Circumstances of
time, place, gestures, in commanded worship: But let us hear his learned gloss
upon this Scripture. [The meaning is most evident that they were to perform
uniform obedience to God, not to make any change in Gods commands, p. 16. n. 26.
either to pretend more liberties or fewer obligations; or again more
obligations and fewer liberties: but to set themselves humbly to the
performance of his precepts.] That is, his precepts concerning his worship (as
well as other duties of common life.) That is, (if I might gloss it) neither to
add to, nor detract from his commands of worship, but to perform uniform
obedience to God, etc. which is the very thing I have so long pleaded for.

My second proof was from the School-man, who makes Religion a moral virtue,
standing between too extremes, Superstition in the excess, and Profaneness, or
no Religion, in the defect: This sure is plain and easy, but not to the
Doctor. He grants the two extremes [On the one side superstition, on the other
irreligion:] Then say I, he grants an excess in Religion, called Superstition,
etc. But see what a dust he makes to cloud the business: [ Superstition is of
two sorts, 1. The worshipping of a creature; or, 2. Giving undue worship to
God; and neither of these will serve to prove the Diatribists conclusion.]
Unhappy man I, that cannot please the Doctor in any thing. These kinds of
Superstition would serve the School-man, p. 17. n. 29.
to prove an excess in Religion, why not me? Not the first (says he) for [Then
this must be his meaning, that a man may be a The word is many Gods: any one or
more with the true.
Polytheist, a worshipper of false Gods:] Why, that is true; and he that
worships the true God, and others with him, exceeds in worship, and is too
Religious: This he should have supposed my answer, and have spoken to it: but
he leads his Reader away in a mist; saying, [ But I hope, in this sense, he
that observes the Ceremonies of the Church of England, and her Festivals, will
not be said to be (a Polytheist, he should say) too Religious.] Still the same
mistake; we are not speaking now of the Ceremonies, or circumstances of
worship; but whether a man may be too Religious: but he is very jealous of his
Festivals, lest they should be charged to be Superstitious, that makes him so
often remind them. Yet be it so; it is not Polytheisme, nor Superstition to
observe Festivalls, in the first notion, of worshipping a Creature: but may it
not prove to be Superstition, in the second of cultus illegitimus? n. 30.
[Here he will be more particular, in viewing and wieghing the words of
Aquinas, referred to by me.] And here he makes a large excursion, to trouble
his Reader, to little purpose: The question is this, [Whether unlawful (or
undue) worship tendered to the true God, be not Superstition, and so an excess
in Religion?] That it is Superstition, is proved by this, that it is made a
Species of it, by the School-man: that it is an excess, is clear, because it is
a branch of Superstition which is defined, by an excess in Religion; the sum
(he says) is this; [That Religion is a moral virtue; as being a branch of
Justice, in giving God that which belongs to him; according to some equality,
in respect of God; equality, not absolutely, because we cannot give God so much
as belongs to him; but considering what man is able to do, and what God will
accept.] All this is well enough; Religion is a moral virtue, a Branch of
Justice; which Justice, stands between two extremes, summum jus on the one
side, which is excess, and nullum jus, which is the defect: so Religion stands,
between two extremes, an excess, and a defect: But hear what he adds, [ As
for superfluity in such things as those, which belong to the worship of God,
there can be none, says Aquinas, as to the circumstance of quantity; I cannot
(says the Doctor) do too much in the worship of God, I cannot offend that way;
all the superfluity possible is in other circumstances; he names but three: 1.
Cui non debet, exhibiting worship to a creature; (that was the first kind of
Superstition.) 2. Quando non debet, at a time, when it ought not. 3. Prout non
debet, in a manner wherein it ought not.] Is not this full to my purpose? that
undue, or unlawful worship, p. 18. n. 31.
for the matter or manner, is superfluity, excess, and Superstition? [No, this
is no competent testimony, to prove his conclusion, That every thing in the
worship of God, which is not commanded by God, is too much.] But first, this is
not my conclusion; it is falsely often fathered upon me. I say not every thing in
the worship of God, (thus he varies the words, All uncommanded worship is an
excess. p. 12. n. 13.
to evade himself and asperse me) is too much; but any uncommanded worship is
too much: and to this, Aquinas testimony is full: for that he calls cultum
illegitimum, which is not by Law commanded. [ Sure (says the Doctor) every
thing (thing again) not commanded, is not presently forbidden; and so offends
not against the Prout debet, as it ought:] I say not, every thing not commanded
is forbidden; but every worship not commanded, I say again, is forbidden: and
we shall hear himself confess as much anon: whence my argument is thus
enforced; [ All worship forbidden, is unlawful, and too much, and an excess;
but all worship not commanded, is forbidden: ergo.] The Major cannot be denied,
the Minor is made good, thus at present: [ All false worship of God, is
forbidden; but all uncommanded worship, is false worship: ergo.] What the
Doctor will say to this, I know not; but shall leave it to his consideration.
For the rest in this, and next number 32. let him and Aquinas agree the matter;
enough has been said to them already.

But in my third proof from the Doctors own confession; n. 33.
I am charged first with nonsense; partly because the Printer put in (not) and
partly, because I, or he, left out (he.) Which if the Doctor had ingenuously
considered, he might have found both sense and reason also, in the words
alleged, thus: [ The Doctor grants, there may be a nimiety or excess (in
Religion) in adding In adding, in a man's adding: and so he is an exceeder, etc.
p. 19. n. 34.
to the commands of Christ, the Gospel rule, those things which belong not to
it; and so he is an exceeder in the fear and service of God.] But yet it will
not pass; [ First, (without a second) the Doctor no where uses that phrase, a
nimiety or excess of Religion.] But this is a very nicety, and strife of words:
in his very sentence, he says; such a man, is [an exceeder in the fear (put
sometimes for Religion) and service of God:] Is not that an excess of, or in
Religion? But that is not all, we shall have the words ere long: n. 35.
[This fear of some thing which he fancies to come from God, when it does not,
is an excessive fear, more then Religion suggests to him; and yet the
unhappiness is, this interposeth it self in Religion.] Mark, an excessive fear
in Religion: but enough of such trifles. A greater matter then this, is; [That
fear, neither is excess of Religion, nor indeed excess of fear, or of service
of God; but the meaning is this, that in fearing and serving of God, he is
guilty of some other excess, not of fearing God, but somewhat else, etc.] This,
first, agrees not well with what is said below, that this excessive fear argued
a defect of love, or Religion, See p. 30. n. 28.
not some other excess: And, second, this is to say and unsay; there is an
excessive fear of God, and there is no excessive fear of God; Quo teneam modo,
etc. He says again, n. 36.
of the man that phansies he ought by Gods Law to kill his Father, and fears
Gods wrath, if he does it not, [He is an exceeder in the service of God, if he
do that in the service of God, which is contrary to it:] Mark, an exceeder in
the service of God (thinking he shall do God good service:) is not this an
excess in Religion, and does not such a man serve God too much, as well as too
little? exceed, and yet come short: and so in one sense, too Religious?

The second ground of the Doctors miscarriages, I said, was, [That he is of
opinion, that excess in Religion, p. 20. n. 2.
is not well called Superstition, etc.] To this charge, he cries, not guilty;
and consulting his 27. sect. and not finding it there, disclaims it. But he
might conceive an error in the figure, 27. for 30. or that I meant not to limit
my speech, to sect. 27. putting an, etc. after it, which might reach further:
yet that the Doctor is unwilling to grant, [An excess in Religion, to be
Superstition, or Superstition to be an excess in Religion] may reasonably be
collected, thus, 1. Because he denies peremptorily, and that often, any excess
at all in Religion; how then, can Superstition be an excess in Religion, etc.
2. That he defines Superstition, by Superstitum cultus; sect. 2. [Superstition
in Latin, is most clearly, the worship of some departed from this world, etc.]
As if this comprehended the full and whole nature of Superstition: which I
opposing, we shall see anon, what he answers to it: 3. Yea more then this; at
his 30. sect. having himself started the objection, [That Superstition may and
does, in some Authentic writers, signify a nimiety or excess in Religion;] He
makes his return, by way of opposition, in four particulars; the second whereof
is this; [For Christian writers, the use of a word, in this or that sense, is
so slight and casual, that not sufficient to fasten an ill character on it.]
The third is this, [That those Authors, who seem to come home to the point, are
so few, or so modern, and of so small authority, that scarce worth producing.]
The 4. calls it, [This supposed nimiety or excess in matters of Religion.]
Would not any Reader conclude from hence, that it is the Doctors opinion, [That
Superstitin is not an exeess in Religion, nor excess in Religion,
Superstition?] Opposing herein the School-mans definition. He therefore now,
will do that, which he should have done before, distinguish, upon excess in
Religion: and promises, [to deal plainly, p. 21 n. 3.
and without all ambiguity.] (Which belike, he did not before.) Thus he says,
[If by excess of Religion, he understand the doing of any thing, in the worship
of God, which Gods word does not command, (the only thing in controversy)
then I stick not to deny, that this is Superstition, or that Superstition
imports this excess.] But he knows, he varies the question; this is not the
controversy, [ Whether the doing of any thing in the worship of God be
Superstition, etc.] What then? [ If he shall flic to any other sort of excess
and contend that to be it, it is the fallacy of ambiguities, etc.] He should
have said, [ If he understand the adding of any worship not commanded, to the
rule of worship; [Then I grant this to be Superstition, and excess; but he
hides himself in that ambiguous phrase; Of any other excess:] and tells not
what it is, n. 5.
nor yet admits of my sufficient expression, what I mean by it, appearing by my
proofs; viz. Addition to the Rule of worship; that is, Addition of worship not
commanded; To which he says nothing; but cavils at the form of my first proof,
and then runs to catch at a fly, an advantage of my words, of super statutum,
n. 6.
above what is commanded, [As if I supposed that was the notation of the word
Superstition;] And here, plays with his own shadow; to make me ridiculous, if
he could, but rather himself: I only say, [ It is an Addition to the Rule of
worship, and so an excess, as super statutum?] And is not an Addition of
worship to the Rule, super statutum? But I, added (to prevent this cavil, [
Though the original be heathenish to signify Superstitum cultus; yet it is well
applied by Divines, (and they learned, to make no comparison) to Additions to
the Rule of worship, etc.] And this is sufficient to mar the Doctors sport. But
if I listed to make him work, and my Reader merry; I might call him to account
for his Etymology, both of the word Superstitio, from Superstitum cultus, and
also of (...), to signify the same: For first, where is cultus to be found in
Superstitio? Superstitio cannot by any Rules be deduced from any word in the
Latin but Superstes. p. 22. n. 7. Then not from Superstitum cultus. From
Super, and sto, not super and cultus. p. 57: n 4.
The Orator he knows, fetches the first Origination of it, from the custom of
some Parents, who night and day prayed, that their children might be
Superstites, that is, live when they themselves were dead; and that practice of
theirs, was called Superstitio: which might have been, though the opinion of
the Heroes living, after departed this world, had not arose: yea, supposing
that opinion, that such did live, were Superstites, in their spirits, yet they
were not presently worshipped, but in process of much time, among the Heathens:
And where is now, his Etymology of Superstitum cultus? Again, (...), he renders
also Superstitum cultus; which is not to be found in the word; but Daemonum
timor: sce p. 30. n. 30. from (...), a trembling fear.
a slavish fear of the Gods, or Demons: that it seems, was the prime use of
the word, which after ages, applied to Religion in general; and others used it
for Superstition. But see the luck of it, (they are often his own words) he
presently confesses, [ That M. C. p. 22. n. 8. Yet several times he regests
this false notion. p. 55. n. 4. p. 57. n. 3. and 4. p. 91. n. 8. p. 258. n. 2.
confesses, that the original of the word was Heathenish, to signify
Superstitum cultus.] To what purpose then was all his vagary? why, I add, that
it was well applied by Divines, to those Additions, etc. He asks, [ What can be
tollerably mean by this? can Divines do well to apply Superstitio to super
statutum, when that is no way the nature of the word?] perverse pen! I meant
and said the word Superstition was well applied by Divines (not to super
statutum, but) to those Additions to the Rule; and surely they may well be
said, to be super statutum; above the command of God. But one thing more; [ Can
any proof be brought hence, to conclude Superstition to be an excess? because
it is super statutum, when no affinity betwixt them? what is unreasonable if
this be not?] Good words, I pray; what more reasonable then this argument: [
Every Addition of worship to the Rule of worship, is an excess supra statutum;
But Superstition, is an Addition to the Rule of worship; ergo, Superstition is
an excess.] Supra statutum is the Judgment of Scripture, and the best Divines.
That said I, which the Scriptures of the Old Testament call Additions, the New
calls Superstition, Will Worship, etc.

But I must not escape so: n. 9.
[ In those few words (named last) there are many infirm parts, 1. That
additions to the word are in the New Testament called Doctrines.] He cuts of my
words; I said, Doctrines, Traditions of men: and so they are Matthew. 15.6.9. By
your Tradition, opposed to the Commandment of God; and [In vain do they worship
me teaching Doctrines the Commandments of men:] He flies to his old Muse,
[Their teaching their own Traditions for Doctrines, is adding them, to the
Scripture, etc.] But then is it not evident, 1. that their Doctrines and
Traditions, were Additions to the word? 2. That these Doctrines concerned the
worship of God, and so Additions to the Rule of worship, in vain do they
worship me: and are not these Additons, excesses? what sense then is there in
his new coined gloss? [Doctrines thore simply signifying, not that addition,
but that to which the addition was made.] What means he? that Doctrines
signifies the Scripture? for to that the Addition was made; so he says,
[Adding them to the Scriptures] what? their own Traditions: Then their
Doctrines were added to the Scripture; but were not Scripture, and if not
Scripture, Additions to the Scripture. 2. But my next infirmity is, that I say,
[Those Additions, are called Will Worship;] The contrary whereof, (he says) is
proved in the Treatise of Will Worship: I shall not anticipate the place: All I
say now is but this: If it be Will Worship, to devise new sorts of worship, and
to offer them to God, for worship: (as the Doctor confesses it is, page See p.
10. n. 11. and p. 15. n. 24.
96. n. 6.) Then those Additions may well be called Will Worship; and such
Will Worship may very well be called, an Addition to the Rule of worship. 3.
This is yet another of my mistakes; [That additions to the rule of worship, are
any where in the New Testament called Superstition: I desire he would show me
one such place, for my concordance will not afford it me.] Let him not evade,
by those words, [Called Superstition,] That is, in so many words, and I will
show many places, where the thing is apparent; that Superstition is an Addition
to the word, and Additions to the word, are Superstition. But in stead of all,
I shall produce his own words, Sect. 46. of Superst. [To affirm God to command,
when he does not, is Superstition, under the notion of nimiety or excess,
because that man adds to the commands of Christ:] Which place will shortly
come to be considered.

He says, [ Those Athenians, Act. 17.22. sure, p. 23. n. 10.
never meddled with, and so added not to the true rule of worship, any
otherwise, then as all that abandon it, add to it, live by some other false
rule, and mind not that: and if they are for so doing, to be styled adders to
the rule of worship, adulterers are so in like manner, and so every sin in the
world, is Superstition.] This is a strange gloss. 1. Do not Idolatres,
Polytheists (such as these Athenians were) meddle with, and add to the rule of
worship? surely then none in the world do: Is it not a moral Law written in the
hearts of all men, (though blotted much) that God alone is to be worshipped? do
not they that worship other Gods, with, or without him, meddle with, and add
to this rule of worship? 2. Does it become the Doctors Learning and Divinity,
to make adulterers (and so every sinner in the second Table) to be (with them
before) stilled Superstitious? when worship (and so Superstition) is only in
the first Table? let the Reader judge.

Against my second proof exception is taken; p. 23. n. 12.
1. Because I use the same medium, as in the former proposition:] An heavy
charge; as if the Doctor did not know, that one medium, may prove several
propositions: The question is, whether it proves the present proposition or no:
2. Then he undertakes to put my argument into form: but that I refuse; and
renounce his whole Syllogism, as none of mine; upon this ground, because he
has changed the question, from uncommanded worship, to uncommanded ceremonies?
and then plays his feats: only I shall remind him, what he grants in his
proposition; 1. [That worshipping of the Demons, is an excess opposite to
Religion:] ergo, [Superstition is an excess.] 2. So also is the worshipping the
true God, after an undue and unlawful manner, (an excess.) ergo, Superstition
is of larger extent, then the worshipping of Demons: which both, the Doctor
seems to deny. Now I shall put my argument into form; [ If profaneness, the one
extreme of Religion, he a defect of Religion; then Superstition, the other
extreme, is an excess of Religion: but the first is true and cannot be denied;
ergo, [If the Doctor did not intend to decline the force of this proof, and to
make a diversion to his Reader; he would not have started a new Hare, that
himself might escape.

My next proof was from the Doctors own concessions; p. 24. n 13. See p. 227.
etc. the numb. 13. twice.
where he first espies a Numeral fault, a figure of 4. twice: Whether this was
mine, or the Printers fault, he has no cause to complain; having 6. for 5. But
that is a trivial excursion; yet ordinary enough. First the Doctor grants,
Superstitiosus may denote such an excess: an excess of Religion: n. 16.
[ What excess in Religion? the super statutum, every addition; 1. Every
uncommanded circumstance, or ceremony in the worship of God? thus he must mean,
if constant, etc.] No such matter; but every Addition of worship supra
statutum, above the command of God. The question was of worship it self, from
the beginning, not of Circumstances of worship: If Superstitious signify such
an excess, will it any thing help the Doctor, to say, so did Religiosus
sometime signify too? Yes, 1. [Superstitio and Religio, were (among Heathens)
the They were not the same, see ad p. 70 n. 1. But one a vice, the other a
virtue.
same: and 2. All such excesses are not culpable, in their opinion.] If they
once did signify excesses in Religion, and culpable; it matters not what their
opinions after were; who were ill Judges of Superstition and Religion: And what
ever Religiosus may signify, let the Doctor show us any Protestant Divine that
ever took Superstitio, or Superstitiosus in a good sense. But what is the
meaning of those words; n. 17.
[My pretensions in that place, were only this, that Superstition among all
Authors signified not any criminous excess.] Does he mean, that Superstition
never in any Authors, signifies a criminous excess? That he cannot say, or that
all Authors do not take it for a criminous excess? (the words may bear both
senses) that is too dilate for the Doctor to affirm; It Is enough for us, if in
some Authors, both Heathen and Divine, it signify a criminous excess: and if
Superstitiosus so signify, so may Superstitio, from whence it comes. But he
says, [ when Superstitiosus is used in an ill sense, as when we say, a
Superstitious person, it is clear, that Superstition there signifies Heathen
worship; or worshipping of others beside the one true God, etc.] That Is not
true; for the worshipping of the true God, in an undue and unlawful manner, is
by the School-man, and by most Divines, yea, the Doctor himself, p. 24. n. 12.
called Superstition. And many other kinds of Superstition the Doctor has
acknowledged, (as appears in these concessions we are now upon) which cannot
signify Heathen worship, that is, worshipping of others beside the one true
God: as we shall show in those concessions that follow. It Is true indeed, that
he that is Superstitions, [acts like one of those false worshippers, and agrees
with them in some eminent branch of their false worship.] As Papists
worshipping Angels, Images, Bread, etc. act like Heathens: but they are
Superstitious in many other things, that Heathens were never guilty of; this
therefore was but an evasion, to take away the suspicion of Superstition from
himself and his party, by laying it upon others.

Secondly, Angel-worship is an excess, and by the Doctor called that crime of
Superstition. But (says he) [is this an excess of Religion, or not rather
impiety?] Might not a man wonder at this question? It is both excess of
Religion, and also an Impiety: It Is therefore Impiety because it exceeds the
Rule of worship: p. 25. n. 18.
['Tis true, (says he) this is an addition to the object of worship;] But is
not an Addition to the object of worship, an Addition to the Rule of worship;
[God alone is to be worshipped?] Yes, (says he again) [ As death is an adition
to life, i.e. destruction to the oneness of that, and as adultery is an
addition to marital love and fidelity.] What, just so, and no otherwise? Surely
death is the deprivation of, not an Addition to life: but worshipping others
with the true God, is not destructive of worship, but only adds false-worship
to it, and that is another manner of Addition, then of death to life: It
corrupts true worship, but does not destroy worship: But then, (the old
Jealousy again,) [What's this to the prejudice of uncommanded Ceremonies,]
(Circumstances he should say.) Nothing at all; for he knows the controversy
is about uncommanded worship: The like answer is made to the next alleged
concession. [The worshipping Demons by Heathens, and of Saints by Papists, is
called Superstition] by the Doctor: But (says he) [The using of an uncommanded
Rite, is none of these.] That Is not the question; n. 19.
I asked, why these are called Superstition, but because they add to the to
the Rule of worship? He likes not my reason: [ It was visible enough in the
naming of Superstitum cultus; and the worshipping of them is Superstition.] Nor
do I like his no-reason, it answers not my question: why is the worshipping of
Demons Superstition? The answer he makes, is idem per idem. The worshipping of
Demons, is Superstition, because it is the worshipping of Demons: why is that
unlawful? because it is forbidden: By what Law? the first Commandment, which
Commands God alone to be the object of worship: Then worshipping of others
with, or beside God, is an Addition to the object, and so to the Rule of
worship: [Why so does sacrilege, add to the rule of worship (even when it
robs God) in this sense, doing something which the rule commands not, no nor
permits, and yet that is not Superstition.] This is his Capriccio, a mere
prevarication; For 1. Sacrilege some refer to the eighth Commandment, which
sure is no Rule of worship. 2. If it fall in the first Table, it is rather to
be called profaneness, then Superstition; not Adding, but taking away from the
worship of God: 3. It does something which the Rule commands not, nor does
permit: but so does adultery (one of his instances) against the seventh
Commandment; but that is no Rule of Worship: But we speak of worship, and doing
worship, which the Rule commands not; therefore worshipping of Demons may well
be called Superstition, for this Reason, for one, because it adds to the Rule
of worship: Though uncommanded Rites, (if not made parts of worship) are not
called Superstition, for this reason, because they are not Additions to the
Rule of worship. There is a double fallacy in his words: some thing, for some
worship; and the Rule commands not, for the Rule of worship. Dolosus versatur
in universalibus.

In the next we are like to be longer: p. 26. n. 20.
[Slavish fear is granted to be Superstition; because it is an excess of that
fear, which is a part of worship in the first Commandment,] For which (I
confess my mistake by haste) I referred to Sect. 24, 25. which should have been
Sect. 13. There the Doctor speaking of the word (...), says, [It may sometimes
perhaps be set to import a cowardly trembling fear; Will the Doctor be so bold,
to defend such a fear as good?
the Superstitious man is Religious and cowardly, fears the Gods and is afraid
of them. The Pious man comes to God, without fear; the Superstitious with much
fear, dreading the Gods as so many Tyrants. The Religious man reveres God, the
Superstitious is afraid of him; and consequently to that, Religion is the
worshipping of God, See p. 58. n. 3.
Superstition the wronging of him: the Superstitious wishes there were no Gods;
as the Atheist thinks there is none.] All which, I thought, were a full
description of Slavish fear, the common Attendant on Superstition: Upon that
mistake of mine, the Doctor takes advantage, and plays upon me; See p. 57. p.
[ Who would have expected the Diatribist, a favourer of the Sect of Epicurus,
as he must be, if this fear of God, which Epicurus called Superstition, be by
him looked upon, as an excess of that worship of the first Commandment, etc.]
Who would have expected the Doctor should be thus rash to suppose or censure
me, to be a favourer of that wicked Sect? when he hears me profess, Superst. s.
21. What Epicurus Doctrine was, or what Heathens though of the word (...), we
are not much sollicitous.] I looked not then at that fear of God, which
Epicurus would have cast out of the world; but that fear of the Superstitious,
which the Doctor has described from several Authors, that I called Slavish
Fear: and an excess of that Fear, commanded in the first Commandment. This the
Doctor calls, [the Ordinary Divinity concerning slavish fear,] p. 28. n. 22
and thereupon takes occasion to read us a Divinity Lecture, concerning Slavish
fear: But first he must (without me) state the question, [And suppose, that by
it, I understand fear of punishment, as by filial fear, a reverential
obedience, proceeding wholly from love, without any thing of fear in it.] He
has at first going out, forsaken the question, which is not, of fear of
punishment in general (which is necessary) but of slavish fear of punishment,
opposed to filial fear of punishment: (which, [that it proceeds wholly from
love, without any fear in it,] is another question, and seems little less then
a contradiction, without a distinction.) I said, filial fear of punishment; and
he demands, first, [whether sons may not lawfully and reasonably fear
punishments from their Parents, in case they shall deserve it.] I answer, yes,
with a filial, not a slavish fear; these are distinct kinds of fears: But
(what ever a child of a man may do) for a true child of God his Father, to
fear him as a Tyrant, with fear of exheredation and casting out of the family,
etc. is a slavish fear, not becoming either that Father, or this Son: Again, p.
29. n. ^4.
he must suppose (before he infer) [the slavish fear in my notion to be such as
is in a wicked man; and then it must be either the fear of Divine vengeance of
a sin formerly committed, or at the time of comitting, or before be commit it.]
I shall yield him more then he demands, the slavish fear, in my notion, may be,
not only in a wicked man, but in a Godly man too, in a desertion, etc. And
both are known by this, that they drive a man from God. It is hope of mercy
that brings men to God; [There is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared]
as well as loved. Well, if slavish fear be in a wicked man; it respects either
a sin committed, or at the time, etc. Hereupon he demands [how any of these
three fears, can by a Christian, duly he called an excess, or with any
propriety, Superstition?] But does he not here vary the question? which is of
slavish fear, not of filial: All these three fears (which are indeed but one,
with a threefold object) may be in a godly man, as well as a wicked, yea must;
Fear of God being a duty of the first Commandment, and natural worship: but it
is the excess thereof that denominates it slavish: ergo, Adam before his Fall,
was bound to fear to offend God, by sin in this he could not exceed; He was
bound to fear vengeance from God after he had sinned: but moderated, not so, as
to account God a Tyrant, to fly from God, as he did, etc. This sure was excess
of fear, and slavish: And this may answer all his demands, before, at, and
after sin committed; he must fear, but still with a filial, not a slavish fear;
There is a middle between slavish fear, and no fear of God; one is too much,
the other too little; between which, as the virtue, stands filial fear, which
is tempered with love of God. n. 26. p. 30.
But says he; [ Love of God, or virtue, is not in a wicked man, as wicked; he
is supposed to have none of that in his heart.] It Is true; but that is his sin,
and so is his slavish fear, which nothing but grace will drive out. n. 27.
This may perhaps give the Doctor reason to change his mind concerning slavish
fear, and no longer to deny it to be an excess of Religion, or not capable of
the title of Superstition: They are his own words, a little inverted. But hear
more.

[The truth is (says he) what is a miss in such fear, n. 28.
is a defect not an excess; a want of love, not an excess of fear.] And I pray,
why not both? love and fear are two distinct affections; and both may exceed,
or come short. And if slavish fear be a defect, what differs it from Security
or no fear? True it is; want of love, is one cause of slavish fear: and that
want is a defect of love; but yet slavish fear is an excess; what is short in
one, is made out in the other. Now love of God, being wanting in wicked men, it
must needs be that they exceed, or come short in their fear of God, yea being
enemies to God, they are Rom 1.30. (...), Plutarch de Superst.
(...), God-haters, and whom men hate; if too strong for them, they deadly fear
them: if too weak, they despise them: it is true also, [ That God is made up of
goodness, as well as Justice, and the Gospel compounded of promises as well as
threats, etc.] But if a wicked (or a godly) man separate these (as usually he
does) looking at the Goodness and promises only, makes him fearless and
secure; that is the defect: At the Justice and threats only, fills with
despair, and that breeds an excess of fear. Only filial fear, compounds those
things in God and the Gospel; the one breeds love, the other fear; yea, a Godly
man fears God for his Goodness, Hos. 3.5 as well as, if not more then, for his
Justice. And now it may appear, that [slavish fear is fitly brought as an
Instance, of excess of Religion, and so of Superstition]

We come now to the fourth or rather fifth concession of the Doctor; p. 30. n.
30.
[To affirm God to command when he does not, is granted to be Superstition,
under the notion of excess, because that man adds to the commands of Christ.]
This is plain, both that Superstition is an excess, and that excess, in adding
to the commands of God is Superstition: what can he say to it. He cannot deny,
but he can excuse it; [He did grant this for to gratify them, Did not Aquinas
take it in that sense?
who will needs have Superstition taken in the sense of nimiety, and so opposed
to Religion, as an extreme to the mediocrity, and as an excess of fear, afraid
of God when we need not, etc.] Belike he did not intend to gratify the truth;
though truth forced him to this concession, more then to pleasure any
adversary. Speak out: Is this Adding to the commands of Christ, an excess or
no? Is this excess, Superstition or no? Is the imposing Commandments on God and
obligations on our selves, and others, which he never gave, an excess of fear,
a being afraid of God, or no? If all these be affirmed; the main question now
between as is granted; If denied, all this concession is but a prevarication;
to raise a dust, to obscure the business, [An excess of fear, a being afraid of
God, when we need not, is proportionable to one notion of (...), arising from
the consideration of (...), which may signify perhaps, a trembling, and so a
cowardly fear in that composition.] How warily, how tremblingly spoken;
[proportionable to one notion of (...),] He might have said, [to the first and
chiefest notion of that word,] which signifies primarily, not the worship, but
the fear of Demons. Then, [may signify, perhaps, a trembling fear.] It does
signify that, and the Doctor has granted the sense, and the thing, in those
that are Superstitious, (above, ad page 26. n. 20.) from the Authority of
Heathens, who (he says) best knew the sense of the word, and the nature of
Superstitious persons; [A trembling and so a cowardly fear] of God. And is not
a cowardly fear of God, a slavish fear, an excess in the fear of God, an excess
in Religion, and justly called Superstition? But he qualifies his concession;
[As yielding the Dogmatizer, to be a Superstitious person] We must be content
with what he will give, (for he is not very liberal,) but shall make this
advantage of it, that Superstitum cultus, the worshipping of Demons, is
neither the only, nor the chief sense of Superstitio, or (...), for the
dogmatizer is yielded a Superstitious person; and a cowardly fear of God, is
granted an excess, and Superstition: which is so far from worshipping of God,
that it hates and flies from him, as a cruel Tyrant: But if this be granted,
and much more, n. 14. viz. Six senses, p. 31. n. 30.
wherein the Doctor has yielded, [That excess in Religion may well be called
Superstition.] Why might not this have saved me so much pains, [of affixing the
contrary position upon him, that excess in Religion, is not well called
Superstition?] Truly this may seem a ground of wonder, and how to reconcile
the Doctor with himself I know not. For that he denies, [excess in Religion, to
be called, or be Superstition;] (yea, that there can be any excess in Religion,
he denies) is evident before, ad p. 20. n. 2. And yet, forgetting himself,
confesses by several assertions; that [Excess in Religion (mark that) may well
be called Superstition.] I leave him to agree with himself, and proceed to the
old exception: n. 31.
[Mean while (says he) the Doctors Hypothesis is still secure, this no ways
belongs to the using or prescribing Ceremonies in the worship of God, etc.] I
never said it did, but only, to prescribing or using uncommanded worship. But
if the Doctor make his Circumstances, or Ceremonies, parts of worship, (as it
will appear he does;) it will touch his coppy-hold, and prove excess in
Religion, and no better then Superstition.

The last concession of the Doctor is now to be considered: [To place more
virtue in things, n. 32.
then God or nature has put in them; is an excess, because it adds to the
promises of Christ, and called Superstition. Sect. 45.] He fairly yields the
cause; [This is another particular, which I allow to be an excess, and fit to
be comprehended under the style of Superstition.] Quod erat demonstrandum,
which was the thing I undertook to prove: Only we must gratify him again,
that we do not charge him, [With yielding, that the Ceremonies or Festivals of
our Church, are in the least degree guilty of Superstition,] provided, he do
not make them parts of worship, more holy, etc. but mere Circumstances thereof.
And thus much of this second ground of his mistake.

The third is, p. 32. n. 3.
[That Will worship is nothing but voluntary worship, as innocent, as the
Free-will-offerings, etc.] To the former part of which he says, [Is there any,
the nicest difference imaginable, betwixt Will Worship, and Voluntary-worship,
etc.] Dolosus versatur in universalibus: and hates distinctions, as a thief
does the light. Does not, may not the word (...), signify either
Willing-worship, or Will-devised-worship? and is there no difference between
them two? Is here not the same distinction to be made of cultus voluntarius,
voluntary worship? And do not most Divines take Will Worship, and
Voluntary-worship, in an ill sense, for Will-devised worship? as I show below,
and call it Superstitio, in that one text where it is used? which has respect
to uncommanded worship, the same with Will-devised worship? Does then this
tergiversation become a learned ingenuous Adversary? But to the second part,
[as innocent as Free-will-offerings, etc] He says (with the same evasion,)
[Freewill offerings were certainly one species of Voluntary-worwip, therefore
those being innocent, so must this.] But I pray say; were the
Free-will-offerings, Will-devised worship? In that sense of voluntary, that
they were freely and willingly offered, (the kinds of that worship, being
prescribed by God) we can grant them voluntary: but that is not the
controverted sense; nor does the Doctor own that sense of the word; but takes
it for offerings, or oblations not commanded by God, but tendered to him, by
the will of man: as has been showed, and shall be showed hereafter. Will the
Doctor allow these oblations, (this worship) to be as innocent as the
Free-will-offerings? He must, or he says nothing to the question: yea, he does
maintain this paradox: as we shall hear.

And that I understood Will Worship in that sense, and voluntary, for
uncommanded worship, p. 33. n. 6.
he may see, by my first Argument: which was this, [It seems a contradiction,
in adjecto, that voluntary and uncommanded worship should be innocent; for,
first, it is expressly against the second Commandment, etc.] His answer is,
[That may seem a contradiction to Mr. C. which does not to other men. Is it
what it seems, or is it not?] It was my modesty to say, it seems, (yet
sometimes seeming is put for really so) when I might have said, it is so; upon
this supposition, (which I shall prove by and by) that uncommanded worship is
forbidden in the second Commandment. For thus the Argument would be formed: [If
uncommanded, Will-devised-worship be forbidden in the second Commandment, it is
a contradiction, in adjecto, to say, it is innocent: But the first is true:
ergo,] To say then, it is forbidden, and not forbidden, is a contradiction; but
to say it is forbidden, and yet innocent, is to say it is forbidden, and not
forbidden: ergo, The Doctor does but obscure the matter, by his Logical notions
of contradiction, and I list not to follow him. But consider what he says to
the purpose. [In this proposition, (voluntary, n. 7.
or uncommanded worship is innocent) there is no contradiction, etc.] True,
first, if he take voluntary, for Willing-worship, of willing performance of
prescribed worship, that is innocent enough; and no contradiction. But,
secondly, take voluntary, for uncommanded worship, and that is not innocent. I
say uncommanded worship, (not uncommanded Circumstances) to be innocent, is a
contradiction: because uncommanded worship, is by all men, even the Doctor
himself acknowledged to be forbidden; and so unlawful, or not innocent. Hic
aqua haerebit. For he presently adds, [Of forbidden worship this were true;
for innocence to be attributed to that, were a contradiction, in adjecto, etc.]
But say I, says he elsewhere, all uncommanded worship is forbidden: ergo, The
difference between forbidden and voluntary, that is, not Commanded-worship, is
none at all, by his own concession; and if he take Voluntary-worship in any
other sense, he forsakes both the question it self, and his own sense of it,
formerly given: Hence that proposition of his, [All being lawful which is not
forbidden] is a blind; It Is true only of things, in the second Table, but not
of worship, in the first: for there, [All worship is unlawful that is not
commanded; He blames the practice of Casuists in reducing all sins to some of
the ten Commandments of the Decalogue: here.
and all not commanded is forbidden.] And his reason added to that proposition,
[Else there were no universal truth in that Maxim; that sin is the
transgression of the Law] will twice rebound upon himself; 1. That he himself
has shaken the universal truth of that Maxim, in this very Section, page 35.
n. 11. [I leave it to prudent consideration, what necessity there is, that all
Laws natural, and positive Divine, should be reduced to one or more of the ten
Commandments.] If no necessity of this, certainly there may be some sins which
are no transgressions of the Law, of the Decalogue; for of that the Apostle
spoke: but of that by and by. 2. The next concernment is his: He says,
uncommanded worship is forbidden, and so a transgression of some Law; by what
Law of the Decalogue is the question: which will come presently into
consideration. p. 34. n. 8.


But as for those sayings of some of the Ancients, [That some men do exceed
commands.] It unseasonably comes in here; and we shall meet with it hereafter:
All I say at present is this, 1. That they must be understood, to mean it of
particular, not the general command, of loving God, with all the heart, and
strength; or 2. Of commands of the second Table, not commands of the first; or
3. Of some Circumstances of worship, not worship it self, worship not
commanded; for then the Doctor himself would oppose them, as Adders of New
worship. And therefore this Instance, is far from conviction of what he was to
prove.

My first proof of his contradiction, in adjecto, n. 10.
was this; [It's expressly against the 2. Commandment, which forbids all worship
not expressly commanded by God.] I must (to use the Doctors words here) not
complain of my eyes, because they are the best that God has given me; but I am
sure the second repetition of (expressly) is not to be seen in my words: But let
him put it in, if it may give him any advantage; For I think he will not deny
the latter part, [that God forbids all worship not expressly commanded by
himself.] It is the former that he quarrels, [That uncommanded worship is
expressly forbidden in the second Commandment.] The word expressly was added,
with respect to the Judgment of our most and best reformed Divines, who
understand the second Commandment in the Affirmative part, thus; [God must be
worshipped with his own prescribed worship;] the Negative whereof is, [All
unprescribed, uncommanded worship is forbidden:] Little did I dream of the
Doctors Gloss of the second Commandment, which is purely his own; for ought I
ever read or heard: (of which by and by) For he says, [What is expressly
against the second Commandment, should oppose some express words in it.] If it
oppose the express, or truly expressed sense of it, methinks it should be
sufficient. Let Us try that: his words are these; [My Optic glass will not
afford me any such prospect in the second Commandment.] What prospect does it
afford him? [All sorts of graven Images, and such like; but for all kinds and
Circumstances of worship, nothing.] First, kinds and Circumstances of worship,
are ill coupled together; for Circumstances are no where forbidden in any
Commandment; but kinds are surely forbidden in some Commandment. 2. When he
says, [All sort of Images and such like,] He might have seen all kinds of
worship, like unto Images, the imaginations of men, there forbidden; had his
Optic glass been made of the same Crystal, that other Divines are. And I
wonder how at first view, he espied (such like) there, when as at his second
review, See p. 43. n. 4. Append. on 2. Commandment
he saw [no more but a prohibition of Idol-worship,] p. 44. n. 8. Yet in a
former view saw clearly this truth; [That God must be worshipped, in a manner
peculiar to him, and appointed by him.] And yet more, [The very use of any
other thing in the service of God, which is by others worshipped, and by which
we are in any eminent danger to be corrupted, (as we are by any new devised
worship) is to be conceived to be forbidden to all Christians, by the force of
that (second) Commandment.] And yet hear how he concludes this Number; [As for
any general comprehensive phrase that can rationally contain a prohibition of
all (worship, Sir) which is not commanded, I can say no more, but that the
first verse of Genesis, or any other in the Bible, has as much of this to my
eye, as the second Commandment.] What a vast difference there is between an eye
calm and clear, and the same eye overdrawn with a cataract of prejudice. What
other men see in the second Commandment, we shall hear anon. We now go on:

The Doctor has spied, by his Optic glass, something more, then other men do
or can see, the cause of my mistake in this matter: [It is, p. 35. n. 11.
the solemn practice of some Casuists, to reduce all sins in the world, to some
or other of the Commandments of the Decalogue; wherein I am not sure, that they
have aimed aright, etc.] Truly, I must profess, that I have believed, since I
knew the Commandments, and what sin is, that all sins are reducible to some or
other of the Commandments of the Decalogue. Sin (says Saint John) is the
transgression of the Law: which the Doctor calls an universal Maxim above; and
if it be not some way a transgression of that law, it is no sin. So here is
another contradiction, in adjecto, to say, a thing is a sin, and no
transgression of the Law. Herein the Doctor is singular again; and runs gross
to all Divines, that I know of; but not without a show of reason; [For separate
gluttony and drunkenness (as they may, and yet be sins) from some accidental
consequences of them -- and you will hardly tell, whether to reduce the
Intemperate use of the Creature.] This is pretry untempered mortar; for, first,
those sins of gluttony and drunkenness, cannot be separated from some
accidental ill consequences or other (wasting of health is but one of them.)
Yet he says they may. 2. It is an old Rule, in interpreting the Commandments;
[That where any sin is forbidden, all the causes, effects, degrees, etc. are
forbidden with it.] But the Doctor regards no such old Rules. 3. Though it be
hard, to which Commandment, directly to reduce some sins, yet it is possible;
and easy [upon the former Rule] to reduce some sins to many Commandments. As:
ergo, drunkenness and gluttony; as they are means to self-murder, and murder
of others sometimes, are reducible to the sixth Commandment. As Incentives of
lust, to the seventh. As wasters of a man's estate, to the eighth. And some say,
The Intemperate use of the Creatures, is reducible to the third Commandment, a
taking of Gods Name in vain, which is much manifested by every creature. But I
believe the Doctor will laugh at such old Divinity; and were it not for the ill
consequences thereof, would easily make them no sins, excluding them out of the
Decalogue; which would be a brave doctrine to gratify the Ranters. If the
Doctor cannot (or but hardly) tell, to what Commandment of the Decalogue to
reduce those Intemperances, they will easily believe and plead they are no
sins. But the Doctor shall be no Catechist, no Casuist, or Confessor of mine,
that holds any thing a sin, not forbidden by the Law; and so is unable to
resolve me, against which Commandment, the Intemperate use of the Creature
offends. I have heard some, of no mean pretense to Piety, excuse some of their
party, that have been drunk; [They have but taken a little too much of the
Creature.] I wonder not, the Doctor is so favorable to the Riotous part of his
Festival; when thus he glosses of sins, and Commandments. But he gives another
instance; [That sort of lying, or false speaking, which is no way hurtful, or
no way intended to be hurtful to the neighbor.] He means the jeasting lie; to
which he might have added, the officious lie, which is helpful to the neighbor,
without hurting any man. If no body be hurt by these, the truth it self is
hurt; and that will be hurtful to the speaker, what ever it be to the neighbor.
There are many more of these instances, belike, and by Papists are called but
Venial sins: with whom how near he complies in these cases, let him consider.

Here again, p. 36. n. 12.
the Doctor speaks of the unlawfulness of Ceremonies, and uncommanded worship
together; as if they were both equally, by us, judged unlawful: But in stead of
rectifying a mistake, he makes one: [He has not considered this one thing,
that whatsoever is not forbidden, is lawful: not, whatsoever is not commanded
is unlawful.] These words, if referred to Circumstances, are both ways true;
but referred to worship, both ways false: whatsoever Circumstance of worship
is not forbidden is lawful: but whatsoever worship is not commanded, is
unlawful; as was said above; ad p. 33. n. 7. And then uncommanded worship, if
it be a sin and unlawful, being forbidden by some Commandment, and all the
other nine renouncing it, it must (but without crowding) be reduced to the
second Commandment, or to none. My answer therefore is ready to his questions;
1. That many, n. 13.
yea most of our Divines, have said as fully, as I have done, that voluntary
uncommanded worship, is expressly against the second Commandment; meaning
against the sense of that Commandment. 2. They that have referred it thither
have given as cogent reasons for it, as the Doctor himself has done, when he
glossed the sense of the second Commandment, to be this, [That God must be
worshipped in a manner peculiar to him, and appointed by him.] Whence it may be
argued and concluded that worship not appointed, that is, not commanded by him,
is forbidden, by the second Commandment.

In his answer to my second proof, he is very brief and very obscure, and
deceives us, by a general, n. 14. p. 37.
[That all Additions to the Rule of worship are not Superstition.] But I say
all uncommanded worship, is an Addition to the Rule of worship, and so
Superstition, and sinful. He is as short to the third; n. 15.
[Worship of Angels, is forbidden by a positive command, and so must needs be
sinful; but the doing of what is not commanded, is not a sin.] This last is a
mere delusion; for if he speak of Circumstances (or Ceremonies as he calls
them) the doing of them is not a sin; but if he speak of worship, the doing of
what is not commanded, is a sin as himself has often confessed: And when I
added, in the close of the third proof, [That they that worship Angels, p. 37.
n. 16.
do not urge it as a Commandment of God,] I intended it as a prevention to his
objection, or assertion, [That the Dogmatizers did pretend a Commandment of
God, and that indeed was Superstition; and allowed scarce any other possible to
a Protestant.] He answers, [He never doubted but there were other sins, beside
Dogmatizing, etc.] But he should have said, [Other kinds of Superstition,
beside that of Dogmatizing:] As he says, [The murderer is a sinner, though he
teach it for a Doctrine, that it is lawful to kill his brother:] So, he is
Superstitious, that places more virtue in things, then God or nature has put
in them; And he is Superstitious, that adds new worship to the Rule of
worship, though neither of then be Dogmatizers, to teach it for Doctrine, or a
Commandment of God, etc. And [though he oblige not, as from God, any other man
to do the like:] As he speaks, because he goes against express precept, [Thou
shall not add to the word,] or Rule of worship.

Lastly, I said, if Will Worship be innocent, Rome is justified in her rabble
of Superstitious worship, n. 17.
etc. He answers to this effect; If it be true, that the worship at Rome is
really Superstitious; he undertook not to justify Rome, or any other Churches
in their worship, etc. But the Church of England, etc.] This is like the rest,
a mere diversion: for the question is, whether Will Worship, of any Church,
Rome or England, be justifiable; and he says, if it be true that the worship
at Rome is really Superstitious, (doubtingly) he undertook not to justify it:
and yet justifies Will Worship to be as innocent as the Free-will-offerings,
without any distinction. And this may serve for the third discovery of causes
of his mistakes.

The last, was, [That he takes for granted, p. 38. n. 1.
that a Church, or person has power to institute and observe worship not
commanded of God.] For which he offers this probation: n. 3.
[Whatsoever is in it self perfectly free or lawful by the Law of God, that a
Church, or particular person has power to institute and observe: But so is the
Christmas Festival: ergo,] I answer first to the proposition; it offends in
leaving out the chief term in the question, viz. Worship; and should run thus,
whatsoever worship is sure or lawful, etc. And then, that it begs the very
question, that a Church has power to Institute worship: (which is denied by me
and the Doctor himself,) Then to the Assumption, it should thus be propounded:
But Christmas Festival is a worship, free and lawful: But this again is
acknowledged by the Doctor to be false, who denies to make it, a new worship;
but a Circumstance of worship. Is not this a probation unbeseeming the Doctors
learning? n. 4.
which his three considerations will no way support. For, first, the Church
has no power to Institute, nor the Christian to Observe any worship, not
commanded of God. 2. The Christian may freely do, what is prescribed by the
Church, in matter of Circumstance, but not in matter of Worship. 3. He
confounds the universal Church, in aftertimes, with the Apostles, as if their
power were one and same; in Instituting worship; whereas the Apostles power was
Divine; the Churches succeeding, but Humane. The Church then, [May dispose,
order, Institute Circumstances of worship to her members, etc.] But may not
meddle, to Institute any worship not commanded by God, which is prohibited, p.
39. n. 5.
because not commanded. His proof of the Minor is voided, by what has been
said, that it is no part of worship; or if so made, is perfectly false; the
prohibition of God lying flat against all Additions of worship, to the Rule,
that is all uncommanded worship. And that was my Argument against it, [Because
all Additions to the word, in matter of worship, be criminous and sinful, and
prohibited by Deuteronomy. 4.2. and elsewhere.] Dare or can the Doctor deny this, in
matter of worship, I say, not of Circumstances of worship? Something he must
and will say; n. 6.
[The whole matter is devolved on this issue; whether the text, Deuteronomy. 4 2. and
the second Commandment, (and others not cited) be sufficient to prejudge the
using or instituting any Ceremony, or Festival, not commanded by God.] Which is
a perverse varying of the question (I fear against his own Conscience) which
was professed by me, (and confessed so by him to be my mind) to be of
uncommanded Worship, and not of Circumstances thereof. And now let him
consider, what good this Suppletory of his has done, unless it be to confirm
the Reader (as well as my self) that I have hit upon some of the true causes of
his Mistakes; it may be, the Discourses following, will discover some more, at
least, Miscarriages, n. 7.
which may need his further vindication. My Account thus far stands right upon
the Audit; and I doubt not will do so in the remaining parts, when they be
rightly cast up. I am now in doubt and deliberation, whether I shall need to
proceed any further at present, with the Tracts themselves, till he has
supplied a new, the Defects of this his Suppletory; especially considering that
much of what is here said, is again and again repeated there. Till then, I
might well forbear to go on with his Large Discourse: He has had above a year
to answer my little Pamphlet (as no doubt he esteems it) and I hope he will
grant me two or three years, to answer his volume.

Exercitation. 1. Of Superstition.
Section, 1. In a just and methodical order of Tractation, the Discourse of
Superstition should precede that of Will Worship, that being more general, this
last a Special under it, etc.
FOr the order or method, whether of those two should have the precedence, the
Doctor is not very solicitous to dispute, p. 41. n. 1.
[Though it be certain, (says he) that I am not of his mind, that
Will Worship, is a species of Superstition, yet I shall not engage in a dispute
thereof, etc.] It is hard, that the Doctor and I cannot be of one mind, almost
in any thing; whether it be, because one of us are often out of the way of truth;
or that one of us, loves to have his hand against every man, that differs from
him in opinion; let others judge, and which of the two, it is. Sure I am, the
Doctor has engaged sometimes, in a dispute, in a lesser matter then this is,
in opposition (as one would think) to his adversary, not of his own judgment.
I shall not debate it with him, but only show my judgment, and the reason of
it, to clear what I first asserted. True it is, that Divines, and Interpreters,
do render both the Greek words, (...), and (...), by this one word Superstitie;
Because (as I take it) they thought, Will Worship to be Superstition: But
whether they thought all Superstition to be Will Worship, is a question; which
is some do, the reconciliation may perhaps be thus made by a distinction. The
whole first Table of the Decalogue, being granted by all, to be the only Rule
of worship, (as contradistinct to Justice or Charity in the second Table) any
way of worshipping God, or any Circumstance, made a part of worship by men, may
be called Will Worship, as well as Superstition; and in that larger sense, are
both one. But if we speak distinctly of the matter of instituted Worship, as
distinct from the Object, Manner, Time; then Will Worship, that is, worship
devised and added by the will of man, in regard of the Materials of it, may,
more strictly taken, be a species of Superstition; because Superstition may be
found in those other Circumstances named which is not in that strict sense,
called Will Worship: But I shall not be bound to persuade the Doctor to be of
my mind, let him enjoy his own thoughts.

That which he replies to, n. 2.
is the latter part of this Section, about the Inquiry, what Superstition is;
not so much, by searching into the Monuments of Heathen Authors, (which is the
Doctors way) as by the Judgment of Divines, etc. He says, [There is no better
way to understand the full importance of words, then to examine them in their
origination, and usage among the best Authors, Profane and Sacred, the
Scripture, in Lactantius, and Saint Austin, etc. As competent Judges of
Superstition, as his latter Divines, that have reduced the use of all
Ceremonies not commanded by God to the second Commandment, etc. Under the Title
of Superstition.] Here are not many words but many miscarriages. 1. To begin at
the last, and common mistake; that he charges our later Divines, to reduce all
use of Ceremonies ( Circumstances he should say) not commanded by God, to the
second Commandment, as Superstitious: which they intended only of uncommanded
worship; not of Ceremonies, unless they be made parts of worship. 2. For the
Origination of words, and usage amongst Heathen Authors; he knows, that usage,
is often changed in succeeding generations; That which once was a good word, is
degenerated, to signify some thing ill, or clean another thing: as Latro,
Tyrannus, Nebulo, with many others. And he that would now take those words in
the first good sense (yet has he Authors Ancient enough (for it) would make
himself ridiculous. Suppose then, Superstitio, and (...), did primarily
signify Religion, yet in after ages they came to signify something ill: or
rather, if they did first signify something ill, and afterward had the hap
among Heathens to get a good sense sometimes; which soever of these be true,
there is no following the first Origination or usage of words; but to have
respect to the several Ages, who are Masters of words. Yet if we may believe
Cicero, De Not. Deorum.
the eloquent Orator, and a well-skil'd man in all Antiquities, in his time he
tells us, (as I touched before) that they were first called Superstitiosi, who,
totos dies precabantur and immolabant, ut liberi sibi Superstites essent,
prayed whole days, and offered sacrifice, that their children might survive,
and outlive them: and then adds, Ita factum est, etc. [So it came to pass,
that the word Superstitious, was a name of a vice; and Religious, of a virtue.]
Whence it is observable from him; first, That Superstition was the name of a
vice, in it is first Origination. 2. That the true Etymology of it, is not from
Superstitum cultus, but, Superstites esse. 3. That the notion of Superstition,
Postea pateit latius, was further enlarged; for so he says; that is, to
signify more, that Superstites esse, viz. Superstitum cultus, and other things
beside: and 4. That Superstitiosus and Religiosus differed very much, the one a
vice, the other a virtue, which we shall have occasion to make use of again
hereafter. But, thirdly, for the sense of those words, in Sacred Scripture, (no
Heathen Author, as he floutingly speaks) they are now under debate, and must
be Interpreted by other Scriptures; 4. For Lactantius, and S. Austin, though
both of them, do refuse Cicero's Etymology of Religio and Religiosus, a
relegendo; fetching it rather a religando; and of Superstitio, from Superstites
esse; yet Ludovicus vives, a Learned Critic labors to reconcile them and
Cicero, in the latter: For upon S. Austin, lib. 4. ad Marcellinum, c. 30. he
has these words, [Cicero does not only say, that they were Superstitious, who
prayed so for their children, for he adds, that Name was afterward enlarged,
that is, accommodated to many other things:] Cicero speaking of it in the first
Origination of it, and Lactantius in a second usage; denominating them
Superstitious, qui falsam religionem colerent, Superstitemque defunctorum
memoriam: who did set up a false Religion, and Celebrated the memory of the
deceased; so he: Yea, Lactantius himself so speaks, l. 4. c. 28.
Qui novos sibi ritus assumebant ut in Deorum vicem, mortuos honorarent, hos
superstiosos vocabant. Nimirum Religio, very cultus, Superstitio falsi: Where
he enlarges Superstition to all False-worship; as well as Superstitum cultus.
But of the difference between Religious, and Superstitious, we shall have
occasion to speak again.

Section, 2. Superstition in the general notion of it, is not unfitly defined
by the learned School-man, A vice contrary to Religion in the excess, etc.
HE begins here with a mistake, [That I took Aquinas his definition out of
Doctor Ames;] (who has it not at all) which I took out of Aquinas himself, p.
42. n. 1.
setting the place in the Margin, where I had it: and after explained it,
partly by the words of Amesius, and partly out of Aquinas himself, because it
may seem a paradox, that a man can be too Religious. Why the Doctor should thus
impose upon me, I know not, except it were to make his Reader believe, that I
took up my Divinity, or trust, from some modern Casuist, having never read
Aquinas, my self. But let that go with the rest of his secret flouts. But we
are beholden to him, that he agrees with Aquinas (not in his definition of
Superstition, to be an excess in Religion, for that he has disputed against,
and refused to say any thing to it, when it was objected to him, in my Preface;
but) in [making the Worship of all but God, and the Worship of God, in any
forbidden, or abolisht manner to be species of Superstition.] First I would
demand, why he added, the word (abolisht.) If that be the same with forbidden,
it was a needless addition; if it differ from it, then there is another species
of Superstition, viz. To revive Abolished-worship: which yet is contrary to
another notion of the Willwor. s. 3. p. 19. n. 32. Rites of the old Law are not
only not commanded, but forbidden under Christ.
Doctor; [when these abstinences (touch not, taste not, etc.) are imposed and
taught as Divine obliging precepts, this is an abuse of them, (which were
otherwise innocent things, etc.] Yet now says, he makes the Worship of God, [
in any abolisht manner, to be a species of Superstition.] By those words out of
Aquinas, prout non debet, in that manner which he ought not; I understood not,
uncommanded Circumstances, but Worship, as I have often said. Nor did Aquinas,
or Amesius own any such sense of those words; but meant it, the one of
Illegitimeworwip, (that is the title of that Question in Aquinas,) the other of
Vndue-worship, those are Doctor Ames his words. Yet the Doctor taking that to
be our sense, flies out in this manner; [ If Amesius have owned that sense,
then he was one of the Gasuists, which I forementioned, as the derivers of this
prejudice into the Diatribist, and if Ursine, Doctor Fulk, Master Perkins are
rightly cited, in his margin, etc. then we have perhaps, the full catalogue of
them, and the Diatribist is now of age to consider, whether they have proved,
or only dictated in this matter.] Upon a mere mistake, for they all four, (no
Contemptible Authors) with many more, mean the same with Aquinas, Worship not
commanded, but Added by the will of man.

My distribution of the Subject of the four first Commandments, into, 1. the
Object, 2. the Matter, 3. the Manner, 4. the Time of Worship: he says, p. 43.
n, 2.
[They are no way qualified for such a structure, to conclude all excess in any
of these, to be Superstition, there being scarce any one minute part of sound
Doctrine in all this.] I am sorry to see the Doctor so poor a Catechist, as no
better to understand the difference of those four Commandments. Not any one
minute part of sound Doctrine in all this? Then sure most of our reformed
Divines are very unsound, who make the same distinction, in sense, that I do,
as I could easily prove, and shall make appear in all the particulars; when we
hear what he says to them.

[In the first, n. 3.
which has most of truth, yet this failing there is, that the right object of
Worship, is not the principal matter of that Commandment, but the worship it
self, etc.] There is then this minute part of sound Doctrine, in my words; that
the right object of worship, though it be not the principal, yet it is some
part of that first Commandment: Yea, this is the principal matter, or object of
the Commandment, in the express words; God alone, is to be worshipped; without
any rivals to, or in that worship: For the Commandhath two parts, a Negative,
no other Gods; an Affirmative, but Me, or before My face; and both concern the
object of our worship; and not one word of the worship it self: but that
follows by way of Consequence, If we have a God, natural reason tells us, he
must be worshipped: he must be treated with, addressed to, etc. as the Doctor
speaks; which are not properly worship, but the manner how we must come to him,
to tender our worship; neither is there the least mention of parts of worship,
there, neither can any man reduce Instituted-worship thither. Will it follow,
because I must have the Lord for my God, therefore, I must Worship him, with
Sacrifices, as of old; or with Sacraments, as now? Indeed Natural-worship
belongs to this Commandment, to love, fear, trust in our God, etc. but as the
matter of it, flowing from the principal object, [God alone for our God:] and
thus Divines distinguishing of Worship, into natural and instituted, do reduce
the first sort, to the first Commandment, the latter to the second; but still
making the first Comandment principally to respect a Right object. Hear some of
them speak their own sense; [ The first Commandment has three things in it. 1.
We must have a God. 2. Him for our God. 3. Him alone, and none else.] Sure this
is some new Casuist, and Ordinary Divinity, as the Doctor calls all but his
own: No it is the Learned, Renowned Bishop of Winchester, in his Pattern of
Catechistical Doctrine, on the first Commandment. page 141. I shall add to
him, another very Pious and Learned, (in the Doctors own Judgment) the
Archbishop of Armach; [Here is commanded, 1. The having of a God. 2. One only
God. 3. The true God and no other for our God, etc.] Body of Divinity. p. 214.
But hear his own gloss: What is the general importance of that (1.) Precept?
That we must acknowledge the God of Israel to be God, and resolve there is no
other God before, or beside him.

But see the force of Truth, Dr. Hammond, Pract. Catech. Append. on, 1. Command.
compelling her adversaries to confute themselves. Hear what the Doctor says
here; [The Superstition forbidden in that Commandment, is not any extreme or
excess of worshipping the true God, but the taking in, other rivals to that
Worship, which belongs to the true God incommunicably, and so is the matter of
the Negative part, not the nimiety of the Affirmative.] Is not this to confess,
1. That the principal matter of the first Commandment, is a right object, God
alone, without any rivals? 2. That there may be Superstition and excess in that
Commandment, if not in the Affirmative part, yet in the Negative part, there
may; yet the Doctor would acknowledge no excess to be Superstition, or
Superstition to be excess in Religion.

[In the second, p. 43. n. 4.
there is not (says he) a word to determine the matter of it to Commanded
worship, as has been evidenced beyond all question.] Let him look back, to
what I have said already to it, and he will find his evidence to be very
questionable, if not, none at all: ad page 34. n. 10. Having there glossed that
Commandment thus, [God must be worshipped in a manner, peculiar to him, and
appointed by him.] I suppose the Doctor intended it of instituted Worship;
whereof God himself must appoint the Materials; and is not that to determine in
general the matter of that Commandment? But if that be not, what is the Subject
of the 2. Commandment, in the Doctors new Divinity? [It is the prohibition of
Idol-worship; and bending the knee to the true God, and none else, observing of
Christmas, etc. are remote enough from that guilt.] Oh! how Jealous is the
Doctor, lest his Christmas should suffer, as superstitious, by the second
Commandment! Truly he needed not to fear it, if he do not make it a part of
instituted Worship by the will of man. But let that pass: Is the prohibition of
Idol-worship only, the Subject of that Commandment? that he must say, or he
says nothing; yet that he cannot well say, without contradiction to what he
said before; that part of the sense and scope of that Commandment, was, [That
God must appoint his own Worship.] which sure is not only, in prohibition of
Idol-worship. And yet, [see the luck of it,] his own words; the Doctor asks,
n. 8. p. 44.
[what is the Affirmative part of the second Commandment, or how can it be
evidenced that there is any, or any more indeed, than a probibition of
Idol-worship, appendant to the, no other Gods, in the first Commandment, etc.]
But, first, the Doctor gave us the Affirmative part of it just now; [God must
appoint his own worship.] And 2. if there be no more in it, then a prohibition
of Idol-worship; let the Doctor do himself so much favor, as to reconcile
himself to himself, for they are at a vast distance: For the Affirmative part,
he has found it, upon a second reveiw; [If an affirmative part be to be
understood, must it not be, howing down to the true God? etc.] Be it so,
(though that, as part of natural Worship, may fall into the first Commandment)
yet that is not all; but also that God must appoint every part of his own
Worship, as is confessed. But 3. One thing must not be forgotten; That he makes
Idol worship, here forbidden, [An appendant to (the first Commandment) no other
Gods.] And if so, the Doctor has lost the second Commandment, (as well as
Papists have) by joining it to the first, as an appendant to it. For he told
us, but a little before, number 3. [The Superstition forbidden in that Commandment
is -- the taking in other rivals to that worship etc.] And now he says, [The
Prohibition of Idol-worship, is an appendant to that, no other Gods, in the
first Commandment.] But say I, an Idol or Image worshipped, is a rival to that
Worship, which belongs to the true God incommunicably: ergo, Idol-worship is
forbidden in the first Commandment, and so our Catechist has joined with
Papists, and lost the second Commandment. I add; for a close of this: The
Doctor has assigned the Affirmative part of the second Commandment, to be,
[That God must appoint his own worship.] Now I demand (as a Disciple or
Learner, of the Doctor,) what is the Negative part that answers to that
Affirmative? must it not be this? [No man must prescribe, or Worship God, by
any kind of Worship, but what he has appointed?] That very gloss of the
Doctors, I put in my Margin; in Will Worship. sect. 1. p. 45. I turned to the
place in this Account, to see what he said to it: and he wisely waves it;
infra, page 99. n. 15. Only he forgot what he had said here, and contradicts
himself, by yielding an Affirmative and Negative part of that Commandment,
which he here denied: but of that more, when we come at it. But because this
Divinity of mine, is too old, or too new for the Doctor; [That the Subject of
the second Commandment, is, a right matter of Worship.] Of which the Doctor
cannot see one word there; I shall gratify him with two eminent Catechists
Judgments, of the sum and scope of that Commandment; whom, I hope, he will not
undervalue. The first is, the Bishop of Winchester: who thus instructs his
Catechumene in the sense of this Commandment: Pattern of Ca^e Chist doct. p.
196. on 2. Commandment
[ The precept prescribes, two things 1. That for his honor, in outward
Worship, he will have modum a se praescriptum; The special thing here
forbidden, is the not making of Images, but a further thing is set down, Col.
2.23. Invented-worship: for (to make) in this place signifies to invent: The
general thing here commanded, is, that we should Worship God, after the Order,
that he has prescribed, Heb. 8.5. Exodus 25.40. Acts 3.22. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Jer.
2.11. Deuteronomy. 5.32. For as Chrysostom. says, Non est honor, se dedecus, si vel
contra, vel praeter mandatum fiat.] Here the Doctor may find, the general sum
of this Precept, and the Affirmative and Negative parts; what is forbidden,
what is commanded. If this be not clear, and home enough, I shall pleasure him
with another as learned as he; Body of Divinity. p. 222, 223 Vide Zanch. in 2.
praecept. Alsted. compend. Theolog. Til. Syst. Theol. disp. 4. de 2. praecept.
Virel in his Grounds.
the renowned Archbishop of Armach: whose words are these, on the second
Commandment. [ What is the scope and meaning of this Commandment? To bind all
men to that solemn form of Religious worship, which God in his word
prescribes, that we serve him according to his will, Deuteronomy. 12.32. What is
forbidden? every form of Worship, though of the true God, contrary to, or
diverse from the prescript of his word, Matthew. 15.9. called by the Apostle,
Will Worship, (mark that) Col. 2.23.] And as if he had not said enough, he goes
over it again; [ What is required to Worship God? 1. That we give unto God,
that Worship, which he himself has prescribed. 2. That alone, without
addition, or alteration. What is forbidden? 1. The neglect of his ordinances.
2. Dr. Featly Handmaid to Devot. In confess. of sin against the 2 Com. And who
not.
The adding any thing unto that pure Worship, when we serve him, by any other
means, then himself has commanded.] I hope now, the Doctor will be satisfied
with these Authorities, and take notice, where I learned my Divinity, in this,
and other points. Yet something I have learned from the Doctors own Catechism,
(I will confess, by whom I have profited.) Besides what I have produced from
him, ad p. 34. n. 8. I have been further instructed by him, in the senfe of the
second Commandment. Of Idolatry, s. 13. p. 6.
[ The word Idol signifies an Image, Sculpture, etc. But besides, these two
things, 1. The Heathen Gods, under the notion of false (together with the
Temples, wherein they were worshipped.) 2. The same again, and their Worships,
That vileness and filthiness, which was wont to be used in their Idol Feasts,
is here forbidden. Append. on 2. Com.
under the notions of filt by, unclean, and abominable.] Now hence I observed,
1. That the Heathen Gods, as false Gods, as they were forbidden rather in the
first Commandment, as rivals to that Worship; so they might be worshipped
without an Idol, or Image, and so were not forbidden in this second
Commandment, which prohibits (says the Doctor) only Idol-worship. This
confounds and jumbles the two first Commandments together, 2. If the Temples
wherein, and the filthy, unclean services, wherewith they served their Gods,
were forbidden under the second Commandment; I would say, this cannot be, as
Idols or Images, but as parts of Worship, and then the Commandment may, by the
same reason, forbid any other kind or sort of Worship, tendered to the true
God: as it commands all Worship prescribed by Him: which is the same, that
those other Divines hold out, and which the Doctor has so much declined, as so
much prejudicial to his opinion, and main cause. But enough of that Commandment.

For the third Commandment, that the Subject of it, is a right manner, he
cannot assent to, because he has in his Catechism, glossed it another way. He
says therefore; [ I had thought our Savior, p. 43. n. 5.
Matthew. 6. ( it should be, 5.) had given us the sum of it, Thou shall not
forswear thy self but perform thy oaths; the Negative, and Affirmative parts of
it, etc.] But other Divines think otherwise; and perhaps the Doctor himself
sometimes: I know how he has expounded this Commandment to his Disciples in
his Catechism; and I am loath to be lead into a new Controversy; yet to
rescue oppressed truth, I shall say something to his Newfound gloss. 1. It is
the judgment of the best Interpreters, that our Savior here corrected the
false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, put upon the Laws of God; and in
special here, upon the third Commandment: which is by several men, understood
in a double sense. 1. That our Savior, first, lays down the false
Interpretation of the Pharisees, See Dr. Andr. Sermon. on 2 Com. p. 40.
as if nothing were meant by [Taking of Gods Name in vain] but forswearing and
perjury: So that Learned and Pious Perkins on the place. 2. Others think (and
very probably) that he especially looks at these words, Levit. 19.12. [Thou
shall not forswear thy self, etc.] Which were not the words of the Pharisees,
but of God, by Moses; which they glossed and corrupted diverse ways: as 1. That
it was lawful, for a man to swear in ordinary discourse, if they did not
forswear themselves; against this our Savior opposes, [Swear not at all.] 2.
That they allowed swearing by other things, the heavens, earth, temple, etc.
Even to esteem it no perjury, though false, to which our Savior opposes;
[Swear not by heavens, etc. nor any thing,] but by the Name of God, when just
occasion to swear. Let your yea, be yea, etc. Thus the Judicious Chemnitius
interprets the words: so that our Savior had no respect directly to the third
Commandment, but as swearing and forswearing, were particular branches of sins
there forbidden, and of Taking Gods Name in vain. Pract. Catech. p. 120.
But the Doctor says peremptorily; [Thou shall not take the Name of God in
vain, is undoubtedly, no more then, thou shall not forswear thy self; swearing,
simply taken, is not reduced to this Commandment.] I shall not enter the debate
with the Doctor my self, for I have none, but new and Ordinary Divinity. I
shall therefore go to School to those Learned Catechists, before cited, who
undoubtedly have found another meaning of the third Commandment. Patt. of
Catech. doctr. p. 221.
The Bishop of Winchester: thus Paraphrases it. [The object of this
Commandment, is the Name of God: The thing commanded, is praise, and this
praise must be to his Name -- The Name is that, whereby we know a man, or
thing, etc. So whatsoever God is known by, is meant by his Name in this place.]
The other, Body of Divin. p. 236.
the Archbishop is more express and full. [ What is the sum of this
Commandment? That we impeach not, but by all means advance the glorious Name of
God, in all things he makes himself known to men: 1. His Titles, Jehovah, etc.
2. His Properties and Attributes. 3. His Works and Actions. 4. His Word. 5.
Sacraments. 6. Censures. 7. Prayer. 8. The whole Worship of God, in all his
Ordinances, etc.] I spare to produce any more, of our Divines, and return to
the Doctor: He says, 1. [ Thou shall not take the Name, etc. is undoubtedly, no
more, then thou shall not forswear thy self. 2. Swearing simply, is not reduced
to this Commandment.] I demand then, to what Commandment, was common, rash,
ordinary swearing reduced? or were the Jews indulged swearing? (as some of the
Fathers seem to hold;) and to swear by the creatures also? The Law Deuteronomy. 6.13.
etc. [Thou shall swear by his Name,] imports two things, 1. That swearing there
was not meant of Ordinary swearing in common discourse, but upon just
occasions, before a Magistrate, etc. 2. That when they did swear, they must
swear by the Name of God, that is, by God himself, and no other creature, or
thing. That Law of Moses, was not a permission, (as the Doctor calls it) but a
precept. What then does the Doctor mean, by swearing, simply taken, etc. That
it was sometimes lawful to swear upon just occasions. That Is allowed also in
the Gospel: our Savior came not to void that Law; or that See p. 46. n. 12.
Voluntary swearing at all, is forbidden (by Christ, (...),) in the 3. Com. As
if it were allowed by the Law before.
simple swearing, either without perjury, or ordinarily, by the Name of God,
was permitted the Seep. 46. n. 12. Voluntary swearing at all, is forbidden (by
Christ, (...),) in the 3. Com. As if it were allowed by the Law before.
Jews by Moses? This I suppose, he will not say. Yet faintly says the
contrary. [Perhaps foolish, wanton (sure, profane, blasphemous) using of Gods
Name, may be resolved, to be there forbidden by reduction.] Is it but perhaps,
foolish and wanton using of Gods Name may be resolved to be there forbidden?
It Is well he will yield that profane, and blasphemous using of Gods Name is
there forbidden. Yet I would be bold to ask my Catechist one question more: How
can (I say not, foolish and wanton) profane and blasphemous using of Gods Name
be forbidden in that Commandment, so much, as by reduction, if the taking Gods
Name in vain, be undoubtedly, no more, then thou shall not forswear thy self?
Cannot men profane and blaspheme Gods Name, but only when they forswear
themselves? or have foolish and wanton using Gods Name, by common swearing, any
thing to do with perjury? I would but propound this argument; [ To use the Name
of God, unreverently, was ever a Sin, against some moral Law; but to use the
Name of God foolishly, wantonly, (much more, profanely, blasphemously) is to
use the Name of God, unreverently, and vainly: ergo,] If against a Moral-law, I
ask again, Against which Commandment, if not against the third? To shut up
this: the Doctor says, Pract. Cat. p. 121. [Swearing by other inferior things,
are now utterly unlawful:] What now only? were they not so, in the Old-law? It
seems not, by the Doctor; for he says, this is something, that Christ has
added to perfect the Law; [ A Christian must not use any of those Oaths.]
Belike a Jew might: But why not a Christian now? Hear his reason: [Because
every of these are Creatures of God (whose whole being consists in reference to
him) and not to be subjected to their lust, to be tossed and defamed, by their
unnecessary oaths.] Will not the same reason serve against the Jews, swearing
by inferior Creatures? were they not then the Creatures of God, and the rest?
Why might not the Doctor have given this reason, because it is a taking of Gods
Name in vain, (which is much made known by the Creatures) and against the
Commandment, which requires, that when men do swear, they swear only by his
Name. But these would have marred his new gloss. I leave it to him.

And now we are come to consider the subject of the fourth Commandment, the
right time, his own appointed day: Which he does not, cannot deny, for he has
granted it elsewhere; but yet has somewhat to say. p. 44. n. 6.
1. [Sure not so, as to prohibit all others, there were other, Fast and Feasts
appointed, besides the weekly rest, etc.] It Is true; but then they were of Gods
own appointment, (who may dispense with his own Laws) and if appointed by men,
they were but Circumstances, not parts of Worship, as the Doctor confesses: But
I was speaking of Worship, he knows. In Religion or Worship of God, four things
are considerable, the last whereof is, a right Time, his own appointed Day,
viz. as a part of Worship: and so all other Days are forbidden. But then,
secondly, he has another elusion, [Under the New Testament, the first day of
the week, certainly was not the last, which the Decalogue prescribed, etc.]
This will prove the Doctors mistake, common to him with others: [That the
fourth Commandment, prescribed, nothing, but the seventh or last day of the
week:] Which if it be true, the fourth Commandment is as fully void, as that
Commandment which prescribed the seventh year Sabbath, or any other particular
Holy Day. The Doctor himself has granted, that the fourth commandment
requires, that we give God, not less then one day in seven: which if it be
true, the principal matter of the fourth Commandment, was not that seventh day;
for that is void, says he, say all; but one day in seven, but still of Divine
appointment, as being a part of Worship. The Lords day then, being one of
seven, and confessedly of Divine Institution by the Apostles, whose
appointments were Divine. There is no asking, [why the Apostles should not
(either they or their successors) institute other dayes] (as parts of Worship,
that must be minded:) the reason is, because the Apostles had Divine Authority,
to institute the Lords day, according to the fourth Commandment, one day of
seven, but neither they, much less their successors, can produce any
Commission, to institute other days, I say still, as parts of Worship: if as
Circumstances only of Worship, it is nothing to the purpose, as I have often
said. And now, for all that is said, the Subjects of the four first
Commandments, are distinct, and clear, as I have propounded them; and will be a
ground sufficient to build that on, which is intended, p. 44. n. 7.
[That Superstition may extend, to the whole first Table, when there is a
nimiety or excess in any one of them.] To the further confirming whereof, I now
proceed.

But first, the Doctor is willing to expose me, to the scorn of all Readers,
for want of Ingenuity, or Charity, to make the best construction of my words:
He says, n. 8.
[to persuade (that assertion before) he commends one observation to us, but
such, as I think, never slipped from any man before him.] Surely the Doctor has
met with some Errata's, in some Authors Printed, which are as unreasonable, or
as much nonsense, as these of mine are. He might have said; either it may be
the Printers fault; or some Inadvertency in the Author; or else have looked
forward, how I improved my notion (which he does at last, when he has
sufficiently flouted me.) Any of these had becom'd him better, then to make
himself mirth, by others (undeserved) shame. I shall not blush, to confess,
there was an Inadvertency in me in passing those words. For those words (the
Commandments of God having a Negative and Affirmative part) were needless and
impertinent here: It had been sufficient to have said, the duties of Religion
do stand in the midst, between two extremes, as virtues do; as my application
shows my meaning to be: Or thus, In stead of those first words, I should have
said; In or against every Commandment of God, here are sins of omission in the
defect, (against the Affirmative part) and of Commission in the excess,
(against the Negative part) and the duties of Religion do stand in the midst
(between those two sorts of sins) as virtues between two extremes: or thus we
must observe, 1. That the Commandments of God have every one of them, a
Negative and an Affirmative part, expressed or understood; the omission being a
sin against the Affirmative part, the commission being a sin against the
Negative; and then 2. The duties of Religion stand in the midst (between those
two sorts of sins) as virtues, between two extremes. Are not both these true
and good sense? But taking the advantage, to abuse his Adversary, he goes on:
First, to question the Cornerstone; [What is the Affirmative part of the
second Commandment, or can it be evidenced it has any?] Where of we have given
him a full account above, Ad p. 43. n. 4. p. 45. n. 9.
Then, [he will suppose with me, that every Commandment has it is Negative and
Affirmative part: he demands only, how he could think, that the duties of
Religion, stand in the midst? What Is the Antecedant, to which, in the midst
relates? there is no other in the period, but the Affirmative and Negative
part: but do duties of Religion stand in the midst between them two?] And then
he goes on to make himself merry, and me a scorn: But letting that pass; might
he not in the second part of the Period, have found, two extremes, between
which (as virtues do) the duties of Religion stand? p. 45. n. 10.
This he stumbles on at length; and would (gladly no doubt) affix that possible
meaning to my words. [But then to what purpose was the mention of the two
parts, Affirmative and Negative: for this, he is still to seek; and his
Plaster not so fit for the malady as he could have wished, and yet has no
better, etc.] Yes, there was a better at hand, and he at last finds it; [The
best of it is, he has not pursued this observation, in the exemplification
thereof.] Why, the exemplifications, might have suggested my meaning to him, in
all the four Commandments. [In the first, a double error; one in the defect,
that is Atheism; having no God at all: the other in the excess, that is
Polytheisme, having too many:] and so of the rest: the duty of Religion stands
in the midst, to have God, and him alone to Worship; this is plain enough to be
my meaning. Yet the Doctor answers his own question, n. 11.
[To what purpose was this observation?] Uncharitably enough; [Sure but to
amuse the Reader, and say somewhat demurely, which should pretend to be a
ground of his beloved conclusions, that all Additions to the rule of Worship
are excess against the second Commandment, etc.] God deal so with my soul, as I
had no defign, but to search out and settle the truth: which I think will now
appear, though the Doctor would fain cloud it, by saying, (as if it were my
conclusion) All Additions to the rule of Worship, are excesses against the
second Commandment;] Whereas I meant, all Additions of Worship, (not, of
Circumstances) are excess against that Commandment: as I have proved.

Upon this mistake, are all those questions of the Doctor: p. 46. n. 12.
[All worship of Idols is forbidden in the second Commandment, but how come all
uncommanded rites to be Idols? etc.] The Doctor varies the question, and then
multiplies his questions: He has often enough been told, it is not about
uncommanded Rites, (unless made parts of Worship,) but uncommanded Worship: A
Rite or Ceremony made a part of Worship, by men, is an Idol or Image: as, supra
on the second Commandment.

[ All perjury, p. 46. n. 12.
(and (by Christ's, (...),) voluntary swearing at all) is forbidden in the third
Commandment, but how come Rites and Ceremonies, and Gestures, though never so
ridiculous, to be either oaths or perjuries? etc.] True it is, first, that
perjury, (as it is the grossest taking of Gods Name in vain, to call him to
witness a lie) is forbidden in the third Commandment: but so was all voluntary
swearing by the Name of God, or Creatures, forbidden in the same Commandment:
on the same reason, in the Judgment of the best Divines: 2. The Doctors
question, [How come ridiculous Rites and Ceremonies, etc. (in the worship of
God) to be perjury?] is it self ridiculous: for though they be not perjury, yet
are they, Takings of Gods Name in vain. His question is grounded upon a double
false Supposition: first, That the third Commandment did forbid only perjury:
2. That voluntary swearing, was not forbidden in that Commandment, by Moses,
but is part of Christ's, (...), or perfection added to the Law, before
imperfect; both which are proved false. The like may be said to the next
question, about the fourth Commandment. [What words of that Commandment,
conclude against instituting of other Holy Days, etc. as an excess? etc.]
Those words, six days for labor, and one only for rest in a week, at Gods
appointment, as an Holy day, do conclude against all men's instituting other
Holy Days: as is proved elsewhere.

I gave an instance of an excess in the fourth Commandment, n. 14.
[In Jeroboams Feast, Instituted by himself, like unto the Feast which was in
Judea,] of Gods institution: what was it, that made that criminous? Let the
Doctor tell us; [This sure was the sin of Jeroboam, to set up Calves in Dan and
Bethel, and so in like manner, a Feast, like that in Judea; and sacrificing
there; contrary to the command of making Jerusalem the only place of
sacrifice. etc.] So the crime was only, with respect to the place. n. 15.
[Had that Feast been separated from that appendant sin, of sacrificing
elsewhere, then God had appointed, etc. I shall desire to know, why that might
not have been as blameless, as the Reubenites erecting an Altar by Jordan.]
Belike then, if the King of Judah, had altered Gods appointed Feast, at
Jerusalem, of his own head, that had been no sin. For the Reubenites Altar,
there are Learned men, that say, they did ill in erecting of it, and the rest
in allowing it: So the ever Honored and Judicious Calvin, upon Josh. 22. Duae
tribus, etc. [The two Tribes and half did very ill, etc.] But the Doctor
respects not his judgment. What thinks he of the Learned and Renowned Doctor
Fulk; [The two Tribes and half, Josh. 22. Made not an Image, but an Altar, for
a memorial; and yet their fact was not commendable, etc.] Against Sanders of
Images; See Joseph. Antiq. l. 5. c. 1. It was not for Worship, etc. p. 47. n.
17.
p. 649. However the difference between that Feast of Jeroboam, and the Altar
at Jordan, is visible; The one was made a part of Worship, by Jeroboam, as the
Chapels, and Sacrifices and Priests were; but the other a Monument only of a
civil thing.

[And why may not a Christian Festival, as a Memorial, not to draw off any man's
heart, from any part of Gods prescribed Worship, be as innocent, as that?]
True, if only as a Memorial; a Circumstance of Worship, and not as a part of
Worship; an Holy Day, equal with the Lord's Day, etc. that is it that makes it a
crime. And we know, that his Christmas Festival was so made and accounted; and
did draw away many men's hearts from some part of Gods prescribed worship, by
putting more honor on it, and less on the Lords-Sabbath; as we have showed:
Otherwise, I shall use his own words, [Why might not our Jealous brethren, the
Doctor and those of his persuasion, that came out to dispute against us,
imitate the Israelites, and lay down that design, and go back to their houses
in peace?]

[We know (says he) Naaman built him an Altar in his own Country, n. 18.
and there offered unto the God of Heaven.] What he knows I cannot tell, but I
know no such thing, by that story. For, first, the text says not the Prophet
granted his request, to let him carry away two mules burden of the earth from
(not Jerusalem, but) Samaria. 2. Much less, that he built him an Altar in his
own Country; though he pretended so much: 3. And yet less, that he offered
sacrifice there to the God of Heaven. For, first, Jerusalem was the place
appointed for Worship, John 4. and therefore Proselytes came thither to
worship: 2. For sacrifice, himself says, [ It was contrary to the express word
of God, which had commanded, that all sacrifice, should be offered at
Jerusalem, n. 14.] 3. If he offered it, in his own Country; who was then and
their his Priest? Sacrifices were tied as well to be offered by a Levitical
Priest, as at the Altar at Jerusalem: But if some of this were granted him,
that the Prophet granted him (which is most improbable upon the former
considerations) and he carried away some of that earth, and with it, built an
Altar, yet it might be, as the Reubenites, not for sacrifice, but as a
Memorial, to put others in mind, what God he now served. This is but a
by-business, and I needed not to have followed him in it, but only to take
down his confidence, in interpreting Scripture; and to discover the grounds of
his mistakes, in setting up Festivals, as Days more holy, and as parts of
Worship: as this Altar, if erected to the end of sacrificing to the God of
Heaven, would have been.

But my conclusion, will not yet down, p. 48. n. 19.
[That there may be Superstition in a general sense, in or against all the
Commandments of the first Table, in the excessive part, etc.] Or if it were so;
[Yet (says the Doctor) I hope the observing of a few blameless, decent,
Ceremonies, instituting a Christian Festival, etc. will not prove to be any of
those excesses.] We have answered twenty times I think; it is not uncommanded
Circumstances, but uncommanded Worship, that is proved guilty of excess.

But soft and fair; The Doctor says, n. 20.
[By the way, I am not sure that in every Commandment of the ten, there are
such excesses: I shall suppose Chastity the duty of the seventh Commandment:
Fornication, etc. the The Dr. has given us both the extremes. Quest. of
Divorce, s. 31. A double Adultery, one in taking a new wife whilst the former
lives, the other in deserting (and denying the duty of marriage to) the
rejected wife. There Adultery, taking another wife, or woman, was made the
excess, in the seventh Commandment, here he makes it the defect.
extreme on one side, take which he will, excess or defect; I demand what is
the other extreme, and whether placed by those Divines named, under the head of
Superstition, etc.] This is a mere perverting of the question, which is not of
the ten; but of the four Commandments of the first Table: And therefore his
instance of the seventh Commandment, is beside the business. To be sure,
Superstition is not to be looked for, in the second Table, but in the first,
which has respect to Worship: And he should make himself ridiculous, that
would imagine any man so simple, as to place the extreme of the seventh
Commandment, under the Head of Superstition: Yet of some Commandments of the
second Table, it is apparent, there may be extremes, and so one in the defect,
another in the excess. Though not under the Head of Superstition: ergo, In the
fifth Commandment: Not to honor our Parents, is the defect: to honor them
above God, is an excess. In the sixth, neglect of our own, or others life, is a
defect; to violate it, is an excess; say the same of the 7.8.9. Commandments:
But this is a needless quarrel; only to make some sport. Does not the Doctor
know that moral virtues stand between two vices, in the extremes, one in the
excess, the other in the defect: Suppose it be, Fortitude, Justice, Chastity
(by him named) and the rest: shall I need to send him to his Ethics, to find
out the extremes, to every virtue? To conclude, are there not sius of Omission,
and Commission, in every Commandment? the one against the Affirmative part of
the Command, leaving undone what is commanded, the other against the Negative
part thereof, doing what is forbidden; and are not, doing too much, and leaving
undone, what is commanded, (which is doing too little) the two extremes, in the
excess and defect? And because all this discourse, is with respect to the main
question, [That Superstition is a vice contrary to Religion in the excess.] I
shall show him a learned heathen, that gives him both the extremes in Religion,
Plutarc. in vit. Camilli. (...).
Plutarch, by name; who bewails [the weakness and infirmity of men, not keeping
within due bounds; but running one while into Superstition and vanity, another
while into neglect and contempt of Divine thing:] Where, (...), and (...), are
opposed, as the excess and defect, and presently after, (...), Religion set up
in the midst, as the virtue, between those two extremes? I hope this old
learning will please the Doctor I leave it to him.

Section, 3. [And hence it may appear, that some are too short, in defigning
the Species, or kinds of Superstition, etc. First, the learned School-man, who
makes but three kinds of it, etc.]
HEre I am first charged, for wronging Aquinas, [saying, p. 49. n. 7.
he makes but three kinds of Superstition, whereas it is evident, he makes
four:] It Is true, in the conclusion, he makes four, but in the body of that
Article, he reduces them all to three; or rather, he makes but two, 1. when
worship is given to the true God, but in an undue manner; 2. When it is given
to a Creature; and that (says he) may be divided into many species, and he
reduces them to three; Idolatry, Divination, and vain Observations, Ligatures,
etc. Now it is evident, that the School-man is confused enough, in designing the
Species of Superstition; and the last, of Ligatures, spells and vain
observations, etc. may very well be reduced to Divination, as done by
assistance of the Devil: as the Doctor (if I mistake not) has somewhere
referred them. But this is but a strife of words; certain it is, he is not
distinct enough in this designation, nor has discocovered all the Species of
Superstition, which the Doctor himself has yielded, some whereof, will not
fall well under any of those which Aquinas has assigned, unless, they may be
referred to his cultus indebitus; For thus they may be ranged; Superstition is
of two sorts; first, when Worship is given to a creature, which is due only to
the Creator; or, second, When Worship is tendered to the true God, but, non
prout debet, indebito modo; in an undue manner; and of this, there are many
Species, as Aquinas confesses: Now that Aquinas is short in his distribution, I
prove thus from himself; [ If Superstition be a vice contrary to Religion in
general in the excess; then according to the general Rules of Religion, there
may be so many kinds of Superstition; But the first is his own definition:
ergo,] The consequence is proved, because Superstition may extend as far as
Religion: Now Religion in general, considers, either the right object, to whom
Worship ought to be tendered, God alone, in the first Commandment: or the right
way, how God will be worshipped, and that is, in there particulars: first, The
right means, (as some call instituted Worship) in the second Commandment, his
own prescribed Worship: or, 2. The right manner of tendering it, with all
reverence: or, 3. The right Time especially, his own designed Day: and so the
kinds of Superstition vary, according to these Rules of Religion. Aquinas
himself; Art. 1. there in Corp. thus concludes, it, [Superstition is a vice
opposite to Religion in the excess, not because it exhibites more to the
Worship of God, then true Religion, but because it exhibites Divine worship, to
whom it ought not, or in that manner it ought not.] And that manner is
threefold as I have said. But it is no heeding what Aquinas says, in designing
the kinds of Superstition, who was himself drowned in the Romish Superstition,
which he would be tender to touch upon.

A second mistake charged upon me, is, in referring Idolatry to the first
Commandment, as some Divines do; p. 49. n. 2.
But (says he) [Those Divines must needs be those, that put the first and
second Commandments into one (as Aquinas did, and I hoped the Diatribist had
not been of his persuasion) else those words, Thou shall not make to thy self,
etc. being supposed to make a second Commandment, no Divine can be so
irrational, as to deny Idolatry to be prohibited there.] I could answer, first,
That the Doctor may well be placed among those Divines, who put the first and
second Commandment into one, as was showed above. But I say further, this will
prove but a strife of words: For if Idolatry be taken strictly, for the
worshipping of an Idol, or Image, so it belongs to the second Commandment: but
if it be taken, for the Worship of Heathen Gods, etc. as often it is, then I
hope the Doctor will not deny but Idolatry may be found in the first
Commandment. Is not Polytheisme Idolatry? is not, (...), the worshipping of
Demons, or Angels, Idolatry? not against the second Commandment, for that
prohibites only Idol, or Image Worship, (says the Doctor;) but Angels and
Demons may be Worshipped, without any Image. Shall we take the Doctors own
former thoughts of this matter; He told us, a good while ago, [That the Heathen
Idolatry, Of Idolatry, Sect. 65. p. 42.
was the worshipping of the many false Gods first, and then of the Images of
them.] Mark here, two sorts of Idolatry, whereof the first, is not the second,
and therefore not in the second Commandment, but in the first, or none. And
when I said Divination, (which is a consulting with the Devil) is the worst
kind of Idolatry, as worshipping the Devil, the worst of Creatures, instead of
God; I hope the Doctor will not deny it to be Idolatry bad enough; I demand,
against what Commandment? not the second, for that he says) prohibites only
Imageworship; but those that use Divination, do not always Worship the Devil
in an Image: and therefore that Idolatry is not forbidden in the second, but in
the first Commandment. I suppose then, the Doctor does mistake, with Aquinas,
(rather then speak truth with me) when he says, [ He supposes Aquinas was in
the right in this, that made it a Species of Superstition, not of Idolotry; and
so it must more fitly belong to the first Commandment, and so must Illegitimate
Worship, being an offense against the due manner of Gods Worship.] But, first,
Divination, may be a Species of Idolatry, and of Superstition too, if Idolatry
be (as it is) a species of Superstition; 2. How he can say, [So it must more
fitly belong to the the first So he says, n. 3.
Commandment,] I do not well understand, for he said just before, [If
Divination be Idolatry, sure that must be forbidden under the second
Commandment.] Unless he will have it belong to both Commandments, the first, as
it is Superstition, the second, as it is Idolatry; which I see not how he can
well say; thirdly, [ That Illegitimate Worship, being an offense against the
due manner of Gods Worship, must also belong to the first Commandment,] is
neither agreeable with the truth, nor with with Aquinas, who makes the Species
of Superstition, to respect the To worship the true God by an Image is it not a
sin against the manner of his Worship.
Object of Worship, cui non debet; and 2. the mode or manner of Worship, to the
right Object: the first whereof must needs belong to the first Commandment, and
the other, to other Commandments. These are indeed but niceties, but such as
the Doctor is pleased to exercise us with; and do not a little concern himself.

It is confessed by the Doctor, p. 49 n. 3.
[That it was an error in Amesius, to understand by the word Superstition, no
more but the tendering of undue Worship to God, and also that he confined it to
the second Commandment, when in all reason it belonged to the first.] But is it
not as bad an Error in the Doctor to confine it to the first, when sure, it may
be extended to the second? Is it not Superstition, to Worship the true God, by
an Image? then Superstition belongs to two Commandments: But is it not
Superstition to use ridiculous Ceremonies in Gods Worship? that is against the
third Commandment. And is it not Superstition, to be scrupulous to defend a
man's self against his enemies on the Sabbath? that is against the fourth
Commandment. Then it is equally an Error in the Doctor to confine Superstition
to the first, as in Amesius to confine it to the second Commandment; and the
Truth is, it extends to many, even all the four first Commandments. Quod erat
demonstrandum.

The next of my mistakes is,] p. 50. n 4.
That I affirm of that Species of Superstition, undue Worship tendered to God,
that it is, properly Will Worship;] Which is but one Species of Superstition.
Sure I am, Amesius understood it so, of new kinds of Worship instituted by
men, against the scope of the 2. Commandment; and this most of our Divines call
(in a strict sense) Will Worship. But I rather agreed with Aquinas here, that
undue or Illegitimate-worship may refer to more Commandments; the third and
fourth: it being possible, and too frequent for men, to Worship God unduely, in
those Commandmets: But if we restrain the second Commandment to the matter of
Worship; then that Worship which is materially of men's addition, may more
properly (with the Scripture, and best Divines) be called Will Worship, and is
but one Species of Superstition; as was said above.

Yet another injury is done by me; that of Aquinas, his Illegitimate-worship, I
give this gloss, [Not commanded of God, p. 50. n. 5.
but instituted and appointed by men.] But how will this appear? By the words
of Aquinas himself, which having cited at large, he says, [nothing is more
destructive to my pretensions, had it been considered.] Let Us hear his fourfold
gloss upon them, n. 6.
(that I may never cite Aquinas more in this matter) thus he says, [1. That
Illegitimate-worship, is, in Aquinas Vitiated-worship, and so more then
uncommanded, that is, prohibited; Illegitimate signifies, not without, but
against Law.] And here he empties his Note-book about that word: But I say, let
it signify that which is forbidden by Law; so say I, is all Uncommanded
Worship; as was proved before by the Doctors own Confession; therefore
Illegitimate-Worship, and uncommanded, are all one; and that in Aquinas his
sense, is Vitiated-worship: secondly, [ The superfluity of Worship (says
Aquinas) Vitiates the Worship of God, when any thing is assumed, which neither
by Divine, nor Ecclesiastical appointment, belongs to the glory of God, etc.]
The Doctors gloss is this, That the Superfluity of it consists not, in being
Super-added to Gods commands only, but to the Churches appointment also; and
so that which is ordained by the Church, though not by God, comes not under the
style of Superfluous or Illegitimate.] By this I see, where the Doctor learned
his old Divinity, even in the Romish Schools (wherein most of his Size, spend
their first studies, scorning all our own Commonplace men, medulla's, and
models of Divinity.) For how readily does he shake hands with Aquinas in the
Authority, of the Churches appointment, as in other things not a few: But will
the Doctor stand to this, [ That the Churches appointments of Worship ( of that
Aquinas and we speak) are not Superfluous, nor Illegitimate?] De Illegitime
cultu: Tit. Articuli.
I hope he will not join with Aquinas and the Church of Rome in this; yet he
dare go far with them, even to call Ecclesiastical appointments, Semi-divine at
least, as shall appear hereafter: see p. 83. n. 4. Divinarum Sanctionem, etc.
But thirdly, [That what tends to the glory of God, or subjecting a man to God,
is neither superfluous nor Illegitimate, so it be ordained by the Church,] It Is
one thing what men intend by their appointments (who does not pretend the glory
of God and that subjection? Papists and Heathens do so, sometimes) and another
to tend really to those ends. Now certain it is, no appointments of Worship by
men, can tend to the glory of God, etc. Which he has peremptorily forbidden:
And one thing more; The Doctor seems to restrain this Lawfulness, [To the
Ordination of the Church,] as if private or particular persons appointments, to
those ends, were superfluous and Illegitimate; which I suppose he will not
grant, viderit ipse, yet Aquinas restraines it only to the Church, the holy
Church of Rome. 4. The School-man makes Worship of God Illegitimate, as well by
the pravity, as the superfluity of it: How may that be? Two ways, one whereof
is (which the Doctor takes notice of.) That the Ministers public using any
Ceremony, contrary to the custom of the Church (such is his sitting at the
Sacrament, and the like) is a pravity, and that is worse then a superfluity in
the Worship of God.] Here is scarce any minute part of sound Doctrine, in this,
(to return him his own words.) For, first, It savours rankly of the Romish
usurpation, that no Ceremony may be used publicly by a Minister contrary to
the Custom of the Church: second, That it is a pravity, so to do; which may
rather go for a Superfluity at most. 3. That it is a pravity, worse then
superfluity of Worship, to use a Ceremony in public; whereas Super-added
Worship, is far worse, then using a new Ceremony, not ordained by the Church:
4. That he charges this pravity upon me, or others for sitting at the
Sacrament; But, first, we are speaking of Worship, not of a rite or gesture of
Worship, such is sitting at the Sacrament. 2. How does he know, that I sit at
the Sacrament? I may perhaps stand, or kneel, for ought he knows, according to
the custom of the places where I come; and may defend my practice, by the
Authority of Saint Ambrose, cited to me, p. 232. But thirdly, suppose I do sit;
I shall not fear to profess my Judgment, that I think it nearer to the first
Institution of the Supper, then his kneeling; and why people should not conform
rather to Christ himself and his Apostles, then to the custom of a Church, I
know no reason, but, [The Statutes of Omri are kept,] and the like. But this I
will say, if the Doctor or his Church, institute and command kneeling, as a
special, more special and better Worship of God, then sitting, I believe, they
would be Superstitious enough; and injurious to Jesus Christ, as preferring
themselves before him, as if he were less humble, or less devout in his
sitting, then they in their kneeling, And now I hope, the Doctor will never
cite Aquinas more, in this matter.

That the barbarous Ceremonies of Baals Priests, etc. should be an excess
against the third Commandment, a taking Gods name in vain; he cannot yet
digest, [Because it is by Christ rendered, p. 51. n. 7.
forswearing ones self.] But that is proved the Doctors mistake, against the
stream of the best Interpretors: [ Nor did Baals Priests, ever use the name of
God at all, and so, not in vain.] Sure those Priests accounted Baal for a God
(they called the true God, Baali sometimes, but God forbids it) and Elias bad
them call upon their God; Then, those Ceremonies used, were part of their
Worship (ridiculous enough if they had been offered to the true God) and being
in Worship, and false, they must be against some Commandment: Not the first,
that forbids other Objects of Worship, beside God. Not the second, that forbids
only Idol or Image Worship (says he.) Not the fourth, that respects only the
Due Time of Worship; ergo, against the third or none. The Doctor passes by the
ridiculous rites and gestures of Papists in their Worship, as loath to offend
them, with charge of excess, or Superstition; though not bold enough to defend
them. p. 52. n. 8.
As for dedicating of Holy Days to Saints by Papists, and comparing it with
Jeroboams Feast, he does not like it; [They are, he says, neither fitly
paralleld, nor appropriated to Papists, when such days were dedicated to the
memory of Martyrs, long before the name or errors of Papists were in the
World.] But on which side is the wrong, in this charge of dedicating of days?
Jeroboams? or Papists? Jeroboams, I hope he will not say, for that is proved
Superstitious above. If he think I have wronged Papists in that parallel: Let
him stand out and justify their Superstition, in that matter, which all, even
the Church of England did condemn. 1. That dedicated to This is the Doctors
Language here: dedicating holy days to Saints: and dedication of Holy Days.
n. 8, and. 11.
the Saints, and to their Worship, and not to God. 2. That made parts of
Worship. 3. That some were no Saints, but wicked men, and some no men at all.
4. Their Number, etc. Jeroboam was a Saint to them. And now I hope it might
well be appropriated to Papists? For those days dedicated to the memorial of
Martyrs, were nothing like these of Papists; they were but occasions, or
Circumstances of Worship; but Papists (as the Doctor his Christmas) make them
parts of Worship, etc. And this may satisfy, what is largely said, in number.
9.10, 11. Only this may be added to the number. 11. That I do not charge the
Doctor with that excess, of the Jews scrupulosity on their Sabbath: but only
bring it as an instance of Superstition in the fourth Commandment.

Section, 4. [Superstition then, in this general notion, as an excess in
Religion, has as many Species, or kinds, as there are Commandments of the
first Table. But it is no easy matter to discover all, etc.]
HEre I am charged with a design, p. 53. n. 1, 2
[becoming humble in stead of Magisterial; because I implore the Readers
pardon, if I be not so Logically accurate, in setting down the particular
kinds of Superstition, as I would.] I profess sincerely, against all designs,
but searching out of truth; and what may my design be herein? Why this, [To
leave the word Superstition in the Clouds, -- that it may be useful for him, as
a Mormo, to affright men out of their obedience to the Church; and to make sure
of a reserve, to add more, when he has need of them.] Truly to me it seems
strange, that I had a design, to cloud the word Superstition, having, in that
before, been driving away those foggie mists, which himself and others, have put
upon it: I know no better way, to clear the word or thing then to give the
definition of it first, and then the division of it, into species; which is all
I have hitherto done: only confessing now, the particulars may be more, then I
can easily reduce to the four Commandments; wherein that Superstition may be
found. I therefore in this and the following Sections, did enumerate such and
so many, as I thought sufficient for my purpose: which being proved to be so in
Thesi, might be as so many principles, or propositions, to conclude the Doctor
in Hypothesi, to be Superstitious, in his observation of his Festival. And now
the Doctor has my full design, in this performance; which belike, he
suspecting, is willing to pass by, no less then ten Sections at once; lest his
Reader, p. 54. n. 2.
taking notice of those particular instances of Superstition, might be ready to
make up the Syllogism, and conclude him Superstitious. The Doctor might have
done me, and the truth this favor, to say to the several kinds by me
alleged, I assent, or dissent, that this is Superstition; some of them indeed,
he has elsewhere set down, as excesses in Religion, and kinds of
Superstition; but why does he not acknowledge, or deny them here? If I may
guess, one reason, I think, is, because he, having given forth his description
of Superstition, to be clearly, Superstitum cultus; as if it had no other
proper sense, was not willing the Reader should know him so imprudent as
afterward, to contradict, or at least countermine himself, by giving other
kinds thereof. And if Superstition were no more but the worshipping of
Demons, he were very injurious, that would charge the Church of England, or
himself, with this crime of Superstition. For example, the Doctor grants a
Negative Superstition, Sect. 29. of Superst. [Placing Piety in the Negative, in
not kneeling, etc.] Hence the diligent Reader, would be ready to say; this is
far from Superstitum cultus, and yet granted by the Doctor, to be a kind of
Superstition; ergo, his description was too short and narrow: The like may be
said of the rest if they be truly kinds of Superstition; if not, the Doctor
has by his silence consented to them; why else did he not oppose them? for
they may be of ill consequence to him, in Hypothesi. All he says here, is,
[What follows in the ten following Sections, I shall resolvedly pass over,
though there be many things fit to be noted, partly because he promises they
shall soon recur again, and partly belong to other Tracts, etc. where we shall
sure meet with them, etc.] But first, I find no such promise of mine, though I
knew, I should have use of them, in place convenient; nor secondly, does he
desire to meet with them; for he waves most of them, when he meets them, as
shall appear.

Section 5.
1. Negative, when men abstain from some thing, under a notion of Religion,
etc. And so on to the end of the 14. Section.

Section 15. Having thus made way for our debate with the Doctor by showing the
nature of Superstition, etc.
THe offense taken at this Section is, p. 55. n. 2.
that I say, [commonly those that are most superstitious, are most confident,
of their Innocence and Piety, etc.] The Doctor would wish and hope to make it
convertible; [They which are most confident of their Innocence, etc. are most
Superstitious.] So to retort it upon me: Truly, what I said, was true enough,
and needed not to have troubled him, unless he were guilty: for I expressly
applied it to Romish Proselytes; and of them it is too evident, the most
Superstitious, are most confident: It was no great charity in him to invert the
proposition, and put it slily upon me, whom he cannot charge me with any one
kind of Superstition, unless it be perhaps with Negative Superstition; n. 3.
which here [he allows me for my portion.] Not that he accuses me of Negative
Superstition, (for I know he cannot) but that he grants me, the first kind of
Superstition, viz. Negative, to be truly one kind of Superstition: but little
cause to make sport with that Concession, if he consider the consequence
thereof a little above. But he says, n. 4.
[ He shall much accuse himself, if he cannot justify his notion of the word
Superstition, to be as good, as Mr. C. his Super statutum.] Enough has been
said to Super statutum, already; I owned not that Notation of it. But if he
will speak to the thing, I dare venture my skill, that he cannot justify his
notion of it, in the largest sense of it, so well as I can this, of Super
statutum: that all Superstition is above the Statute Law of Worship: but all
Superstition is not Superstitum Cultus.

Here should come in my 16. Section.

Let Us hear what he says; first, to clear me from owning that Notation, he
takes notice, p. 56. n. 1.
[That I rather rested in the definition of the School-man, as afore] then in
that notation of others; and yet how often would he persuade his Reader, that
was my Notation? Then see how he justifies his own: [My second Section was not
to give any complete definition of Superstition; n. 2.
but, etc.] But should he not here, or somewhere else, have given us a Complete
definition of it; especially having one provided to his hand by the School-man?
whom he follows at heels sometimes. Was not that definition avoided on purpose,
that he might cloud and cover his own Superstition, by the old Heathenish usage
of the word? We enquire not so much, what it signified of old, amongst
Heathens, but what in after times, amongst Christian Authors, Ancient and
Modern. None whereof (I dare confidently affirm it) take the word in a good
sense, or use it any otherwise, then for to signify a vice, contrary to
Religion in the excess; as shall appear anon. ^ee his 46. and 47 s. of Superst.
But he says, [I no where grant excessive fear of the Deity, to be another
kind of Superstition, among the Heathens.] It Is proved above, that Slavish
fear of the Deity, is an excess in Religion, and that is Superstition in the
School-mans definition. And I ask whether that Fear of God which the Epicureans
would have dispatched out of the world, was not that cowardly, trembling fear,
dreading the Gods, as so many Tyrants, etc. if so, the Doctor may [ go herd
himself among the Epicureans, with the famishing prodigal] which scornfully he
puts upon me. For I do not believe the Doctor will allow such a fear in men's
hearts or in the world: If it was not such a Slavish fear, but a just and
moderate fear of punishment for sin, I have pleaded for it, as much as he: But
(...), I said, did not signify at first, or in the proper notation, the
worshipping of Demons, but a slavish fear of the Deity; p. 58. n. 3.
dreading the Gods as so many Tyrants, etc. An irrational fear of the Gods, as
he speaks; wishing there were no God; as Plutarch has it. But this was spoken
to, above, at large: and proved to be an excess, and superstitious.

He charges me here again for extending Superstition to all the four
Commandments of the first Table; p. 57. n. 7.
[ when I know Aquinas made it a breach peculiar to the first Commandment.] In
the Doctors gloss, he does, but in no man's else. For Aquinas makes one and the
first Species of Superstition to be, when Worship is given cui non debet, that
is, to the Creature; and that is, referred to the first Commandment, God alone
is to be worshipped. The second is prout non debet, in an undue manner; which
may extend either to the matter of Worship, when not prescribed by himself:
which the Doctor calls, p. 59. n. 3. [The giving of false. Worship to the true
God:] which is specially reduced to the second Commandment: or to the gesture
of Worship, performed in an unreverent manner, which is refered to the third
Commandment. The third (with him) is, quando non debet; in regard to the
unseasonableness of the time; which he exemplifies, by worshipping God now
after the Jewish manner, with Circumcision, Sacrifices, etc. But these belong
rather to the matter of instituted Worship, and were reduced to the second
Commandment. The quando non debet, should rather have reference to the Sabbath,
and Festivals, abolished by Christ, or now made parts of Worship by men, with
respect to the fourth commandment. But this Aquinas durst not meddle with, not
daring to touch the Romish Superstitions, in this particular of Festivals: And
if he had done so, he had made Superstition a breach of all the four
Commandments, of the first Table, as I have done: and I think, most reasonably
and justly. Let others judge.

What he says, in the following numbers of this Section, is a mere contention
of words, and sufficiently answered above; as also what is found in the third,
and fourth, except this Concession be taken notice of; p. 59. n. 3.
[Though Superstition be the giving of false Worship to the true God, as well
as Worship to false Gods, Demons, etc. (or a dread, which is not a Worship, to
the true) yet this false Worship is unfitly explicated by uncommanded Worship:
for certainly all such is not false, etc.] Observe here, first, He grants a
Superstition, [in giving of false Worship, to the true God;] But this he never
took notice of, in his Tract of Superstion, but carried his Reader away with
his old notion of Superstitum cultus: Now it concerned him, a Christian and a
Divine, to have spoken of the other notion of Superstition, as it gives false
Worship to the true God; which why he waved, let him now consider. 2. He yet
excuses it; [This false Worship yet, is unfitly explicated by uncommanded
Worship, for certainly all such, is not false.] Certainly? Then are not only
all our Divines, but the Doctor himself also, See p. 12. n. 13.
much deceived; who has often granted, that uncommanded Worship is unlawful,
and so false: and then certainly, all false Worship is uncommanded: unless he
will say, some false Worship is commanded, or not forbidden; which sure his
learning will not suffer him to say. If only commanded Worship be true, and
only true Worship be commanded, then all uncommanded Worship, is false, and
all false Worship, uncommanded, yea, forbidden. 3. He speaks of [a dread, which
is not Worship, to the true God.] But first, Is not a dread of the true God,
Worship, in the first Commandment? how then can he say it is not Worship? 2. Or
does he mean it, a cowardly, trembling, desperate fear of the true God,
counting him as a Tyrant, (which I called slavish fear and excessive) is not
Worship? This is true in a sense; it is not true Worship or accepted, but yet
it is a kind of Worship, though false. 4. What he adds, with an especially;
[If the word Worship, be extended, as this Diatribist extends it, to Rites and
Observances, as well as to the substantial parts of Worship.] But this is a
special calumny, (as he uses to phrase it) for this Diatribist has often
professed the contrary, as this Doctor has confessed more then once. And
himself rather extends the word Worship, farther then I do; for even here, he
(closely) insinuates, a distinction of Worship, whiles he talks of, Substantial
parts of Worship: that is, Substantial Worship: which may imply, there is some
Accidental or Circumstantial Worship, in those Rites and Observances, he speaks
of, which as they are no Worship, (or if made Worship, are confessedly
unlawful) so the Doctor, durst never yet call them Worship, though his practice
makes them worship, and his Tract of Will Worship, defends such kind of
Worship; as will appear in due time. One thing more, and I have done, with this
Section: He says, p. 60. n. 4.
[The second Commandment, is spent upon the Worship of Idols (all for the
interdicting of that) and cannot be properly said to consider the Worship of
the true God, unless it be the external part, that of bowing down, etc.] Indeed
in the Doctors Gloss, that is all, the interdicting of Idol-worship: but I hope
those two learned Catechists, will teach him otherwise, cited above, ad p. 43.
n. 4. That the scope of that Commandment, is to forbid all unprescribed
Worship; and to command the observance only of Commanded Worship; which is
more then that of bowing down, etc.

Section, 19. But he adds, Sect. 11. when Paul tells the Athenians, Acts
17.22. They were, (...), etc.
ALl that he says to this Section of mine, is not much material to the main
question between us, and indeed, a mere strife about words: what (...),
signifies in that place, the Vulg. Lat. reads it Superstitiosiores, and ours,
too Superstitious; The Doctor will have it signify, [onely their worshipping
of a multitude of Gods, n. 2, 3.
more then any other nation did: and the unknown God for one, as being more
Pious, etc.] And for this last, that they were the most Pious, amongst
Heathens, he adds three Testimonies more, You cannot Worship the one God if ye
impart and lavish out that incommunicable privilege to any other: So he said
page 26. numb. 18. Yet now, none so Pious as these Athenians.
to what was said before: But I pray was not their worshipping a multitude of
Gods, Superstition bad enough? when one false God, had been too much: And when
they worshipped more Gods then others, were they not more superstitious, too
superstitious? Nay let them take in the true, but unknown God also, and does
not that still add to their Superstition, that they joined with him so many
base and abominable Rivals? Nay, if they had worshipped the true and known God,
and that alone, but not with Worship by him prescribed, had they deserved the
name of Pious, or more pious? had they not been superstitious, in giving false
Worshp to the true God? It Is confessed in the last Section. Yet the Doctor
here, calls it, a Pious Ethnic devotion: another contradiction, in adjecto,
without a distinction. They worshipped they knew not what, nor whom, and they
knew not how, with an Altar, and Sacrifices, which God never commanded, yea,
forbad; and yet Pious, devout men, with the Doctor. And he says, the word here
is [taken in a good, not ill sense, not of any uncommanded Worship of the true
God, but a Pious, though Ethnic devotion, toward the multitude of their false,
supperadded to the one true God.] Or rather toward the one true God, (unknown)
superadded to the multitude of their false Gods; It Is like, he came in, after
all the rest, so Pious they were: will the devout Doctor call this Piety? yes,
with an extenuation; p. 61.
[which Pious Ethnic devotion, though in a Christian scale, or judgment it
cannot be approved, because it is Polytheisme, yet in comparison with other
Heathens, etc.] Is that all the Crime? was it not, the best of it, false
worship of the true God? and is that worthy the name of Piety, accompanied also
with Polytheisme? I wonder not now, that some men, commend the Devotions, and
Moral virtues of Heathens, as good, and pleasing to God, and preparations to
grace, etc. when the Doctor makes this grossest Impiety, a great measure of
Devotion. Their neighbor nations (he says) [were not guilty of so much
devotion.] If he speak it seriously, he still applauds their Piety; If he mean
it, in an improper sense (as I believe he does) they were not so devout, as the
Athenians; he might better have taken it properly, they were not guilty of so
much Impiety and Superstition, because they worshipped fewer false Gods, and
perhaps did not bring in the true God, as a rival, amongst them: But that the
Doctor should say, [ It was Paul's business, to compare them with other
Heathens, and looked upon it truly, as a greater measure of devotion, than the
other Just as Papists may be said to be more Pious and devout, then the
Protestants, because they Worship many Saints and Angels with the true God.
Heathens had,] is a strange gloss of the text; For by all Circumstances, Paul
looked on it, as an aggravation of their Impiety, and grosser Superstition,
rather then Pious Devotion; It Is said verse 16. [ His Spirit was stirred in
him, (with grief and indignation, ((...), irritabatur;) [when he saw the City
(...), full of Idols, or wholly given to Idolatry.] And no doubt, his scope was
to work them to repentance, which would rather be done by aggravating their
sin, then by way of Comparison, to applaud them, as more Pious and Devout, then
other nations. They had more Idols, and so more Idolatry then others, in
joining many rivals with the true God, when one had been too much: and besides,
worshipped that true God ignorantly, verse 23. and in a manner by himself
forbidden. Let others judge.

Section 20. What Festus meant by, (...), Acts. 25.19. is not much material,
it is like he spoke it with scorn enough, etc.
THe three questions here between us, are not much worth debating; being but
about the sense of some few words. p. 62. n. 3.
1. Whether the word (...), be here taken in an ill sense, by Festus: It seems
to me and many others, to be taken in an ill sense; if the Doctor will needs
think otherwise, let him enjoy his own opinion. The very Heathens (and such was
Festus) branded Religion, which they did not like, by the Name of Superstition;
surely, that was, in opposition to Religion, their own at least, which they
thought to be the truest. 2. p. 63. n. 5
The next is of those words ((...),) which may be taken two ways; either, his,
or theirs; Paul's only, or the Jews also: The Doctor is for the former, and
renders the words, his Superstition: and something being said to it, in this
Section, he takes no notice of it, (unless it be, to say, I give no reason of
what I say) I shall therefore produce my reason there, and add another
strength to it: I said, from a parallel Scripture, Acts 23.29. Paul was accused
of questions, (...), of their Law, not of Paul's own Religion: To which I now
add a second, Acts 18, 15. (...), a question of your Law; said Gallio, one of
Festus his rank. Let Us see if his reason be better, then these two Scriptures,
joined with that, c. 25, 19. Thus he gives it, [ The Jews accusation against
Paul, is plainly mentioned in this place.] Well, so it is, p. 63. n. 6.
in the other two places; what then? [How then, could their own Superstition be
the matter of their charge against him?] I could blush, or pity such
argumentation; Apply it to the other Texts before, Acts 18.15. [ If it be,
(...),] That is (as the Doctor labored to prove, numb. 5.) [An accusation, or
question -- of your Law.] Ask now, how could their own Law, See Acts 21.28.
Teaches against the people, and against the Law.
be the matter of their charge against him? I forbear the other place: And I
add, (if it were worth the while) the context carries it to my sense; Those
words, were spoken to Agrippa concerning Paul's case; [Against whom, when the
Accusers stood up, they brought no accusation of such things as I supposed; but
had certain questions against him, of their own Superstition,] their own Law;
the words before immediately, being spoken of them, not of him; And if he should
say, but one part of the accusation was, about one Jesus, which was dead, etc.
and so of Paul's Religion; the answer will be, that this is a distinct
accusation from the former; and so will conclude, it was, of theirs, as well as
his: The former may include his, but his will not imply theirs. But too much of
this. n. 7.
The 3. is, [ Whether, Festus put Jesus, under the notion of a Demon, or dead
Heroes.] My exception to it was, [ That Paul affirmed him to be alive not in
part, as those departed Demons were supposed, but in the whole man, as raised
from the dead.] The Doctor makes a little retreat, as if he would yield to my
reason; [I shall not, because I need not, make it a matter of controversy with
any.] But it was, but to come on again with more force: [ Yet I had this
consideration, to incline me to it, the immediate subjoyning of One Jesus, whom
Paul contended to live; to be Superstes, etc.] But in citing these words, he
should have looked to the other words, 1. One Jesus, (...), which was, or had
been dead, so the word signifies, (says he, numb. 8.) Whom Paul affirmed to be
alive, or live again; as the words together, do import. As for his other
additions, they are not to the purpose; but conjectures of his own, and I list
not to follow him.

But if he yield in the least, to have mistaken, he will recriminate, and throw
dirt in his Adversaries face; p. 64 n. 8.
[That in this one proof, I have, strained more, then he, in his Criticisme.]
Wherein will that appear. [1. When I read the text, they had many questions,
when the word is, (...), some.] But sure that is no strain; For verse 7. I
found, they laid many complaints against Paul; and in the text, there were
three at least, two concerning their own Superstition, the word is plural, and
another concerning one Jesus, etc. Et tria sunt omnia: we may say, many of
three: 2. [ That I read, both, and also; when no such thing in the Greek, or
English.] But I pray, if those be distinct questions, of their Superstition,
and of one Jesus, as the word, (...), concerning, twice repeated, He leaves out
the second (...), and says, (...) n. 8. Is this fair.
does fairly suggest; may not an Interpreter (so was I there) say, questions
both concerning their own Superstition, and also concerning one Jesus, etc. 3.
The third is long, and I know not well how to contract it: I said, Paul was
accused of Sedition, seducement, profanation of the Temple, etc. he returns,
[Paul had cleared himself from those: and so in Festus Judgment, Paul was not
guilty of any thing, but only of his own Religion, and one Jesus: by way of
explication, (and (...),) being exegetical, etc.] But 1. what though Paul had
answered some of those charges (being innocent in all) yet might not Festus
tell Agrippa, they had many questions against him? as verse 7. it is said. 2.
That Paul was not charged with any thing, but his own Superstition, and one
Jesus, is a mere begging the question. 3. So is the next that, ((...), And) is
here exegetical: which is proved false by the double, (...), concerning; noted
before, which would have been but once, had, (...), been exegetical. And which
is worse, the accusation had not been in the plural, not some questions, but a
question, concerning one Jesus. I wish the Doctor did not here strain his wits
against the light: having said at first he would not make it a controversy
with any: At last, he comes of with a Charientismus: [ If all were granted, p.
65. n. 10.
that I desire, that the Superstition spoken of was not Saint Paul's, but the
Jews; then be will say, it shall signisie the Jews Religion simply, without
any Character of ill, or good laid upon it.] And why did he not save all this
long vitiligation, by saying so much at first, and himself and me all this
trouble? Yet I hope it may do good, one way or other, and then no cause to
repent.

Section 21. What Epicurus doctrine was, or what Heathens thought of the word,
(...), we are not much solicitous, etc.
THat the Doctors intention was, (in his large discourse, out of Heathens,
concerning the word, p. 66. n. 1. etc.
(...),) [To lead us away in a mist, from the true and proper sense of the word
amongst Christans,] may probably be conceived by these things. 1. That having
acknowledged the word Superstition, to be capable to signify, [ the giving of
false Worship to the true God, page 59. n. 3. as well as Worship to false
Gods;] In all his discourse of Superstition before, and his vindication now, he
never exemplifies any Species of the former, amongst Christians. 2. Nay
professes, [ That he believes, there is only one Special kind of
Superstition, whereof any Protestants are guilty, except that, of making
observations of ominous things, and.] Surely, the Worship of Demons, cannot
well be charged upon any Protestants (though upon Papists.) Nor are there many
Protestants, [that dogmatize, or impose as necessary such things, as the Law of
Christ has not made necessary.] And so it will be very hard to find a
Superstitious Protestant; which was the design of the Doctor, when he took
upon him, to vindicate the Church of England and himself, from the guilt of
Superstition. But if there be one kind of Superstition to Worship the true
God, prout non debet, in a manner which he might not, as Aquinas; or with false
Worship, as the Doctor says, surely many Protestants, (and the Doctor for one)
will be found guilty of more Superstition, then he is willing yet to
acknowledge: and so he may keep his wit to himself, numb. 2.

That the Heathens took the word sometimes in an ill sense, he cannot deny, but
says, p. 67. n. 5.
[So they did Religion too.] That Is rather to my advantage; but I let it pass,
taking his confession: I therefore did appeal to Christian Authors, and amongst
them, I believe, it will trouble the Doctor for all his great reading, to find
one Greek Author, that ever used (...), in a good sense, for true Religion; or
any Latin Author (excepting but some Papists) that ever used Superstitio in a
good sense, for true Religion: some Etymologists, and Glossaries that speak of
the word, (...), have an eye to the sense of it amongst Heathens, who took the
thing in a good sense; but profess, that Christians take the word and thing, in
an ill sense. The rest of this Chapter is, (...), and so I pass it by.

Section 22. From that large discourse, about the word, at last, Section, 27.
the Doctor comes to apply it, to his purpose, etc.
FOr my leaping from this 14. to the 27. s. it was, p. 70, n. 1.
because there was no matter of controversy in them, nothing but what I
yielded to be the Heathens sense of the word: But that being granted, the
subsequent conclusions are not firmly founded upon those premises; if the
Doctor will but take in the sense of Christian Authors also (as he ought) when
they speak as Christians. Amongst them, Superstition, is generally taken in an
ill sense; yea sometimes also amongst Heathens, Superstition is opposed or
contradistinguished to Religion; and consequently taken by them in an ill
sense. I shall make this manifest, when I have only made bold to ask the
Doctor one question, why he never gives us their words, when they speak ill of
it; but sets the best face upon the word, when he knows, the thing meant by it,
is so bad Not only signifying Worship of Demons, but false Worship to the true
God, which here he waves, n. 2
and abominable. What chaste man, would take pains to paint a filthy strumpet?
Does Superstition deserve so much from the Doctor, to hide, rather then to
acknowledge her deformity? but I forbear; and now shall show him and his
Reader, what he could have said, out of some Heathens, and many Christian
Authors, for the word Superstitio, if he had been pleased to disgrace it. As,

1. From the Heathen Orator, the master of Roman Eloquence, and well skilled
in their Antiquities; who has these words, (noted, no doubt, in the Doctors
Commonplace book) distinguishing Superstition from Religion; Lib. 2. de not.
Deorum.
Non enim Phisophi solum, verum etiam Majores nostri, Superstitionem a
Religionem seperaverunt, etc. And by and by after, Ita factum est, in
superstitioso, and religioso, alterum vitii nomen, alterum laudis. And in
another place; Lib. 2. de Divinat. ad f.
Nec vero (id enim diligenter intelligi volo) superstitione sublata, Religio
tollitur.

2. From that learned Philosopher, and Moralist, Seneca; whose words are these:
Superstitio error insanus est, amandos timet, quos colit, probat. Quid enim
interest, Epist. 1 24.
utrum Deos neges, an infames? that is, by dreading them, as so many cruel
Tyrants; as the Doctor expressed it, from others: But these sentences of
Seneca, were not then produced, yet are now set in his Margin, page 28. As a
testimony against himself.

3. From Plutarch (a Greek Author) who not only distinguishes, (...), from
(...), Superstition from Religion, but also makes it a vice contrary to
Religion, in the excesss: Some of his words to this purpose, were cited above,
ad p. 47. n. 20 But Plutarch writ a whole book of Superstition, which the
Doctor cited once or twice in his Tract. of Superst. But to hide the ugliness
of Superstition, in that Heathens Judgment, tells us only this, s. 18. [It
goes indefinitely for Religion, but particularly for some fearful apprehensions
of the Gods.] (Therefore not only for Superstitum cultus.) But this is a
palpable disguise of Plutarchs notion of it, as any that read that Tract, will
quickly discover. For 1. From the beginning, he opposes Superstition to
Atheism, as the two extremes of Religion: one in the excess, the other in the
defect: for so he says; (...), etc. I wonder at those that say, Atheism is
irreligion, and say not the same of Superstition: 2. He describes the
superstitious person, with such black Characters, that no man can well speak
for it; such as these beside others, (...), etc. [It must needs be, that the
Superstitious person both hate and fear the Gods,] In the 2. Commandment they
that Worship the true God, with any but his own prescribed Worship, (which is
Superstition) are said to hate him.
And a little after; [ Hating and fearing the Gods, he is an enemy: 3. (...),
etc. There is nothing of Superstition in an Atheist; but the superstitious is,
(...), an Atheist by choice. 4. To omit much more there spoken, he concludes as
he began, but more plainly; making Atheism and Superstition the two Extremes,
and placing true Religion in the midst: (...), etc. [Many flying Superstition,
fall into Atheism, passing over Religion lying in the midst.] Did not the
Doctor know all this? shall a Christian, a Divine, Learned and Pious, defend or
palliate that, which an Heathen so condemns? see what he says for it, Infra
ad p. 72. n. 7, 9. etc.

4. De Oratione.
From Tertullian, one of our ancientest Latin Christian Authors; who speaks
fully the Language of our Reformed Divines; Siquidem quae sine ullius, aut
Dominici, aut Apostolici praeceptae authoritate fiunt, ea non Religioni, sed
Superstitioni deputantur, affectata, and coacta, and curiosi potius, quam
rationalis officii: Where he gives an example of such Superstition. There were
in the Church at that time, certain, that contrary to the custom of the
Church, would Sure this was not Superstitum cultus.
put off their cloaks, when they went to prayer, placing some Religion in that
Ceremony; (as Heathens used to do) to whom he answers, Quod utique si fieri
oporteret, Apostoli qui, quae de habitu orandi docent, comprehendissent; And
comes off with an elegant Charientismus, Nisi, sequi putant Paulum, penulam
suam, Adv. Marci. l. 1. c. 5.
in oratione penes Carpum reliquisse. And the Doctor himself, has cited
another like place out of Tertullian, p. 16. n. 28. to put a difference between
Superstition and Religion, speaking of worshipping of two Gods; Vererer ne
abundantja officit, Superstitio potius, quam Religio crederetur. Where
abundantia officii, may well signify an excess in Religion.

5. From Lactantius; who, (in the place cited above, upon another occasion)
though he approve not the notation Superstition, nor yet of Religion, given by
Cicero, a Relegendo; yet clearly put's the difference, between Religion and
Superstition; Quid ergo est? Nimirum Religio, very cultus; Superstitio falsi --
Religiosos se putant, cum sint Superstitiosi.

6. From Saint Austin, cited by Aquinas (as the Doctor recites it, p. 16.)
Cecidit bestia Superstitionis, [The beast of Superstition is destroyed, by the
first Commandment of the Decalogue, prescribing the Worship of one God:] Tract
of Superst. s. 13.
He would not surely call that by the name of Religion: And Austin is affirmed
to say, Deum a Religioso vereri, a Superstioso timeri: and consequently to that
(adds the Doctor) Religio Deum colit, Superstitio violat: [ as Max. Tyrius,
compared a Pious man, to a friend; a Superstitious, to a flatterer: the Pious
man comes to God, without fear, the Superstitious man with much fear.] This,
beside much more that might be produced out of Saint Austin, is enough to show,
Austin took Superstition for a vice contrary to Religion.

7. From the great School-man (and all his followers, in the Romish School)
whose definition of Superstition, we have so often heard, clearly differences
Superstition from Religion; [It is a vice contrary to Religion in the excess:]
making, worshipping of Creatures, to be but one Species of it; and
Illegimate-worship in general, to be the other, which also has several Species
under it, as we have showed. Before him, the Gloss. Interlin. gave this,
Superstitio est Religio supra modum servata, on Col. 2. Which what is it, but
Religion (so called) in the excess?

8. From all our Reformed Divines, Foreign and Domestic, who all generally
take Superstition in an ill sense, as an addition to, or excess of Religion;
and never in a good sense; All this, and much more, the Doctor knew well
enough; and yet shakes them all off, [as of so small authority, that scarce
worth producing,] as we shall hear anon.

But perhaps the Doctor will say, p. 71. n. 4.
[He never imagined, Superstition truly so called, to have no ill in it:] But
what does he truly call Superstition? nothing willingly, but, worshipping of
Demons: Hear what he says; See n. 7.
[The thing which I contest, is not this, that the Worship of Demons, is, or
ever was true or lawful; but that beside this (adding the like of illegitimate
Worship) there is nothing else, n. 9.
which has been looked on as simply bad in Superstition, particularly not the
excess as that signifies unprescribed, uncommanded Worship, which is the only
matter of the present contest with such as the Diatribist.] But first, does he
not say, Illegitimate-worship is looked upon as simply bad, as well as Worship
of Demons? what difference is there between Uncommanded Worship, and
Illegitimate? Does not Illegitimate signify Unlawful Worship? and is not
Uncommanded Worship also unlawful? His meaning is, (as before) that Illegitimate
signifies that which is forbidden by Law, which is more, then Uncommanded: No,
it is the very same; for what Worship soever, is not commanded, is forbidden. 2.
If this be all the contest with me, and such as I am; the controversy will
soon be at an end: For I mean by Uncommanded Worship, nothing but forbidden
Worship, and that the Doctor has granted, or cannot deny, to be an excess,
super statutum, an addition, and simply bad and unlawful. I shall therefore
accept of his condition offered, and invert his own words; [Never to apply the
word any otherwise, n. 5.
then the Scripture and Christian writers do, for Demon Worship, or undue,
Illegitimate Worship; upon condition, that he will grant, that in that sense,
the word signifies an excess in Religion, in any part of Uncommanded Worship.]
I say Uncommanded Worship, not Uncommanded Circumstances, or Rites (unless made
parts of Worship.) The contest not being at all, of the latter: as is confessed.

Yet renounced again in the following words: p. 37. n. 10.
[ He must set the question, as elsewhere he does, of excessive, as that
signifies no more than Uncommanded Worship, without the addition of being
false, it being evident, that I defend not false Worship of any kind to be
good, but that Ceremonies or Institutions ( of Worship) not commanded by God,
may be perfectly lawful, and that is the only question between us.] Is not
here, first, a contradiction to that he said before; that the only matter of
contest was, of excess, n. 9.
as that signifies Uncommanded Worship? now it is only of Ceremonies, etc. not
commanded by God. 2. Is not here a second contradiction, that he defends not
False Worship to be good, and yet defends Uncommanded Worship, which is False
Worship? And 3. Is it not a third contradiction to say, that I elsewhere set
the question of excessive, as that signifies Uncommanded False Worship, and yet
to say, I must set it, as it signifies Ceremonies, or Circumstances, etc. not
commanded, which he confesses often, I do disclaim? Here are as many mistakes,
as well could be in so few words. The rest concerning, Acts 25.19. and 17.23.
have sufficiently been spoken to before, and I pass it by.

Only one thing must be taken notice of, and explained, to rectify the
Doctors understanding of those words, of mine; p. 76. n. 20.
[Superstitiosus in the positive signifies excess more then in the
comparative;] which says he, are not very intelligible, to him at least. But
the fault was none of mine, but the Printers, for want of a Comma after excess;
then the sense is clear thus: n. 21.
Superstitiosus in the positive signifies excess, more then, (that is much more
then) in the comparative, (which exceeds the positive) Superstitiosiores (given
for the sense of (...), by the Vulg. Lat. and others) must signify an excess.
So much of that Section.

Section 23, 24. The second Inconsequence he says, is this, [That the use of
Ceremonies or Rites in the Worship of God, if not distinctly prescribed, etc.]
THis I said, I believed was a mistake, but rather thus, That what Rite, etc.
is made a part of Worship, etc. is superstitious. Now says he; [This is brief,
p. 77. n. 1.
but very considerable; and might well make an end of this debate, between the
Diatribist and me. It Is the yielding me the whole cause, and I have no more to
contend for, but only peace.] n. 3.
But then, why did he say just now, [The question must be set not of
Uncommanded Worship, but of Ceremonies, etc.] And he being certified of this my
sense, long ago, why has he contended thus long about nothing, to violate that
pretended peace? Do I, or any of our Divines, say, that Uncommanded Rites, etc.
are superstitious, unless they be made parts of Worship? etc. Yes, he would
persuade me, that I know some, [who condemn uncommanded Rites as
superstitious, p. 77. n. 2.
because super statutum, such as kneeling at the Eucharist, Cross in Baptism,
etc.] Truly I can safely profess I know none that do condemn those as
superstitious, but that they conceived them, to be made (by some) parts of
Worship. He should have done well, to name some of them. That he will by and
by, but first, he asks, [Why then did he undertake the confutation of the
Tract of Superstition, which, he must know, intended no more then this, etc.]
But I believe, he intended more than this, in that Tract, viz. to plead
secretly for some Uncommanded Worship; which he newly made the only matter of
contest between us. Yet if he will needs know the reasons of my undertaking
that Tract; these they were. 1. To vindicate the truth, from his
interpolutions, and obscurations, in Thesi, of the full sense of the word
Superstition. 2. Because I saw, he pleaded for Uncommanded Worship, as well as
Circumstances, etc. 3. Because in Hypothesi, I saw, he makes some of his Rites,
etc. parts of Worship; as his Festival in particular; which yet elsewhere, he
calls but a Circumstance of Worship: These were some of my reasons; if I have
any more, he shall hear them anon.

But though I know none, that condemn Uncommanded Rites or Ceremonies as
superstitious, etc. yet he may know some; p. 78. n. 5.
[Who have abstained from the use of some Ceremonies, merely upon this score,
because commanded by their Civil and Ecclesiastical Superiors.] I fear this is
(as he calls such charges) a calumny; They were conscientious godly men, and
gave all due Honor and obedience to their Superiors, in all Indifferent
things; and that they should abstain from some Ceremonies, merely upon this
score, because Commanded, etc. is to me incredible. They might, and did abstain
from some Ceremonies, as too many, and burdensome, but especially as they
esteemed them to be made parts of Worship; which they have I think, proved some
of them to be. The Doctor himself condemns the number and burdensomeness of
them, and as made new sorts of Worship: and so they are agreed; and pity it is,
he and they should fall out again: But he will break the peace, what ever it
cost him; [Instead of naming those men, without their consent, for that must
now be the vilifying them, etc. as not understanding Christians, in the
Diatribist censure; he will name one, upon whom he may pass what judgment he
please; the Diatribist himself, p. 31. Where, first, he has these words, If
men may judge what are fit for number, and wholesomness, every after-comer, may
think himself as wise as he that went before, till they have loaded the
Christian above the Jew. 2. That the Learned Chamier, etc.] How will he hence
prove his calumny, against me and learned Chamier? (glad I am, of so good
company) Why thus: [If the objection be, because men are Judges of the number,
etc. as they are, when they command, then they that abstain from Indifferent
Ceremonies upon this score, most abstain because commanded by lawful
Authority.] Oh, the Doctors conscience! Do any men abstain from Indifferent
Ceremonies? it is, from Uncommanded Worship, at least as they suppose. He has
therefore varied the question; And if he had but looked back to the former page
of mine, p. 29. he had found that, which might have silenced all this vain and
false discourse. There I say; [If men or any number of men, may be competent
Judges in the Worship of God; (in the Worship, not in the Circumstances of
Worship) will not the wisdom and wit of man expatiate here, and grow wanton?]
But if we extend it to his Ceremonies; are not my words every way true? Does
not long experience of all ages, make it evident, that the Wisdom and Wit of
men has herein grown wanton? Let the Church of Rome be the instance; have not
they loaded the Christian above the Jew? and the Sea p. 38.
Greek Church, as much? And I retort it upon the Doctor. If the Judges of
Ceremonies for number and wholesomness, have such large unquestionable
Authority, [to appoint what Ceremonies, they shall judge most useful, most for
edification, and most agreeable to the analogy of faith.] (As he asserts, they
have, of Fest. s. 9.) Then, the Judges of the next age, having the very same
power, with their predecessors, may add as many more, (and the next after them
as many more) as they shall think useful to those ends; till they have made the
number great, and burden intolerable. This consequence is unavoidable, upon
his Antecedent. It therefore concerns him (as well as me) to expedite himself
out of this snare: How shall this be done, to free us both? I conceive one of
these ways; 1. That the power of the Church reaches only to Circumstances of
Worship, respecting Order, and Decency; and then, as any Wiseman can easily
determine them, by the Light of Reason, as Time, Place, Gesture in Worship; so
they will be very Few, and cannot well be Multiplied, being the same or like,
in all ages of the Church. And this I think, is most suitable to the Simplicity
of Gospel Worship. 2. Or else, that if the Church take upon her, to appoint new
Ceremonies, above what the Scripture holds out, she makes them parts of
Worship; (as the Church of Rome, does all her Ceremonies, and some did some of
ours) which is unlawful. And this was the opinion of those who abstained from
our Ceremonies, that they were made parts of Worship, and therefore unlawful.
These things satisfy me; If they do not please the Doctor, let him take his
own way to expedite himself. Sure if he were but constant to himself, and did
not confound Circumstances and Ceremonies, putting one for another, as if they
were the same; he might remember, what he said before; [That some Rites and
Circumstances of time, place and gesture, are absolutely necessary to
Religion;] That was his conclusion. page 7. n. 5. If then he means by Rites and
Ceremonies, nothing but such Circumstances of Worship; we grant the Church, to
be Judge of them: But if he take Ceremonies, for more then Circumstances, new
Rites of Worship, or new kinds of Worship (as sometimes he does.) I could
easily name the man, that is superstitious, in defending and practicing
uncommanded Worship, but shall reserve that, till a fitter time. I shall now
meet the Doctor, p. 79. n. 6.
at his own weapon, his own instance; [He supposes, howing when Jesus is named
in the public Worship, (or when Christ, or the Holy Ghost) to be in it self
lawful or indifferent; he supposes again, then, this and a few other such
Ceremonies may safely be used by a man, without command: He now demands, may a
few, three or four be commanded by Supreme Power? If they may, then men may be
Judges, what Ceremonies are fit, for number and wholesomness, which is contrary
to the words of the Diatribist.] But I demand of him, if this be not a very
Sophisme? For first, will he say, bowing at the Name of Jesus, is a new
Worship, or only a new Circumstance of Worship; if the latter, it is beside the
question, and improperly called a Ceremony. 2. Will he say, that any thing, in
it self Indifferent may be brought into the Worship of God? has the Church
such a power, to institute Ceremonies, of what is so indifferent? will not this
make them quickly to be many, to be burdensome, and bring confusion into the
Church? ergo, It Is indifferent (he says) to bow, at the Name of Jesus, of
Christ, of the Holy Ghost; may the Church of this age command men to bow in
public, when, and as often as all these three are named? If so; the name of
God, Jehovah, Lord, Almighty, and all his Attributes, are in themselves
Indifferent to be bowed at, when they are named. May not the Church of this, or
the next age, command her members to bow, when any or all these are named? what
confusion would this breed? yet so she may, by the Doctors arguing. If she may
not multiply Ceremonies of that kind, [then it seems (his words) what was
before lawful and indifferent, is now since it was commanded, and by no other
change, become unlawful:] Let him try, how he will escape.

I had said, they abstained, because they were thought not indifferent, but
obtruded on them as parts of Worship: p. 30. n. 8.
[These words are either a calumny against the Governors of the Church, or
else they assert what he disclaims so solemnly.] Neither of these is true; 1.
n. 9.
Not a calumy against the the Church, [as if they thought the Ceremonies simply
necessary, by Divine Law, though she had not commanded them.] This is none of
my meaning (whatever some might think) but because the Refusers, thought they
were so obtruded, or being obtruded, were by themselves thought to be not
Indifferent, but parts of Worship. Suppose they did err, in so thinking; yet
they did not abstain merely because they were commanded (which is the Doctors
calumny) by lawful Authority; they rather thought the Authority unlawful, that
obtruded on them things perhaps indifferent, as parts of Worship. 2. Nor do I
mean, that being in themselves indifferent, they became necessary, by the
Churches command; and so made parts of Worship, as that may possibly signify
parts of obedience, to Superiors, by Gods command: For neither do I ever call
that obedience to Superiors, in the second Table a part of Worship, nor ever
say, that the Churches command, can truly make them so, and necessary: But I
meant (as before) they that abstained, did it upon this ground, because they
thought them to be made parts of Worship, and so not, upon his, because they
were commanded by Superiors. n. 11.
And that I may take in the next; [because used and abused by Papists, and by
them made parts of Worship:] It Is evident that Papists do make all or most of
their Ceremonies parts of Worship; Hear what favor he shows to Papists that he
may lave himself from guilt: [Truly I cannot with truth thus affirm of the
Papists, that any of the Ceremonies which we use from them, were ever by them
accounted parts of Worship, but only as useful wholesome Ceremonies appointed
by the Church.] Cannot he say this of them, when he knows, they place the
Worship of God in them? Are not their Holy Days made and accounted parts of
Worship? Is not Caelibate, and vowed Virginity, Poverty, etc. made a part of
Worship? Is not the cross in Baptism so esteemed by them? Truly if the Papists
do not make those Ceremonies parts of Worship; our men (that have borrowed them
from them) are the more to blame, who (what ever they say against it) do
practically make and observe some of them as parts of Worship, well nigh as
much, as those that were instituted by Christ, or his Apostles, as shall appear
hereafter.

Hence, the Doctors Apology for himself, by miscensuring of me, is the more
blameable; [That all his skill lies in mannaging that one fallacy; putting all
Ceremonies and institutions of the Church, under that one ambiguous phrase of
uncommanded Worship, persuading himself, or others, that we retroduce new parts
of Worship.] I know no fallacy here at all; For that it is untrue, that I put
all Ceremonies under that ambiguous phrase, appears, by my profession often,
and one newly cited here; from my 28. sect. [Some Rites and Ceremonies of
Worship, are rather called Circumstances of Worship, time, place, gesture,
which are common Adjuncts of religious and civil affairs, then parts of
Worship.] Where it is evident, both that I take Ceremonies only for
Circumstances of Worship, and also oppose them, to parts of Worship. And the
Doctor himself has as fully and plainly professed against all Uncommanded
Worship (such is all Willdevised, and false, imposed Worship) as I have done; I
hope without Ambiguity. Let Us hear what he asserts; p. 81. n. 12.
[All that we say in asserting whether of Ceremonies, or Festivals, is no more
but this, that each of these, not as parts of Worship, but as decent attendants
of it, though not instituted of God, have yet been lawful, etc.] If this were
all he said, we might well agree; But I fear the Doctors skill lies in
mannaging that one fallacy, under that one ambiguous phrase, of Uncommanded
Worship. See ad p. 73. n. 10.
For he does allow of some Uncommanded Worship, (he calls it after,
Will Worship, not commanded Worship) and makes it more acceptable, and
rewardable, then Commanded Worship: as we shall hear in due place: And I shall
conclude with his own words, [If he would really and in earnest clear himself,
these debates were certainly concluded.]

Sect. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. We acknowledge this assertion, that, [Superstition
may and does in some Authentic Writers, Sacred especially, signify a Nimiety,
or Excess in Religion, etc.
THere is nothing said to these Sections, p. 82. n. 1.
but what has been said many times heretofore; and therefore I lightly pass
them by. Only desiring the Reader, to take notice, that the Doctor having
given three reasons against my Assertion, [That Superstition signifies an
excess,] and I having spoken to them all, he replies not a word to them; but
seems to yield all, and yet upon my Preface, denies, that ever he denied
Superstition to be an excess; See ad p. 20. n. 2. His only evasion is, That
those Divines condemn Superstition, but mean not by it, every excess in Worship
not prescribed, as that comprehends all Ceremonies, and Festivals not commanded
by God; and those are the men, he meant, when he said, [They are so few and
modern, and of so small authority, that scarce worth producing.] But first, I
am confident the Doctor cannot produce one modern Divine of note, that ever
simply condemned all Ceremonies, and Festivals, etc. for themselves did observe
some Ceremonies and Festivals, taking occasion to preach upon them, etc. they
only condemned them as they were made parts of Worship, equally holy, with the
Lords Day, etc. 2. I provoked the Doctor to give us the names of those many,
Ancient, Authentic Fathers, etc. that take Superstition, in a good sense; He
uses not to be so sparing, etc. and yet not one produced. Whereas I have given
him many, that take it in an ill sense, p. 82. n. 2.
for excess in Religion. [All Divines condemn Superstition, but mean not by it
every excess in Worship not prescribed, as that phrase comprehends all
Ceremonies and Festivals not commanded by God.] But first, all Divines do
condemn Superstition, for this reason, because it is an excess, or addition of
Worship not prescribed, according to the School-mans definition of it, before
given; and therefore must necessarily mean it of every excess in Worship not
prescribed. 2. If Ceremonies and Festivals not commanded by God, be made parts
of Worship, by men, as they are by Papists and the Doctor himself, they mean by
that phrase, to comprehend all Ceremonies and Festivals not commanded by God.
And these Divines, are many, and of no small Authority; though the Doctor
slights and contemns them. And I might ask the Doctor, Why is Daemonum cultus
called Superstition, but because it is an excess in Worship; adding the Demons
or false Gods, to the object or Rule of Worship, in the first Commandment: Just
so it is in all the other three Commandments, the Superstition in them is an
excess, in the matter, manner, or time of Worship, not prescribed by God.

Section 30. Of this kind are those three sort of significant Ceremonies, etc.
I Expected here, n. 4. p. 83.
that the Doctor would have showed his opinion of significant Ceremonies, (not
those mentioned by me and him, but) used in our Church, as Cross in Baptism,
Surplice, etc. and have declared his Judgment, whether such significations put
upon them by men, do not make them Religious Ceremonies, and so parts of
Worship, and consequently superstitious: But he wisely waves the debate, and
falls upon the observation of Decency, Uniformity, and Obedience to Superiors;
which he must mean, of Circumstances of Worship, not of new sorts or kinds of
Worship. No Obedience is due to Superiors, when they command such: But he as
wisely lets go the rest; [when they are taught, as making the observers more
Religious, then others, or more acceptable to God, etc.] I ask now, if a man
should put Religion That a man is heard, non said it.
in a gesture, in a place, etc. Or think that it will make quia precatur, sed
quia ibi. He knows what B. him more acceptable to God: Whether this would not
make them parts of Worship, and so superstitious? ergo, If a man should place
more Religion, Holiness, acceptance, etc. in praying in a Church privately, in
kneeling at the Supper, then in sitting or standing (all being left
indifferent) let the Doctor say, whether this be Superstition, or no: I believe
many of our Ignorant, and Formal Protestants do so, though the Doctor himself
perhaps, will say, he looks only at the command of his Superiors, enjoining
that gesture.

Sect. 31.32. But herein the Doctor is again mistaken, that he says, etc.
THe Doctor confesses, That [ in the Church of Rome, p. 84. n. 6.
there is a great multitude of Ceremonies and Festivals, which may be capable
of the title of weight and yoke, but the Church of England, is far more
sparing.] As if he had said, the Church of England laid a weight and yoke upon
her members, but not so great and heavy, as Rome lays upon hers: This is but
little for her Commendation. Fatemur Ceremonias non esse nimis multiplicandas:
Bellar. de effect. Sacr. c. 30.
But were not the Ceremonies in the Church of England, many in themselves, and
compared with other Reformed Churches? Besides the old ones, of Cross in
Baptism, Surplice, bowing as often as Jesus was named, kneeling at Sacrament,
etc. and all those many Holy Days, (which some people found to be a heavy
yoke:) the New ones that were, by some well affected to Rome, even near upon
imposing; as bowings and cringings, at Church door, in the midst, and Chancel,
and at the Altar, and what else, God knows: would not these be a reasonable
number to deserve the name of a multitude? And then I would know, what number
of Ceremonies will make a burden and a yoke; will 20. or 30. or more do it? and
if under 10. will that be no yoke? let the Doctor state and settle his number.
Then I ask again, why are 30. or 20. a yoke? is it because of their number? why
then, 10. is number sufficient, to make a lesser yoke: But if the reason be,
(as indeed it is) because they are but Traditions of men, Gal. 5.1.
prejudicious to Gospel simplicity, and to Christian liberty, where Christ has
left us free; then any one such Ceremony (I say not, necessary Circumstance) is
a little yoke, Who made them judges or dividers of tasks to their brethren? p.
111. n. 8. p. 85. n. 7.
and why should any Church assume a power, to yoke and burden those, whom
Christ has left free? And this was Chamiers reason against Bellarmine; though
the Doctor thought good to take no notice of it, to give it any answer. He
says, [I ask a subtle question; Whether if a Jew had observed some Jewish
Ceremony, not foreshewing Christ to come, or had devised any new Rites or
Ceremonies, etc. would not the Apostle have blamed them for that as
superstitious?] He must remember, we are speaking of Ceremonies, made parts of
Worship, (as those Jewish were before) what says he to the question? He
answers confidently, to both the parts; [No, Yet often has said, that those
rites of the old law, are forbidden under Christ. p. 19. n. 32. and just now,
that they were interdicted Christians. p. 84. n. 5. n. 8.
he would not: and to the last first; in asking the question, I beg the
question, which is (says he) whether every devised Rite or Ceremony, not
commanded of God, be superstitious.] No such matter, the question is, of
Uncommanded Worship, not of Circumstances of Worship; no nor of Rites and
Ceremonies, if not made parts of Worship; And is it probable that the Apostle
would cry down the old Ceremonies, appointed by God, and parts of Worship, and
give them leave to set up new ones, of their own Head? To the former part of a
Jews observing a Jewish Ceremony, etc. he answers as confidently, by a
question; n. 8.
[What thinks be of the abstinence from strangled and blood, a Jewish Ceremony,
and observed by Christians? yet not blamed as Superstitious.] I say this,
first, as it was observed by Christians, so it was ordered by the Apostles, who
might do more then any Jew or Christian. 2. It was not made now, a part of
Worship (as before it was) but only to prevent a scandal to the weaker Jews:
which is evident by this, besides other reasons, that after the Jews were
better instructed or hardened, the custom ceased. And if the Doctor had a mind
to plead for a Ceremony, he might better have pleaded for continuance of this,
both for the Antiquity of it, before the Law, under the Law, and under the
first plantation of the Gospel, observed by Christians, many ages, (says the
Doctor) and also for the Authority of it, from the Apostles themselves. He
cannot produce so much for his beloved Festival. His other instance of the old
Sabbath, is just the same; [ He has the practice of the Christian Church, of
the Apostles, and purest time, who continued the observation of it, with the
Lords day, for some hundreds of years.] But I would say further, 1. The
Apostles did not observe the Sabbath day, as now a part of Worship, as before;
but to take occasion to preach the Gospel, at their Assemblies, which they
could not have on other days. 2. The following Churches, finding it in being
amongst the Jews, continued it a while to gratify them. 3. If they continued
it, as a part of worship, I would ask the Doctor whether they did well, or he
would justify them, seeing it was before annul'd, and interdicted (as he
says.) 4. I must profess, there is much more to be said for the observation of
the old Sabbath, by the Jewish Sabbatarians, than can be said for any of the
Doctors Festivals; the Antiquity of it, the Authority of it, the Apostolical
practice, (says the Doctor) and the Churches observation of it for many ages)
clearly manifested in stories. Whereas, the Festivals, (especially his darling
Christmas) have no Apostolical Authority, or Practice, nor of the two first
Ages of the Church, that can be made appear. I leave these to his consideration.

The 32. Section of mine, p. 86. n. 9.
he overlooks most of it, that most concerned him to have answered, about his
number of wholesome Ceremonies; of the efficacy put in them by some, to procure
grace, etc. and who shall be the Judge of their number and wholesomness. All
this is waved, but a flaw or fault is found in my words, which takes him wholly
up: that I affirm him to say, [If Ceremonies be but harmless, or negatively
wholesome, there cannot be too much of them.] Truly, he that reads the words in
his 41. Section, might easily be mistaken, if he attend not heedfully to them:
thus they are, [Ceremonies must be few and wholesome; yet if they be wholesome, not
only negatively, but positively; not only harmless, but tending to
edification, (for so salubrity imports) then there will be little reason, to
accuse them of excess.] Would not a man at first sight take the meaning to be
that which I have given? If they be wholesome, negatively, harmlesly, though not
only so, but positively, and tending to edification, etc. especially if he
eyed not the parenthesis following, which, all know, may be left out, and the
sense be still entire. But I shall freely acknowledge my Inadvertency, and beg
his pardon; I am sure he needs mine much more, in mislating of the question, so
often (I say not, willingly) as if the controversy was only, [ Whether every
Rite or Circumstance, not commanded by God, be Superstition. n. 7.] when he
knows, it is about Uncommanded Worship.

Sect. 33. This question of a competent Judge, etc.
THe Sophisme charged upon me, n. 10.
will rather reflect upon himself: I said, what is Superstition but folly and
vanity, in the Worship of God: In vain do they Worship me, etc. [This is (says
he) a parologisme, supposing things to be convertible which are not: every
Superstition is folly and vanity, but every folly and vanity even in the
Worship of God, is not Superstition.] Duplex superstitio perniciosa, and vana
seu superflua. Filuc. Trat. 24. c. 2. Foolish and vain Ceremonies or
superstitious.
But that is the Doctors mistake; I dare maintain, that every folly and vainty
in the Worship of God, is Superstition: which I prove from the definition of
Superstition: [Every excess in Religion, of men's devising, is folly, (as
proceeding from man's Wisdom, which is folly with God) and vanity, as wanting
ground of it is performance; but every folly and vanity in Religion, of men's
devising is an excess in Religion; ergo,] And from his own words, [In this
case, (of too many Ceremonies) though any one may be a Nimiety, and that a
fault, yet this not the fault of Superstition, but of folly and vanity.] He was
speaking of store of inordinable, unfit Ceremonies in the Church of Rome, are
not they Superstitious? yet are they also foolish and vain. And when he says,
[ any one may be a Nimiety, and that a fault,] how will he reconcile this with
what he had said before: [If the excess be, in taking too many Rites and
Ceremonies into the Worship of God, then (he hastily assumes this) by this it
is granted, Any one Ceremony, if made a part of Worship, (as the word
signifies) is a Nimiety and excess in Religion, and superstitious: not the
multitude only, as was said above
the Rites and Ceremonies themselves are not Superstitious, but the multitude
only.] But now he says, Any one may be a Nimiety, and that a fault; Now that
cannot be, if only the multitude of Ceremonies makes them superstitious;
suppose ten Ceremonies, all singly indifferent and lawful; which of the ten is
a Nimiety, and a fault? they are supposed all equally, good: or if the number
only make them Superstitious, how can so many goods, added together, make them
bad? either therefore there must be some Rule in Scripture, how many Ceremonies
may be instituted, and yet not be superstitious, unless they exceed that
number; or else the Adding of one, any one Ceremony, to the Rule, is a Nimiety,
and faulty in Superstition. Let the Doctor resolve us in this case.

Section 34. The placing of more virtue in some things, then either naturally,
or by the Rule of the word, or in the estimation of purer ages of the Church,
may be thought, etc.
UPon this principle of the Doctor, I made an Assumption, not only of Romish
Ceremonies, unfit, etc. but of all superadded parts of Worship, what ever, p.
87. n. 11.
[They do place more virtue in them, then either naturally belongs to them, or
by the Rule of the word;] ergo, they are superstious. This argument, the Doctor
thinks best to wave; lest his Ceremonies, he pleads for, should be suspected,
or concluded superstitious: because he places that virtue in them, which
neither naturally, nor by the Rule of the word belongs to them, as has been
showed. All that he pleases to take notice of, is, to answer my question; [What
he meant to add to his disjunction, or in the estimation of the purer ages of
the Church;] thereupon I asked, [Whether the Church after the Apostles, had
power to put virtue into things, which they had not, either naturally, or by
the Rule of Gods word.] He answers, [I never thought any such thing.] Truly he
that reads the words, where these three are put together, and knows the
Doctors Good Will to the power of the Church, would easily take the meaning to
be, as I have expressed it: [That the Church has power to put some virtue into
things, which neither nature, nor God has put into them.] For he makes the
Institutions of the Church, to be almost, if not altogether, Divine; her
Authority, equal and the same with that of the Apostles, (confessed to be
Divine;) and seems to join with, and approve of the phrases of Romanists;
speaking of the power of the Church: I shall instance in some particulars: In
this Section, where now we are, n. 4. he alleges a Testimony of Pope Leo; p.
83. n. 4.
Divinarum reverentia Sanctionum, etc. and renders it thus, [ The reverence of
Divine, i.e. Ecclesiastical Sanctions, has always this privilege, etc.] We
plain simple Protestants, would have thought, by Divine Sanctions, he had
meant, the Institutions of Christ and his Apostles, which are truly Divine; but
the Doctor understood the language of the Beast better than we do. [The Divine,
that is, the Ecclesiastical Sanctions.] Again, when Aquinas was cited, as
saying, [Worship is vitiated by Superfluity, Ad p. 50. n. 5.6.
when ought is assumed, which neither by Divine nor Ecclesiastical appointment
belongs to the glory of God, etc.] He stops my mouth, with this; [That the
Superfluity of it consists, not in being supperadded to Gods commands only,
but to the Churches appointment also, etc.] Where he seems to me, to close with
Aquinas, that the Churches appointments of Worship, are equal with Gods. And
once more, (to take it in here, in this so fit a place, and pass it lightly
hereafter) citing a testimony from Salmeron the Jesuit; Omnis ritus colendi
Deum, etc. Infra ad p. 147. n. 24.
[Every Rite of worshipping God, that is not delivered from God, nor from the
Holy Ghost, by the Church, but is invented by the will of man, is
superstitions.] Leave but out those words (by the Church) and Salmeron speaks
as full for us, as we could desire. But does the Doctor boggle at those words?
not at all, but thus besets me, [where it seems, that which is delivered by
the Church being by him supposed to be from the holy Ghost, does in no degree
fall under this censure, and then the Diatribist is free to make his best
advantage of this citation.] What advantage I shall make of this, he shall hear
anon; I make this only at present, that the Doctor will easily favor a Romish
Gloss against the truth, and could find in his heart to believe with them,
that the power of the Church is Divine. Some other such passages, we may meet
again hereafter.

Sect. 35.36. The Nimiety must be, an excess of fear, or being afraid of God,
when we need not, etc.
TO these 2. Sections, the Doctor says not one word, (but leaps to Sect. 37.)
Where some things were needful to have been considered by him; I shall briefly
remind him of them: First, p. 87. n
[An excess of fear, or being afraid of God when we need not, is granted a
Nimiety, a culpable excess; this might be called Superstition under this notion
of Nimiety.] They are his words, in his 46. and 47. Sections of Superstition.
Now hence how justly have I inferred; 1. That Superstition is an excess. 2.
That this is not the Worshipping of Demons; then Superstition is larger, then
he is willing to make it. 3. That a needless (which I call slavish) fear of
God, is an excess, and Superstition, against the first Commandment. All which
the Doctor has labored to deny; and is now confuted by his own pen. Another
thing deserved his notice; That I say, Sect. 35. [ In matter of Worship, it is
a Nimiety and excess, to do what God has not commanded:] To which he says
just nothing. And then again, when he said; [That this way of dogmatizing, etc.
is the special, and only kind of Superstition, which he believes any
Protestants to be guilty of.] I said, this was a great mistake; for himself
has granted many more kinds of Superstition; as those newly named, placing
virtue, in things, etc. An excess of fear, etc. and I may add, all men-devised
Worship, new kinds and sorts of Worship appointed by men, etc. Happy were it
for many Protestants, and for the Doctor himself, if either there were no
Superstition, but worshipping of Demons, amongst Christians, or none but
Dogmatizing among Protestants: for then his Ceremonies and Festivals, might
very well hope to escape. But besides all those named, there is yet another,
and that is, in the next considered.

Sect. 37, 38, 39 And now we are come to another consideration of the last way,
that he supposes, may be called Superstition, that is, because men place
Holiness in some observances, etc.
HEre he said, [The only inquiry will be, by whom, and how far any thing is
thus separated; by Christ, or the Apostles, etc.] To which I answered, [He
tells us here, p. 87. n. 12.
by whom the separation is made; but not a word, how far, or in what
difference, a thing separated is made holy, by the several Authors: whether,
only gradual, or specifical, etc.] To which he returns not a word of answer:
which yet is a thing of very great concernment: That we may know what degree,
or kind of Holiness we put upon things; So himself said, [The way to discern,
whether we exceed, and place more Holiness then is due to them, is to account
them Holy, in a degree proportionable to the Authority of him that separated
them.] This is a blind; we should know what is the degree of Holiness,
proportionable to every one of their Authorities; else we may place as much
Holiness, in the institutions of a private man, or a particular Church, as we
should place only in those of Divine institution, by Christ and his Apostles.
And so commonly men do; account the Church as Holy, as the Temple was: and
Festivals as Holy, as the Lords day, and are not by the Doctor taught their due
proportions. Many things were there propounded to his consideration, Sect. 39.
which we cannot but take ill, to be slighted, as not concerning him to take
notice of; first, whether any but God can make a thing properly Holy. 2. What
proper Holiness is. 3. The diff^ence of Holiness given by the different Au^
etc. and the rest there propounded. The Doctor waving all these, (for what
reason, he best knows) catches at an advantage from some words of mine. I
said, [In times or places separated by God or men, there is this difference,
(besides others) that those sanctified by God, require holy duties to fill them
up: but those by men, are to wait upon holy duties.] This, he says, (without
consideration) is not so: [Prayer and Fasting, etc. were not appointed for time
or places sake, etc.] He clearly mistakes me; for I meant thus: The Sabbath,
and the Temple being made Holy by God, required Holy Services to fill them up:
But times and places, set apart by men, have respect to the Worship of God; and
are appointed for the Worships sake, not the Worship, for the time and places
sake: That Is it that I said a little before; men cannot make any thing properly
Holy, but only improperly, with respect to Holy things or Duties. And that is,
to make any time or place, when and where those duties are performed, as Holy
as any other time or place, that is, the one no more Holy then another. But
this Holiness, I doubt, will not serve the Doctors turn; yet it must, if he be
constant to his principles: For he professes not to make his time and place,
(Festivals and Churches) parts of Worship, but circumstances only of Worship;
which any Day, or place, is as well as his separated Days and places; and so
one as Holy as another. p. 87. n. 13.
But to this he has to say, [The time and place instituted by God himself, is
as truly a circumstance of Worship, as when instituted by men; and duty is
equally the Substance, etc] This is another of his mistakes; not that time and
place instituted by God, are not as truly Circumstances, as those by men; but
that they are more, even parts of Worship; so was the Sabbath and Temple: but
so are not his Holy Days, and our Churches. [Art thou a Master in Israel, and
know not these things?] And now he may take home his The Doctor uses the
word (till) for, fill; the Printers fault; to give me a flout, and that twice.
Absurdity put upon me, to himself.

I said, [I had thought Apostolical and Divine, had been both one with the
Doctor, (and so they are sometimes) but I perceive he makes them differ, etc.]
He answers, [It is soon dispatched, p. 88. n. 14.
by saying, I do not think the Apostles to be God.] Too soon dispatched indeed;
Did ever any man charge him to think so, when he made Apostolical institutions
to be Divine and infallible? Is not this a miserable subterfuge? when he knows
well enough how to distinguish, between Immediately Divine, (so were Christ's
own Institutions;) and mediately, The Scripture was (...), of Divine
inspiration, or God inspired; yet writ by holy men, 2 Pet. 1.21
by commission from him, and Inspiration from the Holy Ghost; so were the
Apostles, Divine. Why then did he speak thus? Sure it was, either to bring
Apostolical down to Ecclesiastical, or to advance the latter, to the Authority
of the former, and to make them equal. But is it not uncharitable for me thus
to judge? No, not at all, knowing him so well as I do. For he says expressly
hereafter, [His Festival and the Lords day are founded both on the same
Authority.] Fest. 5.57. Then, either Ecclesiastical is Divine, for so is
Apostolical; or Apostolical is but Humane, for so is Ecclesiastical; unless the
Doctor will join with Papists, and make the Churches Sanctions to be Divine; as
was said before. But more of this hereafter.

Yet before we part with this Section, one thing the Doctor is desired, in his
next, to satisfy, how he will avoid that in the close; [By this distinction
(aforegoing) of his, the Papists may excuse their grossest Superstition, in
placing Holiness in things, times, places; they may borrow the Doctors answer;
They may say, they account them Holy, but either by the authority of the
general, or particular Church of Rome; and that is no Superstition, says he,
say they.] Something would be said to this.

Sect. 40, 41, 42. But he goes on: [If my voluntary oblation, I perform as a
voluntary oblation, etc.]
THese three Sections, the Doctor passes over, with an easy touch: because it
touches too near upon his Will Worship; and therefore tells me, [I beg the
question, p. 28. n. 15.
to take it for granted, that his voluntary oblation, is an eminent species of
Superstition, against which punishment is denounced in the second Commandment;
when his whole Tract of Will Worship, undertakes to demonstrate the contrary,
etc.] I could answer for my self, that at my first draught, I placed his and my
own Tract of Will Worship, before that of Superstition, (as he did) and so took
it for granted, I had proved his Will Worship to be a Species of Superstition;
But I say, the place is proper enough here, having in my discourse of
Superstition, held out Will Worship to be a species of Superstition, by the
Judgment of of the best Divines, though much more remains to be said of it.
And I add further, that the Doctor has yielded, Uncommanded Worship to be
unlawful and superstitious: but his voluntary oblation, ( Worship he means)
is Uncommanded Worship: ergo, let him take heed of the punishment threatened to
such Worship. Yet I shall say, I am not much troubled that he reserves this to
the next Exercitation, if I were sure, he would look back to these three
Sections, and answer them there: but this I fear, is but an avoidance of what
he is not willing to answer. We shall observe his performance.

Sect. 43. And now the Doctor may be pleased to review, and if he will, recall
his bitter, false, uncharitable conclusion, etc.
HOw the Doctor has vindicated his Doctrine against me, the indifferent
Reader, p. 89. n. 4.
must now be Judge, not we our selves: It only remains, to see how he will
vindicate his charity, in his bitter conclusion: which he goes about, first, by
his Rhetoric, [craving to premise, that it was but a severe Satyr, against a
vice, and not a person, etc.] I shall with him, desire the Iudifferent Reader
to review those two last Sections, and then give Judgment, whether he does not
even point at the persons, whom he means; not in particular, naming the men,
but in a plain describing a party of men, known well enough to the nation: Thus
he begins: [If some men, The opposers of the Ceremonies of our Church, against
whom that tract was prepared. Infr. p. 114 n. 7.
as they will abide no Rites, so they would avow no quarrels but, etc.] Who
knows not, that he means, those godly, learned, conscientious men, who opposed
the Ceremonies of our Church: So he says expressly here, n. 5. [All that have
opposed our Church, in point of Rites and Ceremonies, and branded the innocent
as guilty of no less crime, then Superstition.] This part of the charge is
false, for they could, and did abide some Rites, as we said above; and did avow
no quarrels, but for what (they thought) Scripture would give them particular
directions and commands: But he goes on, and worse; [And consequently, if they
would not judge or damn their brethren, when neither Christ nor his Writ, etc.
condemns them.] This is both false and uncharitable, to censure men, as
judging and damning their brethren; when neither Christ nor his Writ condemned
them: when as they were men of humble and meek Spirits, readier to be judged
and condemned by their opposites, and patiently to suffer it. It follows
[which till it be done, it must be expected, that they (before described) who
have learned one of the Devils Attributes, that of Satan adversary, or enemy
man, will also advance to another, that of (...), calumniator, and (...),
accuser of the brethren, etc.] What could he have said worse, if he had called
them Devils? Is there yet any more dregs in the bottom of the cup? yes, a
little very charitable stuff. [It now, being by some men resolved (if the
testimony of the rest of their lives may be believed) that there is no capital
damning sin worth heeding or abstaining from, but Superstition, See p. 90. n. 5.
etc.] Now Reader, is this a Satyr, of a vice, and not a description of
persons, or a party? can the Doctor with perfect peace of mind review those
Sections, and see no breach of duty, none against whom he has offended? Non
equidem in video, miror magis.

Only one thing more, and we shall part a while; The Doctor says, [He can
very well abstain from making use of the advantage given him, of more then
recriminating.] And well he may; for he has done it before; saying, [ I have
charged that foul sin of Superstition upon the Doctor personnally, and enlarged
it to his party, which must needs involve all the obedient Sons of the Church
of England, etc.] To which I answer, first, For the Doctor himself, I have
charged him with nothing, but [what is avowed by himself, to be his opinion and
practice, and what is proved really to be superstitious,] according to the true
notion of the word, amongst reformed Orthodox Divines.] These are my words, in
this last Section: which if it be not true, why did not the Doctor deny the
charge, and make it appear, that his own principles do not hold out the nature
of Superstition; and his own opinion and practice do not conclude him guilty of
what is laid to his charge. This is very observable, that wherever I charge
him to be superstitious, he moves it, and takes no notice of it, as will appear
hereafter. 2. As for his party, he takes too much Honor to himself, to think I
meant all the obedient Sons of the Church of England. No, there is a party in
that party, that condemn the Doctor for his Superstition, as much as I do. But
the party, that I joined with the Doctor, were those too forward Sons of the
Church of England, who were (if God had not staid them) running away from their
Mother to Rome, both in Doctrine and Worship; and by all modest and pious men,
even of Episcopal notion, judged as Hetordox in the one, and as Superstitious
in the other. In a word, I shall make the Doctor to be his own Accuser, in the
premises, and his own Judge, in the conclusion, of any charge I lay against
him. And so I now rest.

Exercitation. 2. Of Will Worship.
Sect. 1. Had the Reverend and Learned Doctor (as it became him,) distinguished
the words, either (...), in Greek, or Will Worship in English, etc.
HE now begins to do what before he had forgot, p. 93. n. 3.
or neglected; to distinguish, till he has confounded the words, more then
before, and yet not telling us clearly, in what sense he takes it, as he
promised n. 2. First, [Betwixt Worship on the one side and on the other side,
external Ceremonies or Circumstances of it, which are not parts, but accidents
of Worship.] Where he does not distinguish of the word Worship, (as was
required) in it self, that we might know, what he means by Worship, in the word
Will Worship; but between Worship, and Ceremonies, or Circumstances of Worship,
which are not parts, but accidents of Worship, as he says. And yet some
Ceremonies and Circumstances are made by him, and called Worship, as we shall
hear. 2. He distinguishes Worship indeed, after as confused a manner, when he
says, [Worship, whether the Theological virtue, or some act thereof, together
with the degrees, and frequency of those acts.] As if a man should distinguish
Justice, (his present instance) thus, Justice is either, 1. The Moral virtue it
self. 2. Or some act thereof. 3. Or some degree or frequency of that act. Were
these several species of Justice, or not rather the same virtue distinguished
by accidental differences? So the Acts of Worship, and the degrees thereof,
etc. are either the same kind of Worship, or but accidental differences of the
same Worship. 2. In his distinction of Worship, against Ceremonies and
Circumstances, he is no less confused. For 1. Ceremonies and Circumstances of
Worship, are not one and the same, (which yet he seems to make them) as was
said above. 2. Ceremonies and Circumstances, were sometimes parts of Worship
(and so Worship Ceremonial) as the Sabbath, and Temple, time and place, after
mentioned, in his Illustration, by Justice, etc. And Ceremonies however, are
commonly taken for external Worship, (as I said above;) and then he should have
distinguished Worship, thus: Worship is either Moral and Substantial, or
Ceremonial and Accidental; and then his Ceremonies had been, not only parts,
but species of Worship: And such indeed he makes them, however he dissemble the
matter here. But who is the wiser by all this confusion? who can tell, for he
tells us not) what is meant by Worship in the word, Will Worship: It must be,
either the virtue or some act, or degree, or frequencie of it, on the one side;
or a Circumstance, no part, but accident of Worship, which of them I know not.
Perhaps his Illustration will spring some light. [As in Justice; it may
signify, 1. The virtue it self. 2. Some Act of that virtue. Or, 3. the degree
thereof, and frequent repetition of the Acts of it; but for the Circumstances
of time, or place, attending on any Act of it, they will never be called
Justice, with any propriety.] Where, 1. he leaves out, (whether negligently or
willingly) the other word Ceremonies: For there may be some Ceremonies also in
Public Justice, the Formalities of the Judges and Court, etc. He should have
told us, whether those may, in any propriety, be called Justice; as Ceremonies
in Religion, are by some called and made Worship. 2. He should now apply this
distinction and illustration, and tell us, what now he means by Worship;
whether the virtue, or some Act, or degree and frequency of it, or the
Ceremonies, that is the circumstances of time and place: if he mean the latter
only, Circumstances of time and place; as it is not comprehended in the word
VVill-worship, so it is not controverted between us: as has often been said in
the other Tract. If he mean the former, let him consider, that he confutes
himself from the beginning of this Discourse; who maintains VVill-worship,
Uncommanded-worship, men Devised-worship; not VVill-ceremonies, or
VVill-circumstances of Worship, time or place; which can with no more
propriety be called Worship, then the same, or the like Ceremonies or
Circumstances, in exercising of Justice, can be called Justice. But he is no
less confused in the next; for he says, [Secondly, for the other part of the
word will, or choice of man; it may be of four sorts distinguishable by the
matter willed: 1. When it is forbidden by God. 2. Commanded, but not ad semper:
3. Left free. 4. When though not indifferent nor forbidden, but good in an high
degree, yet not under particular precept, and so omitted without sin, etc.] But
here is confusion enough: 1. Who ever distinguished the faculty of Will, (which
is but one) into four sorts, according to the objects or matter of the things
willed? 2. Will, in this word, must be referred only to Worship;
(Will Worship) which is either commanded or forbidden; there is none left
indifferent. 3. That there should be any thing, which is neither indefferent,
nor forbidden, nor commanded, (and yet good in an high degree) is to me a
mystery, and some of the Doctors new Divinity. It helps him not to say, [It is
not under particular precept.] For if it be under a general precept, it is
under precept, and so pro hic and nunc, (as they say) cannot be omitted without
sin, and if then done, how it can be highly rewardable by God, eo nomine,
because not under particular precept, I am yet to seek; of which more
hereafter. 4. His particular instances, are nothing to the present purpose;
which is of the Will, with relation to Worship, and none of his instances are
of Worship, but other things. We enquire, what Will, signifies in the word
Will Worship; whether, it import, willingness in commanded Worship, or willing
and instituting Worship not commanded: To which all that distinction, and
discourse of the Doctor, says nothing; Only he takes occasion from the last
part of his distinction to empty his Notebook, of what he had read of that
notion, [of things good in an high degree, neither indifferent, nor forbidden,
nor commanded, and yet highly rewardable by God;] wherein I shall not now
follow him, but consider it in a place more fit for it, where we shall meet
with it again. We shall attend his application of that distinction, n. 6. (for
the 5. p. 96. n. 6.
is lost) or rather his no-application of it; for he tells us nothing, in which
of those four senses he takes the word, will, but comes presently to the word
in composition, the word (...), Will Worship, to distinguish of that, and then
tell us, in what sense he does not, or does take it. And to confound us the
more, has found out six ways, or things, which it may denote. [1. The
performing any sort of worship to God, forbidden by him; which yet is not truly
but equivocally called Worship, etc.] Where I observe; first, That any sort of
Worship forbidden by God, is Will Worship, and consequently Superstition; and
so Worship of Demons, is not the only Superstition, which the Doctor was very
loath to grant in his former Tract. 2. How warily he speaks; [which yet is not
truly Worship, but equivocally;] It Is sufficient, first, that the offerers
think it truly Worship; and then I would ask, is not false Worship truly called
Worship, if Worship be properly distinguished into true and false, as several
species thereof, as it is by the Doctor hereafter? But we go on; 2. [The using
any Ceremony in Gods Worship, which is forbidden, etc.] Now for these two, the
Doctor says, [He must readily acknowledge, p. 97. n. 8. Was not the
Worshipping of Angels, a Will Worship? (...), and forbidden?
they are criminous, and he pleads not for them, nor are they capable of that
title of Will Worship.] But, first, Worship forbidden by God, and devised and
instituted by the mere Will of man, may well be capable of the title of
Will Worship: but forbidden Worship, is Worship devised and instituted by the
mere Will of man, s. 1. may well be called Will Worship. 2. Worship not
commanded by God, or uncommanded Worship, is forbidden by God as has often
been said and proved: ergo, all uncommanded Worship, that is set up by the mere
will of man, is criminous, and may well be called Will Worship. [3. Ridiculous
and unprofitable Ceremonies, which though no where forbidden severally by God,
yet by their multitude become an hinderance to devotion, a yoke too heavy for
Christians.] What thinks he of these? He professes his dislike of them, p. 97.
n. 9.
[ yet thinks it not applicable to the notion of the word in the Apostle, but
rather to that in Epiphanius, (...), superfluity of Willworship: where still
the fault is the superfluity, etc. and not the Vncommandedness of them.] Enough
has been said to this in the former Tract: But I add, first, The multitude
orsuperfluity of Ceremonies made parts of Worship by men, as they were by the
Pharisees, and are by Papists, may well be capable of the title of
Will Worship. 2. The fault is not then only the Superfluity; for any one
Ceremony made Worship, by the Will of man, Ceremony in common acception,
signifies, external Worship; and being appointed by men, any one is a Nimiety,
and Criminous; as was said above.
is a Superfluity, and too much, and so criminous, as Will Worship. 3.
Epiphanius taxes the Pharisees, not only for their superfluity of Ceremonies,
but for their Will Worship in them. The Doctor then must not beg, and take the
word Will Worship, in a good sense, and talk of [Superfluity of Will Worship.]
4. If these superfluous ridiculous Ceremonies, be not applicable to the word in
the Apostle, Col. 2.23. Why does he make this one sense, or one species of
Will Worship? Surely superfluous Ceremonies are one species of Superstition, in
the judgment not only of others, but of the Doctor himself in the former
Tract; and being imposed by the Will of man, may well be called will worship:
the Vncommandedness of them, as well as the Superfluity, will name them so. And
if any one such Ceremony be lawful, and so a second, and a third, etc. The more
the better; and how then can there be a fault in the multitude? when as the
Doctor said, [If they be wholesome, Of Superstition, s. 41.
then there will be little reason, to accuse them of excess; for they will then
more probably help the inner devotion, then encumber it.] But of this before
sufficiently, and we go on. All Ceremonies in the sense above, are forbidden.
n. 10.
4 [Vsing or instituting one or more Ceremonies, not forbidden, yet not
commanded, but founded in some pious or prudential consideration, etc] Of this
he says, [It is not Worship in it self, and I need not allow that the title of
Will Worship, Does not the Doctor in this and the next Tract, plead for
VVillworship, in Ceremonies and Uncommanded Worship in Festivals, etc. and yet
now will not allow them the name either of Worship, or VVillship? n. 11.
but refer it to those Circumstances of Worship, etc.] But suppose this one or
more Ceremonies be made parts of Worship, not mere Circumstances; will he not
them grant them Superstitious, and so VVill-worship, by the Will of man? as
was said to the third sense before. 5. [Offering to the service of God any
thing, which God has any way revealed, he will accept of, and reward, if duly
performed, etc.] But what means he, by offering to the service of God? that men
may offer service, or Worship, which God has not commanded? This I suppose he
will not say; yet palpably does it, in his maintained VVill-worship: what then?
will he say, it is not Worship, but a Circumstance of Worship? Then it cannot
indeed be called VVill-worship, for it is not Worship at all: yet to this, the
Doctor applies the word in the Apostle, under the notion, [of voluntary
oblations, and as good and commendable (no way vicious) if it be truly such as
it pretends to be.] So then, he calls that VVill-worship, which is no Worship:
and yet with a limitation, [if it be truly such as it pretends to be.] So that
if it be not truly such; such what? such VVill-worship, as is good and
commendable, the Doctor (begging that there is any VVill-worship good) will not
allow that, the name of VVill-worship, in the Apostle; though it be instituted
merely by the Will of man. There is yet one way more, 6. [Lastly, when either
for the degree or frequency of any known act of Worship, a man does more then
be is by Gods law strictly required to do, prays, or Fasting is not an act of
Worship: but an help to Worship: yet here and elsewhere made so.
fasts oftener, etc.] But to this I say, 1. This is impertinent to the point,
for we are speaking of VVill-worship, not of Commanded Worship; Worship
devised by the Will of man, not by God, as prayer is. 2. The degrees and
frequency of these Worships, are under a precept, if not particular, yet
general; with respect to abilities and opportunities: but the VVill-worship we
speak against, is under no precept at all, unless by way of prohibition. 3. He
that will take upon him to Pray or Fast oftener, then Gods law strictly requires
of him, must certainly know, how often Gods law requires him to pray, etc. and no
oftener: which the Doctor may do well to determine out of the chair. 4. We speak
not of degrees and frequency of acts of Worship commanded, but of new sorts or
kinds of Worship not commanded, instituted merely by the Will of man: And of
such Will worship the Doctor must speak, or he says nothing. Let him now
consider, whether by his sixth-fold distinction, he has not rather clouded,
then cleared the business. [VVill-worship cannot be imagined to denote any more
then some one of these six things, etc.] Whereof the four first, are not
allowed the title of VVill-worship; The two last are not properly Worship at
all, I mean, He call them six species of VVillship. n. 14. p. 98. n. 13.
new sorts of Worship; and besides fall under Commanded Worship. But we speak
of [VVill-worship which respects the Will, and choice (of Worship) by man,
without any necessity imposed by God] as himself states it. n. 13. Let him
speak plainly; What does the Apostle mean by VVill-worship? In which of these
six senses must it be taken? Is forbidden Worship, Will Worship? no, that is not
truly but equivocally Worship. Are forbidden Ceremonies, Will Worship? no; they
are but Circumstances of Worship, but no Worship: and so of the rest. I must
profess, I know not well what he resolves to be Will Worship; but I conjecture,
he means it of the fifth and sixth part of his distinction, See n. 11. and 12.
voluntary oblations, which God by no law exacts from every man, or Fervency
and Frequency in commanded Worship: Now if these two be either no Worship, or
no new sorts of Worship, instituted by the will of man, then the Doctor has
denied that there is any such thing as VVill-worship, at least sinful
Will Worship in the world. I will not anticipate, but only in a word or two:
The first sort of his Will Worship, is [voluntary oblations, which God by no
law exacts from every man:] But then I say, To those, of whom God does not
exact it, it is no Worship at all: and to those of whom he does exact it, (for
of some the Doctor grants he does exact it) it is Worship commanded; and so
incapable both ways of the title of will worship. Nay if those, of whom God
does not exact it, should tender it to God, as new Worship; they would incur
the censure of (sinful) VVill-worship. But this is new Divinity to the Doctor,
(though it is his own) and must wait till it is time comes: And I proceed with
him, to consider what he thinks of my distinction, which was this; [ The words
in both languages, may be taken in a double sense. 1. For willingness and
freeness in worship commanded by God. 2. For worship devised by the wit, and
appointed by the will of man.] p. 98. n. 13.
To the former part he says, [That can be no species of that will worship which
respects the choice and will of man, etc.] I pray, did I make it a species of
will worship, to worship God willingly, in commanded Worship? And not rather
make that, one sense of the word, as it is compounded with, will of man? man's
will, I hope, may willingly perform commanded Worship; and that may be one
sense, of (...), the first part of the word. And why does the Doctor refuse
this sense? [Because he supposes, that in the commands of God, not only the
action, but the cheerfulness of this performance is in like manner commanded by
God, and so necessary, and not voluntary.] Grant this true; yet I ask, may not
a man do a command of God unwillingly? if he may (as is evident he may) then
may he also do it willingly: and the necessity of it, does no more hinder it
from being voluntary, then the unlawfulness of an act against the law, makes it
the more involuntary. That a thing may be necessary to be done, in respect to
Gods command, and yet done voluntarily in respect to man's will, I hope the
Doctor need not learn of me. The word (...), surely, signifies such a
willingness sometimes: as (...), a willing servant; not with respect to the
service of his master, but to his own will; doing willingly what is commanded.
Ephesians. 6.7. (...), with good will. n. 14.
For sure the Doctor will not allow a servant a will and choice, to appoint his
masters service, of his own head, and call that willing service, in a good
sense, but will-service, in a bad sense. And that is the second part of my
distinction: to which he says, [ It has many improprieties in it, and this
great fallacy, plurium Interrogationum, confounding and putting together things
most desperate, etc.] But I appeal all Readers, if there be any thing but
plainness, in the second part of my distinction. Are not those two senses
given, the only possible ones to be given of the first part of the word (...)?
Let the Doctor find a third if he can. As for his fourfold distinction, there
is not one of them almost to the purpose, as has been showed above: Neither do
they at all distinguish the sense of the word will; but the several objects of
the will: clean beside the business. And if I have distributed will worship
into but one part (I distributed only the sense of the word will) as he flours
me, in the end of n. 13. I may more truly say, he has distributed will worship
into no parts; for none of them in his sense are proper to the business in
hand, as I showed before. It Is better to distinguish into one part, then into
nothing. n. 15.
Let the Reader judge. In his last number I cannot but observe briefly some
things. 1. I cited in my first Section a saying of S. Austin, as the sum of the
second Commandment, in the affirmative part. [That God must be worshipped, with
his own prescribed worship,] and another of the Doctors own glosses of that
Commandment in the margin; [God is to be worshipped, in a manner pecular to
him, and appointed by him.] What says he to it? handsomely puts it off, with
saying, [It appears already how little force it has against my pretensions, it
being evident that the words cited, belong to essential parts of Gods worship,
not to each Circumstance, etc.] But this is a prevarication. For nothing
appears before concerning either of those sentences, but the Doctor has
peremptorily affirmed, See p. 43. n. 4.
[That in the second Commandment, there is not a word to determine the matter
of it, to commanded worship: nothing but the prohibition of Idol worship.]
Which if it be not a contradiction to what St. Austin and himself said above,
let all reasonable men judge. And now, when they are clearly laid before him,
in a proper place, to shuffle them off, with a distinction of Essential parts
of Worship, and Circumstances, etc. is a very poor evasion, to hide his
self-contradiction, and to wink against the light. 2. Here also, he grants, an
Affirmative and Negative part of the second Commandment, which before he
denied, or doubted of: But I refer to what is said above, only adding, that
essential parts of Worship, may import these Ceremonies he speaks of, are
accidental parts of Worship: and so they are made to be by many.

Sect. 2. How often, or seldom the Greek word is used in other Authors, or the
Translators of the Old Testament, we shall not trouble our selves, etc.
TO this Section, little or nothing is said, that is material; I shall
therefore briefly dispatch it. And I cannot but take notice, that the Dr. waves
the stating of the question, upon the two senses of the word, before by me
given; and my fixing it upon the latter, saying, [ The thing signified by it
(in the second sense, in which the Reverend Doctor must take it, or he has no
adversary,) viz. Worship devised and imposed, by the will of man, is so much
decryed, etc.] The Doctor leaves out those words in the Parenthesis, and will
say, neither I, nor no; which he ought to have done: For thus I argue; The
Doctor must take Will Worship, either for willingness, in commanded Worship,
(but that he disclaimes) or will-devised Worship, for non datur tertium; there
can no other sense rationally be given: If he take it in this latter sense, (as
he must or he has no adversary) let him speak out and say so, and the question
is fully stated. Yet though this be the sense of the word, in his own opinion
and practice; he will not be so liberal, as to say so: For what means he by
will worship? why voluntary, spontaneous, uncommanded Worship, as he speaks
hereafter, which should have been said here: This he must maintain to be
lawful, or he comes not near the question. To dislike my distinction, and to
say, p. 100. n. 5.
[There may be many acts of worship, many Circumstances of worship, which may
bear proportion with worship, that are not under obligation, etc.] is just
nothing to the question; because they either are no worship, or not devised by
the will of man: and then [what proportion they may bear with worship] is not
inquirable.

Sect. 3. What the word, (...), in the place, Col. 2.23. signifies, may indeed
be gathered from the context, etc.
IN manifesting the scope of the text, I used the Interpretation of Beza, and
Bishop Davenant; supposing it to be, to beat down some Corruptions creeping
into their Worship; and all Rites and Ceremonies, obtruded as parts of Worship,
etc. To this he says, p. 101. n. 1.
Their words are presently answered, by adverting to the distinction, given,
between the Essentials and Circumstantials; the parts and Ceremonies of
Worship.] Nothing here but confusion still: For 1. What is this to the point in
hand, the scope of the Apostle in this Chapter? 2. One of them, expressly says,
the Apostle disputes against all Rites and Ceremonies, obtruded as parts of
Worship; what is his distinction to this? or how is it any answer to them at
all? It is not yet the question, what is meant by Will Worship, by those
learned men, but what the Apostles scope; Let him apply his distinction, and
see it is vanity.

The next is as bad a mistake; p. 102. n. 2, 3.
[ That I charge him, to say, that the Apostle there speaks of the commands, or
prohibitions of Magistrates, verse. 22. in things indifferent, and censures
those under the style of Will Worship.] The clean contrary is asserted by me;
The mistake lies in this, (and that I charge the Doctor with,) that he says,
[The Apostle does not speak of Commands, but Doctrines:] Whereas I say, he
speaks of Commands, as well as Doctrines: (both the words are here) commands I
say, not of the Magistrate, that I disclaim as well as he; but of
False-Teachers, See my 4. s. and his own acknowledgment. p. 104. n. 1.
who laid those Abstinencies upon their Disciples, as their Doctrines and
Commands; but were nothing but Traditions and commands of men; who had no
Authority, in point of Worship, so to impose upon the people of God: and then
all his labor in the 3. and 4. numb. is utterly lost. What the meaning of
Commands here is, and whether the same with Doctrines (as the Doctor says) we
shall consider anon. But one thing, must here be remembered, (he says) [That
the Seducers spoken of in that Chapter were the Gnostick Heretics.] p. 103. n.
5.
This is once before said by him, and many times more hereafter, I know not well
how often; I shall here speak to it, once for all, and but point at it, when ever
it comes again. 1. The Gnostick Heretics, were not yet hatched, when Paul writ
this Epistle to the Colossians; I find no news of them, till the time of
Basilides, Carpocrates and Valentinian, who all lived in the second Century,
about 120. or 130. These were the first, that called themselves Gnostics, as
men of greater knowledge then any others. So Iraeneus lib. 1. Of Heresy, c.
34. Ex his, etc. from these, Basilides, Carpoor, etc. Who were formerly called
Sinoniani, the multitude of the Gnostics did arise. So Tertull. Advers.
Valentin. Atque ita insolescentes doctrinae Valentiniorum, in sylvas jam
exoleverunt Gnosticorum. Upon which words, Rhenanus thus, Valentiniani superbo
nomine, se Gnosticos appellabant. Horam principem facit Irenaeus,
Valentinianum. I know how the Doctor will evade, by saying, The name indeed
began then, but the Doctrines were the same, with those of Nicholas and Simon,
etc. who lived in the Apostles times: So Epiphan. and Austin seem to say.
But that is but an equivocation, or evasion, to say the Gnostics were in that
time, and meant here by the Apostle, because they sucked some of their poison
from those Heretics: Saint Paul therefore could not properly intend the
Gnostics. 2. This is Estius, a Papists gloss upon 1 Timothy 6.20. [Oppositions of
science falsely so called,] a fitter text to be applied to the Gnostics, then
this of ours; Quamvis credi potest, Gnosticorum nomen non statim cum haeresi
emersisse, sed aliquanto post tamen Apostolorum temporibus rem ipsam, jam tum a
Simone and Nicolao originem accepisse certum est. But in that sense, the
Gnostics may be said to have their Original from the ancient Baalites, and
Heathens, who were as abominable in their filthy worships of their Gods, as the
Gnostics lightly could be. 3. The best Commentators on this place, never
dreamed of the Gnostics; but generally say, the Apostle opposes himself
against two Sects, then troubling the Church: First, some Philosophers turned
Christians, who brought in Philosophical speculations; at these he strikes,
verse 8. and 18. in Worship of Angels. Secondly, some Judaizing Christians, who
would keep up the Ceremonial Law with the Gospel; against these are the 16.20,
21, 22. verses. In particular, the 21 verse has clear reference to the
Abstinencies formerly commanded the Jews, but now abolished by Christ, Touch
not, taste not, etc. as some say. However, there is little or no color to
bring in the Gnostics here; who though they agreed with others, in abstaining
from such meats and drinks, yet the chief poison of that Sect was, in
abandoning and vilifying of Marriage, and in other abominable filthinesses, for
which they had not the least pretense from the Jews (with whom the Doctor
says they joined) to abstain from Marriage, that being never prohibited to the
Jews, as some meats and drinks were: yet the Doctor speaks hereafter, See p.
109. n. 3. n. 10.
as if the Apostle here intended them, that forbad Marriage; as the Gnostics
after did. And I do a little wonder how he mist a Criticisme in the 21. ver. Ne
attigeris, touch not; that is, Marry not; (so the Gnostics said) for which he
had a fair text of Scripture, 1 Cor. 7.1. [It's good for a man, (...), not to
touch a woman;] that is, not to Marry. So in the text here, Touch not, first,
Marry not; Taste not, first, such or such a meat, etc. But enough of this at
present, for it will often meet us again. For the rest in this his third
Section, it will come to be condered in a fitter place: only saying now, That,
a show of wisdom is applyable to No justifiable humility, p. 112. n. 10. And
austerity is of the same kind there.
humility, and the rest, as well as to Willworship; all being equally naught
and condemned.

Sect. 4. That we have not mistaken the Doctors meaning, will appear by that
which he adds, etc.
THe chief business in this Section, is to speak to the instance of David,
appointing the Levites to serve from the age of 20. years: whereas God by Moses
had appointed it but from 25. p. 105. n. 6.
The Doctor says, he made this alteration upon prudential reasons, as a King,
not as a Prophet: or by inspiration, as my places of Scripture import. It Is
true, there are prudential reasons given for what he did: but prudence of man
is not sufficient to alter the institutions of God: It Is this prudence that
has undone the Church, that men will be wiser then God, in altering and adding
to the Rule of his Worship. See 2 Chronicles. 29.25. for so was the commandment of
the Lord by his prophets.
Let the Doctor look once more upon the text, 1 Chronicles. 28.12, 13. In the 12.
verse it is said, [David gave to Solomon his Son the pattern of all that he had
by the Spirit, etc. and 13. verse. Also for the courses of the Priests, and the
Levites, and all the work of the service of the house of the Lord.] If the
Doctor saw not this, he was negligent, for I pointed to the place; if he saw
them, he wilfully winked against the light; resolved belike, to maintain what
ever he once says, right or wrong.

Sect. 5. The full importance of the words, verse. 22. (he says) is this, That
when those abstinencies are imposed, etc.
COncerning the sense of those words, p. 107. n. 1.
(...); I know no reason, why the Dr. should forsake the Interpretation of
almost all Interpreters, unless because he loves to be singular: He says, the
Apostle speaks not of the meats, but of the commands of abstaining; I granted
this might be the sense, but yet it might well be rendered, as our Translation,
and all (but the Doctor) do; [Which all are to perish with the using;] that is,
[That now being out-dated, they perish without any Spiritual advantage.] To
this he answers: p. 109. n. 4.
[This is sure very short, it being evident, that the imposing these out-dated
observances, is not only, not advantageous, but hurtful, deadly, destructive.]
But, first, the Doctor varies the question; it is not spoken of imposing them,
by false Teachers, but of the Ordinances, or Abstinencies themselves, [which
all are to perish with the using,] as used by the Colossians, whom they had
seduced. 2. He that says, they were to perish in the using, does not exclude
their hurtfulness, even to eternal destruction; there may be (as often there is,)
a (...), less spoken, and more intended: so Saint Austins words cited by him
import. But as for Saint Ambrose, he reads the text, Quae sunt ad corruptelam
ipso usu, as ours do: and has these words upon it, Quia praecepta and
doctrinae, no^ Dei, sed hominum sunt, in quibus vana spes est. And again; Hinc
se sapientiae rationem habere putant, quia traditioni humanae, nomen Religionis
applicant, ut religio appelletur cum fit sacrilegium: quia quod contra Authorem
est, sacrilega mente inventum est: Ambr. in textum. Where these things are
observable, first, that he reads, (...), corruptelam; corruption, not
destruction: 2. (...), he renders, ipso usu. 3. Gives the reason why those
abstinences lose their virtue, which formerly they had, because they are not
the precepts and doctrines of God, but of men, in whom hope is vain. 4. That he
makes the crime to be, because they made them parts of Religion, or Worship,
which is not Religion, but Sacrilege; and gives the reason, because they are
invented by a Sacrilegious mind (by men) against the Authority of God. And now
I hope, the Doctor will never cite Ambrose more, in this point. He knows
Hierome, and the Greek Commentators take the words in our sense, referring the
words to something understood, viz. meats, which are in interium ipso usu: So
the vulg. So Estius, and all Papists that I have seen, Will-wor. s. 5.
besides all our reformed Divines. [That sense (says he) is sufficiently
improbable, because the Apostle speaks not of the meat, but of the commands of
abstaining:] And this supposition of his is as sufficiently improbable; p. 109.
n. 3.
because (as himself says,) [The antecedent to, (...), all which, is Touch not,
Taste not, etc.] But then the words must be meant, not of doctrines or
commands, (for they can in no good sense be said, to perish with the using, as
we read; or are to destruction, by the abusing, as he reads) but of the
abstinences themselves commanded, or as used or practiced by the Colossians;
they being now out-dated, perish in the using; and are destructive to them that
make them necessary parts of Worship and therein abuse them: But that (...),
the abuse, should belong to the the Doctrines of abstinence, can be no good
sense; which Doctrines of abstinence, are to destruction, by the abuse. But
this is good; which abstinences are to destruction, by the abuse, viz. of an
ordinance, some time since profitable, as a part of Worship: but now abusively
continued to that end. Besides, the Doctor says, [The words, Touch not, etc.
denote other abstinencies, besides that of meats, particularly, that of
marriage.] But, these are the Doctors second thoughts: for in his former Tract
of Will Worship, he saw not this of marriage; or the Gnostics, that after
prohibited marriage as abominable: Humane out-dated Judaical Constitutions.
Will-wor. s. 14.
So [Touch not, etc. noting thereby those doctrines which affirm men obliged to
fasting, or abstinence from such or such meats; (the word (...), to touch,
signifying to eat, etc.] Not a word of abstinence from marriage) then thought
of; though, (...), might signify, to marry; as I said above. 2. Let marriage
be taken in with meats (if that will please him) yet as the speech would be
improper, to say, marriage perishes in the using; (as he objects to us) so also
to say, marriage perishes by the abuse; If he say, he reads thus which
(abstinence from marriage) is to destruction by the absue: So it might be said
of any other gift of God; and then the Apostle says little to the purpose, in
the particular case; any creature abused, is to destruction. But the Apostie
here speaks of Ordinances of God, abstinences under precept lately; (but so was
never abstinence from marriage,) but now used, or abused to a wrong end, being
abolished by Christ: Now wherein that abuse consisted, comes next to be
enquired.

The Doctor placed it in this only, n. 5.
[That those abstinences were imposed as Divine precepts, this is an abuse of
them; (otherwise innocent,) etc.] To which I said, 1. There is little or
nothing in the text, to import this: He replies (something angerly) [what will,
with him, be accounted great I know not; but something there is, to incline it
this way; 1. The word (...), verse. 20. (...) and (...), doctrines signify
those things, which are taught, as from God. Matthew. 15.9. as formerly has been
showed, etc.] This indeed was asserted before, p. 3. n. 1. but not proved at
all; and here it is again asserted more largely without any convincing proof:
yet he says, [It's evident from the form of speech; Col. 2.22. The words are,
After the Commandments, and doctrines of men: as both one.
In vain do they Worship me, teaching for doctrines the Commandments of men;
where the Commandments of men, are taught, not as such, but as doctrines of
God.] It Is much to sight, with what eyes men look upon objects. To me and
others the contrary rather appears; For, first, if I might play the Critic a
little, I would say, there is not in the text to be found, the word (for:) The
words are thus; teaching doctrines, the Commandments of men: that is, doctrines
which are merely the Comandments of men: 2. The word (...), does no where that
I know, signify [to teach things to be Divine precepts, which are not:] The
word (says the learned Professor) signifies, D. Dav. in locum.
[teneri, vel abstringi dogmatib. magistroru^ nostrorum; as the Academicks were
bound to recei^ve the dogmata, the Doctrines or opinions of Plato, the
Peripateticks of Aristotle, etc.] But sure they did not teach or impose their
doctrines, as Commandments of God. 3. The very text produced confutes the
gloss; where the doctrines of the Pharisees, are called the Commandments of men;
and opposed to the Commandments of God verse. 3, 6. Yea the Pharisees
themselves, called them, the Traditions of the Elders, verse. 2. etc. This he
would thus evade: [They were so really, Commandments of men, p. 110. n. 6.
yet were by false Treachers imposed, as Commands of God, and therein their
false teaching consisted.] This might be true of some false teachers, that
preached up the Ceremonial Law, after it was abolished, as still obliging by
divine precept; but there was no color for the Pharisees, to pretend to a
divine precept in their new Traditions; being known not to be commanded by God,
in the Jewish Law; and therefore they called them only, Traditions of the
Elders: They being men of great repute, for knowledge and piety, did invent,
and then by their own example, commend some new ways of worshipping God, and
then by their Authority, they had got in their Disciples hearts, as pious and
devout men, did lay their own doctrines upon them; and they stooped and were
subjected to them. They did not therefore so much as pretend them to be the
Will and Commandments of God, (sure our Savior would not have been silent, in
such a blasphemy) but only that they would be pleasing and acceptable to God,
as being more then he commanded; which is the opinion of all formal Hypocrites,
in their Will Worship. And I cannot but wonder, the Doctor should hold our,
that they pretended their Doctrines to be Divine precepts, when he makes them
differ from the Karraim, in this, that they transcended the Law, in their
Worship; in uncommanded Worship. Now to say, their Worship or doctrines of
Worship, were Divine precepts, was to derogate from that height of excellency,
which themselves (and the Doctor) conceited to be in them. Let him confider it,

But to convince him the more, I could tell him what Calvin's judgment was of
that text, Matt. 15.9. Omnes (...), hic damnari minime dubium est: but the
Doctor will easily slight his judgment. I shall therefore give him the gloss
of a learned Papist, whom he more regards. It is, Tolet on Luc. 11. Annotat.
84. [The Priests had brought in many novel things, though Moses had with great
terror threatened them not to add any thing: of which number of additions,
were those washings. There was a double fault. 1. The innovation it self, was
no slight fault, etc. 2. Another was their Superstition. The Pharisees had put
in those washings, not for any natural or civil cleanliness, but as pertaining
to Religion: who so did contemn them, were judged to offend against Gods
Worship: and whosoever did observe them, seemed chiefly to regard Gods Worship in
them. But this was in no wise lawful, etc. for Christ rejected these washings
as superstitious, Mark 7. In vain do they Worship me, teaching the doctrines
and precepts of men. i. e. such things as men set up of themselves against the
Commandment of God.] Not, (as the Doctor) [such things which though they were
the doctrines and commandments of men, yet were imposed, as Commandments of
God] Judge, Reader, which is the better Interpreter.

But supposing (not yielding) they did hold them out as Divine precepts (that I
said, was an abuse of them:) yet the fault might be, they made them parts of
Worship: that would make them more destructive: And this our Savior
particularly charge upon the Pharisees, [In vain do they Worship me.] They
made their Traditions, to be parts of Worship: I asked, [whether placing
Worship, in the observation of those ordinances, though not imposed as Gods
Commands, were not an abuse of them, to destruction?] The Doctor answers (as a
man amused) by asking me; p. 111. n. 8.
[What I mean by Worship? if such (Worship) as a man may justly prescribe or
practice; ceremonies perfectly lawful; or more, what is sure to be accepted,
etc. it is certain, it were no abuse.] Here Reader, observe 1. That the Doctor
grants, a man may justly prescribe, and then practice his own prescribed
Worship. 2. That he calls Ceremonies, Worship, which hitherto he called only
Circumstances of Worship. But he knows, I mean it of Worship; what then? [If he
mean the commanded Worship of God, then his question implies a contradiction;
for whatsoever the Worship of God is placed in, that is taught, as a command of
God, or else it were not Gods prescribed Worship, which yet it is supposed to
be.] I mean it not of commanded Worship, (it were ridiculous indeed, to ask
such a question) but of uncommanded Worship, devised of his own will, against
the will of God: may not a man devise false Worship, and yet not pretend it to
be imposed by Divine precept? Surely Papists do so, in many of their
Will-worships; holding them our, not as Divine commands, but as things very
pleasing to God, and rewardable by him, etc. Upon this my question falls; to
which he says nothing, but gives as strange a reason; [for whatsoever the
Worship of God is placed in, that is taught as a command of God, else it were
not Gods prescribed Worship] Which is proved false by the former instance; and
begs the question, That no man places Worship in any thing, but he must teach
it, as a Command of God; which I believe the Doctor will contradict by his own
practice; placing the Worship of God in some things, and yet denying it to be a
Command of God. I shall take another instance, from himself in the next number;
n. 9. He (falsely) supposes abstinence from marriage to be meant in Col. 2.23.
See p. 107. n. 3. n. 10.
[It is certain abstinence from marriage may be lawfully practiced, by him that
can bear it, all the error is in imposing it on others, etc.] Suppose now, a
man does not impose it upon others, yet places the Worship of God in it, to
Worship God by it, as Papists do; (whether the Doctor do so, we shall hear
anon) I would ask, whether this be not an error, to place Worship in that,
which God does not command? Whether Col. 2.23. be a [setting down the abuse,
and defining wherein it consists] or no, shall be tried hereafter.

Sect. 6. Yet let us hear wherein the Doctor places the danger, etc.
WHat ever is repeated in this Section, by the Doctor, is fully answered in the
last; and the Doctors notion, I still say, is singular and his own, [That the
false teachers held out their doctrines as Commandments of God;] which no
Interpreters of the place, do touch upon: I shall only observe, what Estius
notes upon the text, answering this question; [Seeing the Apostle speaks here
of Legal Rites, instituted by God, how does he call them the precepts and
doctrines of men? which in the Scripture are taken in the evil sense, as also
are the Traditions of men, viz. those things which are invented and delivered,
by an humane sense and spirit.] He gives diverse answers. 1. [Some took the
place to be meant of the superstitious precepts of the Gentile Philosophy, or
Simonian School (so did the Doctor p. 110. n 5. at least in part.) But this
exposition is refuted; For those precepts were Jewish, Touch not, etc. as those
before, Let no man judge you in meat or drink: which without doubt was spoken of
Jewish observations. 2. Others answer thus: Those Institutions of the Mosaical
law, being imposed to foretell Christ to come, did now pertain no longer to the
Law of God, but to the doctrines and precepts of men; who teach them still to
be observed. So Chrysostom. Theophyl. and others. 3. The Greek Interpreters give
another, That the Apostle has respect to the humane Institutions and
Traditions of the Pharisees, mixed with the Precepts of God; For the Apostle
says not only touch not, but handle not; which because it differs from the
former, seems to be referred to some other things, the touching whereof, was
forbidden, not by the law, but by the tradition of men.] And to this last he
rather inclines. But he never took the word, (...), to signify things imposed
as commands of God; but as the commands of men: Cur sinitis vos regi
praeceptis, and doctrinis humanis: As touch not, etc. But if the Doctor had
considered my question, [what it was they imposed by those ordinances and
doctrines? was it not a way of worshipping God, by those Abstinences and false
worships, p. 111. n. 10. They commended them as acts of voluntary worship, and
so to be acceptable to God. p. 123. n. 3.
Abstinences, touch not, etc.] He would have given an answer, or an evasion;
and have said, yea, or no: If he should say no, they did not impose those
Abstinences as a way of Worship, or as worship, the text would confute him; for
all those legal abstinences, were parts of worship to the Jews, which these
false teachers would have so continued. If he should say, yea, they did so
impose them; then it is evident, that though they might impose them as Divine
Commands, yet the main crime would be, their setting up, or continuing a
worship of God, which Christ had abrogated: therefore the Doctor overlookt it,
and said nothing. The danger therefore was, that they were but Commandments and
Doctrines of men, (or if held out as Gods) placing the worship of God in those
observances, which either he never commanded, or were now out-dated: Yet the
Doctor is at his old fence; p. 113. n. 6.
[If they placed worship in them, in this sense, that they did or taught them
as parts of Gods commanded worship, it is the very thing, I placed the danger
in: If they delivered them as their own doctrines, they did not then place any
part of Gods commanded worship in them.] Enough has been said to this in the
former Section: I only ask, what makes the word (commanded) here? Let him
propound it thus, as I did; If they placed worship in them, (whether commanded
or not commanded, is not material,) was there no danger and destructiveness in
them for that? But the second part is false (upon a false supposition) that a
man cannot place worship in things, but he must teach them as commanded by God.
But here is one thing new; [If they taught them as such things, which though not
commanded by God, would yet be acceptable to him still, after abolisht by
Christ, then they taught that which had no truth in it, for such kinds of
abstinencies, are not now valued by God.] To which I say, 1. This will recoil
upon himself; For he has said, the danger was only that they taught them as
Commandments of God, (which otherwise had been innocent things) in sect. 5. of
VVill-wor. but now he says, they had taught that which had no truth in it,
though they taught them as such things, as would be acceptable to God, though
not commanded by him. And is it no crime, to teach untruths? 2. It falls on him
once more; For he does teach many things (his will worship) to be acceptable to
God, which he has not commanded; yea, the more acceptable because not
commanded: then, he teaches that which has no truth in it; for such
abstinences of worship are not now But more real acts of self-denial,
mortifying of lusts, set up in their stead, as here he says: yet he highly
values those very abstinences: as after, Infra page 129. n. 8. See p. 119. n.
15.
valued by God, who will be worshipped with his own commanded Worship. If he
will say, he does not make them worship, that shall be tried hereafter.

Sect. 7. And now we are come to the 23. verse, etc.
NOt to trouble my self, or Reader, with every minute exception, and his
flashes of wit, I shall speak only to the main differences: And, 1. a word in
vindication of those pious men that opposed some (not all) Ceremonies of our
Church, upon these two premises, p. 114. n. 1.
[1. That will worship is a sin. 2. That the using of Ceremonies, not commanded
by God, was will worship.] For the first of these, that will worship, that is,
worship devised by men, is a sin, and a great one; I know none, Protestant or
Papist, that deny it, except the Doctor; and perhaps not he. For the other,
those men that said, [Ceremonies not commanded by God, are will worship,] they
meant it only of such, as they thought were made parts of Gods Worship: and in
this sense I believe the Doctor will call them superstitious, though he will
not allow them to be Willworship. 2. He opposes only the possibility of the
word, (used only in this text) to be taken in a good sense; The task lies upon
me the opponent (he says) [to prove my Affirmative, that Willworship is
criminous.] But I having made it visible, that the word is not taken in a good
sense here, both by the judgment of almost all Divines, and some reasons
beside; I may now at least charge him with begging the question; still to plead
for a good sense. This discourse will make it more improbable, if not
impossible to be taken in a good sense, in due time. 3. In the mean time we
shall consider his Interpretation of the verse. [Which things have some true,
at least appearing notion of wisdom in them;] I proved, that (...), here
signified not a reality, but a show of wisdom by the Authority of all
Interpreters; and I believe the Doctor in his own conscience, did believe, or
now does, that it does not signify any reality or truth of wisdom, yet how
willingly would he have it so signify: Hear first his confessions; p. 111 n.
10. p. 117. n. 10. See p. 120. n. 19. Will worcester. s. 7.12. p. 103. n. 3. show, or
reality, etc p. 115. n. 3.
He says it twice, [It was but a show, it was but a show, no reality of
wisdom.] And hereafter p. 117. n. 10. [I acknowledge, it was but a show of
wisdom.] And in other places the like: why then did he put in, (some true?) We
have his excuse, and his willingness yet to have it so, the better to make
Will Worship seem to be taken in a good sense. In case it should here signify
the former, (some true notion of wisdom) then it is unavoidably evident, that
Will Worship, must be taken in a good, not ill sense.] But what if it signify
the latter, as he says, he acknowledges it does? To what purpose then, does he
amuse his Reader, with a sense acknowledged false? yet the same he does again
hereafter. p. 140. n. 3. If (...) should, etc
But in case it should signify truth of wisdom; he makes the Apostle to speak
nonsense; to commend those doctrines of Abstinencies, from meats (and marriage
too, by the Gnostics, says he) which he declaimed against, [Those things,
have some truth of wisdom in them.] Why are you burdened with them, or subject
to them? Well, yield it taken for a show of wisdom; [yet then the Will Worship
there, is capable of a good notion; for how can those abstinencies or
doctrines, have so much as a show of wisdom, in Will Worship, etc. if
Will Worship has nothing of wise, or good, but only of wickedness, in it,
which is folly.] This is fully answered in my 12. Sect. (of which more ad p.
135. n. 25.) I shall answer, by asking him these questions: 1. The worshipping
of Angels, was a doctrine and practice of some; had not this a show of wisdom
in it? 2. Had it any thing of wise or good in it? was it not gross Idolatry? 3.
Now ask one more, in his words; How can that doctrine of worshipping Angels
have so much as a show of wisdom, in a Will Worship, will-devised Worship, if
this kind of Worship has nothing of good, but only of wickedness in it?
answer one, and both: But let him but look back, at the abstinences here
condemned; from meats (and marriage) this was the special thing wherein they
placed false Worship: now ask, as he, [how can these abstinencies have so much
as a show of wisdom, in that false worship, if false worship has nothing of
wise or good in it?] Must false Worship, therefore be taken in a good notion?
But he will say, Will worship is good or bad; so is not false Worship. I
answer, that then he begs the question, to say Will Worship is good, and taken
here in a good sense, which is the question: If he say, so do I, taking of it,
in an illsense; I answer, the advantage lies on my side, who have the
concurrent judgment of most Interpreters; and he is alone and singular in his
sense. But more of this anon.

He asks again, p. 117. n. 8.
[What words are there in that verse, to show that these abstinences are
destructive because no better then Will Worship?] It appears, because the scope
of the Apostle is, to beat down those Abstinences as made parts of Worship of
God; which he does not at all do, if Will Worship be taken in a good sense, but
rather commends them. [These things, abstinence from meats (and marriage, he
will needs have it so) in a Religious way as Worship of God, have a show of
wisdom, in good Will Worship, and humility, etc. all good things.] Why then do
ye not embrace those doctrines? much more in case they had the truth or reality
of wisdom, or piety in them: only take heed of holding them to be commanded by
God, and there is no danger nor destructiveness in them. Yet he thinks, his
conclusion more reasonable: n. 9.
[They have some show of wisdom, in Will Worship, therefore Will Worship, if it
be truly such, has some reality of Wisdom in it: else that which has but a
show of Wisdom in it, cannot have that show, in respect of Will Worship.] But,
first, this begs the question, that there is any truly good Will Worship. 2.
His consequence, is false, it should run thus; then Will Worship has some
show, not reality of Wisdom in it; for sure, those Abstinences, had (as
Worship) no reality of Wisdom in them, yet had a show of it. 3. His proof is as
weak; change but a word, and see it: Idolatry has a show of Wisdom in it, in
worshipping of Angels; therefore it cannot have that show, in respect of
worshipping Angels, unless worshipping Angels have some reality of Wisdom in
it. His case of Adultery, is not parall I here: Nay, in the next numb. he
acknowledges not only [that it was but a show of Wisdom, n. 10.
but also it was but a show of Will Worship and a show of Humility, not true.]
But here are more mistakes. 1. Here was but a show of Wisdom indeed, but here
was in those Abstinences, a reality of Will Worship; Whether good or bad. That
it was Will Worship, that is, uncommanded Worship, is evident; and that
uncommanded Worship is sinful and bad, is not denied; and so a reality of bad
will worship: and then will worship here is taken in an ill sense. 2. There was
a show of Humility, in worshipping Angels, verse. 18. but sure no reality of
wisdom, or Humility in it, (an impious humility, as he called it before;) So
there may be a show of Wisdom in will worship, and yet the Worship impious and
abominable. Hence I can grant, [that as the humility is, such must be the
will worship:] n. 11.
That is, as the humility in worshipping Angels, and in these Gnostick
Abstinences, was impious, so was the will worship in both. And this I can
further grant, [That will worship humility, and self-denial, are all three in
the same state in this place;] that is, all vicious and criminal; as that will
worship, and humility, (joined with self-denial thereto, See my tenth sect.
though not expressed) ver. 18 was a vicious and impious will worship and
humility. I do not acknowledge the two latter to be virtues, (as he charges me)
but equally vices with will worship. For a man to abstain from meats (or
marriage) as it is a will worship, (in the Gnostick way) so the humility and
self-denial pretended in it, were as vile and abominable to God, as the
will worship. And thus his Achilles is slain, his great argument answered.

The following numbers, 12, 13, 14. are but a strife about words, and so I pass
them by; but take notice of what he says in the next: p. 119. n. 15.
[That the abstinences from meats (and marriages) abstracted from the error of
dogmatizing, have indeed a show of Piety in those two respects, that he which
abstains voluntarily shall seem to practice a special piece of self-denial, and
to offer to God a free-will-offering of abstinence from meats and marriage.]
But, first, what is become of Humility, that is in the text, and they are said to
have a show of wisdom, in humility, as in the other: He that abstains
voluntarily may seem to practice a piece of Piety, in Humility. 2. Do those two
named, but seem to practice self-denial, and offering to God a
free-will-offering, that is, a will worship, See supra ad p. 113. n. 6.
abstracted from the error of dogmatizing? I had thought they that abstained
from meats and marriage, had more then a show of Piety, and did more then seem
to practice those duties (if they did not dogmatize,) that is, had a reality of
Piety, and did really practice self-denial; For these are part of the Doctors
will worship, which he defends, and applauds as acts of highest Piety: as we
shall hear. 3. These practices of Abstinence, etc. abstracted from the error
of dogmatizing, but yet made a part of Worship (as by Papists they are) have
they not a show of Wisdom in them? and yet are odious to God? The Doctor still
lays all the crime upon dogmatizing, which may be abstracted from them, and
yet the things sinful and unlawful, as now we see. n. 16.
[The worshipping of Angels (supposed now a corolary of the Philosophy, ver. 8.
said to be all one and the same, Superst. s. 7) that also has a show of Piety
in humility.] Now suppose this abstracted from the error of dogmatizing; will
the Doctor say this man practices a special piece of humility? And has not
this humility, thus impious (as he said) an influence upon the Abstinences
following? Does not he, that (with the Gnostics) abstains religiously from
meats and marriage, practice humility as well as self-denial? and may not the
humility, in both, be equally vicious, in a will-devised Worship? sure the
placing of Religion, or worship in those Abstinences, is as criminal, as the
worshipping of Angels; both being forbidden by God. There is only one Unless,
that the n. 19. is twice. p. 121. n. 20.
thing more in this Section worth taking notice of (the rest being but a
contention about words.) 1. That he is by me charged with presumption in
changing the text, from (...), to (...); which though he desire my pardon for,
(which is not usual) yet he seems not to take it well. All I shall say to it,
is but this; That as it is presumtion in an Interpreter to alter the reading of
the Scripture text, having no ancient Copy to favor it; so it may seem an itch
of singularity, to make a Criticisme, to help to confirm that, which he
believes to be false; (as he does Will Worship Sect. 12.) and which will not
advantage his cause, if it were granted to be the true reading; Yet still he is
at it. Again, [If they had the least degree of Piety in them (reading somewhat
of Piety;) then that was in this respect, etc.] p. 123. n. 3. when he has of
acknowledged, they had only a show, as above; and being nothing but the
Gnostick Abstinences, (as he will have it) he cannot imagine them to have the
least degree of Piety in them. As for the particle, p. 121. n. 21.
(...), omitted by him, his defense is easily broken; I know not why he should
neglect it, in his paraphrase (for to that place my exception lies) unless it
were, to color his reading the better, [Which things have some true, etc.] For
it were no good sense, regarding the Apostles scope, to say, which things have
indeed some true notion of Wisdom or Piety, etc. This were to commend them, and
the, (...), to be, not an extenuating, but an amplyfying particle. But enough
of this.

Sect. 8, 9. That the last part of the verse, not sparing the body, etc.
IN the eighth Section, nothing is excepted to; (...), p. 123. n. 4.
and in the ninth nothing but a strife of words, in a point, beside the main
business; [Whether the Abstinences were well comprehended under
free-will-offerings; and whether they may be called positive things:] Wherein I
shall not contest (to swell this Discourse) but leave the Doctor to his own
opinion; though much might be said therein, only these things might be said to
show the difference, 1. The Doctor understands these Abstinences [of the
Gnostics, detesting of marriage, p. 122. n. 2.
making it damnable, etc.] sure such are not comprehended under
Free-will-offerings. 2. These Abstinences are condemned by the Apostle, as
destructive, whereas those Free-will-offerings were allowed and commendable. 3.
The Free-will-offerings were by him, made parts of Worship, but I think, he
will not say so, of the Abstinences from meats and marriage: If he should, I
would say, he is nearer the Gnostics, then I was the Epicureans; who pretended
them to be (as he does here) acts of voluntary oblations, or voluntary Worship;
and so acceptable to God. Had they not defamed marriage, and brought in those
abominable filthinesses, the Doctor and they might have shaken hands. Yea, in
making Abstinence from marriage, a part of Worship, and a state of greater
perfection then marriage, (pronounced honorable in all, by the Apostle) both
they and he do implicitly defame marriage. Offering to God a free-will-offering
of abstinence, etc. p. 119. n. 5. p. 123. n. 4. n. 5.
That the Doctor makes fasting and Virginity, or self-denial, in matter of
meats and marriage, a part of Worship, may appear, 1. By the Phrases he uses in
commending of it; [Designing it to the honor of God; looking on it, as that
which will be acceptable to God, though not commanded, and as such, dedicating
it to God; this sure will be a Free-will-offering.] This was spoken of Fasting;
but then he adds, [The same is as visible of Virginal chastity, etc.] That is,
so designed to the honor of God, so acceptable to God, so dedicated to God;
All which imply the things are put into a Religious state; and made Holy,
Abstaining for Religion or Piety, (...), p. 133. n. 19. So Salmeron. p. 146. n.
21. p. 123. n. 4.
and parts of Worship. 2. That he calls them voluntary Free-will-offerings,
which confessedly were parts of Worship. 3. That here (as hereafter) he gives
it the title [of greatest perfection.] Now to place perfection in things, which
God never placed in them, is a species of Superstition, (as was discoursed in
the former Tract.) But the Doctor to gratify me, will throw a (...), an apple
of contention, before me; (which he is very good at, having thrown abroad more
such apples of contention, then almost any man of late; except but J. G.) [That
such the Abstinences We speak of those Gnostick abstinences, not of such, as he
will fain.
may he, that they safely and fitly may be comprehended under the selfe-denials
and Free-will-offerings:] He instances in two particulars, Fasting and Virginal
chastity. That these are or may be acts of self-denial, is true; that is, when
God calls for them: otherwise, they are not acts of that self-denial, which our
Savior requires, as the first lesson in his school; Fasting, is then
acceptable, when God calls for Fasting, Isa. 22.12 by either some public or
private and personal occasion: and yet then, is not a Free-will-offering, as
being then necessary; nor a part of Worship, but an help to Worship, as our
Divines generally hold. But for a man to set apart days of Fasting, twice a
week, as the Pharisee, or oftener as Papists, as an Act of Religion, and Worship
of God, when God by no just occasion calls for it, is no acceptable service of
God, but rather, displeasing and abominable, as prescribing self-devised
Worship. Say the same of Virginity, or single life; either God calls for it,
and then it is a duty; or he calls not for it, and then it can be no act of
true self-denial; much less, an act of Worship, pleasing to God. For thus I
argue, [either the party has the gift of continency, and then he denies
himself in nothing:] what self-denial is it, for a man to deny himself drink,
when he is not a thirst? [Or be has not the gift of continency, and then he
may not deny himself the remedy and satisfactions tending to it; because then
he exposes himself to temptations.] But now, supposing a man has the gift of
continency, and so resolves to keep his Virgin; if this man should make his
self-denial, or Caelibate, a part of Religion and Worship, (as Papists do) he
will be guilty of Will worship. And if he shall beside, make this state of
Caelthate, See Q. of Divorce. Sect. 36. Not commanded at all, but looked on as
the greatest degree of perfection.
an higher, even the highest or greatest perfection, and so advance it above
marriage, in himself, or another; he comes near to the Gnostics, in defaming
and depressing marriage, an honorable ordinance of God, and preferring his own
fancy before it; and may justly fear, that God will give him over to vile
affections, and abominable lusts, (not much short of the Gnostics, as is
visible amongst Papists) for dishonouring honest marriage. And now I could, if
I listed, throw out another Apple of contention before the Doctor; [Whether he
that assuredly has the gift of continency, is not by God called to single
life?] I will give him some reasons for the Affirmative, and leave them to his
Determination. 1. Every Special gift of God, is a Special Talent to be improved
for the glory of the Giver. But such is the gift of continency, a special gift,
1 Cor. 7.7.
Matt. 19.11. [All men cannot receive this saying, save those to whom it is
given.] And therefore he that has it must improve it, for the kingdom of
Heavens sake, ver. 12. 2. Our Savior seems to lay a command upon it, ver. 12.
[He that is able to receive it, let him receive it.] Which is not a bare
permission, but a kind of precept. And this in the judgment of some learned,
whom the Doctor cannot well reject. The first is the B. of N. Doctor Hall, of
Honor of married Clergy, lib. 1. s. 7. Who thus speaks, somewhat in our
Doctors language; [ Neither do we think that the earth affords any thing more
glorious, then Eunuchisme for the kingdom of God; which is therefore commended
by our Savior, not as a thing merely arbitrary, by way of advice, but of
charge to the able, Qui potest capere, capiat.] And a little after this, he
says of such as upon trial, find they have the gift, and make profession of
it, [The observation whereof, if they through their own neglect, shall let
fall, they cannot be excused from sin, or freed from censure.] But then it can
be no Free-will-offering, but a duty. The other is, the learned Doctor Hamond;
who seems to me, to make it obligatory, to him that is able to bear it; page
211. n. 27. [Virginity, I hope, is not every man's duty, but at the utmost, his,
who can receive it.] If then it be his duty, that can receive it, it is neither
Free-will-offering nor high degree of perfection; which yet these two whose
Testimonies are cited, do seem to make it. However, if it be free, for him that
has the gift, to marry; if yet he should abstain voluntarily, accounting it, a
part of Gods Worship, or a degree of higher perfection, it will, I think, prove
no better then a sinful Willworship. But more anon of this. Those men that hold
Free Will in natural men, to Good, as well as to Evil, no marvail if they talk
so much of Free-will-offerings and self-denials, in these things; which an
Heathen or an Hypocrite may do, as well as they.

The words cited out of Chrysostom. distinguishing acts of man's will from
Commandments of God, and making them, first, p. 124. n. 5.
more rewardable then the acts which are under precept, will fall in again to
be spoken to, more fitly; till then I shall forbear. [That abstinence from
marriage, n. 7.
was never commanded by any Law,] I never doubted; but I never dreamed that
that was here censured by the Apostle; no Interpreters beside himself, that I
know, ever so expounded it. But the Doctor having once assumed it, (as
serviceable to his purpose) most confidently carries it on as yielded him, and
all along applies it to the Gnostick Heresy, who, I said, were not hatched,
till Paul had long been dead, in the second century.

Sect. 10. First he says, he will give his reasous, etc.
THat the Doctor in taking the word, (...), in a good sense, complies with some
Papists, is evidently true; that most Papists take it, p. 125. n. 1.
in an ill sense, is also clearly true: yet [he confesses himself unable to
give any answer, as not guessing wherein the objection lies:] But presently
after finds my meaning. The objection lies here, that the Doctor (for carrying
on his own design) had rather join and comply with those few Papists, who
oppose the Orthodox sense of the word, then with our own Divines, and those
many Papists which agree with them, (which often they do not) in the ill-sense of
the word. For not only my self, and partners (as he scornfully speaks) but the
learned Doctors and Bishops of our Church do so expound it. That the Doctor
should be cross to them, and to the more ingenuous learned Papists, is
something to be admired. But hear what he says, p. 126. n. 3.
1. [He borrowed not this Interpretation from any Popish Writer, but from the
weighing of the text it self, etc.] It may be so; yet may he comply with them;
As Doctor Montacute professed, he never read word of Arminius, yet was as
perfect an Arminian, as if he had studied him many years. It Is no wonder that
men of parts do meet in the same error. As our vulgar people (on the other
side) and all the Sectaries (for the most part) do meet, in the errors of
Arminius; Universal Redemption, Free Will to good and evil, etc. Yet never
heard of, or read, Arminius, or the Doctors Fundamentalls. 2. Yet well fare a
stout heart; He says, [he shall not startle at the Interpretation upon that
account, many Papists having given true senses of Scripture.] But sure, then
all our Divines agree with them, as they with us; truth forcing them to it. Now
such is the text or word before us; most of the Popish Interpreters take it in
an ill-sense, and render it, by Superstition; and that is a strong Testimony
against an Adversary. But, 3. he will retort the argument upon me; [The sense
which he has given is owned by most of the Papists, then he that complies with
most of the Papists, and not he which complies with some few, must be guilty of
that crime of compliance.] Sure this must be, where those few Papists, are in
the right, and the most of Protestants and Papists are in the wrong; which if
the Doctor should affirm to be the present case, he begs the question, and
wrongs those many learned men of the contrary judgment. And when I said, n. 4.
[ I did believe his Interpretation was without any precedent, Protestant or
Papist, s. 7.] I meant not absolutely, to a man, but for the most part, (as
after I said.) Chamier says the same, yet after instances in Bellarmine,
taking it in a good sense, and so does Salmeron too, hereafter: But Estius, as
judicious, and ingenuous, as any Papist I ever met with, says, in confutation
of those, that will needs take it so, In locum.
Docere non poterunt (...) usquam accipi in bonum. [They can never teach (or
prove) that Will Worship is taken in a good sense.]

But that the Doctor will undertake to prove; [first, p. 127. n. 1.
Because it is joined with Humility.] I said, Humility was not the laudable
Christian virtue, but a pretended humility, etc. He answers, [That serves his
turn very fitly; for still they are associated, pretended Will Worship, with
pretended humility; then the fault is in the fainedness of them both: but when
they are truly such, they are Christian virtues, etc.] This was spoken to,
partly before: Here was not only a show of Will Worship, but real
Will Worship, in those observances: and not only a show of Humility, but real
Will humility, and Will-self-denial, (for (...), is applyable to all three, (as
I noted from Estius.) Pretended humility may be in a commanded Worship, but
affected, in a VVilworship.
Now Will-humility, (which is more, then pretended Humility) is an Humility
affected, not of Gods command or allowance, and so sinful, as well as the
Will Worship. Besides, in the 18. verse (...), imports, a voluntary uncommanded
Humility, and is joined here with Worship; and both confessed by the Doctor to
be impious: Why may it not be so understood here, those Abstinences being as
impious, as worshipping of Angels? There was in both, a show of Christian true
Humility, but there was also a real Will-humility; as a real Worship, or
Will Worship. Say the same of Will-self-denial, or will-devised ways of
mortification: I instanced in the Romish Penances, made parts of Worship. To
which he says, p. 128. n. 4.
[It is not their making it the Worship of God, that renders it culpable, but
ridiculousness, and unfitness to the end designed.] Let the Reader mark this,
to make new sorts of Worship, (such as Romish Penances are) is not culpable.
And yet the Doctor has condemned all new sorts of Worship, as impious and
unlawful, more then once. I wonder not now, that he justifies Will Worship.
But he hopes to help himself, by saying, it is not that, [but the
ridiculousness and unfitness.] And why not both these? for they are both. He
knows, there are other Ceremonies or practices named, which are not ridiculous,
nor cruel laniations of themselves, but seem sad and grave exercises of
devotion; as their Pharisaical Fastings from flesh, their Caelibate, Religious
orders, etc. wherein they place much Religion, that is, make them special parts
of Worship: will he say, this does not render them culpable? If so, he will
say, I know no great reason, but he may, in most of their VVill-worship, join
with them: and I fear, does make some things parts of Worship, which are as
like theirs, as one egg is to another.

In his vindication of his second argument; he again rejects that notion, of
[some truth or reality of VVisdom] to be meant by the Apostle; yet comes of
with a mind to have it thought possible. [The bare possibility that it might so
signify, n. 5. See p. 140. n. 3. and n. 25. If it should be so taken, etc.
supersedes the proof from this text, for the criminousnes of Will-ship.] When
he knows, if he will not offer violence to the text, there is no possibility,
it should so signify in this place. It was ill done to dazzle the eyes of his
Reader, with such vain notions, as this.

We are next to consider the sense of 1 Timothy 4.8. [Bodily exercise profits
little, or is profitable for a little] as he reads it: I said, p. 129. n. 7.
[there was a (...), it is hurtful and abominable:] The Doctor jests it away,
first, comparing it with, (...), Acts 26.28. But I say, there is a great
difference between (...), in this text, and (...), in the other: which must be
taken from the context here: for the sense, look back to the former verse 7.
[Avoid profane and old wives fables, but exercise thy self unto Godliness: for
bodily exercise, etc.] Now ask Interpreters what is meant, by profane and old
wives fables; Chrysostom. will tell him, (...), others refer it to those Jewish
fables, which he censured, 1 Timothy 1. Some to the Fables of the Simonians, of a
good and an evil God, etc. But the best is to consult the context: at ver. 3.
where he tells of some, that should (in time to come, ver. 1.) depart from the
faith, so far, as [to forbid marriage, and command to abstain from meats.]
These were those profane and old wives fables, and called by them, (...),
exercises of Piety and mortification: To these the Apostle opposes, (...),
Godliness, that is, [the true and right Worship of God;] as Estius well
explaines it: [Exercise thou thy self, in the true Worship of God;] for, those
bodily exercises, though pretending to much Piety, profit nothing; that is,
made matters of Religion, and parts of Worship (as they were by some Heretics,
in those, or in following times) are hurtful and abominable. Those exercises of
Religion, in abstinence from meats and marriage, were long ago exemplified in
the Gnostics, (of whom with the Romanists, this is a prophecy) and perhaps in
some, in the Apostles times, not yet come to detest marriage as damnable, etc.
but only placing some Religion in them; and calling them (...). Of these the
Apostle speaks modestly, they profit little, that is nothing; though he mean,
they are hurtful, and indeed abominable. And if the Apostle had meant it, of
those (...), which the Doctor understands by them, he would not have said, they
profit a little; but very much; not to the body only, as some, but to the soul
also; to make more See p. 131. n. 15. and n. 17. The excellencies of Fasting.
De jejunio non potest hic locus accepi, quia non est corporalis exercitatio,
sed spiritualis. Estius in locum: vide lauds jejunii. The Doctor makes Fasting
Worship, p. 130. n. 12, 13. and so Piety, and not a bodily exercise.
acceptable to, and rewardable by God, as under no command, and being voluntary
oblations, and Free-will-offerings, which (says the Doctor) may expect greater
reward in Heaven, then any commanded service. Besides, the opposition of
Godliness to those exercises, argues, they were considered as ill and hurtful
by the Apostle; For abstinence from meat and marriage (those bodily exercises)
in the Doctors conceit of them, are great parts of Religion, Piety, Devotion;
and therefore could not well be opposed to Godliness; the Apostle certainly
looks at something before, under the notion of bodily exercise, else he could
not say so abruptly, (...), for bodily exercise, (before intended and expressed
in some other terms) whether the Jewish observations or abstinences from some
meats, ver. 3. as Chrysostom. or those abstinences of fore-prophesied heretics,
from meats and marriage. ver. 3. Ad p. 109. n. 4.
profits nothing; that is, is hurtful, and destructive; as the Doctor said
above. And these are the grounds of my Interpretation. If the Doctor, have any
better, let him impart them, or enjoy his own opinion.

Somewhat he says, to that which I said, [of making those abstinences parts of
Religion, or Worship] which he calls, [an help at a dead lift,] p. 130. n. 10.
n. 11.
and disputes against that notion, saying, [They that make abstinence from
marriage a thing acceptable to God, and a state of perfection, do not count it
a Worship unless in a genervl sense, as every virtuous act performed to God may
be styled Worship, and so this, a Will Worship.] Here first we have a
distinction of Worship, which should have come long ago; that we might know in
what sense the Doctor took it, when he speaks of Will Worship. Something was
said of the word worship, p. 93. n. 3. but then it was only distinguished from
[external Ceremonies, or Circumstances, which are not parts but accidents of
Worship.] And nothing was called Worship, but [the virtue it self, or some act
thereof, together with the degrees and number of those acts] But now we have a
distinction, of Worship, in a special, and a general sense, as every virtuous
act (of the second Table) may be styled Worship.: which is most improperly. 2.
What means the Doctor to talk of Will Worship, and voluntary Worship, if they
be not Worship, but in a general sense, as every virtuous act of righteousness,
etc. may be styled Worship? that is, not an Elicite act of Religion or Worship,
but an Imperated act of it; as visiting the poor and widow, is by Saint James
called, pure Religion: If thus he meant, why did he not tell us so at first, to
prevent both mistake and trouble? 3. Those abstinences forbidden by our
Apostle, were formerly acts of Religion and parts of Worship properly, and were
so held out still by the false Teachers; not Worship, as every virtuous act may
improperly b^ called Worship. 4. The Papists for certain do make them parts of
Worship, place Religion, in their Caelibate, Fastings, and Religtous Orders,
etc. not in a general sense, but proper and special Worship. Will the Doctor
yield, that they that do so make them parts of Worship, are superstitious, and
this is unlawful. Will Worship? I shall ask no more. Lastly to make things more
acceptable to God, because not commanded; to place more virtue and more
perfection in things, then God has placed in them, is confessed to be
superstitious: But this the Doctor does sufficiently; and this we call
Will Worship. And that we may not go far for an instance; the Doctor makes
Fasting, a Sacrifice, n. 12. and a species of Worship, as well as prayer, and
almsgiving, and calls it [an acceptable worship of God,] as Papists do; p. 130
n. 13. See p. 14. n. 20. Fasting and Alms, two sorts of Gods Worship.
which our Divines deny to be Worship, but only an help and furtherance to
worship.

By the way, the Doctor, as he makes Worship of that which is not Worship, so
he degrades some Worship, and makes it none: p. 131. n. 14.
[Hearing of Sermons is not any acknowledged branch of Worship.] I know he
adds the word (bare) to hearing; but bare hearing of the word by profession is
Worship, though not pure and right Worship; as bare praying with the lips, is
Worship; but vain Worship: [ In vain do they Worship me etc. and bare preaching
of the word, is Worship, though not true Worship. But the Doctor makes hearing
of Sermons no Worship; when he says, [Hearing of Sermons, in case it should be
taught, or assume to be a part of Gods Worship;] As if to teach it to be a
part of Worship, were an assumption, or presumption. Indeed this is some of
the old language, that Preaching and hearing of Sermons was no Worship, but the
whole Worship of God, stood in reading and hearing the Liturgy.

That the Doctor placed the illness of those bodily exercises, in this, when
they are taught as necessary, to the defaming of meats and marriage, I found no
fault with, but that he placed it in that only; I expected that he should have
spoken to my question; p. 133. n. 19.
[If they taught them not in that sense, but only placed Religion and the
Worship of God in them, as Papists do, were they not ill?] To this he says
just nothing, but empties his Notebook, to prove, what is not denied.

By all Interpreters, I meant, the greatest part; p. 134. n. 22.
and he cannot name any, it seems, before Grotius, a Neoterick, n. 23. etc.
Cassandrian Author. As for his question, and what here he again repeats, it
is spoken to before, upon the word, (...). I shall only add, that he varies
the question, by altering and putting in words not in the text, piety, for
wisdom, and (in respect) of Will Worship: the words are, a show of Wisdom in
Will Worship; that is, those abstinences wicked enough, made a Worship, by
those men: And here it is, that some would have the adversative (...), to be
understood; [but in Will Worship,] that is, in False-worship, devised by the
will of men, it has a show of Wisdom, but is but Will worship; which supposes,
the VVillworship, to be ill and impious. And the Doctor himself says, n. 24.
[I confess, that supposing VVill-worship as ill, as the Diatribist would have
it, a thing may be foolish or impious, in respect of VVill-worship.] To clear
this, change but the word, VVillworship, into So the vulgar, and others read it.
Superstition, or Idolatry; and then ask, may not those abstinences have a show
of Wisdom, in respect of Superstition in them? or, and yet [be but
Superstition?] which most Interpreters take to be the sense of the words. Now
Superstition, amongst Christians, is always taken in an ill-sense, as has
been proved above: put another like question, may not worshipping of Angels
have a show of Wisdom in Idolatry; or, and yet [be but Idolatry?] All the
question then is, whether, there be any VVill-worship good; which (as we deny)
it concerns him to prove, because he is on the Affirmative part, and must not
beg the question. He again varies the question, when he reads, n. 26.
Piety for Wisdom, here: [How can a thing have a show of Piety, in respect of
that very thing which is impious?] The words should be thus, how can a thing
have a show of Wisdom in respect of that thing which is impious? changing
Wisdom into Piety, and putting in (in respect) makes all this difficulty. For
mark his next question; [Can any thing be represented to me, n. 27.
as having so much as a show of Piety, in respect of lust, or rage discernible
in it:] He should first have said, a show of wisdom (not of piety) and in lust,
and rage, (not in respect of them) can a thing have a show of wisdom, which is
but lust and rage? And then I would answer, first, it may: and secondly, the
question is well laid; [For lust and rage are confessedly for kind, wicked
things; but Worship may be true or false, etc.] He asks, [whether
VVill-worship may be so, true or false? p. 136. n. 28.
that is the word we contend about.] What if we say, it may not, but is always
false? [Then it is directly parallel, with lust and rage, they always ill and
this also.] Why that is it we assert; but then see before how he altered the
question: I said Worship (not Will worship) may be true or false: The truth of
Worship consists, in the Institution or Command of God; the falsehood, in the
Institution of men. Now that is VVill-worship, and therefore it is always false.
We do not say, nor can with reason say, VVill-worship is true or false, but is
always false; and therefore the Doctor (begging this distinction) is far enough
from a demonstration pretended.

When I said, [The words are not, p. 137 n. 31.
which things have a show of wisdom, and of VVill-worship, etc. but in
VVill-worship: and if faulty because they had only a show of Wisdom, they
will be more faulty, that they had but a show of Worship.] I said in the last
clause, too little; for here was more then a show of VVill-worship, and Will
humility, etc. even a reality of them. Now VVillworship being Worship devised
by the will of man, (not Commanded by God, which only makes true Worship) it
must necessarily be False-worships and so ever unlawful; as was said above. He
may compare this verse with the 18. There was in the worshipping of Angels, a
show of Humility, and a show of Worship; but there was more, a reality of
voluntary humility, and a reality of voluntary Worship: and both of these,
mistaken and impious: so in these abstinences, there was also a show of
Worship, and a show of humility, etc. but there was more; a reality of
Will Worship, and of will humility, etc. and all these, impious Worship,
humility, and self-denial; being all devised by the will of man, not commanded
by God. This may satisfy any reasonable man. VVill-worship then is not taken
in a good sense here, because it is joined with humility and self-denial; but
contrarily, they are here both taken in all ill sense, because they are joined
with VVill-worship, VVill-devised Worship, which is always false; both
because it is not commanded (but forbidden) by God, and also, because invented
and instituted by men: And now the Doctor may see, that VVill-worship, is
parallel to Judas traitorous kiss, p. 138. n. 32.
and Papists bowing to stocks and stones. And that uncommandedness of Worship
makes it ill, is not only supposed, but proved in the former Tract. I say
uncommanded Worship, not uncommanded Circumstances. The Doctor may now
consider, how well he has vindicated his second argument, for the good sense
of the word; and I leave him all that wholesome heap of Rbetorick, n, 34.
to enjoy himself, who best deserves it.

Sect. 13. A third reason is, because the Greek Fathers, etc.
THe Doctor here begins with some of his flowers of Rhetoric, a scoff and a
jeer, (much learning puffing him up.) p. 140. n. 2.
[Here truly it is not to be reprehended, but cherished in the Diatribist, that
he is so very much rejoiced, to hear the news, that the Greek Fathers and he
are of a mind, in any the least particular; I hope it will engage him to a
more familiar conversation with them; and then I am persuaded no body will have
reason to repent of it.] This has been the Doctors language formerly; not
only in slighting all our Modern Divines not of his opinion; Of Superst. s.
32. [Those Authors which come home to the point in hand, are so few, or so
Modern, and of so small authority, that they would be scarce worth producing:]
But also to undervalue their learning and reading; witness that speech of his,
VVill-wor. sect. 19. [The words in Latin (which is the language, which those
that are most subject to be abused in this matter, will be most likely to read
it in.] A pretty piece of scorn cast upon his Adversaries, as though none that
were of a different judgment from him, in this particular, were able to read a
Greek Father, or a piece of Philostorgius in Greek, but must only be beholden
to the Latin Translation. Macte virtute. All I shall return, is but this, that
if the Doctor had, either less conversation with the Greek Fathers, or made
better use of them, then to follow them in their errors, and See p. 145. n.
19. How he throws off Theodor. and p. 165 n. 6. Clemens. Alex. and Ambros. p.
145. n. 18. p. 140. n. 3. See p. 146. n. 21. Specimen (which is more then
Speciem, or bare show, some real evidence.)
forsake them in their true interpretations; I am persuaded, no body (nor
himself) would have reason to repent of it. For let it be observed once again,
(seeing it comes so often) that though the Doctor durst not well contradict the
Fathers sense of (...), for a show, not reality of Wisdom; yet how glad he
would be, if the latter might, but by head and shoulders (as we say) be drawn
in, to be the sense of the word; thus he says, [ If (...), should be there
taken for ratio, the argument for the good sense would proceed most
irresistibly:] which is proved above, irresistibly false. And once more, [If
species should prove a true one, then, etc.] page 147. n. 25. Other like
sentences are noted above, after he had disclaimed this sense of truth or
reality; which I leave to his consideration, and go on.

The Greek Fathers, rendered the word, a show, without power and truth;
whereupon I asked, [Can that which has neither power nor truth, in the Worship
of God, be taken in a good sense?] He asks again, n. 4.
[what it is, of which the Fathers say, that it has neither power nor truth?
sure the Doctrines of Abstinence, and not the VVill-worship:] This is a common
Fallacy, with the Doctor to say, it is spoken of but one, when it is spoken of
both: yea, here both are one; the will worship, is meant of those (Gnostick)
Abstinences; and those Abstinences were this will worship: these had a show,
but neither power nor truth of Wisdom; and (said I) can that be taken in a good
sense? Here I produced the Interpretation of the word, (...), by the Latin
Fathers; Ambr. Simulatam Religionem; Hierom. Superstitionem: so vulg. and all
Popish Interpreters: what was it that these Authors say, was Superstition,
counterfeit Religion? Sure it was those Abstinences: and so they were both one,
that will worship, in Abstinences, etc. had neither power nor truth. Yet hear
what he says, [will-worship is rendered by Piety, and unless Piety it self can
be taken there in an ill sense, will worship must be taken in a good sense.] He
had said before, n. 3.
[The Gnostick Doctrines cannot have so much as a show of Piety in
will worship, unless will worship real, be Piety real; and appearance of
will worship, a foundation of an appearace of Piety.] But did not the Doctor
say just now, [ That the Fathers said it of the Doctrines of Abstinence, That
they had neither power nor truth of Piety.] Now he says, [VVillworship is
rendered by Piety, not the Abstinences.] The truth is, those Abstinences had a
show of Wisdom or Piety, but were but Superstition, so the word is most
commonly rendered, or [Voluntary Religion, which a man forges out of his own
brain, willing to seem Religious,] as Estius has it; that is, (say I) will
worship: If then Superstition and such voluntary Religion, cannot be taken in a
good sense, no more can will worship, which is the very same thing. And the
Doctor does but beg the question all along this debate, [That there is any real
or true will worship.] There is indeed a real (salse) will worship in those
Abstinences; together with an appearance of Piety or wisdom. I end this, as he
does; certainly I need add no more ('it is pity I should be required to say so
much) of this matter.

I had said, the simple word, (...), sometimes signifies false Religion; the
composition of (...), or will of man, with it, makes it worse: He asks, [ worse
then what? then false Religion? p. 142. n. 7.
This is fairly to resolve, that the use of any thing uncommanded in the
service of the true God, is worse then false Religion; i. e. then Idolatry or
Superstition.] I will not question the Doctors Learning here, (...),
Superstitiose Deo colo. Suidas, on the word, (...), from the Thracians.
but his Ingenuity, I do, and that twice: 1. That I meant worse, then false
Religion, when I meant the (...), or will, made the word worse; which he could
not but see, had not prejudice, and a desire to slur or slander me, blinded his
eyes; which appears more in the second. 2. That I must fairly resolve, that the
use of any thing uncommanded in the service of God, is worse then false
Religion, etc. When as his conscience knows, and his pen has often testified
for me, that I understand the question (not of any thing, n. 8.
as he, but) of uncommanded Worship, not of Circumstances of worship; as
kneeling in Prayer, etc. as he most injuriously, would make his Reader believe.
Hence I do not conclude, so absurdly, as he would make me, n. 9.
[All Inventions of men are Idolatry, and worse then Idolatry;] but all
invented Worship, by men, is Idolatry or Superstition: and then this
proposition is convertible; I dolatry or Superstition is invented Worship; and
Invented Worship is Idolatry or Superstition: Now Will Worship and Superstition
being both one, in some sense it will follow, (in spite of all gainsaying)
that all Will Worship is Idolatrous or Superstitious. And he still begs, that
there is any Willworship, not Idolatrous or Superstitious: And this may satifie
that which follows; n. 10.
he that uses an uncommanded Ceremony in the Service of God, (provided it be
not made a part of Worship) does not take upon him to be wiser then God; but he
that uses an uncommanded Worship. As for his acts of uncommanded Devotion, we
shall speak to them in due time; let him in the mean time consider how weakly
he has vindicated his third Argument, and see if he can strengthen it better.

Here are some other things yet considerable, but very briefly: As first, that
he would fain get the learned Daille to be of his mind, (who is an enemy (I
believe) to all Will Worship:) whereas his Interpretation is the same with our
Divines.) He says, p. 144. n. 15.
[ The false teachers had a threefold color of Wisdom. 1. Will Worship. 2.
Humility. 3. Austerity to the body, for which three things they admire these
doctrines of men.] But I pray, what Interpreter, Papist or Protestant, does not
so expound it? (By the way, note, he calls them, doctrines of men, not
Commandments of God.) So had the worshipper of Angels a double color of
wisdom. 1. Of Humility, voluntary humility. 2. Of Worship, voluntary Worship,
will worship; yet his practice was never the better for that; and that Humility
and will worship, false and impious, (as has been confessed.) But (says the
Doctor) [ he defines, (...), cultum sponte, and voluntary assumptum; nulla
cogente Dei lege:] Why, so does Beza, Bishop Davenant, and many of our own, yet
take voluntary worship, in an ill sense; as the learned Chamier, his
countryman, also does; whose sense, no doubt Mons. Daille knew well enough.
What more? He says, [They were voluntarily undertaken out of abundance of zeal
and Holiness. And so in his opinion, if abundance of zeal and holiness were
taken in a good sense, will worship must be resolved to be so takens] As if all
Idolaters, the worshippers of Angels, and Saints (as Papists, etc.) did not
undertake their superstitious Worships, out of abundant (pretended) zeal and
Holiness? Those Abstinences spoken of, (granted to be Gnostical and abominable)
were they not undertaken out of abundant pretended zeal and Holiness? Thus
Daille is easily vindicated.

As for Ambrose, he is as much against him, as any man, (he had best question
the Authority of those Comments, under his name.) For his words are these,
Englished by the Doctor, [Hence they think themselves to have some appearance
of Wisdom, p. 145. n. 18.
because they apply the name of Religion to humane tradition; and it is called
Religion when it is sacrilege:] He speaks this of that will worship, in those
Abstinences, where observe, first, He renders, (...), wisdom, not piety, as the
Dr. does.
that he says, they gave the name of Religion to their will worship. 2. That
this which they called Religion was but an humane tradition, not held out as a
Commandment of God. 3. That this Religion, or will worship of theirs, was but
Sacrilege: what can be said worse, of will worship? The vulg. Latin and
others call it Superstition; Ambr. calls it Sacrilege. But the Doctor leaves
out the foregoing words, where he says, [they are the precepts and doctrines,
not of God, but of men:] As I cited it above, ad p. 109. n. 4. As also the
following words, why he called it Sacrilege, [because what is against the
Author, (the Authority of God) is invented with a Sacrilegious mind.] Will
the Doctor grant all this, and yet say, [they offended in this only, that, the
will worship and humility were not what they pretended to be.] Let him go on to
maintain himself by begging.

For Theodoret, the reason (if he will needs have it) why I cited his sense of
the word, amongst the Latin Authors, was, because I found it cited by a
learned Divine, in Latin; But what says the Doctor to his Interpretation?
First, he fairly rejects his sense, [as not pretending that all either Greek or
Latin concurred with him, in this sense:] This is too favorably spoken for
himself, for he might more truly have said, [That few either Greek or Latin,
concurred with him.] I am sure none of our own Divines do, and therefore he is
very glad of the company of Bellarmine, n. 14. and Salmeron, n. 21. and whether
any more, I know not. But this he says he is sure of, p. 145. n. 19.
[That it is not the uncommandedness of the worship, that he finds fault with;
but, first, their teaching those for Gods commands, which are their own; (that
is the meaning of (...), their introducing their own ordinances their
unseasonable Judaical doctrine. 2. The bare show of Piety and humility, etc.]
But I doubt the Doctor strains his conscience in this gloss; for, first, I
observe, that Theodoret, did not understand the Gnostick Abstinences, but
Judaical unseasonable doctrines, yet the Doctor will needs have it meant of
them; and has not one Interpreter for his notion, that I can find. 2. That
the Doctor interprets, (...), to be Gods commands; which most properly
signifies the contrary, their own doctrine, or Ordinances. And yet he says,
[By his conclusion it is evident, that the Abstinences without the doctrines,
would not have been deemed by him reproveable.] This runs upon the former false
supposition, [That these Abstinences had no fault, but only that they were
held out, as Commandments of God] When as we have proved, that they were
sinful, because they were made Religious, and parts of Worship. But enough of
this before.

The Ancient Fathers then, are not for him, but rather against him; he must now
seek for assistance from some Modern Authors; not amongst our own, or foreign
Protestant Divines, they are all against him. To Papists then he must go,
Bellarmine he has closed with above, [as one whose authority were alone
considerable enough, if there were not some others, n. 14.] But he is not
alone; Salmeron another Jesuit, has the very same notions of this text, as if
the Doctor had learned his Interpretation from him; p. 146. n. 21.
this learned Jesuit, renders, (...), not by Speciem, (that might possibly
signify, a bare show,) but by Specimen, which is more, some real evidence of
Wisdom: which sense the Doctor has oftentimes renounced, yet fain would have
it so. 2. The word (...), (says the Jesuit) signifies cultum spontaneum, sive
voluntariam Religionem, pro arbitrio cujusvis abstinendi a cibis: just so the
Doctor, only with this difference, that the Doctor takes in the Gnostick
Abstinence from marriage also, which Salmeron thought not of. 3. Alluding by
this word, to the voluntary oblations of the Law, called Nedaboth, Free will
offerings. How sweetly all correspond! n. 22.
But yet Salmeron is not thorow-paced with the Doctor; [For Salmeron conceives
the words to allude to ver. 18. In voluntary humility and worship, etc. And so
goes along with Estius, and others in that mistake.] Truly if Salmeron take the
words in allusion to the 18 ver. he confutes his own Interpretation of this 23.
ver. For surely, that Worship of Angels, and Impious humility, is nothing of
time with the Free will offerings. And I rather take him and Estius to be in
the right in this allusion, then in his former Interpretation with the Doctor
upon that reason. But they will differ yet further, (unless the Doctor will
turn Papist, in the Divine Authority of the Church) in that which follows: p.
147. n. 24.
[Omnis ritus, etc. Every rite of Worshipping God, that is not delivered from
God, but is invented by the will of man, is superstitious.] I never said so
much, of every rite, if rite signify a circumstance of worship, or a ceremony,
if not made a part of Worship. But will the Doctor say, Amen, to this of
Salmeron? I much fear it. He will rather evade, and tell me, I leave out some
of Salmerons words; [Not delivered from God, nor the Spirit of God, by the
Church.] I did so, but not to conceal them; for I would ask the Doctor whether
he agrees with Salmeron, in this notion, [That what is delivered by the Church,
is from the holy Ghost; i. e. is of Divine Authority.] If he do not, why does
he cite it, seeing it is as false to him as to me. And yet I see a reason for
this, it would serve to blind his Reader, and to jear me; for thus he says,
[Where it seems, that which is delivered by the Church, being by him supposed
to be from the holy Ghost, does in no degree fall under this censure: and then
the Diatribist has free leave to make his best advantage of this citation.]
And so would the Doctor suppose, and say too, if it were not for open shame,
that the Traditions of the Church, are from the holy Ghost, and so not
superstitious: But of this before, and anon again, ad p. 162.10. As for Estius,
he says indeed, that (...), is here taken for Species in genere, sive vera
sive falsa; but yet adds, licet verificatio fiat pro specie, and imagine
falsa: And he cannot take it otherwise, in his sense of (...), which is [an
affected and fained Religion, or Worship, and an affected and fained humility,
joined to an affected Religion.] And now the Doctor has free leave to make his
best advantage of this citation of Estius. n. 26.
Whether Augustine and Thomas gave him authority to pretend their accord with
him, let them agree among themselves, and the Doctor with them. Yet that which
the Doctor cites from August. [Non sit Religio, etc. Let not our Religion be
placed in our fantasmes, etc.] is little for his advantage; for sure the Church
of Rome, (and our Doctor with her) does place much Religion in her own
fantasmes. p. 148. n. 27.
And yet we have the Doctors full consent to this, [That all fictitious false
worship, is to be avoided, etc.] If I list to pick quarrels, I would ask why
the Doctor added false, to fictious Worship; some would suspect, there may be
some fictitious true Worship; as he makes Will Worship to be true or false: But
I let it pass, and hear what he says: [So is not the Commemorating the Birth
of Christ, I hope, nor any Ceremony in use, in our Church.] He knows some
Ceremonies of our Church, have been charged with the guilt of fictitious false
Worship; and the observation of Chirstmas, as made a part of Worship, with the
guilt of Superstition; not as intended to be so used by the Church, but as used
by some of her rash Sons; and the Doctor has not yet washed his hands from this
charge. I shall only speak to the citation out of the Gloss on Coloss. p. 149.
n. 29.
2. [Superstitio est, etc. Superstition is when the name of Religion is applied
to the Tradition of men.] But say I, this is done sufficiently by the Church of
Rome, and by the Doctor himself, if I be not much mistaken. He thinks to evade
by saying, [Dogmatizing is a sin.] But sure that is not in the sentence of the
Gloss. Dogmatizing with the Doctor, is to hold out a thing, as the Commandment
of God; but the Gloss speaks, only of the Tradition of men, in what kind or
way so ever held forth, under the name of Religion. And thus much to confute
his third reason.

Sect. 14, 15. The fourth reason, because by this way, that very obscure place
may be conveniently understood, etc.
WE have been very long upon the last Section, we shall be eased by the
shortness of this: The Doctor puts it off, as spoken to before; and so do I;
only I cannot but add to what I said before, these few things. 1. That the
Doctor begs the question, in this argument, if you will but grant him his good
sense of Will Worship (which is generally denied) then this obscure place may
be conveniently understood, which has posed so many. 2. The consequence is
naught; for grant him his good sense, yet it follows not, that such Doctrines
are destructive only, because they obtrude them as Divine precepts in this
place; for they are held out as doctrines and commands of men; and if not held
out as precepts of God, but only as parts of Worship, acceptable to him; the
place may be as well and better understood. 3. Here he limits the text, to
out-dated Judaical constitutions: but oftentimes in this his account, he says,
p. 103. n. 5.
[the Seducers spoken of in this Chapter, were the Gnostick Heretics,] who
abstained from marriage also, which the Jews never did. But enough of that, as
spoken to before.

In prosecution of my 15. Sect. he grants, and [willingly confesses, that
(...), p. 150. n. 2.
is capable of an ill-sense, i. e. when the Worship is forbidden or false; then
being ill, the voluntariness can infuse no goodness into it: as when it is good
of it self, the uncommandedness cannot make it ill.] Here is an heap of
Incongruities. 1. That here he confesses, (...), Will Worship, to be capable of
an ill sense; which he formerly denied, p. 96 n. 6. [That performing any sort
of Worship forbidden by God, (which yet is not truly Worship) is not capable of
the title of Will Worship.] Yet now says, it is capable of an ill sense, when
the Worship is forbidden. 2. If Will Worship be ill when the Worship is
forbidden and false; it must be so taken here, because those Abstinences made
Worship were ill. 3. If the forbidding and falseness of Worship, make ill
Willworship* I say, all will-devised Worship is ill, (and so again the
Will Worship here is ill; because it is forbidden and false. 4. When he says,
[It being ill, the voluntariness can infuse no goodness into it,] it is dilute
dictum; he should have said, the voluntariness infuses much ill into it, (as
after he says.) 5. In the next words, [When the Worship is of it self good,
the uncommandedness cannot make it ill.] He speaks as improperly; first,
supposing (which is false) that any Worship is good, which is not commanded. 2.
That, were it granted good in it self, the uncommandedness could not make it
ill; whereas were it never so good (as the Ceremonial out-dated Worship was)
yet the very uncommandedness of it, if made Worship by men, would certainly
make it ill; as he will confess ere long. But I shall prove it thus, from
himself: [All forbidden, or false Worship, is ill; but all uncommanded Worship,
(that is made Worship by the will of man) is forbidden and false; ergo, it is
ill.] The major is his own concession here; the minor is proved from his own
Gloss upon the second Commandment, [God must be worshipped in a way, appointed
by him.] Then all Worship not appointed by him, is forbidden and false.

For the sense of the first part of the word, (...), [That it signifies no
more, but doing somewhat voluntarily, without any necessity to do it,] is
another mistake; For a man may do a thing voluntarily, Vide Estius in v. 18.
(...), in Epiphan. signifies, one affecting Wisdom. Theol. dives Theb. sapiens.
Aust. p. 150. n. 4.
and yet must do it, of necessity also: This is true, in all Commanded Worship;
and beside I gave an instance, in (...), which signifies a willing servant, not
in respect to the service of his master, devised of his own head, which no
master would endure, but in respect to his own willingness, to do his masters
commands; as I said above, ad p. 98. n. 13. But take the Doctors sense of the
word; [this notion is, that it signifies Worship not Commanded by God.] That Is
just the sense against which I dispute, Will Worship is Worship not Commanded
by God; such was the Abstinence, from meats (and marriage) continued as a
Worship of God; this Worship, the Apostle condemns as Will Worship, Worship
not Commanded by God, but by men; ergo, Will Worship must needs be taken in an
ill sense. And let him once more look back to the 18. verse. (...), signifies a
voluntary in Worship of Angels; that was a Worship, not Commanded by God, and
evil; just so were these Abstinences, made Worship, not now Commanded by God;
ergo, If he say, (as he does somewhere) the Worship of Angels, was more then
not commanded, it was forbidden: so say I of those Abstinences, as made a
Worship of God, The Dr. himself says, they were outdated and forbidden. p. 19.
n. 32 and often. n. 5.
they were more then not commanded, forbidden. And I add, all uncommanded
Worship is forbidden; yea forbidden, because it is not Commanded by God: God
must prescribe his own worship; ergo, any Worship prescribed by man, is false
and forbidden. The Doctor therefore beats himself, by sticking to this sense of
the word, [(...), (says he) signifies one that does any thing from his own,
not another will and command; but the word to signify voluntary in performing
commands, is (...),] But say I, first, to do any Worship from his own will and
not from the will and command of God, is forbidden; ergo, it is sinful and
wicked Worship. 2. He grants, that there may be a voluntariness in performing
commands; yet that implies, a necessity; which he opposed before, n. 3. Let not
the Doctor now come and tell me, he means it not of Worship, but of
Circumstances of Worship; for he pleads hitherto for Will Worship, uncommanded
Worship. Indeed, as ashamed of this, p. 151. n. 6.
he qualifies it, a little after, [Willworship, i. e. a performance voluntarily
taken up, without any command of God;] and thus he shifts and hides himself
often hereafter. For, the word performance is too general, and may reach to
civil things of the second Table, left indifferent; but we speak of Worship,
which is more special; let him speak out and say, [Will-worship is a Worship
voluntarily taken up, without any command of God,] and then he speaks like
himself, that is, unlike to all Reformed Divines; if he will undertake to
maintain such Will Worship to be lawful. Nor do I dispute against this
signification of Will Worship, as if I thought the Dr. p. 151. n. 7.
did not take it in that sense, for Worship not commanded by God; for I tell
him [that sense of the willingness of the Person in Commanded Worship, will not
help him.] For he takes it in the other sense, I dispute against his sense, as
justifiable in this text: that the word taken for uncommanded Worship, should
be taken in a good sense, if VVill-worship signify uncommanded Worship, (as
the Doctor takes it) it cannot be taken in a good sense: because all
uncommanded worship is forbidden, as I have too often said, being necessitated
to follow him, in his often repititions. I knew he took the word to signify
voluntary uncommanded Worship, but I knew withal that he has condemned all
uncommanded Worship, in his former Tract, and that makes me stand amazed, that
he should defend it here.

Sect. 16. 6. Reason it self assures us, that things done in the service of
God, are not therefore ill, because Spontaneous, etc.
IN application of my distinction of voluntary Worship, I said, [Worship of God
commanded, p. 154. n. 3.
is not ill because it is Spontaneous or voluntary, (I took both for one) that
is, willingly performed, etc. but in Worship devised by man, the will bears all
the blame, etc.] He answers, That [Worship is either false or true, etc. His
rule is perfectly true, in unlawful wicked Worship, all the blame thereof lies
on the will of man: but it can have no place, where the worship is lawful,
etc.] I desire no more, to determine the question: and thus I argue, In all
wicked unlawful Worship, the will must bear the blame: But all uncommanded
worship, is wicked unlawful worship; ergo, the will that devised it, must bear
the blame; and (as I said) the more voluntary, the more abominable.] What can
the Doctor except to? The Major is his own here, in express words: the Minor
has been proved from himself also; because uncommanded worship, is forbidden
by God; who alone must prescribe his own worship. And the Doctor has often
granted in his former Tract, that [to devise new sorts, or kinds of worship,
not commanded by God, is utterly unlawful.] But say I, to set up uncommanded
worship, is to devise new sorts of Worship not commanded by God; ergo, It Is
utterly unlawful: how he will extricate himself, I profess, I know not: But he
adds, [This can have no place, where the worship is lawful.] He must mean
though devised by the will of man: Now this is as much as to say, [Mans will
may devise and institute lawful true worship, but not false or wicked:] When
the question is, whether all worship devised by the will of man is not wicked
and unlawful; and whether all uncommanded Worship (which is, the same with
will-devised worship) be not false and wicked: No, (says the Doctor) good and
true worship, not commanded by God, but by man, is blameless; that is, is
lawful, and good, and true Worship: Does this become the Doctors learning? It
seems he likes it well, for he says, [That a worship in it self and
materially lawful, p. 154. n. 4.
i. e. whilst it is abstracted from the consideration of Gods commanding it, or
not, should by not being commanded by God, become unlawful, this is to confound
things most distant, forbidding and not forbidding.] But, first, No worship,
can be materially lawful, without respect to the command of God; a thing so
considered, abstracted from the command of God, is no worship at all; ergo,
beasts, were the materials of Jewish worship, but till Gods command passed upon
them, for sacrifice, they were no worship: It Is Gods command that makes things
Indifferent, and lawful to be worship. 2. This is not to confound things
distant, for in worship, not commanding, is forbidden; as I have often said:
Indeed in things Indifferent, as Circumstances of worship, etc. not commanding,
is allowing, due cautions being observed. And I shall join with him in this
sentence, [It is as impossible that any thing should be unlawful, in respect of
Gods Law, which is not forbidden by it; as any thing should be lawful which is
forbidden.] But then I add, all worship not commanded, is forbidbidden; ergo,
all Worship not commanded, is unlawful.

But still he asks, n. 5. He changes my words: the voluntariness of an action:
which I spoke of worship.
[How can the voluntariness be the irregularity, unless the law forbid
voluntariness?] Let not the Doctor equivocate with us, in the sense of the word
voluntariness, and he may easily answer his own question; voluntariness, in
prescribed Worship, is not forbidden, but commanded in every Worship; but
voluntariness in uncommanded Worship is forbidden, because that Worship is
forbidden. And the Doctor told us, just now. n. 3. that [in unlawful wicked
Worship, the whole blame, lies on the will of man.] But I shall assume, once
more, all uncommanded Worship, is unlawful and wicked Worship; ergo, I shall
continue still to say, [There is an Universal Negative command in Scripture,
prohibiting all Worship, all new sorts, and degrees of that Worship, beside
what are in particular commanded.] The Doctor deludes us again by changing
Worship, into acts and degrees of acts; the second Commandment does forbid the
former, as I have proved in the other Tract, and I durst make the Doctor judge
in this case; who has often renounced all new sorts of Worship. Yet the Doctor
likes not what I say, of the second Commandment; n. 6.
[It's as far from all appearance of truth, as any thing affirmable by any,
(for what word is there in that Commandment which can sound that way, etc.] I
will not send the Doctor to those two learned Catechists above mentioned; but
to himself, who has affirmed a principle, upon the second Commandment, which
will fully conclude this point; which must be often repeated, to silence his
confidence: this it is, [God is to be worshipped in a way peculiar to him, and
appointed by him.] Then all Worship, not commanded by him, is forbidden; let
the Doctor now go on and say, [Certainly none (no word sounds that way) unless
every Ceremony devised by man, etc. not particularly under precept, be
presently metamorphosed into a graven Image.] But the thing is proved
sufficiently above, by Scripture and testimony of most approved Authors, to
which I remit him. And now let him consider how well he has vindicated his six
reasons, for a good sense of the word (...), in this one place.

Sect. 17, 18. We have done with the first undertaking, etc.
That (...), is well rendered by Superstition, by the Romanists, and by the
learned and ever renowned Master Calvin, may easily be made good, from the
definition of Superstition, given by the School-man, which is justified above;
and by the description of it, by Mr. Calvin, which is this, [Vox ipsa
Superstitio, etc. The word Superstition may seem to be so called, because not
contented with the manner (of Worship) prescribed, it heaps up a superfluous
heap of vain things.] Calv. Instit. l. 1. c. 12. n. 1. For Will Worship
partakes of the definition, it is a vice contrary to Religion, in the excess,
and is an addition of superfluous and vain Worship. And I said not Superstition
and Will Worship are all one, (as he charges me to say;) but clearly otherwise,
[Superstition or will worship, p. 157. n. 6.
are more general then, (...), for Daemonum cultus, which is but one species of
Superstition.] They differ as genus and species; all Will Worship is
Superstition, but all Superstition is not Will Worship, strictly taken, as was
discoursed above, ad. p. 41. n. 1. But if Will Worship be a species of
Superstition, they that interpreted the word so, did but call the Species by
the name of the genus, which is very ordinary. And that Superstition is more
general then (...), is evident, because that is but one species of Superstition;
there are many more given by the School-man, and himself above. But now we
shall hear him distribute will worship into species. [The truth is, n. 7.
that the general Will Worship, as that comprehends all worship uncommanded by
God, has several species under it, Jewish out-dated; and so now uncommanded
Worship; Heathenish forbidden, and so uncommanded Worship; and finally,
Christian acceptable, yet not commanded acts, or circumstances, or degrees of
Worship.] Here we have three sorts of VVill-worship, Jewish, Heathen,
Christian: The first uncommanded, the second, forbidden, the third not
commanded. But, first, the Jewish out-dated Worship is forbidden, (so the
Doctor said above p. 19. n. 32.) and so agrees with Heathen Will Worship. 2.
The Christian, is no Worship, but acts, or circumstances of Worship commanded,
and then it is no Will worship: upon this, he brings all to two species.
[VVill-worship, will-devised Worship may be of two sorts: (as the generical
word Worship may) either true or false, Heathen or Christian: and as the one
is ill, so the other is certainly good.] But, first, Worship is either true or
false, true, when commanded by God; false, when devised by men; that is
VVill-worship; and will he divide false-worship, into true or false, Christian
or Heathen? 2. Are Christian or Heathen, the same with true or false? the one
ill the other good? Is there no good VVill-worship among the Heathens? no bad,
among Christians? so it seems by the Doctors words. 3. He gave us above six,
(if not species He calls them six species of VVill-worship. p. 97. n. 14.
yet) notions of VVill-worship, ad p. 96. n. 6. and now he brings them, first,
to three, then to two, as if he were confounded, and knew not where to fix: And
to speak properly, VVill-worship has no species, (though Superstition have)
only there may be some particulars, as there are of false-worship, which the
Doctor may call Individua, if he please, but not species, as ergo,
VVill-worship is Heathenish, Jewish, or Christian, this is, not a distribution
into species, but in adjuncts, or subjects. Now true it is the Doctor takes
VVill-worship in a good sense, for true and lawful Worship, but I take it in an
ill sense, for false worship, and the Doctor must not beg his sense, nor I
mine; both must prove it, or relinguish it. And now let the Reader judge, who
is in the right: I shall but propound this argument, and leave it to him; [If
worship be therefore only true, because it is commanded by God; then all
worship not commanded by God, devised by men, is false: But the Autecedent is
most certain, the consequence also undeniable, to any reasonable man: let who
will make out the conclusion.] But hear again, [The falseness consists in its
being devised by man's will, p. 158. n. 10
not simply, but in opposition to Gods, i. e. when it is forbidden;] this we
accept of, and say, all worship devised by man's will, stands in opposition to
the will of God, and is forbidden: the Negative part of the second Commandment,
is, [God will not be served, by any worship not prescribed by himself,] and no
addition may by man be made to the rule of worship. The Doctor has so long
dreamed of uncommanded Worship, in contradistinction to forbidden Worship; as
if Worship uncommanded by God (the same with devised by men) were not
forbidden; when as it is therefore forbidden, because not commanded by God, as
I am forced, by the Doctors importunity to repeat too often. No says he, [VVhat
is forbidden, is more then not commanded.] It is so in the second Table, but in
the first, of worship not commanded, and forbidden, is all one. The Doctor
therefore supposes, what is not to be granted, when he says, n. 11.
[That worship which is supposed not to be forbidden, is resolved not to be
false.] He must say, that worship devised by men, which is not forbidden, is
not false: but that implies, that some worship devised by men, is not
forbidden; which now he may see (if he will) to be false. [Gods not commanding
(he says) implies his permission, and so a liberty allowed by God, etc.] If
this were true, the Heathens, and Turks Worship were all lawful, for they are
not commanded, ergo, permitted: He will say, [ They are forbidden, which is
more then not commanded.] This is not to be seen in that former proposition:
but I close with him, and say, All worship not commanded, is forbidden. I
conclude this Section, with a memento to the Reader, to take notice how much
the Doctor has forgot himself, to plead for Will worship, worship devised by
men, which both is contrary to his own assertions heretofore; and presently
again, (he pleads not for new sorts or kinds of Worship, not commanded by God)
and to his present design, which is not (at least openly) to plead for will
worship, but will-rites, ceremonies, circumstances of Worship. But just it is,
that they which forget the truth, should forget themselves.

Sect. 19. Another reason is, that among the Jews, etc.
IN this Section, p. 160. n. 3.
the Doctor plainly confesses, that [his design, in his former Tract of
VVill-worship, was not to plead for any new kind or parts of Worship, but to
justify the use of uncommanded ceremonies and circumstances, and such are
days of Worship, etc.] And I propound the question; [not about a rite or
circumstance or degree of commanded worship, but of worship it self, etc.] Who
would not think we were both agreed? But then I ask, why has the Doctor many
times asserted, that I must and do state the question of uncommanded rites and
circumstances; when I profess often to the contrary, that [the question is not
about a rite or circumstaace of worship, etc.] It may be said, where is then the
difference? n. 4.
[VVhy (says the Doctor) should he mispend and lavish out his pains, delight in
this impertinent severity, arraign and triumph over a poor innocent Tract, that
never attempted in the least, to bring any new kind of worship into the
Church?] I shall show briefly wherein we differ. 1. The Doctor confounds rites
and ceremonies, with circumstances of Worship; sure I am amongst the Jews, So
with Papists, Ritus colendi Deum. Salmeron supra.
all their Ceremonies were parts of Worship, (though all circumstances were
not) hereupon some Divines have thought and said, any ceremony significant, is
eo nomine, made a part of Worship. 2. It does appear, (and will more hereafter)
that the Doctor does maintain some VVill-worship to be good and lawful, that
is, will-devised worship, not circumstances of Worship only. And this was the
cause of my undertaking to confute that Tract of his, and I hope I have not (to
others, at least) misspent and lavisht out my time and pains. As for (...), p.
162. n. 10
something has been said above. I shall add only this, that at first it
signified the Divine law only, (...), never being used for Ecclesiastical; but
in process of time, the Ecclesiastical Canons were graced with that title: and
the usurpation of more power to the Church then was meet, in matter of doctrine
and worship, brought in by this misapplication, much Suporstition, because the
Authority of the Church was held Divine, by the Spirit of God infallibly
guiding her, as Papists now speak: Divinarum Sanctionum, that is,
Ecclesiastical, said the Doctor, p. 83. n. 4.
in Englishing the words of Pope Leo: But the Doctor wisely waves the defense
of those words of his; [we may justly conclude those actions justifiable,
because not prohibited, and not only so, but also acceptable, and and the more
acceptable for this voluntariness.] I answered (in this Section) in Worship,
it will not justify a man, that it is not forbidden in particular, but rather
that it is condemned because it is not commanded. To which I now add, that the
Doctor deludes us, by general terms, actions, performances, etc. when he
should say, worship is justifiable, because not prohibited, and not only so,
but more acceptable, for the voluntariness. And being by me pointed to this
mistake, he says nothing to it.

Sect. 20.21. A third ground of the abuse of the word, etc.
I Said the 18. and 23. verses of Col. 2. might easily be reconciled, the one
respecting a new devised Worship, the other the reviving an old outdated
Worship. p. 163. n. 2.
To this he says, [ The worship of Angels in the 18. verse is much more then
will worship, in the Diatribist notion of it, for uncommanded, will devised
worship, pronounced unlawful, because not commanded: but Angel worship is
forbidden.] Enough has been said of the difference of uncommanded and
forbidden worship, above. Heathenish forbidden, and so uncommanded worship: his
own words. p. 157. n. 7.
I add now, to the present answer, first, If Angel Worship be forbidden, I
hope that will imply, it is not commanded; and upon that notion was unlawful,
that it was a will-devised worship, but more because it was forbidden, by the
first Commandment. 2. So say I of these abstinences, they were both not
commanded, (but will-devised worship) and also forbidden by the second
Commandment. (For I cannot be flouted out of that answer.) 3. Let it be
observed, that the Doctor plainly justifies uncommanded worship, devised by the
will of man; making any worship lawful that is not forbidden: whereas (as has
often been said) the uncommandedness of worship, makes it sinful and false: all
worship being indeed forbidden, that is not commanded by God. n. 8.
And yet the Doctor says, [the fault of Angel worship, results from the
unlawfulness of the Sea my 23. s. Of VVill-w.
matter, which is forbidden in the first Commandment not from the voluntariness
or uncommandedness of it.] This fallacy he would often put upon us, to make the
fault lie upon one, when it lies upon both. 1. That it is not commanded. 2.
That it is forbidden, that Worship which is not commanded, being ever forbidden.

I cited words from Maimonides, brought by himself, and seeing no more cited by
him, I thought fit to make use of it against him: The words are general, n. 3.
[That the error that brought in the greatest part of Idolatry, was, that men
conceived and taught, that vain Worships, and Superstitions, were the will and
pleasure of God.] Here the Doctor demands, [what I mean by vain Worships? n. 4.
does he mean bare will devised Worship, uncommanded, which have no other crime
in them but their uncommandedness?] I answer, I do mean will devised,
uncommanded Worship; but I do not say, it has no other crime, then the
uncommandedness: for I know, it has another fault, that it is forbidden. And
that thus, the Affirmative part is, [God must be Worshipped only with his own
Worship:] then, all will devised Worship is ill, because it is not commanded.
The Negative part is, [No man must prescribe Worship to God:] then all will
devised Worship is forbidden: should I teach the Doctor these principles? And
these were the faults as of Angel Worship, so of those Abstinences, taught as
Worship; and of any will devised Worship, what ever. What confusion, what
injustice is in this? If Clemens did misapply and confound these two texts, v.
18. and 23. p. 165. n. 6.
he was cited by himself, and proved what I intended, that he thought them both
as one. I argued, ad hominem there, rather then ad rem: But see how this great
Admirer of the Fathers, can throw them by, when they do not please him, or fit
his new notions. I need not pretend his reading of the text was true, but his
Interpretation I may justify, that by (...), etc. Humility in the 18. verse,
he understood the same with (...), and Humility in the 23. verse. The
difference only being this, that what the Apostle expressed by two words in the
one, he understood the same, in the composition of them in the other: and so do
most Modern Divines understand them.

The Doctor seems to distinguish of two sorts of uncommanded worship; p. 166.
n. 8.
one that is uncommanded, but not forbidden; the other that is uncommanded, and
also forbidden: Thus he says, [A spontaneous abstaining from meats, sometime,
being in it self perfectly lawful, and so likewise Celibacie, or Virginity, in
him that can receive it; there is no pretense from the uncommandedness of
either, or both of these, that they should be deemed culpable, or made parallel
to the other sort of uncommanded Worship, where the matter is under Interdict,
the Worship of Angels, etc.] Where these things are observable. 1. That before,
the Doctor seemed to make any Worship not forbidden, lawful: but now has found
a Worship uncommanded which is also forbidden. 2. He seems to make abstinence
from meat and marriage one sort of uncommanded Worship, by opposing to it
another sort of worship forbidden: either then, the Doctor makes that
abstinence a sort, or part of worship, or he does not: If he do, then he
contradicts himself, who had said. [He pleads not for any new kinds or parts of
worship, but for the use of uncommanded ceremonies and circumstances.] p, 160.
n. 4. But abstinence from meats and marriage, are neither ceremonies, nor
circumstances; ergo, they are new kinds of Worship, which he has often
disclaimed: If he do not make it a kind or part of Worship, how does he oppose
against it another sort of uncommanded worship. 3. I have said and proved, all
uncommanded worship, is under Interdict, is forbidden; and so unlawful. As for
Fasting from meats, n. 9.
sometimes, or Virginity in them that can receive it, no body rational speaks
against it. But to make these parts of Worship, and states of greater
perfection, preferring virginity to honorable marriage, (as Papists and the
Doctor does) is justly by our Divines censured as superstitious, and will
worship. And the Doctor might have spared his pains, in proving that which none
denies, in his 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. numbers: but he delights, upon all
occasions, to show his Reading.

Only one thing is to be taken notice of, as remarkable, (says the Doctor,)
n. 11.
[Alcibiades lived austerely, using nothing but bread and water, as before, so
when he was in prison: this course of austerity, and severest abstinence was no
way disliked, etc.] When as Attalus diswades it, upon such realons, as served
not only at that time, but always, (except when God calls to fasting and
humiliation.) As 1. [That he did not well not to use the good creatures of
God.] Which needed no other Revelation, (as is pretended) but what he had from
the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.3, 4. where he makes it a part of the Apostacy of after
times, [To abstain from meats which God has created to be received with
thanksgiving of them which believe, and know the truth; for every creature of
God is good, etc.] I conjecture the Doctors evasion: He (with Papists) will
say, it is meant only of them that abstain from meats as unclean: it is indeed
meant of such, but not only. For it is appliable also to those abstinences,
Col. 2.23. which did not intend those only, that abstained from some meats, as
unclean, (if at all) or imposed that abstinence as necessary by Divine command,
(as the Doctor glosses it) but of those, who placed Religion and the Worship of
God, in those austerities spoken of, in not sparing the body, that is, in
afflicting and macerating the body, Abstinentiam induxerunt (Encratitae)
ingrati existentes ei qui omnia fecit, Deo. Irenae. l. 1. c. 30.
by such austerities: as thinking it a service acceptable to, and more
rewardable by God; as the Doctor does. Now to such it might be said, [You do
not well, not to use the good creatures of God, who created them to be received
with thanksgiving, etc. and you show your selves unthankfully to God, and
unnaturally cruel to your selves.] That Is the substance of Attalus first
argument. 2. The other is, [That in so doing he would leave an example of
scandal and stumbling to others, by weakening them, by like abstinences, making
them unfit for suffering.] And I doubt not, but this and other like
austerities, was the occasion of that Monastical and Eremitical severity, which
was after taken up, and is so frequent in Popery. Those first holy men (charity
bids me think) did only use them as exercises of Mortification, placing no
Religion, or greater acceptance, or reward in them: but after times, did all
these, as we see in Popery. And the Doctor is near the brim of this pit, when
he pleads so much, for voluntary Austerities, as uncommanded Worship, as more
commendable, acceptable, rewardable, p. 210. n. 27.

That which remains in this Section of his, is but to note two things. p. 168.
n. 15
1. That he still goes on with the conceit of the Gnostick abstinences, in his
gloss on 1 Timothy 5.23. True it is, the Apostle in 1 Timothy 4.1. etc. Prophesies of
such as the Gnostics were, and the Romanists now are, with this only
difference, that the one sort absolutely condemned marriage in all, the other
in their Votaries and Clergy only: Vid. Estium in locum.
But the very Papists themselves Interpret that text of the Manachees (sometime
after) and of Ebion, near to, or in the Apostles times; and of Saturninus, and
such like; and at last of their successors, the Gnostics: But the learned and
reverend Master Cartwright, has given the reason, [That the text might not be
thought to smile at them, On Rhem. Test. in locum.
and condemn them in forbidding marriage (as also meats) to some sort of
people, they seek out some others to fasten it upon; as sometimes thieves and
murderers, pretend to seek out the committers of that fault, that themselves
may not be suspected.] And mark how Estius puts it off from Rome; [It's
manifest the Apostle speaks of them, who should altogether, or absolutely
condemn marriage, as evil and unlawful: and should reject some kind of meats,
as unclean.] No doubt the Apostle speaks of such, but also of any, that should
do the like, in a lesser degree, which Papists, for certain do; not only
preferring Caelibate before it, as a state of greater perfection, but also
defaming of marriage, with respect to some sorts of men, at least: witness
those hase glosses of some of their Popes, to be seen in Doctor Hall, Honor of
Married Clergy, l. 1. s. 4. The Doctor indeed does not comply with them in
defaming of marriage; but he does in this, making Caelebate a more perfect
state, and in the dedicating of it to God, etc. as a Will worship, that is, a
part of Worship devised by the will of man, as is evident before. 2. The other
thing observable (and we shall meet with it often again) is, that he changes the
state of the question, by changing the word, n. 16. See ad p. 151. n. 6.
from uncommanded Worship, [to uncommanded Performances (such were virginity,
or fasting.] Whereas he made both of them Worship, a little before, n. 8.
[Another sort of uncommanded Worship,] as there appears.

Sect. 22, 23. You must (says he) observe these things, etc.
THese two Sections of mine, are wholly waved by him, which yet concerned him
to answer very much, and me and the Reader to have satisfaction therein. It is
generally believed, that (...), in the 18. ver. and (...), in the 23. Vid. Est.
in locum.
ver. are both one, a voluntary in worship of Angels, and voluntary Worship, in
those abstinences: Papists are herein, better Interpreters, then the Doctor.
The Apostle therefore, condemns both the Worship of Angels, and these
abstinences made worship by men, because they are but Will worship. The Doctor
confesses the former, the Worship of Angels, to be, [That crime of
Superstition. s. 20. etc.] and to be called [Will-worship, or what we please;
including an impious mistaken kind of Humility. Sect. 23.] Such then were
these abstinences, if reason might prevail with the Doctor. It will be expected
that he give an account of these Sections, in his next.

Sect. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. The fourth occasion of the mistake (he says) is the
use, etc.
WHat was said of the two foregoing Sections, may be also said of these four;
the Doctor says nothing to what I said against him, but repeats and refers his
Reader to what he had said in his other Tract: or very little more, that needs
to be taken notice of; I shall only note these few things. p. 170. n. 2.
1. He says, [ the (...), as it denotes superfluity of ceremonies, is not
pleaded for by him,] yet in his 26. Sect. of Will Worship, says, [I cannot
acknowledge that word ((...),) is taken by Epiphanius, in an ill sense.] Surely
then, either Epiphanius or the Doctor, must allow and plead for superfluity of
ceremonies, for that is part of the word. If (...), were good, yet (...), is
bad; and (...), having influence upon the (...), as well as upon (...), must
needs in that respect be ill; will devised superfluous Ceremonies are evil, as
well as will devised Worship: The will (he said) in such cases must bear the
blame, as before. 2. n. 3.
The fault then was not only that they taught them as doctrines (of God) and
laying them as burdens on others (though if they did so, that was bad enough)
but that they made them also parts of worship: [In vain no they worship me.] 3.
Our Savior taxing them, for these very things, their will worship, n. 4.
and Superfluity of that worship, surely Epiphanius would not take it, in a
good sense, to approve what Christ condemned. 4. The Doctor who had before made
[the main crime of the Pharisees to be, n. 6.
their proud despising of other men, not so godly as themselves,] makes a
secret retreat, and confesses, [Hypocrifie was the Pharisees chief crime, and
withal the fuel to their pride and despising of others,] as I had said; which
I the rather note, because it is so rare for him to acknowledge any mistake,
but rather to justify what he says. But says he, [doing some things not
commanded, was no part of their hypocrifie.] Some things not commanded, is a
blind; he should have said, some worship not commanded; for that our Savior
blames them: And the doing of some things not commanded, was the fruit (though
no part) of their Hypocrifie; the superfluity and supererogations of their
Traditions, was the very mantle of their hypocrifie, p. 171. n. 8.
as I said. 5. As for the Asidaei. 1 Macc. 2.42. some read it (...), the Jews;
others Aschidaei (as Junius) who were not of the Pharisees Sect; but notes
(says he) those Profugos, that for Religions sake were scattered here and
there; for Aschid (says he) signifies diffusum: These are described, first,
(...), more of strength or valor, in Israel, and then well minded to the law.
But the Pharisees were not such Warriors, that I read of: And he renders,
(...), qui voluntary adhaerebant legi, and such as fled from the wiced, ver.
43. These being zealous for their Law, their Religion, joined themselves to
Mattathias. [Listed themselves voluntarily,] n. 9.
(says the Doctor,) to defend the Law by Arms. And this every one that was
able was bound to do, in that case: and then it was their duty, and no
uncommanded performance; much less uncommanded worship. The sum is this, every
one that was strong, and godly, well minded to the Law, as he was bound, did
voluntarily list themselves under that Captain, to defend the Law: and this
makes nothing for the Doctors sense, of [volunteers to the Law,] much less for
uncommanded worship. These indeed are commended, that they did so freely offer
themselves to defend their Law, etc. Just as Zebulun and Naphtali in Deborahs.
song, Judge. 5.18. [A people that jeoparded their lives, unto the death, in the
high places of the field.] But if the text be well considered, it makes nothing
for voluntary performances, much less for uncommanded Worship. n. 10.
6. I cannot but observe one thing more, that the Doctor waves my 28. Sect.
also, as to the substance of it, because he cannot answer it, viz. The progress
of will worship in general, with the application of it to himself, and his
party; both in the text and marginable reference; which he thinks not good to
meddle with, in both places; and therefore passes it over in silence.

Sect. 29. And now we are come to the third part of his undertaking, concerning
those voluntary oblations under the Law, etc.
THe Doctor here begins with his common fallacy, his altering of the question,
p. 173. n. 1.
[That all things not commanded, are not unlawful, in the service of God; and
consequently ceremonies and circumstances of Worship are not prohibited to a
Christian.] Where first, all things; are put, for all worship, not commanded;
some things not commanded are not unlawful, but all worship not commanded is
unlawful. 2. He confounds ceremonies and circumstances of worship (as often before
is noted.) He has said, his Festivals are circumstances of Worship, but (I
think) he will not say, that his Festivals are ceremonies of Worship. All
ceremonies Jewish, (parts of the ceremonial Law,) were Worship or parts of
Worship: which if he will say, of those which he calls ceremonies, I dare be
bold to tell him, he is highly superstitious, and presumtuous. Some of them
indeed were Circumstances of Worship, as times, places, etc. but they were also
parts of that legal Worship: but his ceremonies (so called) he denies to be
parts of Worship: yet some of them, would very improperly be called mere
circumstances of worship. But of his above.

The main question in this Section of his, n. 2.
is about the parallel of his Will worship, with the Free-will-offerings of the
Law; he conceived them to be [directly parallel to those voluntary, or
uncommanded oblations among the Jews.] And thence concluded as he thought,
irrefragably, [That the uncommandedness of a few decent rites, or useful
seasons, set apart for the worship of God, could not upon that account, become
unlawful, etc.] I should not be so Critical or Censorious to think and judge
that the Doctor equivocates in those words, [Set apart for the Worship of God,]
which may have a double sense. 1. That they are set apart, as worship of God;
(as the Temple was set apart, not only for other worship, but as it self, a
part of worship.) 2. That they were set apart, only as seasons, for other
Worship commanded, to be performed in: I should not, I say so judge, but that I
have and do observe, that he does make his Festivals, more then circumstances,
even parts of worship: as I shall manifest hereafter, and now go on.

Thus he says for the parallel of these two, [If in any other respect there
were difference betwixt them, yet he was sure there was none in that; they were
equally not commanded by God, and so secured from criminous, as well as the
Free-will-offerings were; or both stand or fall under the same condemnation.]
But this proceeds, upon a double false supposition. 1. That these Will worships
of his, and those Free will offerings were (as he said) directly parallel:
whereas it will appear, they differ, not in some other things, (as he) but halt
upon the main leg on which that parallel should stand; as shall appear
presently. 2. That they agree in this, [that they are both equally not
commanded by God.] Which will also appear to be false. For upon review of what
I said, in my former Tract. s. 29. I perceive, I needed not to have said so
much; yet do not repent of what is said, in those distinctions given, to show
the nature of a Free will offering; they may be useful, in some respects. It
had been sufficient for me, to have denied his direct parallel, between those
things compared; especially in the maine point, between us: [That those
Free-will-offerings were by himself, asserted to be parts of Worship;] which I
punctually observed more then once; and [desired it might be observed, that
those voluntary oblations were parts of Gods worship; so by proportion, his
voluntary oblations, or Will-worships, must be parts of Worship, not rites, or
degrees, or circumstances of Worship.] Will-wor. s. 29. But n. 19. of this
Section, be plainly denies to make good the parallel in this, [as not obliged
to it, that every Rite and Festival shall be a part of Gods Worship also,] as
those Free-will-offerings were. But say I, if they be directly parallel, then
either the Free will offerings were rites, or ceremonies, or circumstances of
Worship, as his Willworship, are now; or both must equally be parts of Worship,
to make them parallel. For it is no good arguing, to say, those
Free-will-offerings were parts of Worship, allowed by God; ergo, Will worships
now are lawful, and allowed by God: and if they were but rites and
circumstances of worship, then it would be more unfit to conclude, therefore
Will worship is lawful now, because the things are not parallel; circumstances
of Worship, and worship it self, are very distant, and no concluding from one
to another. But this is good, circumstances of Worship might lawfully be
appointed by the Church, then, so they may now; and worship devised by the will
of man, was unlawful then, so it is now; but his will worship, is worship
devised by men; ergo, as unlawful now as then. I shall therefore discover a
double difference, between those Free-will-offerings, and his Will Worship
pleaded for. 1. Those (he says) were parts of Worship; but these often denied
to be such; wherein the parallel ought especially to hold; both of them should
be uncommanded Worship, not uncommanded rites, or circumstances of Worship. But
now it is proved a contradiction in adjecto, to talk of uncommanded lawful
Worship; if it be Worship, it is commanded; nothing not commanded by God, is
worship, that is, not true worship, but false. And yet (see the absurdity of
it) the Doctor having denied his rites and circumstances, festivals, etc. to be
parts of Worship, yet pleads for uncommanded Worship; let him reconcile it. If
he shall say, the Free will offerings were uncommanded Worship, and yet lawful:
so may his voluntary oblations be: I shall show his error by a second
difference between them. 2. Those Free-will-offerings were not equally not
commanded, as his Will-worships are. For they were commanded (which is more
then allowed) in their kinds, See n. 4. As being of those kinds, which were
allowed by God.
being to be offered only of things commanded; they were uncommanded only in
their degrees; ergo, the special kinds of beasts, fowls, etc. which were to
be offered were commanded or prescribed by God himself, and so far parts of
Worship; but how often, or how much, for frequency, or quantity, (above what was
necessarily required) was to be offered, was left free; and so was the same
worship in degrees; but did not properly make a new part, or kind of Worship:
the choice of a sheep or goat; of two sheep or more, was not a new worship, but
a new circumstance or degree of worship. But now his Will Worship (intended in
the text, Col. 2.23.) is neither commanded for the kind, (but forbidden
rather, because it is not commanded by God,) nor yet is it any degree of
worship, because it is not in a Worship commanded; if no Worship commanded, no
degree of Worship; it must then be false-worship. 3. In that liberty of choice,
God had respect to the abilities of men, in his commanded Worship; and as a
Pigeon was accepted from the poor, so a bullock was expected from the rich, for
a thank-offering; and so became a duty, and no uncommanded Worship: Deuteronomy.
16.10. The parallel whereunto, in the New Testament, is that Text, 1 Corinthians.
16.2. as was said in my other Tract. But his Will Worship never comes to be a
duty, but continues still to be uncommanded Worship, and so forbidden. I may
therefore safely conclude against his parallel: [Free will offerings were
commanded worship, but his Will Worship is uncommanded Worship: therefore the
parallel is most imparallel.] That Free-will-offerings were commanded Worship,
is proved before, by this, that they are by the Doctor confessed and asserted to
be parts of worship; but every part of Worship was commanded. That his
Will Worship is uncommanded worship: ( men devised Worship) is all along held
out by him, describing Will Worship, by uncommanded Worship. His parallel then
being broken in the main leg on which it should stand, there need no more to be
said to his Section: But to clear the matter more, I shall attend to what he
says, but very briefly.

To the formality of a Free will offering, p. 174. n. 4.
two things (he says) were only required; [1. That it were not particularly
commanded by God, and so were spontaneous to offer, or not to offer. 2. That it
were offered to (and graciously accepted by) God, as being of those kinds
which are known to be allowed by him.] To this I say, first, that he has left
out, the principal thing by himself set down, in Sect. 29. of Will-wor. viz.
[To observe, first, that they were a part of the Worship of God, when they were
performed.] But he dare not say so, of his Will Worship, though he do make it
so. 2. There were some things not particularly commanded, where yet it was not
free, to offer or not to offer; as when it was left free, to offer a sheep or a
goat; it was not free, not to offer one of them; but necessary to offer a sheep
or a goat. 3. The command, where it was not particular for the kind, was yet
general or indefinite, with respect to the ability of the offerer, and so
necessary, not arbitrary. The woman for her purification, if able, was to bring
a Lamb; and it had been sin for her to bring a Dove: And she that was poor, as
she was tied by command for the kind of her offering, a Pigeon, or a
Turtle-dove; so she was bound to offer one of them: (not free to offer nothing)
and that liberty was no part of Worship, as I said in my other Tract. 4. In
those other Offerings, (above what was particularly commanded) there was a
liberty to offer, or not to offer, so many Lambs, Sheep, Bullocks: but as these
were prescribed for the kinds, so they were, as a due debt of thankfulness,
required of the able, whom God had more prospered; and were therefore left
arbitrary, because all men were not equally able, (and so not equally obliged)
to offer. That which was no sin, for the poor, was a sin in the rich; and this
was done by a Gospel dispensation, 2 Cor. 8.8. To prove the sincerity of your
love.
(even among the Jews) to try the Ingenuity of their hearts. In this sense, we
may grant Free will offerings now, in the times of the Gospel; that is, in
degrees of commanded Worship; ergo, Prayer is Worship commanded in general;
there is no particular command, how often in a day, a man shall pray, that
depending upon a man's particular occasions and opportunities; which when they
happened, the frequency was under command: but that frequency made not a new
kind of worship, but a degree of the same kind of Worship. And if any man
should make that frequency, or number, a part of Worship; he made a new kind
of Worship, which the Doctor himself condemns. Again, we may be said to have
Free will offerings in this sense; as they had a liberty of choice to offer a
Sheep or a Goat, etc. so we (at least in private) have a liberty of choice, of
several ordinances, under command; ergo, Prayer, Reading, Singing of Psalms,
are Worship under command; and its arbitrary, which of these we will choose to
worship God withal, or in what order, or frequency; but then these are not new
kinds of worship, but worship for kind, under command; and in respect to that
order chosen, no Worship at all, but circumstances of worship. To his second
thing required to a Free will offering, [that it were offered to God, (and
accepted by him,) etc.] I have this to say, 1. That the bare offering to God,
is not sufficient; for Turks and Papists offer their services to God. 2. That
the acceptance of it, depended upon the command of God, at least for the kind;
[as being of those kinds, (says he) which are known to be allowed by him.]
Where he says too little; they were not only allowed, but commanded by him
for kind, and therefore allowed, and accepted, because they were commanded: if
a man should have offered a Lion instead of a Sheep or Bullock, or an Eagle
instead of a Pigeon, etc. this had been a new worship, and abominable: and this
would be parallel to his will worships now, which are not degrees of commanded
Worship, but new kinds or parts of Worship. The Jews might offer Free will
offerings, in commanded worship, above what was particularly commanded, but
they might not devise or offer any new kinds of worship: and now by what has
been said, the Reader may see the Doctors grand mistake, [That his uncommanded
Worship is directly parallel to those Free will offerings,] which he again
affirms here, n. 4. [Some things were left to men's free power and choice; if
they offered, they should be accepted, if not, they sinned not; which is the
perfect image and clear interpretation of that (...), or will worship, for
which that Treatise pleaded, that it was not criminous in a Christian.] When as
it is apparent, those were parts of Worship, so are not his will-worships, by
his own confession; and those w^ for kind, under command, and regulated by
Divine rules; but these are altogether uncommanded, at least some of them.

And now the answer to the following parts of (...) of his, p. 175. n. ^.
will be easy: when I said, [The formality of a Free will offering consisted
in this, that it was left free to offer or not to offer, etc.] I meant not in
regard of new kinds of worship, not commanded, but in regard of degrees or
circumstances of commanded worship. But he maintains will worship, men devised
worship, not commanded by God. There was a liberty of Free will offerings then,
which respected commanded Worship, but no new kinds of Worship, no will
devised worship by the Jews; which he now pleads for among Christians. He
argued therefore impertinently. [ There were Free will offerings, which were
part of Worship, then; ergo, he cannot see, but there may be somewhat of the
same constitution now, voluntary and not particularly imposed, yet allowed by,
and acceptable to God.] He deludes us with generalities. He should have said,
not somewhat, but some worship (for so were those Free Will offerings)
voluntary, and not commanded by God, but devised by men, allowed by, and
acceptable to God. This I said, has too much of the (...), in the text; and
this (not as he states it) is my Engine to demolish all that he said, from that
parallel; let him stay, and examine it, as long as he pleases.

The Doctor now comes to state the question, n. 8.
[It must be of the spontaneousness of the oblations, whether that being
confessed lawful and acceptable under the Law, it be now unlawful under Christ,
etc.] But that is his grand mistake; the question is of the nature of the
oblations. 1. That they be for kind, under precept: and 2. That they be parts
or degrees of commanded Worship: else, were they never so spontaneous, they
were not acceptable to God; the matter of any Worship is then only lawful and
acceptable, when it falls under a command; that gives it the form, and makes it
true Worship. He equivocates with us, in, uncommanded oblations: which may be
either, not at all commanded by God, in their kinds, and for such he will not
plead; for that is to introduce new worship: or if commanded in the kind, yet
not in the particular degree, or circumstances, and that will do him no good;
for that is not will worship, devised by men; such as that will worship he
pleads for must be: but as it is worship for kind commanded, so it may, pro
hic and nunc (as they speak) be necessary, which his will worship cannot be.
Two things I shall add to this number, 1. That he calls his will worship,
Oblations; which were in the old Law, parts of Worship, or proper Worship:
which he will anon deny of his. 2. That if spontaneousness of oblations alone,
will make them lawful and acceptable to God, the Papists are as spontaneous,
and voluntary in their vowed Caelibate, Poverty, such and such Habits,
Fastings, etc. as the Doctor can be in his will worship; and so he must either
justify them, upon that point, or condemn himself, with them.

And now I shall come to consider his arguments; the first whereof is (he
says, p. 176. n. 10
ad hominem.) Reminding me of my three Texts out of the old Testament; the
second Commandment, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and the fourth Commandment. [1. They were thus
of force against all uncommanded services, in the old Testament. 2. by Analogy
they still hold under the New, which if they do, then is this the direct
contradictory to both the Diatribists pretensions, etc.] His argument is thus
summed up: [ Whatsoever was lawful under the Old Testament, p. 177. n. 12
is lawful under the New. But Free Will or uncommanded offerings were lawful
under the Old Testament; ergo.] First his Major is none of mine, and clearly
false; none of mine, for I argued (with learned Divines) clean contrary; [The
worship of God then, was far different from the worship of the Gospel;] And as
he sets it, it is clearly false, and he can never prove it, [That whatsoever
(worship, for of that we speak) was lawful then, is lawful now.] Give me leave
to make an assumption to it from himself, n. 7. [ The kind of that worship was
Levitical; and long since abolished by Christ, yet was lawful then. Secondly,
the former distinction of uncommanded worship, will avoid his whole argument:
uncommanded for kind, or uncommanded for degree or circumstances: In the first
sense, (as I meant it) the Texts by me alleged do directly militate in the Old
and New Testament. But then the Minor is false; uncommanded offerings for
kind, were not lawful under the old Testament: if uncommanded be taken, in the
second sense, uncommanded for degrees, or frequency, etc. which are but
circumstances of Worship commanded, they were lawful then. But this will not
serve his turn; who pleads for uncommanded, will-devised Worship, both for
kinds and circumstances: such are his Will-worships, of Virginity, etc. not at
all commanded by God, but left indifferent, as he confesses. Now the argument
may (in my sense) be retorted; [ What ever (worship) was unlawful in the Old
Testament is unlawful in the New. But uncommanded offerings (for kind) were
unlawful then; ergo, so now.] Let him try his strength to answer this. But
there is one foul mistake, n. 10. (whether willingly or no, I will not say.) In
touching upon my argument from the fourth Commandment, (in the particular of
Festivals) he charges me to say, [ It is an offense in the excess, to observe
any other Holy Day, but that one of the weekly Sabbath.] My words are
otherwise, [ To make and observe other days, as Holy as the weekly Sabbath, as
parts of Worship, is an offense and excess against the fourth Commandment.]

The same distinction (as before) will cut the sinews of his next argument, n.
13.
taken [from the liberty and advantages which result to Christians, from the
abolition of the Mosaical Law; which consists in taking off, not in imposing
weights and interdicts; whereas by this Diatribist affirmation, a multitude of
burdens come in; when I shall do any thing in the service of God, not
particularly commanded, I am presently ensnared, etc.] First, For the burden,
it is still the same, in matter of new kinds of uncommanded worship; not when
I shall do any thing in commanded Worship, as he too generally speaks) but when
I shall add any Worship, not commanded, then I am ensnared. Secondly, let it
be observed what the Doctor says here, [That the liberty brought in by Christ,
must consist in taking off, not in imposing weights and interdicts.] But
hereafter we shall find him asserting, that Christ by perfecting the Moral
Law, and adding to it, has rather increased the burden to Christians, as we
shall see in due place, p. 218. n. 49.

To the third argument, little need be said more: Free Will offerings were then
lawful, p. 177. n. 14
but not Will Worship, or Worship not commanded. And if Free-will-offerings
then, were not Will Worship, neither is his Will Worship a Free-will-offering
now; they then are not parallel (as was said) and so no arguing from one to
another. As for the fourth argument; n. 15.
I did but say, that it seemed to me (as to others) that the formality of a
Free-will-offering consisted in the freedom to offer or not to offer, etc.
which is true in this sense, that the particular quantity and frequency of
offering, was left free, and not commanded; but not, that the kind of offering
was left free. But he talking of uncommanded Worship, would have his Reader
think, that there was a liberty then, to offer or not to offer, uncommanded
Worship, which was a new kind of Worship, so to build the lawfulness of his
Will worship, uncommanded Worship, upon that foundation.

The fifth argument is answered as the former; (...)
those Free Will offerings that were, in all those periods lawful, were no for
kinds uncommanded worship; which that the Doctor does intend, appears, first,
by paralleling his Will Worship with those Free Will offerings, which were
parts of Worship; and secondly, by his instance of Abels oblation, which
certainly was real Worship; and yet the Doctor would believe (with some, and
but some Fathers) not to have been by way of precept from God, but left to
Free Will, etc. to offer or not to offer; this certainly was not a
circumstance, but a new kind of Worship, never heard of before; and so
unparallel either to the Free-will-offerings of old, or his Will Worship now.
Bellarm. himself grants the Altars (and so the Sacrifices) of Abraham, etc. to
be by inspiration, and impulsion Divine. De ^ff. Sacr. l. 2. c. 31.
And however the Doctor inclines rather to those few, that say it was not under
precept, yet most of our best Divines do think and say, it was under some
precept to Adam, or Abel; without which, it had been abominable, by that
standing Law of the second Commandment, [That none, but God himself must
prescribe any Worship to Him;] which is the Doctors own gloss of that
commandment, as we heard above. And therefore I can easily show a prohibition,
of Moses, and Christ, and his Apostles, not, as he phrases it, [which forbids
us to do the least thing in the service of God, which is not particularly
commanded,] but not to devise any service or Worship of God, which is not so
commanded. And this, I have attempted and cleared, as above. Whereupon I shall
draw up a conclusion contrary to his, (changing but the word performance, which
is too general, in the service of God, into Worship) [That uncommanded Worship,
ever was, and ever will be unlawful.] And this may be said also to his next;
p. 179. n. 17, 18.
where he still deludes us, by Free Will performances, instead of Worship. But
this I shall add, that, first, Gods promulgate allowance of those
Free-will-offerings amongst the Jews, together with his regulations of them,
was an implicit precept; but he can show none such, for his Will-worships
under the Gospel: an allowance of uncommanded Worship, though of circumstances
there is. 2. It must (says he) be some positive prohibition, which is required
to make any thing unlawful, the want of a declared allowance will not do it.]
He still waves the question; which is not of any thing, but of any Worship; and
the want of a declared allowance, will make that unlawful; for all Worship,
not commanded is unlawful, and besides, is positively forbidden. 3. Those
instances in the New Testament by him given, were either, not in point of
Worship at all, or else are but degrees or circumstances of commanded Worship;
and that command, gave them both allowance, acceptance, and reward.

And now at last, p. 180. n. 19
after a long dispute, to make his VVill-worship, or uncommanded Worship
directly parallel with the Free-will-offerings, he destroys all, by saying,
[He is not obliged to make good the parallel so far, as that every Rite and
Festival, shall be a part of Gods Worship, as those Free-will-offerings were.]
But say I, take away this parallelism, and the Doctors argument is nothing
worth: [Free-will-offerings were part of Worship then, and lawful; ergo,
VVill-worship, uncommanded Worship, (which must be parts of Worship, else
unreasonably called Worship) Worship devised by the will of man, is lawful
now.] If he deny these latter to be parts of Worship, (as sometimes he does)
what consequence is this: [Parts of Worship were lawful, then; ergo, Rites and
Festivals are lawful now.] This has no coherence with that Antecedent, were it
never so true it self. If say, they are parts of Worship (as Papists make them)
he contradicts himself, who often has renounced any parts of Worship lawful to
be devised by men. His two consequences upon that refusal, are as little
worth. 1. [That (...), VVill-worship is such, [such, what? a part of Gods
Worship: for so he seems to argue; [though every Rite and Festival be not a
part of Gods worship, yet certainly I may conclude, that Will worship is
such.] But say I, every of his Rites and Festivals are VVill-worship with him;
then are they also parts of Worship, as well as (...) is concluded to be; which
yet was before denied. And yet again, it will appear hereafter that he makes
his Rites, at least his Festivals, some of them, parts of Worship. The second
conclusion, [That the voluntary, (uncommanded) use of these Rites, etc. is now
as lawful, as it would have been, if they had been parts of Worship,] is as
strange an inference as the former; as if he should thus say, See the same
expression, p. 183. n. 8.
[Rites and Festivals made parts of Worship by men, are as lawful, as if they
had been made parts of Worship by God:] For so his proofs, a majore ad minus;
and secondly, from the uncommanded days of Worship, allowed, at least approved
by God, without special allowance, seem to hold out, or I understand them not.
To the latter I shall only say, the Feasts of Purim, and Dedication, were
either appointed by God, (as some think of the first, at least,) and then
nothing to the purpose, as being parts of Worship, which his Rites and
Festivals are denied to be; or if appointed by men, as parts of Worship, it
appears not, that they were allowed, or approved by God; or if as circumstances
only of Worship, as they are allowed by me, so they are not to his purpose,
who pleads, in all this large preceding discourse, for VVill-worship, (which
includes Worship) and uncommanded-Worship, and not only for uncommanded Rites
and Festivals. And this may satisfy what he says in the last numb. 20.

Sect. 30. God commanded not David to build him a Temple, yet David's intention
in that design is very acceptable, etc.
THere was a threefold answer given by learned Chamier to this argument, p.
181, n. 2.
used by Bellarmine, (whom the Doctor is more ready to follow and defend, then
any of our Orthodox Protestant Divines.) I named the two first, but insisted
chiefly on the last. [It was not any part of Worship, but a Circumstance of
Worship,] and so nothing to the present business; which is of parts of
worship, such as those Free-will-offerings were asserted to be: the Temple or
house which David was intended to build, was not to be a part of worship, or a
place made by him, more Holy than other places; but (as I said) by accident, as
it serves for the commodity, and convenience of the worshippers, and I
instanced, in our Churches now. For they used to say, [Time and Place, are
equal circumstances of Worship, and both equally Holy, or not Holy:] But he
warily waves it, only saying, number. 8. [So is a Festival now, a time, as that
(Temple) a place, and so equally a circumstance of worship.] Yet surely Time,
that is, his Festival, is made more then a circumstance, even a part of
Worship, more Holy, etc. as will appear hereafter; and I suppose, he has the
same opinion of some places, our consecrated Churches, though now he call them
both, but circumstances of Worship. But to the point of David's intention; it
was either absolute, or conditional; if conditional, that he would build an
house, if God should allow, and warrant the business, so far it was
commendable; but if it was absolute, Divines do not fear to say, it was
unlawful; David might neither build, nor set out a place for the Temple,
without Gods direction, and leave. And its most probable, that his intention
was absolute, 2 Samuel 7.5, 7.
and therefore he is in a manner checked for it by God, though his intention to
do something for God, was by Indulgence accepted. And then, this example will
afford no force for instituting Religious Ceremonies by men: which the Doctor
calls, Will Worship, or Free-will-offerings. If they will say, they intend them
conditionally, if God will allow them, let them produce that warrant, and we
are satisfied: warrant, I say, not for circumstances of Worship, (which is
yielded) but for their Will Worship, uncommanded Worship. Before then that this
instance will serve the Doctors turn, he must prove these things, first, That
this Free-will-offering of David, was a part of Worship; for so they are
asserted to be under the Law, and yet he will not be obliged to make good the
parallel so far, for his Rites and Festivals. p. 186. n. 19.2. That David's
intention was sure a pious intention, being absolute, (which pious intention he
asserts, numb. 9.) 3. That it was commended, and accepted by God; as it was
absolutely intended by him. It was indeed approved by Nathan, ver. 3. but
rashly, without consulting with God, and therefore both Nathan and David, are
better informed, and in a sort rebuked for that resolution, to undertake such a
business without command from God. If Nathan failed in his allowance of David's
purpose, (as it is evident he did) then David also failed, in his too absolute
purpose, which God after disallows. And thence we may raise this argument, [It
was not lawful for David to purpose absolutely the building any Religious house
for Gods Ark, without Gods special command, or warrant, therefore it is not
lawful for men to institute Religious Ceremonies, without the same warrant.] I
still say a Religious House, and Religious Ceremonies, which are thereby put
into a state of Religion, and so parts of Worship; which mere circumstances are
not: and such the Doctor says, he makes time and place; but indeed makes them
parts of Worship, as we have often said. Hence it is, that n. 2. he talks of
uncommanded acts of Piety, and n. 9. makes David's intention, a Pious intention;
and being uncommanded, an (...), a Will Worship of God, parallel to the (...),
in debate. He must not mean it of an Imperate act of Piety, or Religion, for
that is no part of Worship, and may be in a civil thing or virtue: as acts of
Charity, visiting the sick, etc. are by St. James called, pure Religion: But of
an elicite act of Piety, which is it self a part of Religion or Worship: but
then it holds not parallel with his Will Worship, which is denied to be any
part of Worship. As for example, if a company of people wanted a convenient
place to meet in, for Religious performances; Aquila, or Philemon, accommodate
them with a room in their house, or some good devout Centurion, builds them a
Church: This were an act of Piety, not elicite, but imperate, which does not
make the place a part of Religion or Worship, but an accommodation to Worship.

The instance of Paul, not taking Hire of the Corinthians, when he might, etc.
I said, was as little to the purpose, for it was not in a matter of Worship, p.
184.2.
but an action of common life, and also a due debt: For the first, he answers,
[He no where said, it was in an action of common life, it is misreported, etc.]
Let him review, his 30, s. of Will Worship, and he will find, that he says,
[There be many particulars, both in the Worship of God, and in actions of
common life.] Particulars he means of Free-will-offerings: Now the first thing
he would have observed in them, was, [That they were a part of the Worship of
God,] s. 29. to which he ought to have confined himself, and not to go out into
actions of common life; which have no plea, to be parts of Worship; and this
instance of maintenance, I took, and still take to be one of them, and not to
his purpose. What says he to it? [1. He appeals to my self, Whether I can
doubt, whether an Apostles exercising his office, be not an act of Worship.]
Truly, I did not formerly doubt it, but the Doctor has said something to make
me scruple it; for he seems at least to deny, that preaching by a minister, is
any part of Worship; Hearing and Preaching are relates, and either both, or
neither parts of Worship. See p. 131. n. 14.
But [Hearing of Sermons, is not (says he) any acknowledged branch of Worship.]
Some body would hence infer, [Then Preaching is no branch of Worship.] It may
be he will say, Apostolical (and perhaps Episcopal) preaching, is a part of
Worship, but not of Inferior officers: If he will say so, let him enjoy his
own opinion. My answer is otherwise; I meant that maintenance, and so refusing
or receiving it, was a matter of common life, and not a matter of Worship,
whereof we speak. But mark his inference; [And consequently any (but)
circumstance thereof, a circumstance of Worship.] Who can once doubt, but any
circumstance of Worship, is a circumstance of Worship; there is no great depth
in this: But we are speaking of Free-will-offerings, which were parts of
Worship; and he tells us of a circumstance of Worship; such was Paul's cloak,
when he wore it in Preaching, and his cap, etc. circumstances of Worship: yet
more, [Pauls not receiving hire, was either an action, or in an action of
Worship, or both; and so surely a Free-will-offering.] I list not to make any
inference upon this, but leave it to the Reader.

That his refusing his hire at that time and place, was a due debt, n. 4.
I proved from learned Chamier, and from the Scripture it self: But our new
glosses, will not down with this learned Antiquary. He had rather run into
error with some Ancients, then hold and speak truth with Modern Divines. Let
us hear their, and his gloss; the text is, 1 Cor. 9.17. For if I do it
willingly, I have a reward; but if against my will, a dispensation of the
Gospel is committed unto me; i. e. what is my reward then? etc.] The Comment is
this, [The preaching of the Gospel was committed to him, and was under precept,
and so no Free-will-offering of his: That is his meaning when he says, if I do
this willingly, (...), as a volunteer (so says Theophilact.) If I had not been
Commissionated to Preach, but had done it of my self; if I did Preach the
Gospel without any command, and so no necessity to do so; if of my self,
spontaneously, I have the reward, this would be rewardable in me; i. e. the
very Preaching would, without any other honorable circumstance to inhanse it;
but if voluntarily, if I am Commissionated to Preach, and so my Preaching be an
act of obedience to a plain command, and so necessary, ver. 16. then all that
can be said of me, is, being trusted with a stewardship, I discharge it; it is
manifest, that I do it not spontaneously, but I perform my Lords command, etc.
And so there is nothing of excellence in this, this will bring me no reward:
what in this whole matter shall bring me in any reward? To which he answers,
that Preaching the Gospel, I do it freely without making it chargeable to the
Auditors, that I make not use of my power that I have in the Gospel, i. e. the
power of receiving maintenance from others, etc.] This indeed is the gloss of
some Greek Fathers, and only two Papists follow them; Gagnaeus, and Cajetane,
as Estius tells me, In locum.
who throws off this Interpretation, as too violent and distorted, for very
good reasons. But take the sum from him, more concisely; [By one willing, they
understand him that does it, having no command, but does it sponte, and of his
own proper motion: whom they say, to have a reward, not any one, due to one
that Preaches the Gospel, but much and great above others that took their
hire: the unwilling they interprets to be him, that does it upon command, and
enjoined dispensation, although he do it willingly and from his heart.] Now
take the absurdities that follow upon this Interpretation which the Doctor
follows.

1. It supposes that Paul, or any man, might have taken upon himself the office
of Apostleship, or to Preach the Gospel, without a commission; (contrary to
Scripture, Romans 10. and the Doctors own principles:) [If I had not been
Commissionated to Preach, but done it of my self.]

2. It makes Paul, or any man, that does so, a volunteer in Worship, to set
upon uncommanded Worship, such is the Office of Preaching, an act of Worship,
n. 2. before: which also the Doctor denies, to set up a new kind of Worship,
without command.

3. It must then be said (which is Estius observation) that Paul and all the
Apostles, Preached the Gospel, invitos, unwillingly. Yea, the Angels and Men,
what ever they do by command of God, to do it unwillingly; nay, Christ himself
as man, to have Preached the Gospel, and done what ever he did in the flesh for
our salvation, unwillingly; because he did all upon his Fathers Commandment:
which how absurd it is, who sees not?

4. He makes the rest of the Apostles labor in the Gospel, though willingly
and with all their hearts, worthy of no reward; because they took their hire of
their Auditors: or at least, no great reward, as they may expect that Preach
freely. [This (says the Doctor) would be rewardable in me; the other will bring
me no reward.] [What is then my reward? that is (says the Dr.) what in this
whole matter shall bring me in any reward? the answer is, that Preaching the
Gospel; I do it freely, without charge to the people.] But Estius answers
otherwise, [How did Paul deny himself a reward, if he took hire of them? Thus,
he that without care of the success of the Gospel, and scandal of the weak,
burdens his hearers with charge; he surely Preaches the Gospel unwillingly,
(and so loses his reward:) For he (as he had said before,) Preaches unwillingly,
who Preaches it out of fear, and he who does it, not loving the Gospel, but his
own profit by the Gospel, etc.] Yea, Chrysostom. the first that hinted this
Interpretation, of (...) and (...), (for Theophylact follows him at heels:) Yet
says, that he that preaches the Gospel upon command, shall have a reward;
(which the Doctor denies,) though not so great as he that does it without
command. In locum.

5. It makes Paul to teach works of Supererogation, (which Papists plead from
this text, thus understood) which merit greater reward, for an uncommanded
performance, (as the Doctor phrases it often) then for an act done upon command;
and this we shall hear the Doctor confidently assert hereafter. p. 229. n. 14.

6. Add this absurdity to the rest, that the Doctor here jumpes with the
Jesuits, in expounding those words, ver. 5. of this Chapter, (...), of some
Christian woman, that attended and ministered to the Apostles; a sister, a
woman; not as Protestants, a sister, a wife: Vide Chamier. T. 3. l. 16. c. 12.
s. 19. etc.
which as it overthrows the Apostles scope, which was to show his liberty to be
chargable to them; whereas if he had led about a woman, to bear his charges,
this plea were impertinent: so this Interpretation of the Jesuit, is wittily
and sharply chastised by a learned hand, Doctor Hall, Hon. of Mar. Clerg. l.
1. s. 26.
to whom I refer him.

But I attend him further, p. 185. n. 5.
[Although this was not observed by Cephas and other Apostles, ver. 5. Yet sure
Cephas is not conceived to have sinned thereby, but it is positively said, It
was lawful for all, v. 7, 11, 14.] All this is true, but was it not lawful for
Paul as well as for them? did not he take wages of other Churches, and perhaps
of this Church at other times? yet did he not sin, but this would abate of his
boasting, and rejoicing, over these that did take hire: Had he never taken hire
of any Churches, this had made him differ from the rest, and this had been,
(...), as Chrysostom. speaks, a virtuous action of his own choice, and matter of
great excellence, in the Doctors language, and had been a place for boasting,
as he speaks. [Paul counts and calls this matter of rejoicing, or boasting, in
respect to the reward, which he was allowed to expect from God for it.] But
let us here Estius his gloss of those former words, that the other Apostles
sinned not, etc. [All of them, had not the same causes, to do as Paul did; but
there is no doubt, but they also did abstain from the use of that power, where
the spirit, and reason, dictated abstinence to them. As Paul when those causes
ceased, did not refuse hire, no more then they, as among the Macedonians and
others.] Judge, Reader, which is the Papist, which the Protestant, and which is
the better Interpreter. And as for Paul's boasting and rejoicing in it, as more
virtuous, and rewardable; it savours not of Paul's spirit: For first, It Is clear
against our Saviors rule, [When you have done all, say you are unprofitable
servants, we have done but what we were commanded to do,] nothing to boast of.
If the Doctor shall say (as in effect he does say,) [When we have done all
that is commanded, there is no cause to boast, but if do more then is commanded,
(...), as Chrysostom and Theophylact speak, then a man may boast, and for that
reason, expect a greater reward.] Surely, our Savior did not think, (however
some Fathers speak) that a man may do more then is commanded, above the command
of God, or that he could do all that is commanded; but suppose, you could yet
say, but unprofitable servants. 2. It Is contrary to Paul's own Doctrine, who
every where makes the reward of eternal life, to be designed to Faith and
Grace, not to Works, purposely to exclude boasting, Romans 3.27. [Where is
boasting then? it is excluded: by what Law? Of Works? No, but by the Law of
Faith.] And again, Romans 4.2. If Abraham were justified by works, he has
wherein to glory, but not with God. Contra: what place for glorying? upon this
reason: It is a work of Gods good grace and strength, in us: and then what
place for gloryings? p. 224. n. 3.
[But these men, give Paul, and themselves leave and liberty to boast, for a
work done without, or above a command. [To preach the Gospel, (for hire) is a
precept, and so a debt, no great matter of excellence or boasting in it; but to
Preach it freely, is the honor of my will, and has a greater reward, and in
that respect there is matter of boasting.] What Papist could say more? 3. Nay
some Papists say less; Nec vero convenit Paulinae modestiae, etc. [It beseemes
not Paul's modesty, to promise himself a greater reward and glory with God, than
the rest should receive, who preached the Gospel sincerely, though they took
hire; especially seeing, that concerned them also, which he said above, ver.
12. To give no offense or hinderance to the Gospel of God.] Estius, in locum.
4. But yet further, Paul himself makes it a duty, to Preach freely, when just
occasion is offered; for so he speaks to the Elders of Ephesus, Acts 20.34, 35.
[You your selves know, that these hands have ministered to my necessities, and
to them that were with me. I have showed you all things, how that so laboring,
ye ought to support the weak.] So laboring, ye ought, which implies a duty,
See 1 These. 2.9 and 2 These. 3.7, 6, 9. p. 186. n. 6.
where the people are poor and weak, unable to supply their Minister with his
hire, he may not exact it. And this will bring me to the next thing enlarged by
the Doctor.

And that is, that the Fathers seem to call it, a voluntary act of Piety, and
the highest degree of munificence, above command, etc. But this must be
heartily understood (as I said) above the general command; [That they that
Preach the Gospel, shall live of the Gospel:] but not above a special call, by
circumstances happening. [Things that are restrained by circumstances (says
learned Chamier) are not therefore said to be unlawful: nay, Tom. 3. l. 21. c.
21. p. 818. s. 75.
are therefore said to be lawful, because they are not restrained but by
certain circumstances.] It is the Apostles own Rule, [All things are lawful,
but all things are not expedient.] And it is another maxim of Divines,
Quicquid non expedit, quatenus non expedit, non licet: [Whatever is not
expedient (at this time or place) to be done, is unlawful to be done;] but then
it cannot be above all command. This will not down with the Doctor. [ They that
received hire, were not faulty (says Chrysostom. which they must be, if bound by
any special call (as the Diatribist from Chamier, but against the whole
contexture of the place) to do what they did.] n. 8. There is no great sense in
these words: should he not rather have said, They were faulty, if they were
bound by any special call, not to do as they did: that is, not to receive hire,
which they did receive. However the reason is not beseeming the Doctors
strength: might they not be faultless in receiving hire, where the people were
able; and yet faulty, when they were poor, (which is the special call) if they
did claim it? But the Apostle himself clears it, to be faulty for him, in that
case, to have taken hire of them; [That I abuse not my power in the Gospel.] So
most Interpreters render it: But the Doctor loves to swim against the stream,
and renders the words, that I use not my power, etc. make no use of it. He
knows the word signifies sometime, and often, to abuse, as well as to use; why
must it needs be taken here in the latter sense? because it will better fit the
Doctors design, of uncommanded performances, or highest acts of Piety, above
command. I could refer him to Chamier, Ubi supr. s. 78.
to take his answers to Bellarmine urging this very sense of the word; and
vindicating the authorities by him brought for it, with this proem: Audiat
Bellarminus Jesuita, suoru^ Jesuitaru^ judicium: Where he reckons up Salmeron,
Justinian, and and others not Jesuits, Cajetane, Thomas, Lyranus, and the
Lovanienses; who all render it by, abutar, abuse; and give reasons for it; take
one, Fuisset enim, illud abuti potestate, etc. [For that was to abuse his
power, if he had required his hire, and in that thing, had derogated from the
authority of the Gospel:] So Salmeron: so the rest, to the same purpose. But
the Doctor cites Scripture for his sense of the word, 1 Cor. 7.31. [Vsing the
world, as if they used it not.] So he reads it, but ours and others, as not
abusing it: And if the Apostle had intended his sense; he would have kept the
same word as he did before, in the other instances, and have said, (...), not
(...). But that is but a conjecture; let us try if from the scope and context of
the Apostles words, it may not appear, that it must be rendered, that I abuse
not my power. [If it was a sin for the Apostle, in that case to have taken
hire, then he had abused his power to take it; and consequently he intended to
say, If he had made the Gospel chargeable to them, he had abused his power.]
But the Antecedent is true, the consequence undeniable;] ergo, The Antecedent I
prove thus; [If his taking hire of them, in that case, had been to the
hinderance of the success of the Gospel, then he bad sinned, in taking of it.]
But so it had been: This I prove from verse 12. [We have not used this power,
(...), (the simple verb) but suffer all things, (the loss of our hire) lest we
should hinder the Gospel of Christ.] Implying, that if he had used that power,
he had hindered the Gospel of Christ: which certainly had been a sin. I know
not what the Doctor can say to this; Chamier, ubi supra. s. 80, 81. etc.
unless with Bellarm. he tell us, that (...), [there signifies, Interruption,
not a Scandal: and so not to be a sin, to take hire, though some Retardation of
the Gospel, had followed;] which if he say, let him there see his answer, and
more with it. But see the luck of it, (his own phrase) he that differs from
Estius in his true Interpretation of this text; yet agrees with him in the
false consequence, and abuse of it; to prove works of Supererogation; only the
Doctor dare not speak out, as the other does. Estius asks this question; In
locum.
[ How Paul, by not taking wages, did a work of supererogation, if he was bound
by charity, not to take his hire, lest he should scandalize the weak, or leave
an occasion to the false Apostles of glorying against him?] Hear his answer, [A
work of supererogation is so called, not, that when it is done, has none, or
the least obligation by the Law of Charity; but that which simply and nakedly
considered, is not under precept, but a counsel: although it may by
circumstances, receive some greater or lesser obligation, etc.] As naked and
poor an answer as can be: having said before, [That he should abuse his power,
if he did receive his hire, indifferently of all to whom he preached.] And
withal, holding that works of supererogation are works done by counsel without
and above command. If it have the least obligation by a command, it is a debt,
and not a work of supererogation: and saying, that it may receive sometimes a
great obligation, by circumstances. But what can a man do, when the cause he
maintains is naught? Yet he is more ingenuous then the Doctor that will allow
no bond of Charity to oblige him, or any scandal to the weak, or fear of the
false Apostles boasting against him, or any circumstances to make it faulty, by
any special call, for Paul to receive hire; but makes it above all command;
that is in the Popish gloss, a work of supererogation: which, how the Doctor
will avoid concurrence with, we shall consider ere we have done.

Sect. 31. The like may be answered for the other instance, he might (says he)
have abstained from going up to Jerusalem, etc.
BEfore I consider his answer, I think it not amiss to consider again my own
words: [The like may be answered, etc.] Like to what? like as I answered to the
former instance; [That it is not in a matter of Worship, but of common life;]
and so not to the purpose, which of Worship: which the Doctor clearly waves, to
take notice of. But I shall add, what I now consider better of, that Paul's
going up to Jerusalem, at that time, was not arbitrary, but necessary, and so a
debt; for which consult the former chap. Act. 20.20. [And now behold, I go
bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me
there: save that the holy Ghost witnesses in every city, saying, that bonds
and afflictions abide me.] This was told him again by a Prophet, cap. 21.11. at
Cesarea: when he was upon his journey to Jerusalem, bound before by the Spirit:
whereupon carnal friends diswade his going up: This he courageously refuses to
hearken to: [What mean you to weep, etc. I am ready not to be bound only,
which he was told of before; but to die, etc.] I ask now, might Paul thus
bound, lawfully have avoided that danger? would, Matthew. 10.23. have justified
this? If not, (as is now plain) Paul had he refused to go up, had sinned
against an obligation upon his Spirit, by the Spirit of God; and then this
could be no Free-will-offering. And now I shall briefly consider, what he says
to my other answer; p. 188. n. 2.
[By the general allowance, he might have fled; yet if he should have refused
to suffer, with retarding of the Gospel, he had surely sinned.] Can the Doctor
deny this, that it is a sin to retard the Gospel? No, he cannot; and therefore
answers two ways, first, [His not going, when he knows, he shall suffer, is no
refusing to suffer, but a diverting only at that time.] True indeed, if at
that time he had not a special call to suffer; which he had, as was said before;
and was supposed in my answer; then he had refused to suffer, n. 5.
and surely sinned against that Rule of his Lord. [Let him (when called) take
up his Cross.] 2. [His not going up (says he) was no way the retarding of the
Gospel; only a reserving of himself for more service, etc.] What it was, we
enquire not, but what it might have been, if in some cases he should have
refused to suffer; and in this case, when he was not only bound in spirit to
go up, but told by a Prophet, [Thus shall the Jews bind this man at Jerusalem,
and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles,] which presupposes a tie
of going up. Now for Paul, in such a concourse of people to seem but to be
unwilling to suffer, might have been a discouragement to the Disciples; which
would have been a retarding of the Gospel: And therefore he both shakes off the
temptation of his friend, (as Christ did that of Peter, master favor thy self)
and also professes his willingness to suffer more, then they feared; [I am
ready to die for the name, etc.] Which would put much life and spirit into his
followers. As for Christ's, and Paul's diversions of dangers, and reserving
themselves, for further service, and a fitter time, it was according to Rule,
when they had no call to suffer, and it is as much against Rule, to detract or
refuse to suffer, when there is a special call. The only objection that I can
perceive, is that in the fourth verse. where some [said to him, through the
spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem,] Which may seem a countermand to
that, Cha. 20.20. Where Paul was bound in the Spirit to go up to Jerusalem. The
best resolution of this seeming contradiction I can meet with, is, either that
of reverend Beza, on the fourth verse, [They foretold by the spirit, what
dangers awaited him, as Prophets, and by their humane affections deterred him
from going up,] as those did also, verse 12. Or that of the Doctor himself,
numb. 5. [ Not that I think, the Spirit, either by them (in the fourth) or by
Agabus, (in the eleventh,) diswaded his going; for then it had been an act of
obedience to the Spirit, and so of duty, not to go; but that the Spirit made
known his hazard, etc.] This is something near to Beza's Interpretation. But
when he adds, [Leaving it free for him to go or not to go,] and the rest that
follows, I shall not consent unto it: Sure I am he was bound in the Spirit, to
go up; and the Doctor says, He does not think, the Spirit did diswade his
going up, ver. 4, or 11. and then Paul was bound to go up, and so no
Free-will-offering. And so much for the third instance.

Sect. 32. The next of works of mercy, that though they be commanded in
general, yet the quantum is not defined, etc.
TO which, the Doctor adds two considerations more; I shall not trouble my
self with them; but only note some few things very briefly. First, I observe
whence the Doctor learned his Doctrine of Will Worship, p. 191. n. 2. (...).
[his over-measure-performances, more then the Law exacted.] Namely either from
the old Asidaei, or Pharisees, of whom our Savior says, [In vain do they
Worship me;] or from the Papists, who talk much of uncommanded services, and
works, n. 3.
above commands, and works of supererogation. 2. The Apostle gives no command
to the Corinthians concerning their measure of their liberality to the poor. 1.
Because he knew not their estates. 2. Had not power to dispose of them. 3. Alms
should be free, though a necessary duty in general; as the Macedonians, (...),
of their own accord did willingly contribute to the necessity of the poor. But
when he adds (...), above their power, as if they gave more then they were
able to spare; this is a strain of the text; yet three times used by the
Doctor. Once here, [exemplarily liberal, above what they were well able to do.]
And again n. 8. [Willingly liberal above their power.] And once more, p. 206.
n. 12. [Liberall of their own accord, above their power.] But the words in the
Original import no such thing, that they were liberal, much less, liberal above
their power; but thus they are, (...), etc. which Beza, and we in English,
translate thus, [For to their power (I bear record,) yea, and beyond their
power they were willing of themselves, praying us with much entreaty that we
would receive the gift, etc.] They were willing to their power, yea, and beyond
their power: that is, their will was greater then their power; and beyond their
power. But the Dr. would have us believe they were liberal above their power,
and gave more then they were able; which as it is a kind of contradiction, so
it is against the rule of Charity, which (all say) begins at home. [Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self,] not above thy self; that is an excess in
Charity. But this gloss fits the Doctors opinion well; that Free-will-offerings
are under no command, and so under no Rule. But come to his answers to me.

I said, it was answered in part, by what was said before. [It is not the
question, which is of Worship, not of actions of civil life.] He says, first,
p. 192. n. ^.
[An answer in part, is no satisfactory answer, and so this needs not to be
considered.] But if I had listed to stand upon it, this was a full answer, when
it was quite beside the question. 2. He says, [There is a parity of reason,
from one act of Christian performance to another.] Mark how he waves the
question, by putting in performance, instead of Worship: There is no parity of
reason, from an act of Charity, a civil performance; to an act of Worship, a
Religious performance. What ever there may be in Alms, there may be no (...),
somewhat of Worship above the Law; yet the Doctor says, There may, by Analogy,
be the same, in matters of Christian Worship, as in matter of charity,] which
is one principal ground of his so many mistakes. 3. But then another evasion: [
This of works of mercy is generally defined to be in a Christian performance,
(how warily) an act of Worship, set in the front of such, Matt. 6.1. See infr.
p. 195. n. 11 That rule seems to have a propriety to that particular time: and
is not a rule for all other times.
appointed to be exercised on the Lords day (as a work of the day,) 1 Cor.
16.2. styled by Paul, a Sacrifice, Phil. 4.18, etc.] But, first, why in a
Christian performance? is not an act of mercy by an Heathen, an act of Worship,
as well as by a Christian? 2. A good man, a Christian, is merciful to his
beast, is that also an act of Worship? 3. Is the work of mercy, Matthew. 6.7. an
act of Worship, because it is set in the front of such? why, he knows, that
Protestants deny Fasting, which is one of them, to be a part of Worship, but an
help or circumstance of worship: yet that is nearer to worship, then works of
mercy. 4. Appointed to be exercised on the Lords day; but is it not a work of
any day, as well. 5. Styled a Sacrifice; but sure not properly, but allusively;
as an imperate act of Piety, not elicite; as was said above: what is this, but a
Chaos of confusion, to jumble the two Tables together, Worship and Charity. 6.
But [to remove all scruple, he wishes that after the custom of the primitive
Apostolic Church, this Alms be presented to God in the Sacrament, and then as
certainly, it will be a branch of Christian Worship; and his instance shall be
set to that, etc.] But this is as weak as the former; no act of Charity, when
ever, or how ever done, can properly be a branch of Worship; unless he will
confound the two Tables of the Law. He said before, it was a work of the Lords
day, why may not the Day, as well as the Sacrament, make it a branch, or an act
of Worship. I hope all acts of mercy on the Sabbath, watering a beast, or
pulling him out of a pit, yea, or visiting the sick, is not thereby made an act
or branch of Worship; especially when that Time it self, is by the Doctor, made
but a circumstance of Worship. And now we proceed to the next.

To my further answers, he replies, first, p. 193. n. 5.
[The question is certainly this, whether ceremonies and festivals in a Church
are criminous, if they be not commanded by God.] No, his conscience can tell
him, this is his grand and gross mistake; the question is of Will Worship, like
to the Free-will-offerings, which were parts or degrees of commanded Worship;
which his Ceremonies and Festivals are here again denied to be; and called
circumstances, not acts of Worship. But his alms, were in the last number, made
certainly branches of Worship: sacrifices, acts of Worship. What interfeering
is here? 2. [The reason is the same of circumstances and degrees; if then
uncommanded degrees may be lawful, uncommanded circumstances must be lawful
also.] Still the former mistake, that there is the same reason of
circumstances, and degrees of Worship; when as degrees of Worship (such were
those Free-will-offerings) were Worship, acts, and branches of Worship; but so
are not circumstances. 3. The next is founded on the same mistakes, that either
alms is a branch of Worship, or that there is the same reason, for Worship, and
for Charity, both which are denied and disproved. 4. The same answer may serve
to this; Worship and Charity, are ill compared. But I add, the degrees of
alms, are generally commanded, with respect to men's abilities, and
opportunities; but so are not his Will Worship. The utmost degree of mercy, in
those cases, is not uncommanded, though it cannot easily be defined: for it
must be resolved, by abilities and necessities; which is not easy to
determine, either how much I am bound to give, without defect, without excess;
or what is the necessity of the receiver of it; as I must give according to my
ability, (wherein we are apt to deceive our selves) so I must not give to the
prejudice of my self, or family, or others that need; which yet is sometime
done, for vainglory, and hope to merit, by Papists, and others.

The horns of his Dilemma are easily broken, n. 7. p. 194.
or turned against the wall: I say, 1. His Will-worships for which he pleads,
uncommanded Worship, are under no command, to be done, but under prohibition,
not to be done. 2. I think, there is no high degree of mercy, not the highest,
that he will pitch on, but it is commanded, in cases aforesaid, the mercy it
self is under a special command, the degree under a general. As God has
prospered a man, as opportunity is offered, by necessities of the poor, etc.
But the Doctor is still dreaming of acts of Piety and Charity, (...), above any
command; of which more ere long. 3. I said, (by the Doctors grant) a man may
offend in his Charity, in excess, in defect; then there is a middle rule, which
binds men from both the extremes: which resolved on, makes it a debt, and so no
Free-will-offering. p. 194. n. 8.
He replies, [He prevented that, by setting the instance, of a proportion
exceeding that which is defined a duty.] But this begs the question, that it
may (easily) be determined, what is the utmost, that we are bound to do; the
maximum, or the minimum quod sic, which must be determined by circumstances, as
before, and that very hardly: Let himself tell us his mind in this; [The truth
is, such a middle rule cannot be produced.] n. 9.
Then say I, he cannot set a proportion, exceeding that, which cannot be
defined a duty: It cannot be done, but by particular circumstances, which
require great wisdom and judgment. But says he, [If that which is done, be
more then that which we are bound to, it cannot transgress in the defect.] So
if we give less then we are bound to, it cannot transgress in the excess: yet
both defect and excess, in virtues, are faulty. And I pray, If a man give more
then he ought, is it not an excess? if less then he ought, is it not a defect?
Did he not say, [It's possible, in Charity to offend both ways?] But that
cannot be, if it be impossible there should be any excess, (as he expressly
says) in giving more then we are bound to. Is not Charity a Virtue, standing in
the midst between two extremes? Then any deviction on either side, is strictly
considered, sinful. Peccare est tanquam transilere lineam, said he: Yet (says
he) [ There is an allowance in the New Testament of selling all, and giving to
the poor, Acts 4.] He might as well have said, there is a command of Christ
himself, to the young man, To sell all and give it to the poor; and a promise
annexed. But then it had been a duty, and no Free-will-offering, which would
not have fitted the Doctors design. Sure there was something extraordinary in
that Acts 4. Either some special motion of the Spirit, or some present
exigences of the Church, or honor of the Gospel, that caused that Charity: for
we read of none, that after that time, or the like, ever did follow them: till
the Papists and such like took it up; whom whether the Doctor will justify or
no, I know not: if he would undertake it, I believe he cannot prove it. If
then, they had a special call; it was a duty, and no Free-will-offering.

But supposing the middle rule cannot be produced, (as he said) n. 9. he will
make a double use of it. 1. [If it cannot, then is this an evident proof, that
there are no such middle points, the variation from which is always
criminous.] This is some of the Doctors new Divinity, and Morality; do not his
Ethics, tell him, that Virtue is the middle betwixt two extremes? How can he
know when he exercises a virtue, if there be no such middle point? And in
Divinity, does our ignorance, that cannot easily settle the middle, excuse us
from crime, if we miss it? But worse still. 2. [If it cannot easily be done by
every man for himself, or by the teacher for all, then still it is evident,
that this obligation, is not Universally revealed, and so no duty Universally
obligatory.] This is right the Doctor. How gentle a Confessor, and easy a
Casuist would the Doctor be. If it be not easily known, when we sin, (who can
understand his errors?) we are exempted from duty, in obeying such commands:
such as are ignorant, are not obliged by them. Because we cannot do an act of
virtue, without defect, or excess, does not the command of God bind us, to
avoid both? If ignorance would excuse, men would affect it, to free themselves
from duty. But though it be hard, it is possible to find that middle point; Adam
in innocence could find it, (if he could as well have kept it) and our
blessed Savior did both find and keep it, and has revealed enough for us to
find it, if we had but will or grace to seek it. And the truth is, it is easier
for us to find it, then to keep it, when we have found it. Strange it is to
me, that the Doctor should say, p. 195. n. 10
[There is no ground in the Gospel, for defining or to determine the middle
rule which constitutes a debt.] The Gospel and law both, presuppose that middle
rule, when they say, [Turn not to the right hand, nor the left, let thine eyes
look strait forward: make strait steps to your feet: walk exactly, (...), go
to the pitch of the rule, etc.] But then he will evade by another loophole: The
truth is, that this middle rule consists not in an indivisible point, but in a
latitude, wherein there are many degrees, but all within the rule of allowance,
though not of precept, etc.] This cannot be true, in the rigor of the Law, of
which we speak, (for we speak of things under, or not under command.) The Law
requires exact obedience, to the middle point of perfection, and knows of no
latitude of degrees, or of any allowance; but [do this and live, or not, and
die. Cursed is he that continues not in all things, etc.] Allowance is a
privilege of the Gospel, which gives a latitude of acceptance, of what we can
do, and pardons, what we cannot do: but that very pardon and allowance, argues
inconformity to the Law; and so a duty or debt, not performed or paid: which
argues again, it was within the rule of precept, as well as under the rule of
allowance. And if (as here again it is said) a man may be too parsimonious on
the one side, or prodigal on the other, and go to far; both these are breaches
of the rule. But if neither the Doctor nor his Scholar can find this middle
rule, this strait line, let not their ignorance hope to escape, and make sins,
no sins, because they cannot tell, when they are beside the line.

True it is, n. 11.
[that every degree does not bind every man, so as to make that degree a debt
or duty in that man.] But the reason is not, because there is a latitude of
virtue, in the Law; but because every man has not, the same abilities, or
opportunities to show mercy. He knows, there are laws, that bind some men, that
bind not others: the rich, [charge them that are rich, to be rich in good
works, etc.] not the poor, etc. but those abilities and opportunities supposed,
the highest degree, pro hic and nunc, is to them, under precept, and so a duty.
And he knows also, that he made that text, 1 Cor. 16 2. an appointment by Saint
Paul, [That man should give, as God prospers them:] In his Pract. Catech. and
elsewhere; as above n. 4. Which now he evacuates, by saying, [That rule seems
to have a propriety to that particular time, of great distress and famine, and
is not a rule for all other times.] Let him agree with himself; I needed not to
have followed him thus far, but to give the world satisfaction. It might have
been enough for me to have said, [If there may be a Free-will-offering in
degrees of Charity to men, yet there may be no Worship, nor any degrees of that
Worship to God, which is not commanded.] And this may serve, (with that said
before) to take off his cases put in numb. 12, and 13. Only I shall say, Let
him put what cases he will, the middle rule being either impossible to be
produced (as he said numb. 9.) or not easily to be done, as there he says; he
might justly scruple whether he do not offend some way or other, though neither
he nor I, be able to say, when and where he went beside the rule; because it is
very possible, and too easy, to go out into the excess or defect, but very
difficult and uneasy to keep to the rule.

Sect. 33, 34. As for his instance of Prayer, for the manner, or frequency,
etc. we answer very briefly, etc.
HE grants my answer to this, to be very brief, and needed not to be longer, p.
197. n. 2.
[yeilding him in few words, the whole cause: for if Gestures and Times be
free, then Ceremonies and Festivals are so too, etc.] Truly then may I say, he
has yielded me in few words, the whole cause: For the question is not of
circumstances of Worship, time, place, etc. But of Worship it self. If he will
grant me, (as he has and must) that uncommanded Worship is unlawful, I shall
yield to him, that uncommanded circumstances are free and lawful; due cautions
being observed. I never quarreled his Festivals, as mere Circumstances of
Worship, but as they are made by some, (and he knows, whom) parts of Worship;
this I have often professed, and he sometimes confessed, to be my true stating
of the question; but oftener again denied it.

But he says, I make it intricate [by involving, n. 3.
and confounding these two things together; placing the Worship of God in them,
and pleasing God by them, which are two distant things.] The things may be
distant in themselves, but as I meant them, they meet too often in the same
person: For thus my words stand; [The Doctor defends Worship devised by the
will of man, and not commanded by God; which if he will maintain to be lawful,
and place the Worship of God in them, or pleasing of God by them, I know not
how he will avoid compliance with Papists, etc.] Having said as much before, [
If a man should make any one way (of gestures, time, place, etc.) necessary,
any one more holy, more efficacious, more acceptable to God: no doubt it would
be in him Will Worship.] To all which, his compliance with Papists, in making
some of them necessary more holy, etc. he wisely says just nothing; which
concerned him not a little: Besides the distance that is in the instance of
Prayer, which is a part of Worship, under command; and his Will Worship, which
he calls uncommanded Worship. But [he that defends (he says) the use of the
humblest gestures in Worship, and affirms them to be more acceptable to God
then either the less humble gesture, or those which have no humility at all in
them, does not yet place Worship in them.] Gestures that have no humilty at all
in them, ought not to be brought into comparison with gestures of Prayer, which
are presupposed to be humble: yet none in particular is said to be more humble;
or any used by any Saint of God, in Scripture, said to be less humble; yet are
there many expressions of them; standing, fitting, kneeling, lying,
prostration, and putting the head between his knees, as Elias did, etc. Let the
Doctor now determine, if he can, which of these or others, is the most humble,
or more humble, or less humble, or not humble at all; and he must needs
sometimes charge holy men, yea, Christ himself to be less humble; which some
would account a defect, if not a fault. e. gr. To say, that kneeling at Prayer,
or at the Sacrament, is the most humble gesture, and more acceptable to God,
(the plea of ignorant people) more humble then fitting, is to condemn our
Savior as less humble then himself; which is sufficient to show himself proud;
and is besides, a degree of Superstition, and Will Worship: this very conceit,
makes it a part of Worship, if it was none before.

The like may be returned to the next: n. 4.
He that shall defend Festivals, as Days and Times to be more acceptable to
God, then other Days, makes them thereby parts of Worship; and does not please
but displease God: As for the Prayers and Thanksgivings, they are as acceptable
on other Days, as on those Festivals; or if any shall think them more
acceptable to God, for the Days sake, he makes the Days parts of Worship, and
himself superstitious. So to observe Canonical hours of prayer, public or
private, in such a number, and to place more acceptance in that number, then
in a less frequencie, is, ipso facto, to make it a part of Worship, and himself
as superstitious, as the Pharisee that boasted of his Fasting twice a week. And
this the Doctor does; making the Frequency of Prayer, a Free-will-offering, and
tells me, displeasedly, that I make, pray continually, a debt and a duty. I do
so, upon supposition of occasions or opportunities, which can hardly be
wanting, in Ejaculatory prayer. I said, the particular number of 7. was not a
debt; but I meant, just that number was no duty, from that example of David;
but frequency indefinitely is a duty; and that proportionable to the occasions.
Now no man can tell aforehand, how often that precept, pray continually, and that
other, praying always, for all things, Ephesians. 5.20. will oblige him to pray,
and that other, [In all things, or always give thanks,] obliges often: But both
of them imply, that a man is bound to watch opportunities, and to take them;
and there is not an hour, or minute in a day, but a man has some occasion
offered, either to pray or give thanks. But to tie a man's self to such a
number, or frequency, and to think to please God by it, or find acceptance for
it the more; is that which our Divines dislike as superstitions. To conclude
this, he supposes again, what is not to be supposed, that a man may know, how
often that precept, pray continually, obliges a man every day; and then he may
add some further frequency, which is not under precept, which falls, by what
has been said before: And then his Free-will-offering falls with it.

Sect. 39. We wave the four following Sections, etc. but cannot let pass, what
he adds, about the difference, betwixt a Precept and Grace, etc.
I Shall be brief in dispatching the particulars of this Section: because it is
a (...) to our main business: I said, [Grace it self and every degree of grace,
being a talent also, requires a proportionable return to that degree; Luke
12.48.
to whom more is given, of him more is required.] To which last, he answers
nothing, but talks still of a Latitude (as before in Charity;) p. 199. n. 2.
[The proportionable return (he says) is not so placed in an indivisible point,
that he that comes short of it offends in the defect, etc.] But sure, if more
be required of him that received more; then that proportion is not in a
latitude, or liberty to return less; but equal to the talent received: and then
it can be no Free-will-offering. But what if he exceed that point, shall that
be an offense too? This is grounded upon a false supposition, that a man may do
more then he received, as above a command: And this appears by his cases
supposed. [1. Two men that have the same grace in specie, both may use it well,
and yet one make better use of it, then the other:] The case, first, shall be
put in this latter; both having the same degree of grace; if one make better
use of it then the other, surely he that made lesser use of the same measure of
grace, fell short of his duty, and the other had no cause of boasting, for he
did but his duty. As for exceeding or doing more, then his grace required, it
savours to much of the Popish leaven of supererogation: n. 3.
and men will rather be found in the defect, then in the excess. n. 4.
[2. Paul labored more then all the Apostles, by the grace of God in him:
supposing that measure no greater then in Peter: yet this would certainly be
accepted and rewarded, etc.] If Peter had the same measure of grace with Paul,
and labored less, it was his fault in the defect. If Paul with the same or a
greater measure labored more, he did but his duty at best, and so no
Free-will-offring yet; and so no need of Procustis his bed: which is very
unhandsomely here applied. Let him see how he will answer it to God.

I never doubted but grace is often received in vain; but that I said was this,
n. 6.
[Does God give grace to incline, and leave men free to use it or not to use
it?] Which seems a fair inference, from what he says, [which he that makes use
of it is promised a reward:] as if he that made no use of it, should only lose
his reward, or at most (as he says) be punished with the withdrawing of his
talent, the grace given him. And this he makes the difference of a Precept and
a Grace; [The one lays an obligation, and that sub periculo animae, if not
obeyed; the other not so, but only to strengthen and incline:] mark that, not
sub periculo animae, if it be not used: but if he use it, a reward; if not, no
punishment but loss of his grace received; which perhaps he would account a
benefit to be rid off: And yet says presently; [The bringing of God no return,
of all his grace, is a great and damning sin:] but then it differs not from a
precept, not obeyed, and is given sub periculo animae, if not used. But is it
not a damning sin also, not to return a proportion to his measure of grace? No,
(says he) if he bring him some return, in a latitude; [for there is no
obligation in this matter, ad semper, or, or gradum, to do it always, or to
such a a degree.] To which I said, first, That there is an obligation, Semper,
He that received five returned five more; he that two, two, etc. p. ^00. n. 8.
as opportunity is offered, and always to the degree of the grace, a gradual
improvement. [To whom more is given, of him more is required;] Is express
Scripture. 2. That this gloss savours too much of the Romish dialect; all which
he takes no notice of.

And it seems he was in some haste (more then good speed) to recriminate, and
cast dirt in the face of his adversary. [They that most demurely reprehend this
kind of Divinity, that leave nothing to man's will, yet do often exhort and
reprehend men; which must certainly be vain and ridiculous, unless they be in
some possibility by Gods grace, to do what they are exhorted to, etc.] But,
first, I never denied but grace was often received in vain; but I said, it was
not given by God, not to be used, or not improved by men, but only to
strengthen and incline, as he asserts. 2. Who are those men, that leave nothing
to man's will? not I for certain, who say, the will is (too) free to evil, and
by grace made, in some measure, free to good also. 3. Who says, men are not in
possibility, by Gods grace, to do what they are exhorted to? though I fear, he
equivocates in the word grace, as he knows, who were wont to do. 4. Why may
not they exhort and reprehend such, that do not what they can to avoid sins,
and do things materially good? The Doctor seems to hold, that no man may be
exhorted to, or reprehended for, what is now to him impossible: or, that common
grace is enough to enable men to do, what is commanded: or else it is vain and
ridiculous. But this is a new controversy, and I list not to enter into it. My
meaning was as before, which now he stumbles upon, [That Gods giving grace in
vain, n. 9.201.
must be his not giving it so, as that it shall be no sin, not to use it.] If
this be a strange expression, it is long of his stranger Divinity: who says,
grace is not so given, but only to incline, and strengthen, not to be used,
etc. which was to me, to give it in vain. But of this enough before.

We are at last, brought to the old refuge of a latitude, but with a double
contradiction to what he said before. 1. n. 10.
That grace laid no obligation upon a man, but only served to strengthen and
incline: yet now says, grace does bring obligation with it. 2. That it did not
oblige to a return, proportionable to the measure of grace, non ad gradum; now
he says, it brings obligation with it, and that to some return proportionable
to that grace: But that proportionable return must be, not only ad speciem,
but ad gradum. The only evasion is, [proportionable return consists in a
latitude, which has several degrees in it;] Belike then, he that has ten
talents, if he bring in but one talent improved, brings a proportionable
return; for that is within the latitude. So that if he return of ten degrees,
but one, yet he offends not in the defect, as contra, (for so he says) [ He
that exceeds that minimum quod sic, that least degree, shall not offend by way
of excess, but is more acceptable, and more highly rewardable.] As if the other
nine degrees of ten. (For that is the latitude) were all above command, and
works of supererogation. Yes, so he says in the conclusion; [As the lowest of
these degrees are under obligation, so the superior are not; p. 201. n. 10
but yet such as will be accepted and rewarded by God, to him that arrives to
them.] This is very easy and pleasant Divinity. Let the Reader judge.

Sect. 40.41. Object. Prudence will require us to do that which is fittest to
be done, and so nothing is free; be answers, etc.
WE are now entering into a new Sea of controversy; p. 203. n. 2, 3.
]Whether man is bound to be prudent, to that degree, which he lost by sin.]
The Doctor (to show us some of his new Divinity) distinguishes; [ If by sin he
mean man's own actual sins, whereby he has any ways infatuated himself; then
the affirmative is true, but not applyable to the mattter in hand, etc. But if
of original sin, this sure will be found a mistake; for this loss of Adams was
a punishment of Adams sin, and in his posterity must be looked on as a
punishment; and he that is punished cannot be obliged not to be punished.] It Is
easily known, in what School, the Doctor learned this Divinity, though I say
nothing. But to the point, and to begin with the last first. First, What does
the Doctor mean by original sin? That in Adam only, or Adams first actual sin?
(as some Papists clearly do:) and so make the loss of prudence and original
righteousness, to be no sin, but only the punishment of sin; If it were not
sin in Adam himself, then sure it cannot he such in his posterity? n. 3.
both in Adam, and in his posterity? This Papists say, and the Doctor seems to
hold so, by his arguing; at least in Adams posterity. Yet why is it not a
punishment in Adam as well as in his posterity; and then no sin in him, [for he
that is punished cannot be obliged not to be punished.] If no man now be bound to
be as prudent as Adam was in his integrity, (as he says) was not Adam himself
bound after his fall to be as prudent and righteous, as in his integrity? No,
for then he should be bound not to be punished, being punished with the loss of
that prudence, and original righteousness. 2. Will the Doctor grant any
original sin in Adams posterity? then I ask, what that original sin is? If
only, the loss, or want of original righteousness (as Papists make it) is not
the want of original righteousness a sin? How then is it called orginal sin, if
it be no sin? And sin it cannot be (in the Doctors Divinity) because it is a
punishment of Adams sin. Then again, no infant is a sinner, in the want of
original righteousness: Oh, blessed harmless babes! while they live, and surely
all saved when they die young. This is the Divinity of some of the Doctors
Scholars, which I fear they learned from him. 3. Did the Doctor never hear, in
the Schools, [That one sin, is the punishment of another,] and in the
Scripture, that God (in severest justice) punishes sin with sin? and why not
Adams first sin, with the loss of original righteousness (which it self is a
sin, as being (...), an inconformity to that Law created in him?) in himself
and his posterity, they being all in him, and standing or falling with him? But
if original sin, in Adams posterity, The pollutions of our nature, etc. are
infelicities, if not sins. Pract. cat. p. 52. yet p. 74. called sin.
be more then a want of original righteousness, even a pravity of nature
inclining them to all evil, as well as averting from any good; (as all Orthodox
hold) it is not only a punishment, but also a sin. And then though he that is
punished is not bound not to be punished, yet he that has lost original
righteousness, is bound to be righteous; as righteous (and so as prudent) as he
was created. As a decoctor or prodigal of an entrusted state, who has
wastefully spent it, (which is to him a punishment sufficient, to want that
estate) is yet bound to the repayment of it. 4. A man that by his actual sins,
has infatuated himself (which is the first part of his distinction) is bound
to be prudent to that degree of prudence, he lost by his sin, (there is truth
in this affirmation says the Doctor.) But say I, the very loss of that
prudence, is a punishment of his sin; and so cannot be a sin too, by the
Doctors arguing. That it is both a sin and punishment, the Apostle is clear,
Romans 1.21, 22. [When they knew God, and glorified him not as God, etc. they
became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened, they
became fools.] Is it not a sin for a man, by his own lusts, to darken his own
heart, and to put out his own eyes? yet is it also a punishment, infflicted by
God upon him, ver. 28. [God gave them up to a reprobate mind.] Much more might
be added: But granting it true, of a man, infatuated by his actual sins; yet
the Doctor has his evasions: ['Tis not appliable to the matter in hand, viz.
to such an high degree of prudence, as now he speaks of; for of that he may
come short, without any degree of actual sin, as shall thus infatuate, and
deprive him of prudence.] Let the Doctor apply this to Adam himself, when he
was alive, after his fall: He was bound to that high degree of prudence, which
I speak of, that he lost by his sin: and of that he might not, without sin,
come short, though his following actual sins did not further infatuate him, and
deprive him of that little remaining prudence which he had. Prudence in the
highest degree, was a part or degree of the Image of God, that knowledge he
had, at his creation, which by his actual sin he lost; and is not loss, or want
of that knowledge, or Image of God, a sin, as well as a punishment? If so in
Adam, so also in his posterity. He therefore shifts the foot of his answer; [He
speaks of a regenerate man, by the inlightning wise Spirit of God returned to
that state of prudence, from which his own actual sins may have degraded him;
and if so, he is as prudent as he is bound to be, and yet capable and growing
in knowledge, and so free from sin in this respect, though not at the highest,
that lapst nature is capable of.] Though this regenerate man, appear not in the
Doctors discourse, yet it will do him no good, if granted; for we speak of any
man since the fall, every man is bound to aspire to that degree of prudence, or
knowledge, which he lost, not only by his own actual sin; but by the sin of
Adam. Hence the Apostle, Romans 12.2. lays it on all as a command, [ Be ye
transformed in the renewing of your mind, that you may prove, what that perfect
will of God is. And Ephesians. 4.23, 24. Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and
put on that new man, (...), etc. which after God, was created in righteousness
and true holiness.] Which in Col. 3.10. he expresses thus, [Which is renewed in
knowledge, after the Image of him that created him.] Implying that what is
short of that Image, that knowledge, is short of that which the Gospel calls us
to, and consequently a sin, contrary to the Doctor who says, [ Though he arrive
not at the highest degree, The Law is satisfied with the lowest. n. 6. n. 3.
he is free from sin.] His latitude, gives his disciples elbow-room enough in
Religion, and takes off their care of aspiring to higher degrees, when the
lowest is without sin. But hear more in the second part of his distinction; [No
man is bound now, to be as prudent, as Adam in his Integrity, any more then to
be as healthy, any more then to be born in the state of innocence and
perfection, etc.] Strange confidence this: 1. Is there no difference between a
mere punishment, and that which may be a sin, as well as a punishment? Does not
he that sins (did not Adam so) deface the Image of God, whereof prudence was a
part? as he that defiles himself, defaces the Image of God, that consisted in
true Holiness? and is not that a sin? and is not that man bound to make
reparation of that wrong, in defacing the Image of God? But sickness and
diseases are mere punishments, and so no man is bound to be as healthy, as Adam
was created. And for innocence and perfection, (as well as prudence) a man is
bound to be as innocent and perfect as Adam, though he cannot be born so, being
begotten of impure and defiled parents, and for want thereof, is born by nature
the child of wrath, which supposes him sinful.

But this and the like assertions of mine, p. 204. n. 4.
(he says) [Are nothing but an heap of paralogismes, no one of the proofs
belonging to the highest degree of mercy, which should be inferred from them. I
had thought that perfection, which Law and Gospel call for, had intended the
highest degree of piety and mercy; but the Doctor has found out a new kind of
perfection, which has a large latitude of degrees; n. 5.
of which more ere long. Hear what he says here. 1. [The perfection of Holiness
which the Law required, was but either sincere and upright, or at most, but
unsinning obedience, and neither of these includes the highest degree of Piety,
which is possible.] The first part of this answer, confounds Law and Gospel:
The Law required not only sincerity and uprightness, but also exact perfection
of of parts and degrees: [Do this, all this, and do it well, or die.] The
Gospel is satisfied indeed with sincerity and uprightness; pardoning what is
not exactly done, and accepting through Christ what is done; but the Law knows
no such Indulgence: This he misdoubting, helps it with another; [or at most but
unfinning obedience.] But unfinning obedience, includes both a conformity of
nature, to the Holiness of the Law, and also the highest degree of piety
possible. He that comes short in a degree of Holiness, which the Law requires,
his Holiness is sinful, and without mercy, damnable. [Cursed is he that
continues not in all things, etc.] Yea, the highest degree of Piety (if
possible) in a nature corrupted, and inconformable to the Law, is finning
obedience; and needs pardon.

This answer before, satisfies him not; therefore he adds, n. 6.
[ If by the Law be meant the Covenant made with Adam in innocence, then it is
true, that the perfection, which that required, was unfinning obedience; and if
Adam had performed that, yet he had been capable of higher degrees of Piety,
then that law required, there being in unfinning obedience a latitude, etc.]
The Doctor is much beholden to his latitude, and degrees of perfection, etc.
But it is proved already that unsinning obedience, reaches to the least title of
the Law, and to the highest degree of Piety; and then the cause is mine. And as
for Adams being capable of higher degrees of Piety, upon his unfinning
obedience; that is, that his state was a state of proficiency, it comes
presently to be considered in the next. But I pray was not the sum of that Law,
[To love (and to serve) the Lord, with all his heart, soul, mind, strength,]
that is, to the utmost of his possibility? and then, must he not needs sin, if
he came short, or remitted his love, in any of those circumstances? Yet he
says, upon his former mistake, [That to those highest degrees, the Law cannot
be thought to bind, when it is satisfied with the lowest; all the superior
degrees being additions.] Which is certainly false: For if Adam might have
satisfied the Law, with the lowest degrees of Piety, he might have remitted of
his love in the service of God, contrary to that Law, and besides might have
merited (as Papists say) by going to those highest degrees, beyond unfinning
obedience, and above what the Law did bind him to. But this suits well with
the Doctors uncommanded Worship, and works of perfection above all commands.

Yet this the Doctor must gain, or he loses his cause; he therefore instances
in frequency of prayer, [Adam (says he) might have exceeded any proportion
which Gods Law required of him. p. 7. p. 204.
] But what if I should say, Adam needed not to pray at all, as wanting nothing,
unless he would pray for perseverance; but the Angels in Heaven, need
perseverance, yet we read not that they pray for it: But this may seem a
paradox, but not so unlikely as some of the Doctors. I shall therefore wave it,
and desire to know of him, what proportion of frequency in Prayer, the Law
required of him? How many times a day, etc. this must be resolved, before he
could exceed that proportion: I leave it with him, and proceed. 2. [If Adam had
never finned, yet might his state, he a state of proficiency, and then the
perfection required, was not the highest degree of Piety, etc.] The Antecedent
is very uncertain, that his state was a state of proficiency; he was as perfect
and complete in his kind, as his nature could hold; as the Angels were (it is
probable) as full of holiness, at their creation, as they are now; and so the
Saints after the day of Judgment, as perfectly holy, as to eternity; no
proficiency in grace; that is for viatores, not for comprehensores: And hence
it is evident, that the highest degree of Piety was required of him, and he had
sinned, by any lower; contrary to the Doctors consequence. 3. That Adam and his
posterity should have been rewarded according to their works, (the Doctors
third argument) is true; but that they should have had degrees of rewards, is
at best a problem, and upon the former ground, of a state of non proficiency,
like to be false. This may be seconded, by the instance of Angels, there is no
such proportion of rewards to them; for they enjoyed God, their utmost
happiness, from the first creation, at least from their confirmation, as they
shall do, to eternity. And now if I were disposed to make the Doctor some new
work, I could cast a (...), (as he calls it) an Apple of contention, before
him, by starting a new question, [Whether there shall be degrees of glory, to
the Saints, in Heaven.] He knows it is a controversy amongst very learned men,
and much is said on both sides: If he please to determine it, let him; and I
proceed.

What was said before of Adams proficiency, and rewards proportionable, he
confesses to be but a speculation; p. 204. n. 8.
he therefore [ supposes I meant the Law of the Jews, and then the perfection
of Holiness which that required, must, he supposes, signify truth and
sincerity of Holiness, such as was in Zach. and Eliz. Luke 1.6.] There is first
a mistake, that I meant the Law of the Jews, as contradistinct to the Law;
which he calls a covenant of works: I meant it of the Law, as contradistinct to
the Gospel; in that sense, the Law given to the Jews required not only
sincerity and truth, See Gal. 5.3.
(which yet were required in innocence) but perfections of Holiness, in the
highest degree, as I said before. I remember I have read somewhere, Pract. cat.
p. 8. 2. edit.
that the Doctor says, [ The truth is, the Judaical Law did represent unto us
the first covenant, and that especially, and is so called, Heb. 8. by requiring
perfect obedience, and pronouncing a curse on him, that continued not in all
those many burdensome ordinances, which the Law gave no power to perform.]
True it is the Doctor adds there, [So it did represent the second covenant:]
But under favor, he speaks, incongruously twice. 1. In saying, the Law
Judaical represented the second Covenant, which the Gospel only holds forth.
2. That he joins the Ceremonial Laws and Ordinances, as a part of the first
Covenant with the Moral Law, which alone was the Covenant of works to Adam.
Neither did that Law represent the second Covenant at all; for the Ceremonial
Law of Sacrifices, etc. did only represent Christ, and this was a Gospel
dispensation, and beside the promises of Christ, obscurely intimated, this was
a great part of the Jews Gospel. Hence it will follow, that the perfection of
Holiness which that Law of the Jews so considered, required, was not only
sincerity and truth of Holiness, but (as he said) unfinning perfect obedience,
and pronouncing a curse, etc. Sincerity and truth of Holiness, as it was also
required in the Law, is accepted only in the Gospel: Then Zach. and Eliz. were
not just with respect to the Judaical Law, but the Gospel dispensation. And
when we hear of any, said to be just, and perfect, it must be understood
Evangelically, not Legally and strictly: for properly there is no perfection,
but what exactly answers to the perfection of the Law. Then it follows again,
that there are no degrees of perfection; perfection implying the highest
degree. There are degrees of Holiness and Righteousness, in the same, or diverse
persons, but no degrees of perfection; yet these degrees of perfection, the
Doctor makes great use of, as we shall again hear.

I said, the Law required Perfection of Holiness, and he said, the Gospel
requires yet greater perfection: n. 10.
He answers, [That greater perfection which Christ required, is but an higher
degree of the same perfection; but not the highest that is possible, etc.] But
here are many mistakes. 1. That there are degrees of perfection. 2. That he
having imputed Imperfection to the Law, yet calls that perfection that Christ
required, an higher degree of perfection; when the Law before, was it self
imperfect, wanting perfection; Vt perfectorum perfectiores appareant and
Gnosticorum magis Gnostici viri, etc. ut Irenaeus, l. 1. c. 5. Opepones, etc.
and required it not. Christ only required perfection. 3. The perfection
required, whether by the Law, or Christ, being supposed to be the Highest, he
yet makes one, yea, many degrees of perfection above the highest: Christ (says
he) did not require the highest degree that is possible: And now we have a fine
Philosophical speculation indeed: [Suppose eight degrees of zeal or piety, or
perfection; A Jew had as many, suppose five, as would denominate him perfect a
Christian more, to have six, it is visible, that he that has all, that is
required of a Christian, is yet capable of having more, seven, and yet not come
to the eighth degree.] [Take heed that no man spoil you, by Philosophy, etc.]
may very well be used here. The Doctor might as well made 18, or 80. degrees of
Zeal, and Piety in several men, p. 205. n. 11
and he does so, presently: [There is beside, in every degree, a latitude also,
and in it, as it were fractions, and all this little enough to bear proportion
with them different works of pious men here, or their glory hereafter.] But,
first, In this Arithmetical, or Geometrical proportion, the Doctor forgot where
to place the four first degrees of Zeal, Piety, Perfection; and I can think of
none but Heathens to be a fit subject of them; so that some, at least four
degrees of them must be found in an Heathen, five, in a Jew, six, at least in a
Christian: If then an Heathen arrive, at the fourth degree, he is perfect in
his latitude; a Jew at five, etc. And no marvel, for the Doctor made (above)
the Athenians to be very pious men, and more devout then their neighbors, 2.
But then again, I would ask, what if the Heathen come short of the fourth
degree, the Jew of the fifth, the Christian of the sixth, are they perfect or
imperfect, in that posture? That they are yet perfect, according to the Doctors
Philosophy, (for Divinity it is not) is proved from this, that his latitude of
perfection, takes in all the eight degrees; ergo, he is perfect that has but
one degree, as well as he that has four being an Heathen, or five being a Jew,
or six being a Christian: Nay, he that has the lowest fraction of the sixth
degree, has the sixth degree; then he that has the lowest fraction of the
fifth, has the fifth; and so of the fourth. And why then has not he that has
but one degree, nay one fraction of that first degree, a right to challenge
perfection, as will as he that has four, five, or six degrees. 3. If he shall
say, He that falls short of the fifth degree, being a Jew, falls short of
perfection, and is imperfect; and he that falls short of the sixth degree,
being a Christian, falls short of perfection, and is imperfect; then I would
ask by what Rule of Scripture, or right reason, is he imperfect, that falls
short of five, being a Jew; or six, being a Christian; and yet he that arrives
at five, or six, yea, the lowest fraction of that degree, said to be perfect;
seeing he also falls short of the eighth, which is supposed the highest degree
of perfection. 4. Divinty would rather say; supposing Zeal and Piety, to
require eight degrees; he is only perfectly zealous, and perfectly pious, who
arrives at the eighth degree, and all these that fall short, more or less, of
that degree, to be more or less (not perfect, for that they are not, but)
imperfect, and so no degrees of perfection; what is less then it ought to be,
is in vitio, so far faulty, and sinful; as we shall hear anon. As fractions
therefore in Arithmetic, are imperfect numbers; so those degrees of Zeal and
Piety, in Divinity, are imperfect virtues: there may be degrees of virtues,
Zeal, Piety, etc. but no degrees of perfection. But enough and too much of this
fine speculation.

The next about degrees of mercy, is bottomed upon the same airy speculation.
1. p. 205. n. 12
That there is any highest degree of mercy determined by the Law, to which a
man is bound; which being done, a man may exceed that. The Law is not
determinative, but according to circumstances, requires more or less; and then
binds, and so it is not above command. 2. That to give above a man's ability,
and the necessity of the poor, is no breach of charity, in the excess; when as
the Law limits charity to others, by that to our selves. 3. That the
Macedonians, did give above their ability, which the text says not, as was
noted above. I did not understand that precept, n. 13.
[Be merciful as your heavenly Father, etc.] in regard of equality, but
quality; and in regard of proportioning our mercy, according to the
circumstances, which command our mercy; as Deuteronomy. 15 8. [Thou shall open thine
hand wide unto him, and shall surely lend him sufficient for his need, in that
which he wants.] That Is one act of charity; another is, giving, ver. 10.
[Thou shall surely give him, etc.] The words are more full in the Original;
[Opening, thou shall open thy hand, and lending, thou shall lend him; (how
much?) enough for his want, that which is wanting to him; giving, thou shall
give unto him.] That is, freely, fully, according to thy ability, and his
necessity. But what if the Doctor do this, and then will be yet more merciful?
is that excess, and a fault? I had said, Circumstances considered, [I am bound
to supply his need; and to give less, were neither prudent, nor pious, what
ever it were, to give more.] This last, the Doctor takes hold on; [He dare not
pronunce it an offense, against either of those virtues, to go beyond this: but
breaks off abruptly, what ever it were to give more.] I did not then affirm it
to be an offense to give more; because it was in question: but if he had read
on the next Section, I brought here his own confession; [That it is possible to
offend against prudence in too prodigal a giving; and in too parsimonious,
against Piety.] That says as much, as I intended: that there may be an offense
in the excess in giving too much; as in too little, a defect: to which he says
nothing, but labors to evade it, as we shall see presently. But in his way, a
man can hardly offend, either in the defect or excess: Not in the defect, if he
give but a little; yet charity or mercy having a latitude, and degrees: he that
arrives at the lowest degree, or fraction of a degree, is not only merciful,
but perfect in mercy, as well as he that goes to an higher degree: Not in the
excess; for he had newly said, n. 12. [Supposing any sum, that in all those
circumstances, two men are bound to give, yet certainly one may lawfully exceed
that sum, and give more; even beyond his ability; and this not be sinful, but
more acceptable, etc.] Why then should the Doctor blame (if he do blame) some
devout Papists, who give away all, and go themselves a begging, as thinking it
a very meritorious work, more acceptable; more rewardable? yet this the Doctor
adds, [As I am bound to supply his present wants, so I may make provision also
against his future necessities, etc.] He says too little in the last; he may,
yea must make provision against his future necessities; for he wants for the
future, as well as at present; and an able man is bound to provide for that.
The Samaritane gave him a good pattern for this, who did not only power in
wine and oil, for his present need, but left money, and charge to the host, to
take care of him, with promise to repay it: [Go thou and do likewise,] is our
Saviors inference and command: and then, not above a command.

Sect. 42. And here he confesses it is possible to offend, etc.
THat virtue (and so charity) consists in a middle point, between two extremes,
he cannot deny; but still flies to his old refuge, not in an indivisible point,
there is a latitude of degrees, etc. To which enough has been said before. All
he excepts to, is, [That righteousness of God, p. 206. n. 14
does not use to punish those facts which have no Law observable by man to
forbid them, etc.] I did not say, they had no Law observable by man; but thus,
[If it swerve from that point, to either extreme, it is more or less a fault,
though not observed, perhaps not observable by men.] My meaning was, that a man
might easily swerve from the middle point, the strait line, wherein virtue
consists, and very hardly observe the declinations: which yet is punishable,
etc. especially when some vices have the very similitude of virtues. The Doctor
seems to think, that in natural men, the Law being blotted and blurred in
their hearts, the Lord may not in justice punish them, for what they cannot now
read; just like his other Divinity. I said moreover, [Prudence it self being a
virtue, in our created nature, then certainly commanded to do what was fittest,
and so it does still, that what is short of the Rule, by our imprudence, is a
fault, etc.] To which just nothing.

But enough to the next. I said two things in answer to the objection
propounded by him, p. 207. n. 15.
[ That it seemed to touch upon. 1. The mercenary. 2. The meritorious way of
Romanists, etc.] To the latter he says little, yet sure the Romanists do hold
merit of good works, though required by the Law or Gospel; how much more, of
works, and perfections of virtues above the Law and Gospel? wherein how the
Doctor agrees with them, let him consider: I can see no difference; but that
the Doctor denies the word, merit, which they openly profess. For the other, I
say it is too mercenary to look only, or first, at the reward, rather then at
virtue; and to look at a greater reward for a work, or virtue, above a command,
make it yet more mercenarie, and savours too much of merit. Did the Doctor
never hear it spoken, [ O derunt peccare boni virtutis amore? And that, a good
man should serve God for himself, though neither reward nor punishment, heaven
nor hell?] No, this is some new modern Divinity sure: As ancient as Clem.
Alexand. Stromat. 4. who asserts, Virum bonum and perfectum nihil boni facere,
propter metu^ poenae, vel spem mercedis, sive ab hominibus, sive ab ipso Deo?
And so Bernard, De diligendo Deo: Licet Deus sine praemio diligi non potest,
tamen non est ei, intuitu praemii, serviendum. Which cannot be absolutely
taken, n. 18.
but as I have expressed. As for merces ex pacto, or by way of promise, that is
made to works under command; but there is no pactum, or promise of reward, to
any works done, above the Law: or let us see the place. Where has Christ
promised a greater reward, to any such work above the Law? That Matt. 5.12. is
made to such as suffer for him, but upon command, To take up their cross. But
where has Christ promised a greater reward, to that perfect state of
Virginity, (as he calls it) then to honest and chaste Marriage? It is therefore
presumption for any man to expect it, upon that notion, and (as he said, s. 45.
of Superst.) [ groundless, and folly, fastening some promise upon Christ, which
he has not made in the Gospel; p. 208. n. 20.
] which is no better then lying. But he says, [He supposed prudence to look
either only, or first, on the greatest perfection of virtue, as the way, to
the most glorious reward.] I pray, what is that perfection of virtue, that he
first looks at? It is either under command, or not. If under it, it cannot look
for a greater reward, but by promise: If not under command (as he intends it,
of Virginity, or voluntary Martyrdom) as it has no promise, so it is no proper
virtue, or perfection, (as shall be showed anon) and so no way to the most
glorious reward hereafter. The Doctor is here even at the gates of Rome.

I denied not, that it was lawful to make use of hope and fear, and so to look
at rewards promised, or punishments threatened; p. 209. n. 23.
yet the Doctor first makes [my Divinity here suitable to what I gave a taste
of, in that of slavish fear;] (which whether it be not better then his, the
Reader may judge by what is said about it above, ad p. 26.) and then jeeres me
with the fable [of the woman's firebrand and basin of water; one to burn up
heaven, the other to quench the fire of hell: to take away hope and fear, etc.]
I believe I have said as much in vindication of hope of reward, in a Sermon
abroad, some years since, on 2 John ver. 8. as the Doctor has said, in his on
I suppose it should be 2 Cor. 7.1. yet not among the Errata's.
1 Cor. 7.1. which I never saw; or in his last Edition of his Pract. Cat. which
I have not yet read: as perhaps, nor he mine.

He now speaks out, p. 210. n. 26
and says, [The highest degree of virtue, is, in this whole debate, denied by
him, to be under command.] And he adds very angerly, n. 27.
[It were a contradiction and madness in him, when he speaks of perfection,
which is not under command, to mean that which is required in the
Commandments.] I have hitherto, I confess, thought it a contradiction, and
little less then a spiritual madness in the Proctors of Rome, to hold, the
greatest perfection here, or the highest degree of virtue, to be under none,
but above all command. Nor did I think the Doctor had been gone so far in this
disease, that when he spoke all along of Will Worship, uncommanded Worship, in
Rites, and Ceremonies, and Festivals, he had intended them to be the highest
virtues, or perfections, not under command, which now I perceive he does. We
must therefore unravel all again, and search further into this Romish mystery:
The Doctor somewhere above, charges me with a fallacy, plurium Interrogationum;
but if he be not in this debate, more guilty of it himself, let the Reader
judge. There are in it many questions, not yet determined; which must be
resolved, before this discourse will pass: as, first, [Whether there be any
virtues, not under command. 2. Whether there be any perfection above command.
3. Whether there be any perfection in this life. 4. Whether there be any
degrees in that perfection. 5. Whether Virginity, and voluntary Martyrdom, etc.
be to be accounted virtues. 6. Whether there be a greater reward promised to
such, then to works commanded, or under the Law?] I shall speak to then all.

Quest. 1. Whether there be any virtues, not under command.
This Question seems to me, to be all one with that of Papists, whether there
be any Counsels, or works of Counsels, above command. Which they thus define,
[A Counsel is a good work, not commanded by Christ, but commended.] So Bellarm.
Or, [an exhortation to some good work, obedience to which, is laudable; but the
transgression inculpable.] So Alphons. de Castr. which will better appear, by
the opposition of a precept; [Which is a Law or Rule, which binds all, to whom
it is given, so that he that disobeyes it, is in danger of eternal damnation.]
They differ (say they) many ways, especially in the end; [Which of a precept
is, either reward or punishment; of a Counsel is, a greater reward to him that
observes it, and no punishment to him that neglects it.] The Doctor (to avoid
the odium, or suspicion of compliance with Papists) avoids the name of
Councels, but yet, first, gives us another word, that is the genus of it,
advice, or exhortation, (...), opinion, (...), just as in the case of single
life, page 192. n. 3. And 2. Talks of virtues not under command, which is
Counsels with Papists. And 3. Makes the observers of them capable of a greater
reward, See suprd p. 93. n. 4. s. 4.
and no punishment to the neglecters of them. The Apostle gives his advice,
only in things indifferent, and so do Papists, and the Doctor; but herein they
differ, that the Apostle assigns no reward (much less a greater) to the
observers; or any loss of reward, to them that neglect them, much less,
punishment. If they would call Counsels, works in themselves not evil, left to
every man's free will, and no more ado, we (says Chamier) would not deny them
such: as Paul Counsels Timothy, to use a little wine; and the Corinthians, to
abstain from Marriage, in that time of distress, supposing the gift of
continency. But such Counsels as these, as they incur no punishment, Good in an
high degree. p. 93. n. 4.
if neglected; so if observed, they have no reward in heaven. But it is evident,
the Papists, and the Doctor with them, do not esteem them opera non mala; but
bona, good, yea better, then works commanded; and also make them virtues,
highest virtues, and most acceptable, and rewardable. Now that there are no
such Counsels, or Virtues above the command of God; I thus shall prove.

1. [ Every proper virtue acted, is an act of obedience; But virtues above
command, acted, are no acts of obedience; ergo,] The Minor is evident thus:
Every act of obedience, presupposes a command; for obedience and a command are
relata; therefore without a command, there can be no obedience. The Major is
proved thus; every virtue acted, presupposes a Rule, to which it holds
conformity; but conformity, to a Rule, is an act of obedience; and consequently
not above command.

2. [ There is no virtue, but has it is opposite vices: It Is the nature of
virtue, to stand in the midst, between two extremes: But Counsels or Virtues
above command, have no opposite vices, in the excess or defect.] Not an excess,
for they are the highest perfections: not a defect, because there is no
prohibition of neglect or omission of it; and so the neglect or transgression
of them, is no sin, and then no vice in the defect: See p. 93. n. 4.
So the say, neglect of a Counsel, is no sin.

3. [If there be any virtue above command, then there is some vice, under no
prohibition of the Law. The consequence is good, for there is parratio of vice
and virtue: But there is no vice or sin, below, and not under a prohibition of
the Law] This is clear, from the definition of sin; which is a transgression,
or inconformity to the Law. Yet I remember the Doctor above, quarreled with
them, that reduced all sins to the Law of the Decalogue: Sure every fault or
vice must be a transgression of the Law. p. 222. n. 3.
It may be upon design; that if there be any sins not reducible to the Law, he
might introduce also some virtues not reducible to the Law; that is, above
command: And I add, if sin or vice, be an (...), which properly signifies not
so much a transgression, as an inconformity to the Rule of the Law; then every
virtue must be a conformity to some Law; which may be added to strengthen the
first argument.

4. [That which is under no Law, precept or prohibition, is a thing left
indifferent:] Now to do a thing indifferent, is not capable of praise; or
neglect it, of dispraise, of reward or punishment. But the doing of a Counsel,
(say they) is very commendable, yea rewardable; as the highest virtue, or
perfection; therefore it is no thing indifferent, and then it must be under
command or prohibition, which is a contradiction to their assertion, that these
virtues, are under no command. More might be added, but these may suffice at
present.

Quest. 2. Whether there be any perfection above command.
This depends upon the former, and stands or falls with it; for the perfection
the Doctor means, is of virtues above command, or (in his own words)
uncommanded degrees of virtue. And here the Doctor must hold out a new coined
distinction, of perfection of virtues, under the Law, and perfection of virtues
above the Law: for so he does, in effect, when he says, [A man may come to the
perfection, which the Law requires, and yet come short, or go beyond it; to an
higher degree of perfection, in uncommanded degrees of virtues.] Nay more, [The
latitude of virtues under command is so large,] (like the distance, between the
Tropicks) that a man may tumble up and down, and arrive at the least degree of
perfection, required by the Law; be yet more perfect if he arrive at an higher
degree, not commanded by the Law; though (which is a contradiction) under the
command of the Law. This may be gathered from n. 10, 11. by his eight degrees
of perfection; and the fractions in every degree: Let the Reader turn back, and
consider if it be not so. But besides this, there are degrees of perfection,
(beyond the Tropicks) in uncommanded virtues, above the Law, I know not how
many: and those we now are to consider; One or two Arguments may suffice to
ruin this opinion. [1. If there be no virtues above command, then there is no
perfection above command.] The consequence is clear, because the Doctor by
perfection here, understands uncommanded virtues, or above command: The
Antecedent is proved by four arguments, to the former question; ergo. 2. [ If
the Law be the absolute and only Rule of perfection, then there can be no
perfection above command: But the first is true, Psalm. 19.7. Jam. 1.25.] The
consequence is evident, and needs no proof. The Doctor then must find out some
distinctions to evade this; either, first, That of Papists, [There is a
twofold perfection; first, perfect, according to the Law; or imperfect,
suitable to our frailty;] Which seems a contradiction in adjecto, an imperfect
perfection: yet so they speak. 2. That of his own; [Perfection is capable of a
double notion: either it may signify unsinning obedience; or any higher degree
of exercise of any particular virtue, chastity, mercy, etc.] Of which more,
when we come at it. p. 214. n. 37. Only saying now, that these distinctions
are almost the same, with that of our Divines, that perfection is either legal,
which is properly perfection; or Evangelical, improperly called so, by Divine
indulgence and acceptance. But this will stand him in no stead here; the
question being, [whether there be any perfection above command,] above the Law;
not whether there be any other perfection in the Gospel above the Law. And this
would have fitted the Doctor better, who holds, that Christ has perfected the
Law, and brought in an higher degree of perfection, then was required by the
Law: as we shall hear ere long: in this sense, he might say, there is a
perfection above the Law; that is, in the Gospel: but this is not to the
purpose; for even that perfection, is under the command of Christ; and so not
above command. 3. Add this one argument more, that which is under obligation
on men to do, is not above, but under some command (the reason and proof of
this is, because obligation to do any thing supposes a command.) But the most
Heroical virtues, or works, are under obligation to be done: This is proved
thus, those works which are done by some special gift and strength from God,
are, co nomine, under some obligation to be done; but those high works are done
by some special gift and strength from God (and cannot be done without it.) The
Minor is evident and needs no proof: the Major is proved by that maxim
universal of our Savior, [ To whomsoever much is given, of him much is
required, and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more,
Luke 12.48.] But to those heroical workers, much and more is given; therefore
much and more will be required, and so they are not above command. For this we
have the Doctors own concession: [Whatsoever degree of perfection, either by
doing or suffering, we can aspire to, it is still the work of Gods good grace
and strength in us, (for what have thou which thou have not received? and then
what place for glorying? p. 224. n. 3.] Let him consider how he will reconcile
himself to himself, who above allowed of boasting, ad p. 185. n. 5. 6.

Quest. 3. Whether any perfection at all, in this life.
This is also taken for granted by the Doctor, but never proved; but our
Divines, generally deny it, and oppose Papists, who affirm it. They say, [There
is no perfection in this life, but only in that to come, when God shall be all
in all.] It may be said, in this our peregrination, some are more perfect then
others, or rather more truly and properly, more or less imperfect, as there is
a progression in the love of God and our neighbor; under which heads is
contained, what ever perfection can be propounded to any man: to which all
Christians are to aspire, but cannot attain it here. And this the Doctor dare
not deny, or if he should, may easily be refuted: first, by Scripture, [Who
lives, and sins not: If we say we have no sin, we sin by lying.] And
secondly, by reason, from Scripture: If in many things we sin all, then we
reach not to the Rule of perfection, the Law. 3. The reason of it is, we know
but in part, and believe but in part, and so practice but in part. 4. Saint
Paul as high toward perfection as any man, denies it of himself, Phil. 3 12.
[Not as though I were already perfect.] If the Doctor shall say, as he will
anon; he means it not of unfinning perfection, of the Law, he must be told
again, he varies and deserts the question, which is of perfection above
command, which is, above the Law.

Quest. 4. Whether any degrees of perfection.
A man would think this were reasonably denied; there are degrees toward
perfection, but perfection it self knows no degrees: yea, degrees to
perfection, and progress in grace, to which the best are exhorted, argues
Imperfection; but here the Doctor will fly to his Latitude and degrees of
virtues: to which enough has been said already.

Quest. 5. Whether Virginity, voluntary Martyrdom, etc. be virtues or states
of perfection.
The Doctor speaking of uncommanded degrees of virtues, expresses it in four
particulars; p. 210. n. 27.
[Virginity, Austerities, abundant Laborings, and Martyrdom it self.] For the
first of those, the Doctor should have told us, what he intends by it; whether
he mean chastity, for so Papists do; as if there were no Chastity in Marriage;
or Caelibate and single life: If he take Virginity for Chastity, that is an
improper instance, for it is under command, and he is speaking of uncommanded
virtues. He must then understand it of single life, or an unmarried state;
which I gather, because he speaks of undertaking those courses be it of
Virginity, etc. and elsewhere says, [It is not commanded, but looked on as the
greatest degree of perfection] I wonder he did not except Martyrdom, for
reasons which he knows, but let it pass. Take it then, for single life; I would
make bold to ask, how is single life a virtue? and if it be, is not Marriage a
virtue too? they are but differing states of life: [ Gerson (says Doctor Hall)
has taught us not to call Virginity a virtue; though cousin germane to a
virtue.] But sure that must be, when Virginity, that is single life, is
attended with chastity of body and spirit: else it is far enough from virtue.
But by the same reason, Chaste Marriage may as well be called, a virtue, or of
kin to a virtue: both improperly enough. Does he then place the virtue, in the
undertaking, or vowing of it, as Papists do? That seems his meaning: But that
is no virtue, the virtue is rather in keeping of the vow, then making it. Then
again, how is his Virginity, or single life, perfection, or the greatest degree
of perfection? Why marriage should not be a state, and as great a state of
perfection, as single life, I see no reason; seeing God himself brought the
first couple, from Virginity to a Married state; and has pronounced it
honorable, which he said not of a single life. Let him take it in what sense
he please; I shall prove it is neither virtue, nor higher degree of perfection.

1. It is no virtue, that is proved by some of the arguments to the first
question; first, [Every virtue is under some command; but Virginity or single
life is under no command.] The Minor, is the Doctors main assertion: The Major
is proved in the first: A virtue must be under some Rule, that guides it is
conformity, etc. As then, every vice is under some prohibition, so, every
virtue must be under some precept. Secondly, if Virginity be a virtue, it has
its opposite vices, (as was said in general above.) But virginity, or single
life has no opposite vices: or what shall they be: what the excess? what the
defect? I hope he will not say, Marriage is either of the extremes. Thirdly,
things in themselves indifferent, are neither virtues nor vices; nor yet the
using or not using of them, virtuous, or sinful: But single life ( as also
marriage) are in themselves, things indifferent, neither commanded nor
prohibited, but left free, to the qualifications of the persons; ergo, they are
no virtues, nor vices. Fourthly, No virtue can ever be a vice or sinful: but
it may be sinful for some to undertake single life; that is, such as have not
the gift of continency. Lastly, that which may fall under a command, may not be
called as uncommanded virtue: But single life may fall to some, to be under a
command; of which in the next.

2. It is no high, or higher perfection, then Marriage. This is proved. 1.
[Because it is no virtue, as has been proved,] and of the perfection of
virtues, we are speaking. 2. Marriage is an honorable Ordinance of God,
Virginity is but an imposition of a man: Now it seems absurd, that a
voluntary institution of man, should be a more perfect state, then an Ordinance
of God? 3. The undertaking of a thing indifferent, is not commendable in it
self, as the neglect of it, is no dishonor, and so no high perfection to
undertake it. But Virginity, or single life, is a thing indifferent, only
commendable in the end of undertaking it, the greater glory, or service of God,
which may be and ought to be our ends in all use of indifferent things;
[Whether eat, or drink, etc.] 4. The undertaking a thing, that may be under
command, is no high perfection, but a duty: But single life may fall under a
command. For thus I argue; [A man either has the gift of continency from God,
(for it is a special gift) and then God calls him to a single life, to be freer
to his service; and so it will prove a duty: or he has not the gift, and then
it is his duty to marry,] (as was said long ago.) If he shall say, though a man
has the gift of continency, yet the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. leaves it free for him
to marry; and then if he voluntarily abstain, that is the virtue, and high
degree of perfection, which he speaks of: I answer, that is denied by some;
[That he that knows he has the gift, may marry, but it his duty not to marry
(as above,) Qui potest capere, capiat, is say they, a charge to the able.] And
the Doctor himself says in this very place, n. 27. [I hope it is not every man's
duty, but at the utmost his, who can receive it.] Where he inclines to think it
is a duty to him that can receive it: and then it is no perfection, much less a
great one. 5. To place virtue, or perfection, in any thing, or state of life,
which God has not placed in it, is superstitious and sinful: so the Doctor
Superst. Sect. 45. But God has not (though the Doctor has) placed virtue, a
high and more perfection, in single life, then in Marriage; ergo, The Doctor
and Papists with him, are sinfully superstitious. And now I come to the last
question.

Quest. 6. Whether there be a greater reward promised to such, then to
Marriage, or works commanded by the Law.
That a Counsel differs from a Precept in this, that the one observed brings a
reward, neglected, a punishment; (that is the latter) and the other, (the
Counsel) brings no punishment if neglected, and a greater reward if observed,
is the doctrine of Papists: the Doctor speaks the same language for the latter
part, for his uncommanded virtues; that they are more commendable, more
acceptable, more rewardable, then works done, that are under command. This he
has twenty times, I think, at least, asserted, and making Virginity the
greatest degree of perfection, far higher then honest and honorable Marriage,
must consequently say the same of it; [It is more commendable, acceptable,
rewardable, then Marriage.] Which words would beseem a Papist better then a
Protestants pen. But to the point, Whosoever has learned to remove corruption
(from marriage) shall find the crown of Matrimonial chastity, no less glorious
then that of single life. Dr. Hall. Decad. 5. ep. 9. f. See Contempl of Jepthe,
ad finem.
I once more desire to see the place of Scripture, where this promise is made;
and if it cannot be shown (as I am confident it cannot) then I would first
argue thus, ad hominem, and ad rem; [To fasten a promise upon Christ which he
has no where made, is a superstitious vanity, and more, a plain belying of
Christ and the Scripture: But to say, that Virginity or single life, is more
acceptable, and rewardable, then honest Marriage; is to fasten a promise on
Christ, which he has no where made; ergo,] The Major is the Doctors own
assertion: Of Superst. s. 45. The Minor is strong, till the place be produced.
2. To say, that a thing or work done, not under command, is more acceptable,
commendable, rewardable, then a thing or work done under command; is high
presumption, for men to take upon themselves, to distribute their own honor and
rewards: But this the Doctor does presumptuously do, together with Papists: the
Major is proved by this, that God has promised rewards to them that obey his
commands, and they may faithfully expect them; but he has made none such, to
things done, beside or above commands, and therefore it is high presumption to
expect them. 3. A thing in it self indifferent, if not done, it is no fault, if
done, it deserves no commendation; much less then may it expect more
acceptance, and greater reward, then a thing done upon command; but Virginity
is a thing indifferent; ergo. And for a close of this discourse, it must be
remembered, that the Doctors subject in this debate was Will Worship,
uncommanded worship, such as are Rites, and Ceremonies and Festivals: suitable
to those Free-will-offerings which were parts, or degrees of Worship; and he
fell off from that to things of common life; works of mercy, and states of
life, which are not parts of Worship, nor can be called Will Worship, because
they are no Worship. Now mark the issue of this discourse; either the Doctor
must make Virginity, voluntary Martyrdom, and the rest, Worship; (else they
cannot be Will Worship) or else he must say, that his Rites and Festivals,
appointed by men, etc. so observed, are more commendable, more acceptable, and
more rewardable, then the very institutions of Christ himself, being duly
observed by Christians; which if he will say, no Papists can say worse. And
this may suffice to be spoken to the first, that of Virginity.

The next is, the undertaking of Austerities, (n. 27. p. 210. n. 27.
) such I suppose, as Fastings, and Watchings, and the like, not sparing of the
body: (I hope he does not mean Eremitical, Monastical, Ridiculous Penances and
Pilgrimages, which are part of Romish Austerities) I know not well, what he
means by them; only I suppose he intends it of that (...), in the text so long
before us; making that as good, as his (...), and humility; parts of his
Will Worship, which Papists themselves condemn, Vide Estium in locum. The like
may be said of his abundant labourings; which must be meant by him, of one that
labors in Preaching and propagation of the Gospel, not only above other men,
but more then he is commanded (for he is speaking of uncommanded degrees of
virtues.) For this I shall only say; this man that is so abundant in labors,
either has gifts and abilities, (together with opportunities) of body and
mind, and that is a virtual command: (such talents, are given to be used) or he
has not; and then, as he is under no command, to labor more abundantly then
other men, that have them, so he cannot do it, if he would; the former is under
command, and so no Free-will-offering. Paul that labored more then all the
Apostles, says, [Not I, but the grace of God with me:] and if he had more
grace then they, he was thereby bound to labor more; [To whom more is given,
of him more required.] Lastly, for his Martyrdom; he means it of voluntary,
spontaneous Martyrdom, offering himself to it, when he has no call, but
liberty to avoid it: p. 211. n. 28.
this he calls the most perfect state, (having said before, that Virginity was
the highest perfection.) Yet something may fall out [that may binder, and make
it unlawful, to aspire to the most perfect state,] n. 30.
even the precept of God may interpose, viz. When some discharge of known duty,
or some greater good calls us another way.] Then obedience is better then the
richest sacrifice.] Before I go further, I will consider this, what reason is
there for this, that a small known duty, suppose to our selves or neighbor,
should hinder the offering of the richest sacrifice? when the glory of God
stands in competition with a duty to man; is it not fitter, that the latter
should give place to the former? nothing can bring more glory to God, then true
Martrydome: And what good can be greater, then the greatest glory of God, to
call us off another way? and make it unlawful to aspire to the most perfect
state? nothing can be said, but this, [That obedience is better then sacrifice,
the richest sacrifice,] as was said to Saul. But then I would proceed to say,
that when ever a man has not a sufficient call to suffer, he is under some
command to avoid it; such as that is, [When they persecute you in one city, fly
to another, etc.] which was practiced both by Christ and Paul, and others; who
held themselves bound to avoid it, while they had possibility to escape, and no
direct call of God to suffer; whence it will follow, that if he shall offer
himself to suffer, when he may lawfully avoid it, he sins against that command,
and against his own life, in the sixth Commandment. The issue then will be
this, if God call him to suffer (which he does, when he precludes his escape)
then it is a duty, and under command, and so no Free Will offering: If God
offer him a way to escape, he sins if he neglect it, against more commands then
one; and then he is no Martyr. I refer the Doctor to his own words, p. 109. Of
Will-worsh. but he takes no notice of them, I shall therefore here set them
before him? Pract. Gat. p. 98. [What is to be said of those, that rather then
offer to Idols, did kill themselves? It will be safest to affirm that this was
a fault in them.] And those others that offered themselves and their children,
to the fire and rage of persecutors, unless he will help them, by some instinct
or incitation of God, as he does Sampson, which was a virtual call and command,
cannot be excused, and scarcely deserve the name of Martyrs. Affected
Martyrdom, is no virtue, no perfection, and so, though it may find pardon
from God, can in that respect expect no great reward from God: Yet this is the
Martyrdom he pleads so much for; a When it may possibly, and without sin be
avoided, etc. See page 96. numb. 6.
Voluntary Martyrdom, without a command or call from God: which is the
Doctrine of Papists, and their practice is according to it; when Priests and
Jesuits desperately offer themselves to death, for sedition, rebellion, etc.
and call it persecution in the Magistrate, and themselves accounted Martyrs.
And this is that which I said, was the Doctrine of Papists, n. 30. p. 211.
which I believe all Orthodox Protestants will disclaim, a voluntary affected
Martyrdom.

But we have here a new distinction of perfection according to the Comandments;
[There is one, which is according to, that is, required by the Commandments:
Another, that is allowed by the Commandments of the Gospel very well, though
they require it not of every man, or lay it under precept, and such is that of
Martyrdom,] which he spoke of before. But I think I may safely say, [There is
nothing allowed by the Commandments of the Gospel, which is not also required
by the Law.] That of [requiring of it of every man,] is a very blind: For
neither Law nor Gospel require every duty of every man, or of the same man, at
all times. He knows affirmative precepts bind not ad semper; but when such
and such circumstances meet, to bring him under the obligation of those
commands: And he knows also, that there are particular commands, for men in
such a station, or relation. A command to a Minister binds not any of his
people: that to a master, binds not a servant, and so of the rest: That of
showing mercy binds not the poor, that wants ability to exercise it: Or if he
have ability, it binds not where there is no object of mercy. Now put it to
his case of Martyrdom; himself said, numb 27. [When either I am not
competently furnished with strength, from God, to go through with it, or have
not any reason to persuade my self that I shall be so furnished; then the
undertaking such heights may prove treacherous, etc.] He might have said also
when I have no call from God, but an offer rather to escape, then it may be
treacherous to undertake it: for then has he no reason to persuade himself, he
shall be furnished with strength to go through with it. [What is not of faith
is sin?] God has promised to give strength in trouble, which he calls us to,
but if we will voluntarily thrust our selves into sufferings, (though of
Martyrdom) we have no promise (witness Peter professing to die with his
Master, and rushing into danger) of strength or assistance; and we do not
trust, but tempt God. Now God does not call all men, or at all times, p. 212.
n. 31.
to Martyrdom: [This (says he) is the evincing of my assertion against
himself; for upon that I infer, therefore Martyrdom, which is the highest
degree of perfection, is not under any command.] Take out but those words
(which is the highest degree of perfection, which is proved false) and see what
a demonstration he has made: [God calls not all men to be Martyrs, therefore
Martyrdom is not under command.] Does it not as well follow, [God at sometimes,
calls some men to be Martyrs, therefore Martyrdom is then under command,] and
then it is a duty, and no such perfection, as he talks of. And on the other
side, if any man without a call, shall rush into a conceited Martyrdom, it is
much less an high perfection, but an imperfection rather, to say no worse. But
will it follow, Martyrdom is under no command, because it is not so to all? or
at all times? when it is not under command, it is no virtue or perfection; and
when it is a virtue or perfection, it is under some command.

But I had like to have forgot the Doctors Sarcasme, and the glory of his
Martyrdom. The Reformation old, n. 30.
or new, does not please the Dr. and therefore he flings fire and arrows at it,
and says, Am I not in sport? for thus he says, [I never thought that our
English Reformation, sealed by the blood of many Martyrs, had looked on
Martyrdom, as a conceited Popish perfection. And if this be the privilege of
the present deformation, to exclude Martyrdom out of the catalogue of virtues,
is the Martyrs and Saints out of the Kalendars; if the Diatribist, he now one
of that triumphant Church, etc.] (n. 30.) Good Sir, whom does this concern? The
old and new Reformation honor true Martyrs as much as Papists, or your self;
though they do not approve of your voluntary Martyrdom, which is proved both
Popish and conceited; and though they do not dedicate Holy Days to them, and
make them as holy as, if not holier, then the Lords day, our Christian Sabbath:
And if you be guilty of this piece of Popery, you may have free leave for me.
But see how fain the Doctor would be a Martyr, at least a Confessor; p. 212. n.
30
[He is well pleased to suffer this sword of the tongue, till God shall please
to call him to any higher trial.] It cannot be denied but the persecution of
the tongue, for righteousness sake, is a lesser Martyrdom, Matthew. 5.11. but
there has no sword of the tongue touched the Doctor, but the sword of the
Spirit; which has smitten those opinions, wherein he complies with Papists in
their errors: and if he will needs be counted a Martyr for this suffering, he
may go and join the Papists as Martyrs with him, for being confuted by our
Reformed Divines, in the same opinions and errors. And now let him glory in
this his voluntary Martyrdom.

For a number or two, the 31. and 32. there is nothing found that has not been
spoken to, about He takes for granted, I allow degrees of perfection; which I
twice there deny.
degrees of perfection (I said degrees to perfection) acknowledging none in, or
of perfection; to which enough before: only I observe on passage; [When the
precept binds to no more, then to be merciful in some degree, it is evident it
binds not to be merciful in the highest degree, etc.] This is that which I
noted above; if the precept bind to no more but to some degree of mercy, then
he that shows the least degree, fullfills that commandment, though he be able
to give more, and the party needs much more; and so this man is perfect in
mercy, though there be not the highest degree of mercy or perfection. This
doctrine I am persuaded will please covetous men exceedingly well; the
Commandment binds to no more, then to be merciful in some degree. But I leave
it, and proceed.

Sect. 46. But then thirdly, (says he) the perfection we are commanded by
Christ, is capable of degrees, etc.
IN answer to this, I cited a sentence of Saint Hierome, [Charity, which cannot
be increased is in no man, etc. and what is lesser then it ought to be, is
faulty, in vitio est, etc.] (Which afterward, he alters, into ex vitio est. n.
36.) This place whether it was Hieromes, or Augustines, or in both, It Is
August. ad Hierom. ep. 62. p. 213. n. 35.
(for I find it cited, severally, and it matters not which it was;) he
endeavors first to avoid, by this distinction; [It speaks of an universal
impartial observation of the whole Law; and then it it will in no wise be
appliable to our business, which is only of the degrees of this or that
particular virtue, which it is certain that man may have, who yet it guilty of
some sin, in other particulars.] Which is as if he should say, a man may be
perfect in this or that particular virtue, as charity, etc. though he sins in
other particulars; and so be not perfect in the universal observation of the
whole Law. And this is the answer of some Papists, that in some particular acts
of virtue, a man may be sinless: citing for it, very learnedly, that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.28. and 36. [If thou marry thou have not sinned, etc. he
sins not, let them Marry.] True (says Chamier and others) Marriage it self
is no sin; but there may be sins committed in Marrying, in them that Marry. And
they assert, (contrary to Papists and the Doctor) [That there is no act of
virtue, that we exercise, but some sin cleaves to it.] But if a man may be
perfectly without sin in one virtue, why not in another, and a third, and at
last in all; and then some perfectionist may say, he is perfect in all; and (as
some friend of the Doctors is reported to say;) keep himself from all sins? Yet
the Fathers Testimony will not so easily be shaken off. For they instance, in
charity which generally respects the whole Law; [Love is the fullfilling of the
Law;] that is, perfect love to God and man: if then there be no perfect love in
general, to be found in any man here, then there will be none found in the
particulars, of love to God and love to man; which quite destroys the Doctors
assertion, [That a man may be perfect in this or that particular virtue, and
yet be guilty of some sins, in other particulars.] He suspecting this might be
objected, flies to another; [acknowledging that be that fails of any part of
his duty, is therein faulty, p. 214. n. 36.
yet no man can infer hence, therefore every regular act and obedience which
comes short of the highest degree of perfection is a sin.] But this is a secret
calumny against his Adversaries; as if they were of opinion, [that every
regular act, short of perfection, were a sin.] Papists indeed charge
Protestants with this slander; but they have been refuted many times over. It
becomes not a Protestant to join with them, in this forged cavillation. The
Doctor has heard it often, [ Bonum ex integris causis, malum ex quolibet
defectu: But let him (if he please) charge this upon Saint Augustine, who says
expressly, Peccatum est, cum vel non est charitas, vel minor est quam debet. De
perfect. Instit. ad rat. 15. We say only, it is sinful, not a sin.

That will not do, n. 37.
he must try another: [perfection is capable of two notions; unsinning
obedience, or an higher degree of exercise of any particular virtue, chastity,
mercy, etc.] of the latter he intends it: But now he is gone from his former
glosses, of a Latitude in perfection, and degrees of that perfection, making
the lower (if not the lowest) degree of mercy, to be perfection: now,
perfection signifies an higher degree of exercise, of mercy, etc. Then his
lower degrees, at least, are imperfect, and no perfections; And if so, why are
not his higher degrees imperfections also, seeing they come short of the
highest, which indeed is only perfection.

But I shall desire to know, what is the highest, or higher degree of chastity,
(one of his instances) which is not under a law of Moses, or Christ in the
Gospel? suppose a man should attain to the chastity of the Law (which the
Doctor made imperfect) yet if he attained not to the highest degree of
chastity, which the Gospel requires, surely he will not be perfect in
chastity. And (supposing a man arrived there) can a man ascend to an higher
degree of it, then Christ requires in the Gospel? I desire to know, what that
is, or how it may be manifested? Suppose a man arrived so high, as not to lust
in his heart; no concupiscence stirring there, etc. this were, I think, the
highest attainable in this life, (if not in the other life also) yet this is
none of the Doctors perfection, which must be above all command, to make it
more acceptable, and more rewardable: for this highest degree of chastity, is
under command, and so no uncommanded virtue, or perfection. I know not what the
Doctor can instance in, to make an higher degree of exercise of this particular
virtue of chastity, that is not under command, unless he will produce,
Virginity or single life, and make that, (as he does) an higher virtue and
perfection, (he says, the highest) because it is not under command. And if so,
then as he knows, there is, or may be an impure Caelibate, or single life; so
let him take heed, that he charge not honorable Marriage, with some degree of
unchastity, or as a lesser chastity, as Papists do. In a word, perfect chastity
consists in puncto: and the least spot (as in pure white linen) renders it
defective, and imperfect. Whence it follows, that there are no degrees in the
perfection of chastity, though in chastity it self, there may be degrees:
provided that we yield, that what is short of that highest degree of
perfection, is so far sinful, or imperfect.

And now I am charged with another Imputation, that I would make the world at
least suspect, n. 39.
[that the Doctor holds and teaches perfection in this life, and calls it,
little justice.] I did not charge him with any such thing; but upon
supposition, left it doubtful, because though some passages incline that way,
yet I found him not directly asserting it; but seemingly the contrary numb. 36.
[Fullest perfection, which cannot be increased, is not to be found in any man
in this life.] But upon consideration of what he says now, I may be bold to
say, he does teach perfection in this life, 1. In saying only, the fullest
perfection is not to be found in this life; therefore some perfection is to be
found in this life. 2. He maintains degrees of perfection of virtues, both
under and above commands; and I should think, perfection above command, is a
full, if not fullest perfection. But if any shall say, the Doctor does not
assert unfinning perfection in this life; See n. 41.
I shall say, that he does too: for thirdly, though he deny universal unsining
perfection, yet he assirms, sinless perfection in the exercise of some
particular virtues, chastity, mercy, etc. Yea, not only the higher degrees,
but any degree of perfection, he makes to be sinless, and to fulfill Christ's
precept in the Gospel; as we shall hear presently; and is angry that any should
charge the lower degrees of perfection, to be sins, or sinful: for if he yield
them to be sinful, he denies their perfection, or else speaks contradictions,
p. 215. n. 39.
imperfect, sinful perfection. His cavil at my change of (if it be) into (if
there be) will not help him; He spoke of the perfection of mercy before, s. 46.
and then says, [If it be not that, but any perfection acquireable in this life,
etc.] which leaves a suspicion, and more, that he holds some perfection in this
life; adding, [it will be capable of degrees and growth also.] And this I
charged with contradiction: which he endeavors thus to avoid; n. 41.
[What contradiction can there be, in affirming that in this virtue of loving
enemies, mercy, etc. there are degrees, and consequently possibility of growth
also?] Truly none at all, but he was speaking of perfection it self; that this
perfection was capable of degrees and growth, n. 40.
which to me seems still a contradiction. There was little justice in this (his
own words) to change the question, I hope he will be sensible of it. But he
says, [ Love and mercy to enemies, etc. Some degree attainable in this life,
etc. n. 40.
is certainly attainable in this life; and no heresy to say, that by the grace
of Christ, one may obey such a precept of Christ's, when Paul professes
unlimitedly, he can do all things through him that strengthens him.] That the
virtues named, are attainable in this life, I never doubted, in some measure;
but to say, perfection in those virtues, is attainable in this life, is next to
an heresy, a Popish error at least; and so much the more suspicious in the
Doctor, because he makes use of the same text that they do, for their
perfection of Virginity, or Caelibate; yea, perfection to keep the whole law.
[Paul professes unlimitedly he can do all things, etc.] Let us hear an
ingenuous Papist interpreting this text, against his fellows and against the
Doctor, 1. Estius in loc.
[Paul having before, Phil. 4.11.12. spoken great things of himself, lest he
should seem too arrogant, (as they that plead perfection in this life, are) he
refers all to the power of Christ; I can do all things, but through Christ,
that strengthens me. 2. The sense is, all those things before mentioned, and
all other things, which are to be suffered by me, I am enabled and do perform,
by Christ.] Not all things unlimitedly as the Doctor phrases it; for then he
might fulfill the whole Law, and be unsinningly perfect in this life: which he
cap. 3.12. renounced. But says the Doctor, [by the grace of Christ, one may
obey such a precept of Christ's, as [Love your enemies, etc.] This is
equivocally spoken, it may mean, perfectly obey it, to the highest pitch of it,
(and that the Doctor dare not speak, what ever he thinks, for he speaks
doubtfully; [It is attainable by them which have sinned, and do still sin, in
other things, and perhaps in some circumstances of this.] Mark it, sin in other
things, (and not in this) or perhaps in this, etc. perhaps not in this, what
ever they do in other things:) or it may be meant, in some measure they do obey
that precept, love your enemies; and that no man denies. In a word, the
perfection meant by Christ, Matthew. 5. last, Be ye perfect, is not an unsinning
perfection in general, or in those particular virtues, of loving enemies, or
mercy; as if attainable in this life; but only an exhortation to Christians to
aspire to that high perfection, the copy whereof is in their heavenly Father,
which they can never attain unto, at least not in this life. As when the
Apostle says, [Be ye holy, as he is holy,] he does not mean that any can
perfectly keep that precept, but only that they should endeavor after
perfection of holiness, 2 Cor. 7.1.
[perfecting holiness in the fear of God.]

And now the Doctor complains of my sharp discipline, p. 216. n. 44
exercised upon a saying of his, [If the perfection be not acquireable in this
life, it is certainly not under Evangelical precept now, etc.] This I said was
strong and strange confidence; that was all the discipline upon it, except my
reasons to prove it; which was doctrine rather then discipline, in his sense. I
shall produce them in order, and consider what he says to them. [1. The Law it
self requires perfect obedience of Christians.] To this he says, two things,
[1. The Law, not the Mosaical, but that of the first covenant, required perfect
unsinning obedience; but this is not now in force with faithful penitent
Christians, who are not now under the Law, but under grace: the second
Covenant, which requires not innocence, but repentance sincere, not perfect
obedience.] But here are many misadventures. 1. The Catechist told us. [The
Judaical law, did represent to us the first covenant, by requiring perfect
obedience, and pronouncing a curse upon him, that continued not in all things,
etc.] Pract. Cat. p. 8. this is now contradicted. 2. This Law Mosaical, the
moral Law, is still in force, to unbelieving and impenitent Christians, they
are still under the Law, and under the curse, though it should not be in force
with faithful and penitent ones. 3. But even faithful Christians and penitent,
are under the Law, as it is a Rule of righteousness, though not as the first
covenant or else the Doctor must turn Antinomian. 4. Nor is it Orthodox to say,
the covenant of grace (or the Law in the hand of a Mediator) required not
innocence, but repentance, I^ requires both, though it is contented with
repentance, and the Law as the first Covenant, required sincere, as well as
perfect obedience; and the Gospel requires no less. The very Gospel requires
perfect obedience, (the Doctor says perfecter) as well as the Law, 2 Cor. 7.1.
but then the rigor of forfeiture in failing, is by another perfect
righteousness abated; there is mercy concerning this, which the Law knew not of.
No repentance would serve there. But he says, secondly, [ It cannot be said,
that the Law is the Rule of Evangelical righteousness, i. e. of that
righteousness, whereby believers are now said to be justified.] Here are more
mistakes; for Evangelical righteousness, is twofold, or has two parts, (...),
Rev. 19.8. 1. The righteousness of Justification, and so the Law is not the
Rule of Evangelical righteousness, but Faith, or the Law of Faith, as it is
called, Romans 3.27. 2. The righteousness of Sanctification, and so the Law, ever
was, and will be the Rule of Evangelical righteousness. And I cannot but
wonder, that the Doctor should deny the Law to be the Rule of Evangelical
righteousness, that is, by which believers are justified Not separating
faithful actions, or acts of faith, from faith, or the Condition of
justification, etc.
(at least in part) who makes the condition of the new Covenant, to be, not
only Faith, but Obedience, and all other graces, required by the Law; even to
Justification, Pract. Cat. p. 28. But that by the way. The second thing I
objected, was, [ That the Orthodox maintain the Law to be perfect, or the
eternal Rule of righteousness, against the Church of Rome.] This he shakes off,
n. 45.
by saying; [It is but a contention of words, that the Diatribist, (it seems)
and some others have espoused against I know not what adversaries.] Sure the
Doctor is not so little seen in our Controversies, as not to know, that this is
one point of difference between the Romanists and us, concerning the Law; that
they put imperfection upon it, and ours maintain it to be the most perfect Rule
of moral righteousness. The first difference that Bellarm. puts between the Law
and Gospel is this, Lex operum est doctrina inchoata, Evangelium perfecta. But
we need not go so far to find an adversary that has espoused this quarrel: It
is the learned D. H. Who was charged by me, [ for compliance with them of Rome,
in charging the Law with imperfection] This he made my third misadventure, and
he undertakes to maintain it, against the Orthodox, n. 46. p. 216.
saying, [ It Is evident in that place of the Catech. p. 94. that, first, The
words of Christ, that he came, (...), to fill up the vacuities of the Mosaical
Law. 2. The many express examples of his doing so, in Matthew. 5. his additions
to the Law; It was said of old, -- but I say unto you. 3. The uniform suffrage
of all antiquity was the ground, whereon he built his affirmation, etc.] Here,
I must confess, I had a strong temptation (to use the Doctors language) to
undertake the examination of that part of his Catech. p. 92. to p. 95. but that
I am loath to swell my discourse into a volume, to the burden of the Reader,
and trouble of the Printer; for it deserves (as many other passages in that
book do) some consideration: The Doctor herein palpably concurring, not only
with Papists in this exposition, (excepting but that they make some of those
additions, Counsels, not all precepts, as he does) and professing [he should
never disclaim the doctrine upon that account, etc.] but with Socinians also,
in making Christ a Lawgiver, and not an expositor of the Law; and prescribing
a new way of salvation, from that of the Law, not in regard of Justification by
faith in Christ; for so it may be called a new way, in opposition to that of
the Law; (but this they deny) but in regard of the observation of those new
precepts, or Laws, which Christ, they say, makes the way to salvation: And the
Doctor does little less; making obedience to the Gospel precepts, to be in part
the condition of Justification, as they do, as was touched above. I shall at
present, only speak something to the third particular grounds of his
Affirmation; [That the Law was imperfect, and had before some vacuities, which
now are Christ meant to heighten that which was imperfect. Qu. of Bapt. Inf. s.
4. Requiring what the Law had not required, and so the adding more to it. p.
217. n. 48.
filled up, by Christ.] The first was, [the words of Christ, that he came
(...), to fill up the vacuities of the Mosaical Law.] But this looks like a
fallacy, called petitio principii, which he asserts, but proves not, abusing
his Reader with ambiguity of words: For he confesses, Catech. p. 93. the word
(...), signifies two things, [Either to fulfill and perform; or to fill up and
perfect; and is rendered sometimes by one, sometime by another.] Why then does
he so poorly beg the latter sense, when it may as rationally be read, to
perform, or fulfill. As, 1. Take the Law, for the Moral Law only; Christ came
not to destroy that, neither by Doctrine, nor Practice, but to fulfill it;
otherwise he had not been a sinless, perfect Savior. 2. If the Ceremonial Law
was also intended, that also was fulfilled by Christ, both in his observation
of it strictly, as occasion was, and also, in bringing in the substance, of
those Ceremonies. 3. The That it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the
Prophets, frequently.
Prophets) are also mentioned: Now, whether it be meant of their Doctrinal
Interpretations of the Law, or their prophesies of Christ; both ways Christ
came to fulfill the words of the Prophets; but in no good sense, to perfect, or
fill up their vacuities: But again, take the word to signify to perfect or
fill up, that may have a double sense. 1. To Non veni solvere, sed ad implere]
his viz. additamentis, quae vel ad expositionem, pertinent antiquarum
sententiarum, vel ad conversationem in eis. Aquin. in loc. ex Aug. cont. Faust.
perfect or fill up, the full sense of the Law and Prophets, which the
Pharisees had evacuated and voided, by their jejune and empty glosses of the
Law, and Prophets; and thus all Orthodox Modern Divines, understand it. 2. Or
to fill up the vacuities, and to perfect the Imperfections of the Law and
Prophets, which is the gloss indeed of some Fathers, the Greek especially, who
follow one another for the most part; and of most Papists. And why the Doctor
should follow them, (having so many other senses Orthodox) and refuse the
senses of the Modern Protestants, I know not, but that he loves to run cross to
our own, and chooses often to follow the Ancients, (as the then Pharisees did
their Ancestors) into error, rather then to speak truth with ours. The second
ground, was [ the many express examples of his so doing in that fifth of Matthew.
his additions to the Law, in so many particulars, introduced with; It was said
of old -- But I say unto you.] But this ground is as unsound and fallacious as
the former; taking it for granted, that those words [ you have heard, it was
said by (or to) them of old time; signify, you have been taught, and that out
of the word of God, or books of Moses,] which is the very question now in hand:
whether it do not rather signify Matt. 5.20. Imports he spoke of the corrupt
glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees: except, etc. compared with the former,
and following verse.
you have heard, it was said by them of old time, the Pharisees and Scribes
your Rabbis; or said by them, to your Ancestors; (for the Pharisees were of
some long standing, before our Saviors time.) They said thus, and thus,
corrupting the sense of the Law, but I say unto you, this is the true sense of
those Laws, etc. as the instances do make it appear. Concerning the third,
[Thou shall not forswear thy self,] it is vindicated above, ad p. 43. I shall
clear the other two from his gloss, not to be directly meant of the word of
God, or books of Moses, but as perverted by the glosses of the Pharisees. The
first is evident thus, it carries their gloss with it: [Thou shall not kill,
and whosoever kills, shall be in danger of the judgment.] Now the first
part, is the Law of God, by Moses, there is no question of that; but of the
sense of it, which they made only to be actual murder, (as our Saviors
Interpretation of it, does import) and the punishment only to be temporal
death, by the Judges. Whereas our Savior makes lesser degrees of murder,
guilty of eternal death. But it is worth the while to consider, what the Doctor
understands, by killing, in this Law. [1. Pract. cat. p. 99. and 101.
The principal thing is the shedding of man's blood. 2. By way of reduction,
other things which are preparatory to that; as 1. Mutilating. 2. Wounding. 3.
Entering and accepting of Duels. 4. Oppression of the poor. 5. The beginnings of
this sin in the heart, malice, hatred, cursing, etc. all these reducible to
this Commandment, as it was given in the Law.] But if the Law prohibited these,
sure the Pharisees did not think, nor teach it so: And then Christ was an
Expositor and not a Law giver: and if malice and hatred were reducible hither,
as preparatories to murder; why not rash anger, and calling Racha, or fool,
which are also degrees and preparatories to the main sin. Yea, these were
expressly forbidden or condemned by Moses and the Prophets, as were easy to
instance; and ergo, Christ does not give new precepts, but expounds the old
Law, and vindicates it from their false glosses. The like may be said of the
seventh Commandment which they glossed only of the outward act of adultery:
when as our Savior shows, Prove. 6.25. and 23.33.
the Law extended to the lustings of the heart; which are clearly forbidden in
the Old Testament. The third ground of his affirmation was, the concurrence of
some Greek Fathers, in this gloss: who, in this, (as in other things not a few)
were confessedly mistaken, and in other things rejected by the Doctor himself:
though herein embraced by him, in opposition to Calvin; as some Papists have
acknowledged some interpretations of Scripture to be more proper and genuine,
but yet reject them, because they hate Calvin, who was of that opinion. The
arguments whereupon the Fathers built their Interpretation, are of no strength;
1. [Because Christ under the Gospel, gives either higher or plainer promises,
then he did before; eternal life, as those of a temporal Canaan.] As for
plainer, it may be granted, but that makes no difference in the Law, the Jews
being under clouds and shadows, Christians in the Sunshine. And for higher,
there could be none higher then eternal life, and glory; and that was promised
in the Law and Prophets, only not so clearly, and frequently, as in the
Gospel. 2. [Because he gives more grace, to perform them, then before he had
done.] To this, I would say, 1. This makes no difference, but rather seems to
imply, that the precepts were the very same; there was only less grace
dispensed to perform them. 2. If he do give more grace, yet if he lay higher
precepts, of greater perfection, then the Law required; a less strength to a
lesser burden, might do as well, as a greater, to a greater; yea, no doubt,
some of the Saints under the old dispensation, did perform them as exactly, as
any under the new: then, either grace was the same to both, or the Law equally
perfect to either. They did, I say, perform those very duties, which he says,
are required by Christ's new precepts, as exactly, as any under the Gospel
dispensation. But the Doctor will perhaps evade or avoid this, by saying (as he
does,) [These were above that which the Law required, and so were works of
Counsels, or supererogation, more acceptable, and more rewardable: not
necessary, before Christ advanced, and perfected the Law.] But though it
concerned the Doctor rather to confirm his Affirmation (which he has not done,
in his Catech. or here) then me to prove a Negative; yet I shall propound an
argument or two, for my opinion; [That Christ did not give new Laws, or perfect
the old, as being imperfect before, but only reduced the Law, corrupted by the
Pharisees, to it is true and genuine sense.] Or which will come all to one;
[That the Law is in it self perfect, without imperfection, and consequently
needed no Additions of Perfection.]

1. The Old Testament every where pronounces the Law to be perfect, Psalm 19.7.
and Psalm 119.96.

2. The sum of the Law, and the highest degree of perfection, is the same with
that given by Christ in the Gospel, [Thou shall love the Lord, with all thy
heart, etc. and thy neighbor as thy self Ver. 33. This is more then all whole
burnt-offerings and sacrifices, all Freewill-offerings.
: there is none other Commandment greater then these,] Mark 12.31. mark that;
there is none greater then these. If there had, here was a fit time for Christ
to have declared it: Then it follows, that Christ added no new Commandments to
the old, and so nor did, nor could perfect the Law.

3. The Law of Moses commanded perfect obedience; ergo, it self was perfect;
the antecedent is thus proved, if the Law required not perfect obedience, then
there was some degree of disobedience, which was no sin, for where no Law, no
transgression; but no degree of disobedience, but it is a sin. 2. The Law set
God for the pattern of holiness, Levit. 11.44. So (and no more) does the
Gospel. Matthew. 5. last. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. This was cited by me, but waved by the
Doctor.

4. If Christ in that Sermon, require nothing, which was not required by Gloss.
Nisi abundaverit, referendum est ad intellectum Pharisaeorum, non ad
continentiam veteris Testamenti, Aug. contr. Faust poenem enim omnia quae
monuit, vel praecepit Dominus inveniuntur and in illis veteribus libris. Aquin.
in locum.
Moses and the Prophets, but the very same, then he came not to perfect the
Law, but confirm it, by a true exposition of it. The consequence is clear; the
Antecedent is proved, by the particulars in every Commandment; which they call
additions, but are but explanations of the true extent of the Law: As rash
anger, reproachful terms of Racha, fool, etc. spoken by way of contmpt and
revenge, to vex and fret a brother, as the (...), Chrysostom. in loc. If the Law cut
off the branch, much more the root.
root or degrees to murder, tending to death, etc. are forbidden in the Old
Testament, and blamed as ^s. So the lustings of the eyes, or heart, are often
forbidden; to say nothing to the third Commandment: So love of enemies, doing
good to them, etc. are required by Moses and the Prophets, and practiced by
holy men in those times, as a degree to that perfection which the Law called
for: So those virtues, of Spiritual Poverty, Mourning, Meekness, and the rest,
are commanded and commended in the Old Testament, as conformities to the Law;
ergo, no new Laws, nor higher perfections, in the Gospel. These and many other
arguments are used by our Divines, against Papists, and Socinians, in this
point: I leave them to the Doctors consideration, and proceed to what now
follows.

And that is another heterodox assertion, p 2^7. n. 47
[Acquireable perfection may be (and some degrees of it, is) under precept, but
unacquireable perfection is not Christ's easy yoke, is not now made up to us of
impossible precepts.] Now he knows, 1. That our Divines maintain, there is no
perfection acquireable in this life; against Papists, etc. 2. That I have said
and proved, there are no degrees in, but toward perfection. 3. That it is also
proved, the highest perfection is under precept, and none above it. 4. Then it
follows that unacquireable perfection, is under precept. 5. Christ's yoke, is
not therefore said to be easy, because it is not made up of impossible
precepts, or made up of possible precepts, for so it is not absolutely true,
even Christ's precepts some of them, are in themselves impossible with respect
to our present weakness. But it is said to be easy, because what is not, or
cannot be done, is pardoned; and what is done, in sincerity, is kindly
accepted. Now that unacquireable perfection is under precept, and that Christ's
yoke is made up of impossible precepts, (to us) I prove by this one argument;
[To love the Lord our God, with all our heart, soul, mind, strength, is a
precept of Christ's, as well as of Moses; but this perfection is to us
impossible in this life, and unacquireable, say all Orthodox Divines; ergo.]
Yet here the Doctor goes on, to assert; [ That Universal charity was granted
not acquireable in this life. n. 34, 35. But Universal purity, is the same with
that, and confessed under precept here. n. 48. p. 217
universal purity, is now more severely required of all Christians, in an
higher degree then it had been under the Jewish economy.] Though I am not of
his mind in this, the same universal purity being always required by the Law,
though Christians have more grace and stronger motives, to endeavor it; yet I
shall make some use of it, and tell him, that there is no higher perfection to
be found, then an universal purity, which is only to be had in heaven: and
this being (as he says) under evangelical precept, I cannot but wonder where
he will find, [higher degrees of those and other Christian virtues,] which are
above universal purity, which is under precept; why thus, he says, [Christ came
to perfect the Law; so he might do, and yet leave some degrees of mercy, etc.
free, and not under precept.] See but the progress of this discourse; the Law
required perfect obedience, but yet left some degrees free: The Gospel that
requires higher perfection then the Law, even the highest acquireable,
universal purity. Is not this enough? No, then come the Papists, and the
learned Doctor, and tell us of many degrees of perfection, above all Law and
Gospel commands; Oh, proud nature, whither will thou clime! these men think it
below them, to aspire to do their duty only, to arrive at commanded
perfection, Because they would not have their piety restrained within those
narrower bounds, etc. Fest. sect. 28.
unless they may clime above the very Angels, Seraphims, and Cherubims, (who
content themselves, with commanded obedience and perfection) and do much more
then is commanded; and make God himself to be in their debt, for greater
acceptance, and reward.

But if Christ has perfected the the Law, p. 218. n. 49 See p. 177. n. 13.
and given new precepts of higher perfection, how can it be said, that Christ's
is an The liberty consists, in taking off, not imposing weights.
easier yoke, then that of the Law, and not rather heavier? Those three ways
noted by him will not serve the turn; first, [ The taking off the burden of
Ceremonies. 2. The taking away the damning power of the least sin. 3. In giving
greater strength.] for the second, the taking of the damning power of the least
sin, was common to the believing Jews, with Christians; and to unbelieving
Christians, the least fin is now as damning, as then; and so the yoke is as
heavy as it was to them. For the first, the taking of the burden of
Ceremonies, is no great ease; for if Christ has set the moral Law to an higher
pitch of perfection, and [Universal purity is more severely required of all
Christians in an higher degree then under the Jewish economy,] as the Doctor
newly asserted, n. 47. And if [ Christ has put some things under precept which
were not under precept by Moses Law.] I shall add his own words, p. 218. n. 49
[In this one respect, there lies more weight on a Christian, then did formerly
on a Jew.] Instead of lessening, Christ has made the burden heavier; one
degree of moral perfection, is an harder burden, then all the ceremonial Laws:
Those they might with some care and diligence exactly perform, being but
external Rites; but no care or diligence of a man without grace, can rise to
one the least degree of moral perfection. And to natural men, the Law is every
whit as exact, and yet impossible to observe, as before; and Christ has not
eased their burden at all, but they lie under the curse of damnation, for
every the least breach of the Law. But what an increase of weight will Christ's
new moral precepts of higher perfection, lay upon them? For instance, if the
sixth Commandment forbad only the outward act of murder, and the seventh
only actual adultery, as the Pharisees at least (if not the Doctor) supposed,
and Christ have added new precepts, to make rash anger, and reproachful
language to be murder, and the very lustings of the heart to be adultery, a
natural man has a much heavier burden then a Jew: for it is not impossible for
him to abstain from the acts of those sins, and so to fulfill the letter of
those Commandments: but very difficult, if not impossible, without great grace,
to prevent anger and lustings of the heart. But he says, [That weight is
abundantly recompensed by other respects.] That must be, one way, because he
gives more strength, by giving more grace. But 1. that is, not given to
unbelieving Christians, who yet lie under these new weights. 2. Nor is this to
make the yoke lighter, but heavier, only giving more strength to bear it: but
a lesser strength to a lesser burden, might do as well, as was said above. 2.
He speaks indeed of another way of easing the burden, [ The gainfulness of the
new yoke, will make it light, though it be a yoke, Pract. Cat. p. 95.] But when
the burden is increased, to the proportion of the gain, there will be little
ease in that; and if love of gain only make it easy, it seems more mercenary,
then ingenuous. This is but one of the Doctors new Philosophical Speculations.

Sect. 47. Whence it is apparent, etc.
ANd now we are come to a new debate, p. 219. n. 52
[Whether every man be bound to do that which is best.] The falseness of the
affirmative, the Doctor undertakes to discover. 1. [By the words of the
Apostle, he that Marries does well, but he that Marries not, does better.] I
said, well and better there refer to worldly good; in those persecuting times:
So the Apostle, ver. 26. [For the present distress.] This he says, [ will be
soon shaken assunder. 1. By considering that, well belongs to moral goodness,
ver. 28. If thou Marry thou sinnest not; doing well, is not sinning, and that is
a moral good.] But I pray Sir, is not, doing well, more then not sinning, if
taken of moral good? and if taken of worldly good, not sinning, is not doing
well. The truth is, the Doctor here equivocates with us; these texts have no
respect to one another in regard of good and evil moral: [It's good, for the
present distress, I say, it is good for a man so to be,] to be a Virgin or
unmarryed: This must necessarily be understood of a worldly good, in respect of
the present distress, to prevent trouble, etc. But if Good be meant of moral
good here, then it must needs follow, that it is morally evil to Marry; it is
evil for a man so to be, that is, to Marry; moral good, and moral evil are
opposed; not moral good, and worldly evil. The 28. ver. is an answer to a
secret objection (which the Doctor makes by his sense;) If it be good not to
Marry, morally good, then it is morally evil to Marry. No says the Apostle, if
thou Marryest, thou sinnest not: but take this with it, such shall have trouble
in the flesh; that is, worldly evil, at this time attends upon Marriage;
therefore it is worldly good, not to Marry, though it be no sin to Marry. Hence
the 38. ver. alleged by the Doctor, must be understood of the same kind of
good; both the well, and the better: He that Marries does well, there is no sin,
but only trouble in it; but he that Marries not, does better, (supposing the
gift of continency, else he does worse not to Marry) because of the present
distress; there is no sinning in either; but in worldly respects, he does
better, that Marries not. But the Doctor has a second answer: n. 53. p. 219
[Marrying is quite contrary to worldly good, such shall have trouble in the
flesh.] This sure is a great mistake, how is Marriage contrary to worldly good?
not in a worldly respect, as Marriage is a civil thing; if Marriage be good, as
it is, and necessary for some; worldly troubles are not contrary to Marriage,
but many times coincident. Not in a moral respect, is Marriage quite contrary
to worldly good: for moral good and worldly good or evil are not contrary: But
if worldly good, as Marriage is, be opposed to worldly evil; they are not yet
contrary, but diverse things in the same subject: Marriage good, and troubles
ill. A third answer is from ver. 32. [The advantages of Marriage; the unmarryed
cares for the things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord, etc. which are
(not barely worldly) spiritual advantages, and a greater moral or spiritual
good, then the caring for the things of the world to please a yoke fellow:]
But, 1. Every thing that may be an advantage to a moral and spiritual good, is
not presently to be accounted it self, a moral or spiritual good: Riches are a
great advantage, to do more good, but yet are not moral goods. A Church is an
advantage to the public service of God, and in some sense, better then a field
or wood, yet not a moral good; and many such like. And it may be said, he that
has riches, is better then he that wants them, not morally, but in respect of
a worldly advantage to do more good; and they that may serve God in an house or
field do well, but they that have a Church do better; that is, have better
accommodations to serve God; which yet are neither moral nor spiritual goods:
say the like of Marriage, and single life. But this (he says) Paul spoke of him
that has the gift, [That if he Marry he does well, if not, better;] that is,
say I, neither ways he sins; but in regard of freedom from the troubles of the
times, and more liberty to serve God, he that Marries not, does better; which
if he will understand of morally better, he having the gift and yet Marrying, 1
Cor. 12. last.
should do ill, that is, sin; for he is bound to do what is best, if in his
power; as here it is supposed to be. Mark once more the Doctors words, [Is not
the holiness of body and spirit, and the caring for the things of the Lord, a
greater moral, or rather spiritual good, then the bare caring for the things of
the world, to please a yoke fellow?]. 1. This supposes a man that is Married
cannot be holy in body and spirit, and care for the things of the Lord, as the
unmarryed may: which is a dishonor cast upon Gods ordinance, of honorable
Marriage. 2. That a Married man does barely care for the world, to please his
wife. 3. That it is not as morally good for a married man, to care for his
family, and to please his wife, as for the unmarried, to care to please God:
when both please God, and there need no comparison. 4. If Virginity, or single
life, were morally better, then Marriage, the Apostle neglected the chiefest
argument to persuade it, the greater reward in heaven, as a greater good work;
for so the Doctor determines; this Free Will offering, is more commendable,
acceptable, rewardable. But not one word of this, in all the Scriptures: What
ever some Ancients, and many Papists presume to dictate, of an higher glory for
Virginity, then for Marriage; and use this, if not as the only, yet as the
chiefest persuasive. Hear what some of the Ancients, who extolled Virginity
enough, if not too much, In laudem Basilii orat. 22.
to the disparagement of Marriage, say: 1. Greg. Nazianz. commending the
children of Bazil the elder, says, [Some of them so used their Marriage, that
it was no hinderance to them, that they might not aspire to an equal glory of
virtue, with the Virgins.] That is, were as holy in body and spirit, and cared
for the things of the Lord, as much as they. Next, Saint Chrysostom, with respect
to the reward, Ad Hebr. c. 4. orat. 7.
has this saying, [Vse Marriage with meet moderation, and thou shall be the
first in the kingdom.] More might be added, but these shall suffice; much being
spoken to this before.

His second argument, p. 220. n. 54.
against my position, was this, [The best being superlative supposes the
positive to be good; but if bound to the best, that which were only good, were
evil:] This consequence I proved to be naught, by an instance; and now I add,
it follows only, that that which is not the best, is less good; good, I say by
indulgence, but so far sinful, as they are short of perfection. [All our
righteousness, n. 55.
is as filthy rags,] said the Prophet, and Greg. after him; [All humane
justice, if it be strictly judged is injustice.] He cries out of my inconstancy;
I said before, good works were not evil, and now to be injustice: And are not
both these true? They are not evil, that is sins, as wrought by faith: but they
are sinful and injustice, if strictly judged by the Law: said not the Prophet
both these in one sentence, and Gregory the same? What prevarication is this in
him? Does he not say the same himself in his second answer? [When he said, such
a thing is good, and another best; he never meant, that either of them is not
convincible by God, to have some mixture of evil.] What said I other then this?
But he elsewhere says more; that not only the best, but the lower degrees of
good, may be sinless: [That the evil which is or may be, (and so may not be)
adherent to it in some other respects, being pardoned by God in Christ, the
lower degree being good, an act of obedience to Christ's command, that which is
higher, and so better then that, may yet be somewhat not commanded, and so a
Nedabah in a Christian.] Where he supposes, first, That it may be sinless in it
self, though evil may adhere to it in other respects: this is expressly affirmed
by him, p. 223. n. 5. of which anon. 2. He also takes for granted, that the
higher degrees of good, are under no command; which is disproved above. 3. If
that Nedabah, or work of higher perfection, be a part of that man's
righteousness, (it is abundant righteousness with the Pharisees and the Doctor)
sure, the Prophets, Gregory's, and his own concession, will in Gods strict
judgment, affirm it to be unrighteousness. But that is little less then a
contradiction, that an act of highest righteousness, not under any Law, should
be judged unrighteousness by a righteous God, without a Law, to judge it by.
Let him consider it.

Sect. 48. The next objection raised by him, etc.
THat we may see how good an expositor of the Law of God, the Doctor is, his
answer to the objection, from the first and great Commandment, [Thou shall
love the Lord thy God, p. 221. n. 1.
with all thy heart, etc.] is very considerable. He affirms, That the phrase
denotes only, two things, 1. Sincerity of his love to God, as opposed to
partial, divided love. 2. The loving him above all other things, not admitting
any other thing into competition with him, or in such a degree of love.] First
I would say, that these two are almost both one; for what is partial, divided
love, but admitting of some other thing into competition with him; and such
love, is insincere. He that loves God sincerely, loves nothing in competition
with him. 2. To love God above all other things, is the same with, to love
nothing in such a degree of love. But all this may be done, and yet a man may
be very short of the perfection of that Commandment; To love God, with all his
heart, and the rest. And that we may know whence the Doctor learned this
Divinity; we find it in Bellarm, and other Papists, one while distinguishing
thus, [God is two ways loved with all the heart. 1. Above all other things,
sincerely and perfectly, that nothing be set above or equalled with the love of
God: and thus, the love of God is under command to us. 2. That no vicious
cogitation, may creep in, but that the whole man be taken up with the love of
God; and this (say they) is not commanded us in this life.] Just the same with
the Doctor, (...)
who agrees fully with them in the first part of the distinction, and saying
those only are denoted, must also agree with them in the latter. Another while
they thus distinguish, [The Commandment may thus be understood, that God alone
is to be loved, and nothing beside him; or that nothing be loved against God,
above God, or equally with God, etc.] The first part is not the scope or sense
of the Commandment, for he presently adds, Thou shall love thy neighbor, etc.
The second part, is the same with the first, in the other distinction. And it
is remarkable that these distinctions are used by Papists, in the case of
venial sins, and perfect fulfilling the Law in this life: The former of these,
I observe not the Doctor to assert, but the latter he does frequently; that a
man may fulfill the Law to perfection, and that in the lower degrees, and
attain to perfection above all command. But in this exposition of this Great
Commandment, the Doctor with Papists leaves many, Vide Cham. t. 3 l. 11. c. 14.
s 2. etc. and l. 6. c. 12. s. 33.
if not all the Ancients who generally hold, this Law not possible to be
fulfilled in this life, and to require the highest degree of the love of God,
to the utmost perfection. Yet who so great Admirers of the Ancients as they?
Let us return to the Doctors answer, that those things were required by that
Law, I granted; but more then this, is also required, 1. Perfect love, with all
the faculties and powers of the soul, as the Ancients gloss it: heart, mind,
soul, strength. But where is the man that ever did, or can do this? A man may
love God sincerely, and above all other things, (the Doctors gloss) and yet be
far short of fulfilling this Commandment: Saint Austin gives the reason [So
long as the flesh lusts against the spirit, God is less loved, then he ought.]
The Law, I said, [Required perfect love: p. 221. n. 2.
such as was in Adam in innocence.] 1 John 4.18. He answers, 1. [ That perfect
love in Adam, p. 221. n. 2.
had a latitude,] and consequently several degrees of that perfect love.] But
this is proved false in both, that Adams love had a latitude, to love God with
a less or lower degree, then withal his heart, soul, etc. and that there are
degrees of perfect love. 2. [That perfect love in Saint John, is not all one
with that which Adam had in innocence; for that I confess (he says) not to be
acquireable in this life, whereas the love in Saint John, that casts out fear,
is in every Confessor and Martyr.] It Is no disparagement to his Confessors and
Martyrs, to say they had not perfect love of God; many of them were fearful a
long time, even to denial of Christ at first; and the best of them felt many
reluctations of the flesh against the spirit; but perfect love casts out all
fear. They loved God in sincerity, and above all other things, even their own
lives; yet were not perfect in love, though God was pleased to pardon their
defects, and accept of their love, etc. [There is no fear in love,] that is, in
perfect love, so it follows, [perfect love casts out fear, and he that
fears is not made perfect in love.] But when shall love be made perfect?
Saint John answers, ver. 17. [ Herein, or in this, our love is perfected, that
we may have boldness at the day of Judgment.] Then love will be perfect, and
not till then; how proves he this? [There is no fear in love, he that fears
is not made perfect in love.] But the best Saint, is here troubled with fear;
ergo. And I again wonder, that the Doctor should hold perfection of love in
this life, acquireable, without all fear, when he holds, the best and highest
degree of love and grace in his life, may fail and be utterly lost: Must not he
that believes this, be full of fear sometimes, even tormenting fear? How can he
love God with all his heart, mind, soul, strength, that fears (by reason of
his own frailty, and mutability of his will) that fears God may be his enemy
hereafter? Nec hominem amicum possit quisquam amare, cui noverit se aliquando
fore inimicum. August. [That one Martyr may be more zealous, and express more
intense and fervant love, then another.] Proves, what I say, that neither of
them are perfect in love; the Commandment requiring perfect love in all.
Sincere love to be capable of degrees, was never denied by me, but affirmed;
yet not perfect love: perfection is not capable of degrees; but includes all
degrees, and what is short of that, is faulty, in vitio, as Hierome said. p.
222. n. 3.
[Sure (says he) if both obey the precept, then they do not offend against it:
if not offend, then is not this faulty.] Does this beseem the Doctors learning,
a learned Catechist? We know but in part, and therefore believe but in part,
and obey but in part: So far as we believe, and obey, so far we obey the
precept; but as we believe but in part, and obey but in part, so far we offend
against it, and so far in vitio, and faulty. Did not himself say, p. 220. n.
54. [Good works, are not evil, but good, though not prefect from all possible
mixture of sin.] If in our best works there be a mixture of sin, do they not,
as far as they are good, obey the precept; and as there is a mixture of sin,
offend against it, and so are faulty? and sure, [every fault or vice must be a
transgression of the Law,] as he says here. The evasion is, p. 222. n. 5.
[That it is not the sinless perfection we speak of, when we say, it consists
in a latitude, and has degrees: but sincerity of this or that virtue, in this
or that performance, etc.] But, first, what ever he does, he knows, I spoke of
sinless perfection, even in perfect love; [Otherwise it were not strictly
answerable to the Law, and so far faulty;] they are my words there. And I know
not how to say, there is, a sinful perfection, without a contradiction. 2. What
does he less here, then speak of a sinless perfection, [In this or that virtue,
in this or that performance; and as this, though it excludes not all mixture of
sin in the man, in whom it is, yet may exclude it, in this or that act; for it
is certain, that I may in an act of mercy give as much as any Law obliges me
to give, and so not sin, in giving too little.] Ad p. 214. n. 39.
This was spoken to before, but here is more plainly expressed, and I shall
add a little to it. 1. If it may exclude a mixture of sin, in this or that
act, by the grace of God in Christ, (for so he cautions it) why may it not
exclude (by the same grace) a mixture of sin, in another act of virtue; and so
in a third, and in all, and so exclude it altogether in the man; and then there
is an universal sinless perfection in this life, which he has often denied. 2.
But what needs any such grace of God, to do that, which may be done by an
Heathen without grace? He may, in an act of mercy, give as much as any Law
obliges him to give, and so not sin, in giving too little. 3. Neither he nor
the Doctor can determine aforehand, how much the Law obliges him to give, (as
was said above) but it is determinable only by circumstances, which then, bring
it under a command. 4 Neither of them, giving as much as the Law obliges to,
do sin in giving too little: but may they not sin, in giving, in the act of
mercy, some other ways? For want of Charity, 1 Cor. 13.3. out of vainglory,
in hope of meriting, Matthew. 6.1, 2.
etc. The Pharisees (it is like) gave more then the Law obliged to, (their
abundant righteousness, as they called it) yet here was a mixture of sin, not
only in the men, but in the very act of Mercy. 5. But what needed the Doctor
to limit this sinlesness, to this or that act of virtue, when here he plainly
asserts, n. 5.
[ The lowest of them (of the degrees of virtues) may be sinless, and all the
superior, voluntary oblations, more then the strict Law required of us.] How
easy is it for such a Teacher, or Catechist, to infect his Disciples with the
Popish doctrine of Merit, or Supererogation; if not by doing sinlesly in the
lowest degrees of commanded perfection, yet by his superior voluntary
oblations, more then the strict Law required of them: but that comes to be
considered in the next Section.

But there is yet a difficulty or two, to be spoken to, the example of Angels,
and of Christ himself; [1. In several ranks of Angels one sort (the Seraphims)
being more ardent in zeal then other Angels.] This instance was not proper,
when we are speaking of the love of God, in men, according to the Moral written
Law; but we know not by what Law Angels are governed; yet supposing (which is
most probable, though disputable) that there are several ranks and degrees of
Angels, each exceeding another in excellence and perfection of nature; then I
would say, that each rank was bound to love God, with that height of love, (and
zeal) which their nature was capable of, and to love him with a lower degree,
as the inferior ranks do, were in them faulty. That universal maxim, will
reach them; [To whom more is given, of him more is required.] Now whether the
same Angel love God more intensely at one time, then another, is a question,
not easily determinable. Adam in innocence might perfectly love God, according
to the perfection of his nature, yet not with that perfection of Love,
wherewith the lowest Angel loved him: now whether the Doctor will say, that an
Angel had not sinned, if he loved God, with that lower degree of love in Adam;
I shall leave to him to determine.

2. The example of Christ, was impertinently brought to prove [that sincere
love is capable of degrees.] p. 222. n. 5.
For, first, I granted, sincere love in men was capable of degrees, denied it
only of perfect love. 2. Love of God in Christ, was perfect not only in
sincerity of the virtue, but in that, which the Doctor calls sinless
perfection, and so not capable of degrees: Christ, (he says) differs from
Angels and men in this, that he was perfect and never sinned (so are also Angels
perfect and never sin, and so their example was also impertinently brought,
when we are speaking of men) when men are imperfect and faulty the best of
them, as the Doctor confesses; and then not perfect in love, and so the lower
degrees, are sinful, even when they are sincere in their love. 3. What then is
affirmed of Christ, is not common to Angels and men, with him. 1. If it were
granted, that Christ was more ardent in one act of Prayer then in another, this
is not applyable to the same Angel who is not more ardent in one act, of love
or zeal, then another, sure the Doctor cannot prove it. 2. Christ was far more
perfect in love then Angels, being God man, not having the spirit by measure;
therefore he might supererogate (as I said) in his acts of love and expressions
of it, though Angels cannot. 4. Nor then is it common to Christ with men, to
love God more in one act then another, being perfect in love, with a sinless
perfection; the most that men can do, being but to love God sincerely, which is
capable of degrees, but faulty in the lower. 5. Even the sincerity that was in
Christ's love, was sinless, and perfect; but so it is not in men, whose love
being less or more sincere, is less or more imperfect. 6. His distinction here,
of sinless perfection, (which he renounces) and sincerity of this or that
virtue, which (he says) consists in a latitude and has degrees, and a mixture
of sin in the man, etc. Is first very improper; for he should have
distinguished plainly, [perfection is either sinless or sinful,] (As Papists
blush not to do) but this had dashed his plot of perfection in lower degrees
(whereof many are with him sinless) as (we said elsewhere. 2. Even here the
lowest sinless.
If he speak not of sinless (but sinful) perfection, why did he bring in the
example of Christ, or Angels, whose perfection is sinless, as well as sincere?
sincerity in Christ was not capable of degrees (any more then his perfect
love.) And yet the Doctor concludes here, [ Why sincerity may not in a pious
Christian be capable of degrees, as well as in Christ himself, and (mark it)
the lowest of them be sinless there is no reason showed,] when he renounced
before sinless perfection.

Sect. 50, etc. And this makes way for another, and the last objection, etc.
WE are now drawing to an end of our second Diatribe of Will Worship, and the
matter is to consider, how the Doctor will wash his doctrine, from compliance
with Romish Supererogation; to which end, he professes well in words,
rectifying, and applauding Cyprians sentence, p. 224. n. 2.
[That none of the most heroical workers, ever thought their master beholden to
them. n. 3.
And that it is infinite mercy, that any the most excellent work of ours is
rewardable with him,] and that for two or three very good reasons. And yet
there will appear but little difference between his Principles and theirs:
First, he put a difference [between doing more then is commanded, and doing
something which is not commanded.] I said, he that does something not
commanded, does also more then is commanded, and so they are, in that sense,
both one: and the Romanists do not suppose, that he that has done more then is
commanded, has done all that is commanded, to set their Supererogation upon.
Then it will follow, that he and they agree in this principle; [That
Superogation is founded upon doing something not commanded:] which he makes
evident by a second distinction: [To Supererogate supposes, either that the
person has paid God all that is due to him, that is, has never sinned,]
(which is the same (said I) with the first part of the former distinction, that
he has done all that is commanded, which the Romanists do not own.) [Or that
having sinned and so become a debtor, he has paid that debt by satisfaction,
by doing something else, which may satisfy God for his sin.] That is, (said I)
by doing something not commanded: In this latter, he placed the Romanists
opinion. Now this principle is his as well as theirs, [A man may do something
not commanded:] This he has often asserted, and expressly here below, n. 12. [I
affirm it possible for a Christian to do something which is not commanded him.]
The sense whereof we shall consider, n. 5. p. 225.
when we come at it. But hear what he says here. [I yield that the Romanist is
not so gross, as to affirm him that Supererogates, not to have sinned, and
therefore never defined that to be the Romanists doctrine.] But sure it is, the
Romanists do say and affirm some Saints not to have sinned; the Virgin Mary
for one, to be free not only from actual sins, but original also; and he knows
who was the man, of whom some of them affirm, Bonadventure.
videtur Adam in hoc homine non peccasse: And then there is more reason to
found Supererogation upon such as never sinned, then on such as have sinned,
and yet pay God by satisfaction: the latter have enough to do, to satisfy for
their own sins, and cannot well expect to Supererogate for themselves or
others: but the former having never sinned, that is, done all that is
commanded, which might satisfy God and his Law, for themselves, might with
more color, undertake to satisfy God for others by doing something not
commanded. And yet by the way, I would ask a Romanist, whether if Adam had not
sinned, as the Angels do not, he or they could supererogate for themselves or
others? If they say, they could not, because they, in doing all that is
commanded, did but their duty; then, would I infer, much less can a sinner
Supererogate, by doing something not commanded. If they shall say, they might
Supererogate, (as their principles and the Doctors too, seem to import) by
doing more then is commanded; I would desire to see the reason, why they should
not found their Supererogation rather upon that first part of the distinction,
[That to Supererogate, supposes, that the person has paid God all that is due
to him, by doing all that is commanded him, by way of perfect obedience, that
is, has never sinned,] seeing that is more reasonable, as has been said. I
leave them and the Doctor, to resolve this doubt. And this indeed the Doctor
comes to n. 8. [Supererogo, p. 226.
is to lay out all and more, and from the opinion of pious men's doing so, the
Romanists have clearly raised their treasure of the Church, as the bank, into
which, their payments are made.] Mark that, to Supererogate is to lay out all
(that is commanded) and more, that is, to pay God all that is due, by way of
perfect obedience; and to lay out more, that is something not commanded. Which
is that, which he finds fault with in me; that Supererogare is as much, as
super quod erogavit lex, (or rather, rogavit, for that was my word, however it
was changed into erogavit.) Now upon this, the Doctor makes himself and his
Reader merry; n. 7.
[ About the Etymology of supererogation, which either my fancy or something
else (he says) suggested to me, as I did derive Superstition, from Super
statutum:] In both he does me manifest injury; in the latter, against his own
profession, and I fear his conscience; who said, I did not raise the Etymology
of Superstition from Super statutum, (as indeed I did not) but only said, that
Superstition was by our Divines, well applied, to signify that which the
Scripture calls addition to the word, or Rule of Worship, as being Super
statutum, which rather respected the thing, then the Origination of the word
Superstition; as appears above. In the former he does the same, for I do not
make the super quod rogavit lex, the Etymology, but thus: Supererogare is as
much, (that is in sense) as super quod rogavit lex: And this, I shall evidence
against all contradiction. 1. I turned to the word, in my Dictionary, and there
found, Supererogatio to be rendered, (attesting August. for it) a giving more,
then is required; required, by what? but by the Law. 2. Supererogator,
rendered, (out of the same Author) one that gives more then he needs; that
is, more then he is bound to give by any Law. 3. Supererogo; to give moreover;
jam ante erogatis, addo; which supposes him to give all required by the Law,
and to add something not required by it; and is not all this, as much, as
super quod rogavit lex? Again, for erogavit, I find, that it has this sense,
beside others, rogando aliquid elicere, as well as expendere, to lay out: And
if the word erogare signify at any time to require, or procure by asking; the
Etymology might pass, with reasonable Critics, Supererogare, is as much as
super quod erogavit lex. Besides all this; Papists who best understand what
they mean by works of Supererogation; Estius in 1. ad Cor. c. 9. v. 15.
call them [works of Counsels, that is, those which are commended so, that yet,
absolutely there are no precepts delivered concerning them.] That is, works
done, more then the Law required. Lastly the Doctor himself, in the place newly
cited, from n. 8. says as much as I do, in sense, [Supererogo, is to lay out
all and more, and from the opinion of pious men's doing so, the Romanists have
raised their treasure of the Church.] Nay, its more then I said, for I did not
say, it is as much, as to lay out all, that is to do all that is commanded by
the Law, and more; but only, more then the Law required, though he had not
done all required by the Law. And upon this the Dr. founded their
Supererogation, refusing the former part of the distinction. But now I would
ask, how can the pious Romanists be said to Supererogate, that is, to lay out
all and more, if not first, by perfect keeping of the Law, wherewith they are
entrusted, and then doing something more, laying out of their own stock, in a
Counsel of perfection, and what is this, but more then the Law required? and by
so doing, to make satisfaction for others sins, having none of their own to
satisfy for. He were simple, that would go about to satisfy God for others
sins, by doing things commanded to himself, or to satisfy for others, who
needs it for his own sins. It must then suppose, he has kept the Law, and that
he supererogates, by doing more then the Law required; which needing not
himself, he is content, it be laid out for others that need it. And that the
Romanists do hold many of their pious Saints, can and do perfectly keep the
Law, the Doctor is not ignorant, (what he thinks, he can do, I know not; sure I
am he says, [Christs yoke is no made up of impossible precepts,] and so its
possible for a pious man perfectly to keep them.] If he say, but he does not
hold the most pious man never sinned, though he may attain to such perfection
in time, Doing all that is commanded. p. 228. n. 14. The evil which is or may
be adherent to it (a good work) being pardoned by God, etc. ad page 220. numb.
55. numb. 8.
as to keep the Law, and so, Supererogation cannot be founded upon the first
part of the distinction, that the person never sinned: I answer, if those
former sins be pardoned, (satisfaction being made by Christ) they are as if
they never had been, and then, when he is arrived at such perfection as to keep
the Law, that is, to sin no more; then he may do more then the Law required,
and so b^gin to Supererogate. Upon this, all the Doctors Grammatical notions
vanish into nothing, and I go on.

A Supererogating work, then, is certainly a work done, which is more then the
Law required, or (which in my sense is all one) the doing something which the
Law does not require: which (said I) [Is a derogation from the perfection of
the Law of God, and lays imperfection upon it (as the Doctor plainly has
done.] The Doctor is angry at this, and answers, ^. 11. p. 227
1. [If such works be derogatory to the Law, they are not Supererogatory works,
but the contrary.] As if they might not be Supererogatory in the opinion of a
Romanist, and yet really derogatory to the perfection of the Law, charging it
with imperfection. 2. [His treatise (he says) defends not the thinking a man's
self to do more then the Law requires, but to do somewhat which the Law does
not require.] And I say again, is not the doing of somewhat which the Law does
not require, the doing of more then the Law requires? whether the person have
ever sinned or not, is another thing; nay, is not Supererogo, to lay out all,
and more, in the Doctors gloss: then it may include both, as was said above.
But for charging the Law with imperfection, the Doctor has said it, and will
defend it, but by no new arguments; but the old repeated, and before confuted.
And as confidently he again affirms, n. 12.
[its possible for a Christian to do something which is not commanded him.] If
I listed to be merry, I might say, its possible for him to do something not
commanded him, for its too possible and frequent to do something forbidden him.
Or 2. its possible for him to do some, yea, many things not commanded nor
forbidden him, many things indifferent: But more seriously, the Doctor means it
of voluntary oblations, that is, voluntary worship, Will Worship, (that is the
subject of his discourse) its possible herein for a Christian, to do something
not commanded him; yea many things, as Papists do; but how lawfully is the
question: Yes, lawfully enough in the Doctors Divinity; [For as in the Law, so
in the Gospel, the Law of Christ, some things are left free and uncommanded.]
What things are so left free and uncommanded in the Law or Gospel? Some civil
things? All indifferent things? Or some Worship? Of that we speak, not of
circumstances of Worship; as has often been said: If he assert this of Worship,
I shall desire no other Adversary to confute him but himself. As for his
[Latitude, and higher degrees of that Latitude, not under precept] enough has
been said before. The conclusion is this, his doctrine of Will Worship, is
founded upon this Popish principle, [Thou a man may do, not something only,
but some Worship to God, which he never commanded:] Will worship (he says) is
voluntary Worship, uncommanded Worship, this is not only lawful but
commendable, acceptable, and more rewardable then commanded Worship, and
therein he and Papists do sweetly agree; and why he may not agree with them in
their Supererogation, I yet see no reason.

I said again, that he that does something not commanded, may be said to
Supererogate, in respect of him, who does nothing but what is commanded, as the
Pharisees did. p. 227. n. 13
He answers [This belongs not to my notion of Supererogating.] Take it then in
his notion, Supererogo, is to lay out all and more: He that lays out but all
entrusted with him, does but erogare; he then that lays out more then all, is
said, supererogare, with respect to the other: and may not, at least will not
such a man insult over other men that do nothing but what is commanded, [Lord I
thank thee, I am not as other men etc.] Yea, and expostulate with God himself,
[ Why have we fasted, and thou regardst it not? etc. Isa. 58.] But, [he that
thus scorns and exalts himself above other men, is far from doing more herein
then is commanded, etc.] True, but yet he may truly, in the Doctors sense, do
something not commanded; though not more, that is all that is commanded and
something more: And this is enough to puff up a carnal heart, partly to
compensate for something done amiss, and to quit scores with God (as she, Prove.
7.14.) and partly to insult over other men, of lower performances: as
experience tells us.

The Apostle indeed allows, n. 13.
a glorying and rejoicing, in the conscience of having done well; but he never
allowed or practiced, a glorying in doing any thing, which the Law commanded
not: as appeared above, in the instance of preaching without wages. The Doctor
cannot but know, [That a man without grace, an Heathen or hypocritical
Christian, may do many of his works of highest perfection: as give liberally to
good uses, keep himself single and unmarried, etc.] But this man uses not to
compare himself with others virtues, but with their defects: and he is so far
from charity to wish or think other men better then himself, that he thinks
himself better then others, and thanks God there is not an honest man but
himself, as that proud hypocrite did. I fear, that all Will-worshippers, that
think they do more then is commanded, are guilty of some pride and scorn, as
humble soever as they seem to be. But I said further,

They that think they can do something not commanded, do expect to find more
acceptance from God, and a greater reward, then they or others do, for doing
only what is commanded, and this is a kind of Supererogation; an over-pleasing
of God. [This, first, he says, p. 228. n. 14. I willingly, and expressly grant
it to be my doctrine, that voluntary oblations are more acceptable and wardable
with God. p. 229. n. 17.
is nothing to the notion of the word.] I have professed to look more at the
nature of the thing, then the notion of the word: and this, I am sure, they
that do things not commanded, do expect, as I have said, and the Doctor will
confess it presently. But, secondly, he will put in a caution, to make it
passable; [That uncommanded works can never satisfy for disobediences, and
that it is perfect impiety and folly, to neglect duty, and then to compensate
by doing more then is commanded.] First, I observe how the Doctor confounds the
terms of his former distinction, doing more then is commanded, is here put, for
doing somewhat that is not commanded; which is found also so used, numb. 13.
The first of them, for it is twice, (the crime the Doctor found in mine, at the
beginning.) But, secondly, the caution will not do the work: For Papists (some
at least) do not think, their uncommanded works do satisfy for their own
disobediences; but when their own sins are pardoned, (as they think at least)
and they enabled to keep the Law, then they think by uncommanded works, to
satisfy God for others sins. And the mischief is, that they, that think they
can do things not commanded do usually the rather neglect the care of securing
of duties, but hope to compensate by doing things not commanded: [You make void
the Commandment of God by your own Tradition, and say, it is corban, etc.] But
we have here the Doctors method and pathway to Heaven; it is somewhat long,
but it could not well be shorter, and the end will make amends for all, the
greater reward. Thus it lies: [He that shall have observed this method
uprightly, eschewed evil, in a strict mortifying of lusts, etc. in abstaining
from sin, and doing [* Doing all that is commanded.] Mark that.
all that is commanded (confirmed by authority of a Poet, virtus est vitium
fugere etc.) and whenever he has failed, secured his retrait by an early
humiliation, confession, begging of pardon in Christ, and sincere reformation,
and then labored industriously to superstruct doing of good works, of the more
eminent (I mean uncommanded) degrees of virtues; I shall not doubt to encourage
him to think confidently, and expect from our great (...), more and greater
acceptance, (I shall add, reward also) then the same person could in reason
expect, for doing only what is commanded.] I shall add what he adds in the
next, p. 229. n. 15
and consider them together. [There is no reason to make question, but that of
two men, which have been equal in obediences, one exceeding the other in acts
of uncommanded perfection, the more perfect, shall have the richest reward,
etc.] To all this, I shall speak first in general, and then to some
particulars. In general thus, by considering how far an hypocrite may travel in
this way to glory. 1. He may abstain from some, yea, many sins, (wherewith some
sincere Christian may be overtaken,) and the Doctor will not say, his pious
Christian can or does abstain from all sins. 2. He may do all that is
commanded, for the letter of the Law; as Paul himself before his conversion,
says, he was blameless; and the Doctor does not say, or does not mean, (though
he say all) his pious man, may do universally all that is commanded. 3. When he
has failed (if at least he may fail) he may (in the Doctors language) secure
his retrait by an early humiliation and confession, Pray ye to the Lord for me.
as Ahab and Juda did. 4. He may beg pardon of God, and that in Christ, as its
like Simon Magus did, who desired others also to pray for him. 5. He may make
an outward Reformation of his failings, in many things, as Herod did, and the
Doctor will not say, but his Pious Christian, may fail still by infirmity, in
some things repented of. 6. After all this, he may use Austerities, Fasting,
Watchings, and other Penances, for the mortifying of his lusts, at least in
pretense, as Papists do, and the Pharisees did. 7. And then he may proceed to
superstruct doing of good works of the more eminent uncommanded degrees of
virtue: (for I observe none such named by the Doctor, but an hypocrite may do
them) as give alms liberally, as the Pharisees did, above what the Law
required; [If I give all my goods to the poor, and have not charity,] (supposes
the ease possible) I am nothing: He may be frequent in Praying five or six
times a day, in Fastings, twice or thrice a week, and in other such Austerities
as before: He may make himself an Eunuch, undertake to profess a single life,
under pretense to please God better: Nay, he may offer himself to voluntary
Martyrdom, (which two last, are the Doctors highest perfections of all.) [If I
give my body to be burned (for Religion, for Christ) and have not Charity.]
Supposes that case also possible, for an hypocrite to attain to: May now the
Dr. [encourage this man, to think and expect confidently, more and greater
acceptance and reward then another, that only has done what is commanded?]
And that with some failings? Perhaps he will say, he does not all these things
uprightly, or sincerely, and so loses all. Be it so, yet this was more then the
Doctors eye could discover; for he cannot see his heart: therefore, he might
encourage him still, confidently to expect, if not more, yet some acceptance,
and reward; if not for abstaining from so many sins, and doing so many things
commanded, (because he played but the hypocrite in all) yet for his eminent
uncommanded degrees of virtue, a just (...), would not let such high
perfections go altogether unrewarded: But I shall come to some particulars. And
first, with respect to what I said last, it must be supposed, in this
distribution of rewards, that uncommanded eminent degrees of virtue, Else they
are but as Ciphers in Arithmetic which of themselves signify nothing, but
make a figure more by conjunction.
and highest perfection, may of themselves expect some reward, or acceptance
from God, by whomsoever they are done, though he have not done all that is
commanded. For if they give more acceptance and reward in conjuction with
commanded virtues, they must give some positive reward single and alone, or
joined with lower degrees of virtue, and then an hypocrite may expect some
acceptance and reward from God for such eminent virtues, who yet is most
abominable to him. 2 Though obedience to commands, may expect acceptance with
God, and reward and glory in Heaven, yet uncommanded eminent perfection carries
away the prize, or crown of glory: But I desire to know, who gave this
authority to these men, to distribute rewards, less to obedience commanded, and
more to uncommanded virtues? 3. A (...) on earth distributes his rewards and
prizes, by an act of justice, to the best deserving, not of mercy and favor.
But I hope the Doctor will not say so of God, though Papists are bold enough to
say so. 4. If this reward be not an act of justice, upon merit; then it must be
by way of promise, which is of grace or mercy. For works commanded, are
rewarded of mere mercy, Psalm. 62. last; if uncommanded works may not plead
merit, none can; yet Papists that make commanded works meritorious, do also
make uncommanded works more meritorious. If then the Doctors eminent
uncommanded virtues may expect a greater reward, then works commanded, the
works of men's devising are exalted above the works of Gods commanding. By what
Rule? not of merit or justice, that the Doctor disclaims; not of mercy, for
then they must have some promise, the ground of that expectation: but promise
he can show none, or let us see the Patent; where uncommanded virtues are
promised, I say not a greater, but any reward at all. All the promises in
Scripture are made to the obedient, and obedience imports a command; as all
threatenings are made to the disobedient, which implies a prohibition. And for
ought I see, there may be as well some eminent or lesser wickednss not under
prohibition, against which there is no threatening, as any eminent virtues, not
under some command, for which there is no promise. 5. The Doctor puts us a
case, [suppose two men equal in obediences, one exceeding the other in acts of
uncommanded perfection, this shall have the richer reward.] Just the Popish
dream of Aurea and Aureola: But let me put him a case; Suppose two men unequal
in obediences (no doubt, but such there are) and he that has the least of
obedience, (whether by frailty or otherwise) has exceeded the other in acts of
uncommanded virtues: which now shall have the greater acceptance and reward? If
the latter, then it will follow, that he that has most sins (such is he that
has the least of obediences) shall have more glory for uncommanded virtues,
then he that has lesser and fewer sins (such is he that has more obediences)
for want of uncommanded virtues. Nay, it will follow, that he that has less
and fewer obediences, but more uncommanded virtues, shall have both less and
more glory, then the other; less, because the other having more obediences,
should in reason (the Doctors own phrase) expect a greater reward, then he that
has less, and yet more, because he has more uncommanded virtues: which is a
Q^odlibet fitter for the Romish Schools to determine. If this be not [the
intruding into those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his
fleshly mind,] Col. 2.18. I leave it to consideration. Yet the Doctor says, p.
229. n. 15
[Its most evident, (the latter shall have the richer reward) whether by
considering the degrees of glory in heaven or the rule by which God distributes
them still under the Gospel; to every man according to his work.] As for the
degrees of glory of Saints in Heaven, he knows, its a disputable problem; how
ever very uncertain how they shall be proportioned, being a work of pure grace
and favor, which may give as much to him that comes in to work at the last
hour, as to him that came in at the first, and do him no wrong. And as for the
Rule of distribution of rewards, according to men's works; that may have a
double sense, either according to the quality or kind of men's works, good to
the good, and evil to the evil, as often it is applied, Romans 2.6. Gal. 6.7, 8. Or
according to the quantity, more reward for greater good, and lesser, for
lesser, and so greater torments to greater and more sins; and contra: and so it
is sometimes used: And for greater punishments for greater sins, its clear by
Scripture, which speaks of greater damnation, and easier for Tire and Sidon,
etc. the reason is, because that is an act of justice; but whether more or
greater good works shall have greater reward, may reasonably be scrupled,
because that is a work of pure mercy, which may do what it will, with its own.
However, God will reward men according to their works of obedience to his
commands, according to his promise: but not according to men's own devised good
works, of higher perfection, and uncommanded; unless they can show us such a
promise.

In the next place, my Charity is slighted and rejected with some scorn; that I
said, n. 16.
[Ours are not yet come so far, as to think they can merit by such works, as
Papists do,] and the Dr. concludes from my confession, [We are not Papists yet,
nor yet do I maintain works of Supererogation, etc.] It was both my Charity,
and Modesty thus to speak of some; for he knows, some of ours who were as
zealous as himself for Will Worship, are turned absolute Papists even in this
point of merit, by commanded and uncommanded works. [Let him that yet stands,
take heed lest he fall.] And the rather, because he stands upon slippery
ground, which may easily cast him into the same precipice. I did not directly
charge the Doctor, with the opinion or heresy of works of Supererogation; but
sure he is very near it: and seeing that, I spoke in Charity, (but he takes it
by the wrong handle) to prevent his falling into the pit. I shall only show
him how near he is to it, if he will have the patience to hear me. As in other
points he is gone far toward Rome, (as very learned men think.) so in this
particular now before us. They agree in these things. 1. In the Principle of
Supererogation, which is, [That a man may do uncommanded works, or, that there
are uncommanded virtues, of eminent perfection, above commanded virtues:] So
they, so he asserts. 2. They agree also, in the success of such uncommanded
perfections; that they are more commendable, more acceptable to, and more
rewardable by God: this he and they do confidently affirm alike. 3. In the
ground of them, in regard of satisfaction to God by them, that is merit: for so
Papists do expressly make them meritorious, of more glory for themselves, and
for pardon and glory for others that need them. But this the Doctor disclaimes
and abhors, p. 224. n. 3. [It is an infinite mercy, that they are rewardable,
the most excellent of them.] True, in words he denies all meriting of glory, by
his most eminent perfections; but see the consequences of his doctrine: for
thus I would argue, [If uncommanded works be more rewardable, it must be either
by way of merit, or of grace; I know no third way, Romans 4.4. Of grace or of
debt: But his uncommanded works are not more rewardable by way of grace; for
then they have some promise for that greater reward in Scripture; but they are
all made to obediences, upon commands.] What remains then, but by way of debt,
or merit, and then indeed, he may not only confidently expect a greater
reward, but peremptorily challenge it, The Doctrine of Supererogation is
founded in their opinion, that a man may, by uncommanded performances, make
satisfaction for his own, and other men sins, which I no way believe or
acknowledge, p. 224. n. 1.
by way of justice as Papists do. It may be said, wherein then does the Doctor
differ from them? In point of satisfaction only, either for their own or
others sins. But Papists make their works of Supererogation, or uncommanded
virtues, to merit greater glory for themselves, if not for others also. And
herein, in the first at least, they both agree. Let us review a little the 53.
Sect. of Will Worship, and we shall see what he asserts to free his doctrine
from Supererogation. [1. It supposes no perfect obedience;] Nor do Papist do
so, but does not the Doctor so? both in his particular acts of some virtues,
which he makes to be sinless, and also in universal obedience to the Law, to be
possible at least: for Christ's yoke is not made up of impossible precepts. Nor
do Papists hold that all men can or do keep the Law, but only some eminent
Saints, and consequently they do, or should hold, (if they speak reason) that
none but such can Supererogate. But if such as have sinned, and do sin may
Supererogate, the Doctors denial of perfect obedience, does not make it
impossible for himself also to Supererogate, which is, (as he says) to lay out
more then is commanded, that is, to do something not commanded. But again, if a
man may Supererogate (being a sinner) by doing something not commanded; how
easy a consequence is this, to carnal reason; [I can do more then is
commanded; ergo, I may merit more glory for my self, if not satisfy for
others,] which brings me to the next. 2. [ If supposing every man to have
sinned, it pretends not to the least degree of satisfaction to God for any
the least sin, of our own. 3. Much less for others sins:] So they differ only
in point of satisfaction for sins, which notwithstanding, hinders not, but
there may be Supererogation, in point of doing more then is commanded, (whence
Supererogation has its denomination) and also, in purchasing (if I may not say
Virgo-majoris est meriti: said Hierom. cited above. p. 95.
meriting, which is true enough, if such works have no promise of greater
reward; meritting I say) glory, more glory for our selves, if not for others;
and so the Doctor falls into their doctrine of merit of glory, though he escape
the gulf of satisfaction for sins, and which is worse, and most blasphemous
against the precious and infinite merits of Christ, is hard to determine. By
all which it may appear, my Charity was useful enough, to fetch out a brother
fallen, or stay him falling into the pit: And yet see how contemptibly the
Doctor throws it away. p. 229. n. 16
[I only add, that it is no way useful for him, to lose his pains and his
charity, by confuting those of whom he only divineth, that they may hereafter
fall into false doctrine; which yet I hope I shall not do, having no temptation
from all this Diatribists exercitation, and arguments therein contained, to
fly to any other Sect of Religion, to furnish my self with answers for him.]
Truly I am sorry my charity and my pains should be lost upon him; I find my
pains is not lost to others; and for my charity, let him now consider what need
he had of it: if not, it shall, I doubt not, return into mine own bosom. And
were I of his opinion, I should find a temptation upon me, to those ill
consequences of his doctrine, and must either fly some whither for answers to
them, or fly to Rome, to be of their opinions, in point of Supererogation. For
what wise man might not be tempted to think, [When the Scripture calls to the
most excellent way, and prudence (as he said) suggests, the readiest way to be
most glorious in Heaven, is to do that which is best;] and the Doctor or
Papists, shall teach this doctrine, See n. 17.
[ That to do things not commanded, is more commendable, acceptable, rewardable
with God, then to do things commanded by God.] Who will not feel himself
tempted, to leave or somewhat neglect, the common rode of obediences to
commands, and run into this newfound easier way, that will lead more speedily
to higher glory. This has mislead thousands of Papists (and they no Babies) as
it did the Pharisees of old, and if I be not deceived, many of our own
superstitious Formalists (for such there were, though the Doctor scorns the
words) into many Will-worships, who (it is known too well to be hid) did neglect
the commands of God enough, but were zelots in the Doctors uncommanded Worship,
and Ceremonies; and ambitious, some of them, of his uncommanded eminent
perfection, and virtues, etc. And for a close of this, I did not before, but
now almost durst take upon me to Divine, that in his next answers, to what is
now said, the Doctor must either fly to some other Sect of Religion, (that of
the Romanist) for answers, or else must return to the way of truth, which he
has deserted, and I defend; which God grant.

Hear what he says more, p. 230. n. 18
[As those which freely do those things which others account unlawful, ought
not to despise those which do them not: so on the other side, those which do
them not, ought in no wise to judge or condemn those that do them,] Romans 14.
But, first, this rule of the Apostle, must be understood of things merely
indifferent, meats, etc. not of things unlawful and forbidden, as all
uncommanded Worship is: In this case, they that do it not, ought in all wise to
judge and condemn them that do it, and not to suffer sin upon their brother,
Levit. 19.17. 2. It Is well known, that they which did too freely do those
things, which others accounted (and proved) unlawful, did not only despise,
but judged, condemned, and punished those which did them not. And so were the
first and worst transgressors of their own rule; bespeaking the favor, not to
be despised by others, that themselves might have the liberty to judge others,
etc. Had they left them as indifferent and free, to do or not to do them, there
would have been, as no judging of them that do them not; so no despising (but
rather pitying) of them which do them.

And now I have done with this Diatribe, but that charity, (which begins at
home, though it after go abroad) calls upon me to rectify two misprisions, and
injuries put upon me. [1. That I censured our Bishops (by the Character of
Over-looking,) as guilty of insolence and contempt, toward others, which like
the Karaeans kept close to the rule of the word, for their Worship.] I can
sincerely profess, that to my best remembrance, the Bishops in that notion,
were not in my thoughts; some of which I ever reverenced as learned and pious
men. But if any of them were superstitious Formalists, (as some were known to
be) in that notion I might intend them: whose insolence and contempt, of their
differing brethren, was too often felt, in making their own constitutions and
ceremonies, snares to tender, honest consciences, etc. Yet if the Doctor will
needs know whom I meant, I shall freely tell him; they were those, who,
ambitious perhaps of that Episcopal dignity, did comply to every new introduced
superstitious ceremony, with scorn enough overlooking them, who could not do
so; some of them being loose and profane in moral conversation: That Is the
first. There is another great mistake, and very false; yet like a thread runs
through all his former discourse; [That I presume all use of uncommanded
Ceremonies to be Superstition first, and then Formality.] Which I so
professedly disclaimed often, and have his confession, sometimes to the
contrary, that I understood the question only of uncommanded Worship, not of
Circumstances, not of Ceremonies unless they be made parts of Worship, or
offend against some other Scripture Rules. Which whether his Christmas Festival
(as it was by most observed) be guilty of, comes next to be considered.

Exercitation. 3. Of Christmas, and other Festivals.
HAving so largely vindicated the two former Diatribees in Thesi, I shall not
need to be long, in Hypothesi. The judicious Reader, ere this, understands,
that my main design in undertaking this work, was primarily to manifest the
Superstition and Will Worship, in the ordinary observation of the chief
Festivals, (and the rest) and secondarily to justify the abolition of them,
against which, the Doctor has so much declamed. For which end, I took in, (as
I said at first) his other two Tracts, of Superstition and Will worship; to
make a clear discovery (of that, which I saw the Doctor had clouded) what those
two Crimes were, which (beside the Riot) were charged upon his Festival; that
so the Application of them to the Festival in particular, might be the more
easy and obvious to every intelligent Reader. For if Superstition and
Will Worship be, as I have proved them to be from the Testimonies of Orthodox
Divines, and of the Doctor himself, and they criminous. And then the Observers
of the Festivals be proved guilty of those two crimes, and the Doctor as deep
as any, (which only remain to be made good) I shall venture to make all
indifferent, but judicious Readers, yea, and the Doctor himself in his sedate
and impartial judgment, both witnesses and judges of my conclusion. If the
Doctor himself shall lend me both my premises, even sometimes, totidem verbis,
I hope he will not be so uncivil or unnatural, as not to own the conclusion, as
a child of his own begetting; though it has been several times brought home,
and laid at his door, but he has gone in and out, and took no notice of it. I
shall once more lay it before him: But first, some other business takes us up,
to be briefly dispatched, rather by way of strictures, then a set and continued
discourse.

That the custom of a Church in things indifferent, is somewhat considerable,
I denied not. p. 231. n. 3.
But when humane customs are degenerated into superstition, and made
Will Worship, that custom though never so ancient is not to be pleaded. He may
see, that my scope was only this, to beat down degenerated customs, pretended
only to be ancient and Apostolical; and withal, to retort the argument
intended by him, more sutably to the text alluded to; [The Apostles and prime
Church, had no such custom (as his Festival) therefore, they are contentious
who plead for the continuancy of a custom so degenerated.] Whence the Doctors
testimonies, are indeed, ex abundanti, needless and superfluous, (except to
show his reading) [That Christians should comply with the customs of the
places whither they come;] That is, n. 4. etc.
while they are in things indifferent, and neither burthenous by their number,
nor vitiated by the former abuses: But he knows, that Augustine in his time
which was early to us, complained of the yoke of Ceremonies introduced, and
wished them abolished: and so much for that Section.

How those Heathen usages, p. 233. n. 3.
that stuck so long to the Festival, came in, or when, it is not See n. 8.
worth the while to debate; it would be a better service, for the Advocates of
the Festival, to study how to get them out, which (I fear) they have not much
troubled themselves withal. Sure we are, many customs came in, in compliance
as with the Jews on one side, so with Heathens on the other. I know he
remembers well enough, who said; Ita belle Ethnicos in hac re, Polydor. Virg.
de Invent. Rer. l. 6. c. 8. p. 234. n. 7.
ut in nimis multis aliis, aemulamur. Though neither I nor he, can exactly
tell, when that compliance first began. Suppose, that which the Doctor says be
true; [At the first conversion or plantation of the faith such things might
from the Jewish state adhere unto the Christian, and so some others from the
heathen also, it is possible and imaginable.] But its as true (which he adds)
they were not taught them by Christianity. Christian Religion taught them no
such things, nor intended their continuance: but yet they were continued a long
time. Hence his argument for Infant Baptism (of that I think he means it also)
from the custom of the Jews to Baptize, is not constringent to a gain-sayer,
I believe he finds it so in his conflict with Master Tombs: for how easy were
it to answer, (as I remember he does) it was the custom of the Jews to
Circumcise after Christianty began, to keep the old Sabbath, and what is that to
Christians? And if my judgment were of any worth with the Doctor, I should
make bold to tell him my conjecture in this case. Its very probable, that at
the first beginning of Christianity, such things, or customs, as the Sabbath,
the Paschal, and Pentecost Festivals, might adhere to the Christian, though not
taught it by Christian^y, that they should be continued as Christian Holy Days;
and so some Heathenish customs in like manner from the first plantation of the
Faith: But then I would infer, 1. That the Festivals of Pasch and Pentecost,
called after, Easter and Whitsuntide, were no Apostolical constitutions, but
rather charitable condescensions of the Apostles, and after Planters, to win
the Jews to the Christian Religion. But not as taught them by Christianity; nor
to continue any more, then the old Sabbath or Circumcision, etc. Which by
degrees vanished. Else I would ask, why was not the old Sabbath perpetuated in
the Church Christian, as well as Easter and Whitsuntide; there being more to be
said for it, in the Apostolical practice and other ways, then is or can be
produced for those Fostivals, as I have elsewhere said. 2. I would also infer,
that Festivals were continued or exchanged, for some Heathenish ones, (as
Christmas for the Saturnalia) to win them the better to the faith; not to be
continued longer, then the Faith was well fettled: But such is the mischief of
humane policies in Religion, that ill usages once brought in, can seldom or
hardly be gotten out again. 3. The Doctors argument is as little constringent
as mine, that those [usages must needs be brought in, at the first conversion
of a nation,] which might come in by degrees.

The time and Author of our conversion, p. 235. n. 1.
is as uncertain as the former, and confessed by the Doctor, [ to be a (...),
to the business of Festivals.] And therefore I shall no longer draw the Saw of
controversy therein, but leave the Doctor to his own conjectures, (for they
are no better) and proceed to something of more concernment. And that is, about
the institution, and observation of Easter, (by which standard all other
Festivals are to be rated as the Doctor says p. 243. n. 10.) which, if we may
believe him, was instituted, or at least observed by the Apostles themselves.
The trial whereof is referred, p. 241. n. 2.
not to Scripture, (which an Apostolical institution, which is acknowledged
elsewhere to be Divine, might justly expect) but to Tradition, out of most
uncertain Histories, unfit to build our faith upon. Eusebius, who lived in the
fourth Centurie, a great distance from the Apostles age, is the first that
writes about it, and all he says, is from certain Epistles, received by
Tradition; n. 3.
he says, [ All the Provinces of Asia observed it on the fourteenth day, as
from a more ancient Tradition, and a custom long before delivered to them,
which (says the Doctor) considering the time, wherein this question was
agitated, at the end of the second Century, can amount to little less then
Apostolical.] But more then this, in the Epistle of Pollycrates to Victor, he
says, [ Many Biships of Asia observed the fourteenth day, according to the
Gospel, keeping exactly the Canon of faith, no way wavering from it.] A good
while after, comes Nicephorus (no very credible Author) and says, n. 10.
[ Following the Apostolical tradition upward, or from the beginning, and that
expressly from Saint Peter the Apostle, which (says the Doctor most confidently)
still leaves the matter most evident and irrefragable, that this feast of
Easter, which sure is a Christian Festival, was observed and celebrated by the
Apostles, etc.] This was sp^ken for the practice of the Western Church, wh^
kept on the Lords day; but the Eastern observation might fall on any other day
of the week, as the Jewish Pasch did. But Socrates, in his time observed, n. 16.
[ That several nations had their several customs of observing Easter.] That
is, as his words are; [ As in many other things, so also the Feast of Easter by
custom in every nation, had a peculiar ((...),) private observation; because
none of the Apostles, gave to any a Law about it.] Now these things hang not
well together. I shall propound some considerations, to cool the Doctors
confidence, to weaken, if not to break, this his standard of all other
Festivals, and to make it more then probable, that it is not Apostolical.

1. The best and only ground he finds to pitch his Standard on, is but
Tradition, unwritten Tradition, not the least title of Scripture consequence,
but that of (...), of which by and by. The plea is the very same with Papists
for their Festivals, and other Ceremonies. Socrates who relates the debate
between the Eastern and Western Churches and their plea on both sides, from
several Apostles adds, [ But not a man of either side could produce (...), a
written demonstration of these things.] They all plead unwritten uncertain
Tradition: Whereas a standard for all Festivals should have at least one foot
standing upon a written word. It is too much (though too ordinary) for the
Doctor to comply with Rome, in the countenancing of unwritten Traditions.

2. Traditions Apostolical do sometimes imply, their written Institutions and
instructions; [Hold the Traditions Traditiones vocat, doctrinae, and institutu
Religionis Christianae, etc. Estius in locum.
which ye have been taught, by word or our Epistle,] 2 These. 2.15. (which no
doubt were both the same:) But the Doctor though in the Authorities pleaded, he
is content they shall use the words Apostolical Tradition, often, yet himself
waves it, and never calls his Festivals an Apostolical Tradition; but an
Apostolical observation, The words of Nicephorus in the margin, p. 242. n. 5.
are (...), Apostolical Authority: which is more then custom, practice, etc.
not Englished by the Doctor.
custom, practice, n. 10.17, 18, 19. The reason is, because an Apostolical
Tradition to the Churches to keep, might well infer an Institution, and so
Divine Authority, which he knew, he could never prove, and therefore pleads,
[Onely the Practice Apostolical, and not their commanding it by Law.] n. 17.
But say I, Apostolical Practice only makes it more uncertain and more unable
to bear his Standard, because they practiced many things, not as Christians, or
to be conveyed to Christian Churches, but merely too comply with the Jews
their contrymen, to win them the better, as was said above.

3. p. 242. n. 5, 6.
Yet what is that less, then an Apostolical, Divine Institution which
Polycrates and his fellows, plead for their custom: [All which (says he)
observed the fourteenth day according to the Gospel, not at all transgressing,
but following the Canon of Faith.] But then it might be feared, and inferred,
that Peter and Paul transgressed both against the Gospel, and Canon of Faith,
in their contrary custom. Let him see to that. Is it not very probable that
Paul who was often and long in Asia, would have withstood Philip and John to
their faces (as he did Peter the prime Apostle in a like case, Gal. 2.) for
judaizing, and complying with the Jews, in the Festival, who had set up another
Day in the Western Church, or rather had cried down the observation of such
days in other Churches, Romans 14. Gal. 4.

4. If it were (I say not of Apostolical, Divine institution) of Apostolical
observation and practice, as a Christian Festival, would they have differed so
in their Tradition of it to the Churches, being guided all by the same Spirit?
would Philip and John observe and leave to the Eastern Churches, the Jewish
day, and Peter and Paul the Lords day, all of them jointly having appointed in
all Churches a weekly day, for the commemoration of the Resurrection? which is
also made the foundation of Easter day. It Is nothing probable.

5. If the Eastern observation of Easter was according to the Gospel and Canon
of Faith, how came it to pass; that that custom was abolished, (as it was) and
the Western, was established? was not this to set the Churches together by the
ears, both of them pleading Apostolical Tradition?

6. The Romish plea, for their custom, from Peter and Paul, may reasonably be
judged to be forged (as their primacy of the Pope, is,) For, 1. it is most
probable that Peter was never at Rome, but uncertain and false Tradition so
would have it, as our best Divines do make it appear. 2. Its most improbable,
that Paul, who was so vehement against all observation of Feasts, (except the
Lords day) should institute, or practice the same Festival, and that at Rome,
and so build again what he had destroyed. Romans 14.6. Gal. 4.

7. Its no way credible that the Apostles all or any of them, would first cry
down the Festivals as Jewish, and presently set it up as Christian; or 2. set
up an annual day, for the commemoration of the Resurrection, the Lords day
being before set up for the same end. 3. Or lay such a ground of difference to
the succeeding Churches, by different timeing of it. Credat Judaeus apella, Non
ego.

8. How came that contest between Victor and the Afiaticks, about the day, when
the same difference was between him, and the French, and Britain Churches: No
less then a threefold different observation of Easter, in the Western Churches,
as was noted.

9. Why does not the Dr. endeavor, to recover the day, which Philip our
Apostle, and first planter (by some sent hither by him) endowed us with, and
that according to the Gospel and Canon of Faith, from John the longest liver of
the Apostles; but submits to the Western custom, and so subjects us to Rome,
which he so fears, and warned me to be ware of? I leave these to his
resolution, and come to consider, what he says to my arguments against it.

1. There is no mention of the institution or observation of it, in Scripture;
nor ground to found it on. p. 244. n. 12 I said, there was no ground in
Scripture to found it on: To which he says nouothing.
To this he has three answers. [1. There is small virtue in this, from
Scripture negative.] As little virtue as there is in this negative argument,
for me; it seems to be great for himself, against me: For here n. 17. he
pleads thus against the institution of the Lord's Day; [ Sure the New Testament
has no where any Law-giving concerning it:] And again, against the use of the
fourth Commandment, [Where did Christ reduce us to the fourth Commandment.] p.
263. n. 8. And once more, p. 281. n. 19. [Christ never reprehended the
observation of the Feast of Dedication,] (that we read of) therefore he
approved it. But, in the case in hand, and ad hominem, I have argued strongly
from Scripture negative; [ Will worship is not commanded in Scripture,
therefore it is unlawful. But this Festival with that of the Nativity, is made
a Will Worship by Papists and the Doctor;] ergo, they are unlawful, and as
such, have no ground in Scripture. 2. Answer [ The Apostles word, (...), let us
keep the Feast is some (be it acknowledged a less weighty) ground in Scripture
for the observation.] This word of the Apostle in the judgment of all
Interpreters, has nothing to do with his Festival: The text and context are
also against his gloss; which makes it so light, that it is not so much as some
weight for the observation of it. And I having said so much against this gloss,
in my 31 Section of Fest. I wonder he should so confidently produce it here,
and say nothing to purpose to it, in its own place. All I shall say now, is
this, that if this be the sense of it, (which the Doctor begs) it has not
only some, but an exceeding weighty ground for the observation of his
Festival, a (...), a Lawgiving, an institution Divine, which he will deny to
the Lord's Day, and proves more then he intended, not only the observation and
practice, but also institution Apostolical: But more of this below. 3. Answ. [
The mention of the Lord's Day; Rev. 1. is some farther ground; if it be the
annual, then there is a clear evidence for the observation of it, in the
Apostles days.] The Doctor is happy, if all his suppositions might be granted
him; he knows, the place is generally understood of the Weekly-day, and what is
then become of his clear evidence? But hear again, [If it should be the weekly
day; yet in any reason, the annual day of the resurrection, was the foundation
of this weekly day.] It is observable, that in all this discourse of Festivals,
the Doctors great design is, to vilify, if not to nullify the authority of
the Lords day, so to exalt above, or equal with it his Festivals; which (if
there were no other crime) is sufficient to stir the indignation, of any truly
Religious man: Here he does it, and again presently, n. 17. and afterward
often, as I shall note as I pass on. But this he here asserts, is most
incongruous. Rather the weekly-day, was the foundation of the annual day: For,
first, its said, Christ rose on the first day of the week, often; and
thereupon. It was designed to be the Christian Sabbath, or day of Assemblies:
but never is it said, he rose upon such a day of the month, or year. 2. If the
Lords weekly day, was not first instituted, how came the contest between the
Churches, whether Easter day should be observed on the Lord's Day, or on the
Jewish day, which might and did fall, on any other day of the week. Tradition
says, that Peter and Paul observed the Festival on the Lords day at Rome, does
not this suppose the Lord's Day to be instituted before the Festival of Easter?
Saint John and Philip, its said, kept it on the Jewish day; how then could that
be the foundation of the weekly day. And let the Doctor remember, that his
Mother the Church of England, as she includes Easter day, among the Sundays,
making it no otherwise an Holy Day; so she founds the Lord's Day, not upon the
annual day, but upon the fourth Commandment. When she commands this prayer to
be said after it, [Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this
Law.] But the Doctor will either prove, or illustrate what he said; [As it is
evident that the weekly Friday fasts in the Church, had their foundation, in
the annual great fast on the day of Christ's death, in the Paschal week.] As if
the fast on Good Friday, were of equal antiquity or authority with the
Lord's Day; or humane constitutions, were to be a foundation for a Divine
institution. [That the Apostles did expressly repeal those Feasts,] n. 14. p. 244
has not (he says) the least degree of truth in it, as has formerly appeared
in the view of Gal. 4.10.] Let the Reader turn to the place, p. 3. n. 2. and
see what he says to that text; all is but this, [It is peculiarly restrained
by all circumstances to the Judaical Feasts, but no more appliable to the
prejudice of the yearly Feast of Christ's birth, then to the weekly of the
Resurrection.] Even from the beginning to the end of this account, his design
is to slur the luster of the Lord's Day, levelling it to his Festivals. But,
first, the Apostle speaks indefinitely against observation of days, as
religious, Paulus praecepit. says, Hierom.
all beside the Lords day, which he had there also established, as the day of
collection, (and first of Assemblies) for that collection supposes the day
before designed (instead of the old Sabbath) as well at Galatia, as among the
Corinthians; 1 Cor. 16.1. [Now concerning the collection for the Saints, as I
have given order, ((...)) ordered, ordained) to the Churches of Galatia, even
so do ye, upon the first day, etc.] Here Is an Apostolical institution for
collections on the Lords day, and presupposes the day before appointed, in both
those Churches. 2. It is no ways probable, that the Apostle would cry down
Jewish Festivals of Pasch and Pentecost, and set up the very same again, at the
same time, as Christian Feasts, as I said above. If they were abolished as
parts of Ceremonial-worship, how scandalous might it have been, to change only
the name, (nay the name was not changed in other Churches) and set up other
Feasts in their stead, as parts of Christian Worship: for so they would be
esteemed, if the Apostle had set them up, or brought them in.

The sestimony of Socrates the Historian, he eludes by a distinction; he means
it thus, n. 15.
[They made no Laws for the observing of Festivals, but refers the original of
them to custom;] but the Doctor speaks only of Apostolical practice, so he
says: But, first, Socrates says nothing of the Apostolical practice; but
refers it wholly to the custom of several places and people. [It seems to me
(says he) as many other things were introduced, by a custom in diverse places,
so, the Feast of Easter, by custom, in several people, had a peculiar
different observation.] Why? because none of the Apostles had made any Law
concerning it.] But sure if the Apostles did change it from a Jewish, to a
Christian Festival, and did themselves observe it, as exemplary to the
Churches, they did thereby at first give as good as a Law, and make an
institution, for them to observe. And I am persuaded that upon this ground, of
Apostolical tradition, and observation, came in all the Superstition, in after
ages, in making them Holy times, and parts of Divine Worship, etc. and they
established them as a Law, as Socrates said, believing them to be Apostolical.
2. The truth seems to me to lie here: The Apostles did often frequent the
Assemblies of the Jews, in the Temple, upon their solemnest Festivals, as a
greater opportunity of fishing in a wide Sea, a multitude of people; as at
Pentecost, Acts 2. and again, Acts 20 16 [Paul hasted to be at Jerusalem at the
day of Pentecost,] for the same reason; which custom of the Festivals
continuing, till the destruction of Jerusalem, the Apostles did condescend to
be at them, while they lived amongst them: Whereupon the following Church
seeing this example of their practice, took it as a Rule, to observe the
Feasts, especially the Jewish Christians in Asia, being tenacious of their old
customs, and so kep^ the very same day, the Jews did; which other Churches,
after the Jews were grown obstinate, finding such a custom of the Feast, in
hatred of the Jews, changed into the Lords day: as Augustine observes. Epist.
119 and Can. Nicen. de Fest. Pasch. by Constantines persuasion. But see the
tenaciousness of men for Traditions of their Fathers. The Doctor cares not,
(what he can) to weaken or question the Authority of the Lords day, to
strengthen and stablish his Easter Feast. p. 245. n. 17
[It will be hard for the Diatribist to produce any other evidence for the
weekly Christian Sabbath or Lords day, (then the custom and practice
Apostolical:) the New Testament has no where any giving of Law, conerning it.]
But sure it will be easy for the Diatribist to manifest a palpable difference
between the Lords day and his Easter, out of Scriture the best Record, (beside
what is said out of prime Antiquity.) For 1. We find the Name there, as a day
of Christian Assemblies, but not a word of Easter. 2. We find the Apostles
practice and observation of it, but never of Easter. 3. We find grounds in
Scripture for the institution or designation of the day, but nothing for
Easter, but rather the contrary prohibition. The grounds of the weekly
Christian Sabbath, it is well he will allow the Lord's Day so honorable a Title,
he cannot say so much for his Easter Feast; and some of his way, would have
scornfully called it, [Your Saint Sabbath.] The grounds I say, are these. 1.
For a solemn day of rest, which is a Sabbath, we have the fourth Commandment
moral in the judgment of its greatest enemies. 2. We have it granted, that
the day must not be less, then one in seven; yea, one day in seven, is granted
moral in the fourth Commandment, by the Doctor p. 262. n. 6. It is equitably
inferred, that a Christian should at least set apart one day in seven, for our
great Christian purposes, the first day of the week, etc.
himself. 3. Christ in Matt. 5. came to stablish (and not destroy) this Law,
amongst the rest. 4. We have Christian exercises performed on the day, beside
prayer, and preaching, and Lords Supper, collections for the poor are ordered
to be on this Day, which presupposes the day That which was done by the
Apostles, if it were not a rule for ever, yet was an effect of such a rule
formerly given by Christ, and interpretable by this practice to be so, in his
4. Quaer. s. 94.
before designed by Christ, or his Apostles: All this together amounts to a
Divine (...), or institution. And lastly, the uniform observation of this day,
in all ages, in all Churches, must needs presuppose it to be a Divine
Ordination. Not one of all these can he truly prove applyable to his Easter
Feast. Away then, with such unworthy comparisons: But we shall meet it again,
ere long.

And yet Isaid, p. 245. n. 19.
and say again, [The observation of Easter has better Antiquity then this of
Christmas, though not Apostolical.] He answers, [The Apostolical practice being
so evident, there can be no doubt, and then the Analogy holding, and the
argument proceeding in full force from one Christian Festival to another, will
certainly justify the observation, etc.] The question is not now of the
observation of either, but the Antiquity; so that this was a mere evasion.
There are histories and traditions, and ancients that speak of Easter, in the
second Centurie; but not one word of Christmas; and the Doctor has produced
none of that Antiquity for it; which to me, is a good evidence there is none.
And as for Analogy, from one Festival to another; it holds as well thus: If
there can be produced neither Apostolical institution, nor observation of
Easter, as a Christian Festival, (as is probably evinced above) then much less
is there any ground for the institution or observation of Christmas as an
Holy Day: But this is but a (...), to the main business.

When I granted, the Antiquity of some Festivals (in the third or fourth
Century) might argue they had nothing of the corruption of the Roman
Antichristain See, adhering to them; The Doctor is overjoyed, n. 1. p. 247.
[and congratulates the unexpected success of his paper.] But without any
cause, for it wrought nothing with me, being of that opinion before, that Rome
was not at that time Antichristian: But to discover my meaning, and to cool his
boasting, I believe the first Institutors of Festivals had a good Intention, to
commemorate the mercies of God, bestowed on us in Christ, making them only
circumstances of Worship, though some Superstitions, did soon after creep into
the observation of them: But after ages declining more and more, till
Antichrist got into the throne, those Festivals (I meant) comparatively had at
first nothing of that corruption, which after adhered to, and overwhelmed them,
both in their Institution, and also in their observation. Neither did I mean,
that the Festivals as they were lately observed by some in England, had nothing
of the Roman See, (as now it is corrupted) having charged the observation of
them, by the Dr. and some others, with little less, if not the same
Superstition and Will Worship, (besides the Riot) with them at Rome. And
however the Doctor say, p. 248. n. 3.
[That nothing could be more unjust and improbable at once, then what is
suggested of corruptions, in the most ancient primitive Church.] Yet himself is
more unjust in straining and misconstruing my words: For I spoke not of the
primitive Apostolical Church, but of some ages after, wherein I supposed those
Festivals were invented, (suppose in the third or fourth Century,) and it were
too easy to prove, that corruptions crept into the Churches, both in Doctrine
and Worship, in those ages, though more in after ages: And though its true, the
Governors of the Church did oppose all fundamental errors, n. 4.
against the Multa hujusmodi propter nonnullarum vel sanctarum vel turbu
lentarum personarum scandala, devitanda improbare non audeo. August. Epist. 1
9. p. 249. n. 7.
Natures and Person of Christ, etc. as the Apostles had done, yet corruptions
in Worship might and did creep in, [Good men being loath to oppose them,
thinking them errors that would increase piety,] as the Dr. Faulk observed.
And though the Church did oppose and censure corruptions, in Doctrine and
Worship, as she was able; yet had she in all times, some undutiful Sons, that
corrupted both; and of their Errors I meant, the Church of Rome and the Romish
Religion, as distinguished from the Reformed, is a bundle. And what great
advantage thereby I have given to Papists, by this Affirmation, I see not: For
this is not at all [an agnition that the most accused Romish practices now
adays, are the same, which were delivered to them from the primitive Church.]
They were not delivered to them, by the The gates of hell in idle Ceremonies
did assault the Church. The Fathers (in them) declined from the simplicity of
the Gospel, Doctor Pulk Rejoined. to Mart. ar. 1. see also, a. 3.
Church of any age, much less by the Primitive; but they like flies fell upon
and followed the corruptions of former times, and like Spiders sucked poison out
of sweet flowers. If the Doctor enter his descent to this. I am sure many as
true Sons of the Church of England, as himself, have said as much, and will
subscribe their Assent unto it. Sure I am, he has given them much more
advantage, against the true Church of England, in justifying their Superstition
and Will Worship, in their Festivals, by his Pen and Practice; as will appear,
ere we part.

The next debate, p. 249. n. 1.
in order, should be about the power of a Church, universal or partiular, to
constitute ceremonies for it self, as it shall judge most useful, etc. and in
special, to constitute Holy Days and Festivals The Doctor let fall those words,
[That this Anglicaene Church was invested with unquestionable power to
institute Ceremonies for it self: which may not without temerity, be changed or
abolished by any.] To this I put in a demur, and desired to see it proved, as
tending much to the decision of the present controversy. To which end, after
some explication to state the question right, I gave in some arguments, for the
Negative. All which the Doctor will not touch with one of his fingers, but
wisely leaps over four leaves of mine together: but goes on to beg the
question, in three particulars; [1. n. 2.
That this Church of ours was first planted by some either Apostle, or
Apostolical man, (which cannot easily be proved.) 2. n. 3.
That the Feast of Christmas was set up (that is an Institution, but corrected)
or celebrated by those that first planted the Faith here, i. e. some Apostle or
Apostolical person (which is more improbable.) 3. That what was by so good
authority, introduced, having no equal reason to supersede it, may not without
temerity, now be abolisht by any, etc.] And this is the main question, which
being founded upon the two other, unproved suppositions, falls together with
them. Yet the Doctor will prove this last by induction: [Not by any other
persons, Pope, p. 250. n. 4.
or Consiscory, because none has power over a Church founded by the Apostles,
and not subjected to any.] But this supposes it founded by the Apostles, and
that that only makes a Church (...), her own supreme head; whereas, if she
were planted, neither by an Apostle nor Apostolical man, but by an ordinary
Minister, she was free from subjection to any other head: [Not (says he) by the
Church it self.] What? may not the Church it self alter her own Institutions?
are her Canons unreversible? No, [because it cannot be now supposed to have any
such persons in it, as may be fit to compare with the first founders of it.]
But then, the Feast of Easter on the Jewish day, might not by the after Church,
be abolished (as it was) because no such persons as John and Philip could be
supposed there. And besides, it would make all the Apostles observations,
unchangeable, and Divine: yet there is one help left; [Not without some greater
reason for the changing and abolishing, then they may appear to have had for
the using of it.] This will come again in hypothesi to be considered; I shall
only ask now, what better reason had Constantine to change the Jewish day, to
the Lords day, when the Asian Churches had the Gospel and Canon of Faith, to
found their custom on?

But see the Application of his discourse. 1. I granted the English to be
subject to no foreign power: n. 5.
he demands, [Whether it be subordinate to it is own Sons, or to any but the
legal Fathers of it?] and then goes on with his scornful language sufficiently:
To which I shall give no other answer but this, to demand whether it be
subordinate to its own Fathers, (the Bishops, for them he means) and the reason
why I ask it, is, because he said even now, [That which was by so good
Authority introduced, (as his Christmas he says, was by some Apostle, etc.) may
not without temerity be abolished by any; not by any person, not by the Church
it self,] for reasons there given; unless he will say, his Bishops are persons
fit to compare with the first Founders: otherwise neither Sons nor Fathers,
might change or abolish it. But I questioned the unquestionable power of the
Church, to institute Ceremonies, and to make them unchangeable. n. 6.
The Doctor complains [of change made in his inference; he never assirmed of
those Ceremonies once instituted, that they might not upon good reasons be
changed and abolished, His words are, may not be changed and abolished by any:
Of Fest. s. 9. and he n. 4 not by any person, not by the Church it self.
by the same power which instituted them.] But if it be impossible to find the
same or equal power, in the Church, with them that instituted them, [it cannot
be supposed to have any such persons in it, fit to compare with the first
Founders,] are his words; then he does affirm, they may not be abolished by any
person or Church: Yes, upon better reasons, they may, then they had for using
them. This were very hard to find in any after Church, that they should be
wiser then the Apostles, to find greater reasons for the abolishing, then they
had for using them. He should have said, instituting them, not using them; for
we are speaking of a power to institute and abolish: And yet here he forgot
himself and talks of reasons, [Whereon this Festival was supposed to be
instituted.] Which word he has warily waved all this while, and pleaded only
Apostolical Practice and not Institution; but let it go: He therefore hastened
[ to examine the present reasons of abolition of this Festival, whether they
were as important, as those whereon this Festival was supposed to be
instituted, viz. that of the pious and thankful Commemoration of the Birth of
Christ. 2. Whether the reasons for abolition, were not fained, those of
Will Worship and Superstition, etc.] I shall answer first to the second
question. The Doctor may vainly hope, that he has evidenced them to be fained;
but will find them stick too really upon his Festivals, in his own opinion and
practice; which if it be made good, I shall venture to say to the first, that
the reasons of abolition were as, and more important, then of the Institution:
because Superstition and Will Worship are most abominable to God; and the birth
of Christ may be piously and thankfully commemorated upon any other day, as
well as this.

And now, n. 9.
was it not more policy, (to say no worse) then piety in him, to wave all my
discourse concerning the power of a Church to institute Ceremonies? and [to
take leave to pass it over untoucht.] Which by the Laws of disputation, would
not be granted him? For does it not concern his Festival nearly, to know,
whether the Authority instituting it was sufficient? if not, its void ipso
facto: If so, it behoved him to manifest it; having asserted, that this or any
Church of the like foundation, [is invested with unquestionable power, to
institute Ceremonies for its self, which consequently may not, without great
temerity, be changed and abolished by any.] However, this being excepted to,
and that (as I think) upon very good reasons, it concerned him, to have given
me and the Reader satisfaction herein. But let us hear how he colors his
tergiversation. [The two branches of his proposition were no way concerned in
any part of my state of the question; 1. That a national Church planted by the
Apostles or their successors, may lawfully use a Festival for the commemorating
the birth of Christ, etc. 2. That such an usage, when it has gained a
reception, ought not to be declaimed against as Antichristian, or laid aside by
persons under authority, etc.] For this latter, there is scarce one word of it
in his proposition, and for the former, it must necessarily be founded upon
this supposition, [That such a Church has unquestionable power to institute
such a Ceremony, such a Festival:] Which if it be not proved (as it is merely
begged) let the using, or usage, be never so ancient, (having concurrence of
other Churches) yet it wants Authority for the continuance of it. For the
Doctor must know, that its one thing, [To use a day for the Commemorating of
the birth of Christ, and on it to pray, to praise God, etc. exhorting all good
Christans to partake thereof, and to lay aside, their ordinary labors, etc.]
and another thing, to institute a day as a Religious Festival, making it as
sacred as the Lords day Sabbath, a part of Worship, and a sin to work upon that
day;] as Papists, and the Doctor do. And consequently, if such Superstition and
Will Worship be gotten into the observation of such a day, it may be declaimed
against, in those respects, as Antichristian, and laid aside, by those that
have power in their hands: which whether they had sufficiently, who laid his
Festival aside, I leave to the Doctor to debate it with them, as not concerning
me, who do believe, that I have sufficient Authority from the word of God, (I
say not, to abolish an usage or custom) not to observe any such day, as is
guilty of Superstition and Will Worship. But to satisfy his credulous Reader,
who takes all his words as an Oracle, he slurs my four leaves discourse, thus,
n. 10.
[I shall omit now to take notice of the infirmities, which this discourse of
his, is as full of, as from any writing of no greater length, may well be
expected.] If it were so, (though others judge it not so) it was the easier for
him to have answered; his charity uses not to hide or spare my infirmities.

In his 8. and 9. Sections, p. 252. n. 1. etc.
there is little of moment, to our main business; some jerks and squibs there
are, not worth taking notice of, and therefore I shall (as he did, with much
more material things of mine) take leave to pass them by untoucht, and proceed
to the next.

That I proved what I said, p. 255. n. 3.
[That the first and purest ages of the Church did not observe his Christmas,]
is the scope of my 6, and 7. Sections of Fest. 1. By disproving the Antiquity
of Easter to be Apostolical, by three arguments, which are again applied, Sect.
27. to his Christmas, and the Doctor ought to have taken notice of them. 2. By
the utter filence of the most ancient Records of the usages of the Church, for
the first 200 years, at least; which is most improbable they would not take
notice of, if then in use and practice: Truly (to use his own words) my eyes,
or my memory very much fail me, or he has not in any degree, out of any the
most Ancient Records, given any one instance of any one Father, that speak one
word of his Christmas Festival; All he pleads, is but the Analogy of it with
that of Easter, which has been sufficienty spoken to, and will again here:
which might plead something (though not much) for the observation of it, when
it was once set up; but nothing at all, for the Institution, or Antiquity of
it. n. 4.
And therefore he finely puts it off, thus, [The dimness or want of stories of
those times, makes it not so evident of this of Christmas, yet the Analogy
holding directly between them; the argument remains as firm, that the laying
aside those Festivals, is a separation from the Apostolic, purest times.] But
first, the Doctor speaks of the dimness of the first ages; which sure is a
figure, (...), dimness, for cimmerian Egyptian darkness: The stories of those
times, would have been as clear for Christmas, as for Easter, if such a
solemnity and usage, had been in being in Ignatius, and the next to him; or in
Tertullian, a man of great learning, a diligent observer and recorder of the
Customs and Practices of the most ancient Church: Dr. Ham. of Infant Bapt. p.
97. n. 5. Yet not one word of Christmas, in the end of the second, and
beginning of the third Century.
Tertullians and Origenes time. 2. The Analogy holds not in these two
Festivals: For, first, Easter had a solemn Feast of the Jews, to plead either
its Institution, or observation; but there was no Feast of the Jews, at the
time of his Christmas; but it seems rather to be taken up, in imitation of the
Gentile Saturnalia, a good while after. 2. Easter day, the day of Christ's
Resurrection, is particularly set down, (and by the Asiaticks observed)
according to the Jewish account, or Lunary year, in all the four Evangelists.
But the day of Christ's Nativity, (as it cannot be discovered out of Scripture,
so) is observed according to the Romish, or Solary, year. 3. Easter day, in the
Western Church observed on the Lord day, may seem to carry some Antiquity in
the face of it: But the observing of Christmas according to the Romish year,
does fairly show, it was not observed in the Apostles time, nor by men, that
came from Jerusalem. 4. The Church of England observed Easter day, as a Lords
day; but Christmas as a peculiar Festival, and therefore, the Analogy is small
between them. Whereupon, the argument is of no force, [That the laying aside
this Festival of Christmas (of Easter enough is said before) is a separation
from the Apostolic and purest time:] When it can never be proved, that it was
in use, in those times, or some good while after. The Analogy holds only upon
Supposition: That if the Apostles did institute and observe Easter as a
Christian Festival, (which is proved most improbable, or uncertain) they might
proportionably, institute and observe his Christmas, which is more uncertain,
if not certainly false.

But what say we, p. 256. n. 7.
[To the Solemnities and Festivities of Ignatius and Polycarp, two Bishops that
lived in the Apostles times, observed from the very times of their deaths, and
that in compliance with other the like Festivals of the Church before them;
which must needs come home, to observation of Festivals in the When as, these
Martyrs died not till after all the Apostles, many years and there is not the
least mention of the Festivities of any of the Apostles, till many ages after.
Apostles days.] To this, I say, many things. 1. The Dr. pitifully and poorly
begs, [that those Feasts were instituted in compliance with other the like
Festivals of the Church before them.] Whereas, if those were Feasts, as after
they were used, they had better Antiquity then not only his Christmas, but his
Easter also, and had none before them; unless he will plead St. Stephens day,
(who was a Martyr before them,) long after, put to attend upon Christmas day.
2. If these Feasts of Ignatius (which he often mentions here and after) were
observed so near the Apostles days, (as he asserts) does not the Doctor, 1.
cast dirt in his Mothers face, for abolishing those Feasts, putting them out of
the Calendar, and separating from the Apostolic and purest times? 2. Does he
not also much gratify the Church of Rome (which he sometimes causlesly casts
upon me) as more conformable to the purest times, in observation of those
Festivals, then his Mother the Church of England? 3. Is not he himself, a
Separatist and Schismatic, in his compliance with his Mother, in his
separation from the Apostolic purest times? in casting off Holy Days, of above
fourteen hundred years standing, from the very Apostles days? Let him see, what
he will answer. And I shall only add; If the Church of England, in King
Edwards days, in rasing out of the Calendar those Feasts, did not separate from
the Apostolical, Universal Church; nor does it follow, that in laying aside his
other Festivals, she has made any separation from that Church, the rather,
because he cannot prove his Christmas Apostolical, as he would believe he has
proved those Feasts of Ignatius and Polycarp, n. 7.
to be. Oh, [but there is no analogy betwixt the Church of Englands departing
from Rome, and the Diatribists departing from the Church of England:] Where its
observable, that he takes the Church of England, to be only, the Superiors,
that is, the Bishops, the Fathers of the Church, as Romanists do; those of the
inferior Clergy, are none of the Church, no nor the Parliament of England. But
if I remember aright, his Superiors the Bishops were, laid aside, (even by the
King himself, excluded the Lords house) before his Festivals, and so had no
Superiority in things agitated in Parliament, and then we made no Separation
from our lawful superiors, in this particular: And so his first difference is
nothing. The second is this, n. 8.
[Those things wherein the Church of England departed from the Romish opinions,
and practices, were none of them such as this of Festivals, common usages of
the universal, ancient primitive purest Church, but innovations unduely brought
in, and imposed upon all Christians. [Yes, just the same, usages of the ancient
primitive Church, the Feasts of Ignatius and Polycarp, observed near the
Apostles days, as he says, and where is then the difference? If then, this be
any advantage to the Romish Church, n. 9.
she may thank the Doctor for it, who pleads so much for some Festivals, to be
in the Apostles days and purest times, that he has made his Mother a
Schismatic in rasing them out of the Calender etc. as was said above. But I
shall enter my protestation of descent to this proposition also.

It is an easy thing for the Doctors great learning, to slight all, that comes
from others, p. 257. n. 1.
as worthy no reply: How solidly I have proved the observation of this
Festival, by many among us, to be superstitious, is already evident, and will
be more, ere long: though the Doctor will wink, and pass it all by, as if he
saw it not. 2. That contrary extremes of Superstition, and profaneness, n. 2.
may meet in the same person, may indeed seem a wonder and very strange, but is
too often exemplified, I have known (and I believe the Doctor too) some Sons of
this Church, superstitious to admiration, who have been as profane, as almost
the times yielded any: As if they had intended to make good that speech of
Socrates, cited by me, Fest. page 171. [There are some, who think all whoredom
(and drunkenness, etc.) to be a thing indifferent, that do contend for Festival
days, as for life.] Nor is it such an irrational thing in these times, to call
the same man Papist first, and then Socinian: For as much, as some that are
Papists in some opinions and practices, are also Socinians in other points, as
might be proved. That I derive Superstition from super statutum, is proved
false, by his own confession above. The rest in numb. 3. has been spoken to
before, and that of the Creed and Catechism is a (...), and I pass it by.

Who they are, that in these sad and erroneous times do stand up against all
the Sects and Heresies, p. 259. n. 4.
is evident enough; though I had said nothing, and how little those of the
Doctors parties do appear to oppose them, is clear enough; partly because they
are willing to put that burden upon those, whom they esteem their enemies, and
partly because they preach the same Doctrines of Arminius and Papists which
themselves do hold and publish: But if the Reader will see the Preface to the
Doctors Practical Catechism, in the first Impressions, This Diatribist; as
this Publicane. n. 5.
he will find, [a Pharisee could not have said more, in his solemnest
magnificat,] then the Doctor has suffered to be said of himself. It may be, he
was sensible of it, and therefore has wisely left it out in his last
Impression: And how he slights and undervalues both the learning and persons of
his Adversaries, has been showed above, and may again ere long. But it seems
the touch of Arminianisme, has enfired the Doctors zeal; whereof he is as
guilty as any I know, witness his Catechism, and his Fundamentals. I ask in a
word; Durst the Doctor have broached such Doctrine in his Prelates time, in K.
James his days, or beginning of King Charles? We see how dangerous a thing
Toleration is: Yet if we speak of pride, what has an humble Publican to do,
with an high flown Arminian, who dare answer the Apostles, quis te discrevit?
with an, ego me decerno: And when you hear men plead so much for Free Will, and
Free Will offerings and uncommanded perfection above both Law and Gospel, and
tell us confidently they may and do expect a greater reward for uncommanded
virtues, then for commanded duties; are not such men almost as high as Papists
and Jesuits, who dare say to God, [He should be unjust, if he do not give
eternal life, n. 5.
to their good works?] But to vent his anger, the Doctor charges me with two
palpable untruths; first, that I say absolutely, that Festivals are forbidden
by the second and fourth Commandment, when I only say, [If they be made parts,
of Worship, as holy as the Lords day, etc.] Then 2. that I think, [grace may
not be received in vain:] When, upon his own confession I meant, that God does
not give it, only to incline and leave men free to use it, or not to use it,
see ad p. 199. n. 6. and p. 200. n. 9. And having done this, he charges himself
with two commonly reputed errors. 1. To favor slavish fear; which most
Divines condemn. 2. To favor mercenary obedience, which natural men have
disallowed, as less ingenuous; and our Savior checked some of his followers
for, [Ye seek me, because ye did eat of the loaves and were filled.] See above,
ad p. 26. n. 20. of the first; and ad page 207. numb. 15. of the second.

I am again charged (unjustly) with change of his words, p. 260. n. 1.
upon a design; He said, [The solemnity has no other design, but to teach us
what we have received from God, and assist us, to render a pious
acknowledgement of it, etc.] which I interpret, of the design, in the first
Institutors of this service. Surely if we will speak rationally and properly,
the Solemnity it self is not capable of having designs, it must then be, in
the first Institutors, or second observers: And if so, the example of Gideons
golden Ephod, or his design, in setting it up, is parallel enough with his
case of Festivals: Their designs equally in appearance, good; the issue
equally bad; both have proved snares in aftertimes. n. 3.
From whence it follows, not (as he infers,) [That every Festival designed as
a public pious acknowledgement, etc. is to be looked at, as a snare, to all
the people of God,] but, that, in the service of God, no plausible design, can
privilege an humane Institution, from being a snare to Gods people, being made
parts of Worship, etc. as in time Gideons Ephod proved, and his Festivals also
amongst Papists, as I there said. And sure, (for all his Logical notions)
examples are so far argumentative. But how then could he have given a lash to
the Lords day, if he had not thus Syllogized? n. 4.
[For then indeed the Lords day, which is supposed to be designed for those
good ends, must upon the same account, be abolisht also.] Upon what account?
because, it is supposed to be of the same Institution with his Festival? this he
will assert anon; Or because it may, by some, be abused to Superstition, as his
Ephod was? This, I suppose he intends: As if the abuse of an Ordinance of God,
were to be paralleled with the like abuse of an Ordinance of man. All Gods own
Ordinances may be abused to Superstition, but I hope, the Doctor will grant
another remedy to them, then abolition: But humane Institutions, (if they may
at all be admitted into the Worship of God) if they prove snares to the people
of God, deserve no other remedy, then the brazen Serpent, and Gideons Ephod
found, a total abolition. The Doctors inference therefore, upon the Lords day,
proceeds upon his supposition, that it is Authority is the same, with his
Festivals: or else, if the one, the Lords day, be of Divine, and the other, his
Festival, of humane Institution, the one, for such abuses, must be abolished,
the other only purged from such abuses.

We are now coming to make good the charge of Superstition and Will Worship
upon the late observation of his Festival: p. 261. n. 1.
which the Doctor has no mind to meddle with; but pleads his largeness on
these subjects already, to ease himself of the trouble, and (as he pretends)
his Reader also, of an ungrateful penance. When as I dare say, nothing would
have been more grateful to many of his Readers, then that he had clearly washed
his hands of this charge, or acknowledged the truth of his guilt. And now I see
the reason in part, why he waved that necessary debate, of the power of the
Church, to institute Ceremonies, such as his Festivals are pleaded to be. In my
9. Sect. of Fest. I propounded and stated the question, as knowing that it
would be of great use, in the following parts of this discourse, but he lays it
aside, and will by no means, be brought into the list of this debate. See supra
ad p. 249. n. 1. His first argument to free the observers from appearance of
Will Worship, was this; [They observe this usage in obedience to the Laws of
the Church.] I answered, that he ought to have proved, first, that they which
instituted the Festival had a lawful power to do it: else Papists may use the
same argument for their Holy Days, n. 3.
etc.] Now here his answer; [1. My not proving of this, was founded in my
supposing it, that as Magistrates in general, so Governors of a Church, are
invested with power to institute Circumstances of Worship, etc.] But here are
many misadventures: 1. That he supposes, what he should have here or some where
proved; at least after my challenge of him to prove it, Sect. 9. and stating
the question for him. 2. The Magistrates civil, have a larger power, to make
Laws in things indifferent, then the Governors of the Church, in Religious
affairs, who are tied up to the Laws of the word. 3. The Doctor changes the
words of the question, which was of Ceremonies, made parts of Religion, or
Worship, and not of Circumstances of commanded Worship, as, time, place, etc.
The Papists for certain do make their Festivals, Holy Days, parts of their
Religious Worship, and may not they plead for observation of them, p. 262. n. 4.
[They do it in obedience to the Laws of the Church.] And so in other usages of
theirs: Hear his second answer to this; [This is interpretable as a far greater
kindness to them, then I have ever been guilty of, the Church may command in
lawful things, therefore it may do so in unlawful things.] But first, what are
the things unlawful, which the Church of Rome commands? adoration of Images,
the Mass, etc. He must know, that this will not reach to my answer, which is of
observing by others, not commanding by the Church; and he cannot condemn the
observers of things unlawful, commanded by the Church, till he have first
proved, that the Church had no power to command such things: So by proportion,
he cannot justify observers of Festivals by this, that they do it in obedience
to the Laws of the Church, till he have not supposed, but proved, the Church
had power to institute them; wherein the force of my answer lay, though the
Doctor would not see it. 2. But speak to the point of Holy Days; which the
Doctor thinks as lawful as they do: If a Papist should answer my proposition
and question; Why do you observe your Festivals? he would answer just as the
Doctor does; he does it in obedience to the Church, and therefore it is no
Will Worship. But say I, you must first prove the Church has power to
institute them: No, says he, with the Doctor, I suppose that, and therefore do
not prove it. What can the Doctor say more? He may not now come and say, the
Church of Rome commands things unlawful: (for he and they suppose Festivals to
be lawful,) and if he say so, he condemns himself with them. If he shall say,
they command them as parts of Worship, and make them Holy Days, and that makes
them unlawful: he must have recourse to my answer. It will not excuse the
observers to say, they do it in obedience to the laws of the Church, unless he
prove they had power to command those things unlawful, which he cannot do: And
if this answer be good, that the Church of Rome commands things unlawful when
she makes her Festival as parts of Religion and Worship, etc. I dare put it
upon this issue, that the Doctor is as guilty as they in these crimes, and does
them a far greater kindness, then I have ever been guilty of. By my answer to
this first comparison, he may see the unjustness of the other three, which he
would fain put as absurdities upon me, and make me ridiculous to his Readers. I
could easily retort them, but I forbear recrimination. I shall only say, the
Doctor varies the question, and then makes his Inferences and Comparisons; for
the state of the question was, whether the Church may ordain, and private
persons observe Festivals, as Holy Days, parts of Worship, etc. and then I
dare make comparisons and inferences with him. 1. It is as lawful for the
Church of Rome, or any Church, to command other unlawful things, as to command
Festivals or observe them, as Holy Days, as parts of Worship, etc. for both
are equally unlawful. 2. There is equal unreasonableness, in besainting those
that are gotten into the Calendar at Rome, and consecrating, that is, making
holy a day, and a part of Worship, as in consecrating a day, to the
commemorating of the birth of Christ, upon the same terms: especially some of
them, which were observed near the Apostles times, as that of Ignatius and
Polycarp, is said to be, which cannot be proved of his Festival: But
comparisons are odious, and I forbear the rest: he may easily make it out. The
only question is, Whether the Doctor (as he does plead for some Festivals,
which they of Rome observe as well as he, so) do not make them (as they do)
Holy Days, and parts of Worship, etc. and so be equally guilty of the crimes
charged upon them, as they are, which shall by and by be manifested: But
something else is first considerable.

The Doctor justified the observers, by their obedience to the fifth
Commandment: I answered, that he might better have justified their obedience by
the fourth Commandment, having founded days of public Worship on that
Commandment. [It is, (said he) a designation of Time for the special performing
of public Worship, as necessary.] Now I supposed, that he by designation of
Time, had meant, the special Time there designed, a weekly Sabbath; or one day
in seven necessarily to be observed, and then he might have justified their
observation, by that Commandment, and needed not have reduced it to the fifth
Commandment. But it seems I was mistaken, for he intended no such thing. Hear
what he says, [The difference is very conceiveable betwixt time or times
generally considered, for Gods service, p. 262. n. 6.
and this or that particular time:] The meaning is, that sometime is necessary
by that Commandment, but the particular designation, is at the Churches
disposing: the former belongs to the fourth Commandment, the latter to the
fifth. See but how liberal the Doctor is, to God. 1. [That God should have some
time assigned, for his service, is of the very law of nature, and so much of
morality, there is fundamental to the positive precept of the weekly Sabbath in
the fourth Commandment.] Some time, why some time is of the Law of Nature, for
the Doctor to eat his breakfast; in as much, as he can do nothing, without some
time, and this is all the morality the great School-man, and the Doctor his
Symmists, allow to the fourth Commandment: which would have been moral, or
rather natural, had there never been any fourth Commandment placed in the
Decalogue: But seeing God is Lord of us and all our time, it had been fitter to
have said, All our time was due to God for his service, except some time be
allowed by him, as necessary, for our worldly business: Besides, this some time
to be assigned for Gods service, is not said to be designed by God, in
particular; but only, that some time must be assigned; that is, by the Church,
which is poorly begged, as before. And this is the Helena for which they so much
contend: and no marvel; for if they can but get this granted, that the power of
designation of the necessary sufficient Time for Gods service (a thing of most
high concernment) is in the Church, we must grant, that she has power enough
to institute what Ceremonies, she shall think useful, in the service of God.
But he is yet more liberal. [2. The fourth Commandment being given to the Jews,
for one day in seven, as a fit and moderate proportion of time, it might
equitably be inferred, that a Christian should at least set apart one day in
seven for our great Christian purposes, etc.] But his Colleagues say, that
proportion of time, in the fourth Commandment was Ceremonial, and so void; and
one day in eight or ten might be sufficient, if the Church so pleased. And what
is this equitableness the Doctor speaks of; not just and necessary, it may not
be less, yea, must be so much at least; but fit, and convenient, to be designed
by the Church, nay, by every Christian, for so he says: For if he should yield
it necessary by this Commandment, to set apart one day in seven, he grants the
fourth Commandment to be moral, for so much time; which ere long, he will, as
others do, deny. There would then remain nothing to be done, but to find out
that particular day of seven to be assigned for God and his service, and who
has power to do it. For that he is yet more liberal, then some of his
partners, [The first day of the week, and accordingly he supposes it instituted
by the Apostles of Christ.] Surely, this is one of the Doctors
Free-will-offerings, and we (if not God) are much beholden to him, if he would
not retract this gift, which he will do anon; founding the Lord's Day and his
Festivals on the same Authority of the Church. But I take what he grants,
kindly; If the first day of the week, was by Apostolical, that is, Divine
Institution, as one of seven: I ask, by what Rule or Commandment, did they,
make that day necessary and moral, if not by the fourth Commandment? and then,
it is moral, not only for some time, but for one day in seven, which will
hardly be yielded. And again, if the Lord's Day be of Apostolical, divine
institution, according to the fourth Commandment, it is Holy, above, not only
all other days in the week, but above all his Festivals, for which he has
nothing in the fourth Commandment, nor can prove them of Apostolical
Institution; the most he pretends to, is but Apostolical practice, and
observation.

And therefore (fearing he has yielded too much) he starts back, and says, [As
among the Jews, n. 7.
beside the weekly Sabbath, required by the fourth Commandment, they had many
Festivities, some appointed by God himself, others instituted by men. Yet
constantly observed, without prejudice to the fourth Commandment: So nothing
hinders, but under the Gospel, the Church may ordain Christian Feasts, etc.] As
for those Feasts appointed by men, they have their place below, where they
shall be spoken to. For those of Gods appointment, we do not think the fourth
Commandment exclusive, to hinder God, for appointing what days he pleases;
only, it presupposing the power of ordaining Holy Days, to belong to God, it
excludes men, for setting up any as holy, without his leave. It cannot
therefore, be inferred reasonably, [God had power to appoint what Holy Days he
pleased to the Jews; ergo, the Church under the Gospel, may appoint as many as
she will.] Besides, those Festivals of the Jews, (beside the weekly Sabbath)
were typical and Ceremonial, and a part of their yoke; which being taken off by
Christ, it becomes not the Church to put the same and a greater, upon the necks
of Christians. Add to this, that those Festivals, were not properly reducible
to the fourth Commandment, requiring but one in seven, whereas the Doctor will
fetch them all in under his fundamental morality of some times, to be assigned
for Gods service, by the fourth Commandment, that is, such as the Church shall
appoint, and yet pleads the fifth Commandment, to justify obedience to them,
[not as an act of Will Worship, but of honor and observance to this ordinance
of the Church, and so a duty of the fifth Commandment.] Which sure needed not,
if the fourth Commandment be moral for assigning some times for Gods service,
by the Church, for that Commandment will both command, and justify their
obedience.

That we Christians are by Christ reduced to the fourth Commandment, as for one
day in seven to be holy, so for our allowance of six days for our own works; p.
263. n. 8.
he says, 1. [It has not the least appearance of truth in it: where did he
reduce us to the fourth Commandment?) Did not the Dr. say even now, n. 6. That
it is equitable by that Commandment, that a Christian should at least set apart,
one day in seven? for more then one in seven, let him look for authority: one
in seven shall serve our turn: And I ask, by what Rule or Authority does the
Doctor presume to take the allowance of the six days, for his own occasions*
if not by the fourth Commandment? and will he not by the same Commandment,
allow God, one of seven? But where did Christ reduce us to the fourth
Commandment? I answer, in Matthew. 5. where he professes, he came not to destroy,
but to fulfill and stablish the Moral Law, whereof the fourth, for one in seven
is one: But then says he, ['Tis visible what the consequence must be, even an
obligation to the Jewish Sabbath, for that certainly was the subject of that
Commandment.] Has not the Dr. As he did the second Commandment above ad p. 44.
n. 8 The Dr. leaps from p. 152. of mine, to p. 157.
now destroyed one Commandment more out of the Decalogue, which Christ came to
establish? or is not this, the (...), of the Dr. that the subject of the fourth
Commandment, was that seventh day Sabbath? for if so, it is as fully void as
the commandment for the Paschal Sabbath: or else the Doctor must turn, either
Jew, and observe that day, or Anabaptist and Quaker, etc. and make no Sabbath,
but every day a Sabbath. I leave it to his choice. The rest that follows in
this Section, is impertinent to the main business: Some thing he says, about
the mistake of the day and venial sins; not fit to be passed by: For venial
sins, n. 11, 12.
he has this passage; [He that talks of venial sins, must be presumed not to
exclude the blood of Christ, etc.] I spoke of venial sins, in the notion of
Papists; but sure they do not include the blood of Christ, when they talk of
venial sins; but rather exclude it, saying, That men need not ask God
forgiveness for them; but themselves may satisfy for them, by an Ave Maria, a
Pater noster, or a knock on the breast, etc. And the Doctors language is too
like theirs; [The excuse of blameless ignorance will wash away greater errors,
then this, if an error.] As holy water washes away venial sins with them. As
for the mistake of the day, to be no sin, I intended it ad bominem, to the
Doctor, supposing and making the day to be an Holy Day, and part of Worship, as
the Sabbath, and Paschal day were: wherein to mistake the day, was criminous.
Yet let the Doctor consider how near he and others have been to sin, upon the
mistake of the day; in the Collect for Christmas day; they used to pray thus,
[Almighty God, which have given us this day, thy Son to be born of a pure
Virgin, etc.] If Christ was not born on this day (as it is very uncertain) is
not this a manifest untruth? telling it, not only to men, but to God too in
their holy Prayers: But enough of that. The Superstition and Will Worship are
the crimes that were charged upon his observation of the Festival, oftentimes
before, and here more fully and directly; but the Doctor will take no notice of
it, but leaps over five or six leaves together. p. 264. n. 14
And mark how he excuses this omission: [ What Superstition is charged by
Chemnitius, on Papists observation of their Holy Days, is all answered before
it be produced, by this consideration, that Chemnitius allows this and other
Festivals, which is all he contended for, who undertook not to be advocate for
the Legend or Calendar of Papists.] But, first, though Chemnitius did allow of
his Festivals, yet not of his Superstition in the observation of them, any more
in him, then in Papists. 2. The Doctor has taken upon him to be advocate for
some Festivals, which are in the Papists Calendar at least, as well as in ours
in England, and pleads for them with the same arguments that they do. 3. The
same Superstitions charged upon Papists observation of their Holy Days, are by
me there, charged upon some, yea, many amongst us, in some of those
particulars, and the instances are all taken out of the Doctors Tract of
Festivals, and so intended him for one of the guilty persons; but because it
seems, I did not name the Doctor, he takes no notice of all this; I shall
therefore now charge home, and lay it so in his way (as between two walls) that
he cannot avoid the seeing of it, unless he will tergiversari, turn back, or
else fly over all, as formerly he has done; or rather (which I wish) fall down
before the Truth, and give Glory to God.

But before I come to demonstrate, that the Doctor is, (...), self-condemned of
those two crimes, I desire it may be remembered, first, That I having set down
several Species of Superstition, p. 6. s. 5, etc. and most of them taken out of
the Doctor himself in his Tract. of Superst. he puts in no exception against
them, but seems (if silence be consent) to grant them all: Some at least he
assents to, in this discourse, p. 30. n. 30. and 32. 2. That here again I
having showed the several ways of the Superstition, charged by Chemnitius, on
the observation of Holy Days, by the Papists, and applied them, in particular
to himself; he neither gives consent to them by his silence, or wilfully
declines to vindicate himself from the charge. For if he could not assent unto
them, it concerned him to have denied and opposed them, in both the places, as
dangerous grounds, to conclude against his own opinion and practice, and had
given me occasion thereby, to confirm them, by Reason, and Testimonies of
Orthodox Divines: which being not by him done, I might the rather take them as
granted, and only borrow the propositions from him, and leave him or the
Reader to make up the conclusion: as thus, first, [To place more holiness in
days, then God has placed in them, is superstitious:] So Chemnitius asserts,
so I laid it down Superst, Sect. 10. and it is generally the judgment of our
Divines, upon this sufficient reason, because [God only can Sanctify things
or times for the Sanctifying of those that use them:] This is thus far yielded
by the Dr. himself, [That to place more holiness in them, then is due to them,
is faulty, Superst. s. 50.] [If I count it holy in that degree, then I offend
not,] implying if he did more, he then offended; and being there provoked by
me, to show what degrees of holiness, a Church, or Person, puts upon things or
times, he again waves it in his last, as able to asign none; and then the
proposition is undeniable, [To place holiness, or more holiness, in days then
God has placed in them, is Superstitious.]

But the Doctor (and his Symmists) places holiness in days, where God has
placed none, and more then God has placed in them: That God has placed no
Holiness in his Festival, is confessed; by denying Christ or his Apostles to
have instituted it. Of Fest. Sect. 28, 77. That he places holiness in it,
appears by his own words, when he says, [The day is to be esteemed above other
days of the year; (Lords days too it seems) consecrating it from common to
sacred uses,] Ibid. s. 59. that for his opinion and judgment: And that in
practice, he placed more, at least equal holiness in it, with the Lords day; he
confesses, [That the day has been observed, if not much more, certainly as
strictly as any Lords day in the year, etc.] Sect. 24. Yea, more strictly (said
I) with more solemn services, with stricter cessation from sports, then on the
Lords day, on which sports were permited, but no touching of Cards or Dice that
day. Ibid. The Assumption then is justified, the Doctor does place more
holiness in his Festivals, then God has placed in it. Therefore he is
Superstitious.

2. [To esteem the observation of that day, and the services done on that day,
to be better and more pleasing and acceptable to God, than the observation of
any other day, (the Lords day it self) and then the services done on other
days, is a superstitious vanity.] So Chemnitius. So I asserted, Superst. s. 13.
to which the Doctor enters no descent: or if he should, I would thus confirm
it, [because it fastens some promise on Christ, which he has not made in the
Gospel:] The Drs. own words, in a like case, Superst. s. 45. But the Doctor
esteems the observation of that day and the services done on that day, to be
better, more pleasing and acceptable to God, then, etc. For the observation of
the day, he makes it a Free-will-offering, to dedicate and consecrate the day
to God, and asserts of the Institution of it; See this account, p. 197. n. 4.
and p. 229. n. 14. more and greater acceptance, etc.
[It is (more then lawful) pious in it self.] Sect. 77 And the services to be
more acceptable to God, then on other days, results from his frequent
assertion, [ That such services being not commanded, are the more acceptable
because voluntary:] So he says, [When in the service of God, a man out of a
pious affection shall do any thing else, beside what God has commanded, by any
particular precept, this action of his is to be accounted so much more
commendable and acceptable to God:] Will-worsh. s. 16. And again, [ The more
acceptable for the voluntaries, as being in that, parallel to those oblations,
which are pronounced most acceptable, s. 19.] But I assume, the observation
(and dedication) of his Festival, together with the services done upon the day,
are such as God has not commanded by any particular precept, but voluntary;
and therefore the more acceptable, by the Doctors Divinity; the conclusion then
may not be refused; therefore he is superstitious.

3. [To place the Worship of God in observation of a day, which God has not
made holy, is superstitious:] So Chemnitius charges the Papists to do, and this
was by me laid down as a Species of Superstition, Sect. 6. and 8. Of Superst.
Whereunto we have the Doctors consent or silence: But if he should deny it, it
might be proved thus, both from the definition of Superstition given by the
School-man, [A vice contrary to Religion in the excess,] which the Scripture
calls, addition to the Rule of Worship, and also by the scope and sum of the
second Commandment; [God must prescribe his own Worship,] which the Doctor
himself has glossed, as the sense of that Commandment, as is cleared above.
And it may yet be farther confirmed from his words and grants. [ To make new
sorts or kinds of Worship, is by him condemned as Superstition, p. 12. n. 13.]
But to place the Worship of God in the observation of any day, that God has
not made holy, is to make a new sort or kind of Worship, and consequently, is
Superstition.

But the Doctor places the Worship of God in the observation of a day, which
God (confessedly) has not made holy, his Festival: This I shall prove many
ways. 1. His Festival is one of his Free-will-offerings, which anciently was a
part of Worship. 2. He calls it, Will Worship, which includes voluntary
uncommanded Worship, (so he often explains it) and so being uncommanded
Worship, it is a new sort, or kind of Worship, which God has not commanded.
3. He calls the consecration of it, a voluntary oblation, (which signifies
Worship.) [An oblation to God in honor to him; Sect. 59. Offer it up a
voluntary oblation to Christ, Sect. 28.] 4. He equals the observation of it,
with the Lord's Day, both in abstaining from labors, and making the very rest
it self an oblation to God; as we shall hear in the next. All these make it a
part of Worship; as high as the Lordsday, our Christian Sabbath, made holy by
Divine institution: Therefore again, the Doctor in so doing, is superstitious.

[4. To forbid labors on that day, when they hinder not the public Worship
(if God have not made it holy) is superstitious.] The reason is, because God
allows men six days for their own works. And though it be lawful for the
Magistrate or Church, to set a part a Time ordinarily for public Worship, yet
not to prohibit labors all the day, when that public Worship is ended, and to
make Rest necessary for the whole day: for that is to make it as holy, as God
himself did and does the Sabbath.

But the Doctor forbids labors, and requires rest, from sports, much more sure
from labors, all the day of his Festival: So he says, Fest. Sect. 59. [People
may not without offense to God, follow their lawful (as that signifies
ordinary, particular, or on other days lawful) vocations; -- Rest it self is
farther capable of the honor of being an oblation to God, if in honor to him,
we thus offer some part of our time unto his service.] What did God require
more on his Sabbath, to make it holy? [In it thou shall do no manner of work]
It Is true indeed, the Doctor speaks there of the Institution of the Church, and
the command of God to honor our superiors, by submiting to them, and seems to
limit this strictness of Rest to the Public Assembly on that day: But when he
makes Rest an oblation to God, and forbids sports, cards, and dice on that day,
I can hardly believe the Doctor will allow of lawful labors, Following the
plough or attending the shop. p. 258 n. 3.
after the public Assembly is over: Yea, it is known, that it was held, and
accordingly censured as more criminous to work on this day, then on the
Lord's Day: True it is also, that the Public Worship of God on any day,
requires for the time, cessation from our own works (as necessarily
inconsistent at the same time) but this is equally required on any day, when
public (or private) Worship is commanded, as on his Festival day. But to make
it necessary to Rest from labors, and a sin for people to follow their
vocations, on the Festival day, when the Worship is ended, is that we charge
with the crime of Superstition: And this the Doctor does; ergo, he is
superstitious.

[5. To place more virtue in things or times, then either naturally they have
in them, or by the Institution of God, is superstitious:] So I asserted, Sect.
14. So the Doctor asserted of Superst. s. See account. p. 37. n. 17. placing
more virtue in them, is a fault.
45. [The placing of more virtue in some things, then either naturally, or by
the Rule of Gods word, may be thought to belong to them, is a Nimiety, and
Superstition, and the reasons are strong to confirm it.] [The doing of which is
either utterly groundless, and then it is folly; or else it fastens some
promise on Christ, which he has not made in the Gospel.]

But the Doctor places more virtue in some things and times particularly, in
his Festival, then either naturally or by the Rule of Gods word belongs unto
them: This I shall prove from himself: To expect acceptance, and greater
reward, for uncommanded service, or Worship, then for commanded duties, is to
place more virtue in them, then either naturally, or by the Rule of the word
belongs to them, for there is no promise made to such uncommanded virtues, or
Worship: as has been proved above: But the Doctor does expressly assert, and
confidently expect, better acceptance, and greater reward, for uncommanded
services; or his Will worship, page 229. n. 14, 15. Therefore he places more
virtue in his Will Worship, (such he makes his Festival) then does belong unto
it, and consequently, he proves himself to be superstitious.

6. Lastly, [All uncommanded Worship, ((...)) is superstitious:] It Is made by
all our Divines, a Species of Superstition, and by the School-man; to Worship
God, ut non debet, with uncommanded Worship, is a kind of Superstition; Yea,
and by the Doctor himself, it must be so concluded, thus, [All false Worship is
superstition,] so here p. 59. n. 3. [Superstition is the giving of false
Worship to the true God.] And elsewhere, but all uncommanded Worship, is false
Worship, the Doctor I know denies this proposition, but without all just
reason; yet so he says in the same place; [False worship is unfitly explicated
by uncommanded Worship: for certainly all such, is not false.] But I have
sufficiently proved that proposition, thus, [All forbidden Worship, is false
Worship;] that the Doctor cannot deny: But all uncommanded Worship, is
forbidden: This is proved above, by the scope of the second Commandment, and
granted so, by the Doctors own gloss; God must prescribe his own Worship; ergo,
no man may invent and prescribe it, and consequently, all not commanded by God
is forbidden, and by a further consequence, superstitious. And from the Doctor
himself once more, [To invent and make new sorts or kinds of Worship, is
superstitious, p. 12. n. 13. but to set up uncommanded Worship, that is, not
commanded by God, is to invent and make new sorts of Worship: Therefore it is
superstitious: Thus the Major is good. But the Doctor pleading for his Festival
as he does, sets up uncommanded Worship: That he makes it a part of Worship, is
proved above, in the third Argument. And making it an example of his
Will Worship, he grants it to be Worship: That it is not commanded by God, was
also granted, Will Worship he explains, by uncommanded Worship, or will-devised
Worship: It is then an uncommanded Worship, and so superstitious. And thus we
have proved, from the Drs. own Assertions, and practice, that in observation of
his Festival, he was grossly superstitious, and (whether he will confess it or
no,) is self-condemned. I shall leave it to the judgment of the Reader, and
proceed to consider how he will excuse the matter of Riot, attending on it.

There are many things of lesser concernment, little to the main business,
which I shall therefore pass by: One thing may not be omitted, the Good will
the Doctor bears to the Lords day; every way to equal it at least, with his
Festivals. For here, and n. p. 266. n. 5.
7. and 16.35. Because the Lord's Day is subject to the same abuses of Riot and
profaneness, with his Festival, he would weaken the argument for abolition of
his Feasts; [That if abuse must abolish a custom, it might hazard the
Lordsday, which has been so abused.] But we have said before, that there is not
the same reason for Divine Institutions, and humane Inventions, in the Worship
of God. The former must not be abolished for any abuses; but the latter, when
abuses do almost inseparably stick to them, the best way is, to separate them
from the service of God. If he say, n. 14. and 16
might not Reformation serve but abscision only? Truly, it is little for the
credit of his Governors, that in so long time, as since the Reformation, they
never attempted any Reformation of the Riot and Profanations of his Festival,
but rather countenanced them, in their own and others Families, when the
abuses, not of Riot and Revellings only, but of Superstition also (for so I
meant) have been so notorious.

I said, Sect. 18. [The Heathen usages, do imply, that the Festival it self was
instituted to gratify the Heathens, by imitation of their Feasts at the same
time of the year.] n. 6.
The Doctor speaks a little to the usages, but denies the Festival to have been
instituted to gratify the Heathens, though he confessed the Saturnalia to be
celebrated in the same month of December. Sect. 63. But this makes it very
suspicious, the Feast was instituted to gratify the Heathen; hear a great
Papist speak his judgment in this matter; [What wonder if the grown customs
among the Gentiles (we may add the Jews also) were such, as from which though
they were converted to Christianisme, Baron, ad An. 58. p. 606. Quid mirum, etc
they were yet so hardly taken, that it might seem impossible to put them quite
off? what wonder I say, if the most holy Bishops have granted them place, in
the Worship of God.] But hear another more expressly, in matter of Feasts, it is
Hospinian, after Beat. Rhenanus, in Tertul. de Coron. Mil. [The old Bishops
were wont, De Orig. Fest. volluere veteres Episcop. etc.
when they could not call men from the Superstitions of the Heathens, by the
Preaching of the word, to seek at least to do it, by observing their
Holy Days, with their own Worship. But this was to drive out one nail with
another, no way to take off the Superstition. Albeit then, the beginning of
these Solemnities was tolerable at first, yet at last, they grew to such an
heap of Superstitions, that they became the fountain and beginning of horrible
errors and Susterstitions] I might add to these Doctor Jackson, Orig. of
^dol. Sect. 4. c. 23.
who shows the first occasion of Superstition in Christians to have been, the
infirmities, whereby it came to pass, that Heathenish (and Jewish) Rites, where
to men had been long accustomed, could not easily be extirpated: See more
there, the mischief of such Accommodations.

The Apostle (said I) exercised his discipline upon the Agapae, those Love
Feasts, as well as upon the riotous part: p. 269. n. 17
To this the Doctor says, [ It was the Lords Supper into which that excess was
crept. Did Paul (he asks) destroy and abolish this Feast, the Lords Supper?] He
is still unhappy in his comparisons of Divine Institutions, with Humane
Inventions and Additions: He tells us, n. 18. [There were two parts of the
Lords Supper: first Bread and Wine taken in commemoration of Christ's Body and
Blood: the other in eating and drinking together more liberally: this latter
was taken away upon unreformable abuses of it.] But then sure, the Apostle
needed not to exercise his discipline upon the first part, the Lords Supper, by
abolition of a Divine Institution; but upon the Feasting part; wherein might be
distinguished, 1. The Love feast it self (begun upon good intentions, to
relieve the poor, and testify brotherly affections) 2. The Riot and excess
that crept into it; which was separable from the former, and yet the Apostle
takes away the Feast it self, as well as the Riotous part; because, as the
Doctor says, of the too common unreformable abuses of it: Say the same of his
Festival, abused both to Superstition and Riot.

But he tells us (out of Justin Martyr) how this Feast was reformed; [Offerings
not lessened, p. 270. n. 20
but otherwise disposed of, and that which was not eaten at the Lords table,
was kept in a common bank for the poor, etc.] Which is, as if he should say,
the Feast it self was abolished, but that Charity which was spent formerly in
Riot, was otherwise disposed of, and if this will serve his turn; it shall
serve mine also, in reformation of his Festival; as he prescribes, n. 21. But
how satisfyingly the Doctor excuses his indulgence to the eating and sporting
part, n. 22, 23. let the Reader judge? When I have but once more presented his
former words, (which he labors to mollify or palliate) Thus he said, Sect.
22. of Fest. [For the eating and sporting part, that need not be abolished,
save only in case of great and general abuses. 2. Till the abuses are not
only so great, as discernible to out balance the good uses, but also so
general, that the whole Church, in a manner, runs madding into these very great
abuses.] But said I, this is pretty untempered mortar, and the sowing pillows
under profane men's elbows: For, 1. For the eating part, (I meant the Riotous
part) he knows the Apostle did abolish the Love Feasts themselves, not stay to
reform the great and general abuses of them. 2. For the sporting part, such as
was much unbeseeming the Festivity of such a Savior, the Doctor will not
yield, that that shall be abolished, save in case only of great and general
abuses; Nay, 3. not for great and general abuses, [Till they be so great, as to
out-ballance the good uses, and so general, that the whole Church runs madding
into them.] 4. Those abuses, I said have been long so great, that they have
out-ballanced the good uses, and so general, that the whole nation has run mad
into them, and yet the eating and sporting part, the riot, and revellings was
never attempted to be reformed; for those too common unreformable abuses, the
like whereof were found in, and caused the abolition of those Love Feasts, as
he said, p. 270. n. 18.

Yet see again his good will and and respect to the Lord's Day; thus he says, [I
as heartily wish a devout, p. 272. n. 24
conscientious, profitable observation of the Lord's Day, as of any other
Festivity, etc.] How greatly is God and his Day beholden to his liberality. He
says not, I could wish the Festival days, were as devoutly, etc. observed as
the Lordsday; that had preferred it a little, as the standard of observation of
Holy Days. But his way depresses it, below his Festivals, and makes them (as he
did Easter, above p. 243.) the standard of devotion to the Lord's Day. And it is
very like his practice in observation of the Days was answerable; for he told
us of Christmas day, [That it was observed with much more, at least as strictly
as any Lord's Day in the year.] Equal strictness was too much, but more, is more
unequal and unjust. This he would evade, by interpreting the words by those
which follow, [ In frequenting the services of the Church, in use of the
Liturgy, Sermon, Sacraments, etc. without prejudice to the Lordsday, on which
the Lords Supper, was not constantly celebrated.] But this confesses the fact;
that besides all that pompous show in Cathedrals, of Vestments, and Music,
etc. the The Sacrament of the Lords Supper, I make an ingredient in the
strictness of the Celebration of of the Festivity. numb. 27. page 172.
Lords Supper (which he knows was anciently celebrated, every Lordsday, and
somewhere oftener) should be enjoined strictly to be celebrated on Christmas
day, and was by some so observed, and not on the Lord's Day. This imported some
greater Holiness, and Honor to that day, above the Lord's Day, and we then
might have wished (as heartily as the Doctor does now) that the Lords day,
might have been kept as devoutly, etc. as the Festival day, and fit it was, it
should have had some pre-eminence, as being of Divine Institution, which his
Festival had not.

The Apostolical Institution of the Lord's Day, was, I thought, granted by the
Doctor, Fest. Sect. 31. and Apostolical Institutions to be Divine, was also
asserted, Quer. 1. s. 22. p. 273. n. 30.
Yet how willingly would he, and how subtlely does he retract, what he had
granted, to make either the Lord's Day equally Ecclesiastical with his Festival,
or his Festival, equally Apostolical, with the Lord's Day. For I having charged
him to assert, Sect. 57. [The Lord's Day to be by the same authority appointed,]
viz. of the Church: See how he shuffles to avoid it, first, [I did grant it,
though I know not in what words of Scripture, that Institution (of the Lords
day) is set down.] Was he not then too rash to acknowledge what he could not by
Scripture, some way make out. He pleads Infant Baptism to be the institution of
Christ, and of Apostolical Practice, though he cannot tell where to find either
of them in Scripture: He might have gratified the Lord's Day with the same
allowance, especially having the mention of the Lord's Day there, and
observation of it by the Apostles, (which presupposes an Institution) which the
other wants. 2. He takes off the objection from s. 57. thus, p. 273. n. 30.
Those words there used, [Though the Lord's Day be by the same authority
appointed,] do not belong to the stating of the question, and no affirmation
that the Lord's Day is not instituted by any higher authority then
Christmas Day, etc.] Let the Reader turn to the place and judge; He had said,
[The same Church, or any other authority equal to that, obliges, etc.] Then
follows, [And though the Lords day, be by the same Authority appointed,] that
must needs be, the Church, which obliges, etc. 3. But he goes on, and says, [He
is confessed in my Margent, to have said, the Apostles instituted the Lords
day, and he speaks as plainly, Sect. 57. of Christmas day, that it has it is
Institution and usage from the universal Church.] But I ask, (if he equivocate
not with us) does not this, put a plain difference between the Institution of
the Lord's Day, and Christmas Day, the one Apostolical, the other
Ecclesiastical? or else he must make them both of the same Authority, and was
not that his design, without any calumny? Here yet more. 4. [Either this is a
calumny in the Diatribist, or else that the word Church, must be taken so, as
to comprehend that part of it, of which the Apostles were rulers in person, and
then what harm has been in that speech thus interpreted; the Church of the
Apostles, Instituted the Lord's Day, and either they personally or their
successors used and delivered down the other Festivals, of Easter, etc.] But
this is a miserable prevarication: For, 1. What means he by the Church of the Sea p. 39. n. 4. Universal Church, including the Apostles, chief pastors
thereof, or the succeeding Churches, with their Governors.
Apostles, which instituted the Lord's Day? either the Apostles themselves, (as
it is usual with some, to call the Rulers, the Bishops, only, the Church:) and
then it is of Divine Institution, and so differs sufficiently from Institutions
of the succeeding Church, or Rulers: Or the Church without, or with the
Apostles; but he cannot show any such power in the Church, to institute
Ceremonies as parts of Worship, without them, or with them; neither then could
it be called an Apostolical Institution, but Ecclesiastical rather, if the
Apostles were not considered as Apostles, but as Governors of the Church, and
so not of Divine Institution. 2. Yet how doubtfully he speaks of his
Christmas; [Either they personally or their Successors used and delivered down
the other Festivals.] If not they personally, but their successors, then
behold a different authority again; they personally instituted the Lord's Day;
but not his Christmas; then they are not both by the same authority appointed.
3 Yet more warily; [They or their successors used and delivered down the other
Festivals.] He should have said, they ( not used, that imports but their
practice, but) appointed or instituted the Festivals and delivered them down,
etc. Or else the difference would again appear; the one had Institution, the
other only usage or practice: And he may remember how he has all along
declined Apostolical Institution, and pleaded only their practice, for his
Festivals, and now declines the Churches Institution also, and talks only of
their using and delivering them down to posterity 4. He was speaking of the
same authority, for the Lord's Day, and Christmas day, but now concludes with
Easter day, and other Festivities: The reason is, because he has something in
story, for Easter, (not as an Apostolical Institution, but Ecclesiastical usage
only) but not a word in the prime Antiquity, for his Christmas, either
Institution, or observation; So this was a blind for his Reader. Lastly, what
needed all this wariness, and modesty; when we shall hear him take confidence
upon him shortly, to affirm; [Christmas is certainly derived from the
Apostles,] p. 276. n. 3. Of which, in it is place.

For the lawfulness of Cards and Dice, even in his holy Festival, p. 274. n. 32.
(as at other times) we have here the Doctors opinion: I purpose not to follow
him into a new controversy; enough has been said by learned men, and perhaps
enough against them, by some, both Ancient Fathers, (beside Heathens) and
modern Casuists (whom the Doctor will not vouchsafe to read) to persuade tender
consciences to forbear them: And as for those that allow and plead for their
lawfulness, they bring in so many cautions, that, if it be not impossible, it is
very improbable that one of an hundred does or can observe them. The Doctor
himself has some considerable. [1. Used moderately. 2. As diversions. 3. No
way abused by our inordinacy;] that is, Mr. Gatac. of Lots. c. 8. p. 236, etc.
as others have it, a man must not spend, 1. Too much time. 2. Too much
patience. 3. Too much estate, at them; and many others, too long to repeat, too
hard for most Gamesters to remember; much more to observe and practice. Amongst
the rest, unseasonable use is one offense; when they are used, in times, that
require more then ordinary Holiness; as Festivals, this of Christmas,
especially, were accounted. Now if that Author, and the Doctor would allow
them lawful, yet at that time, they were surely very unseasonable
intertainments of a Festivity for a Spiritual Savior, and (as the Doctor
grants,) n. 35. [ Services fitter for the Revels of Bacchus, etc.] But let the
Dr. and others but say (as they do) Cards and Dice are lawful, people will run
away with the allowance, and leave them to come after with the cautions. And if
these abuses, in violation of the caution, be ordinary, and almost inseparable,
from those sports, and unreformable (as he said of the like, in the
Love Feasts) not one of many thousands observing, nor caring to observe them;
it will not become the Doctors great Piety, to open that door to profaneness,
which he will never be able to shut again. But he knows, these were but part of
the Festivals intertainments, in many great houses: there were promiscuous
dancings, and Lords of misrule, and besides, surfeiting and drunkenness,
chambering, and wantonness, the common attendants, and consequents of such
liberty; which as they were not endeavored to be reformed; so are in the
vulgar, unreformable, unless by abolition of the occasions. As, I believe, the
Doctor will find when ever he goes about it. To regest the same abuse, n. 34,
35.
on the Lords day, or the like, has been shown to be very impertinent and
injurious to the dispute between us. And so much for that.

How undeniable, or rather how uncertain and insufficient his evidences were,
p. 275. n. 3.
that the Feast of Easter was observed by the Apostles, as a Christian Feast,
or Holy Day, has been made appear above, and the case to be the same, between
Easter and Christmas, has also been considered, and thus far yielded, or
proved, that neither of them were of Apostolical Institution, or observation;
and it was sufficient for me to use no other arguments against his Christmas,
than against his Easter; those that were used against one, being rather more
strong against the other: The arguments were three, the last whereof, from the
different observation of it the Doctor waves, and upon his former Supposition,
that Easter was (not Instituted, but) observed by the Apostles; he tells us,
[His affirmation mu^ ascend higher then it ever meant to have done, and not
proceed disjunctively, that this Feast is derived from the Apostles, or the
succeeding Church but leaving out the latter part of the partition, fix upon
the former, that, being yielded to have the same Original with Easter, it is
certainly derived from the Apostles, as Easter was.] This is no more then I
expected, that the Doctor would (...), 2 Timothy 3.13.
ascend higher in his after affirmations, th^n ever he meant to have done;
Error is like a swift running river, which upon opposition, rises higher, and
grows more violent. But I expected he would rise one degree yet higher, that
is, from an Apostolical usage, or observation, to an Institution: It may be, he
means so much, by the word, (derived) from the Apostles. Easter it self was not
pleaded as an Apostolical Institution, bu^ Observation, which how unsatisfying
it is, was showed above: And mark the proof here; the evidences now brought,
are not for Easter, but for other Festivities of Ignatius and Polycarp; n. 4, 5.
who died after the Apostles, and (to see the luck of it, if I may use his
words) are rased out of our Church Calendar. Yet from these, n. 6. p. 276.
the D^ctor assumes, or [resumes his former affirmation without all diffidence,
that other Festivals, besides that of the weekly Lords day, were derived to us,
some certainly from the Apostles, others from the Church immediately succeeding
the Apostles:] If I should have made so loose an Inference, upon such premises,
my Logic had heard of it, on both ears: The Affirmation was, that certainly
Christmas was derived from the Apostles, because Easter was so; Easter was so,
because the Festivities of Ignatius and Polycarp, were set up soon after the
Apostles. And the conclusion is, other Festivals were derived some certainly
from the Apostles, others from the succeeding Church: Some certainly from the
Apostles? pray, which were they? leave out, but the Lord's Day, which was not
derived only (if that signify only usage) but instituted by the Apostles,
and say, without begging, which were they? Easter and Chrismas; which is the
question: But how came in the Lords-weekly-day, here, of which no question, but
it was of Apostolical Institution? either to give it a slubber, that it was but
an Apostolical usage, to level it with his Festival, or to baffle his Reader,
that he might not stumble at his too confident affirmation, that Christmas was
certainly derived from the Apostles; because the Lord's Day was so. And yet
after all this confidence, see his diffidence, where to place the Original of
his Chrismas: for thus he goes on; [In one of which ranks, (Apostles or
succeeding Church) though I have no reason to doubt, but this of the Nativity
is to be placed: Yet because we have not those evidences of the Fact, which we
have of Easter and others, I shall not build upon any degree of uncertainty,
nor affirm more then what the Tratise has showed out of the Ancient Fathers,
that this Feast is deduced to us, early from the first antiquity,] Parturiunt
montes, etc. Sure the first Antiquity, was from the Apostles days; but he dare
not lay it upon them certainly, Though Constant. in the fourth Cent. did make
orders for the observation of the Lords day, and other days, yet not a word of
Christmas which is very strange, if then in usage.
because of uncertainties, and yet affirmed confidently it was derived from
them: Socrates tells us, the Apostles did not settle any Laws for Festivals;
then not for this of the Nativity; how then was it derived from the Apostles?
And if derived from the Apostles authority, how is it not an Apostolical
Institution? The Doctor shifts off this, by their observation, which of his
Christmas can never be proved. Thus he shakes off also, his friend the Lord
Falkland, who, in all probability, has discovered the Original of this and
other Festivals. He is also silent to what I said of his reasonable Inducement,
for the Institution of this Festival; concluding with his old mistake, (if I
may not call it a calumny,) [That all uncommanded performances are here again
blasted, by the express words of the second Commandment, and Col. 2.23.] Which
was spoken only of uncommanded Worship; But sure (to use his own words) we
have formerly spoken enough (and too much) of this arguing.

Concerning the Feast of Dedication; I shall not need to be long: p. 277. n. 1.
First, I said, there were reasons to think, it was not a Religious Festival,
but civil, as that of Purim seems to be: Est. 9.21, 22. For, first, it is
certain of this last, that it was not observed with Acts and Services of
Religion, Sacrifices, etc. because those must be observed only at Jerusalem,
upon the Altar there, (which was demolished at that time) but this of purim,
was observed at Shusan: where, had they an Altar, they might not offer
sacrifice, See supra p. 46. n. 14. and p. 281. n. 20.
or keep a Religious Feast, by the Doctors own confession. 2. It Is said, they
kept it (as they ordered it) [A day of Feasting and joy, and sending portions,
and gifts to the poor.] Without any mention of Religious services: The like is
said of the Feast of Dedication, [They ordered, it should be kept yearly, with
mirth and gladness,] but no command or order for Sacrifices, in after times;
the Doctor is very confident that it was a Religious Feast, and would prove it
from the text. 1. Maccab. 4.56. [They rose up early and offered Sacrifices
according to the Law, etc. And the people fell down upon their faces,
worshipping and praising God, etc.] But first, the Doctor joins things
together, which are distant in the text; for he says, n. 8. [Ordaining that it
should be so kept for the future, from year to year.] So kept, is not in the
text, as if they ordained it should be kept with Sacrifices as at first it was;
but only, kept with mirth and gladness.] 2. Sacrifices at a Feast made not the
Feast Religious; there were Sacrifices offered every day at Jerusalem, when
they kept a civil Feast: As amongst us, the birth days or coronation days of
our Kings, were but civil Feasts, to be kept with mirth and joy; suppose there
were any prayers or preaching on those days, these would not make those Feasts
Religious. The fifth of November. was commanded to be kept as a day of joy and
rejoicing, and prayers and preaching only in the morning; but yet, I think,
the Doctor will not call it a Religious Feast. At our private Feasts, the Lord
Majors day, or days of the Companies Feasts, they meet at Church, and have
prayers and preachings, yet those Feasts are not called Religious Feasts, but
Civil. 3. Those Sacrifices offered, are said to be according to the Law, that
may be understood, either with respect to the Altar, (now reedified) where they
were by Law commanded only to offer; or with respect to the kind of offerings
which were all ordered by Law, [May not (says he) burnt-offerings according to
the Law, approved and commanded, be used in a Religious Feast?] No doubt, they
may and must, if so commanded: But the question is, whether offerings of that
kind, might not be used also in a civil Feast, among the Jews? and the Doctor
must not beg it. And if those Sacrifices were commanded by the Law, they were
no Free Will offerings, which only pretend to Worship, which mirth and
gladness, the other ingredients of that Feast, could not do.

In all this, hitherto said, there was no great conviction, p. 279. n. 10
to prevail with me, [That this was a Religious Feast instituted by the
Church.] I shall try once more to convince the Doctor, that either it was not a
Religious Feast, or not approved by God. Thus I argue: [To make a new kind of
Worship, not commanded by God, is unlawful, and not approved by God: But to
make a Religious Feast, not commanded by God, is to make a new kind of
Worship; ergo,] The Major is the Doctors own concession, above. The Minor is
proved, because a Religious Feast, was and is, a part of Worship, as is evident
in all the Feasts of Gods Institution; then it follows, that either they did
not make the Feast of Dedication a Religious Feast, or if they did, they
transgressed the Rule, and could not be approved by God. That the Doctor makes
it a Religious Feast, is evident, by his earnest pleading for it, under that
notion, and disclaiming it as civil. If he shall say (as it is all is left to
say) they made it not a part of Worship, but a Circumstance of worship; he
first makes it not a Religious Feast for which he has so much pleaded, and
then has lost his instance, of this Feast, to his purpose; for then it was no
more an Holy Day, then any other day of the year. And now he may consider [how
well he has demonstrated the vanity of all my three Diatribees, of
Superstition, Will Worship, Festivals,] and the rest: For he makes his Festival
a Will Worship, that is, a Worship uncommanded, and so a Religious Feast, and a
part of Worship: and so will be found guilty of Superstition and Will Worship,
in observation of his Festival, which is supra statutum, an Addition to the
word, against the second and fourth Commandments, and Col. 2.23. n. 11.
And thus I shall assert; [If his Christmas Feast, be answerable perfectly to
this of the Dedication, and hold analogy with that,] as he says, then they are
either both Religious Feasts, and parts of Worship of humane institution, and
both unlawful; or if they be both but circumstances of Worship, they are
nothing to the purpose, which is of uncommanded Worship, not of uncommanded
Circumstances of Worship. And that they went beyond their commission, in making
it an annual Religious Feast, I hinted, by saying, that neither Solomon nor
Zerubbabel, did make theirs so, for ought we read. n. 14.
[Here (says he) are the Symptoms again of a desperate cause; that fain would
catch at some supports but is forsaken of all] His evidences are all too short;
1. That Judas, etc. ordained it should be kept thus from year to year, is
partly true, but not evident, they kept it thus, that is as a Religious Feast;
but in mirth and gladness; or if they did, the question is, (which the Doctor
must not beg) whether they did well or no, the Negative whereof is proved
above: 2. It Is not evident it was so observed (as a Religious Feast) by the
Jews in Christ's time; it might be, as a civil Feast. 3. Nor is it evident, that
though Christ was present in the Temple, at the Feast time, he approved and
confirmed it. If it was only a civil Feast, it is nothing to the purpose,
though he approved it, as he did the wedding Feast, John 2. If it was a
Religious Feast, and so made a part of Worship, Christ would not approve it,
because they that did so institute, or so observe it, went beyond their
commission. As for those learned men, that interpreted it of Solomon's or
Zerubbabels Dedication, p. 280. n. 15
as they certainly erred in so doing, (as I proved) so they mistook in making
of them annual; for the reason by me given; they might make an extraordinary
day of thanksgiving, for some special mercy, (as a day of Humiliation for some
judgment felt, or feared) for then God calls to those duties: but to make
either of them Annual and perpetual, I desire to see their commission: And this
may answer the Doctors demand; n. 16.
[Supposing those two were never observed but once, why might they not as
lawfully be celebrated often or annually? If the first offended not, by being
super statutum, how could the second or hundredth -- repetition render it
criminous?] I shall but demand of him; supposing Jehoshaphat, in an exigent,
called and made a solemn day of Humiliation; why might he not have made it
annual, to posterity, if the first offended not, how the annual repetition of
it? Answer one, and answer both. The resolution is given above: A Magistrate
may, upon a special occasion appoint a Feast or Fast; but to make those days
perpetually Religious Feasts or Fasts, he has no commission: And if he make a
civil Feast perpetual, it is nothing to our debate. Let not the Doctor snarle
at this answer; I shall boldly say, n. 17.
if King Lucius never so long ago, or any other King had kept Christmas day, or
Good Friday, as Religious and parts of Worship (as Papists do now, and the
Doctor with them) I should have written Triplicem Diatriben against them, as
now I do against the Doctor. But if he had made them no more then Circumstances
of Worship, I should never have used my pen against him.

That Christ was present at the Feast, as a Feast, n. 18.
is also begged, but nor is, nor can be proved; the text says not, he was at
the Feast, Vide Junium. contr. 3. l. 4 a. 17. an. 6. Pelican. in 1 Mac. 4.
but Jesus walked in the Temple. Now take the Doctors inferences, or
Interrogations: [Was not that an evidence of Christ's approbation?] Jesus walked
in the Temple; ergo, he approved the Festival; take another like it, Paul
hasted to be at Jerusalem at Pentecost; ergo, he approved and confirmed that
Festival after Christ had abolished it: and then add, would Paul have been
present at an unlawful, superstitious, detestable feast, etc. and never have
reprehended it? so the Doctor argues, [Christ was at the Feast; ergo, if
unlawful, he would have reprehended it. But he does not reprehend it; ergo, he
approved it.] But, first, let him not beg Christ was at it, as a Religious
Feast. 2. Let him remember his own Rule, [ There is small virtue in an argument
from Scripture Negative.] p. 244. n. 12. 3. Nor was it any more scandalous for
Christ to be in the Temple, at the time of the Feast, then for Paul and other
Apostles, to be there at Pentecost and other times, when Temple and Festivals
were voided by Christ's death. If I had made such loose inferences, how would
the Doctor have insulted? He cannot but know, that my answer, is made by very
learned men, over whom the Doctor would not thus triumph. n. 20. p 28.
I could now return him his own words a little inverted. What if Jesus walked
in the Temple on the Feast day, does it therefore follow, that he approved?
etc. This is a new kind of arguing still, etc.

[Marriage, n. 21.
(he says) might be approved, to be Religious:] If he would engage in a new
controversy: This indeed, if proved, would help to countenance his Virginity
or Caelibate, to be Religious, and a part of Worship, as Papists make it: But
why Religious? because, there are Prayers, and Sacrament, etc. at the
Celebration of it. But this might turn all Civil Feasts into Religious, when
those or some of those services are premised to them. Yea, our ordinary meals,
when Prayers for a blessing before, and Praises after, are used, would be then
turned into Religious Feasts. But he says, [The only difference between a
Civil and a Religious Feast is, that in the one, the public services of the
Church (some or all of them) are used, adding Festival diet also, whereas the
other is made up only of the latter.] But enough of this before, ad p. 277. n.
1. His question then, is easily answered: n. 22.
[Can the services of the Church being added, make that criminous which was
innocent before? make that which was but civil before, sacrilegious and
impious?] That was not the question, but whether the services of the Church
make a civil Feast Religious? And whether, (beside Superstition and
Will Worship) Riot and revellings do not pollute his most sacred Festival? This
rarity the Doctor was acquainted with before; but he would forget it, to give
me a slur in the eyes of his Reader.

For the Feast of Purim, Hest. 9. There are many answers given by learned men;
1. That it was a civil Feast; which appears probable by the text; they made it
a day of Feasting and Joy, etc. without any mention of Religious services; as I
said above, see ad p. 277. n. 1. But the Doctor instead of demonstrating will
needs suppose; p. 282. n. 24.
[That a day of rest, of assembly, of feasting and gladness, sending of
portions (such as in a sacrifical Feast) will to any unpartial Reader, pass for
an indication of a Religious Feast.] Truly he must be very partial, whom this
will convince: All these may be found, in a civil Feast. A day of rest, from
ordinary labors: An assembly at the Common Halls, or places of meeting, or
places of the vulgars recreations: A day of Feasting and gladness, etc. Only
one thing the Doctor would insinuate, which certainly was not at Shuphan,
[portions, (...), such as in a Sacrifical Feast.) Which Sacrifices might be
only at Jerusalem: This he did, to make it seem a Religious Feast; which had
it been done, would not make the Feast Religious, as was said above. 2. If it
was a Religious Feast, others answer, Mordecai was a Prophet, and so directed
by God to make it so, which the Doctors Festival wants. If that Feast of Purim,
had not such Divine Authority, and yet made a Religious Feast, (as the Doctor
will needs have it) I dare still say, they went beyond their commission, and
the Doctor shall justify my assertion; who condemns all new sorts of Worship
as unlawful.

Concerning the Institution of the Lord's Day, to be Divine whether by Christ
himself, or the Apostles, enough has been said, in another place, and I shall
not renew that debate at this time. And how odious the frequent comparisons (if
not preferment) of his Festivals, with the Lord's Day were, has been manifested
above. The Doctor cannot yet forbear, but he must either level the Lord's Day to
his Festival, or advance his Festivals into the same Chair of Estate with the
Lord's Day: for thus he says, p. 284. n. 5. He teaches his Catechumene thus from
Acts 20.7. That the Lords day, was the time so early set apart to the Lords
Supper, and such holy duties: and for collections, Pract. cat. 2. ed. p. 273.
[The parallel that I set betwixt the Lord's Day and Christmas, was only this,
that as neither of them was found prescribed, or by law commanded in Scripture;
so the want of such law, should be no prejudice to the one, more then to the
other, as long as by some other way it appeared of the one that it was derived
from the Apostles or the succeeding Church, as of the other that it came
immediately from the Apostles:] Now 1. These last words spoil his parallel,
that the Lord's Day came immediately from the Apostles, and that as an
Institution Divine; whereas his Festival came not at all from any Institution
of the Apostles, but from the usage of the succeeding Church. 2. That the
Lord's Day had a law to found it on, the fourth Commandment for one day of seven
of Divine appointment, (as was showed above) and needed only a Divine
designation, which was done by Christ or his Apostles: but his Festival had no
law to found it on, but rather a prohibition, if made a part of Worship. But
yet the Doctor goes on; [If the Apostles usage gave to one a Divine Authority
the usage of the succeeding Church must be next to that, though not Divine; and
the latter lawful, yea, and obligatory as well, though not in so high a
degree, as the former.] Here are misadventures enough, for so few lines. 1. He
now secretly waves the Apostles Institution of the Lord's Day, and brings it to
their usage, that so, it might be equal to his Festival; an usage only. 2.
Then he would have it supposed (for he is excellent at suppositions, that will
not be granted him) that the usage of the Apostles, will make any thing Divine;
which is most unreasonable, unless he will again recall and establish as Divine,
the old Sabbath, and other Jewish Ceremonies. 3. He has much ado to forbear to
say, [The usage of the succeeding Church, must be (Divine also) next to that,
and lawful and obligatory (almost as much as that of the Apostles) as well,
though not in so high a degree.] 4. If the Authority for instituting of the
Lord's Day, and his Festivals be the same, (as he has asserted often) and both
derived from the Apostles: then either the usages and Festivals of the
succeeding Church, are Divine; or those of the Apostles are but humane and
Ecclesiastical: And then, the usages of the succeeding Church, are not only
lawful and obligatory, as well as those of the Apostles, but as much, and in as
high a degree also; the Authority being the same. But the Doctor is engaged,
and cannot fairly go back, that the Lord's Day is of Apostolical Institution,
and their Institution also Divine, and does not that carry in it, Divine
prescrition or Law? He will help himself by a distinction, n. 6.284.
[If by institution be meant giving law for the observation of it, then there
is no doubt, of his proposition: n. 7.
But it is possible that Institution of the day by the Apostles, may signify,
that the Apostles practice in assembling weekly on the Lords day, should have
the force of an Institution or Law, with the succeeding Church, though the
Apostles gave no law for it, or no such law appears from them.] Never, I think
was it heard, that an Apostolical usage, was called by the name of an
Apostolical Institution. Or that the Apostles practice, was ground sufficient
to make an Institution or Law to the succeeding Church: Yes, (says he,) n. 8.
[The Aposiles examples are the only way of conveying some usages to us,
without any their prescript Law; and in this sense, I consent to the
Diatribist, that their Institutions carry in them Divine prescription, or a
Law.] But I shall not thank him for this consent, and shall enter my descent
against this last proposition, [That the Apostles examples, etc.] He should
have instanced in some such usages only, that carry in them a Divine Law, and
have no other grounds of Scripture, to import a Divine Institution. And if such
usages carry in them a Divine Law, why has he not spoken out, and told us,
that his Festivals, being derived from the Apostles, or the succeeding Church,
are Divine Institutions, and not only Apostolical usages. Yet he grows
confident, to demand this as granted, n. 9.
[That whatsoever else shall be in the same manner derived to us, through all
ages of the Church, from the times of the Apostles themselves, may be
acknowledged also to carry a Divine impression upon it.] He means, as well as
the Lord's Day: This, this is the Helena, the Doctor so contends for; to
stablish by Tradition, that which cannot be proved from Scripture. But I would
say, 1. There are not many things so derived to us from the Apostles, through
all ages, except the Lord's Day and Infant Baptism, (though this latter has
not in Scripture, Apostolical practice, as the former has. But had not both of
them sufficient grounds in Scripture to infer a Divine Institution, Infants
communicating in the Lords Supper continued six hundred years in the Church:
says, Dr. Morton, Appeal. l. 2. c. 13. s. 3.
I for my part, should not be much persuaded by a mere Apostolical usage,
through many ages, from the Apostles themselves. For its known the Apostles did
frequent the Assemblies on the old Sabbath, and it was observed (as I remember)
together with the Lord's Day, for the four first Centuries; yet cast off at
last, as not Divine. And therefore, I must profess my dislike of the Doctors
proceedings in his plea for Infant Baptism, merely or chiefly from Tradition,
of Apostolical practice, and in a manner waving As imperfect ways of proving
it, Inf. Bapt. p. 2. n. 1, 2. and professing to lay the most weight upon
Apostolical practice. p. 95: n. 39. that is, Tradition of the Church. n. 9.
the Scriptures, whereon all our Divines do found it. But this was done, to
bring in his beloved Easter, and Episcopacy so much doated on: For the first,
how well he has demonstrated it to be derived from the Apostles, as a
Christian Festival, let the Reader judge by what has been said above. For the
other of Episcopacy, it leads into a new controversy, wherein other Learned
men are engaged, to them I leave it. But I cannot pass by, another odious
comparison, betwixt it, and the Lord's Day, (Et si non aliqua nocuisset, etc.)
He appeals my knowledge, [Episcopacy has perfectly as much to be said for it,
in every respect, as the Lord's Day.] I do here profess his mistake of my
knowledge; for I know no such matter, and I durst venture my skill, to prove,
[It has (if any thing at all) not so much, (much less perfectly, and in every
respect) to be said for it, in the Scriptures, as the Lord's Day.] But I shall
not enter into a new debate.

But he speaks of a demonstration of Easter to be derived from the Apostles,
and well then he may insult over the Lords day, if he can find a Law in
Scripture for it, and none for the Lords day, n. 7. And that is found by him,
in 1 Cor. 5.8. Let us keep the Paschal Festivity: so he rendered is, Fest. s.
31:
[(...), Let us keep the Feast,] here is an express Law, if it be meant of
Easter Day, as the Doctor would have us believe: But against this, I brought
some Interpretations and Authorities, from Ancient and Modern Writers; taking
it, in another sense: and I might have brought more, but that I would not fill
my pages, and trouble my Reader, when the context clears it from the Doctors
gloss: If the Doctor did not believe it, why did he cite it? If he did believe
it, why does he so poorly relinguish it? For first, he slights all those
Authorities, only telling us, [It were no impossible thing to answer those
testimonies:] p. 285. n. 11 Det. of Inf. Bapt. against M. Tombs p. 17. n. 26.
Yet elsewhere says The word is by circumstances applied to the Feast of Easter,
( p. 244. n. 12.) as some ground in Scripture for the observation. Estius (
with Beza) better hits the sense, Sicu^ Judaei fermento abstinebant quamdiu
Pascha celibrabant, it a and vos Christiana and perpetuum Pascha agentes,
semper oporter abstinere, a fermento veteris ac p^avae conversationis. Itaque
Epulemur, etc. In locum.
But I could bring him one Testimony, that he may not well slight; who thus
glosses that text, [Paul himself saying, that Christ our Passover is sacrificed
for us, the plain meaning of it being this, that the Jewish Passover being
abolished, we have now the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ,
substituted in the stead of it.] Not, the Jewish Paschal Feast being abolished,
Easter Feast is substituted instead of it; let us therefore keep the Feast, of
the Lords Supper: which was the very gloss of Aquinas, by me produced.
Secondly, as he slights them, so he shakes off me, with a lofty scorn; [I shall
never discourage him in that very reasonable course of appeal, to the judgment
of the Fathers, and other such learned men.] As if no body (of his Adversaries,
at least not my poor self) did converse with the Fathers and other Learned men,
but himself; who yet takes upon him, Magisterially and Dictator like, to vent
his own Interpretations of Scripture, quite against the Judgment of many
Ancient, and most Modern learned Protestants: And whether it advantage me or
no, sure it will prejudice him not a little, to bring a text to prove a Law for
Easter, which his own conscience tells him, is not the sense of it, by that
means to advance it above the Lord's Day; when he confesses, [ all that he was
to prove there, was no more but this, that there was no Law in Scripture for
either of them.] As for me, whether I have brought from Scripture some other
places, which are more Apodictical evidences of Apostolical Institution, (which
imports a Law) for the Lords day, it is left to the Indifferent Reader to judge.

As for Aerius his being condemned by Epiphanius, for holding Festivals
unlawful, p. 286. n. 1.
(as also he did, Episcopacy) if he meant only (as some think he did) that it
was unlawful to make Festivals parts of Worwip, or Holy Days, equal with the
Lord's Day; as he was unjustly branded for an Heretic for this opinion, so he
has in this, (as also in the matter of Episcopacy as the Doctor knows) many
Orthodox learned Divines of his opinion who were never called Heretics for so
doing. I shall give him the thoughts and desires of some of them; First, Bucer,
(whom the Doctor delights to cite sometimes) in Matthew. 12. Ferias alias
(praetur diem Dominicum) optarim abrogatus universas, etc. [I could wish that
every Holy Day, beside the Lord's Day, were abolished. The zeal which brought
them in, was without all warrant of the word, and merely followed corrupt
reason, viz. N. B.
to drive out the Holy Days of the Pagans, etc. Those Holy Days, have been so
tainted with Superstitions, that I wonder that any Christian should not tremble
at their very names.] The next is Oecolampadius, in Isa. 1.4. [I never heard
wise man yet, who did not judge, that a great part at least of other Feasts,
besides the Lords day, should be abolished.] The last shall be the learned
Zanchie, who though he speaks favorably sometimes, of some Festivals, yet thus
delivers his judgment; [ It is most agreeable to the first Institution and
Apostolical writings, that one day only in the week, be kept holy:] in 4.
Precept. n. 3.
Let the Doctor now go on, and call these learned men, Heretics in paraphrase,
as he plainly does, it will be little for his credit.

I shall in the next place, take the Doctor at his word; p. 286. n. 4.
He professes, [If I shall bring any so fair evidences that they that observe
Feasts are superstitious, he will think himself obliged, to do more, then deny
the accusation.] That is, I suppose, he will acknowledge it, and retract his
error: Now I accept the condition, and shall appeal to the Doctors own
conscience, whether I have not brought fairer evidences of solid arguments and
reasons, and that from his own concessions, that he is superstitious in
observing his Festivals, then he has or can bring, to prove those that neglect
his Festivals to be Heretics; or if the Doctor should be partial to himself, I
shall appeal to the impartial Reader, whether he be not by his word, and by
strong reason obliged, to do more, then deny the accusation. The rest in this
Section, as they have been often spoken to, so they are impertinent to the main
business, and I pass them over.

And now having made it appear (which was my main design) that the Institution
of his Festival, was not Apostolical, and the observation of it, as of late,
was attended with Superstition, and made a Will Worship, I shall not need to
draw the Saw any longer, about the Antiquity of this and other Festivals. This
may suffice for them all, [If they were Instituted at first, as Holy Days,
parts of Worship, etc. they cannot be freed from the guilt of Superstition,
etc.] If only as circumstances of time, to meet for the Worship of God, as it
is nothing to our dispute, and denies them to be any holier, then other days:
So it was by me, from the beginning, to the end of this last Diatribe, granted
lawful; (see Sect. 75.) due cautions being observed. Wherein the Doctors
ingenuity suffers not a little, that he takes no notice of these my
concessions, but carries it so, as if he would have his Reader believe, I
absolutely made such times unlawful.

As for those Testimonies, of Origin, Cyprian, and Chrysostom, produced (he
says) in his Pract. Cat. p. 288. n. 11
p. 180. The first, Origin, speaks indeed of Innocents day, in his time
observed, but not a word of Christmas day. The next of Cyprian, in the third
Century, if he mean it, of his Sermon de Nativitate, its branded by many
learned men as Spurious and none of his: So is that of Chrysostom. also, as I
could have pleaded, but that I saw no validity in his proofs of the Antiquity
of the Festival, but much uncertainty, both that he tells us, it was not fixed
at Antioch in his time, to such a day, (which different observation argues it
not to be Apostolical) as also, that he palpably mistakes the grounds of his
Demonstration; [That Zachary was high Priest, and that it was the Feast of
Tabernacles,] which both were proved false. But the Doctor takes no notice of
this my answer, but thinks to evade by saying, [ That the question at that
time, p. 291. n. 11
belonged not to the Festivity it self, but only to the particularity of the
day, the 25. of December.] For its observable that he also speaks of the Feast it
self. p. 512. l. 25. [That the Feast was so speedily promulgate and ascended to
so great an height, and flourisht,] and the words a little before, [ That it
was manifest and illustrous to all that dwell from Thrace to Gadeira] with the
Doctors Comment on them, [from East to West, which sure with him signifies, all
the world over,] cannot be meant of the particular day; for then there would
have been no question in Chrysostom. time, about it; if the day had been so
manifest and illustrous all the world over: Besides Chrysostom. (...) etc.
himself (if it be he) tells us before, that it was not yet ten years since this
day was manifested; therefore, in the other words, he spoke of the Feast it
self, not of the particular day. So likewise in those words, alluding to
Gamaliels speech, [ What he spoke, (...), (of the Gospel sure) I speak the same
of this day, if it be of God, etc. not only it shall not be dissolved, but
every year increase, and be more illustrous,] cannot be meant of the particular
day, (which was different in diverse places) but of the Festivity it self. And
the (...), the Preaching, must not be meant [ of it, n. 13.
i. e. the day certainly] as the Doctor glosses it; for the words may better
bear this sense, (...), etc. [ Because the Preaching also, i. e. of the Gospel,
(of which Gamaliel spoke, not of the day,) in a few years took possession of
the whole world, etc.] Which if it were taken of the Feast, or day, would prove
more then the Doctor intended, that the Apostles not only observed, but
instituted the Festivity also: It was not fairly done, for the Doctor in
Interpretation of the words, to leave out the particle ((...)) which there must
signify (also) as spoken of another thing. However, this very Testimony of the
different time, of observation of it, to me, is sufficient to prove it not of
Apostolical observation, much less, Institution. But enough of this.

The Doctors premises being thus invalidated, p. 292. n. 2.
his conclusion must needs be weak and (as it is) unjust, charging those that
rejected or observed not his Festivals, (both as Heretics as newly before, as
also) as Schismatics; [As an act of affected departure from the Universal
Church in all ages, etc.] Which I suppose all sober and indifferent men, will
look upon, (when they have read and considered what has been said to his
premises) as a most injurious caluminy: For it has been made appear, 1. That
it was no Apostolical Institution. 2. Nor Observation. 3. Nor Universally
observed in all ages, and places of the Church. 4. Nor, when it was observed,
was it uniformly observed, in regard of the day: In Epiphanius time, it was
observed on the same day, with that they call the Epiphany, The fixth of
January Cassian. Collat. 10. c. 2.
or Twelfth day: by the Britains on Mid-Winter day, about the Winter Solstice
the 10. or 11 of December. In Chrysostom. time, the particular day was not fixed at
Antioch, but very lately came to be known; and the Dr. himself twice has told
us, it was not universally observed all the world over, till about 400 years
after Christ. But he complains of wrong, in my citation of the places, as
misreported. p. 294. n. 8.
To which purpose he produces one of the places at large, to demonstrate what
fidelity I used in citing it. Let the Reader peruse his very words, and he will
acquit me from this charge, and I think, will conclude as much from him, as I
say. Thus he said, [ Though the particular day was not fixed at Antioch till
Chrysostomes time, yet from Rome over all the West, it had been so observed
from the most ancient records of Christianity: upon which my conclusion is,
that it appears at least, to be an Ecclesiastical constitution, very early
received over all the West, the far greatest part of Christendom, and within
400 years universally solemnized, etc.] Take a short Comment upon these words:
[ The particular day was not known at Antioch, till Chrysostom. time,] in the
fourth Century: Is it probable that in such an universal observation of the
Apostles and Primitive Church, they should not have agreed on the day, [Yet
over the West, it had been so observed.] But the West, is not over all the
world, as he told us, in exposition of Chrysostom. words, ad p. 291. n. 11. [It
appears at least to be an Ecclesiastical constitution,] but that is short of
Apostolical Institution, or Observation, which was confidently asserted above:
[very early received over all the West, the greatest part of Christendom.] But
that is far from the primitive times, and short of all the world of Christendom,
whereof there was a considerable part in the East: [And within 400 years
universally solemnized.] What is this, but what I said, in sense, that it was
not universally solemnized, till abbat 400 years after Christ; that is, about
the fourth Century: His own words, [ within 400 years,] imports that it was not
universally solemnized in the first 300 years, and that is enough for me. And
what needed the Doctor to be so critical, for a word, to make a man an
offender? what cause was there of that outcry, n. 10.
[What can be more visibly unjust? etc.] But seeing he is so riged; why did he
not take notice, of those other words of Nicephorus, The Emperors Edict, if it
were reconcilable with the Apostles practice. p. 289. n. 3. yet never with an
universal observatition of it before that time, numb. 11.
[ That Justinus the Emperor, first commanded it to be kept Festival over the
world.] First, over the world, that is universally, in the sixth Century: which
is sufficient to clear what I said, that it was not universally observed in all
ages and places; what justice was there, in this omission? I shall only ask or
take the leave, (...), in this, to make use of his words, more truly, [ It
seems the guilty person has the privilege (to cry out first, and) of accusing
and judging in any form of language;] which to whom it belongs, let the Reader
now judge.

And one thing more, I shall desire his umpirage in, whether the Doctor has
dealt fairly with me, in leaping over almost four leaves together, from p. 191.
to the end of 197. where there were many things of near concernment to himself,
and to the main debate between us. There I did, as it were, challenge him at
his own weapon, his own rule of judging and resolving of controversies, in his
first Quere; and by application of that rule, regulated by his own cautions,
made it appear, [That he cannot prove, that in rejecting, or not observing of
his Festival, we have departed from the universal Church, in all ages.] Let the
Reader be pleased to review thoses pages of mine, and then give sentence. Only
he makes some two or three strictures, where he thought he had some color of
advantage. First, I granted, p. 293. n. 6.
[What had the concordant attestation of the Churches of the Apostolical time,
while they were yet alive, was Apostolical; but there are not many things so
attested.] And I added, [What ever doctrine, or practice, wants such concordant
universal, uniform Attestation, is not Apostolical; for they being all guided
by one Spirit would all agree uniformly, in the same doctrine and practice.]
Which he cavils at, but answers not. I added this Negative rule, partly as more
clear and certain to us, at such a distance, from the Apostles, when it is
harder to find, or judge what was Apostolical by such attestation of the
Churches, then what is not Apostolical, in the want of such attestation: partly
that I might turn his Canon upon himself, by showing that his Festival, has no
such concordant, universal, uniform attestation of the primitive Ancients, or
Apostolical Churches. 2. I added for an instance, the concordant Attestation of
the Churches, of the second and third Centuries, for the Millemium, Christ's
reign on earth for a thousand years, which found no considerable (if any)
opposition, for 250 years, and produced the Lord Falklands words to attest it.
n. 7.
All he says to it, is this, [I confess, this had not formerly been produced,
but it falls out, that I have elsewhere sufficiently cleared it;] and he cites,
Qu. 1. s. 38. which I took notice of, and answered; but he neglects it, and
tells us also of his defense of the Lord Falk. Tract of Infallibility, which I
have not had the opportunity to see: But how he will take off the Lord Falk.
way of arguing to the invalidating of Traditions, I profess not to divine.

And now, after a long and tedious journey, we are drawing near to our rest:
where we meet with a complaint, and a valediction. The complaint is [of my
Fastidious Reflections, upon three Questions returned to the Author of the 16
Queres.] But sure the three questions were proposed, not only to that Author,
but to any, [that should think fit, to resume this business into
consideration, and enquire any further into this Subject.] And so to me, who
was unsatisfied with his whole Tract of Festivals, and with the manner of his
proposing of those three questions. And why he should call them Fastidious
Reflections, I know not. The R. Doctor and men of his way, do not love, or do
not use to state their questions right, (as in this so in other controversies)
that so they may have the more liberty, to expatiate in ambiguities. This is
evident, in all these three Diatribees, of Superstition, Will Worship, and
Festivals. My hardest task has been to find out the true state of the
controversies about them; which I saw the Doctor had declined, and when it was
done, did labor to obscure it; why he did so, let him now consider. It Is
apparent, that in all the three questions, he has mistated them. This I showed
him in each particular, and all his answer is, Fastidious Reflections. But I had
more cause to complain, of fastidious neglects, and omissions. In that, first,
by not stating the question aright, either first or last, he would insinuate to
his facile and credulous Reader, that I am of opinion, [that all Circumstances
of Worship, as time and place, etc. when established by the Church, are
unlawful.] Which I intended only of uncommanded Worship; as himself has more
then once, acknowledged for me. 2. That he so fastidiously refuses to answer my
four questions, truly stating the controversies betwixt us. Surely, it
concerned the Doctor to have answered yea or nay, to affirm or deny them, or to
show their mistakes, in the mistating of them. That he endeavors thus, [ In
his proposing of 4. other questions, p. 295. n. 12
he inserts particulars, wholly rejected by me, as that of parts of Worship,
adding, as it is propounded, s. 9. (but I hope not by me so propounded) of
abuse to Superstition, and Profaneness, etc. I shall be little obliged to
accept them, in his terms, to begin new disputes, at this time.] But, first,
that of parts of Worship, was necessarily to be inserted, into the question,
both, because in circumstances of Worship, we differ not, or not so much; and
also for that, what ever the Doctor rejects in words, he does indeed maintain
Will worship, Uncommanded Worship, and (as has been proved) makes his Festival
a part of Worship. 2. That insertion of Superstition and profaneness, was also
necessary, as being proved against some observers of his Festival, and also
charged upon himself, in my third question, in particular. And sure the Reader
cannot but suspect the Doctor to be guilty of this charge (of Superstition)
that he silently passes it by, when ever (which was often) it was charged upon
him: especially now that it is proved so fully against him. As for his
valediction, it is thus. [It is not amiss, that we shake hands for a while, and
commune each with his own heart in stillness. And so I heartily take my leave
of him.] This parting sounds, as if the Doctor heartily desired, we might never
meet again, in these contests; which I shall easily condescend unto; if this
now said, satisfy not, I shall not expect it, by any thing more that can be
said. But I could and do heartily wish, we might unanimously agree, in the one
truth, that lies betwixt us, and give one another the right hand of fellowship,
never to be disjoined more: Let the R. Doctor now commune with his own heart,
in stilness, and consider whether he has fairly, and Christian-like, carried
on his debates, 1 Timothy 6.4. Aegrotans circa quaestiones Iraen. l. 3. c. 12. 3
John 2. Tit. 1.13.
with one that dealt so fairly, and respectively with him. And I shall commune
with mine own heart in stillness, how so much charity, (as is here pretended)
and so much scorn and reproach, to make me vile to all his Readers, can meet
and dwell together in one breast. And because I now sufficiently perceive, that
he is, (...), I shall heartily with him (as of old) (...).

FINIS
Errata.
In the absence and distance of the Author, diverse Faults have escaped the
Press, which the Candid Reader is desired to Correct with his Pen before he
begin to read.

PAge 3. line 14. read Pelidae. p. 4. l. 20. for how r. here. l. 23. r. (...) p
6. l. 17. r. inkie. l. 35. r. abstruse. p. 7. l. last. f. a. r. an. p. 10. l.
11. r. level. p. 12. l. 35. r. ostendo. p. 13. l. 9. f. sad r. bad. p. 14 l 8.
r. Protestant. l. 18. f. shall r. still. l. 15. mar. r. one side. p. 16. l. 4.
r. answered. p. 27. l. 17. r. unprescribed. p. 28. l. 14. r. and. l. 20. dele
first. p. 33. l. 19. f. his r. this. p. 34. l. 1. r. nodo. p. 37. l. 25. f. is.
r. in. p. 41. l. 15. r. dilute. p. 42. l. 36. dele to the. p. 44. l. 33. r.
thought. p. 46. l. 13. f. ergo, r. e.g. and so often after. p. 50. l. 35. r.
worship. p. 53 l. 1. f his r. this. p. 55. l. 25. r. cross. p. 56. l. 6. r.
e.g. p. 59. l. 25. f. sure r. free. p. 65. l. 1. r. patuit. l. 3. f. that r.
than. p. 66. l. 14. f. or. r. on. p. 88. l. 23. f. there r. three. p. 93. l.
11. r. sanctionum. p. 112. l. 26. r. religione. l. 32. f. probat r. violat. p.
113. l. 20. r. (...). l. 25. r. (...) l. 31. r. (...). p. 114. l. 9. r.
praecepti. l. 18. r. fi qui. l. 32. put in of. p. 143. l. 11. f. moves r.
waves. p. 153. l. 26. r. disparate. p. 159. l. 12. and 13. for first r. id est.
ibid. l. 16. r. considered. p. 181. l. 23. dele first. p. 184. l. 13. r. (...).
p. 185. l. 35. r. (...). p. 196. mar. r. (...). p. 200. f. time r. kin. p. 205.
l. 35 (...) p. 208. l. 30. r. forbidding. p. 212. l. 8. r. e. g. l. 15. r.
relinquish. p. 221. l. 4 f. smile r. smite. p. 222. l. last r. (...), and so
twice in the next page p. 224 l. 9. f. more r. men. p. 225. l. 2. r. marginal.
l 31. f. his r. this. p. 229. l. 26. f. his. r. this. p. 253. l. 10. r. is of.
p. 254. l. last. r. detrect. p. 261. l. 11. r. deviation. l. 13. r. transilire.
p. 269. l. 10. r. procrustes. p. 281. l. 20. r. make. l. 25. f. them r. the. p.
289. l. 20. r. Counsels. p. 290. l. 34. r. they say. p. 291. l 19. r. neglect
of p. 297. l. 11. f. as r. an. p. 302. l. 15. r. referred. p. 315. l. 20. f.
third r. three. p. 320. marg. f. paenem r. pene p. 321 marg. r. (...). p. 346.
l 24. r. and (...). p. 362. l. 36. r. (...) p. 363. mar. r. doctrinas, and
instituta. p. 374. l. 5. r. Lord Faulk. l. 21. r. dissent. p. 403 l. 1. r.
expect better. p. 426. l 3. r. dissent. p. 428 l. 3. r. relinquish. ibid. mar.
r. celebr. and Christianum. p. 429. l. 12. r. worship. l. 20. r. praeter. l.
21. r. abrogatas.

Books Printed, and are to sold by M. Wright at the Kingshead in the Old
Bailey, viz.
MR. Shepheard's Epitomy of the Law, being of excellent use, to all those that
desire to be instructed in the English Laws. All the several Acts and
Ordinances of Parliament, and his Highness the Lord Protector; From 1640. unto
the year, 1657. The History of Divine Verities, declaing many wonderful things
which God brought to pass from 29 to 38, from 38 to 1641. And what shall be
from 1641 until the next coming of Christ. The Saints Treasury, being sundry
Sermons preached in London by the late Reverend and painful Minister of the
Gospel, Jeremiah Buroughs. The Sermons of Mr. Henry Smith, gathered into one
Volume; Whereunto is added, Gods Arrow against Athiests: Printed according to
his corrected Copies in his lifetime. And the life of Mr. Henry Smith, By
Thomas Fuller B. D. With Alphabetical Tables of the Titles, Texts, principal
matters, and things therein contained; and the Effigies of the pious and
Reverend Author. Pastorum propagnaculum, or, The Pulpits Patronage, against the
force of unordained Usurpation, and Invasion, By Tho. Ball, Minister in
Northampton. Plain Scripture Proof, for Infants Church membership and Baptism:
Being the Arguments prepared for Mr. Tombs at Bewdley, By Richard Baxter,
Minister of Kederminster. The English Improver improved, Or, The Survey of
Husbandry surveyed, By Wa. Blithe. Treatises and Meditations, dedicated to the
Saints, and to the Excellent throughout the three Nations. By F. Rous, Esquire;
Irelands Natural History, being a true and ample Description of its Situation,
Greatness, Shape, and nature; Of its Hills, Woods, Boggs: Written by Gerard
Boat, late Dr. of Physic to the State in Ireland, And now published by Samuel
Hartlib, Esquire; Seven Sermons, or the Exercises of seven Sabbath. First, The
Prophet David's Arithmetic. Secondly, Peter's Repentance. Thirdly, Christ's last
Supper. Fourthly, Christ's combating with Satan. Fifthly, Sea-mens Cards.
Sixthly, the Sinners Bath. Seventhly, the forming of Eve, with a Treatise upon
the Commandments. By Lewis Thomas, Preacher of the Word of God. The destruction
of Inbred Corruption, or, the Christians Warfare against his Bosom Enemy. By
Mr. Alexander Simpson, late Minister of Gods Word. A view of all the Laws and
Statutes of this Nation, concerning the service of God, and Religion. By Will.
Shepherd, Esquire; The Mystical Marriage, or Experemental Discoveries of the
Heavenly Marriage, between a Soul and her Savior. By F. Rous, Esquire;
Church-Reformation promoted, on Matthew. 18. ver. the 15, 16, 17. Also, some
Animadversions upon Mr. Humphrey's second Vindication of the Sacrament: And
secondly, some Animadversions upon Mr. Sanders his Antidiatribe. By D. Cawdry,
Minister in Northamptonshire. Independency a great Schism. proved against Dr.
Owen. By D. Cawdry. Family Reformation promoted, on Joshua, Chap. 24. ver. 15.
And by short Catechisms fitted for the three fold Relations in a Family. By D.
Cawdry. Walsingham's Manual; Or, Prudential Maxims for the Statesman, and the
Courtier. Written by George Lord Digby. A Persuasive to Peace amongst the Sons
of Peace; Or, a Treatise of Christian Peace. By Tho. Whitfield, Minister of the
Gospel. The Righteous man's rejoicing; Or, a Treatise tending to show the Nature
of true Joy: By Tho. Witfield, Minister of the Gospel. Diatribe Triplex; Or, a
threefold Exercitation; Concerning, 1 Superstition. 2. Will Worship. 3.
Christmas Festival, with the Reverend Dr. Hammond. By D. Cawdry. The Lightless
Star; Or, Mr. John Goodwin discovered a Pelagio-Socinian; By the Examination of
his Preface to his Book, entitled, Redemption redeemed. Together with an
Answer to his Letter, entitled, Confidence dismounted. By Richard Resbury,
Minister of Oundle in Northamptonshire. A Garden of Spiritual Flowers planted,
By Ri. To. Will. Perk. Ri. Green. M. M. and Geo. Web.
Corrected and enlarged. A Treatise of the Holy Trinity in Unity; By Benjamin
Austin, Pastor at Castle-Ashby in Northamptonshire. A Pensive Man's Practice,
very profitable, for all persons. Wherein are contained, devout and necessary
Prayers for sundry godly purposes; with requisite Persuasions before every
Prayer, newly corrected and amended, by the Author J. Norden. A Godly Garden,
out of the which most comfortable Herbs may be gathered for the health of the
Wounded Conscience of all penitent Sinners. The Marriage-Blessing, in a Crown
of Children; being the substance of a Wedding-Sermon: First, preached at
Cogenhoe in Northamptonshire: And since enlarged and published by H. Wills, M.
A. Minister of the Gospel. A Thousand notable Things of rare and excellent
Virtue. By A Cuppton. A most comfortable and Christian Dialogue betwixt the
Lord* and a troubled Soul. By Dr. Cowper, BB. of Galloway. London's Gate to the
Lords Table, being a Tract concerning the Sacrament. By E. F. Published by Mr.
Ed. Calamy. Mr. Balls Exposition; Or, a short Treatise, containing all the
principles of Christian Religion. The Doctrine of the Bible; Or, the Rule of
Discipline: briefly gathered out of the Holy Scriptures. The Pathway to Health,
being excellent and approved Medicines of great Virtues: As also notable
Potions and Drinks; with the Art of distilling and making precious Waters. A
Light from Christ, leading unto Christ; Or, a Rich Jewel of Christian Divinity.
By Jam. Bourn, Minister in Derbyshire. Two Treatises: the first, A plain
Platform for preaching, whereby the Word of Truth may be rightly divided, and
he that speaks, speak as the Oracles of God, digested into 20 Propositions.
The second is, the destruction of inbred Corruption, or an Antidote against
fleshly lusts. By A. Simpson Minister of Gods Word. The Fathers Institution of
his Child, directing the Conversation of his whole Life, in respect of God, and
of other People, and of himself. By Michael Jermin, D.D. Independency further
proved to be a Schism; Or a Survey of Dr. Owens review of his Tract of Schism,
with a Vindication of the Author from his unjust clamours and false aspersions.
By D. Cawdry, preacher of the Word at Billing in Northamptonshire. The Marrow
of Modern Divinity in two parts, touching both the Covenant of Works, and the
Covenant of Grace, with their uses and end, both in the time of the Old
Testament, and in the time of the New; clearly describing the way to eternal
Life by Jesus Christ. And a spiritual Exposition of the ten Commandments;
Whereunto is added, the difference betwixt the Law and the Gospel. With the
Commendatory Epistle of diverse Divines of great esteem in the City of London.
The Pearl of Peace and Concord, or, a Treatise of pacification betwixt the
dissenting Churches of Christ. First, written in the Germane Language, by that
Reverend and Learned Divine, Dr. Johannes Bergius, Chaplain to the most
Illustrious Prince Elector of Brandenburgh. And now translated into English, by
Mauritius Bohemus, Minister of the Gospel. The Land of Promise, and the
Covenant thereof explained, by certain Questions, and Propositions against the
Millenaries of these times. A Treatise tending to show, that the just and holy
God, may have a hand in the unjust actions of sinful men. By Tho. Whitfield
Minister of the Gospel. The Charges of the Crown, Revenue of England, and
Dominions of Wales, with the several Officers, Courts, Customs, Households,
Houses, and Castles, Towns of War-Forts, Bulwarks, Forests, Parks, Chases,
with their several Fees, and allowances, according to the ancient
Establishments. By Captain Lazarus Haward. A Divine Tragedy lately acted; or, A
Collection of sundry memorable Examples of Gods Judgments upon
Sabbathbreakers. By Mr. Henry Burton.
FINIS.

