Certain PARTICVLARS, Further tending to satisfy THE Tender Consciences OF
Such as are required to take THE ENGAGEMENT.

WRITTEN By a Godly and Learned Divine.

London, Printed by Robert White, 1651.

Certain Particulars, further tending to satisfy the tender Consciences of
such as are required to take the ENGAGEMENT.
THe present Engagement being a thing new and formerly unknown to our English
Nation, Mutatione imperiorum raro mutantur calamitates. Lopez. Flor. 405.
is not easily digested of many; for although we read of Principalities amongst
the Britains, an Heptarchy among the Saxons, and a continued Monarchy both by
the Norman line and long before; Yet before this time, we never heard of a
State Government, and therefore no marvel though it work on sober and
ingenious men, who are not acquainted with the affairs of the times, and
thereupon are jealous that every change may tend to the worse, and not to the
better. For my part it has stuck with me, and therefore those considerations
which have satisfied me, if they may satisfy you, I have my end; however, I
hope you will heartily accept what is sincerely meant.

1. The Engagement runs thus: I do promise to be faithful to the Commonwealth
of England, as now it stands, without a King and House of Lords.

Fides cum promittitur etiam hostibus, est servanda. Aug. ad Bonos.
In which first, There is the Act, I do promise to be faithful; that is to say,
first Negatively, we do promise not to act any thing secretly or openly against
the Commonwealth: Fidem qui perdidit, nihil potest ultra perdere. Sen.
And secondly, Affirmatively, to stand for it, and endevor the welfare and
safety of it: Now a Promise does bind as well as an Oath; yet with some
difference because a Promise may be dissolved by consent, but an Oath cannot
unless there be some condition either expressed or employed, because it is
solemnly made to God.

2. Respublica est res populi. Aug. de civitate Dei. lib. 1.
The Object, the Common wealth; By the Commonwealth may be understood 1. the
public Affairs and welfare of the place where his lot is cast to inhabit, and
so much the word respublica does hold forth. Non mihi soli, sed etia^ multo
potius natus sum patriae. Cic. Rhetor. li. 1.
2. It may be taken for such a policy, wherein the original of Government lies
in the people, both to depose Magistrates abusing their Trust, and to elect and
choose others in their places. By what has been said you may see what is meant
by being faithful, etc. viz. 1. To seek the welfare of the common affairs of
this Nation, and of those grand Privileges which have cost our Ancestors and
our selves such large expense both of Bullion and blood; As namely, Magna
Charta, the frequency of Parliaments, and our own civil propriety, to our
selves and Posterity. 2. To endevor to preserve that native and natural freedom
which is invested in us, that is to own Government and Governors so far as
they derive their power from the people.

3. The Limitations that are given: 1. Affirmatively, as it is now established;
this word (now) carries us to the time past when it was not a Common wealth,
but a Kingdom; or else it carries us to have reference to the time to come, and
then it holds forth no more then this, that we are so far bound to it, as it
shall continue thus settled; seeing this may happily not be the exact Model, but
only made use of till another full Representative may be called; and why any
should boggle at either of these, I see not; for though the Government may not
in all points suit their apprehensions, yet our case would be far worse if
there were none at all, and perhaps for such a time as this, the fittest
expedient which could be found out. The 2. Limitation, is Negative, without a
King and House of Lords; which seems to mean an utter extirpation both of
Monarchy and Aristocracy, and the setting up of a Government by a State near to
Democracy; so making the chief power to rest in the people; which if it may be
rightly composed, in my apprehension, cannot but be a happy and a lasting
Government; for it is most suitable to reason that no man should bear rule over
others, but by their consents, and in case of maladministration to be
questioned by them.

By this time you have seen what the sum and scope of the Engagement is; Give
me leave to resolve and answer such Questions and Objections as are usually
brought against it.



the preservation of our selves, and our Religion, from ruin and destruction:
Now if any Articles in the Covenant shall in the future, cross either of these:
then certainly they that are Covenanteers are disobliged in such a case; for no
sober men will ever engage against their own safety, or the safety of Religion,
which is more dear to them then their own.

2. Though the whole Covenant be to be taken together, yet so as matters of
lower concernment are to give way to matters of higher concernment; Honest ab
ejus foedere receditur qui communem libertatem opprimere conatur and tentat.
Thucyd. lib. 3.
so as if the preservation of the Kings person may be thought incompatible,
with the preservation of just Laws, and the safety of the People, then the
deposition and devesting of the King of his Office and place, can be no breach
of the Covenant: and in case it were presumed that the thing was not so
equitable in the persons that did it; yet supposing there were such a guilt on
the person of the King, and that in the eye of the Law, both of God and man;
then cannot this Engagement in this particular in the least oppose the
Covenant; and if no man dare free him from such a guilt, I see not how they can
accuse such as engage upon his removeal, on the most prudential way for their
own safety. The like may be said of the House of Lords, whose sitting there was
never from the People, but persons that received their Honor from the King, and
made themselves higher then all the Commons of England; yea, and took the
boldness to maintain it, that the Commons were to propound, and the Lords were
to judge: and lastly, that none might question their Actions, but by their
consent; how such a creature therefore might be consistent with a free
Commonwealth, I leave it to sober men to judge; or how such should be
permitted to be Judges over a Free people that were never chosen by them, can
consist with reason and freedom.

3. Suprema pericula semper dant veniam culpa. Cyp. Epist. Impia est promissio
quae scelere adimpletur. Rener. de jurand. cap. 3.
The safety of the People, is the Paramount Law; this therefore takes the first
place in the Covenant, as most necessary; for the King, and other Officers, are
but Servants of the Commonwealth, and have their rise from it, and their
maintenance by it; and although there were no Parliament, as there is no King,
nor House of Peers, yet every one were bound by that Law to use his best
endeavor, to seek the welfare of the State. In a Ship, put case the Master and
Mariners were drunk, or out of the Vessel, so as the Ship were in danger to
suffer shipwreck, in such a case Passengers might, by the same rule, endeavor
the safety of it; and certainly much more in the Commonwealth; and if any such
Article could be supposed to be in our Solemn League and Covenant, which should
oppose this Maxim, we ought rather to repent of our rashness, then persist in
it.



To which I Answer:

1. If by a full Parliament, be meant the whole definite number Elected and
Chosen, such a number is very seldom to be found, wherein there is the integral
number of all the Members; the Parliament was a true Parliament, when many of
such as were Members of it fled to Oxford, and sat in a Junto there;
therefore, though a Parliament have not all its Members, yet it may be a true
Parliament now, as then it was.

2. The Question is not whether it be such and such, In rebus dubiis ac
periculosis imminentibus eae conditiones accipiendae quae aliquid spei certe
relinquunt.
but whether it be one; if it be one, though not in all points as it has been,
and hereafter it may be, yet it may challenge obedience; a Father has lost one
of his arms, and therefore imperfect; is also in prison, and therefore not
free; yet his child stands bound to obey him, as if he were both perfect, and
free; if you could assimulate the case of the Parliament to this case (which in
my apprehension you cannot) yet the Parliament commanding right things, it
ought to be obeyed.

3. In such a turn of time as this has been, men cannot go by those common
principles, as when a State shall be settled; every Article in our Solemn
Covenant cannot be justified by the Laws of this Nation, but yet it was very
necessary and equitable to the rules of common safety it should be taken; even
so we may say, that though there may be supposed defects in the Parliament, and
a want of some of her integral parts; and withal, not in that constitution and
condition it were to be wished; yet at such a time as this, wherein God has
chalked out his own way, we are rather to stand adoring his work, then make
head against it.

Oath of Allegiance, to be true to the King, and his Posterity?

Aquin. Tanner 22. quest. 89.
or expressed. I am bound to obey the King, so long, and so far as he is true
to his Trust; but if he prove unfaithful, and be thought unfit to Reign, my
obligation cease, and it is agreed by the School men; no man stands engaged
in any matter, of which he can have no certain knowledge, further then when he
took that Engagement, he thought it would be; in case it fall out otherwise, he
cannot be said to be bound: the change of the thing intended, changes the
Engagement. And for his Posterity, as in the election of a King, the Posterity
of the King is elected; so in the deposition of a King, his Posterity cease,
as to right; King Saul being deposed, his Posterity lost their Title to the
Kingdom.

2. Rex est singulis major, universis minor.
It has often been observed, that the King is invested with power above any
particular Subject; but yet he is inferior to them all, and that he is as far
below a Commonwealth, as any particular person is below him, or else there had
been no difference between a King of England, and Cambises the Persian
Emperor, that by a Law might do what he list; therefore if the power of the
Representatives of the Commonwealth be above a King, then certainly our
obedience to them must take place above any other Power binding us.

3. If providence do hold out another way of administration, in the Government
of this Commonwealth, who are we, that we should let God? And certainly God
that changes times and Governments, would rather have us soberly to follow his
providence, then to think we, by our opposition, can cross him in his way.

4. Suppose a Government in all points were not right, yet in case it be all
the visible Authority that is then in being, and withal, command right things,
I see not why it may not be obeyed without the crossing of any former Oath, as
it may appear in Christ's paying the Didrachma to Caesar; unto which children
were not bound, but strangers; and the Apostle exhorts them obedience to
Caligula, and Nero, then Usurpers, Romans 13.

5. If such Oaths were in all points binding, that a King, and his Posterity,
in no case might be laid aside, then a Government upon never such immergencies,
misdemeanors or necessities of state, might not be altered, which were to cross
the way that God has taken from the beginning of the world in the changing of
humane Titles and times.

Joshua made to the Gibeonites upon a mistake? which yet having made it, he
thought he was bound not to recede it from it; by the same reason in the case
we have sworn, although upon some mistakes, yet our Oath must be kept
unviolable.

Joshua, by the command of God should have destroyed the Gibeonites, for no
Oath of ours can disoblige us from our obedience to God; yet it does not hinder
but God may dispense with his own Law, as I think he did in this, though it be
not expressed in the Text, Josh. 9. as he did in Abraham's, case commanding him
to kill his son contrary to a moral precept; and then if he dispense with it,
it is sufficient warrant for us to rest satisfied; and this seems to be
Joshuahs case; but now for us, we are to hold to such principles as Gods
ordinary providence holds forth.

Again, Joshuahs Oath was only as a Magistrate, to suffer poor men to live
under him as vassals and slaves, which is far different from ours, in having
men to rule over us as Tyrants; for in case Joshua should have sworn obedience
to the Gibeonites, its a great question whether then God would have dispensed
with his own law, and therefore it does evidently appear that men are not bound
to all such unjust Oaths, as out of rashness, or ignorance, they may, upon some
occasions, be brought to take; for then Jephtas rash vow, and Herod's wicked and
sinful Oath might not have been broken; the which I think no serious or sober
man will affirm.



Sublata religione corruere rempublicam oporlet, quoniam sublato Dei timore
sequitur impietas and ruina imperiorum. Lopez. page 573. Grande quidem est
procerem esse, sed multo grandius est de proceribus judicare. Cas. Ep.
now the fact may be lawful in it self considered; as now to instance in the
Kings case; his taxations of the people unjustly, his introducing of Popery
into the Kingdom, making wars against his Parliament, and shedding of the blood
of many of his subjects, by his Agents in the three Kingdoms, were so great,
and so manifest, that I suppose few will deny but that there was such a guilt
on him, as that both in the eye of the Law of God, and man, he justly deserved
that which is now fallen on him; and if so, no man can deny the lawfulness of
the thing; but as to the persons that did it, whether they should have done it,
and at that time, and what intentions they had in so doing, none of these
questions reach us, because there is not the least hint of them in the
Engagement.





2. No man is further bound to any person, Omnes tyranni conflati sunt perfidia
and crudelitate. Lopez. p. 3. Fulcrum imperiorum est servare religionem. Lips.
Turbata religio politiam turbat. ibid.
or persons invested with power, then they are true to their trust: and if they
prove otherwise, then they may be as justly deposed, as the late King was.

3. They that are true to a Christian Commonwealth, as such, those cannot but
be true and faithful to the Church; for the ruin of States begins at the
Church; and if the Church be opposed, God will not bless that State: the reason
is, because a well-reformed Church, is the greatest preservative of a
Commonwealth.

Scots, or English, when they entered into this solemn Covenant to alter the
Government?



2. For our intentions, they are to be considered either as general, or
special; now in any humane thing it is not possible for men to foresee all the
special consequences which may fall out upon any engagement which shall be
made; it is sufficient that the general ends of it be kept firm; at the
entrance into the Covenant, no man would have imagined so much blood should
have been shed, or that the Kings heart would have been so hardened as it was;
and therefore in special, I believe a change of Government was not intended by
any, saving as I have said, in general terms.

3. I do not see but the Covenant we have taken, and the Engagement now
required, may well stand together; our Covenant as has been said, binds with a
limitation to preserve the Kings person, but it binds without any limitation,
to bring Delinquents to punishment; and therefore, in case it may appear, that
the King was the greatest Delinquent; then the latter Article, which is without
any limitation, ought either to be expunged, or of necessity to take place:
perhaps some would seek to blind our eyes, with that old maxim of slavery, viz.
That the Kings of Engl. can do no wrong; whereas indeed such a Principle puts
them in a capacity of doing wrong, and the greatest Tyranny without control,
which were to make the King an absolute Tyrant, and the people absolute slaves:
again, if the King can do no wrong that commands, why then should his Officers
that are put upon unjust actings, by his instigation, and Authority, be
accounted guilty, and to suffer for their obedience? and why should the Capital
Offender escape the sword of Justice as guiltless, and poor underlings, suffer
at the Bar of Justice, as guilty? It is said of David, that he had slain Vriah
by the sword of the children of Ammon: and in another place David confessed, I
have sinned, but what have these sheep done? therefore a King may do wrong as
well as others.



Multi sibi and aliis calamitates accersunt, qui primas occasiones lapsuum non
vitant. Lop. page 377. Vide Ruther. Lexet Rex. quest 31.
and peculiarly concern its own preservation? we were not only less then men,
but worse then Beasts, if we should not do it; for what offense can this be to
them, to hear that we engage our selves to preserve our own Commonwealth, so
long as our Engagement binds us not to act any thing prejudicial to them,
unless they have some envious affection to us, hoping by our divisions to make
us a prey unto them? otherwise it may be an offense taken, but not given.

2. There is no such great difference between the transactions of the Scottish
affairs and ours, that should make such a division; for what great difference
is there between binding a King hand and foot, whom they dare not otherwise
trust, or else by force and Arms to keep him out, and between his total
ejection as a man perilous to sit in so high a place of Trust? Surely to me
there does appear no great difference between their change of Government and
our Government changed, unless it be in this, that in the one, the Tyrant is
unhorst, and in the other, he is bound legs and arms in the Saddle.

3. Falsus amor plus nocet quam professum odium. Lip. Vt malum cibum nec
retinere possis sine noxa, nec rejicere sine molestia, ita nec malum Principem.
Plut.
That which is pretended to bring division between the two Nations, may happily
prove the cause of divisions amongst the Scots, that desire so much a King, and
say, as they in Saul's, nay, but we will have a King to reign over us; for if he
get into the Saddle, he may possibly get some to loose him, and then he will
play the Rex, and as Sampson did, lay about him; I say no more; I wish for the
sakes of many honest Presbyterians amongst them, my words may not prove a true
prophecy; for if it do, our brethren perhaps may repent when it is too late.

English Army into Scotland be lawful?



First, Aug. cont. Faust. Bella suscepta caeca cupiditate and ira, plerumque
procedunt and desinunt infaeliciter. Petr. ad Can.
There are some causes which render a War to be unlawful.

1. If it be undertaken from height of pride, and a desire of Rule and
tyrannizing over a Nation; and therefore if a War be taken ex libidine
dominandi, it cannot be good; the reason is, because every people should be
content with their present lot; this has not been the ground of our motion,
which may appear by our often tenders of terms of peace, which they have as
often rejected.

2. John Stow Chron. of England.
If it be undertaken for hopes of gain; the Spaniards encouraged their
Soldiers to come to the Conquest of England, from the plentiful things in this
Land; but this was confuted by Gods immediate hand against them; this could not
be our ground of marching into Scotland; for it is a poor Country, and the
charge to Conquer and keep it, would in no wise prove advantageous.

3. Tunc solum utile est concurrere ad arma, cum justitia apud hostem non
potest invenire locum.
If it be undertaken to revenge a private quarrel; a public State stands not
engaged to revenge private quarrels; but there are other private Courts
appointed for the ending of such, as the Court of Admiralty, which is common to
several Nations; Notwithstanding in case such Courts should be patronized by
the Supreme Authority thereof, Casiad. l. 3. Ep. 1.
either not to act, or to do injustice, then the quarrel may become National;
this is not our case, as shall appear, because the same Courts are continued,
and strict justice executed on offenders, unless in the case named.

Secondly, Vbi justus exercitus deest qui hostibus opponi and satis nostra
curare possit, tunc injuriis hostium patemus; deinque bellum latrocinium potius
quam bellum. Polyb. lib. 5.
There are some just causes why a War way be undertaken.

1. When public injuries are done by one Nation against another; There were
injuries done by Amaleck against Israel, and thereupon Israel had a command
from God to smite Amaleck, 1 Samuel 15.2. I suppose no knowing man will excuse
Scotland of acting public injuries against England; I shall silently pass
over what injuries were done us, while they pretended to be our friends, which
were many and unsufferable, and only pitch upon their Invasion by Duke
Hamilton, and that by Authority of their Parliament, whose carriage was so
exceeding base and cruel, that many in Westmerland, Cumberland and Lancashire,
were forced to leave their own homes, to live in Woods and Mountains, and such
as stayed behind were beaten, and had their houses rifled, their
household stuff carried away, and their Cattle driven away, and sold before
their eyes; of which injustice no recompense has been made unto this day; nay,
though the recompense has been demanded in a fait way at their hands; now
whether this may not be a just cause of this Expedition, let unprejudiced men
judge: for my part it is clear to me it is.

2. Bellum in hostile solum transserre quantum possimus debemus; nam ea ratione
terretur hostis and ad sua tutanda revocatur, Polib. ibid. Bellorum res been
disponuntur cum in pace tractantur. Casiad. Ep.
Another just cause of War may be by way of prevention, as in the former War
against the King it was by way of prevention, least when he had gathered
thousands of armed men, Papists and others, the Parliament might have been
surprised, which undoubtedly was their plot. It is evident that the Scots
really intended to invade England, had they not been prevented by our Armies
seasonable marching in amongst them, as may appear from Chancellor Londons
Letter taken at Dunbar, wherein it plainly appears, that on their Kings signing
that Declaration for the maintenance of the Covenant, Religion, and suppression
of Malignants, sent unto him (the which has since been broken by them all,) he
should have the whole body of that Kingdom to assist him in his coming into
England; they say the way to conquer Rome, is to fight in Italy; and we are
sure the way to keep Scotland quiet, is to March in among them.

To conclude, Bella nihil aliud sunt quam scopae asperrimae quibus mundus
sordido excrementoru^ cumulo liberatur. pet. Can. p. 94.
for my part for the sakes of many godly people of that Nation, who in the
simplicity of their hearts have espoused themselves in this quarrel (as those
did that went with Absolon) not understanding the design that is now driving
on: I wish there might yet be a happy agreement; but truly I fear that party
are so over-powred, that the Sword must end the controversy, which happily may
be better for them that are godly, who peradventure may see something among
them, which is the cause of this misery; The Lord makes War as a means to purge
away dross and corruption out of a Nation. Two things I have observed in that
Nation, The one is the great oppression of Landlords grinding the faces of the
poor, so as they live more like Turkish Slaves then Christians: The other is
their promiscuous admission of all to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, unless
it be persons extremely scandalous; These two are so notoriously known and
confessed by them, as needs no further proof. Whether this War may not fall
heavy on the godly for these things, I leave to themselves in this their day
of affliction to examine. Saepe fit in bellis ut victor fleat and victus
intereat; id est, ut bella sint penae tam victori quam victo. Ibid. page 93.
Now in the behalf of so many as are godly in England, I dare say, they have no
joy in that any harm does befall the Lords people, if it could with their own
safety be otherwise: It is sad in War when the Conqueror weeps, and the
conquered are undone.

FINIS.

