A Sober ANSWER, TO A Serious Question. PROPOUNDED By Mr. G. Firmin Minister of
the Church in Shalford in Essex. viz. Whether the Ministers of England are
bound, by the Word of God, to Baptize the children of all such Parents, which
say, they believe in Jesus Christ; but are grossly Ignorant, Scandalous in their
Conversation, Scoffers at Godliness, and refuse to submit to Church Discipline,
The Negative is not sufficiently defended. Which may serve also as an Appendix
to the Diatribe with Mr. Hooker, lately published, concerning the Baptism of
Infants, of Parents not confoederate.

By DANIEL CAVVDREY Pastor of the Church at Great Billing in Northamptonshire.

Mark 10.14. Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not,
for of such is the Kingdom of God.

Licensed, Printed, and entered, according to order.

LONDON. Printed for Christopher Meredith at the sign of the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard. 1652.

TO THE JVDICIOVS, BUT Indifferent Reader.
IT is (as the Reverend Author of the Question now before us, says, in the
very entrance of his Epistle to the Reader) a very sad and uncomfortable state
of a diseased Church, when the Physicians are at difference concerning the way
of curing the Patient. This (as in other things, by others) is really
exemplified in himself, and one Mr. Jeanes, in a Learned Tract of his,
entitled, [ The want of Church Government, no warrant for a total omission of
the Lords Supper] who both intending the Cure of their diseased flocks, go
clean contrary ways to effect it. He is so far from denying Children of the
most Scandalous, the privilege of Baptism, that he admits such Parents to the
Lords Supper, pleading the necessity of that Ordinance, and his own want of
power to amend, or keep them away. Our Author, on the other side, not only
keeps such Parents from the Lords Supper, but also denies Baptism, the other
Sacrament, to their children. The one way seems to some, to tend to the
Profanation of that Ordinance: The other to the division, if not the
destruction of the Church, by making all, at least the greatest part of the
children of Congregations, little better then Infidels. And which of of these
two ways of Cure, is best, or worst, is hard to say. I shall say nothing at
present of the former, but (with leave) something of the latter, with as much
mildness and meekness as I can; for he says truly [ He has not so handled
the question, as to deserve a sharp answer, page last.] Had he seen (which I
conceive, he has not) a Tract lately come forth, called [ The inconsistency of
the Independent way with Scripture, and with it self] he had found a Diatribe
there with Reverend Mr. Hooker, about almost his very question; which either
might have prevented his publication, or have given him occasion, to alter, or
enlarge his thoughts, in some particulars; his grounds being most of them taken
from Mr. Hooker, and the answers and arguments against him, falling full upon
his own. The difference between them is not great, if any at all. The one, Mr.
(Hooker) requires an Explicit Covenant; to make Church members, and allows no
children of the most knowing and godly Parents, not confederate, the privilege
of baptism. The other seems to deny Baptism, only to the children of those
who are grossly ignorant, scandalous, etc. I say, he seems only to do this: For
both he speaks suspiciously sometimes, toward an Explicit Covenant, and his
question, as it stands in terminis, (not being at all explicated) if not
rightly taken, may seem also to exclude the children of such, as submit not to
Church Discipline, though knowing and godly. And page 9. of his Epistle, he
requires expressly (as a qualification of a member) [ That he profess his
subjection to Discipline] which is Tantamount if not the same, with the
Independents Explicit Covenant; yet herein he is to be commended, that he is
not so rigide as they are, in his qualification, or admissions of members.

And seeing we are accidentally fallen upon the Explicit Covenant, I shall
consider what he says of it, in his Epistle; though I might refer him to the
Tract aforesaid, where it is fully handled. In page 16. of his Epistle, thus he
speaks [ Some Ministers scorn the notion, that an explicit Covenant, is the
form of a Church visible; and some professors are so rigid for it, that
without it, they deny all Churches] of the later sort, is Mr. Hooker himself,
(though sometime he grant an implicit Covenant sufficient) for part 3. of his
Survey page 11. he says expressly, [ Non confoederate persons, in their sense
are Non members of the Church, etc. and consequently their children have no
title to Baptism, (which is one of our Authors arguments in page 10. of his
book, borrowed from Mr. Hooker part. ^. p. 24.) whereby he unmembers, and
unchurches all not so constituted. For my part, I scorn not such a notion, but
with Apollonius, and others, think it lawful, though not necessary, as the form
to the being of the Church; the Impsicite being of it self, confessed to be
fully sufficient. But I require a proof of the necessity of it. All that can
reasonably be said, is but this, That it is very requisite and expedient, in
corrupted Churches, in a time of Reformation, to renew the Covenant with God;
and that includes the Covenant of Pastors and Members, and of Members one with
onother, [ To walk with God and one another in all relations] Our Author
himself seems to grant, the Implicit Covenant may serve to the esse. Formale;
but then, in a manner recalls his grant again, when he says there, [ Though
explicitenesse be not essential to the esse Formale of a Church, yet you will
find it almost essential to the esse of a Government, etc. else when you come
to exercise discipline, you will find some members explicitly stubborn, to
spurn the Implicit Covenant, at their heels.] Truly they that are such, can as
well spurn the Explicit also. And in this Looseness, or rather want of
Church Government, can remove from his Church, to another, and ease themselves
of his most Explicit Covenant. They (of whom he speaks there) that [
acknowledged discipline as an Ordinance, and said to him, that if they had not
promised him to submit to discipline, he had no power over them] spoke not
aright. For by the Explicit Covenant of Christianity, they were bound
Implicitly to all Gods Ordinances, (of which this is one) and he had thereby
power over them. And by the [ Implicit consent to Church Government, in that
Implicit Covenant, which is in every Parochial Congregation, page 17.] they
were bound to him, and he had power over them, though they did not explicitly
promise him, to submit to him: yea, that Covenant, both general of
Christianity, and special, in joining with a Parochial Congregation, if he
would improve it, and press the obligation of it, upon his people, were
sufficient to persuade them to submit, and authorize him to exercise discipline
upon them. See Review of Survey part. 2. p. 104 and 109. etc.
But if people will be perverse and obstinate (at their peril be it) they can
as easily cast off the cords of his Explicit Covenant, as Sampson did his
wythes; yet page 17. he says [ How can this discipline be exercised, without a
free consent unto it, being this Church-relation, is not natural as (father and
child) but free] when to my apprehension, he requires an Explicit Covenant, to
make or admit a member, as Independents do. The truth is, as I conceive, that
relation of Christians one to another, is not free, but after a sort, natural;
and flows as natural from the Covenant of Christianity, or Regeneration, as
that of father and child, brother and brother, from generation; as is more
fully discoursed and cleared in the Tract aforesaid. Ibid page 125. 126. etc.
I shall not trouble his Epistle any further, but make bold, to make some
Animadversions upon his book, which may serve as an Appendix to the Diatribe
there expressed.

There are lately Printed for Christopher Meredith at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard; These Books.
MAster Elton on the ten Commandments and Lords Prayer; formerly burnt by the
Bishops. Doctor Dons (late Dean of Paul's) Sermon at the Lady Danvers funeral,
with verses of Mr. George Herbert, etc. 12. Viccarsii Manuductio ad artem
Rhetoricam. 12. A Letter of Mr. Thomas Sheppards, late of New- England, sent to
R. Harlakenden of Essex Esquire, removing four hindrances in Gods Worship.
First, how one may be rid of an earthly carnal heart, sold to the contentment
of the Creature. Secondly, of a proud heart which is unwilling to seek after,
to wait upon or to stoop unto the Commands of God. Thirdly, of a self-seeking
heart that eyes it self, especially in the best duties. Fourthly, of a slighty
heart of Gods hands in mercies and Judgments.
The state of the Saints departed; Gods Cordial to Comfort the Saints remaining
alive, a Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Mistress Smithee Harlakenden, wife
of William Harlakenden Esquire, by R. Josselin. The Christian Centurions
Observations, advices, and Resolutions concerning matters, Divine and Moral, by
Philip Skippon, Sergeant Major General, etc. Also two other books formerly
published by the same Author. viz. First, A Collection of Promises. Secondly, A
true Treasure, or thirty holy vows, etc.
A learned and full answer to a Treatise entitled the Vanity of childish
Baptism, etc. by William Cook Minister of Moxall in Warwickshire. Vindiciae
Redemptionis in the Fannings and Siftings of Samuel Oats, his exposition upon
Matthew. 13.44. by John Stalham, Pastor of the Church at Terling in Essex. The
Sum of a conference at Terling in Essex concernning Infants Baptism. John
Geeres Reply to Doctor Boughen, touching the Coronation oath; two books of his
in defense of Infants Baptism, in answer to Mr. Tombs Objections.
A Sober ANSWER, TO A Serious Question, Propounded and Published by G. F.
Whether the Ministers of England are bound by the Word of God to Baptize the
children of all such Parents which say, they believe in Jesus Christ, but are
grossly Ignorant, Scandalous in their conversations, Scoffers at Godliness, and
refuse to submit to Church Discipline?
The Negative is not sufficiently defended.
BEfore I fall upon the Discourse it self, I shall take leave, a little to
consider the state of the question. And I desire to be satisfied by the
Reverend Author, whether he intend, that all these qualifications in his
question, must meet jointly in one man, or he means it separately, and singly
of any one of them, as sufficient to debarr his children Baptism. If jointly,
that all these must concur, he will hardly, or very rarely find all these
together in one man. For a man may be grossly ignorant, and yet not of a
scandalous conversation: Or very Scandalous, and yet very knowing, or both
those, and yet no professed s^orner of Godliness. Or none of all those, yet
(not being convinced of the necessity of it) refuse to submit to Church
discipline. If any one of these singly, will strip him of that privilege, then
the last alone will do it, viz. [ Refusal to submit to Church-discipline] be a
man never so knowing, and godly in conversation. And then, I pray, what differs
he from the Independents in their Explicit Church Covenant? This is the
Resolution of M. Hooker, whom our Author follows in most of his discourse)
Survey part 3, p. 11.
[ The pinch of the question lies here, whether persons Non-confoederate (and
so in our sense not members of the Church) do entitle their children to the
seal of Baptism, their parents (though godly) being yet unwilling to come into
Church-fellowship] And he resolves it Negatively, (as our Author does, upon
his grounds partly, and chiefly.) Inconsist. of Independ. way etc. part 3.
But in that special sense, the Diatribe is ready to give him satisfaction: as
for the present question before us, Mr. Hooker rejects it, as out of question;
for thus he writes; ibid. [ Its not then the question, whether wicked members,
while they are tolerated sinfully in the Church, they and their children may
partake of the privileges? for this is beyond question, nor do I know, nor
never heard it denied by any of o^rs.] Had he lived till this time, he might
have known, and heard of some of ours, (if not still theirs) this question
negatively resolved, and earnestly (though modestly) defended. And to say the
truth, this question springs from his, and seems a reasonable consequence
thereof; for if one refusing only to submit to Church Discipline, loses this
privilege of Ordinances for himself and his, be he never so knowing and godly,
it seems very reasonable, that such as were grossly ignorant, and scandalous in
their conversation, etc. should much more justly be debarred the same. If it is
said, these are Church Members, though sinfully tolerated, but so are not those
that Refuse to come into Church Fellowship: I answer,

1. These are Church members also, at least of the Catholic Church, as more
then professors only, true believers and godly, and therefore are (we think)
unjustly debarred the privilege of Ordinances, for themselves and theirs not
being convinced of the necessity of their Church Government; as is largely
discoursed in the place aforesaid.

2. We may suppose easily that some, that were from their Infancy
Church Members, yet growing up are scrupled in the point of Church Discipline,
and so not willing to submit to it. These also, are yet tolerated (I say not
sinfully) in the Church, and so ought not to be debarred the former Privileges
by his own principles.

3. Our Author, that has started a new question, (out of question with Mr.
Hooker:) oftentimes professes, (as we shall hear anon) that the worst of these
tolerated (sinfully) while tolerated, have right to Ordinances, for themselves
and theirs. And so the controversy were at an end; This principle answers and
overthrows all his Arguments. But because, the former Diatribe with Mr. Hooker,
may receive light, and strength from this Contest; I shall take into
consideration, those things, to which little is said, in that Discourse, as
being then out of question.

[ The Infant abstracted from the Parent, gives no reason why it should be
Baptized] To which (otherwise propounded by Mr. Hooker) we have answered
already; Diatrib. 6. p. 18^.
and now explain our selves further, thus.

1. This is not rightly proposed (of all children, or any whatsoever:) as
appears, because he speaks indifferently of the child of a Turk, Indian, or
Christian, living together in a Parish, or place. A Minister, in such a case,
had reason to ask, whose child it is; because two sorts of the three, have no
right to Baptism, for themselves or theirs. But the question intends to speak
only of Christians children; for so it was propounded; not, whether a Minister
at large in any place, but of England, where all are Christians, and profess
to believe in Jesus Christ: then, it is supposed he would not ask, whose it is
in that respect, for it is not only Home, but a Christian born.

2. If he would (as he may) ask the question, when a Christians child is
brought to be Baptized, it is not to know whether he be ignorant, scandalous,
not submitting to Church Discipline, etc. or godly (such questions were never
asked till these last overcurious days) but that the Parent may be present,
to undertake for the education of the child, in the true Religion.

[ All children are Baptized by virtue of the Parent, one or both, considered
in relation to them] This is Mr. Hookers second premised conclusion; only
restrained to the next Parents; which is intended by our Author also: Ibid. p.
187.
To which much has been said; and now we add.

1. This in effect, is the same with the former; That the Negative; the child
brings nothing of it self to Baptism; This the Affirmative; the Parent only
gives it right thereto.

2. It takes for granted (what is denied) these two things. First, that there
is no way to admit a child to Baptism, but Parental, by virtue of, and
relation to the Parent. Secondly, and that not the pro-parent, or
predecessors, but the next Immediate Parent, which are two questions, the
first whereof, he medles not with at al.

3. In stating of this second premise, he takes occasion to define a Church; [
A Society of visible Saints joined together, by way of Covenant, etc.] where
two things are to me observable. 1. That he seems to own no Catholic Church,
but a Particular Congregation; nor any members of a Church, but of such a
Church; For else a new question may arise; whether a man converted to the
Faith, but as yet confoederate with no particular Church, but (if of any) only
of the Catholic Church, be to be reputed a Church member, and have any right
to require Baptism for his child. 2. He requiring an explicit Covenant to
such a Church, seems not only to contradict himself, in his Epistle, where he
grants an Implicit Covenant to be sufficient, but also to un-Church most of
our English Churches, for want of this Explicit Covenant, and consequently to
agree with the Independents, as in that point, so in this, in denying Baptism
to any children, but of members explicitly in Covenant.

[ upon this ground, all our Arguments against the Anabaptists stand; and if
this be taken away, Infant Baptism must fall] To which I say; Our arguments
against the Anabaptists stand not upon this ground only; But their Arguments
against Infant Baptism, stand upon the notion of an Explicit Covenant, to be
made by every one that is Baptized. And if we had no better ground, than an
Explicit Covenant, our cause must fall. Diatrib. 6. p. 186.
The difference is not great: The Anabaptists exclude children, because they
are not able to Covenant in person, in the Covenant of grace: The Independents
exclude children of Parents not joined to gether in a Church Covenant, and so
in their sense no Members of a Church, as was said elsewhere.

Amesius and others; it is, (I suppose) mistaken. For it is not brought
immediately to prove childrens Baptism, [ Because they are capable of the
grace of Baptism; men also being but mere Patients, in the first receiving of
it] but by way of answer to an objection made against it by the Anabaptists.
They plead that children have not, nor are capable of the grace of Faith and
Repentance, ergo not to be baptized: Our Divines deny the consequence upon this
ground. They are capable of grace, as well as men of years, both being alike
but Patients in the first receiving of Grace; therefore that can be no bar to
their Baptism. But enough of that.

[ The Morality of that command (to Abraham to circumcise his seed, with
himself) stands thus, that the children of Believers must have the Imitating
seal.] The Analogy indeed stands fair, under several dispensations of the same
Covenant; that, as circumcision then, so Baptism how, belongs to believers and
their children, unless God reveal himself to the contrary, which concerns
Anabaptists to prove, by express Scripture, (as he says) which they can never
do. Nay the contrary is evidently continued, Act. 2.38. etc. 1 Cor. 7.14. etc.
The seed is holy by the Parents. If he should plead a Morality in that command,
the Anabaptists would easily deny it, and put the difference; there was
express Command for childrens Circumcision, not so for their Baptism; It is
enough it can be proved by consequence from Scripture.

predecessors giving right to childrens Baptism, much need not to be said
here, It is largely discussed in the foresaid Diatribe with Mr. Hooker, page
188. and afterward. All that I shall say now, is this. 1. What England was when
Austin came into England, we need not much enquire. For we look at England, as
many years since reformed, we need not go to many generations past, there are
some alive, that had, or have predecessors known to be godly, let the question
be of them; and two of them undertaking for the Christian education of the
child. And though it be true, that some people received the Gospel after the
example of their Kings, and were Baptized for company (as Simon Magus it seems
was) and supposing it was but in outward profession only, yet that was
sufficient to give them right to Baptism, for themselves and theirs, and
consequently they were a true Church, though not a perfect and pure Church. For
my part, I should not plead that promise in the second Commandment, showing
mercy to thousands, etc. but rather that to Abraham, [ I am thy God, and the
God of thy seed] which, whoever will restrain to the next generation only, it
concerns him to prove, by express Scripture, (as he required above in a like
case, of Anabaptists) that God is not the God of the seed of a godly Christian,
in a second or third generation, but only of the first; which I believe he
cannot do.

immediate Parent godly, do give right to his child for Baptism, yet if that
child growing up, prove Scandalous, his Parents godliness does not give him
now right to the Lords Supper, because he himself puts in a bar, to keep him
from the Supper; the reason is, because more is required of him for the Supper,
than for Baptism. But then says he; [ If so, why does not the Scandalous life
of the Immediate Parent put a bar between the child to be Baptized, and his
predecessors?] The answer is, the child must not suffer for the Parents
personal sin. True (says he) for Eternal punishment. But we say, not for
Temporal or Spiritual punishments. He replies; [ Not indeed when it is
considered without relation to the Parent; which it cannot in this case, and so
may suffer by him] To which we answer.

1. The Jews children could no more be considered without relation to their
Parents, than ours, yet the wickedness of a Jew hindered not their Circumcision.

2. We must distinguish between the general state or a Parent, and his Personal
wickedness: If his state be that of an Infidel, the child suffers with him;
but if he be for state a Christian, the child is born a Christian, and the
Parents Personal sin, is not imputed to the child, to hinder his Baptism. It
has, besides its relation to its Parent, a Birth-priviledge as born of
Christian predecessors, and thereby may challenge the seal of Baptism.

3. All this proceeds upon his former supposition, that there is no way to
admit children to Baptism, but the Parent, and that the next and Immediate
Parent, which is largely confuted, in the Diatribe, chap. 2.

Lastly, all this discourse is destroyed, by what he often yields, [ That a
wicked Parent tolerated, may give right to a child's Baptism.]

Corinth converted old, having children Infidels, which have also children; [
whether would a minister Baptize the Infants, by virtue of the Grandfather] Is
not our ease, where both father and grandfather are Christians? Yet what
Minister that understands himself, would scruple to Baptize the child of an
Infidel Parent, supposing him either dead, or resigning his child up to the
Grandfather, to be Christianlike educated? All that he says against it, is but
some accidental inconveniences that may follow. As first, [ The Grandfather is
old, may dye quickly, before the child grow up, etc.] So may the Father, though
a Christian and never so godly, yea both the Parents; who then shall take care
for it? Again [ The Infidel will not let his father Baptize the child; who have
most right over the child, the father or Grandfather?] But suppose the Infidel
willing to give up his child to the Grandfather: what says he then? That many
things may fall out to hinder the Act of Baptism of such an Infant, is nothing
to the question: the question is, whether it can hinder its right? If the
Grandfather also will undertake for it, or some other friend, what says he
then? If the mother be a Christian, though the father an Infidel, yet she can
give a right to the childs Baptism: this he confesses page 10. But the father
an Infidel, will not suffer it to be Baptized, or if Baptized, will breed it up
in his Idolatry; I ask, as he, [ who has most right over the child, the father
or the mother?] yet the child undenyably, has right to Baptism by the mother.
So then, there may be a right to Baptism, where no power to act it; See
Diatrib. p. 188.
so it may be in the Grandfather, for ought is yet said.

Its true, that Aquinas says, in his 8. page [ children of Infidels are not to
be Baptized, white they are under their care and power, against their wills]
But this seems to grant, that if they were willingly resigned to the care and
power of a Christian undertaker, they might be Baptized, and then the Church
does not act against the Law of Nature; which is his fear and needless
exception.

[ Then though there are none to educate this child, for the ignorant profane
Parents will not but teach them how to break the Covenant; predecessors
cannot, they are dead, yet we must seal to this child] Let the Church take it,
and take care of it say we; But says he, [ Where do you see Churches take care
of such children, etc.] we answer, He need not go far to see this; he may
perhaps see it in his own Parish. Our Church or State have ordered very
commendably, and charitably, that the children of very Papists, are taken from
them, and bred up Protestants. Yea every Parish is ordered to take care of
their own poor Orphants. If they cannot, the State, with the charity of good
men, has provided Hospitals and Schools for such childrens education: we will
put him a case. Suppose both the next Parents, being Church Members, dye, and
leave Infants, having no known kindred in, or near that place: who shall take
care of them? we say the Church whereof the Parents were members: for the
children baptized, are members of that Church, and the Church ought to take
care of them. If the Congregational Church, neglect this, they come short of
our Parochial Churches, though they pretend not only more piety, but more
charity also to their own members. In a Christian Church or State, there ought
to be a care of children, of Parents deceased, both in temporal and spiritual
respects.

See ubi Suprae p. 212.
[ where shall we stay? how far may we go, for this predecessor? how many
generations? etc. This is fully answered elsewhere: we only once again desire
him to prove by express Scripture, that the promise [ I will be thy God, and
the God of thy seed,] extends not only to the next generation; or to how many
generations it is limited. Something he speaks to this purpose, page 28. [ We
find many promises made to the posterity of godly Parents, Genesis 17.7. etc. now
if the children of such Parents grow up, and though but young, yet reading they
find such promises, or hear of them; it seems these poor children must not lay
hold of the promise, and claim it by virtue of their parents, and plead it
with God, etc. for sure if God will not so much as give them an outward seal of
the Covenant, by virtue of the parent, the poor child cannot plead these
promises, which come by the parent] Thus he, and well, argued against the
Anabaptists. Do but but change the word parent into progenitors, grandfather,
or grandmother, and the plea is strong against himself: Lord, I am sure my
grandfather, etc. was a godly man, my grandmother, a godly woman; thou have
made many promises to the posterity of such, not only to the next, but as I
think, remote generations, though my next parents, were both wicked and
profane; yet my pre-parents were godly. It seems, by this new Doctrine, to use
his own words [ This poor child must not now go and lay hold of this promise,
and spread it before God, etc. for surely if God will not so much as give to
this grandchild the outward seal of the Covenant by virtue of the pro-parent,
or grandfather, it cannot plead the promises, which come by him] Let his own
experience, in making use of these promises, teach him more mercy and charity
to grandchildren.

[ If predecessors give right, then the children of an Immediate Parent
Apostatized from the faith, and excommunicated from the Church may be Baptized,
etc. and then the children of our English Apostates in Turkey may be baptized,
etc.] We fear not to affirm, they may, if either they will resign them up to
those that are Christians, their kindred or others, or any will undertake for
their education. But in particular; First, for the case of an Apostate, it is
answered elsewhere, in the Diatrib. p. 188. And we add now, that an Apostate
renouncing his Christanity, renounce also with it his Baptism, and so turns
Heathen; and that alters the case, except, as before, he be willing to give it
up, to such as will undertake for it. But then secondly, for the Excommunicate
Parents (for if but one be a member, the child has right to Baptism) for such
Parents we say their case is not the same, with an Apostate, or Heathen: For
though in some respects, an Excommunicate person is worse than an Infidel, (as
the Apostle speaks of a man that provides not for his family, though not
excommunicated) because he should be better, etc. yet in regard of State and
Church Priviledges, he is better.

For first, he is for state still a Christian, and retains his Baptism, which
an Infidel has not.

2. He is a members still, though diseased much, and a member under cure, (as
the leper of old, shut out of the camp was) which an Infidel is not. He is I
say, a member in a large sense, as he speaks of a scandalous person tolerated,
p. 41.

3. [ Heathen and non-members of Churches, when they are taken into a Church,
they are Baptized] they are his own words, page 42. But so is not an
Excommunicate person, therefore his State is better than theirs; He is neither
Heathen nor non-member: ergo a member at large.

Fourthly, if in regard of Church Priviledges, he be no better than an Heathen,
yet that is still in respect to himself, not to his child, who being born a
Christian of a Christian, has right to Baptism, as shall appear in some cases
at least. The child that is debarred Baptism, for the Parents Excommunication;
falls into this punishment, either when it is born before his Excommunication
or after he is Excommunicated; If before his Excommunication it be born, but
not Baptized before he is Excommunicated, then his Excommunication cannot
hinder its Baptism, for it is born a member of the Church, being born of one
that was yet a member, when it was born: and the personal sin of the Parent,
cannot prejudice its right: (Baptism makes not a member, it was one before; as
he speaks page 25. of a Jews child, a member before circumcision) whence thus
I argue upon his own principles; [ A member of the Church, may be Baptized. But
a child of a wicked, not yet excommunicated, is born a member; ergo it may be
Baptized] though it should happen (as it may) that it be not Baptized before
the Excommunication. It remains then to say, either it loses this right to
Baptism, if it be born after the parents Excommunication, or not at all. And
now we are fallen upon his argument, p. 9. [ If I may Baptize the child of an
excommunicate person, then I may Baptize a child of a non-member of a Church,
and so of an Indian or Turk, for they are non members, etc. and he is no other,
in respect of communion, in Church-priviledges] we answer, by distinction of
the Assumption; I may Baptize the child of a Non-member, that is, of one that
at present is accounted no member; as is plain in the case of a child born, but
not baptized before the Parents Excommunicated. And therefore this consequence
of his is unsound; [ If the parent be a non-member, the child is a non-member
also] for that child is a member born, though the Parents at present stand
Excommucated. It is true only of an Infidel, or Apostate; who are no members:
but an Excommunicate person, is in some sense a member still, as was said
above; and then to Baptize such an one, is not to Baptize a Non-member.

Observation of Reverend Gillespy, from Buxtorf, etc. is not very Orthodox,
though true perhaps in the practice of the latter Jews: [ That a child of an
excommunicate, ought not to be circumcised] It was, if done, a corrupt
Invention, and Tradition of their own, of which there is no ground in
Scripture. And therefore, page 32. he does well to wave it.

Zanchy, and Perkins, who plead for the Baptism of children of Parents
Excommunicated, p. 11. That which has been said, may help toward it, we come
to a new question started, p. 13 [ whether profession of faith in Christ,
though parents be grossly ignorant, scandalous, etc, be sufficient to make a
man, and continue him a member of the visible Church:] To which, we say in
general, That our main question is not about making or continuing a man a
member of a Church, but whether a man qualified as in the question, continued
and tolerated a member of the Church, can give right to to his childrens
Baptism. And this he does expressly resolve in the affirmative at least three
times. Once thus of a Jewish Parent wicked not excommunicated, [ Doubtless so
long the immediate Parent was not cast off from giving a right to his child, p.
13.] Again, in the same page [ If a member be very scandalous, and the Church
let him alone, that person may challenge any Ordinance in the Church, both
Baptism and Lords Supper:] Again page 34 [ wicked persons so long as they
continue members, and the Church lets them alone, they may challenge Baptisme]
whence I would conclude the contradictory to his conclusion, in this manner. [
The child of a scandalous member tolerated, may be Baptized. But the child of a
scandalous member not excommunicated, is the child of a scandalous member
tolerated, ergo, it may be Baptized, and a minister may lawfully Baptize it.]
All he says to this, is this, page 13. and 34, [ Our question is, whether such
persons should be let alone, is not that Church too blame?] But by his favor,
the question is not, whether such persons should be suffered, or the Church be
too blame to suffer them: but whether such being suffered in the Church, their
children ought to be Baptized; and though he undertake the Negative, yet he
determins the question here Affirmatively: [ So long as wicked persons continue
members, and the Church lets them alone, they may challenge Baptism.] which
one sentence confutes, (as it contradicts) both his question and practice, in
his refusal to Baptize the children of such; and at once gives us an answer to
all his arguments following: But we shall further consider what he says, to
show his mistakes, and give him fuller satisfaction.

[ Members are visible Saints; but such are not visible Saints, ergo.] 1. We
must distinguish between a first admission into a Church, and continuance in a
Church, by such as are born of members of a Church: Such, if now to be
admitted, in their own persons, are not fit to be members, nor ought to be
admitted. But if children of members, prove ignorant or scandalous, they are to
be continued, and accounted members, till they be legally convicted, and cast
out: we grant such a one, [ is not qualified sufficiently, to make a member,
nor ought to be continued, continuing such; but the Church ought to reform him,
or eject him] which are partly his own words. But then, while the Church is in
reforming him, he is a member, and consequently has right to give his child
Baptism. He should have proved, (with respect to the first and main question)
that such are not members, during the Churches toleration of them, and then
infer, their children have no right, because children of Non-members. 2.
Church Members and visible Saints, are taken in Scripture, sometimes
improperly; even such as in the question, ignorant, scandalous, etc. are
saluted, with the whole Church as Saints, 1 Cor. 1. etc. and called brethren, 1
Cor. 5.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14,15. Now brethren and members are aequivalent terms; if
they be accounted brethren, they may be accounted members, in a large sense, as
he confesses page 41. 3. when we say a profession of the faith is sufficient
to qualify a man to be made or continued a member; we do not mean a bare
profession with his mouth, that he believes in Jesus Christ, though visibly he
live like an Infidel; but thus at least, when nothing in his life appears to
the contrary Conversatinot scandalous, he seems to require no more, page 43.
; though there be yet no great positive signs of his holiness. Thus we think
the Eunuch, at least, Simon Magus was admitted. This indeed is sufficient for
Admission; but as there must be more to continue such in the Church, so there
must be something positive, of obstinacy, in ignorance or gross wickedness in
life, to cast out again. The Church cannot upon the Negative (if once admitted)
cast them out; nay, nor upon positive appearances, but after legal proceedings
with them; therefore so long, they are to be accounted members, etc.

[ If (says he) a bare profession be sufficient, then none can be cast out for
the vilest sins, Heresy, etc. because he is the same now, as when he was
admitted.] The consequence is unsound, and proof like it. For when he was first
admitted, upon his profession, no such scandal appeared; but now it does;
therefore he is not the same, that he was, when admitted.

[ A Rebel opposing Christ in his visible Kingdom, is not fit to be a member of
it, because no subject;] I answer, he is not fit to be admitted, if no member
before; but fit to be continued till trial of Reformation be past, and this
himself confesses after, page 17. of which hereafter. A Rebel is a Subject,
(though not an honest Subject) till reformed, or outlawed, or cut off. And we
desire to see the place in Scripture, where those, who are within the outward
Covenant, are presently dis-covenanted, if they walk contrary to the conditions
of the Covenant.

Object. All are not convinced that Church Discipline is an Ordinance of God?

Answ. [ I speak (says he) of such as have been convinced, and acknowledged
it, from Matthew. 18.15. but yet would not submit to it] Reply. Then say we, a
man not convinced of it, may be a member, though he refuse to submit to
discipline, if out of ignorance only of this particular. But this
qualification, is not in his question; but generally, [ If he refuse to subject
to Church Discipline.

Authorities, Ancient and modern, page 15. etc. That more then a bare
profession is required to make a member, we assent; but still with our
distinction, that more is required to the first admission, than to the
continuance of one born a member in the Church. And this leads us to that
consideration, of a Church to be now constituted, and one already constituted,
p. 17. The Churches of England are not now in constituting, but a succession
for many years. To this he says: [ That which constitutes a Church, continues
it a Church: if then, a bare profession be not sufficient to make a member, nor
is it enough to continue a man a member of a Church.] We answer, both
propositions are faulty. The Minor, for we have proved, that a profession of
faith, nothing appearing to the contrary, will constitute a member, and so a
Church of many members, though all hypocrites. The Major, because more is
required to a first admission; than to continuance in the Church. As is
evident, in men of years converted from Infidels: a personal profession of
faith is necessary to such: but their children are admitted, and continued
without it, by their Birth privilege, etc. till they give evidences of their
ignorance or scandal, and be orderly proceeded with, for their reformation. And
this is his own resolution and remedy to reform them without a new
constitution, for so he says: [ Let Churches be constitute according to the
rule, and so continued; or (mark it) exercise discipline, and reduce them to
their first constitution] This makes it clear, that there is another way to
reform a constituted, but corrupted Church, than first to constitute a Church;
viz. discipline. But then I would object.

1. How can we exercise discipline, (I say not where no Government is settled,
but) when the parties refuse to submit to discipline, as not convinced of the
Divine Authority of it?

2. Would he have men, ignorant or scandalous, or refusers of discipline,
suddenly ejected? Not so, he says, [ Not that I mean we fall presently upon
excommunication, before we have tried other means, and patiently waited.] Well,
then the person is yet a member, and the Church, a Church in being, or
constituted (else no discipline could be exercised by it) though corrupted:
then have those members under cure, right to all Ordinances for themselves, and
theirs: and so the Church needs no new constitution* But if his arguing be
good, our Churches are no true Churches, our members, no true members, for the
greatest part, having no right to Ordinances for themselves, or theirs (why
else are they debarred from both Sacraments) and so we are at once un-churched,
and dismembered, and a new frame to be molded, which is flat Independentisme,
Brownisme, (if not Anabaptisme) which this our Author seems to have renounced.

dissolved. The first is this: [ Such persons (as the question mentions) de
jure ought, and de facto are excluded from the Lords Supper, therefore they
ought to be excluded from their childrens Baptism.] First, I deny the
Antecedent, in the first part of it. Some of the persons mentioned in the
question, ought not de jure to be excluded from the Lords Supper; as namely,
such as refuse to submit to discipline, if godly, but not convinced yet of the
divine Authority of discipline. This is nothing but the rigid way of the
Independents, who exclude from the Lords Supper, and Church Communion, those
that cannot subscribe to their Church Covenant Explicit, be they never so
godly and knowing, as was said above. Secondly, all those that the question
mentions, ought not to be excluded from the Lords Supper, while they are
tolerated in the Church. This is his own confession often: and consequently
ought not to be excluded from their childrens Baptism. Then for the latter
part, that they are de facto excluded, admits a question, whether they are not
unjustly excluded. And it is resolved to be so, not only by Mr. Jeans his
arguments; but as a consequence of the former: If de jure, they ought not to be
excluded, then de facto, they are unjustly excluded: which is worthy all
Ministers consideration, who for many years have had no Sacraments for fear of
admitting such, as the question mentions: whereby, pretending they want power
of an Eldership, no Government being settled, they usurp (inconsiderately
perhaps) a power above the Elderships to exclude, not only such, but their
whole Parish, by their own single power: But see into what streights the New
way has brought us? They cried out of our Churches, and separated from them,
because of our mixed communions; And now Ministers abstaining from the
administration of the Supper, for fear of a mixture; they cry out again, and
call people to separate from us, because we want an Ordinance. The Lord judge
between us in this matter. But now for the consequence, [ that therefore they
ought to be excluded from their childrens Baptism;] it is also denied, and all
the proofs thereof. For it should proceed of the same, not of several persons,
thus; Those that de jure ought, and de facto are excluded from the Lords
Supper, ought (if now they were to be Baptized) also to be excluded from
Baptism for themselves. As backward, if excluded justly from Baptism, much
more from the Lords Supper. But it holds not with respect to their children;
(as we have heard by his own confession.) The young children of members, are
unfit to be admitted to the Lords Supper, yet not to be excluded from Baptism.
The reason is, because more is required to the Lords Supper, then to their
Baptism. The proof is as weak, as the consequence; [ Baptism seals to the
same Covenant, as the Lords Supper does ergo, if excluded from one they ought
to be exclud^d from the other.] It holds good against themselves, not their
children. The proof of this is like the former; [ The ground of exclusion from
both, is the same, viz: because those persons appear not such, as to whom those
privileges do belong:] this is false in respect to their children: And all
these consequences are grounded upon his first (false) premised supposition, at
the beginning; viz. [ that the child has no right, but in relation to the next
Parent] which is confuted above. And now we add briefly. 1. Its
Birth-priviledge, that being born a Christian of a Christian gives it right, as
of old to circumcision. 2. It may have right from a grandfather, or by
adoption, etc. 3. Neither the Scripture nor any History (that we remember)
gives an instance, that the personal default of a Christian Parent Baptized,
ever hindered the child from Baptism. 4. Himself confutes his own argument, by
often granting, that such (as in the question) tolerated by the Church, have
right for themselves and theirs: Let him consider it.

Whereupon, his observation page 19. of admitting the children to Baptism, in
the afternoon, whose Parents in the morning were excluded from the Supper,
need not seem so strange, and his Dilemma may be retorted upon himself, thus:
He grants, a wicked person tolerated, may be admitted to the Lords Supper, and
his child to Baptism; only he says, de jure he ought to be excluded. Now I
would ask, (as he) does such a man appear to be under the Covenant of Grace or
no? If so, why should he de jure be excluded? If not, why should he, de facto,
be admitted? or why does he give Baptism to the child, which (says he) must
suppose the Parent to be within the Covenant? So here is a believer, and no
believer, in a short time, and yet the same man. Let him answer one, and both.

Suspension from the Lords Supper, in some sense; page 19. of one fallen into
some gross sin: and I think, he does not deny Baptism to the children of
such, which if he yield, he destroys his own argument and question. As for his
Quaere, [ whether if the parent be suspended from the Supper, his child may not
also be suspended for the present, till he repent, being the child depends on
the Parent, etc.] may be thus answered, by his own principles: The Parent,
though suspended from the Supper, is yet a Churchmember, till he be
Excommunicated, then has he right to give his child Baptism. If the Parents
sin, did annul his own Baptism or render him an Heathen again, it were a
question whether it did not hinder his childs Baptism. But suspension does
not that, nor excommunication but utter Apostasy only: Besides, it would be
proved, that that which suspends from one privilege suspends from all: and
that for his child, as well as for himself. The child (we say) having a native
right, it seems unreasonable and injurious, that the Parents personal fault,
should suspend it. Else in this case there is no difference, between the child
of a Christian and of an Infidel.

[ Such Parents, if they were now to be Baptized, ought not to be Baptized;
ergo, cannot challenge it for their children. The reason is, because Baptism
belongs primarily to the Parent, if ergo, he have no right, he can give none]
The consequence is again denied, and the proof of it;

For first, it a received Maxim amongst the Lawyers; Quod fieri non debuit,
factum valet. Suppose an unfit person Baptized, his Baptism is not null, he is
a member till legally excluded, and so has right for himself and his, to the
consequent privileges.

2. He confutes this argument also, by granting, a wicked member tolerated, to
have right to all Ordinances; yet if he were now to be Baptized, he ought not
so to be accounted.

3. His reason is of no force: for it should thus proceed, because Beptisme
belongs, both primarily, and only to the next parent, which we have above
denied, and disproved. In a word; this argument holds only in respect to the
person himself, not to his child. For certainly the child that is Baptized when
an Infant, being the child of a member, had right to Baptism then, though if
when it grows up, it proves ignorant or scandalous, we may truly say, if he
were now to be Baptized, he ought not to be Baptized. Hence it may appear, that
the question will fall only upon such persons when Excommunicate, which yet is
no qualification, expressed in his question: For till they are ejected, they
have right (by his own confession) for himself and theirs. But of Excommunicate
Persons, we have spoken above.

The third argument is like the former: [ Such a Parent, is no disciple, ergo,
the child is none: and then Ministers are not bound to baptize it, by their
Commission] we answer, 1. That Commission was for the first gathering of
Churches; not of Churches constituted; 2. We have proved above, the child may
be a member, when the Parent at present is none, being Excommunicated. Now a
disciple and a member, is all one. 3. Such Parents tolerated are members, and
so disciples; ergo, the child is a disciple. That then is not a sound
assertion, page 20. [ If I can give the child one seal of the Covenant, by
virtue of the Parent, I will give the Parent the other] for I may see reason to
deny the Parent the Lords Supper, and yet Baptize his child: because more is
required of the one, than of the other.

[ To give the seal to the child of one visibly in Covenant with the Devil, is
a profaning of the Ordinance, etc.] But we deny that every ignorant, scandalous
person, and the rest in the question, is visibly in Covenant with the devil;
especially if tolerated by the Church, for so long he is visibly in the
external Covenant of the Church. 2. Suppose the person be Excommunicate, and so
delivered unto Satan, (as the incestuous person was) yet it were hard to say,
he were visibly in Covenant with Satan, though at present under his power. 3.
Every gross sin (as in Noah, David, etc.) does not conclude a man visibly in
Covenant; Diatrib. p. 190
much less ignorance, as in children and youths Baptized. 2. Last of all, one
not convinced, and therefore not submitting unto discipline. See whether this
new way leads its followers.

mischiefs attending the common Baptizing of the children of such; [1. The
slighting of this Ordinance; without any preparation to it.] But all this may
be amended by pressing the due reverence to this, as to the other Sacrament;
better then by debarring the child its right, for the Parents fault. 2. [ Its a
jumbling of the children of the most holy with the profanest, etc.] This falls
upon himself; For if the wicked Parents be tolerated, he will not, he may not
deny to Baptize their children; no more, than of the holiest Parent. He may
grieve that he cannot reform this abuse, but need not scruple to Baptize their
children; nor to pray for them, as for the other.

[ The Jews, though very wicked, had their children circumcised, ergo.] He
answers many ways.

1. He mentions again that observation of Gillespy, that some said, [ that the
children of Excommunicated Jews were not circumcised] But he does well to wave
it; as for what we said to it above; so because it is nothing to the question,
which is not of excommunicated parents, but wicked Parents tolerated.

2. [ He supposes they were not so guilty of ignorance, as many of ours.] But
that's nothing to the question; their children were as ignorant as ours, and the
Parents never Excommunicated for ignorance, nor their children denied
circumcision for that reason. But closer to the point he says.

3. He would see a proof, [ that the Priests did debar many from the Passover,
for moral uncleanness, many years, as ours do from the Supper, and yet had
their children circumcised] We answer. 1. The Priests are blamed for admitting
the morally unclean, to some Ordinances, but it concerns him to prove, where
ever they were blamed, for circumcising the children of such. See Ezech.
44.7.9. cited by himself, page 35. to the same end. 2. It is doubtful at least,
whether the practice of those ministers can be justified, who suspend any so
long from the Supper, and yet Baptize their children: therefore that can be no
safe ground to debar children of such from Baptism: Of which see Mr. Jeanes.

4. He conceives [ Something peculiar to them, in that National constitution,
from ours: Gods enters Covenant with Abraham, and his family; commands him to
circumcise his seed: the constitution of our Churches, does not begin with any
particular person; but makes disciples, and Baptize them] But this makes no
great difference: For a Church Christian may begin with a person and his
family; Suppose one of a numerous family, when he is discipled, his house is
discipled with him; and there may be a Church in his house; yea every
householder converted to the faith, was a child of Abraham, in one sense; and a
root to his posterity in another, and so the promise is made to him and his
seed, not only of the next, but of remoter generations, till they Apostate, as
Ishmael and Esau did: He yields page 33. that descent by the flesh, was one,
though not the sole ground of circumcision. And so it is now, 1 Cor. 7.14. Let
us see what was peculiar to them.

1. [ When they came to John's Baptism, it was not sufficient to plead, we are
Abraham's seed, ergo, Baptize us.] True, because this was a new dispensation, a
new Ordinance, to which repentance was required in the first Parents, but not
of their Infants. And just so it was in Circumcision of Proselytes, to the
Jewish Religion.

2. [ When they fell to foul Apostasy, their children were still Circumcised,
whether regularly, he leaves it.] Yes regularly, for ought appears to the
contrary: The Rule was, [ Abraham and his seed must be circumcised.] And so the
proportion holds for Baptism. If the parents fall into Apostasy, the children
may regularly be baptized, for ought appears in the Gospel to the contrary, if
they will give them up to their pro-parents or friends, and they will undertake
for them. And in such a case a Minister would Baptize them.

3. [ They were very exact in admission of Heathens: more required, than to
profess they did believe in God, etc.] So would we be, in admission of
Infidels: but that's nothing to admission of their children.

4. [ It is true, that wicked Jews being members of that Church National, might
challenge circumcision, so for wicked persons, so long as they continue
members, and the Church lets them alone, they may challenge Baptism.] Now this
expressly yields both the present argument, from the Jews, to be good: and also
the main question, that such persons, if tolerated, may give right to their
childrens Baptism, and Ministers not only may, but are bound to Baptize them,
against which he has all this while disputed. Only he says; [ Our question
is, whether such persons should be let alone? is not that Church too blame?
ought such de jure to be members?] No, the question was, whether such persons,
while suffered in the Church, have right to give their children Baptism? And
that is fully granted.

5. exactness in the Churches of the Gospel, in diverse respects, we dissent
not, so it be not beyond the Rule. But as he dislikes the rigidnesse, which
some (he means the Independents) would have, in admission of members, to
Church Communion, so we dislike his rigidnesse, in admission of children to
Baptism.

sense of 1 Cor. 5.11. for many pages together, I purposely pass by, as
leading into another controversy. I shall only consider, that Question
propounded, page 42. as his Advice for the Reformation of our Congregations,
which is this; [ Whether it were not better for the Ministers of England, as
they do suspend persons from the Lords Supper, so also for a time to suspend
them from Baptizing their children, and in the mean time, Ministers to follow
Catechizing close, etc?] To which I have these things to say.

1. It proceeds upon an erroneous, at least a doubtful practice, that Ministers
have done well, in suspending so long, such men, their whole Parishes, from the
Lords Supper; of which something has been said above. This way as it has
given occasion to some to separate, and join themselves to Independent
Churches, as wanting with us an Ordinance; so it has made others more profane
than before, who were something awed, by their approaches to that Sacrament.

2. For the Inference from that practice; I say, If they did, and do well, in
suspending such from the Supper, yet it is not safe or expedient (in my
judgment) to suspend them from the other, for their children, as things now
stand in England: for besides what has been said, in behalf of poor children
above, I observe.

1. If one Baptize them not, another of another Judgment shall, and will, and
who can hinder it? This increases the D^visions betwixt ministers, by others
intermedling within their charges, and Congregations.

2. This will be one way, to make the next generation, no better than Infidels,
for the most part, being all unbaptized; or else profane and ignorant, as being
without the care of the Churches.

3. This will exasperate the Parents, being profane and desperate enough
already, against their Ministers, and so not only prejudice them in their
maintenance (however he finds it otherwise by the power of some friends) but
also alienate their minds more from the desired Reformation.

4. This is contrary to the express Rule, to punish the poor children for the
Parents personal faults; at least in some cases, as is manifested above.

5. This is contrary to his own principles, who has often granted, that while
such Parents (as in the question) are suffered in the Church, they have right
for themselves and theirs, [ and you must not deny it, if you own them for
Church Members, however custom has prevailed to the exclusion of them from
it, without regular proceeding, etc.] page 42. If the Church shall tolerate
such evils, etc. they cannot deny them the privilege of members, Survey, part
3. p. 11. and he instances in the Church of Sardis, etc.
Now both Mr. Hooker, Survey, part 3. page 11. and himself has often yielded
them to be members to all privileges of the Church, while (sinfully)
tolerated. And as for that regular proceeding to reform them by suspension, or
eject them by Excommunication, it is not in the power of any Minister alone,
and therefore not only unjust if they should usurp it, but also impossible, as
our Churches yet stand, for the most part, unpresbytered, and without a settled
Government. Whence a new ground of obloquie and reproach, would be offered to
Anabaptists and Independents, yea and to profane people too, to charge our
Churches, at least our Ministers as Antichristian, for usurping not only a
Bishop-like, but a Pope-like power in every Parish; the thing so much feared in
the Presbytery.

Magistrates could be prevailed with, to settle a right Government in the
Church, which all Congregations should be bound to submit to, or else to
execute Justice upon notorious Offenders, and scandalous persons; the Ministers
in the mean time, [ following Catechizing close, to breed knowledge in their
people, and laboring to reform them from a scandalous conversation, by all the
gentle persuasions, and meekness of wisdom, which God shall give them:] that
so, when the Authority of the Magistrate has civillized at least their
conversation, and by Catechizing, they have gotten knowledge, we may then with
more comfort give them the privilege of both the Ordinances. In the mean time,
(such are the straits some men have brought us into) no better way (in my
shallow head) than to press hard upon such Parents, the conditions of the
Covenant of grace, at the times of Baptism, or other times, the duties of
Parents with respect to their own Baptism, and their childrens; as by this
seal, engaged both of them to be Gods people, that is, [ to know him, to fear
him, to love him, to trust in him, to delight in him, and to obey him in all
his holy commands delivered in the Word;] and all this, as they expect the
performance of the Covenant on Gods part, to be their God. By all which
faithfully and earnestly pressed upon them, they may, (by the blessing of God,
upon our labors) be qualified according to his own Rules, delivered in his
Epistle, by which he practices; viz. [1. See and profess the sense of their own
undone condition by sin, and utter inability to help themselves; but by relying
upon Christ. 2. Have competent knowledge. 3. Have their conversation such, as
does not cross their profession, by living in any known sin, or omitting any
known duty, as praying and Catechizing in their families, etc. And lastly,
profess (if it be necessary) their subjection to discipline;] to tie them
faster by a new obligation, to a duty, to which they were bound before, by
their Covenant of Christianity.

FINIS.

