CERTAIN ORDERS MEET TO BE OBSERVED UPON ANY FORAINE INVASION, For those
Shires that lie upon the Sea Coasts.

With a Direction to the Justices of the Peace.

LONDON, Printed by R. C. for Michael Spark, Senior, and are to be sold at the
sign to the blue Bible in Greene-Arbor. 1642.

CERTAIN ORDERS, MEET TO BE Observed, upon any Foraine INVASION.
THAT in every Shire be appointed one Noble man, to take the chief charge for
the ordering and governing of the same, and he to appoint a Leader of the
Horsemen, and one other of the Footmen. And under them Captains and Officers
of all sorts, which Captains may be of the better sort inhabiting the Country,
if their courage and skill be answerable for it.

The chief Leaders both of horsemen and footmen, must be men of that
experience, discretion, temperancy, and judgment, as well in ordering and
disposing of great Numbers, as also in taking advantages of grounds, times,
occasions, and matters offered. And it were to be wished they were such in all
points, as the whole Realm might be able to furnish every frontyshire but with
two of that conduct and valor, that there might be also a meeting and drawing
together of some convenient numbers both of horsemen and footmen, to be
trained and exercised into all manner of sorts, and forms, as well frivolous as
necessary, to the intent to make them the more perfect how to give and receive
a charge. For I think, if you shall ask the opinion but of three Captains,
how horsemen ought to charge, and how they should receive a charge; and so
likewise of footmen, and of their retraites: your three Captains will be of
two opinions at the least. And yet the first thing we offer unto the enemy, is
rashly to join battle without any foresight of the Inconvenience thereof. A
thing so generally received of all our Nation, for the best way, as who should
seem to impugn the same, is in danger to be made ridiculous, and his reasons
to be holden for heresy, and not fit to be heard, or read. And yet how rude,
ignorant and untowardly we should and would present our selves thereunto; make
but some modells of convenient numbers assembled, and you shall see the same.

In private quarrel for trifling causes, every man desires to be exercised,
and skillfull in that weapon wherewith he would encounter his enemy: But in
this general conflict wherein we fight for the safety of our Country,
Religion, goods, wife, and children, we would hazard all in that order and
form wherein we are altogether ignorant and unexperimented.

But because I have found it by experience and reason a very desperate and
dangerous kind of Trial, I would not wish any Prince to venture his kingdom
that way, (unless he be weary of the same) being the only thing for an
Invadour to seek, and a Defendor to shun: for the one does hazard but his
people, and has a I ot to win a kingdom; the other in losing of the
battle has lost his Crown.

A Battle is the last refuge, and not to be yielded unto by the Defendant,
until such time as he and his people be made desperate.

In which kind of trial seldom or never shall you see the Invadour to quail,
no though his numbers have been much lesser then the other.

There is a kind of heat and fury in the encounter and joining of Battles;
the which whose side can longest retain, on that part goes victory;
contrariwise which side conceives the first fear (whether it be upon just
cause or not) that side goes to wrack, yea and often times it falls so out
before the Pikes be couched.

Thus much to the incertainty of Battle. Wherein albeit I would wish our
Nation to be well exercised and trained (being a thing of great moment:) Yet to
be used in our own Country, as the shoot anckor and last refuge of all.

A Caveat for the avoiding of that dangerous course in running down to the
Seaside, at the firing of the Beacons.
THat there be in every Shire, places appointed whereunto the Country may
resort upon the firing of the beacons, which places of assembly would not be
less distant then sive of six miles from the sea side at the least, for the
footmen to gather themselves together. To the intent you may the better sort
your men, put them in some order, and consult what is meetest to be done; which
you shall hardly be able to do, if your place of assembly be within the view
or near unto the enemy, who will by all means seek to attempt you in your
disorderly assemblies. Moreover, if sear once take your men, or that they be
amazed; if you had as skillful Leaders as the earth does bear, they would not
be able to dispose or reduce them into such order and form as they would;
neither will the enemy give you time to deliberate what is best to be don; but
that you must either disorderly fight, or more disorderly run away. And above
all things I especially advise, to shun that old and barbarous custom of
running confusedly to the sea side, thinking thereby to prevent the landing of
the enemy, or at least to annoy them greatly: which you shall never do. For be
it upon any Invasion, you may be sure that there is no Prince will undertake so
great an enterprise, but he will be sure to have such a number of boats, and
gallyes, other small vessels of draught, as he will be able to land at one time
2 or 3 thousand men; which boats shall be so well appointed with Bases and other
shot, as that they will be sure to make way for their quiet landing. And for
mine own part I much doubt whether you shall have in two or three days (after
the firing of the beacons) such a sufficient number as with wisdom and
discretion were fit to deal or venture a sight with so many men as they will
land in an hour, for any thing that ever I could yet see in the Countries
readiness at the firing of the beacons.

If the enemy does intend but to land, and burn some houses or village near
to the Sea Coast, for the prevention thereof as much as may be, it were good to
appoint only those that dwell within two or three miles of the Sea side to
repair thither to make resistance, and for their succor you may appoint the
horsemen to draw down to the Planes next adjoining to the same, who may also
keep them at a bay for straggling far into the country.

But if the attempt be made by a Prince purposed and appointed to invade, if
you give them battle at the first landing, you offer them even the thing they
most desire: and it is a thousand to one a Conquest the first day.

My Reasons are these: First you give battalle, but I pray with what people?
Even with Country men altogether unexperimented in Martial actions, whose
Leaders are like to themselves, and one other thing as dangerous as all this;
You fight at home where your people know the next way to save themselves by
flight, in recovering of Towns, Woods, and by ways.

Contrariwise, with whom do you encounter? but with a company of picked and
trained soldiers, whose Leaders and Captains are no doubt men both politic
and valiant, who are made so much the more desperate and bold, by not leaving
to themselves any other hope to save their lives, but by marching over your
bellies. And besides, it is to be imagined that having spread some faction
before amongst your selves (as there is no Country free from seditious and
treacherous male contents.) they are animated to pursue the victory more
sharply. Again, if you once receive an overthrow, what fear and terror you
have brought your selves into, how hardly you shall bring a second battle,
and how dangerous to fight with men dismayed; those that be of experience can
judge. Likewise what pride and jolity you have put your enemies in, to march
forward, having no Forts nor fenced Towns, to give them any stop in this
fear, or for your own people to take breath, and make head again: but that
your enemies and factious companies of your own Nation may join together, and
be furnished of vittailes, Horse and Carriage at their will and pleasure;
without the which no Prince can prevail in any invasion; for if you drive him
to bring these things with him, (as if matters be well foreseen and a good
plot laid you may easily do) a world of shipping will scarce suffice for the
transportation thereof, besides an infinite mass and charge, that must be
provided beforehand; yea and what wast and loss thereof will fall out, though
wind, weather, and shipping were had to pass without disturbance, experience
thereof remains yet fresh in memory.

Again, if scarcity of vittailes and unsavourinesse thereof once grow, the
pestilence and other sickness (which does assail the best vittailed and
ordered Army that ever was) will then be doubled and trebled, in such sort, as
it will in short time fight and get the victory for you.

And here by the way I would put you in remembrance that there be continual
lets and disturbances by your Navy of the quiet passing of their vittailes
which should come unto them; whereof you shall oftentimes take advantage also
by storms and contrary winds.

Wherefore I hold it for the best and surest way to suffer the enemy (coming
to invade) to land quietly at his pleasure; which he will otherwise do whether
you will or no. Only fronting him in the Plains with your horsemen. And by
all means and diligence to draw the vittailes, Cattle, Carriages, and Corn
behind your back; and that which you cannot, to wast and spoil, that the
enemy take no advantage thereof; keeping such Straights and passages with your
footmen, as may be kept, and which with small numbers of your horsemen you
may safely do until greater power do come to back you. And though they
win some Straight (which they cannot do without great loss:) yet by keeping
of back receipts in Straights, you shall always (if you be so driven) retire
without any great loss or danger. And always remember to leave a Ward in
every place meet to be guarded, though it be but of twenty or thirty persons:
which will be an occasion for the enemy to stop the winning of them before they
can pass: because else those few numbers will always annoy their vittailes and
munition that daily and howerly must have free and quiet passage to them. Now
if they tarry the winning or yielding of them up, (though it be but a day or
two kept) you get thereby time to your selves to gnow stronger, and your enemy
loses opportunity, and waxes weaker.

For we see and find by experience, that huge armies lying in the fields, but
15 or 16 weeks, are brought to that weakness, and their first courage so
abated by sickness and pestilence (which are handmaids unto such great
assemblies, especially where any want of those things are that belong to the
sustentation of man's body) that they may with smaller numbers and less danger
be dealt withal then at the first landing. Moreover, your people shall in that
time attain to some knowledge by daily exercise and use of their weapons, and
the terror of shot will be more familiar unto unto them. For it is not numbers
that does prevail, but trained men, Resolute minds, and good order. For if a
Prince would only select and choose out such men to wear Armor, and employ
the rest (I mean the baser sort) to the spade and shovell, there is no doubt
but he shall sooner attain unto victory by this means, then with rude
multitudes, in whom there is nothing but confusion and disorder.

Again, the spade and the shovell are so necessary Instruments in time of
war, both to the Invadour and Defender, as nothing is so impossible, that
thereby may not be achieved, and made eas^e: And without the employment
whereof, we cannot presume at any time of safety. I could discourse at large
hereof, in showing the use and benefit of them: but because to every man of
judgment and experience, it is sufficiently known, I shall not need to speak
much therein; but wish you to embrace them, being to a Defender so especial
and singular a commodity, in that he may better be furnished with infinite
numbers of them.

And moreover, if you shall appoint them to weapons, who are apter to labor
then to fight: you shall find double inconveniences thereby, in misplacing
them contrary to their natural disposition and use.

And touching mine own opinion and judgment, I should more stand in fear of
a few picked and choice Soldiers, that were furnished with a sufficient number
of Pioners, then with the hugeness of an Army of unselect and dis-furnished
numbers.

Now to say somewhat by the way, touching your Armed Pikes, the only body,
strength and bulwark in the field. It is not a little to be lamented, to see
no more store in this Land. We have so wonderfully weakened our selves, as it is
high time to look to the restoring of them again. And touching the use of
shot, as it is a singular weapon, being put into the hands of the skillful and
exercised Soldier (being the pillars and upholders of the Pikes, and without
which he is no perfect body:) So no doubt, on the contrary part, committed to a
cowards or an unskilful man's handling, it is the privyest thief in the field.
For he robs pay, consumes victuals, and slays his own fellows, in
discharging behind their backs. And one thing even as ill as this, he
continually wastes powder, the most precious Jewel of a Prince.

Wherefore, I would wish Captains, not only to reject such as are altogether
unapt, but greatly to commend them that discharge but few shots, and bestow
them well. For it is more worthy of praise to discharge fair and leasurely,
then fast and unadvisedly. The one taking advantage by wariness and foresight:
whereas the other loses all with rashness and haste.

But to return to the Pike again. My self being in the Low Countries in the
Camp, when those great Armies were last assembled, and perusing in every
several Regiment, the sorting and division of weapons, as well as their Order
and Discipline: There were two Nations (the French being one) that had not
betwixt them both, an 100. Pikes. Whereof I much marvelling, and desiring
greatly to know the cause that had moved them to leave the Pike, which in my
conceit, I always judged the strength of the field:) Happening afterward into
the company of certain French Captains, (some of them ancient in years, and
such as were of the Religion) I demanded the reason that had moved them to give
over that defensible weapon the Pike, and betaken them altogether to shot. Not
for any disliking or other cause, (said they) but for that we have not such
personal bodies, as you English men have, to bear them; neither have we them
at that commandment as you have: but are forced to hire other Nations to supply
our insufficiency, for of our selves we cannot say, we can make a complete
body. Moreover they affirmed, that if in the time of Newhaven, we had let them
have but 6000. of our armed Pikes, they would have marched through all France.
So highly esteemed they of the Pike, who nevertheless (in our Judgment) seem
to have given over the same, or to make small account thereof.

Moreover, for the better and readyer ordering, and training of your men in
every Shire. Those that are appointed to be Captains, should have under every
of their several charges, only one sort of weapons, viz. one Captain to have
the charge of Pikes, another of Shot, etc. And no man's Band to be less then
200. men. By means whereof, your Sergeant Major (or such, to whom you shall
commit the order of your footmen) may, from time to time, readily know the
numbers of every sort of weapons, whereby he will at one instant range them
into any order and form of battle, you will have them. And every Captain
and his Officers shall serve with their own men: which is a matter of great
contentment to both Captain and Soldier. For otherwise, if he have charge of
more sorts of weapons, then must he either dis-joyne himself from his Officers
in time of service, or else he must commit his men under another man's
direction: which breeds oftentimes great disliking and murmr.

Orders for the provision, and guard of the Beacons.
FIrst, that the Beacons he provided of good matter and stuff, as well for the
sudden kindling of the fires, as also for the continuance thereof.

That the Beacons and watch-places, appointed to give warning unto the Country,
of the Landing or Invasion of the enemy, be substantially guarded with a
sufficient company: whereof one principal person of good discretion to have
the chief charge at all times, of every Beacon.

That the Beacons that are next to the Sea side, and are appointed to give the
first warning, may be very sufficiently guarded, as well with Horsemen as
Footmen; whereof some discreet Soldier, or man of judgment, to have the
chief charge, (as has been said before) who must be very respective and
careful, that he give not any Alarm upon light matter or occasion: Nothing
being more dangerous then false Alarummes to breed a contempt, and security.

Your Horsemen must be ready to give warning to the other Beacons in the
Country, lest by weather they may be prevented, that they cannot kindle fire,
or else the enemy may hinder them by sudden assault, and so either let the
kindling of them, or extinguish the fire newly kindled, before the other
Beacons can take knowledge thereof. For it is always to be feared, that the
enemy will seek by all means and policy, not only to surprise the Beacons,
that are next the Sea side, and should give first intelligence unto the
Country: but also such as are appointed to guard them, if their watchfulness
prevent them not.

Other necessary notes to be observed.
THat there may be order taken to have a store of Powder, Match, Bullets ready
cast, Mouldes of diverse bores, charges, bow-strings, shootinggloves,
warbrasses, and such other necessaries fit to be used at that time: Whereof (I
doubt me) whether the whole Shire be able to furnish the tenth part would be
required. Whereof it were good to be provided aforehand, and brought in Carts
to those places of Assembly: whereby men may be readily furnished for their
money, and the service nothing hindered in time of need.

That it be looked unto, by such as have charg to take the view of men and
their weapons, that every shot be provided of a Mould, a priming Pin, a
Ferries, a Flint, and match-Powder, which things be as needful to be seen
into, as the Piece it self, although few provide and make reckoning thereof.

That in the said Musters and Assemblies there be good numbers of laborers
appointed, who may also be assigned to have a Spade, a Mattocke, a Shovell, an
Axe or a Bill. And these Pioners, to resort to the places of Assembly, at every
Alarm. Over whom, would be a skillful Ingenier appointed to have the chief
charge and government.

And whereas you have great numbers of Hacknies or Hoblers, I would wish that
upon them you mount as many of the highest and nimblest shot you can, which may
be sent down to the Sea side upon every Alarm, or to such Straights and
places of advantage, as to a discreet Leader shall seem convenient. The which
Arguletiers shall stand you in as great stead, as horse of better account.

For by the means of them, men will take great courage to offer a proud
attempt upon the enemy, being assured to their succor, if any occasion or
appearance of danger force them to retire.

It were considerable that all the Youth of the Land were well prepared with
Bow and Arrows. For in woody places, or behind banks, or in other places
these might annoy the Horse and Men: Witness the brave Battles achieved in
France by Bowmen, and these Arms would supply many thousands, which are not
able to get better.

FINIS.

