All such persons as have just cause to complain against privileges and
protections (claimed by the Parliament, the Nobility, Gentry, King, Queen, or
Princes Servants, persons of quality, or others) are desired to come to Sadlers
Hall in Cheapside, London, upon Wednesday next, by two of the clock, being the
21. of this present July 1641.

And you are likewise desired to bring with you your particular grievances in
writing at the same time.

CERTAIN PETITIONS PRESENTED BY THE LORDMAIOR, AND COMMONALTY OF The City of
LONDON, To the Honorable House of Commons, SHOWING. The great Inconveniences of
Protections, Privileges and Privileged Places, with the Allegations and
Reasons tendered by the Committees, appointed by Common Council of the City of
London, against the same: being Voted by a Committee of the Lower HOUSE.

LONDON, Printed for George Badger, 1641.

To the Honorable Assembly of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, in the
Commons House of PARLIAMENT: The humble Petition of the Lord Mayor and
Commonalty of the City of LONDON.
SHOWS, That your Petitioners, by reason of their Trades and dealings, are
the greatest Creditors in the Kingdom; That before, but chiefly since the
Sitting down of this Parliament, they find the multitude of Privileges and
Protections, Claimed by the Parliament, the Nobility, Gentry, his Majesty's
Servants, Persons of Quality, and others, to be such, as for the most part take
away all benefit of Law from your Petitioners, you may be pleased to Consider,
that his Majesty, and this Honorable Court are the Fountains of Justice, from
whence the propriety of every Subjects estate is derived, And seriously to
take into consideration, that Parliaments continuing long, or coming often,
these Inconveniences, and mischiefs will follow: 1. Propriety will not be
maintained, because the Debtor is made master of the Creditors Estate. 2. The
want of that liberal Credit, which has formerly been given to Persons of
Quality. 3. The great decay of Trade, wherein every member of this Kingdom,
from the highest to the lowest, has his common Interest. 4. And without some
present remedy, there must necessarily follow, the destruction of many
Families, their means being detained from them.


Your Petitioners therefore humbly desire, that by the Wisdom and Justice of
this Honorable House, such course may be taken, That these Inconveniences may
be removed.

And they shall pray, etc.
To the Right Honorable, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, in the Commons
House of PARLIAMENT, Assembled: The humble Petition of those whose names are
under written, being Citizens and Tradesmen, of the City of LONDON.
SHOWING, That we lately making our griefs known to the Lord Major, Aldermen,
and Common Council of London, they were pleased to intercede to this Honorable
House, by an humble Petition against Privileges and Protections, whereby as
yet we find no fruit or benefit: We therefore humbly desire, That that
Petition, and the reasons therein given, may be taken into serious
consideration: And be pleased further to consider, that we and our Families
are not able to subsist, neither are we able to bear the great and public
charge, already imposed, and to be imposed, our means being detained from us,
And these which prosecute in a fair and legal way, just and honest debts,
being therefore Severely punished.

Humbly therefore do your Petitioners desire this Honorable House, which has
ever maintained the Common Justice of the Kingdom, and still provided remedies
against great and growing evils, to do therein such Justice, as your
Wisdoms shall hold agreeable to the Law of God, and Reason; And your
Petitioners shall ever pray for the prosperity of you, and your honorable
proceedings,

REASONS, Tendered by the Committee, appointed by Common Council of the City
of LONDON, against Protections, Privileges, and Privileged Places for
De^tors, to make good the Propositions, and Allegations set forth in their
Petition, presented to the Honorable Honse of COMMONS, against Protections.
ALLEGATION. I.

REASON.

ALLEGATION. II

REASON.

ALLEGATION. III.

REASON.

ALLEGATION. IV.

REASON.

That some principal Merchants of the City of London, writing to Friends into
foreign parts, for about One hundred thousand Pounds, to furnish the
necessity of the State withal, were from them answered, that they were afraid
to send their moneys, because they could not command the same back again at
their pleasures, by reason of Privileges, Privileged places, and Protections
so generally granted. And it is a general complaint of Strangers here, that
whereas our Merchants trading into foreign parts, have liberty and freedom
without interruption, to recover their debts against Persons of greatest
quality and Estate, Strangers residing and trading in this Kingdom, have not
the like liberty against the meanest Subject in it, by reason of Privileges,
Protections, and Privileged places: the like whereof (by consent of all
Merchants, with whom we have conserred) is not granted in any place whatsoever,
neither to Nobles nor others.

Besides the great prejudice and inconvenience to the Common Trade of the
Kingdom, and to many particular persons alleged in the Propositions before
mentioned, it will clearly appear by the multitude of Protections,
Privileges, and Privileged places, whereof use is made at this present, by
debtors, to shelter themselves from payment of their just debts, whereof to the
number of a thousand, came to our knowledge within the compass of a few
hours, and are particularly collected and distinguished in writing, and many
more will appear, if further way may be given to an inquiry after them. And by
credible information, the debts owing by some of the Nobility of this Kingdom
(which the Creditors are enforced to forbear by reason of Privilege, not
reckoning within this estimate, any other debts, either of Lords or Commons)
do amount to above a Million, which Sum (as is conceived) if it might be
gotten in, and employed, would drive a greater Trade than is driven by all the
Merchants in London put together. By which estimate, the mass of Money
withheld from Creditors by their Debtors, under color and pretense of
Privileges, Protections, and Privileged places, against Law, and the right
and property of the Subject, the miscarriage of Trade and Creditors, is more
evidently represented.

Moreover, it is humbly conceived, That whereas diverse estates of Nobility and
Gentry are clogged with vast debts and encumbrances, Young heirs, and persons
of Quality would be careful how they run into so deep debts, if these ways to
evade the just and honest payment of them were taken away. And lastly, we
humbly represent that (as Parliaments are now settled by the wisdom of the
King and State) these Privileges, Protections, and Privileged places are a
greater burden to the City of London, a greater grievance, and of worse
consequence to the general Trade of the Kingdom, than the Patents of Soap,
Leather, Salt, or that great and unsupportable burden of Ship Money.

WE are informed, that in Spain and Portuga'l, all men's estates are alike
subject to pay debts, but every Nobleman and Gentleman, his person is free, and
his bed that he lies on, and his horse allowed him, but all else is subject to
pay debts, and one may have Sentence for a just and true debt, a bill or bond,
in 27 days, and then the Creditor may go without an Officer into the Debtors
house (Yea, though he be a Nobleman) and take the Plate from his Table, and
take down his Hangings, and carry them away, with what else he sindes, and
sell them at an outcry, and take the money in part of his debt, and likewise
Sequester the whole Rents, or Revenews of his Lands, till the debt be fully
satisfied. Sanctuary cannot defend a Priest from payment of his debts, though
it guard his person; An Englishman has there caused his slipend or Rent
bel^nging to him, for his maintenance, to be Sequestered for the payment of his
debts.

Duke DALVA, his Plate was taken out of his house for payment of his debts.

In Florence, Ligorne, Pisa, and the rest of the Duke of Florence his
dominions, No Nobleman or Gentleman is any way Privileged or Protected more
than others, but all men there are subject to the Law alike, and for a just
debt, a bill or bond, he must pay presently, or go to Prison without suit of
Law; only he is called before the Judge, and if he cannot deny the debt, he is
forthwith sent to prison, there to remain until the debt be paid; no man
there was ever Privileged or Protected, except upon some great occasion. The
Great Duke has sometimes protected the persons of Strangers for some short
time, but never his own Subjects

In the United Provinces, Holland, Zeland, and the rest, all persons are alike
subject to the payment of de^ts, none are Protected or Privileged, of what
Quality soever; no not the States themselves: Soldiers only are excepted in
their Persons, so long as they are in pay, and employment; but their Rents,
Revenews, their goods, their wages, is liable, and may be sequestered and taken
for payment of their debts.

In Flanders, and in Brabant it is the like. In Geneva no men whatsoever are
privileged from payment of their debts, but at all times, all persons are
subject to one Common Law: and for a just debt, a bill or bond, one may have
Sentence in Geneva in a month at the furthest, both against their persons and
estates; there it is held a great disreputation, not to pay their debts, and
the Law is, that if any be chosen Senators, and is sued for debt, that he does
not pay, he must leave his gown, and cannot be admitted.

In Germany, no Noblemen or Gentlemen are Privileged, or Protected: it has
been known that at Hamborow, or near that place, a Noblemans goods, or estate
has been sold for payment of his debts; and having not enough to satisfy,
they sold his honor likewise.

SEXTVS QVINTVS the Pope made a law, that no Cardinal should have a voice in
the Conclave, at the Election of a Pope, if he owed any money, or were
indebted, which custom is still in use. And this SEXTVS QVINTVS, was Pope in
Queen ELIZABETH'S days.

In Scotland, neither the Kings Service, the Court, not the Parliament can
Protect the Person or Estate of any man, neither Nobleman or Gentleman, from
payment of his Debts, or the Prosecution of Law against him.

FINIS.

