CERTAIN QUERIES Lovingly propounded to Mr. WILLIAM PRYNNE, To be by him
ingenuously resolved, from his large Treatise, entitled, The Sovereign Power
of Parliaments:

CONCERNING 1. The Peoples power of electing, recalling, and punishing t^eir
Parliament Men. 2. Parliament-mens wages and rewards. 3.
Parliament-proceedings. 4. Power of Parliaments. 5. The Peoples power of
electing Synod-men. 6. A perpetual Parliament. 7. The three Estates in
Parliament. 8. An Order, or Ordinance of Parliament. 9. Parliament Protections.
10. The Parliament and Armies Case.


Bonum est omnia scire. It is good to know all things. July. 16Printed in the
year of Liberty, 1647.

I. Queries concerning the Peoples power of electing, re-calling, and puni^^ing
their Parliament Men.
WHether is it not the undoubted liberty of the Subject to choose their
Parliament Men.

Whether have Parliament Men so chosen any power to ^^present or act for the
People, further then they have commission from those that chose them?

Whether may Parliament Men so chosen, act, or go beyond the commission which
they received from those that chose them?

Whether are not all Parliament Men to be accountable to the respective
Cou^ties and Corporations that chose them?

Whether may not all Parliament Men be found to have an unlimited power, even
to destroy their respective Counties and Corporations, unless they were to be
accountable unto the said Counties and Corporations?

Whether if any Parliament Men refuse, are negligent, or unable to discharge
the great trust reposed in them; may not the respective Counties and
Corporations recall them back again as often as they please, and send others
more honest, diligent, and better qualified for discharging so great a trust?

Whether is any Parliament Men shall betray the trust reposed in them may not
their respective Counties and Corporations proceed to punish them by fines,
imprisonment, or death, according to the magnitude of their offenses?

Whether would it ever a whit the more endanger the being of Parliaments,
though never so many of the Members of both or either House were questioned and
punished for their unjust breach of trust; then if so many corrupt Judges of
the Courts at Westminster were executed for their injustice or bribery, and
honest men chosen in their places?

II. Concerning Parliament-mens wages and rewards.
Whether does it not only concern the respective Counties and Corporations to
make allowance unto their respective Parliament Men for their ordinary
expenses, and reward them for the in extraordinary services?

Whether is it more in the power of Parliament Men to receive the Kingdoms
moneys, and distribute them amongst themselves, 5000. l. 10000. l. of ^0000.
l. apeec^ ^^^on whatsoever pretenses; then it is for so many Apprentices or
other servants to be their own carvers, to pick their masters pockets, and take
the moneys out of their masters cash-chests, dividing them amongst themselves,
according to what proportion they please, for wages (...) reward?

Whether are not such Parliament Men as liable to be punished by the known
Laws of England, as Apprentices for fingering and disposing of their Masters
moneys without commission or consent?

Whether ought not all such moneys, weekly pensions, and pretended rewards and
considerations already received by any Parliament Men, be brought into a
public Treasury for payment of the Kingdoms just debts; and not only such as
received them, but such also as so profusely gave them, be made exemplary by
some note or other, for thus arbitrarily disposing of the Kingdoms stock?

III. Parliament proceedings.
Whether have not many of these present Parliament Men behaved themselves
toward the people more like domineering Masters and Tyrants, then
Representatives and Servants?

Whether ought the high Court of Parliament to entertain any causes, save such
as could not elsewhere find relief, or had been unduly sentenced in other Courts
of Justice?

Whether in this present Parliament have not Petitions been chiefly admitted
through favor, or rejected for want of friends?

Whether are not all Parliament Men censurable by their respective Counties and
Corporations, for refusing to receive, or acquaint the House with such
Petitions as have been given them, by any one, or more members of their
respective Counties and Corporations?

Whether ought not the debates, and all proceedings of Parliament, with their
subordinate Committees, except some few, which may require secrecy be made more
public, if possible, then any of the Courts at Westminster?

Whether ought not the Records, or Books of either House, lie open and free for
any one to peruse, with such restriction only and oversight, as may secure
them from being perverted or defaced?

Whether ought not any Subject of England to have a copy of any Act,
Ordinance, Order, or Vote of either House, at such cheapest rates, as may only
produce the Officers a livelihood?

Whether is it not requisite that a Parliament being once begun, no Member
should absent himself without express leave, upon apparent danger of health;
and in such case, another forthwith to be chosen in his place?

Whether is it not requisite, that nothing pass as voted in either House,
without three quarters of an exact full House; that is, three quarters of so
many Members as each House consists of.

Whether is it not requisite, that every particular Parliament-mans name be
registered, with his respective Yes or No, unto each Vote, that each County,
Corporation, or any particular man may see how they behave themselves upon all
occasions?

IV. Power of Parliaments.
Whether were it not most unlawful and irrational, to suppose that
Parliament Men or any other number of people may have an unquestionable or
unlimited power, to live how they list or do what they list, without control
or being accountable?

Whether were not such an unlimited power in any number of people destructive
is a Nation?

Whether is not such men's power to be interpreted unlimited and boundless, as
have no other rule for what they do, besides their own will and pleasure?

V. The peoples power of electing Synod-men.
Whether have these present Parliament Men any Power or Commission besides
their own will and pleasure, to alter or set up a new Religion?

Whether if these Parliament Men have power to alter our Religion, may they not
possibly reduce it unto Popery again, or set up such a new one, as yet was
never heard of or imagined?

Whether if they should set up Popery, or any other new-fashioned Religion,
make new Creeds and Service-Bookes, must we not either conform unto them, or
say, they had no Commission for setting of them up?

Whether is there any known Law for enabling of a Parliament to ch^^^^ a
Synod, in such manner as that now assembled at Westminster was chosen?

Whether is not the power in the people for choosing Synod-men, as wel^^^^ as
Parliament Men?

Whether was it not an extraordinary breach upon the Subjects Libert^ for
these present Parliament Men to take upon them the choosing Synod-men in such
manner as they did?

Whether by that Act of choosing Synod-men, and reserving the last appease of
all Synod matters unto themselves, together ^^th their arbitr^^^ proceedings in
Civil matters, and their endeavoring to perpetuate bo^^ one and other, does
it not appear, that these p^^sen^ Parliament Men intended to inthrall the
whole Kingdom bot^ in C^^^ll and Church Matters unto themselves, their sons,
kindred and alliance, un^o the worlds end?

VI. A perpetual Parliament.
Whether a King of Monarch who is but one, if he should degenerate unto a
Tyrant, be not easier to be suppressed then 500. Parliament Men, they turn
Tyrants?

Whether has not a perpetual Parliament a capacity of preferring their sons
kindred and alliance throughout the whole Kingdom to be chosen Parliament Men
instead of such as die or shall be voted out at pleasure for not being of their
faction even to the worlds end?

Whether has not a perpetual Parliament a capacity of intrusting none with
the Militia throughout the Kingdom, besides their sons, kindred and alliance,
unto the worlds end?

Whether has not a perpetual Parliament a capacity of preferring their sons,
kindred and alliance, to be Committee Men throughout the whole Kingdom, unto
the words end?

Whether has not a perpetual Parliament the like capacity of preferring their
sons, kindred, and alliance, to be Judges, and Justices of the peace, and unto
all Offices, both of repute and profit, throughout the whole Kingdom unto the
worlds end?

Whether has not a perpetual Parliament a capacity of preferring their sons,
kindred and alliance, to have the sole command of the Navy unto the worlds end?

Whether this perpetual Parliament, with their sons kindred and alliance,
being the sole Committee Men, and having all Offices of repute and profit in
their own hands, together with the sole command of the Militia, both by Sea and
Land, have not a capacity of becoming, the most absolute Tyrants which this
Kingdom, or any Nation under the cope of heaven, ever endured?

Since the Act for the Trienniall Parliament was passed in the (...) of King
Charles, and that Act for not dissolving this present Parliament without
^^^sent of both Houses, not till the 17* of K. Charles; Whether were it not a
contradiction, and a mere nullifying of the first Act of the 16* of K. Charles,
to intend that this present Parliament should not have had a convement end,
even within three years, that the Trienniall Parliament might have had its due
beginning according to the said first Act of the 16* of K. Charles?

Whether is not a perpetual Parliament prejudicial to every man besides these
present Parliament Men, their sons, kindred, and alliance; who by this means,
are bereft of the honor of serving their Country in Parliament, when they
should be called unto it?

Whether is not a perpetual Parliament prejudicial to the whose Kingdom in
general, which has no possibility of enjoying the (...) abilities, or
talents of any others, besides such as are present Parliament Men, their sons,
kindred or alliance?

Whether was it more in the Kings power to make a perpetual Parliament, then
to cause that there should never be any Parliament again?

Whether was not the going about to establish a perpetual Parliament the
greatest breach of the Subjects Liberty, which was ever made upon them*

Whether are not such as were most active in the Houses to contrive it, or
advising of the King to pass it, with all others endeavoring to being about
this perpetual Parliament, guilty of highest Treason which ever was committed,
and most worthy to be questioned and punished, as the most destructive of all
Counselors both against King and Parliament, unless they can make their
innocence appear more clearly then hitherto it does? and consequently,

Whether ought we not to be more jealous of a Hydra, a many-headed Tyranny,
then of Monarchy, which having but one head, may easier be reduced upon any
occasion of exorbitancy? and lastly,

Whether are not both King and People obliged both toward their God and
Country, for bending all their might and maine to break on and put a period
unto this perpetual Parliament?

VII. The three Estates in Parliament.
Whether is it not the first fundamental Law, or rather the cornerstone and
groundwork of all the Laws of England; that no old Law shall be repealed, nor
new Law made without concurrence of all the three Estates in Parliament?

Whether are not these three Estates in Parliament, the King, the Lords, the
Commons?

Whether may it not be presumed an extraordinary policy in our Ancestors, to
establish the foundation of all our Laws and Government rather upon these
three Estates, then upon two or one?

Whether according to the old Proverb, that it is better to have two strings to
a bow then one, is it not more hazardous to have old Laws repealed, or new
Laws made by one or two Estates only, then by all three Estates in Parliament?

Whether is not the denial of a negative voice to either of the three Estates
in Parliament, a reducing of the three Estates, unto a lesser number?

Whether do not such go about to overthrow the groundwork, of all the
fundamental Laws, who endeavor to reduce the three Estates in Parliament to
two, or one?

Whether are not such to be questioned and proceeded against as Archtraytors to
their Country, who go about to overthrow the very groundwork of all the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and seek to introduce a Government more
hazardous, or less politic, then what our Ancestors had settled so long since,
and prospered so well withal?

VIII. As Order or Ordinance of Parliament.
Whether is not in Act of Parliament, of more validity, and more binding, then
in Ordinance, or abate Proclamation or single Order of either House of
Parliament?

Whether is the acting by a bare Ordinance as warrantable, as by an Act of all
the three Estates in Parliament?

Whether according to the known Laws of England, may not the three Estates in
Parliament assembled, question, and even punish all such as have at any time
acted by an Ordinance, or Order of either House of Parliament?

Whether then does is not exceedingly concern the whole Kingdom, that an Act
of oblition bepassed, for all such matters as have been transacted without the
Royal assent, since the beginning of this Parliament?

IX. Parliament Protections.
Whether is there laity (...) that the Estates of Parliament Men, whether Lords
or Commons, sh^^ld be exempted from paying of their just debts; much less the
Estates of their servants, or persons of whomsoever they protect; and least of
all, when a Parliament shall be spun out into such an everlastingnesse?

Whether the keeping Parliament-mens Estates, both of Lords and Commons, from
being subject to pay debts, has not likely been an effect of the tyrannous
usurpation of Parliaments, rather then any just Law or practice?

Whether have not these Parliament-mens so long exempting their estates from
paying debts, expressed them to be mere self-seekers, done them much hurt and
discredit, and even dishonored Parliaments, as much as any one act of theirs?

Whether may it is not to be supposed that no act has so much alienated the
minds of London from these present Parliament Men, as their not paying their
private debts unto the Citizens, to whom so many of them, both Lords and
Commons, are so much engaged?

Whether is it not probably to be judged, that many men have used indirect
means to get themselves chosen Parliament Men, that they might thereby exempt
both their persons and estates from paying debts, and be at liberty to cozen
their fellow subjects by privilege of Parliament?

Whether have not many men with their whole families, not only much suffered,
but been quite undone, through the death of so many Parliament Men, both Lords
and Commons, during the over-growne Session of this everlasting Parliament?

Whether is it not most of all unreasonable and unjust, that such Lords as have
not been suffered to sit in the House of Peers for their malignancy, should
yet their estates protected by the same House, from paying of their debts;
whilst such as were dismissed the House of Commo^^ for the same cause, became
liable to payment of their ^ebts* both in their (...) and estates? And lastly,

Whether if there had been any colorable Law or Custom formerly for freeing
Parliament-mens estates from paying debts, were it not a most ^^centio^^ and
unwarrantable Law or Custom (...).

X. The Parliament and Armies Case
By what know Law does it appear, that this present Parliament ha^ any other
rule or ground for levying of a war, and keeping Armies on foot; beside the
extreme necessity there of, for preservation of the Kingdom, or their party
rather?

Whether has not the Army under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, the
selfsame ground of extremest necessity, not to disband, until they see
themselves and party secured, by the settlement of the Kingdom?

FINIS.

