CEDRVS BRITANICA ET LAURUS REGIA SIVE REX and CORONA A POETICAL HEXAMERON.

Showing, 1. The Invention, 2. The Distinction, 3. The Designation, 4. The
Necessity, 5. The Dignity, 6. The Perpetuity.
Of Crowns.

Printed, Anno Dom. 1660.

A POETICAL HEXAMERON.
Should Juno now (as once she did he nine)
Persuade my Muse to chose a theme divine;
And dare, with the sweet Acheloiades
To sing a parode, till she would won the baies:
I Would wish her take no other theme then this,
Rex Coronatus, is a Kingdoms bliss.
I. Of the Invention of Crowns.
SUBTLE invention! pregnant womb of Arts!
Which made the Crown of such admired parts,
And so stupendous, that it is hard to tell
Whether thou shewdst an art or miracle.
Man held the pencill, thou did guide the hand:
His was the motion, but thine the command.
What e're of solid matter framed we see,
Was immaterially first wrought by thee.
Invention made the Artist merit fame:
She did the work, though he has got the name.
Who e're it was, that found this royal art
Of making Crowns; he wisely did impart
His skill: Who would so rare an Art interre;
And make its womb to prove its Sepulcher?
Should not the fancy act by emanation,
An Art would prove a bodylesse Creation.
The idea of a Crown, that is forged and coined
Only within the Mint-house of the mind,
Is little worth, unless it serves to be
The exemplar of some real Entitie.
What honor is it to think on Crowns? since Clowns
May be Crowned with imaginary Crowns.
That must have real worth, that is made to be
The greatest Emblem of Supremacy.
Here Art excelled: the Crown she did engage
To be the wonder of the golden Age.
It Is soon resolved, whether more skill were shown
When Nature wrought the Gold, or Art the Crown.
Gold's but Mechanic trash that does besmear
First the Refiner, then the Artificer:
Nor is it fit for Crowns or Scepters, till
It Is forged and furbisht by admired Skill.
Admired Skill! that make Crowns to be
Like that Celestial-spangled Canopy,
So full of Diamonds; as if Art thence
Would cause not only light, but influence.
O rare invention! thou such Skill have shown
In making, that thou best deserve the Crown.
II. Of the Distinction of Crowns.
Should Art, and Nature strive, and both disclose
Their Glory; that the Crown, and this the Rose:
The Rose no doubt would blush and shut her eyes,
As guilty of her own deformities:
Would throw her self, and all her beauty down
Before the golden splendour of the Crown.
Should Flora all the Glory of the Spring
Gather into one heap, and proudly bring
Her sweetest Flowers forth; they were not meet
For Crowns, their beauty b'ing as short as sweet.
What though the Ancients used such toys of old
For Crowns and Garlands; shall we now slight Gold?
Take all the Tulips, Roses, Lillies, Pines,
Pinkes, Poppies, Violets, and all that shines
Or casts a fragrant smell: Cut branches from
The Laurel, Myrtle, Olive, Ivy; some
Of these perhaps may please the wanton sense,
Yet not contain that worth and excellence,
That grace and beauty, which ('bove natures power)
Is wrought by Art in her transcendent flower.
Well then my Sophocles sit down; be still;
Make Crowns no more with his white Daffodill:
Sappho that famous Poetresse may now
Use Rubies 'stead of Roses: Juno's brow
May scorn the Lilly: may Diana be
Ashamed to wear a Crown of Myrtle tree.
Let sleeping Morpheus with his Poppy-crown
Dream never so much of flattering renown:
Let Meleager boast himself the man
That wore the Garland once Pancarpian:
Let Bacchus wear (who makes the Tun his Throne)
An Ivy Chaplet on his head, or none:
Let Gamesters strive, and think it great renown
To win the Olive, or the Laurel Crown:
But what is all this? let Natures Rosarie
Exhaust her richest Treasures, and outvie
The Triumphs of those ancient Roman plays,
Wherein the Victors wore victorious Baies:
Yet these, because they fade as fast as spring,
Are toys and shadows. Gold best Crowns a King.
Whose durable and glittering matter speaks
A long and glorious reign: Whose substance breaks
Resisting metals: and whose worth and weight
Do argue weighty cares, in worthy might:
Whose All-commanding virtue lets us see
The power of an earthly Deity:
Whose estimate above inferior things
Shows what esteem is due to sacred Kings.
Gold then we see the chiefest Mineral,
Must needs be best to Crown a King withal.
III. Of the Designation of Crowns.
Crowns are for Kings, and Kings alone for Crowns:
When these two meet and join, Rebellion frowns;
Dissension frets; and Treason stops her mouth;
The Monsters of a Kingdom lose their growth,
Go backward (that is their proper motion
To walk like Crabs (...).)
Kings then have greatest honor, when they wear
That which commands the Subjects dread and fear.
The Motto of a Crown should always be
Rex and Corona, joined eternally.
Et, like a Gordian knot, should stand so stout
'Twixt both, that naught but death should cut it out.
For in the Union of those Delian-twins,
Concord in state, and Truth in Church begins.
Crowned, is a concrete, proper unto none,
But those, whom right exalts unto the Throne.
Here Subjects are not Subjects, Kings must be
The only Subjects of this Property.
England has often been sick, but yet not dead;
Because she had a Crown to bind her head.
Preserve the head, wherein the senses lie,
And then no fear, the body cannot die.
Give that the Crown, and Diadem to boot:
Less pompous Ornaments will serve the foot.
It cannot be, but that a Kingdom reele,
Which takes her Crown, and wears it on her heel.
What e're is so preposterous as this
To order, carries an Antithesis.
Look round about, behold what Symmetrie,
And sweet convenience in the world we see:
Nature distributing her Gifts to all,
Keeps a proportion Geometrical.
And shall not man in imitation, thus
Observe a Prius and Posterius?
Should we not own some Power imperial,
The wild and savage beasts would shame us all:
For they consent the Lion still should reign;
Because by nature made their Sovereign.
The Crown, which all admire, and some adore,
Is that, which none but highborn Princes wore.
The tallest branch upon that Royal stem,
Is only fit to wear the Diadem.
Should Peasants rule, and keep their Princes under,
'Twould put the seven wonders out of wonder.
Of all Monstrosities, not one like these,
To see a Nation walk Antipodes;
To see the Sun divested of its light,
And made inferior to the guide of night;
To see a Dunghill mounted to the Sky,
There placed to be the Days illustrious Eye;
To see a Swine wear Jewels in his snout;
To see the Lillies cropped, whilst Briers sprout:
Yet these, and many more were found wrapped in
That late Apostrophe of Crown from King.
Crowns therefore are the great Prerogative
Of sacred Kings: Flowers that will not thrive
Or grow on Sordid shrubs; but made to be
The highest Glory of the Cedar-tree.
IV. Of the Necessity of Crowns.
When that the Sun shall cease to guide the day;
When Moon and Stars shall need no borrowed Ray:
When Kings and Government shall be no more;
Then Crowns shall cease as needless: not before.
The States (as Stars take from the Sun their light)
From Crowns receive both Majesty and might.
These only can the Kingdoms Peace defend,
And make the sturdy'st Tyrants break or bend:
These only can with their victorious Rays,
Dispell our storms, and give us Halcyon-dayes.
When the late Crown did fall, such Tempests rose,
As if the Center would it self disclose:
Such Hero-canes did then disturb our ease,
As if Old-England were an Indies.
Cyclopian Darts did wound and kill so fast,
As if the World would then breath out its last.
It was an Age that well might weary out
The Cyclops, Vulcan, Mars, and all that rout.
The Sword struck off our head without control,
And made the Palace like a Capitol.
And shall not future Ages weep the tale,
And story of that Monarchs Funeral?
There needs must follow darkness, tumults, war,
When that the Sun became a falling Star.
'Twas then the Horses ran where e're they list
To fi^e the World, when their own guide was mist.
Posterity shall mourn to hear what fate
Hung over this doleful, this distrackted State.
But we may now rejoice. There comes at last
A sweet forgetfulness of sorrows past.
May that once Captive, now triumphant Crown
Conquer its foes, and throw Rebellion down:
Restore this Palsie-Nation to its health;
And Monarchy prefer to Commonwealth.
So shall we ever jo-paeans sing,
And make the World with acclamations ring:
So shall our words with choicest accents be
Raised up to such Seraphick harmony;
That every single Vowell shall rebound,
And like a Diphthong give a double sound;
Nothing shall pass out through our lips, that is
Not uttered with a cheerful Emphasis.
Without the Crown all other things are toys:
The crowning of the King crowns all our joys.
O may it therefore never more be known
Our selves to want a King, our King a Crown.
V. Of the Dignity of Crowns.
Read over the Worlds Alphabet, the story
Of sage Antiquity: there is not that Glory
In all the Feats of Art, which here is shown
In this her Masterpiece, the Royal Crown.
Those golden Apples, which brave Hercules
Took by his valor from the Hesperides,
Were fair without, and beauteous to the Eye,
Whilst all within did rot and putrify
The Golden Fleece, which Jason took such pain
To steal from Colchos, was but wool in grain:
'Twere grains of Gold that made it such a piece,
B'ing first a Sheeps-skin, then a golden fleece.
The golden Crown has more of worth then these,
Or any jewel from the Indian Seas.
It needs no varnish outwardly to hide
Its inward blemishes; it needs not pride
It self in painted shows; it needs no foil,
Unless it be its Diamends to spoil.
Which sparkling Gems, like eyes set round, do well
Denote a King the Kingdoms Sentinel;
Who with more care his Subjects fortifies,
Then Argus Io, wih his hundred eyes.
Its matter is by Chemists so refined,
The Quintessence is only left behind:
So strange and admirable is its frame,
The Artist scarce believes he made the same.
Who would to all its excellencies come,
Must with the golden number count their Sum.
Would in a word know what this Circlet is?
Thou can not without a Periphrasis.
It does in its Superlative degree,
Transcend the reach of an Hyperbole.
There Is more contained in that one word, Crown;
Then ever was or fully can be known.
Crowned, that is enough it self; there needs no more
Be said, to make the Subject to adore
His lawful Prince; or make his Prince to be
Entitled to a just Supremacy.
VI. Of the Perpetuity of Crowns.
If that an humble Verse could reach the Sky,
Or meeter could mete out Eternity:
Then might perhaps to every eye be shown
The vastness of the Crowns duration.
Time may unglosse the Flourishes of Art,
But cannot annihilate the smallest part
Of massy Gold. Crowns shall out-wrestle all;
Yea, time it self at last, and giv't the fall.
When these (like timely fruit from off the Tree)
Do fall away, they do not cease to be:
Nor shall they die at Natures Funeral,
But shall be changed, and made perpetual.
O may Great Britains Monarch many years
Reign here below, and then above the Spheres:
And when these golden Shadows all are gone,
May there for ever wear a real Crown:
May, when his Princely Race is finished here,
Pass from his own to Heavens Star Chamber.
May factious Comets never more presage
To Peace a Period, Prince a Pilgrimage:
Till that time comes, when time it self shall die,
And shall lie buried in Eternity.
An Ardent wish for the Coronation of his sacred Majesty CHARLES II.
Are Crowns so useful to maintain
The Peoples safety, Princes reign?
And made for none
But Kings alone?
Then why does not that Royal head
With its own Crown (that is so dread)
It self adorn,
Since't must be worn?
Why do our greatest joys come on
With such a slow gradation,
As if delay
Would bid us nay?
Why does delay thus rack our hope,
Making us run beside the scope,
And happy end,
To which we tend?
Why don't our eyes behold and see
The joyfull'st Contiguitie
That e're was known
'Twixt head and Crown?
Come quickly then thou joyful day,
Come swifter then a darted Ray
Out from the Sun
When clouds are gone,
Outrun our thoughts: with nimble speed
Anticipate the time decreed.
Let haste prepare
Against despair.
Our minds with expectation led
Would languish, if not pullyed
And still drawn up
With cords of hope.
And hope it self would fail at last,
Should it not see that day make haste,
Which does attend
Its hoped end.
Lets wait a while. We shall ere long
Shut up all Sorrows with a Song.
When Charles is crowned
Joys shall rebound.
FINIS.

