Certain considerable and most material Cases of CONSCIENCE, wherewith diverse
well-affected in this Kingdom are much perplexed, the clearing whereof would
worthily deserve the pains of the Assembly at London.
I. WHether there be any clear evidence of Scripture, wherein the conscience of
a Christian may safely rest for taking up of Arms against his Prince?

If it had not been forbidden, there had been the less doubt, but there being
so many places of Scripture so evidently and so directly against it, how shall
ordinary capacities that are but ordinarily enlightened, be sure that in joining
with the two Houses now at Westminster, he does not transgress Gods
Commandment, and draw upon himself damnation? There are three things
pretended, but they do not satisfy tender consciences.

First, it is said, This was is not against the King. What it is in Gods fight.
God knows; but to any humane understanding it seems to be against the King.
It was first undertaken to fetch the King to Parliament; it is prosecuted still
that we may obtain our desires of the King; and when we send to Treat about
Peace, we send to Treat with the King; and if the King should chance to
miscarry by a Bullet in these Wars (which God forbid) who then, that has
contributed any assistance to the Parliament, could have any comfort in his
soul, that he were free from the guilt of killing the King?

A second pretense is, That this is a defensive war. Indeed if our Armies did
always retreat and go back from the King, we should think so too; but now when
we see our Armies still pursue him as at first time also, when we sent to fetch
him to the Parliament, it seems to be against all sense and reason to count
this War a defensive War.

Thirdly, it is pretended, A Parliament may do that which private men cannot
do. And that is certainly true without all doubt; but yet the question does
still remain, whether the two Houses (which make not a full Parliament) can
lawfully take up Arms against their King? It has been always observed in this
kingdom, That a Parliament cannot be till the King call it, and if it cannot
lawfully be without him, it is not easy to be believed that it may lawfully
Act without him, much less against him; and it seems something strange, that
the King of his goodness having continued this Parliament, should now be
distressed by that unto which he himself has given life: And here it is to be
considered from whence the Parliament has that power which they have; if it be
said, From the King, without question he gave them not power to take up Arms
against himself: if it be said, From the People (which is in deed our
Pachamentary doctrine) our own doings do convince us, for our hearts tell us,
That the people, for the major part, are Enemies to our proceedings, else why
have we sent for the Scots?

There is another thing pretended also, at least amongst the vulgar, whereby we
would, many of us, quiet and still our consciences, and yet it will not do. It
is said, That the King and Parliament are one, others express it thus (to give
it the better color) That the Parliament is a part of the King: And that which
is inferred thereupon is this, That the Parliament can do nothing against the
King, and that whatsoever any man does for the Parliament, he does for the
King, because the King and Parliament are one. Now it is true indeed, the King
and Parliament are one, one body politic, whereof the King is head; and so it
is true too that the husband and the wife are one body, whereof the husband is
the head, and the union between them is so near, that a nearer cannot be
imagined between the King and Parliament, and yet, it follows not, because the
husband and the wife are one, that it is impossible for the wife to miscarry
her self toward her husband: who knows not that there are some untractable
women in the world, that carry themselves most unchristianly toward their
husbands, both with froward words, and cross actions? and if any man shall
take the wifes part in such away, it cannot be said of him, he is for the
husband and the wife; for while he is for the wife in such a way, surely he is
against the husband: So for the difference in hand, though the King and
Parliament be one, it follows not that it is impossible for the Parliament to
be disloyal, and they carrying themselves in such a way, whosoever shall be
for them, it cannot be said of him he is for the King and Parliament, for while
he is for them in such a way, he must needs be against the King. This inference
therefore follows not. Indeed thus we may rightly argue, The husband and the
wife are one, therefore the wife ought not to be injurious and disloyal to her
husband; and so, the King and Parliament are one, therefore the Parliament
ought not to be disloyal to the King; this Argument will hold, but we see the
other holds not. And as the only way for a man to show himself a friend both to
the husband and the wife in such a case as is mentioned, and to make peace in
the family, is to let the wife know her duty; so the only way for a man now
to show himself a friend both to King and Parliament, is to let the Parliament
know their duty, and to endeavor to reduce them thereunto. This comparison
does make the business plain, only in one thing the comparison holds not. If
the wife at any time pretends her husband does her wrong, there is a Judge on
earth above them to end the strife, namely the King, or his Deputy: But if at
any time the Parliament conceives the King does them wrong, there is no higher
Judge on earth to fly unto, they must seek unto heaven by their Prayers, and
wait on the Lord for a redress of their injuries.

II Whether he that offers violence to the Kings Person, can be free from the
sin of Rebellion, because he pretends to defend the Kings Power?

What violence has been offered to his person is too evident. The unworthy and
dishonorable words that have been uttered of the King, in Pamphlets, in
Declarations, yea, and in Pulpits also, to humane reason seem no small
indignities, but much more to be excluded from his Houses, to have his Revenues
withheld, to be pursued with Armies, and shot at with Bullets, etc.

III Whether we do not oppose the Kings Power, when we got about by force to
diminish his Power?

As in Election of his Counselors, his negative voice, etc.

IIII Whether the practice of any former Parliaments, held in time of thick and
dark Popery, may be a sufficient warrant for Parliaments now to walk by?

Some former Parliaments have been too bold with Kings (as our Chronicles show,
neither may we think all that out Parliaments have done in that behalf to be
lawful, because it is recorded in our Chronicles) some former Parliaments
indeed have been too bold with Kings, but they were Popish Parliaments: and
though it be true, all that is, or has been done by Papists is not unlawful,
yet it becomes not us, who intend to root out Popery, to tread in their steps,
nor depend on their opinions, much less to make them our president, unless we
have other warrant for our doings by the word of God.

V Whether the practice of any of the Saints walking contrary to the rule of
the word, and yet approved of God, may be a warrant for us to wolke in the same
way, unless the circumstances be in all things the very same, and we our
selves sure we have the same spirit that they had?

The examples of Saints in those ways, wherein they have walked besides, or
contrary to the word, and yet without censure, they are at the most, but as it
were, particular exceptions from the common rule, granted only to them and for
that time; and if we make bold to follow them, not having the same occasions
that they had, or not the same accidents and circumstances enforcing and
accompanying the occasion, or not observing the method and manner of their
proceeding, or not having the same extraordinary motion and direction (which in
these days is not usual) if we pretend to follow them, and fail in any of
these particulars, we do not follow them indeed, neither can we say we take the
exception we find in Scripture, but we make to our selves an exception from the
common rule, and this can no way be safe, nor warrantable for us. As for
instance; The example of the people rescuing Jonathan 1 Samuel 14.45. is much
insisted on for the justifying of this War; but there are so many doubts in
it, that the conscience of a Christian cannot safely without doubting and
danger rest on it. As, 1. whether they did rescue him with entreaty and
Petitions, or with force and violence, it is not plainly expressed. 2 If they
did it with violence, yet it does not follow, because they did it that
therefore it was justifiable. Doctor Tailor speaking of this Scripture in his
Comment on Tit. 3.1. page 554. does plainly confess, That it cannot justly be
collected from thence, whether Jonathan were delivered by intercession, or by
mutiny and sedition, and withal he adds, that if it were done by opposition
it is to be condemned. There is in that Scripture a narration of the thing
done, but no Testimony given that it was well done. These same people at the
self same time as is recorded in the same Chapter, ver. 33. did most palpably
sin against Almighty God, and they that did not stick to transgress against
the Majesty of Heaven, shall we think it impossible for them to miscarry
themselves toward his Vicegerent here on earth? they that were so guilty in
the one, how can we be confident they were not faulty in the other? surely
there is nothing in the Text that can persuade a man they were not faulty, but
only his own willingness so to apprehend it; nay, is it not plain they
carried themselves like swearing Ruffians even in the very rescue it self?
(though this does not hinder but they might petition too) as the Lord lives,
say they, etc. certainly it cannot but be a great blemish to the Action, where
there is so little care of conscience even in the very Acting; but suppose the
whole work to be done out of pure conscience, and to be approved of God too,
which yet has no such evidence, yet it is a question, whether there be an
exception granted to us from the common rule of the fifth Commandment, because
there was an exception granted unto them, for special facts are no warrant for
us. 4 If their example do grant us an exception too, why then we must not
digress from their example; their example must be to us an example indeed; but
between their case and ours at present, see what a manifold difference there
is. First, Jonathan was the heir apparent to the Crown, and the hope of the
future age, for ought the people as yet knew, and it would trouble a Nation to
have the hope of their settlement cut off in the very bud; there is no such
thing here with us. Secondly, it was most manifestly evident, that Jonathan was
most innocent, and had not deserved to dye at all, and it would trouble
religious people (as the Jews pretended to be) to have the guilt of innocent
blood brought upon the Kingdom; there is no such thing with us. Thirdly, they
proceed not on bare jealousies and fears, the thing was most certain, Saul had
vowed his death; there is no such vowed destruction threatened to us or ours.
Fourthly, they were now already Armed before there was occasion of this rescue;
they did not put themselves into Arms of purpose for that service, but being
Armed, upon a sudden this business happened, and to the view of man, that may
be somewhat tolerable upon a sudden motion or passion, which both in the sight
of God and man is intolerable to be done upon deliberation. In all these
particulars we see there is a great difference; the like may beshewed in all
other examples, as of David and others that are produced to the like purpose
And what assurance such examples that differ so much from our condition, can
give to the conscience of a Christian, may justly be doubted by all that in
sincerity make conscience of their doings.

VI Whether there can be in any Christian State or government, so much as any
pretense of any fundamental law, which is contrary to the law moral, all, and
to the express Commandments of the written word of God?

There is much speech of a fundamental Law, but plain and simple hearted
Christians know not what to make of it, nor where to find it; and that it
should have power to enable us to that which Gods word so expressly forbids,
is cause of no little wonder and astonishment.

VII Whether it be lawful in the sight of God or man, for a company of people
that has gotten head in any Kingdom, and made a strong party, by the force of
Arms, not by he Ancient orderly way of that state, to overthrow the known laws,
and change the Ancient government of that Kingdom?

This is the course of beasts, among which the stronger always bears sway;
And besides, there should then be no certainty of Peace in any Nation, for
still as any faction grows strong, so it should be lawful for them still to
frame a new government, though it were never so well settled before. The
Presbyterians now may bear the sway, but in a short time, the Independents may
be more powerful, and then we must have new Wars, and after that, who knows
how soon may arise a Sect of a higher strain? (as the Devil is always busy)
and then we must go to cutting of throats again; thus we shall never have
Peace, if this course be lawful.

VIII Whether they that have sworn to the Kings Supremacy and now hold any
coequall and coordinate power are not forsworn?

To him that is supreme there can be no equal; neither will it help to say,
The oath has reference to foreign powers, for though in the process of it,
it has reforence indeed to foreign powers, yet in the beginning of it, we do
testific and declare in our consciences, that the King is the only supreme
Governor etc. absolutely, and generally without any exception or limitation at
all; and who can give us a power to understand the oath with a limitation, when
we have all taken it without a limitation?

IX Whether it be not contrary to the such, to go about to Wrest the Militia
out of the Kings hand, when we have in the same oath of Supremacy declared in
our consciences, That the King is supre can Governor, etc. in all things or
canses both spuituall and temporal?

If the Militia be a temporal business (temporal or spiritual) the King by
this oath, must be supreme therein; And here it is to be considered, whether
the Militia be not already sttled by Act of Parliament; if yea, why is not that
course followed, which by Law is prescribed? if no, why then it is to be
thought it belongs to the Kings prerogarive, which we have all bound our selves
to maintain, both by our oath of Alegiance, and also by our late Protestation,
and indeed how can he else be a King? for without it he cannot afford that
Protection which he owes to his Subjects as he is their King.

X Whether all we that do not take up Arms in behalf of the King, having taken
the Oath of Allegiance to him, be not forsworn?

The words of the Oath are these, I will bear faith and true Allegiance to His
Majesty, his heirs and successors, and him and them will defend to the
uttermost of my power, against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which
shall be made against him or their persons, their Crown and Dignity, etc. These
are the very words of the Oath; now whether our disregard of his Commands, our
depraving his Government, our fighting against his Armies, and our endeavor to
take him captive, in the sight of the Almighty will be esteemed, as tending to
the defense of his Person, Crown, and Dignity, is such a scruple, that the
Malignants, who take up Arms for him, seem more directly to follow the words of
the Oath, and think that none do rightly perform this Oath but themselves.

Neither will it serve the turn to say, That Oath was made to prevent all
encouragements of Rebellion that might be brought from Rome; for diverse reasons
show that the intent of the Oath, is to bind the Subjects to true Allegiance,
whatsoever encouragement from any power might be presented to them, (though
because the Romanists or Papists were at that time principally suspected, the
Oath does principally bend its Forces against them;) for first, there was an
Ancient Oath of Allegiance before, which did bind the Subjects indefinitely,
that is, generally to bear to their Sovereign truth and faith, both of life and
member, without application to any particular power from whence Rebellion might
be suspected, and it were a vain thing to imagine, that in an Oath newly
framed, there should be a gap left open to endanger the Prince, which had been
prevented in the old. Secondly, in this latter Oath we are bound to defend the
Kings Person, etc. against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which
shall be made by reason of any encouragement from Rome, or otherwise. Thirdly,
it is acknowledged by us in that Oath, That neither Pope nor any other person
whatsoever, has power to absolve us of this Oath, or any part thereof; whereby
it is evident, the Oath does bind us to perfect Allegiance, without digressing
upon any occasion whatsoever.

XI Whether all we that have taken the Protestation, to maintain the
Privileges of Parliament do not violate our Protestation so long as we join
with the two Houses at Westminster.?

It is one Privilege of Parliament, That none of the Members should be
excluded thence, or hindered from Voting there, and that freely: it is another
privilege, that no forraigners, Scottish Commissioners, or others should have
any power there; whiles both these things are done, and suffered by the two
Houses at Westminster, how are the privileges of Parliament maintained by
them? and how do we keep our Protestation while we consent unto and join with
them?

XII Whether a man who has subscribed, that there is nothing in the Book of
Homilies contrary to the word of God, as all Beneficed men, and Lecturers have
done, (as will appear if the 3. Article of subscription in the 36. Canon be
compared with the 35. Article of Religion) whether he that has thus
subscribed, can join with the two Houses, but that he must make not only them,
but himself also guilty of Rebellion?

There be four Homilies against Rebellion, or rather four parts of one Homily,
wherein these ways of taking up Arms against the Prince are wholly condemned,
and this must needs be consented to for sound and orthodox by all Ministers in
the Kingdom, or else they must say, they subscribed merely in a color, that
they might hold a Lecture or a Benefice.

XIII Whether we all that have vowed by our late Protestation, with our Lives
and Estates, to maintain the Doctrine of the Church of England, as it is
opposed to Popery, do not violate our Protestation, if we maintain not all the
Doctrine contained in the Homily against Rebellion?

Who knows not that the Homilies against Rebellion, were compiled purposely
against Popery, the Popish Priests in those days being so busy to stir up
Rebellion? it being also one special point of Popery, to justify the Arms of
Subjects against their Sovereign. The fashood of such tenets and the iniquity
of such practices is fully declared in the Homily against Rebellion and if any
Doctrine may justly be said to be established in the Church of England, surely
this is one part of it, because by Act of Parliament in the 13. of Elizabeth,
the Articles of Religion are confirmed, among which Articles this is one, viz.
Article 35. That the Book of Homilies does contain Godly and wholesome Doctrine,
etc. The Doctrine then that forbids the taking up of Arms against the Prince,
is Godly Doctrine, established in the Church of England by Act of Parliament,
and so established as opposite to Popery; and if we maintain not this Doctrine,
what care do we take of our Protestation? pay that which thou have vowed.
Eccles 5.4. if we maintain not this Doctrine, what care do we take of Acts of
Parliament?

XIIII Whether those Ministers that have taken the oath of Canonical
obedience, can safely take the new Scottish Covenant, or yield to a change of
the present Government of the Church of England, so long at least as these
Bishops are living?

And yet if the oath of Canonical obedience be not enough, see how the
Ministers are all bound not only to the present Liturgy, but also to the
present Government, both by their subscription, and also by a vowed promise,
with a calling of God to witness and help thereunto. As for the Act of
Parliament, whereby the Liturgy is confirmed, (in which Liturgy the Bishops by
a prescribed Order more then once or twice are appointed to be prayed for) it
binds all the Subjects as well as Ministers. It is the Law of the Kingdom
established by Sovereign Authority, and this Authority the Apostle says we
must be Subject unto, both for fear of wrath, and also for conscience sake.
This does concern all the Subjects of the Kingdom; but the Ministers, Assembly
men, and all are yet somewhat further bound. For at their Ordinations they have
put it under their hands (and that willingly and ex anima, as they professed at
least) that the Book of Common Prayer contains in it nothing contrary to the
word of God, and that they themselves will use the form in that Book
prescribed, and none othen. And to this they have subscribed not once only,
but again and again, some of them when they took degrees in the Universities,
all of them when they were admitted into Orders both of Deaconty and Priest
hood, and also at their several Institutions to their Livings, and admissions
into Lectures as appears by the 36. Canon forementioned, and yet besides all
this, they made a vowed promise at their Ordination; for a question being thus
demanded of them, will you reverently obey your Ordinary, etc? This Answer was
returned by them, I will so do; the Lord being my helper. Now whether men that
have so often bound themselves willingly and with all their heart, and have
lived accordingly, some of them 20. some 30. some 40. years, may lawfully
endeavor by the sword to free themselves from this bond, or encourage others by
the sword to procure a liberty for them, or enter into a Covenant, quite
contrary to this bond; is a case of conscience so deservedly considerable, that
all who have any conscience, or do believe there is a Heaven or Hell to go to
hereafter, cannot but startle at the very first hearing of it, and that so much
the rather, because all Mimsters of the Kingdom have yet besides made another
solemn Vow, to their power to maintain quietness and Peace; for at their
Ordination this question being demanded of them, Will you maintain and set
forwards (as much as lies in you) quietness, peace, and love among all
Christian people, etc? The Answer they have all returned is this, I will so do,
the Lord being my helper. O God that art the helper of all them that do not
forsake thee, make them all that fear thee mindful of their Vows, and
careful to perform them.

XV Whether the tampering so much with Oaths undertaking to dissolve some, and
impose others, viz. new Covenants contrary to our former Oaths, whereby the
consciences both of Prince and people cannot but be ensnared, whether this does
seem to argue any sincerity of zeal and purity of Religion, or rather whether
it does not argue a wilful purpose and resolution to compass our own ends, if
possible, though it be with the wrack of men's souls as well as of their
Estates and Lives?

XVI Whether there be any reason or conscience, the Clergy only among all the
Subjects of the Kingdom, should be excluded from Voting about those Laws, to
the observance whereof it is expected they should be bound as well as the rest
of the Subjects?

What a singular encouragement is here to be a Clergyman in the Kingdom of
England?

XVII Whether the Assembly of Divines at London have any lawful calling?

Justly doubted; for an ordinary calling all the Kingdom knows they have not,
they were not chosen by the voices of the Clergy; neither were they gathered
together by the Kings will and Commandment, without which there can be no such
Ecclesiastical Assembly, as they themselves have put under their hands;
(compare the third Article of subscription before mentioned with the 21.
Article of Religion, and it will easily appear;) and besides, there is an Act
of Parliament against such Assemblies, as have not the Kings consent thereunto,
in the 25. of Henry 8. An ordinary calling then they have not; and an
extraordinary, by any supernatural inspiration, it is to be thought, they will
not assume to themselves, and so they have no lawful calling at all. However,
the guides of the Kingdom they have taken upon them to be, and therefore they
may do well, briefly and plainly to resolve these perplexing doubts, with some
Manifesto, that we may know it is done or approved by them. If we be misled,
woe be to us, we shall perish in our iniquity, Isay 9.16. but our blood shall
be required at our watchmens hands. Ezekiel. 3.18.

XVIII Whether men lawfully possessed of temporal Estates, and having by their
last will and Testament or any other lawful means bestowed the same to the
maintenance of the Clergy with fearful curses, some of them, and imprecations
on those that should divert it from that use; whether those Estates, can safely
be alienated from the way, which the Doners themselves devised, without
sacrilege?

True the curse causeless will not come, but that these curses are such, who
can say? nay, and if there were no curse, yet who can say it is not sacrilege!
if Ananias and Saphira might not alienate what themselves had given, who has
power to alienate that which is given by another man? To rob Peter and pay Paul
will not be sufficient to excuse the business. A man had need be sure of his
warrant, before he take upon him to be a divider. Luke 12.14.

XIX Whether we who endeavor to change the government of the Church, that we
may procure liberty of conscience, and yet exercise cruel Tyranny upon men's
Consciences our selves, by requiring them to join with us, though there be so
many scruples of conscience against; it by plundering and imprisoning them, if
they will not join with us; and by imposing new Covenants contrary to former
Oaths; whether we seem not to the Malignants too justly to be guilty of deep
Hypocrisy, espying a mote that was in the Bishops eyes, and not discerning the
beam that is in our own?

XX Whether we that cried out upon the Papists, for endeavoring to bring in
the Spaniards, and upon the King for intending as we conceived, to bring in the
Danes, be not unexcusable before God and man, for doing that our selves, in
bringing in the Scots which we condemned in others? Romans 2.1 etc Item whereas
we complained of the Tyranny of the Bishops, that many thereby were driven to
forsake their Native Country, and yet we by our cruelty shall do the self
same, are we not in this behalf also unexcusable? many more such Items may be
added.

XXI Whether it can stand with the quiet of Christian consciences, to make such
an effusion of Christian blood, as now has been spilt, and yet is in spilling
merely upon carnal motives?

Religion is indeed partly pretended, but draw this fair Curtain aside, and
behind it there stands the carnal care of self-seeking, seeking to save our
Skins and Purses; we are unwilling to suffer for Religion, and therefore we
would establish a Religion, according to our own minds; we would willingly
prevent Ship Money, and other burdens, and therefore we desire to have more
power in our own hands, and less in the Kings; so this War in the up shot, is
altogether to save our selves from trouble; which we know not whether it will
ever come upon us; and yet here it is to be considered withal, whether the
good that is aimed at in it, will justify all the evils that have been
committed by it? nay whether, if all that was feared by our over-forward
jealousies had been brought upon us, we could possibly have been in so bad a
condition as this War has put us? so does the wise Lord justly Cross men's
carnal proceedings.

XXII Whether it be not extreme rashness to affirm, That the whole Catholic
Church, in the point of Episcopacy was in an error, all the world over 1500.
years together?

That the whole Church was governed by Bishops all the world over, till Mr.
Calvin's time of late at Genevae is known to all; and amongst those Bishops, to
reckon up how many burning and shining lights, how many zealous propagators and
propugnators of the truth, how many learned Professors, how many constant
Confessors, how many glorious Martyrs, have been found from time to time
(though amongst them as amongst men of all callings, there have been some
faulty) were a work large enough to fill a spacious volume; and if,
notwithstanding all this, we shall blemish them and the whole Church of God,
that not only tolerated but honored them, if we shall blemish them all with
an error about the lawfullnesse of their calling, shall we not take more upon
us, then the Psalmist durst to take upon himself? he did not dare to condemn
the generation of Gods Children, Psalm. 73.15.

XXIII Whether our party being so divided, some being Presbyterians, and some
Independents, and both sides contending strongly that each of their several
disciplines is that discipline, which Christ has ordained and appointed in his
Church, whether it be not apparent to all the world, that one of them must be
in an error?

Two contraries can never be both true, and while one maintains a dependency,
and the other an Indepency, there is between them a contrariety.

XXIIII Whether, it being undeniable rashness to condemn Episcopary, as
before, and an error being unavoydably acknowledged in one branch of our party,
both branches also being equally confident of their assertions and both
introducing novelty, whether there be not just cause to suspect them both as
erroneous and less agreeing to the word of God then is Episcopacy?

XXV Whether the case being so uncertain and disputable, there be any necessity
so much blood should be spilt, and so many lives lost, for the removoll of the
old, and bringing in of a new government?

It was David's Prayer, and he uttered it with some sense oa heavy burden that
was upon him, deliver me from blood-guiltinesse, O God; and he had killed but
one Vriah and a few more with him but so many thousand being lost amongst us,
and so much blood spilt for the change of a government, if it be without
necessity, Oh how intolerable will this guilt be, on whom soever it lights,
whether on the Parliament that begun it, or on the assembly that did not since
warn them of it, or on us all that have been their well-wishers and abettors in
it?

XXVI Whether Christ did ever prescribe such a way as this for setting up his
throne, viz. the use of the bloody sword?

Our Savior does enjoin his Disciples to take up the Cross and follow him, so
far is he from commanding them to impose the Cross on others; and when the
Samaritans would not receive him, he did not allow his Disciples to execute
vengeance upon them; yea, when his Enemies came to apprehend him, yet he
forbids Peter to use a sword for his own defense; neither will it help, to say
that our Savior was at that time to suffer for our Redemption, and that
therefore he did forbid Peter to use a sword in his defense; had our Savior
aimed at nothing else, it had been enough to have rebuked Peter for his present
action, without mention of a rule for perpetuity; but when our Savior does not
only rebuke him but also as a reason of his rebuke, does annex the
establishment of a perpetual Law, all that take the sword shall perrish by the
sword, he does thereby show that not only at that time, but also at all times,
he forbids a sword to be taken up against the civil Magistrate for his sake.

XXVII Whether in our consciences, we be not persuaded that the State of the
Kingdom might without war, and with his Majesty's good leave and furtherance,
have been reduced from its deviations unto the happy condition, wherein it
flourished in the blessed days of good Queen Elizabeth?

About the beginning of this Parliament, there was some such thing commended by
His Majesty in his speech unto the Parliament for a Reformation, not an
Alteration; and never did any Nation live more happy, then the people of
England did in those golden days, (which were since continued also, though
some ecclipses of that happiness, a just judgment upon us for the abuse of
our long Peace and Plenty, have of late befallen us;) Religion flourished,
Souls were saved, and every man sat under his own Vine in safety: and if we
might have obtained so happy a condition without War, let all the world judge
whether that which we desire beyond the condition of those times, be worthy of
the loss of so much as one man's life or no; and if not of one, much less of
so many thousands. The Parliament Men were chosen, and sent up out of their
several Countries respectively, for the good of the Kingdom, and Oh that they
would seriously consider, as they expect to answer it before Gods tribunal
seat at the great Judgment day, whether would be better for the Kingdom to
have been restored to the condition it enjoyed in Queen Elizabeth's days, or to
be reduced to the plight in which now it stands? I, but though it be bad now,
yet it will be better, when we have wrought a perfect reformation, hereafter!
Be it so, and let us feed our selves with those hopes; but yet the question
does still remain. The happy condition of Queen Elizabeth's Reign we might have
had freely, the glorious contentment which we dream of, beyond the condition of
that Queens days has already cost much blood; the question is whether that
glorious contentment, which we think to obtain, God knows when, will be a
sufficient recompense for all the lives that have and shall be lost in the
obtaining of it? neither is this all, the loss of so many thousand friends,
and Contrymen slain by the sword; but unexpressible also are the calamities
under which they groan that are yet alive. It is with them at London, as once
it was with Samaria, the Metropolis, when time was, of the Kingdom of Israel.
They trusted in the Mountain of Samaria, a strong place, and being in safety
and plenty themselves, they took not to heart the affliction of Joseph, that
is, the miseries of their Brethren and Contrymen that lived abroad in other
parts of the Kingdom, and for this cause there is a sharp judgment, woe be to
them, denounced by the Prophet Amos 6.1.6. There is no place so strong that woe
may not enter; and therefore O God that art the God of mercy, and delightest in
the prosperity of thy people, give unto our Parliament a desire to be like unto
thy self, and to put on bowels of mercy both toward themselves, and toward
their miserable, yea, now gasping Country, that we may accept of, and be
contented with, and thankful for so much as we had under the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, rather then out of a desperate resolution of having more, to lose
all, and bring a total desolation upon the whole Kingdom.

XXVIII Whether they that hold the head, The head of the body politic, and the
head of the body mystical, are justly to be persecuted by us?

Job says no; These are his words, Ye should say, why persecute we him? seeing
the root of the matter is found in me, Job. 19.28. Nay, we should say, why
persecute we him that is the head of the body politic, and holds the head of
the body mystical? the root of the matter (that is, the profession of the true
Christian Faith) being found in him. The true Circumcision, that is, the true
Children of Abraham, as the Apostle does declare Phil. 3.3. are they who
worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence
in the flesh. And this is the Religion professed by the Church of England; this
is the doctrine of the Church, That for salvation they depend only on Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in their own works: And as for those Ceremonies
used by them in the external worship of God, they have no confidence in them
neither, nor reckon them a part of the worship This may well be esteemed to be
the root of the matter (though Job indeed applies this phrase peculiarly to the
faith of the Resurrection through Christ, which as being a particular, is
comprehended in this general, of embracing Christ by Faith with all his
benefits) and to slur this profession, the root of the matter, with the odious
imputation of Popery, what is it less then Blasphemy? and to pursue the
professors of this Religion with the sword, as Papists, (though neither Papists
nor Brownists, for their Religion are thus to be pursued) what is it less then
a bloody prosecution of the truth?

XXIX Whether in the sight of God and all indifferent men they are not to be
accounted factious and seditious who by the power of the sword endeavor any
where the subversion of the Ancient government and known Laws contrary to the
will and liking of the Supreme Magistrate?

Indeed among us at this day, they that are for Peace are esteemed factious,
and they that are for innovation even by the sword are accounted Peaceable; the
strangest paradox that ever was heard of. But the counsel of the Holy Ghost is
this (and good it is for Christians to follow his counsel) Fear thou the Lord
and the King: and meddle not with them that are given to change. Pro. 24.21.
The knitting together of these duties in this place is very observable: for the
Holy Ghost hereby shows, That they fear not God, who fear not the King; and
that one evidence of the want of the fear of God, is to study or endeavor any
innovation without or against the King; with such he wishes us not to join, and
a reason he adds in the next verse, for their calamity shall rise suddenly,
etc. To the like purpose is that in Eccles. 10.8, 9. If this Scripture be
Scripture still, we know not how to join with the Parliament for an alteration
against the Kings will; nay, besides these two places, the Scripture does
frequently require subjection, and forbids resistance; who knows not those
eminent places Romans 13.1, 2, 5. Tit. 3.1. and 1. Pet. 2.13, 14. We have all
protessed to defend the privileges of Parliament; but that the Parliament has
any privilege more then private men to walk contrary to the word of God, or
that they have any dispensation granted from walking according to Scripture
rules, is not yet made evident; if this privilege were once clearly
manifested, we should never make any more doubt at all.

XXX Whether to have such thoughts as this, I will go on in the way I have
chosen, even to the effusion of Rivers of blood, though I see so many doubts
(doubts that seem unanswerable) though my conscience have no warrant out of
Scripture for it, whether this be not the resolution of a man, whose salvation
is desperate?

For the Apostle tells us, that whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Romans 14.23.
and whosoever does wilfully continue in any sin, is not yet in the state of
Salvation; for the Lord will not be merciful to them that offend of malicious
wickedness.

XXXI Whether it be not more suitable to Christian Religion, and safer for a
Christians soul, upon these grounds, even to suffer under the King, if he
should prove Tyrant or persecuter (which upon many evidences, we have good
cause to hope he never will, and should with our Prayers, endeavor to obtain
he never may) rather then upon no grounds, but bare fears and jealousies taken
up by an implicit faith pinned upon the sleeve of a few men not privileged
from error, contrary to Gods word, to Acts of Parliament, to subscriptions,
Oaths, and Vows, to Rebel against him?

Upon these considerations and such like, many have fallen off already from the
Parliament, and unless some clear satisfaction be hereunto speedily given, (if
at least any satisfactory reason may be given how we should break all these
sacred bonds and not be guilty) it is to be thought, many more will fall off.
Great is the truth and will prevail. And O thou that are the God both of truth
and peace, direct our hearts, that we may understand the truth, and incline our
minds to follow those things that make for Peace, yea, Lord grant unto us all
with settled purpose and serious resolution, to walk in those ways that are
most suitable to the Gospel, as knowing that those are the ways that make
most for the glory of thy name, and most for the comfort of our own, otherwise
erring and endangered souls.

-- Turpe haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli.
Satius est de media via recurrere quam semper currere male. Be not deceived,
God is not mocked. Gal. 6.7. FINIS. 1645.

