THE INCONSISTENCIE OF THE Independent way, With Scripture, and It Self.

Manifested in a threefold Discourse, I. Vindiciae Vindiciarum, with M. Cotton.
II. A Review of M. Hookers Survey of Church Discipline. The first part. III. A
Diatribe with the same M. Hooker Concerning Baptism of Infants of
Non-confederate parents, Cap. 2. Of his third part.


By DANIEL CAWDREY, a Member of the Assembly, and late Preacher at Martins in
the Fields.

JEREMY 6.16. Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where
is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls.
LONDON, Printed by A. Miller for Christopher Meredith at the Sign of the Crane
in Paul's Churchyard, MDCLI.

THE EPISTLE TO THE Dissenting Brethren.
IT is some men's happiness (I know not how or why, unless it be out of the
partiality of their Followers to their own way and party) that write they (or
preach they) never so weakly (or absurdly) they find some admirers to cry them
up, all their words as Oracles, and all their works as Wonders. Other men,
though they do clearly discover (perhaps because they do discover) the
weaknesses and contradictions of those ways and works, must have their Books
buried in silence, slighted and scorned, or themselves censured and traduced:
Ep. to the Way cleared, page 2.
[as carrying on a design, endeavoring by pen to blot the fair Copy of Truth,
and to cross out of the Book of men's memory and esteem, the names of them whom
God will honor though they will not, etc.] I have observed it as a depth of
Romish policy of late, That they have left off to answer to any controverted
points (being beaten out of the field by the full and clear confutations of
their Doctrines, by our late learned Champions) and betake themselves now to a
compliance with all Heresies and Sects, so to oppress the Truth in another
way, by crying down both Ministry and Learning. To which purpose, some
Jesuiticall Pamphlets have been vented of late in several dresses, The Swords
Abuse asserted. The vanity of the present Churches, etc.
and scattered abroad to do mischief, which have been answered and confuted;
but they have the wit, not to reply, lest they make the cause worse. This
practice some of our Independent Brethren have too much imitated; Witness the
Diatribe, about Ordination, Imposition of hands, and preaching by Gifted men,
not in Office; which being learnedly and judiciously answered by D. S. and
proved to be a Paradiatribe, the Author thereof (thought to be a great man
amongst them) is unwilling (it seems) to reply, whether out of consciousnesse
of his own weakness, or out of pride and scorn of all, not of his own way and
opinion; that his Disciples may think it is not worth answering. The like I may
say of Vind. Clav. which having discovered many weaknesses and contradictions
in The Keys and Way, is answered rather with slighting and scorn, then any
solid convictions, as will appear in this present Vindication. Of 7. Chapters
in the Vind. Clav. he answers but to one; and of 3. Sections in that first
Chapter, he answers but to two; and throughout those 2. Sections, does rather
reproach his adversary by the undeserved names of Vindex and Avenger, then
satisfy his charge. And after a threefold promise (with attestation of the
Name of God twice) to give a further answer, shakes him off, as some
contemptible person, set to be slighted, rather then answered. When I had, upon
the first sight of his book, read what he had written, I presently set pen to
paper, and made a draught of this present Vindication; but yet was not
persuaded to print it, partly because I waited till M. Baily and M. Rutherford
put out their Reply, to join it with theirs, (which I have long in vain
expected) and partly because I was unwilling to make any further Discovery of
the weaknesses of the Reverend Author, and partly because I might think, the
best answer to a slight answer, was no answer. But when I considered, that the
Book was cried up by the Epistler to it, as so exquisite a piece; in these
words: [In the latter part of this Book (The Way Cleared) being controversal,
you have a fair Additional to the Models before printed of the Church Way (so
much called for) not Magisterially laid down, but friendly debated by
Scripture, and argumentatively disputed out, to the utmost inch of ground, and
defended Cap a pie (as they speak) from the head to the heel, of every branch
of truth essential to the controversy:] and when withal I perceived that
this and other Books of that Way published, were highly esteemed as
unanswerable, and very taking with weak and unsettled minds, to the disturbance
of the peace of the Church; I found no rest in my spirit till I had seriously
tried the strength thereof, especially of that Reverend and Learned M. Hookers
Survey of Church Discipline, which I heard most magnified, as the strongest
piece of that Way; and so by the way give in a short answer in Vindication of
Vind. Clav. from the Reply of M. J. C. so far as concerned my self. Ep. to the
Way Ep. to the Way cleared.
To forward this undertaking, I was the rather provoked; 1. By the importunate
and reiterated recognition of those Tracts, those Models (as they call them) of
the Church Way, Ibid.
viz. Church Government, Church Covenant, etc. and now the late Model (or
crambe saepe cocta) of M. Bartlet, and this Additional, of the Way Cleared. 2.
By the often repeated quarelling, Ep. to the Way
at our calling for a fuller Treatise, and a clearer Model of the Church Way:
3. By the nonperformance of that promise so long ago made, so often pretended,
[Of a fuller Treatise of the same Subject, with ampler demonstrations, by joint
consent of the Churches of Old and New England.] But will they never take
notice of the Answers given to most, or many of those? (for they all hold out
the same things;) And why are they not rather offended (we have told them we
are, and they ought to have given us satisfaction, had they esteemed us
brethren) offended, I say, at their own scandalous breach of promise, in not
exhibiting that fuller Treatise by joint consent, etc. Our Brethren of the
Assembly, how long, how often did they promise a full Model of their Way, which
yet we have as long and as often called for, and expected, but all in vain? The
time was, when some complained (but causelessly) as an excuse of their neglect
of promise, Ep. to the Woy
[That their hands were bound up, and of the unwillingnesse of Licensers to
License their Tracts, etc.] But sure these last two or three years, their hands
have been loose enough, and the press open; but still this fuller Treatise by
joint consent, etc. cannot find the way into the Light: We have rather cause
to think, that their disagreement among themselves, is the reason why they dare
not give us their Model, lest the world should see their differences (being so
few of them) and their Lightness and Inconstancy, if (as often they have done)
they should hereafter change their Judgments, upon pretense of New Light,
perhaps as old error, as that they left last.

That I may briefly declare my judgment, concerning this Way, so much adored
and magnified by many; there are three things which have much prevailed with
me, to persuade me, that it is not the way of Christ.

1. The contradictions, at least the many differences, as from the Scriptures,
so from one another, and one man from himself; a Scheme whereof is presented,
at the end of our first part.

2. The propensity of many of their principles (wherein they differ from the
Presbyterians) to separation, and to the worst of Schism; I shall instance in
some particulars.

1. [That there is no Catholic visible Church, no Church visible but a
particular Congregation:] which is to deny all communion of Churches, and to
grant only communion of members; yea, some grant scarcely so much: Witness the
Reverend Author of the Survey of Church Discipline, who says expressly, Surv.
par. 2. page 64, 65.
[He has professed the course (of administration of the Sacrament to those of
another Congregation) to be unwarrantable; because the Administration of the
Sacrament is a Ministerial Act, and what authority has he (the Pastor) to do
it, or they to receive it from him to whom he is no Pastor?] This must needs
open a door to as many divisions as there are Churches, none having any power
beyond their own Church: whereby all Religions, all Heresies, may be tolerated,
and none can hinder it.

2. That all Church Power, the power of the Keys, is independently and solely
in a particular Congregation;] which is the setting up of Church against
Church: and that Admission and Ejection of members is only into and from a
particular Church: A child is baptized into a particular Congregation, and not
into the Catholic, or other Churches, to them he is an Infidel: And one
excommunicated is cast out only of his particular Church, because the power
extends no further then to a particular Congregation.

3. That a Church essential, or a Congregation of believers without Officers,
may choose and ordain her own Officers:] which will be the ready way to break
them into separated Assemblies, one part choosing one, another another.

4. That a Minister is a Minister to none but his own Congregation:] which
tends to destroy the unity of the Church, and that communion which the Churches
of God may and ought to have one with another.

5. Gathering of Churches out of true Churches;] which gives way to every man
to separate from his own, and to join himself with another Church, supposed
purer; with contempt of the former Congregation: The Reverend M. Hooker
confesses; Praef. to his Survey, p. 11. and in his Book.
[That the faithful Congregations in England are true Churches, and therefore
it is sinful to separate from them as no Churches:] And yet our brethren here
practice this separation, by gathering their Churches out of ours, confessedly
true Churches.

6. That none but confederates by the explicit Church Covenant have right to
Ordinances:] which is to keep out many precious souls from communion with their
fellow members, and their children from Baptism, and to make them no better
then Infidels. That Is the second thing.

3. The many mischievous consequences of those principles, and sad effects, of
the practice of the Independent way, in Old England, fully manifested in these
few last years: For instance.

1. Under the Name, Shadow, and Shelter of Independency (as another Trojan
Horse) have not only other Sectaries, but had liberty to set up their Churches,
(...); but also the Jesuits themselves, have masked under this Vizard,
transforming themselves into all shapes and sects; and have had the fairest (or
rather the foulest) opportunity to propagate all monstrous and soul destroying
errors; and to ruin not only the Presbyterian but the Independent Churches
also: Evident it is, that most of the points of Popery, are preached and
published in these Churches, as a fair inducement to usher in the Antichristian
Religion, whenever the secular power shall come into their hand.

2. Their Renouncing of their former Ordination in our Churches (which is
reported to be done by some, if not most of our Dissenting Brethren) has
ministered occasion to Jesuits, Anabaptists, profane persons, and such like, to
cry down our Ministry, as Antichristian, or null: and has exposed us to all
those foul reproaches of Baals Priests, False Prophets, Black-coats, etc. which
are daily poured out against the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ. It is by
one of them laid to our charge, as a great crime, that we also have not
followed them in this Renunciation. This he says, M Bart Model. p 119, 120.
As learned and godly as the most and best of the Ministers are, in the Church
of England, yet (with grief of heart let it be spoken) very few of them have
learned to this very day to disclaim and renounce the evil and error of the
way of coming into the Ministry, I mean, their Antichristian Ordination,
received from the Prelates, etc. Those Bishops being Antichristian, their
Ordination also must needs be so, etc.] To which I say these things. 1. I
desire him to remember his own distinction; Page 80.
[ We must distinguish between the corruption of things, and the things
themselves, between the essentials of a Church State, and the accidentals: Now
it cannot be denied, but in respect of the Accidentals of a Church State, so
all is lost under the defection of Antichrist, that is, in respect of the right
order and administration of Ministry, Ordinances, and Government: but not the
essentials of these; and so long as these remain, the Church State is not lost,
etc.] Our Ordination therefore, was not Antichristian, though it be granted,
that the Title and Office of a Diocesan Bishop, were Antichristian: Nay, he
seems to say and hold, that in Rome it self, the Church State is not lost, so
long as the essentials remain; viderit ipse: But we say, The Prelates were
certainly Presbyters, and ordained not alone, but together, with the hands of a
Presbytery: And if they did arrogate such power to themselves, as that no
Ordination could pass without them; yet that was but an Additional corrupt
circumstance; And himself tells us; [That the corruption of Administration does
not wholly make it null or void;] Page 10.5.
Then (we say again) Our Ordination was not Antichristian; that which was so
(if any thing in it was so) was rather the error of the Ordainers, then of the
Ordination, or ordained. 2. If the call of our Congregations will give us a
right Ordination, most of us, if not all, have that to show, as well as
themselves: A call or consent of our people either explicit or implicit; which
is confessed sufficient, by the Reverend Surveyor of Church Discipline, Par. 1.
page 47. Thus the people and parish^s* etc.
and acknowledged to be in our Churches; why then should we renounce our
Ordination? 3. If it be necessary to renounce our Ordination as Antichristian,
because of a corruption in the Ordainers; I would ask him, whether Baptism
administered (I say not by a Romish Priest) by a Minister so ordained, be not
also Antichristian? (as Anabaptists do sometimes object.) And whether he
himself did ever to this day renounce and disclaim his Baptism (like enough
done with the Sign of the cross, by some prelatical Minister) as
Antichristian? Himself propounds a like Question thus: [Are not those that we
judge godly, Model, p. 105.
and in a capacity to make use of all the holy Ordinances of Worship, to be
baptized again?] And he answers negatively, they are not, for this reason
amongst others. [ Because it is supposed they have been (though corruptly)
baptized already; Now the corruption of any administration, does not wholly
make it void and null, if they had the essentials of that Ordinance, etc.] He
might have been as favorable to our Ordination, if he had pleased: But he may
remember and satisfy another Query propounded by himself, to some Anabaptists,
to be seriously considered: [Whether there be any lawful Baptism, Page 71.
where the Administratour has no lawful calling thereunto?] And I would
propound it, as seriously to be considered by him; Whether if our Ordination be
(as he makes it) Antichristian, the Administratour of his Baptism, had any
lawful calling thereunto, and consequently whether his Baptism be lawful or
null; and he must not be rebaptized? And thereby gratify the Anabaptists, as
in others, so in this opinion and practice. But I proceed to another.

3. Their preaching as Gifted Brethren, (for so they only are to all
Congregations but their own) has caused this general liberty of preaching, by
men not in Office, of all Trades and Professions; to the contempt of the
Ministry, to the multiplication of schisms, divisions, and separations, from
their former Ministers and Churches; while every man has liberty to propagate
his own erroneous notions, and every man takes the License to hear whom he
likes best, as most agreeable to his own opinion. Yea, this very Liberty taken
and allowed by them, has almost brought as much contempt upon themselves, as
on the Presbyterian Ministers; Many of their followers choosing rather to hear
even Boy-preachers, then themselves.

4. Their placing all power in a particular Congregation independently, without
any power of appeal, makes an unjust censure irremedible. For this New England
it self affords us a fresh and sad instance, upon the report of very credible
persons. There was an Excommunication passed by the major part of a
Congregation there, against a person who thought himself wronged, and desired
his cause to be heard, by the Elders of other Churches: who, upon the hearing
doubted whether the Excommunication could be justified. And they desired the
rehearing of it. But it would not be granted by that Congregation, or
prevailing party in it: whereupon one of the Elders a reverend Pastor of
another Congregation, writes thus to a friend: [ It will be a trouble to poor
M. Chapter not to have his business examined: but he must consider how the case
is, and look up to heaven, for I can assure him there is no help to be had upon
earth, till the Churches are reformed, and become Presbyterian. I speak
seriously, I think that such things will make some incline to the Presbyterian
way, who formerly have been as firm Independents as M. -- If Independency do
not break all the Churches in New England, except a few Semi-presbyterian, Some
are deceived, etc.] In consideration whereof, he gives his advise, to diverse
other Independent Ministers, to think seriously of the Presbyterian way: and
diverse there, are become more moderate then formerly: Happy were it for Old
England if our Dissenting Brethren would hearken betimes to this advice; before
they have utterly broken their own and our Churches.

5. The power given to a Church-essentiall (as they call it) both to choose and
ordain their own Officers, or Ministers, as it is, and will be a cause of many
factions and divisions; so it will bring the Ministers maintenance to depend
upon the peoples benevolence; who may, and will upon the least dislike, reject
him, and deny him any allowance; which will in a short time destroy the
Ministry, discourage others from the Ministerial calling, and consequently
ruin Religion. I have seen a Letter from New England to this purpose; wherein
advising his friend to do his endeavor to preserve the stablished maintenance
of the Ministry here; He says, concerning New England Ministers thus: Though
most of the people here grow wealthy, yet not one Minister almost, has from
the people a competency to maintain himself and family, except he have an
estate of his own:] One main design of the Anabaptists or Jesuits, in crying
down Tithes here, is to destroy both Ministry at present, and Learning for the
time to come, when there shall be no certain establishment of a subsistence in
that calling. How far our brethren have been assistant to this design, I wish
them seriously to consider.

6. It is the observation of many both learned and godly, That many of those
that once decline from us to the Independent way, stay not long with them, but
fall presently into Anabaptism, from thence to Familism, from thence to
Rantism, even the utmost of blasphemy and profaneness: Some poor souls have
tired themselves in seeking and trying all the New ways of Religion, and after
a weary vagary to find the truth, which they lost, have returned home by
weeping cross. But few there are that do so; which is a Lamentation, and shall
be for a Lamentation. Yea, it is observed, that those that run not into those
extremities of errors, blasphemy and profaneness; yet fall strangely from the
power and practice of godliness, wherein sometimes they walked, and grow more
remiss and loose, in secret and family duties, in sanctification of the
Sabbath, etc. of which many holy men in former times and later, have found and
said, [That it was the Nurse of so much piety in Old England, and the glory of
our Church and Nation:] Little did we think, that those who outstood the
Sabbaticall profanations of the Prelates, their reproaches and scoffs of
purity, preciseness and strictness (as they called it) would have so soon
declined to the same looseness with them, upon a new pretended principle of
Christian Liberty, or Liberty of conscience. But we see that to be true; [That
the Sun (of Toleration) can do that with a Traveller, to make him cast aside
his garment, which the stormy winds (of persecution) could not do.]

7. And lastly, To add no more, Those sad and never enough to be lamented
Divisions, in Towns, Congregations and Families; those animosities, jealousies,
bitternesses, heart-burnings, amongst brethren; attended with so much contempt
and scorn of those Churches and brethren, they have forsaken; being the fruits
of this New Way; make it more then probable, this way is not the way of Christ.
It is observable, that as soon as ever any begin to decline from us, though
they were the entirest bosom friends before, [such as took sweet counsel
together, walking to the House of God together as friends:] fasting and praying
together often, in public and private; communicating at the same Table of the
Lord, etc. after all this, they first withdraw and estrange themselves, then
come to slight both us, our Ordinances and Ministry, as well as our persons:
and in some it ends in an open or secret opposition, and it is to be feared at
last it will end in hottest persecution. The Spirit of Christ is a spirit of
meekness, gentleness, and forbearance: The way of Christ, and the wisdom
which is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, etc.

These considerations of the evil fruits of the Independent way (so called) I
do not therefore exemplify (God is witness) to cast reproach upon the
persons of any of that way, who are (as I trust, many are) truly godly, but
only to give them occasion seriously to review the principles by which they
walk. And I would humbly entreat them to read the following discourses,
without prejudice or partiality; and then judge, whether there be not a
Discovery made of the weakness of the foundation of their way: And if it prove
so to be, to retract what they have more weakly built upon it, for the glory of
God, and the peace of the Churches.

If any say, you have said much against their way, but nothing, or little, for
the goodness of the Presbyterian way. I answer, Enough has been said for it
already, by the London Divines, in their Jus Divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici;
and the Vindication of the Presbyterian Government by the Province there: This
to me is a very probable argument of the goodness of the Presbyterian way,
That all sorts of men, Athiests, Papists, Episcopal, Anabaptists, all
Sectaries, and profane men do so much oppose it. That way (said he) must needs
be good, that Nero persecutes: whereas most of these, the latter especially
like well of, and comply with the Independent way, as granting more Liberty
then the Presbyterian will. Besides that, the fruits of the Presbyterian
Government, in other Reformed Churches, especially in the preventing or
suppressing of errors, heresies, and profanesse, speaks sufficiently for it.

I had also some thoughts, to have vindicated the Presbyterian government from
those unjust aspersions cast upon it by M. B. in his Model, p. 52. etc. but
they are either so weak or so false, that they fall by their own weight before
an indifferent and intelligent Reader. I shall now stay the Reader no longer in
the porch, but refer him to the Tracts themselves: Desiring the Dissenting
Brethren with single and impartial Judgments to consider the miserable rents
and divisions, the errors, heresies and blasphemies broken out in this Church
of England, since their way got footing and countenance here: and withal (in
the fear of God) to study how they may be repairers of those breaches made, and
restorers of Truth and Peace lost, to this distracted and almost destroyed
Church, Amen.

To the Preface.
1. THe Author of Vind. Clav. did not therefore conceal his name, that he
might secretly accuse whom he durst not openly charge; but for other reasons
made known to, and approved of by Reverend and godly Brethren here. Nor was
there any need (after the Roman custom) for him to show himself face to face;
especially when he charged nothing clanicular, but what he found, and any might
find publicly in the Authors own books. And had not the Subject and Titles
of his books discovered him, he did not so much as name him in all his book,
but only the first letters of his name: except once by citing the words of the
Prefacers to The Way, in their Epistle. Love (it is true) is the best way to
heal dissentions; but it is rather love of the Truth, then of men's persons, if
those must be severed. And this the Author of Vind. Clav. thought he
manifested, in his vindication of it from those errors and contradictions,
which he found (as he still thinks) in those books he undertook. Yea, he
thought he could not better show his love to the Reverend Author, then by
manifesting his errors; as well as the weaknesses of that way, wherein he is a
Leader to many (such is the respect to his person) besides the way of Truth.
Amicus Plato, etc. And whose books do most breathe lust to contention, his, who
discovers errors, or theirs, who defend them, being discovered; is left to the
judgment of all indifferent Readers.

2. There is no doubt but the name of the Author of Vind. Clav. is well enough
known, to this Reverend Brother, by information of some from hence. He is one,
who is known to honor and reverence his person, worth, and holiness, as much
as any man; and as sorry to see him so mistake his way. One he is, that came to
the reading of his books, with prayer and sincerity, to find, and submit to
the Truth found; Gal. 2.14.
But when he saw, that he [walked not uprightly according to the Truth of the
Gospel,] he thought it his duty to withstand him (as Paul did Peter) and to
vindicate the Truth suppressed, and the Keys usurped into the hands of the
right owners. And that is the proper sense of the word Vindiciae: The Assertion
of Liberty or Freedom for the oppressed. It was not therefore an argument of
much love, to take the word in the worser part, and to call the Author by the
name of vindex, (which sometimes also signifies a Redressour of things, or a
Defender or Restorer of Liberty) much less the Avenger: as if [the title and
purport of the Book did hold him forth to be a man of Revenge:] For as there
was no reason (no former difference being between them) so there appears no
footstep of Revenge, in all his discourse. The purport of the book, was not to
revenge himself, but to vindicate, that is, to rescue Truth, which he thought
he saw oppressed, not so much by the strength of Reason, as by the Authority of
men in reputation for learning and holiness. And he thinks, (and so do others
with him) there is more appearance of Revenge in the names of Vindex and
Avenger put upon him unjustly (besides the slighting of him in the shortness
of the Reply, of which more hereafter) then is to be found in all his
proceedings. If there be any phrase or passage too sharp, or unbeseeming the
gravity of either party (as he begs pardon for it, so) he desires it may be
imputed to that zeal he bears to the Truth, and to the souls of many seduced
into a mischievous separation, the consequences whereof are found to be so
dangerous to this Church of England, as threatening its utter desolation.

3. But what says he to the charge (in the Title page) of weaknesses and
contradictions? If (says he) Christ may have any glory by that, I shall
willingly acknowledge that I am made up of weaknesses and contradictions;] If
those had been charged upon his person, he had answered religiously: But if it
be only intended against his way, he answers nothing: Or if this were really
confessed, it would be not only to the glory of Christ, but his own also. But
if it be (as it rather appears to be, by his Defense of those weaknesses and
contradictions) only modestly spoken, as intimating the contrary, surely Christ
shall have little glory from that, and himself less. There is a way to seek
glory, by flying it, and that is, no glory, says the wisest of men. But when
he applies that to his person which was spoken of his books, he does but elude
the charge, and not answer it.

4. [Neverthelesse (says he) all this will not argue that which the Avenger
says, He has heard that I have often altered my judgment since I went to
New England, etc. That tho Assertor (not the Avenger) has heard so, Par. 1.
page 28.
and that of some near and dear friends of his, is true; and he has found,
that another (whom he under takes) has heard so too: But that he has altered
his judgment, and that to contradiction, in his two Tracts, The Keys, and The
Way, Vindex, the Affertor, thinks he has made to appear in Vind. Clav. beyond
any reasonable contradiction, and shall do more in this. Now when he says, [He
sees by the first words of the Way, that the Publishers had not the Copy taken
from him, but an imperfect Transcript:] he lays a foundation for the eluding
of all, or some at least of the objected mistakes; by disclaiming their Copy:
But then he looses this ground again, when he says: [I do believe what the
Publishers do report (and they had it from his own Letters, as they say,) That
setting aside some difference in Logical terms, there is no material difference
between the Keys and the Way, either in doctrine of Divinity or
Churchpractice;] which is to own the Differences and Contradictions between
those Tracts, if any such be proved: Of which in the next.

5. It was objected, that the Author of those Tracts, did as flatly centradict
himself, as ever any man did: For in the Keys he says, [The Keys were
delivered to Peter, as an Apostle, Page 4. Page 27.
as an Elder, and as a Believer;] But in the Way, he says, [They are given to
Peter, not as an Apostle, not as an Elder, but as a professed Believer:] Is not
this a flat contradiction? There is a threefold answer given to this Objection.

1. The words (says he) are not mine, but the Assertors,] The words as they
are contracted are not his in terminis, but if they be not his, in their sense,
let Reason judge: In the Keys, expounding the sense of those words, [To thee
will I give the Keys, etc.] he says, [It has proved a busy Question, How
Peter is to be considered in receiving the power of the Keys; whether as an
Apostle, or as an Elder, or as a Believer: Now because we are as well studious
of peace as of truth, we will not lean to one of these interpretations more
then to another: (To speak ingenuously and without offense what we conceive,)
the sense of the words will be most full, if all the several considerations be
taken jointly together: Take Peter considered, not as an Apostle only, but an
Elder also, and a Believer too, all may well stand together:] Does not this
Discourse clearly hold forth this Proposition, as the sense of that Text, The
Keys were delivered to Peter as an Apostle, as an Elder, and as a Believer too?
(all may well stand together.) See Keys page 5 If Peter then received the whole
power of the Keys, then he stood in the room of all such as have received any
part of the power, Apostles, or Elders, or Churches.
And now take the words of the Way; [In the Gospel of Christ, the power of the
Keys is given to Peter, not as an Apostle, nor as an Elder, but as a professed
Believer:] And is not this a flat contradiction? ^and that as ever man spoke?
(for contradictions do not recipere magis and minus:) Yea, this latter
proposition is again contradicted, in this very Defense, when par. 2. p. 22. he
says, [ Peter in his lowest relation in the Church, (as a professed believer)
had his share in the power of the Keys; not that he had his share in the whole
power of the Keys, as a professed Believer: but that he had other parts of the
power of the Keys, as an Elder, and as an Apostle, immediately given him by the
Lord Jesus.

Now let any Logician judge, whether this be not as much as to say, [Peter had
the power of the Keys given him as an Apostle, as an Elder, and as a Believer:
which is a flat contradiction to the other; The power of the Keys is given to
Peter, not as an Apostle, not as an Elder, but as a professed believer:] His
Apology makes it worse, [It is (says he) a trivial rudiment in Schools,
whatsoever is attributed to any as such, is given to all as such universally,
reciprocally, and only; If the Keys were given to Peter as an Apostle, then to
all the Apostles, and only to the Apostles:] Now assume; But the Keys were
given to Peter as an Apostle, (says he in the Keys) therefore they were given
only to Apostles; and so not to believers as such: Again, argue thus: If the
Keys were given to Peter, not as an Apostle, not as an Elder, but as a
Believer, then to all Believers, and only to Believers: But (says the Way) the
Keys were not given to Peter as an Apostle, nor as an Elder, therefore they
were given to all Believers (women and all) and only to Believers. What the
Publishers of the Keys say, helps not off the contradiction at all; [The
disposal (say they) of this power may lie in a due allotment into diverse hands,
etc. rather then in an entire and sole Trust, to one man, or any sort or rank
of men or Officers:] For they agree not with their Author, nor he with them:
He says, this power of the Keys is given only to Believers: They say, it is
put into diverse hands: and is not this a contradiction? But he takes himself
wronged by the Assertor, affirming him to place all the power in one sort of
men, in that place; The Way, page 45. which in the same passage he does deny,
[They (the brethren) may not administer Sacraments in defect of all Officers;]
Truly this is to discover the contradiction more: For if the Keys be delivered
to believers only as such, then the power of administering Sacraments is given
to them: for that is a part of the power of the Keys: But he asserts the former
in the Way, page 27. therefore, Take his own Proposition, or argument, a
quatenus tale; [If Peter had received the power of the Keys, quatenus
Apostulus, or quatenus Presbyter, then only Apostles, or only Elders had
received all Church Power:] Does it not follow as well, If Peter received the
power of the Keys, quatenus a Believer, then only Believers had received all
Church Power? But Peter received the power of the Keys, quatenus a Believer,
(not as an Apostle, nor as an Elder) says he expressly, The Way, p. 27.
Therefore only believers have received all Church Power. And if all
Church Power, then of administering Sacraments, which he after denies: Besides,
in the place named (the Way, page 45.) he gives the brethren the greater part
of Church Power, viz. to ordain and excommunicate all their Officers: which are
the highest Acts of Rule (as he elsewhere speaks) therefore he may not deny
them the lesser to administer Sacraments: Yet he says, [He that says, Peter
received the power of the Keys, as in the room of all sorts of Officers and
members, he affirms that Peter received all Church Power, found in Believers,
Officers, or Brethren: And is there any passage in the Keys, which crosses or
contradicts this?] The Assertor did not say there was any passage in the
Keys, that contradicts this; but he still says (as then he said) there is a
passage in the Way, that not only crosses, but contradicts this, and that
flatly, as never man more; Thus, he that says, Peter received the Keys, not as
an Apostle, nor as an Elder, but (that is, only) as a Believer, contradicts
that: as now is evident to any eye,

2. But a second answer is given to help out the first: [If there had been some
difference between the Way and the Keys, in some expressions; yet (as the
Praefacers, etc.) it lay rather in Logical terms, then in doctrine, or
Church-practice, and such is this, about the first subject of the power of the
Keys, etc.] Had it been only a lesser difference about a Logical notion (as he
minces it) the Assertor had not observed it: but a difference (of the highest
magnitude) to contradiction, in delivering a new way, is very remarkable: How
shall we be brought to agree with them that contradict not only one another,
but one man himself? 2. The first subject is indeed a Logical term, but the
matter discoursed is doctrinall Divinity; and whatever the practice be, it is
in Divinity as well as in Logic, a contradiction to say, The Keys were given
to Peter as a Believer only, and to Peter as an Apostle and Elder too: To say,
all the power of the Keys is given to the Brethren, as Believers; and yet to
say, The power of administering Sacraments is not given to them. And if the
practice be not suitable to the doctrine, it makes yet a more remarkable
difference: why this is also told us, The Way, p. 45. [They (the brethren)
might proceed against all Officers as well as one, yet in such cases our
Churches are never wont to proceed, but in the presence, and with the consent
and approbation of other Churches:] But then their Doctrine and practice agree
not, which is the greater blemish, seeing they hold that power of the Church to
be jure divino, and immediately from Christ: And as for administration of
Sacraments, and preaching the Word ordinarily, we know not what you practice in
New England; but we are sure in Old-England, They that were never Evangelically
ordained (or have renounced their Ordination) do both preach and administer
Sacraments; and so doctrine and practice contradict one another.

3. There is yet a third answer to succor both the former* [It were no just
matter of calumny, if in foam latter Tractate I should retract or express more
commodiously what I wrote in a former less safely: as Augustine, etc.] Truly
Sir, it had been no just matter of calumny so to do; but of honor and
reputation rather. But to write contradictions, and to take no notice of them,
till observed by others; and then to be so far from retracting, as to stand
upon justification of them, is nothing like S. Augustines practice, and so falls
short of his reputation.

There are in that Epistle Praefatory, as also in the Animadversions upon the
Epistle to the Keys, other differences observed, between their Author and the
Praefacers; but he is not pleased to take notice of them; It is too hard
perhaps to reconcile others with himself: It is well if he can reconcile
himself to himself: which how, and how far he is pleased to do, we now follow
him to consider.

Errata.
PAge 5. line 10. for on read or. p. 9. l. 15. for not r. yet. and put in be
in the end of the line. p. 11. l. 17. for sent r. shut. p. 12. l. 29. for
declared r. enlarged. p. 24. in marg. for 7. r. 3. p. 34. l. 3. after else put
in then but. p. 37. l. 12. for effect r. affect. Ibid l. 28. for wickednesses
r. weaknesses. p. 38. l. 3. for new r. now. p. 40. sect. 1. for fill r. full.
p. 53. l. 1. for Critical r. Crypticall. p. 72. l. 8. for Congregation r.
Corporation. p. 77. l. 34. for promises r. premises. p. 83. l. 27. for oration
r. operatio. p. 89. l. 31. for if r. is. p. 93. l. 15. r. his meaning and
theirs to be as. p. 97. l. 14. for precious r. previous. p. 104. l. 3. for
consideration r. confederation. p. 106. l. 27. for both r. but. p. 121. l. 1.
for entrusted r. interested. p. 125. l. 1. after before, put in, us.


