Certain Annotations upon some Texts of Scripture published by Authority
Since the unhappy distractions began in this Kingdom.
Texts. Annotations. Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not curse or revile the Ruler of
thy people. [Revile] Not speak any manner of evil of them by reproach or
calumny, nor wish any evil to them by imprecations or curses. Eccles. 10.20.
Curse not the king, no not in thy thought, for a bird of the air shall carry
the voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter. [Thought] Or
Conscience. Exodus 22.28. It shall be revealed by some unexpected means
suddenly, either by Gods especial providence, who hates ill thoughts against
Kings, or by the policy of Princes, who have spies in all places. 1. King.
21.10 Thou did blaspheme God and the King. These two are joined, to work in
such as heard it, a greater detestation of the Crime: that they Who slighted
the King, might be moved at the name of God; and they who regarded not God,
might be moved at the name of the King. 2. Sam. 16.10 Who shall then say,
Wherefore have thou done so? [Say] Namely to the Lord, because he hereby justly
corrected David for his sins chap. 12.10.11. Though Shimei haynously sinned in
cursing and reviling the Lords anointed, and was afterward by God justly
punished for it. 1. kings 2.9.44.46. 1. Sam. 19.23 Therefore the king said unto
Shimei Thou shall not die. [Die] That is neither at this time nor during my
reign, though his offense was so heinous and scandalous that he did not think
it just, that it should be wholly remitted, but that his successor should call
him to account for it. 2. kings 2.8. etc. Pro. 24.21. My son, fear thou the
Lord and the king, and meddle not with them that are given to change. [Middle]
Or mix not thy self with. [Change] Or that speak evil of the King himself. 22.
Who knows the ruin of them both? [both] Of them that fear not God, and of
them that fear not the King. Job. 34.18. Is it fit to say to a King thou art
wicked, or to Princes, ye are ungodly? Learn from the respect which is due to
earthly Princes, the reverence which is due to the sovereign Lord. Eccl. 8.4.
Who may say unto him, What do thou? Who dare say so in regard of his power?
or who may, in regard of his authority? Pro. 25.3. The heart of kings is
unsearchable. He shows, that it is too hard a task for a subject to attain to
a reason of all the secret doings of the King. 1. Kin. 11.26. And Jeroboam
Solomon's servant, etc. even he lift up his hand against the king. One of his
chief officers and counselors verse 28. The judgment was the greater, in that
such a one was against him, and not strangers. 1. Sam. 24.6. The Lord forbid
that I should do this thing unto my Master the Lords anointed, to stretch forth
my hand against him, seeing he is the Anointed of the Lord. [Stretch] That is,
to Kill him or to lay Violent hands upon him, to do him any hurt, [Seeing]
Because the Lord who made him King, has only power and right to depose him.
Seeing God by his absolute power has made him King, it only belongs to him
to depose him. And therefore I ought not to hurt him, neither as an enemy, or
as a misdoer. For the quality of a King swalloweth up that of an enemy toward a
subject, and covers that of a misdoer within his own kingdom. 26.9. Destroy
him not, for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed and be
guiltless? This is so plain that it was conceived to need no Annotation. 10.
As the Lord lives, the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die,
etc. [Smite] q. d. I will not smite nor suffer him to be smitten, but leave
vengeance unto God. I will leave him to God, to do with him what he pleases,
or when he pleases: but as for my self I will have no hand in his death. 2.
Sam. 1.16. And David said unto him [the Amalekite that slew Saul] Thy blood be
upon thy head. That is, Let the guilt and punishment of thy death, be wholly
imputed to thy self, who by thy sin have justly deserved it: Bear thou the
first punishment of thy capital offense. 1. Sam. 24.5. And it came to pass
afterward, that David's heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul's skirt. His
conscience checked him because he had done it. [Smote] He trembled, and stirred
up himself with horror, that he had proceeded so far in this action, as that it
might be taken for an injury. Pro. 30.31. A King, against whom there is no
rising up. [A King] Whose power is uncontrollable. Pro. 16.14. The wrath of a
King is as messengers of death, a wise man will pacify it. For there is no
resisting it. 20.2. The fear of a King is as the roaring of a Lion, whosoever
provokes him to anger sins against his own soul. Puts his life in
danger. Romans 13.2. They that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Or
Judegment, The word in the original signifies as well judgment as damnation;
and thereby we are to understand punishment which they shall receive as well from
God as the Magistrate, who resist the powers ordained of God, not only by
rebellion as Absalom, but also by not yielding obedience to their commandments
in those things that are not against the word of God. 6. For this cause pay you
tribute also: for they are Gods Ministers. [For they] He gives a reason for
what he had said, namely that Princes were Gods Ministers, seeing he has
inspired that common consent in all Nations to pay them tributes, as tokens of
subjection, aids to their Office, etc. Matt. 22.21. Render unto Caesar the
things which are Cesars. [Render unto Caesar.] As a debt. Romans 13.7. You think
your payments to maintain Gods service free you from paying tribute unto Caesar,
but you are deceived, your must maintain both religion and civil power. 1. Pet.
2.13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whither
it be to the King as supreme. [Which are] His stamp upon them shows ye are his
subjects, and therefore ought to pay tribute to him: for coining was always a
sign of Sovereign power. [Supream] That is under God. There is therefore no
other Supreme on earth above the King in his Dominions. 1. Kin. 11.37. And thou
shall reign according to all that thy soul desires. As a supreme King, under
no superior on earth. 1. Sam. 10.26 And there went with him [Saul] a hand of
men whose heart God had touched. That is, by his Spirit had inclined to yield
willing obedience to their King. 1. king. 10.25. 2. Chro. 17.5. 1. Pet. 2.1.2.
I exhort therefore that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and
giving of thanks be made for all men, For kings. [For Kings] He names Kings in
the first place, because they are highest in dignity. This seems to be
specified by reason of the erroneous opinion of some men, namely that all civil
order was profane, and that Kings were as so many enemies to God. 1. Sam.
24.11. My Father. Both because he had married his daughter, and being King was
Father of his people, so. Eza. 49.23. Kings are called Nursing Fathers. 2. Sam.
21.17. Thou shall [speaking to the King] go no more out with us to battle,
that thou quench not the light of Israel. [Quench the light] Heb. candle or
lamp. That is, their wisdom to guide and counsel them, and even the very life
and joy of the whole nation. So 1. King. 15.4. and 11.36. q. d. Lest the glory
and splendour of Israel perish with thee. The person in whom consists the
conduct, counsel, joy and life of the people. Hos. 10.3. Now they shall say, we
have no king, because we feared not the Lord. Within a very short time God
shall take away their King, and then they shall feel the fruit of their sins.
Judge. 17.6. In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did that
which was right in his own eyes. That is, No Judge or supreme magistrate, viz.
the King, to keep the people in awe and order: so King is taken. Gene. 36.31.
Deuteronomy. 33.5. This is prefixed as a reason why the Danites were put to provide an
inheritance for themselves, whereas while the whole people were under any
government the tribes assisted one another, chap. 2 3. Jos. 22.2.3. Number. 32.21.
18.1. 19.1. In those days there was no King in Israel. No supreme Magistrate
(which by the annotations upon. 1. Pet. 2.13. and 1. Kings 11.37. is the King)
to punish sin. Pro. 30.27. The locusts have no king, yet go they forth all of
them by hands. How much more should they that have, live orderly under them?

Romans 14.22. Happy is he that condemns not himself in that thing which he
allows.


LONDON, Printed by R. N. ANNO. 1647.


