Certain Considerations showing the imminent Danger of this City, together
with the Remedies. Humbly presented to the Right Honorable the Lord Major, the
Right Worshipful the Aldermen, and Common Councell-men. By the Ministers of
the City.
march 18 1644
MICHA 6.9. The Lords voice cries unto the City.


THe danger set forth, Theologically and Politically.
1. Theologically, in regard of our sins; which are; 1. A general slighting
of the public ministry of the Word. They mocked the Messengers of God, and
despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose
against his people, till there was no remedy. Therefore he brought upon them
the King of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the Sword. 2 Chronicles.
36.16, 17.

And thou Capernaum which art exalted unto heaven, shall be brought down to
hell, Mat. 11.23.

The time well come, when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their
own (...), shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears, and
they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto
fables, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.

2. A Decay of the power of godliness under that great plenty and variety of
choice means, which no age heretofore has afforded: I have somewhat against
thee, because thou have left thy first-love, Remember therefore from whence
thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works, or else I will come to
thee quickly, and will remove thy Candle-stick, Revel. 2.4.5.

3. The many sad breaches, and unnatural Divisions, that are amongst us. Every
Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to desolation, and every City or
house divided against it self, shall not stand, Mat. 12.25.

Whereas there is among you, envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not
carnal and walk as men? While one says, I am of Paul, and another I am of
Apollo, are ye not carnal? 1 Cor. 3.3, 4.

4. The great neglect of the Public, and every one mostly regarding his own
private Interests: Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your sieled houses,
and this house lie wast? Ye looked for much, and lo it came to little. Why
says the Lord of Hosts? because of mine house that is wast, and ye run every
man to his own house, Hag. 1.4.-9.

For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's, Phil. 2.21.

5. Incorrigiblenesse under the heavy judgments of God, viz. The Pestilence
lately devouring at home, and the sword still abroad. I have sent among you the
pestilence, after the manner of Egypt, your young men have I slain with the
sword, -- Yet ye have not returned to me, says the Lord, Amos 4.10.

The people turns not to him that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord
of Hosts: therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch and
rush in one day. Isaiah 9.13, 14 -- -- I gave her space to repent of her
fornication, and she repented not, Behold I will cast her into a bed -- Rev.
2.21, 22.

6. Insensiblenesse of our Brethrens calamities: -- But they are not grieved
for the affliction of Joseph, Amos 6.6, 7. Therefore now shall they go captive
with the first that go captive, contrary to 1 Cor. 12.26.

7. Carnal security, notwithstanding the abundance of Soul-awakening
Ordinances: And as it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the
days of the Son of man, they did eat, they drank, they married wives, they
were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the Ark, and the
flood came and destroyed them all, -- Luke 17.26, 27, 28, 29.

When they shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon
them, as travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. 1 Thessalonians.
5.3. Vid. Judge. 18.27. Isa. 28.15, 17.

8. The abounding of erroneous and heretical opinions unsuppressed:
Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer the
woman Jezabel, which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and to seduce my
servants, to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to Idols, --
Behold I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultery with her,
into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds, Revel. 2.20, 22. --
There were false Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be
fals-teachers among you, who shall bring in damnable heresies. -- 2 Pet. 2.1, 2.

There are certain men crept in unawars, -- turning the grace of God into
lasciviousness, -- Jude v. 4.

9. Breach of our Covenants with God. I will bring a sword upon you, that shall
avenge the quarrel of my Covenant, Levit. 26.25.

Set the trumpet to thy mouth, he shall come as an Eagle against the house of
the Lord, because they have transgressed my Covenant, -- Hos. 8.1.

Let your own consciences be Judges, how you can suffer all sorts of Heresies
to pass unpunished, the seeds of manifold Schisms to be spread abroad
uncontrol'd, profane erroneous opinions to be commonly broacht without
restraint in that CITY, which has so expressly engaged it self in a most solemn
and sacred Covenant before Almighty God, to extirpate all errors, heresies and
schisms out of the house of God.




2. (...). E^clesiarum Valla^. ad Sy^odum Londi^iensem.
Politically in regard of our selves, and in regard of our enemies. In regard
of our selves.
First, the great distractions that are in our armies, which mightily weaken
their hands, and utterly disable them, from doing us that service, that might
otherwise be expected from them, by the blessing of God, upon their endeavors.
2. Our Brethren of Scotland, at a great distance, who if the storm should
suddenly fall upon us, are not ready (as with hearts so) with hands to help
the Lord against the mighty. 3. Our City forces much decayed and broken, whose
courage and forwardness in the Cause, has formerly bin very advantageous, and
chiefly succesfull, for the preservation of City and Kingdom, against the
common Adverfarie.


In regard of our enemies, we only hint these considerations. 1. Their active
Instruments abroad, to bring in foreign Forces. 2. Their union among
themselves at home. 3. Their strong expectations, of great advantages, by our
present divisions. 4. Their industry, for the speedy raising of a numerous
Army. 5. Their grand design, against the Parliament and City. 6. Their
necessity of expediting that design, 1. Because many of their Quarters are not
able any longer to maintain them. 2. Their parties much weakened, in several
parts. 3. Their fear of the Scots advance.



The Remedies that we humbly offer, are likewise Theological and Political.
Remedies Theological.
First, unfeigned Humiliation, in a deeper sense of our present sins and
sufferings, then hitherto has bin manifested. Neh. 1.4. Nehemiah's fasting.
Jerem. 9.1. Ieremiah's weeping. Ezekiel. 7.16 Ezekiels mourning. Hab. 3.16.
Habbakuks trembling. 2 Cor. 11.29. Paul's burning in a godly zeal for the good
of his brethren.
How suitable would they be to such times as these are. 2. A settled uniforme
method of Worship, Discipline, and Government amongst us, according to our late
solemn Covenant, whereby all Achans may be removed from our Camps, and all
that visible profaneness from the face of our Congregations, which the pure
eyes of a holy God, cannot endure to look upon. Vid. Josh. 7. Levit. 10. Hab.
1. 3. A holy Concord and Unanimity amongst Brethren, especially those of the
Ministry, All having the same love, All being of one Heart, and of one way, All
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same Judgment, All
endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, All of
public spirits, not seeking great things for themselves, but seriously
intending the things of Jesus Christ. Psalm. 133.1. Phil. 2.2. Ier. 32.39. 1
Cor. 1.10. Ephesians. 4.3. Ier. 45.5. Phil. 2.21. 4. A frequent publishing, pressing,
and urging of the late solemn League and Covenant, for a through Reformation,
by the Ministers in their several Charges, whereby our David's, and our
Joshua's, Superiors, Inferiors, Magistrates, Ministers, All of all sorts may
be persuaded, and encouraged to pay their vows, and to go one before another
in the Example of a Real, and not a verbal Reformation. Psalm. 102.2. Josh.
24.15.


REMEDIES POLITICAL.
1. That as all Israel by Gods appointment in times of their emergent dangers,
so LONDON, and the parts adjacent be every man and horse, fit for service,
instantly prepared against the day of battle, the manner whereof, we refer
to the wisdom of the State, of which great Number by encouragements out of
Gods Word, and exercise of Arms, the Spirit of Fortitude will doubtless come
upon multitudes, to fight Christ's Battles against his Antichristian
Adversaries. Numb. 1.2. Prove. 21.31. Deuteronomy. 20.1. 2. That least we be prevented
herein, the Parliament be humbly and earnestly petitioned, to expedite the
completing of the Army, according to their New Model. 3. That some more
effectual course be taken then has been heretofore, to purge the City of all
treacherous Papists, dangerous malignants, whether strangers or others, who are
always plotting mischief against this City, and will then be sure to
ingratiate themselves with the Adversary, by putting their plots in execution,
when they may be most pernicious and destructive.


We have given out these Advertisements, that we might awaken the City out of
their present deep security, unto a more then ordinary Activity, for the
Parliaments, their own, and the Kingdoms safety, for there is yet hope in
this our Israel concerning this. Ezra 10.2.

Or that at least, we may deliver our own souls from the guilt of blood.
Having used our utmost endeavors, to save life, and not to kill. Mark 3.4.

2 SAMUEL 10.12. Be of good courage, and let us play the men, for our people, and
for the Cities of our God, and the Lord do that which seems Him good.


FINIS.

