CERTAIN PROPOSALS OF Diverse ATTORNEYS of the Court of COMMON PLEAS, For the
regulating the proceedings at Law, and remedying some Inconveniences: Whereby
the Clyent will be much secured, the Process shortened, the greatest part of
the charge of most Suits abated, many unnecessary Suits in Law and Equity
prevented, and the Creditor and Purchaser well provided for: and thereby
Lending, Trade and Commerce advanced: Which is the end and desire of the
Proposers. Presented to the Honorable Commit for the regulating proceedings
in Law December. 5. 1650.

LONDON, Printed for W. Lee and D. Pateman, and are to be sold at their shops
in Fleetstreet. 1650.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the COMMITTEE assigned by Authority of Parliament for
regulating the proceedings at LAW.
May it please your Honors,
The humble Proposers observing some unnecessary charges and delay introduced
by the corruption and multitude of Offices and Officers, which still increased,
besides some inconveniences that the corruption of time had produced, the same
being more obvious to them then others by reason of their experience in the
practice of the Law: for remedy thereof consulted how to apply themselves to
the Parliament, and to that purpose had several meetings together, wherein the
Proposals now presented to your view were agreed on, as things that would
conduce much to the ease, benefit, and safety of the Suitor, security of
Creditors and Purchasors, make good provision against the most general
inconveniences, prevent many frivolous and unnecessary suits, both at Law and
in equity, shorten the process in many, and ease the charge in all; and (which
is not the least of their ambitions) take away those aspersions that seem to
blemish that Law, the Law of England, which they humbly conceive to be the most
perfect Law of any humane Law in the World; a Law that admits Nullum absurdum,
that admits nothing against the Laws of God or nature, against reason, or
repugnant to any other Learning, wherein all matters of fact are adjudged and
tried by twelve able discreet and indifferent neighbors to the place where the
matter of fact arises, and the matters of Law are debated, adjudged, and
determined by as many of the most ancient, grave, and learned Lawyers of the
whole Common wealth, who for their great experience, integrity, and wisdom,
are first deservedly called to the state and degree of Sergeants at Law, and
after to be Judges; and the process of this Law is so quick, that it seldom
happens any cause at Law depends above three or four Terms; but
covetousness, the root of all evil having built some Floodgates upon the
channel thereof, whereby the course has been obstructed, stopped, or diverted
out of its due course, and thereby more care taken to catch the Fish for the
benefit of the Officers, then for the dispatch or advance of the Clients
business, and the Proposers being unwilling to trespass upon the Freehold of
others by pulling down the Wares themselves, have by the drawing the channel a
nearer way in some Cases, and in other upon a lower flat, have nevertheless so
ordered the business, as they humbly conceive that most of the Grist will be
ground without paying Toll at those unnecessary Milnes. And because Reformation
wrestles with many difficulties, it being hard to find an Ephesus without some
Demetrius, or some Critic that will conclude the Shrubs seek the fall of the
Cedars, hoping thereby to advance their own tops: the Proposers have been very
tender not to propose any thing that may in the least degree seem to advance
their own Interests, but many things that will turn to their particular loss,
they always preferring the public good before their own particular
interests. Neither have they rashly herein proceeded, having at least spent ten
months in the conception, digesting, considering on, and composing of what
they now present to your more grave considerations; and as they are not the
issues of rash brains, so they have not passed without perusal and correction
of many others of good judgment and experience, and are now to live and die
under your Honorable censures: whereby if you shall receive any light to the
furthering the good work in hand, or the Republique any benefit the Proposers
have their wished ends, and humbly therein submit themselves and these their
poor labors to your better judgments, by the hands of the most humblest of

Your Servants, S. D.

The humble Proposals of diverse of the Attorneyes of the Court of Common Pleas,
as the same were agreed on at their last general meeting held at Staple-Inne
upon Friday the 24 day of May, Anno Dom. 1650.
1. These Fines are the 200th part of the thing demanded, be it land, debt, or
damage, and must be paid at the Plaintiffes entrance into his suite, though he
never recover any thing.
They humbly propose and conceive that Fines upon Original Writs are against
the Fundamental reason of the Common Laws of this Realm, which never imposes
Fines upon any but offenders: But these Addere afflictionem afflictis, are
exacted of the party injured, who comes to sue for Justice, when the party
delinquent too often escapes the punishment. And therefore they humbly propose
that the same may be taken away, and no more paid or demanded.

2. They humbly conceive that the mean Process in suing to the Utlary are
unnecessary, This is proposed to prevent the chatge and delay which the Clyent
is now at, who must be two Terms in sueing to the Utlary, and is besides the
delay put to the charge of three Capias, which are commonly sued forth
altogether, and returned altogether in the Sheriffs name, but by the Attorney,
but by this course of suing to the Utlary the process will be a Term shorter,
and 5 s. 10 d. less charge, besides the Fine, if fineable and the proceedings
by way of Summons will case us of common Bailyes, and make sure that suits will
come to issue in two Terms.
and do tend only to charge and delay: And therefore they humbly propose that
upon two summons being made in Writing to the Defendant personally, or left
with some discreet person ( viz. some person of Sanae memoriae, and above the
age of fixteen years) of his family, by the Sheriff or his known Officer, and
returned served by him upon Record, the party Plaintiff may proceed to
judgment in all personal actions in manner following, without appearance of
the Defendant. (That is to say) the first Summons to appear being made by seven
days before the day of appearance in form aforesaid, the party Plaintiff may
enter his declaration in Court; and in case no appearance be made thereunto
within eight days, that then a new Summons in the nature of a Scire facias
briefly containing the matter of the Declaration to be awarded upon the
Imparlance Roll to summon the Defendant to appear at a certain day to come
against him, at which day if the party do not appear within eight days after
and plead, and the Sheriff return him summoned by seven days, in form
aforesaid, that then Rules having been duly given in Court to that purpose,
judgment shall be given against such Defendant by his default: and that in all
personal actions issues may be returned upon the Venire facias, The
proceedings to trial upon the Venire facias will bring many causes to trial a
Term sooner, and will ease the charge about 4 s. 11 d. in a Cause.
and Writs of nisi prius awarded, and trials had, and tales de circumstantibus
granted thereupon as formerly upon the habeas corpora and distring as jurat,
provided the Jury be returned ten days at least before the trial of the cause,
and that no Essoyne shall or may be allowed upon the return of any of the said
Writs of summons or venire facias; and in all other process the ancient course
to be observed which is only proposed by way of supplement, It is not proposed
that the Writ of Capias shall be taken away first, because many persons have no
certain places of abode. Secondly the way of summons being a new manner of
proceeding, the proposers doubt the success may not answer their intentions
and expectations. Thirdly, because in some cases the party plaintiff may have
just cause to require special bail, of which if deprived, he would be in
danger to lose the benefit of his suit, and therefore the proposers humbly
conceive it better by finding out nearer and cheaper ways to bring the old
road to be neglected, then to deprive the suitor of the old before he has
experience of the new.
and not to take away the ancient course of proceeding by way of Capias and
Exigent, if the case require it. But if so, then the Exigent to be awarded upon
the return of the first Capias, as formerly upon the plur. Capias, and as it
is now used after judgment. And for encouragement of the Shieriffs in the due
execution of the said process, They humbly propose that the like Fees may be
paid upon the Venire facias for summoning the Jury, as formerly upon the
Distringas jur. and habeas corpora, and that two shillings four pence may be
paid for every Summons to be made, the Shieriffe undertaking to do the same in
due time, viz. four pence for a Warrant, twelve pence to the Baily that makes
the Summons, and twelve pence for the Shieriffs regard; And that he shall
receive likewise twelve pence for the return of every Summons duly made; and
that the Plantiffe may lay his Action in the proper County where the cause of
Action shall arise, notwithstanding the Summons go out into a foreign
County, where the parties dwell, and that without the delay of testatums, and
that so all succeeding process may issue into any County without testatum.

3. They humbly conceive the recovery of Rents, The Process In Replevin at
this day is so delatory, that if the Plaintiff will (who upon the matter is
defendant) he may delay the Avowant two or three years, for after long delay in
the County Court, he may make a long and delatory defense after removal, and
descend to issue and trial, and then become Nonsuit, whereupon the avowant
shall have a Returna bahend. the Process whereupon will spend well nigh a year,
and then the Plaintiff may sue a second deliverance which supercedes the
avowants Process and puts him to a new proceeding to trial, which will spend a
great part of another year; but by the course proposed, three Terms will
dispatch the business, as in other cases.
Services, damages for Trespasses, and other duties by way of distress, is
both a ready and ancient course, and prevents many unnecessary suits, but by
the intricate and prolix process thereof, the same is very much abused, and
from thence neglected. They therefore humbly propose, that a nonsuit in a
Replevin may be perem ptory against the Plaintiff; and that if the same shall
happen upon trial, the Jury sworn for trial of the issue may inquire of the
Avowants damage. But if otherwise then a Writ to enquire of damage to issue,
and final judgment to be thereupon given in both cases, and that against the
Defendant like process may issue by way of Summons, and judgment had as
aforesaid, without the unnecessary proceedings in the County Court.

4. They humbly conceive that the long delay, that real Actions admits is the
occasion, One halse of all trials on Ejectments fall off upon some defect or
other in these points which reach not at all to the merits of the cause.
that all titles, where the entry is not taken away, have of late been tried
in Ejectments, which for that purpose are very useful; but there being so many
circumstances in sealing the Lease, entry and ouster necessary to be proved
upon trial, that many trials have, and continually do miscarry thereby to the
great delay and damage of the Clyent; they therefore humbly propose that all
Ejectments shall be brought against the present Tennants and occupiers of the
Lands in question, against whom such process by way of Summons shall issne, as
aforesaid: And that upon trial of the issue the Lease, entry and ouster shall
be admitted, and the title only insisted upon, and that for the better settling
Possessions according to right; and by the Common Law it may be provided, that
if any person or persons after any possession shall be delivered by Writ of
hered. This is proposed to settle the possession by the Common Law, for at this
day after the Clyent has settled the title at Law, which often proves tedious
enough, he cannot settle the possession without a Decree in Chancery, and here
is no provision made for those that enter to make Leases for trial of titles,
because they may proceed by Summons against the Tenant of the Land if they will,
according to the second Proposal.
facias possessionem, or other legal process shall again oust the party, or
voluntarily distribute the possessions so delivered without legal process
warranting the same, that then a Writ in the nature of a Writ Redeseisme may
issue to the Sheriff to re-establish the possession in the Plantiffe, and to
give damage, etc. as in case of Redeseisme has been used.

5. They humbly conceive that the Common Bar and new assignment in actions of
trespass, The Common bar and new Assignment puts the Clyents in every Action
of trespass quare clausum fregit, that comes to trial to at least twelve
shillings charge and may be supplied by three or four words in the
Declaration, and put the Clyent to no charge at all, and the recital of the
Writ in many Actions almost doubles the charge to the Clyent, and is useless.
quare clausum fregit, and the recital of the Original Writ in actions of
trespass, and upon the Case, and several other actions are superfluous
things, and infinitely increase the charge of the Clyent: They therefore humbly
propose, that in all Actions of Trespass, quare causum fregit, the place may
be assigned in the Count, And that for the future there may be no more recital
of the Original Writ, other then in the form ensuing, (that is to say) A. B.
attach. fuit ad respondend. C. D. de placito tr. or de placito tr. super casum,
or the like, as is observed in the Upper Bench; and the Originals in all
personal actions to be made accordingly without repetition of the special
matter.

6. They humbly conceive, Many Judgments are daily reversed for want of
Originals, which sometimes happens because the Attorney rather then he will pay
a post Terminum or more, which is twenty pence a Term, he will hazard his
Clyents cause, which Fee was originally intended as a punishment upon the
Attorney for his neglect; but it turns too often to the destruction of the
Clyent: and therefore the Proposers have proposed the punishment to return to
the Clyents relief and not destruction. Other times this mischief happens
because an Attorney pethaps may forget in due time to sue out the Original,
and after when he sees the default, he would amend it, but the Creditors
holding a course for their own benefit that no Original Writ can be sued forth
returnable of a former Term, but within the first week of the ensuing Term,
the Attorney is therefore restrained to do his duty to his Clyent.
that by reason Original Writs are not duly sued forth and filed, many
judgments are daily reversed, and in the time to come are subject to the like
inconvenience by the carelessness neglect or forgetfulness of the Attorney or
Clark, or to save post Terminunis which turns much to the prejudice of the
Clyent: And therefore they humbly propose that from henceforth there may be no
restraint, but that the Plaintiff may at any time before the want thereof
assigned for Error, sue forth and fyle any Original Writ, or other Writ to
make good or warrant any judgment. And that for the fyling of original Writs
no post Terminum be demanded or paid; and that then, if any Judgment happen to
be reversed for default of Original Writ, the Clark or Attorney in whose
default the same shall be, shall and may be fined in such sum to be paid to
the party grieved, as the Court shall (having respect to the quality of the
offense) think meet and impose.

They hvmbly conceive also that the not due fyling of Warrants of Attorney, The
Warrant of Attorney originally seemed of good use, but now it. is only fyled
by the Attorney, and is of no use at all, but puts the Clyent to some charges
and much hazard, for that the want thereof is sufficient cause to reverse a
Judgment, and the fyling now of no use.
which through forgetfulness or carelessness is often neglected, is very
dangerous to the Clyent, and yet of no benefit or use at all, and therefore
they humbly submit it to the judgment of the Parliament whether the same be
not fit to be discontinued, and the penal Statutes for the enjoining thereof
repealed.

8. This is the most unreasonable charge upon the Clyent that can be invented,
which is the tenth part of what damage soever the Plaintiff recovers: as if
the Defendant upon a bargain promise to give the Plaintiff a 1000 li. which
he recovers in damage, the Prothonotary shall have 100 li. and does nothing
for it, nor can justify the giving of any costs for it was originally, as is
conceived exacted by the Clergy as a personal Tithe, the Clergymen being the
Clerks that Writ to all or the most of the Courts at Westminster.
They humbly conceive, that Damage Clear is both a great and unreasonable
burden to the Clyent, who after a long and tedious suit, must have his Debt or
other duty Tythed; a duty anciently belonging to the Clergy, but is now
converted to an improper use (as they humbly conceive) And therefore they
humbly propose, that the same may be taken away, and no more paid or demanded.

9. They humbly conceive, The ordinary charge of a Fine comes to about three
pound, besides the fine and post sine, which is the fourth part of the yearly
value, and the ordinary charges of a recovery, comes to about 4 l. besides the
five, which comes to a tenth part of the yearly value, but if done by attor
ney, and not in person, amounts to much more, and these so dangerous too that
the carelessenesse or knavery of an Attorney, or Officer may leave them at fast
and loose, and the satisfaction a purchasor can receive by them is nothing at
all, for that no man, but the parties privy can tell of what Lands they be sued
forth off, when as a deed enrolled may be enrolled in both offices, for a ten
or twenty shillings charge that shall contain all certainties, and subject to
no error: and though Statutes by reason of the general Office may be found, yet
purchasors shall never be secured against judgments and recognizances without
such course; perhaps it may be objected, that many that owe moneys, and make
morgages, would be loath that their conditions should be known; and that it
would be a hinderance to commerce and trade; to which it is answered, that it
is better that such commerce should be lost, whereby much honest trade will be
advanced, for that men will freely and frankly trade, lend, buy, etc. when they
know they cannot be cozened in their assurances, but here as in all other
cases, the proposers leave fines, and recoveries, being very ancient and
authentic conveyance to the Clyent to use, or not to use.
that Fines and Recoveries for cutting off Intailes are both a great charge to
the Clyent, and very dangerous in point of Error, and the same contain not any
such certainty of the lands, as were necessary to satisfy and secure
Purchasors and Creditors, and that also Intailes are very dangerous to them,
and were first obtained, and since continued to avoid forfeitures, which they
humbly conceive, is not proper to a well governed Commonwealth; and therefore
they humbly propose, that Tennant in tail may be empowered to alien, as if he
had the absolute Feesimple; and that as well the Lands of the Tenant in tail;
as also the Copyhold Estate of Copyholders may be subject to their debts in
whose hands soever they come, as other Freehold Lands in Fee simple are, and
that such Alienation by Tennant in tail, and all other Estates made of any
Lands, Tenements, or other Hereditaments, or of any rent, or other profit
issuing out of the same, shall not be valued as against any creditor or
purchasor for valuable consideration, before the same be enrolled in some
inrollment Office to be established in the proper County, and transcribed, and
also enrolled in some general Office of Inrollments in or about London or
Westminster, and to be of effect as against such purchasors and creditors only
from the time of the inrollment thereof, and that Offices be erected as well
for the doing thereof, as also for the brief entering, inrollment, and
recording of all Judgments, Statutes, and recognizances, to the execution
whereof any Lands, Tenements, or other Hereditaments is or shall be subject or
liable; and they likewise to be of force as against such Purchasors, and
Creditors from the time of the inrollment only, and that reasonable Fees may
be settled by the sheet containing certain numbers of words for the doing of
the same. And they humbly propose, that such deeds enrolled shall be of the
same effect as Fines are, and were either at common Law, or by any Statute,
Feme coverts being duly examined by the Recorders or Registers (who they desire
may be men of great integrity, judgment, and worth;) and one Justice of Peace,
as formerly upon the taking the acknowledgement of fines has been observed.
If the Clyent because he can get no Process served upon the Defendant be forced
to utlaw him, and then be forced to seiz his Land to force him in, the profit
goes into the Exchequer, and the Clyent loses all, or else shall be put to the
charge of a Lease which will lie him in above 20. Marks, and 4 l. or
thereabouts yearly to continue it, and then if the party plead some feigned
Title, or reverse the Utlawry, all is lost, and it is desired, that if the
Parliament conceive it fit, that this Proposal be reduced to a Law, that care
may be taken in the penning it, that the Exchequer Clerks may not evade it, for
that lowable Laws will not hold them.


10. And whereas the Clyent is often enforced to utlaw the Defendant by reason
he absents himself; and after a long chargeable, and tedious suit, is put also
to seize the Defendants Estate, and expects thereby to receive the benefit of
his suit, when contrary to the poor suitors expectation, the whole benefit is
swept into the Exchequer. They therefore for remedy thereof humbly propose,
that the Plaintiff in such cases may have the benefit of all seizures upon
Utlawries till his debt, or other damages with reasonable costs be satisfied
and paid; and that to that end Process may issue out of the Exchequer, by
which the Sherriffe may be authorized, and commanded to deliver all such Goods,
and Chattels, and satisfy and pay all such moneys by him to be levied to the
Plaintiff, until he be satisfied of his debt or damages, with reasonable
costs to be assessed by the said Court; and that afterward the Sheriff be
accomptable in the Exchequer, for the profits, The Parliament having already
observed the inconveniences of Writs of Error have provided some remedy against
the mischiefs of them, but the proposers having contrived this proposal before
that was published, and finding (as they conceive) that the new Act will not
produce that good effect that was intended, they have presumed to proceed upon
their former grounds, and humbly present these Cases which they conceive are
not provided for by the said Act.

1. The new Act only remedies after Verdict, and they humbly conceive other
Cases are within the same mischief, and deserve as much favor, for that those
that come to trial are most commonly frivilous wrangling Actions, when the
other are for securing debts upon bond, and often of great value.

2. It is that no Writ of Error should be a Supersedeas, etc. And they conceive
that it only takes away the Supersedeas by the Writ of Error, but not that
which is cursitorily made upon the Wit of Error.

3. Admitting it does take away all Supersedeas, which they humbly conceive was
intended yet because the Act does not appoint what Court shall make the
execution, they humbly conceive that Act availes little, since the Common
Pleas, or inferior Court, after the Record removed cannot make out execution,
nor the upper Bench till it is affirmed.

4. The New Act gives double costs but because it does not give execution for
them, it is humbly conceived the party is put to his action of debt for them
wherein he shall have no costs

5. It provides that nothing shall be moved in arrest or stay of Judgment but
matter of substance appearing in the Declaration and proceeding after, so that
they conceive all matter deborst le Record is excluded, wherein though the
intention of the Parliament was good, yet it is conceived that if the party be
surprised for want of notice, or that a Jury miscarry themselves in giving
their Verdict, and many other accidents of like nature, within the strict
letter cannot be allowed in arrest of Judgment, which it is humbly conceived
was not intended to be restrained by the Parliament.


as before times has been used.

11. And also when as the Clyent having run over all the Process and having
obtained Judgment, and expecting his execution thereupon, Writs of Errors are
often brought for delay, which though we humbly conceive our former proposals
will make good provision against, yet the same being a Supersedeas, and
admitting long Process, it is often more costly and dangerous to the Clyent,
then all that has proceeded; and though they humbly conceive appeals just and
useful, yet to prevent the inconveniences thereof, they humbly propose, that no
Supersedeas upon a Writ of Error be from henceforth made forth or allowed, but
that the Court where the original Judgment was entered, may make forth
execution, as though no such Writ of Error had been brought, or record
transcribed, unless the party prosecuting the same deposite in Court, the
money or other duty recovered, or give sufficient Bail, to satisfy the
Judgment with the costs and damage awarded, in case the same Judgment be
affirmed, or the Writ of Error discontinued or abated, or the Plaintiff
therein nonsuited; and that the death of any party to the said suit shall not
discharge such bail; and that from henceforth no Writ of Error shall be
received or allowed, unless the same by returnable within eight days, if
there shall be so many in Term; and if there shall not happen to be eight days
in Term, then at the first return of the next ensuing Term; and that the
Plaintiff in such Writ of Error shall without any scire facias, assign his
Errors within four days after the return of the said Writ, whereunto the
Defendant in the said Error may if he will appear gratis, and be at liberty to
allege dimunution, or join in issue, and proceed to the examination of the
Errors; and that in case Judgment be affirmed, and it appear any such Writ of
Error shall be brought merely for delay, or that the matter assigned shall not
be difficult, or abide argument, then the party Plaintiff in the said Writ of
Error, to pay to the Defendant for his or their delay therein treble costs, and
damage; and in case of nonsuite or discontinuance before argument, double
costs, and in case of abatement, or in such cases where the matter shall be
difficult single costs and damages; and that the parties may have thereof like
execution as for the principal debt, or damages.

12. They humbly conceive it fit, There is (by reason the Civil Law has no
compulsary Process) no remedy, but in Chancery for Legacies, where if the
Legacy be small, it is quickly spent with a great overplus.
that some legal course were provided for the recovery of Legacies, and that
the Clyent should not be forced to an equitable course in Chancery for every
petit Legacy, the remedy whereby often proves worse then the disease. They
therefore humbly propose, that an Action of debt, Trover, detinue, or other
action, as the case requires may lie at common Law for the same, and that
therein the thing demanded upon due proof made upon the trial may be recovered
with costs and damages, and like defense, and process may be had therein, as
in such other Actions are, or shall be used at Common Law.

13. As the Law now stands, the heir may defeat all creditors, for if he fear
the debts of the Ancestor, he may alien the same day his Ancestor dies, and
leave the creditor no medium to bring his action, and though it is true that
fraud may be averred, yet few frauds are hard to be proved.
They humbly conceive it very hard to the creditor, that the bare alienation of
an heir should defeat him of a just debt, the same being often done merely in
fraud, when perhaps the creditors money purchased the Land discending; and
therefore they humbly propose, that an Action of debt may lie against the heir
in all cases, as well after as before alienation, and that his Person, Goods,
and Land, may be subject to the execution for the debt of his Auncesters upon
specialty, to the value of the Land discending in Fee simple, or Fee tail; and
that such action, and this proposal, may (if the Parliament shall conconceive
meet) be extended to the heirs of Copyholders, as well as Freeholders.

14. Many persons run into debt to buy Land, gain liberty in prison, and there
live upon other men's Estates, and laugh them to scorn, which this it is hoped
may provide against.
They humbly propose, that in case any debtor shall continue in prison upon any
execution or Process of Law for due debt, above a year, or continue outlawed
after judgment above a year after notice thereof, that then at the prayer of
the Plaintiff, a Writ in the nature of a fierifacias may issue out of the
Court, from whence the Process issued, whereupon he continued so in prison,
directed to the Sheriff, whereby the said Sheriff shall be empowered to levy
the said debt and costs by the sale of the Lands, Goods, Tenements, and other
estate, which such debtor shall have in possession, use or trust in the hands of
another, and satisfy the creditor therewith so far as the same will extend, and
then the prisoner thereupon to be discharged. And whereas the Creditor is
often defrauded of his just debt by the frauds, and coven of Executors, and
Administrators. For remedy thereof they humbly propose, that in all cases,
where Executors or Administrators shall suffer Judgment by Nihil dicit, nonsum
informatus, or confession, that Assets shall be presumed, and execution issue
immediately against their Persons and estates, and that upon all Trials of
plene administravit, the defendant shall exhibit a true Inventory, and the
Judge before whom such Trial shall be had may be authorized to examine such
defend. or defendants upon oath to the truth of the same, or other wise Assets
to be presumed, provided that in case the party defendant shall happen to
besick, or have necessary occasion to be absent at the time of the said Trial,
that then if the defendant or defendants shall come bebefore fore any Judge of
the same Court where such cause shall be depending before the said Trial, At
this day if an executor give Judgment by default, the plaintiff must either
procure the Sherriffe to return a devastavit which will not be had but by
bribes and security, or else he must proceed by way of inquiry, which is a
very questionable way, and as seems very dangerous for defendants for if an
Inquest of office find assetts, the defendant has legally no remedy, though
in strict Law he has no way to avoid it, having no day in Court after
judgment, nor attaint against the Jury; and now because the Civil Law has no
compulsatory process, it is hard to charge Executors or Administrators with an
Inventory, and those that are then delivered in are carelessly received, and the
oath for the truth thereof too often not duly administered.
and exhibit an Jnventory, and be examined to the truth thereof upon oath, or
shall come before any two Justices of the Peace of the County where such cause
shall be tried, giving the plantiffe or his Attorney notice thereof, and shall
there exhibit an Inventory, and be examined upon oath to such reasonable
questions as the plaintiff or his Attorney, or such Justice on his behalf in
his absence shall propound concerning the truth thereof, that then such
Inventory shall be as effectual as if the same had been exhibited in form
aforesaid upon Trial of the said cause, and that the Judges and Justices
aforesaid may be empowered to administer and examine upon oath as aforesaid.

15. They humbly propose, The present inconvenience concerning Tithes is very
great, the Civil Law not having power to proceed, and the Common Law only for
predial Tithes, wherein though treble damage be given, yet because there is no
costs they are not worth suing for, unless of some considerable value, and
Justices of Peace, few of them being Lawyers, cannot well judge therein.
that in case the Parliament shall think fit to continue payment of Tithes,
that then an Action of debt, detinue or trespass may lie generally at Common
Law for the same, as well before setting forth as after, wherein damage and
costs may be recovered, as in other like Actions at Common law.

16. They humbly propose, that for the avoiding of unnecessary and frivolous
suits at Law, that it may be enacted, that if any Attorney or Solicitor shall
deposite in the defense or prosecution of his Clyents cause any other or larger
sum or sums then so much as the charge thereof shall surmount unto in
Easter Term, Trinity Term and the short Vacation, or in one other Term and
Vacation, that then such Attorney or Solicitor shall be without all remedy to
recover the same against the Clyent at Law.

17. And for the further avoiding of the frivolous suits at Law, In Replevin at
Common Law tender of amends before impounding in all cases was a good bar,
and by the Statute 21. Jac. in trespass, for involuntary trespasses tender of
amends is made a good plea being done before Action brought; but because many
times impoundings and actions are made and brought perhaps before the Defendant
has any knowledge of the trespass, this proposal is presented: But for
voluntary trespasses it is conceived fit to leave them at the Common Law to
prevent greater inconveniences.
they humbly propose, that tender of sufficient amends with costs for all
involuntary Trespasses may be a good bar in all Replevins and Actions of
Trespass brought for the same, so that the same be done before the Rules be
out for pleading in such Action.

18. And for the relief of distressed Widows that have no Joyntures, By the
Common Law the Widow cannot intermedle with the Inheritance of her husband
till her dower assigned or recovered by Action, and the process is so delatory
therein, as that she may perhaps be two or three years before she shall have
her Dower assigned by Law, besides the great charge, and twenty accidents may
abate the suit to set her how to begin and lose her costs, as death of Tenants,
marriage, entry upon any part of the Lands, etc.
they humbly propose, that it may be lawful for them to hold and enjoy all the
Lands whereof the husband died seized of any estate in Fee-simple, or Fee tail
in Demesne in common with the heir, until such time as the heir shall assign
her or them Dower to the value of a full third part thereof in severalty, and
that of all Rent and other Inheritance and services whatsoever, whereof she is
Dowable, and the husband dies seized, she may take and seize, or have and
maintain all Action of Debt, or distreine and avow for a third part thereof,
until such assignment. And that this proposal may extend to Coppyhold Lands
where the wife is Dowable, as well as Freehold.

19. And for the avoiding many unnecessary, At Common Law solvit ad diem, or
nil debet is no plea to a simple obligation or Bil, because the same is not of
so high a nature, so that if the Plantiffe were knavish in all the cases in
this proposition, he might force the Defendant into Chancery, where both
Plaintiff and Defendant spend on the Defendants part.
prolix, and costly suits in Equity, they humbly propose, that to all Bills,
Bonds, and other specialties for payment of money, or delivery of goods, or
ware which are paid or delivered, and accepted by the Plaintiff, though not at
the time and place, nil debet per primam may be a good plea for the Defendant.
And that in all other cases the Defendant may plead or allege quae prist a
payer, and tender in Court the principal debt, or other duty, with Interest
and charges; or if part only be paid, or delivered and accepted, the Defendant
may be admitted to allege the same, and allege prist a payer, or deliver for
the residue, and tender in Court the residue of the debt or other duty, with
interest and costs; and that in both cases the Plaintiff shall accept thereof,
or be clearly barred of his Action in case he shall take issue thereupon, and it
be found against him; and that like pleading and tender may be allowed and
received upon Mortgages within seven years, or some other certain time or
number of years after forfeitures; and that after such time elapsed no Mortgage
may be redeemable either at Law or in Equity.

20. And further they humbly propose that to take away occupacy, estates for
life may be deviseable, By the Law at this day, if a man that holds for another
man's life happen to die, and have not assigned over his Estate, he that next
happens possession, though a stranger, in strict Law goes away with the state;
wherein though the Law directs the state upon very just ground, viz. that in
equali jure melior est conditio possidentis, yet because many inconveniences
happen hereby, this Proposal is submitted to judgment.
and in fault thereof discendable to the heir, and make the heir subject and
liable to the debt of his Ancestor, to the value thereof.

21. And lastly, where as the Parliament has lately enacted, that the
Defendant may in all eases plead the general Issue, For if the Defendant being
an Executor shall plead non est factum to a Bond, which is conceived to be the
general Irsue, the plaintiff shall be put to prove the Bond sealed and
delivered, that the Defendant administered, and has assets, and then the
Defendant may prove payment, or that the Bond was made per dures etc. and many
other cases are brought within the same mischief.
and give the special matter in evidence, which they humbly conceive may be of
great benefit and ease to the Defendant, yet it may be of infinite
inconvenience to the Plaintiff, who thereby will be necessitated to very great
charge in bringing to the trials of such Issues many witnesses that otherwise
might have been spared; besides the many dangers that will inevitably fall upon
the Plaintiffs, to the loss or hazard of their causes. For the preventing of
which mischief, it is humbly proposed, that by way of supplement to that Act
it may be provided, that in all cases where the Defendant shall plead the
general Issue, and intends upon the trial to rely upon any special matter,
the Defendant or his Attorney pleading such plea, shall upon the tender of the
said plea, or at least fourteen days before the trial of such Issue, give a
note in writing under one of their hands to the Plaintiff or his Attorney of
the contents of such special matter, whereupon the Defendant will rely at the
trial of the said cause, and to be concluded to give in evidence any other
special matter whatsoever, and that the Defendant may not upon any trial rely
upon two special matters of justification; and that that act may not extend to
Replevins, nor that the Plaintiffes put to prove any thing in relation to the
maintenance of his Action, that such special matter had admitted, if duly
pleaded.

FINIS.

