CERTAIN Prophesies presented before the Kings Majesty by the Scholars of
Trinity College in the University of Cambridge.

1. Touching England in General. 2. Touching the Court. 3. The Church. 4. The
Seas. 5. The University. 6. The Gentry. 7. The City. 8. Ports and Castles. 9.
Land. 10. Rome.
With some other Remarkable Prophesies of diverse other learned Scholars,
concerning the estate of the Church, and people, wherein is to be read many
Remarkable Passages worthy of observation.

fanciful depiction of an astrologer

Printed at London for T. B. 1642.

Certain Prophesies presented before the Kings Majesty, by the Scholars of
Trinity College, in the University of Cambridge.
1. Touching England in general.
THe Church is something Ceremonius, which shall be tried, but first harkned
for, and nothing heard a long time, but when the vertex of the Organ does
perpendicularly point out our Zenith, then shall it be heard.

2. Of the Court.
Wonders! Wonders! we see as in a Land-skip, an honorable throng of Noble
persons, as clear as if we were under the same roof; concerning whom it
seems by their gracious brows, and courteous looks; something they sow, which
if it be indifferent they will favorably accept, if otherwise, they will
pardon: and these be noble Courtiers.

3. Concerning the Church.
Though Romes Iliad draw the Moon so near, that indeed you would swear that
the bush of Thorns that is in it pricks your eyes; yet shall there come a
Crystal of a large Arch-multiplied Millions, which by refractious Optics,
and strength searches like the eye of Truth, all Closets that have windows.

4. Concerning the Seas.
I see a Stranger sailing toward Dover Pier, etc.

5. Concerning the University.
See, an Hall thrust full of bare heads; some bald, some busht, some bravely
brancht, well larded with Townes-men; grave, wise, and modest.

6. Concerning the Gentry.
We hear an humming noise of laughter, the Court and University are merry
with an old Gentleman in a Comedy.

7. Concerning the City.
The City shall have a Glass, which with the help of an other refractive
prospect, shall serve to see fifty miles, and that the dim sight of
threescore, may looking find the same sight with them of thirty.

8. Concerning Ports, Castles, and Forts.
We see Cariatus Persius landing at Dover, attended by two Porters, that seem
to groan under the burden of two load of paper; and he has brought with him
from beyond sea a strange observation.

9. Concerning the Land.
Oh Caelestiall Music; but it seems far off at the first, then strange, and
after a silence again most Angelical and heavenly; one verse of which I set
down, viz.

Sing sweetly, that our notes may cause
The Heavenly Orbs themselves to pause;
And at this Music stand as still,
As at Jove his amarous will:
So now release them as before,
They Have waited long enough; no more.
10. Concerning Rome.
In the last place have at Rome; I see the Pope his Cardinals, and his Mules,
the English College and the Jesuits, there writing, and doing shall be
discovered, though they have long stood, and are grown (...) old.

The Prophesies and Predictions of Master Wilson and others.
ROme, and Romish both City, and Country (as it stands now under the Pope,
and his Mitted Bishops, and Clergy) shall not only be subject unto ruin, and
destruction, but that most certainly, it is to be pulled down, loosing by
little, and little their riches, glory, strength, credit of Religion, and
holiness, which made them honored, followed and feared of Kings, and Nations,
this fall draws on apace, and hasteneth.

The great swarms of popish Priests, Friars, Monks and Cardinals, and the
whole Popish Hierarchy, and pontifical Clergy, which like filthy locusts
springing out of smoke fly together in so great heaps, in the west shall be
blown away with an east wind.

It is worth the taking notice, 1. That the bare profession of being a member
of the Latin Church, 2. of the Romish Church, 3. The crisme in the Sacrament of
confirmation, of which many do so boast, shall plainly appear to be a public
sign, and token to be the mark of the beast.

The great degenerate stars of the Church; who through pride and ambition fall
into heresy and impiety, shall fall themselves.

Twelve hundred and threescore years is the space of time, wherein (from the
first rising of Antichrist, all his increase; his waxing, wounding, reviving,
and taking heart again, to execute his cruelty in that City, which was the
Queen of the world, where he and his Favorite should bath themselves in
pleasures) after the said 1260. years are accomplished, then shall these
things be.

All things in the world do take their time, the bird to build her nest, the
husbandman to sow his seed the mariner to go to sea, the gardener to set his
trees, the sick Parient to take physic, the cook to season meats, and the
dresser of his Vineyard to gather his fruit. It will be too late for birds to
build in Summer, to sow in harvest, to go to sea when after the ship is
launched, to transplant trees when they are old, to take physic when we are
dying, to season meats when they are unsavory, and when winter is come to
gather fruit. The five foolish virgins came too late, Dives in hell repented
too late, the time present is only ours, is the figtree fruitless, never shall
fruit grow on it more.

But oh alas, are we not like the Ephesians, we have lost our first love, or
are we not like the Laodiceans, we are neither hot nor cold, or the twilight,
neither day nor night, or the Autumn, neither fair nor foul, or one sick of an
ague, one day well, another ill? or a man in a lithurgie, neither alive nor
dead: or an Hemaphrodite, neither male nor female, or to those creatures called
in Greek Amphibia, which live in water or on land: or the marigold which
shuts and opens with the sun? I would to God that we were either hot or
cold: that as the hollowest regions bring forth sweetest spices, so zealous
professors might be greatest practisers of good works: that as the sun in the
heaven is switest at her setting, so the sons of God might be best at their
ending But is it so? no: the more we are taught, the more ignorant many are,
and the older we are, the colder in religion.

We have indeed many of us, as it was said of Aristogriou, Mert^m, or rather
religioneman lingua, relion in tongue: but when trial is made of us, every
Phocion can espy our halting: And then with Archilocus we think it better,
Clypeum abjicere quam interire, even to cast off all Religion, then to undergo
the least disgrace or loss for religion.

The Moon desiring to be aparrelled as the rest of the planets, answer was made
her, that her diverse changes could admit no kind of habit, and whilst we desire
to be attired with the robes of Christians, it is to be feared, that if we
tread not the moon under our feet, we shall never be clothed as the Church
was with the sun.

But notwithstanding the change of times, and instability of most people, there
is nevertheless some who keep close unto God, for whose sake, God of his
infinite mercy, and God has appointed times, and seasons, sorrow, and joy, and
every thing in due and proper time, and running their race toward heaven, are
with joy brought thither in Gods own time, of whom Prudentius says, Generosa
Christi secta nobilit at viros,
Cui quisquis servit, ille vere est nobilis.
He noble is that comes of Christ his race,
Who serves this Lord, he surely is not base.



