The Triumphant Lady: OR, The CROWNED INNOCENCE.

A Choice and Authentic Piece of the Famous, DeCERIZIERS, Almoner to the King.

Translated into ENGLISH, out of the Original FRENCH, BY Sir WILLIAM LOWER
KNIGHT.

London, Printed for GA. BEDELL, and THO. COLLINS, and are to be sold at their
Shop at the Middle Temple Gate in Fleet Street, 1656.



To the READER.
Gentle Reader,
BEfore I touch upon the Lady, who is now to be the glorious Subject of my
Discourse, give me leave, I pray you, to look back a little upon my Illustrious
Innocence, Genivieva, whom I am obliged to vindicate. Me thinks I hear some
ignorant Incredulous say, that she is a Romantic Lady, a Fabulous Divinity,
and no Authentic Piece, as I have set her forth in my Prefaces to the world.
To convince their Error, to clear their understanding, and to rectify their
judgment, I would have them know, that I drew it forth just so as it is to be
seen with Puteanus, and Raderus in his Bavaria. Aubert Mireus having given in
his Belgic Feasts many praises to that holy Princess, assures that her Life
is written by Matthew Emichius of the Order of the Reverend Fathers Carmilites,
or White Friars, and which is conserved yet to this day in the Charter house of
Confluence upon the Rhine. Now though I might say, that all that which I
assured of that generous Woman is true, since it might arrive unto her indeed,
and that the fair Apparitions which I described, were showed to her spirit, yet
I will content you, and discover with simplicity what is purely of her History.
It is true, that Genevieva Princess of the House of Brabant, was married to a
Palatine of Treues; it is true, that she swouned at the departure of her
Sifroy; that she was fair, and tempted by Golo: it is true, that she gave him a
box, and that he put her into Prison; that her husband commanded her death upon
a suspicion which this evil servant gave him, through the Artifices of a woman,
suspected of Magic. It is true, that two of his Domestics upon the point of
killing her, left her (...); and that they met a little dog, which lost his
tongue to conserve that of the Countess. It is true, that a voice promised her
the assistance of heaven, entering into the wood, and that a Hind nourished her
child the space of seven years. It is true that the Palatine in Hunting, was
conducted into his Wives Cave, and that he knew her. It is true, that he made
her Slanderer to dye with the punishment which I observed, that that Innocent
Lady ended holily, after she received the Communion, that they built an
Hermitage in the place of her Penitence, and that we have seen there in the
following ages our Lady of Mersen. If I said that her Cr^o^fie spoke to her, it
is to be interpreted of that mute language, wherewith God speaks inwardly to
his Favorites, or we should remember Peter the Martyr. When the Cross
followed her, that was meant spiritually, as it happens to all the afflicted,
or really, as to the most Blessed Isabel d'Vuans. The Wolf which clothed the
little Benoni, could he not use the same gratitude with the Hyena of the great
Macaires. It would be easy for me to find all the other circumstances of my
Illustrious Innocence, if it were any way necessary; but I think it is enough
to make confessed, that I gave no Fictions to those that took the pains to read
it. In my opinion, this illustration suffices to undeceive those who think to
be deceived. It only rests unto me to answer those Sages who wonder at this,
that Genevieva remained so long unknown, and who demand if it were not easy
for her to retire to her patents. Certainly, these Demands should be made to
Genevieva rather then to me; notwithstanding I think that one should not doubt
of a History, as soon as one meets there some circumstances difficult to
receive. If God permitted that this Virtuous Princess should be mistaken by
her own husband, is there any cause of Admiration that no body has known
her? Was there not more cause to wonder at this, that his Providence having
given us his Son for three years, he hid him thirty years in a Country the most
frequented of the earth, and in the most famous Town of the Universe? God hides
himself in the midst of the Sun, why could he not hide a woman in an infinite
Forest, and in Dens which make wild Beasts afraid? His Providence labored it
self to turn aside those, whom hazard or design would conduct unto that
solitude, to trouble the devotions of our Saint. When God speaks in secret unto
any one, he draws him aside: but as his Discourses are important, they are
commonly long. And why should God have inspired the thought of Genevieva to
retire her self toward her Parents, who might be dead or ill affectionated?
Moreover, my Reader, Heaven would not revenge an Innocent, it pretended only to
see a Saint to suffer. The Court of Princes, where there is nothing but
delights, was not proper for this purpose. I care not to satisfy those that
complain of the reason and resentments which I gave to the Animals and to the
Trees, upon the miseries and the departure of Genevieva. This reproach comes
(without doubt) but from those who know not the Liberty of the Orator; who may
even in the judgment of the most severe Masters, make the plants and stones to
speak.

So much for Genevieva. For Hirlanda, whose Triumphant life I now treat of; I
suppose I shall need no Apology, because none will deny her the Crown, but such
as are stupid or malicious: yet I foresee that those who will have
demonstrations of Mathematics upon the truth of History, will not fail to
quarrel with her whom I serve, and that some people will take it for a tale
made for pastime.

My Reader, before you take part with the Incredulous, or Easy, I pray you to
remember; that you believe more strange ones upon the recital of Titus Livius,
and Quintus Curtius, and that there are many such in our best Books. And then
though this should be a symbolick History, should I not be pardoned this
Liberty in this kind of Writings: since it is granted, that Saint John
Damascene has used them in the Life of his Josaphat. It would be easy for me
to employ the example of the Queen Elvira, or of the Empress Matilda, which I
have touched in my following Discourse, but besides that their adventures have
circumstances as suspected as those which I propose, they are too common not to
be known.

Receive then my Hirlanda, whom I have drawn by the cares of one of our Fathers
worthy of credit, from a Manuscript of the Town of Autun. Perhaps without his
Diligence and Charity she might remain forever buried in oblivion. We know,
thanks be to God, what can be objected to this History; but we know well also
what ought to be answered thereunto. If I would wrangle, I should find without
trouble as much probability for me recital, as the Objectors pretend to give
prop to their doubt. I force no body to receive my sentiments; if any one will
be obstinate, let him permit me to be plain. In case that I deceive my self, my
error shall not be of those whereof Heresies are made; and likewise I dare to
assure it less criminal then a presumptious knowledge; since that simplicity
which has no malice ought not to suffer any reproach. Remember
notwithstanding, that though I say that Hirlanda was Duchess of Bretany, this
ought to be understood according to the Alamans manner of speaking, who call
all the Princes of a House, Duke or Marquess of the Province whereof it bears
the name. For example, in their use, those of Saxony, of Bavaria, or of
Brandenburg take the title thereof, though they possess not the demain. And
surely it is not to divine in my own cause, since Dargentreius and other
Authors of the History of Bretanie, speak often enough in this manner. You will
judge well that the ornaments which I give it, set it forth without altering it,
and that by this conduct I endeavor to instruct and to divert the spirit,
without pretending to corrupt it.

Would to God that those pens which are held up to be delicate, would employ
themselves to collect in the same design the diverse accidents of History,
without amusing them in making worlds fairer then that which God has made. We
should see that our youth would become learned in recreating themselves, and
that those fatal sources which empoison so many souls, would be dry by the
proper industry of those that have given them course. Whilst that these fair
wits shall resolve themselves to render this good service to the Church, I
conjure those that shall do me the honor to read this work, to read it with
equity and without pre-occupation; perhaps they will find here no less
divertisement and profit, then there is danger in those mysterious pieces. Let
us not leave our selves to be deceived by that ridiculous persuasion which the
devil upholds with all his power, that fair expressions belong not but to the
family of Theagines and Chari^lea. Why should the language of the Religious be
as rude as their robe and their life? Make they profession of ill speaking, or
rather, come they all from Arabia, or from some country more savage? Have we
not seen some of them who were clothed with the fairest pomp of the world, to
seek under this virtuous disguisement the souls: which run to their ruin? What
will they? that Love; who is but a child, should render men eloquent; and that
Zeal, which is a Seraphin, should not hinder them to be mute? Let us grant
notwithstanding, that there is as little ill instruction in the works of those
Messieurs, as choice words in ours; who should dare to maintain, that there is
merit to read them? But if we derive no advantage from this reading, and that
all the sages assure that it is not without suspicion of crime, who will be so
prodigal of his time, as to abandon himself to this dangerous idleness? All
posterity mocketh that Bishop, who would rather lose his Miter, then disavow a
fable. Permit me to tell you, my reader, that one would make a much worse
judgment of your obstination, if not to quit for a testoon of paper, you should
imprudently hazard Paradise. But one learns the world and civility from
Romance; grant that it be so: who will resolve himself to lose innocence, or at
least to hazard it upon the expectation of so small a gain? I assure not that,
which notwithstanding is but too true, that the reading of these pieces is much
more fatal to good manners, then that of those other works which openly make
profession to instruct men in debauchery. Every one can comprehend it by this
sole reflection, that we have horror of a declared enemy, and use precaution
against the danger which is known unto us. On the contrary, there is no person
that helps not to deceive himself, when the occasion of failing seems to favor
the inclination which it intends to corrupt. To speak truth, I know not who
will give his approbation to Romances, after the glorious Francis de Sales has
stricken them with Anathema. I will not make use of the answer which he made to
a Lady who consulted him upon that kind of writings: it suffices me to let you
know, that this great Prelate named them the Prentiship of a trade which is
infamous enough. Would it pleased God, for the little love which I have, for
me, and the perfect hate which I bear to those agreeable corrupters of
innocence, that their work and mine were reduced into ashes to choke that
blood-sucker. But since that all my tears, and those of good people deface not
one of their lines, I will never cease to continue the endeavor which I use to
procure their ruin: perhaps though my weakness gives subject unto some to
laugh, it will inspire courage and will in others to succor me.

DISCOURSE. That it is a greater and more noble Effect of Courage to suffer
then to revenge Calumny.
FORCE, a Principal and most necessary Virtue of man has two Effects,
Sufferance and Action: and to express me more neatly; Force acts with
Courage, and sustaineth with Patience. By its first Office it should moderate
that generous impetuosity, which solicites us continually unto great
Enterprises; and by the second, it represseth the fears which the distrust of
our power imprinteth in us at the encounter of the difficult. Aristotle, the
clearest of all those who have known Nature, assures in the third Book of his
Morals, that the Force which sustaines meriteth much more praise, then that
which assaulteth: Behold his reasons, There is this difference between him that
acts, and him that suffers, that the first is the master of his Action, and
therefore as the beginning of his endeavor is in his liberty, his progress
depends of his constancy. If he knows himself weak, he cease; nothing
obliges him to carry on his assault but the hope of the Victory which he has
begun. On the contrary, the second is constrained in the sufferance, for as
much as the relief of his evil springs from the sole defect of power in those
that labor him. Now who sees not that it is more difficult to remain long
immovable in the Conflict of grief (that which Patience ought to do) then to
be moved with resolution for some moments to the design of great things, which
proceeds from courage? from whence I conclude, since it is more eafie to have
vigor for some minutes, then for months and years it is less in our power to
be patient then courageous. Moreover, he that suffers, has all his evil
present, and he that assaults sees his only to come: yea the evil of the
Patient, is a grief real which torments him, and that of the Courageous is
oftentimes but an imagination which threatens him. I think no body doubts that
the present grief is not more incommodious, then that which we look upon in the
future. Nature is moved in the apprehension of the evil which shows it self,
but she despaires in the combat of that which afflicts her; nothing comforts
her in the actual convulsions of her pain, and a thousand precautions promise
her succor, when her misery is distant. That great Philosopher of whom I
borrow these Reasons, produces a third better then the others. Never does the
Courage resolve it self to the pursuit of an enemy, but it promises it self
the Victory: On the contrary, Patience scarce sees her self assailed, but she
apprchends to be overcome. It is not a discretion that we should expect from an
Adversary to accommodate himself to our forces, in such manner as be would
dispute with us the advantage with honor. As his design is to vanquish, his
wisdom is to measure himself before the Combat; if he sees himself not able, he
cares not to hazard himself; but if he thinks that he has more strength then
his enemy has resistance then he contracts himself, drawing new forces from
the weakness of another. Saint Thomas upholds the sentiments of Aristorle with
this solid Discourse. One cannot doubt that the perfect suppression of fear is
not more hard to find, then the just temperament of choler which are the two
effects of Force; then there is more mer^t in sufferance then in action. For as
much as danger which is the proper object of choler and fear, concurs of it
self, and by its natural condition to moderate audaci^y and on the contrary it
aideth timility. And therefore the repression of fear is less easy then the
moderation of the motion, which is opposed to it: for besides that our
inclination is for Choler, which accompanies courage; patience is always
followed of fear, which is, the strong est to be the weakest of our affections.
Now it is certain, that it belongs to Force to assault, for as much as it
rules audacitie, and sustaines in correcting fear. It is less then, to do,
then to suffer. So the Holy Ghost praising the Beauties of his Spouse, speaks
not of her armed hand, but of her neck adorned with a thousand Bucklers,
because we have a thousand evils from which we should defend our selves. From
all this Dispute I gather, That there is much more Courage to suffer Calumny,
then to revenge it, since Revenge acts, and Patience sustaineth. Though this
truth remains strongly enough established upon these Reasons, I think it fit
to add some others, which are proper to the subject which I treat of. It is not
a little glory to triumph of an enemy, whose ^ate is no less unjust then
damageable; for as much as he who is the Conqueror of another, seems to become
the Master. So that the same Motive which thrusts us on to superiority,
solicites us to revenge. But we ought to observe, that man having more aversion
from Infamy then love for esteem, it is more glorious to repress the
sentiments of injury, then to satisfy the appetite of glory. The secret
principle of this inclination is found in that reasonable interest, which per
swades us, that the entire ruin of our being excites more our fears and
flights, then its perfection merits our desires and searcher. So is it
certain, (what greediness soever we have for reputation) that we never hazard
its pursuit in the occasions of dishonor. A great Courage gives it self up
unto the dangers of losing life, because he sees his recompense in the esteem;
but he withholds himself from the Encounter of reproach, because he fears
the Infamy. Therefore it is no wonder if I say, that it is more to suffer
detraction which endeavors to sully us, then to revenge it, fince the
peaceable acquiesment has this ill witness, that we love ignominy, and the
effort which we make to reject it discovers our impatience. And really, to
consider the forces which we employ in the one and the other, we shall find
that reason alone aids us to suffer Calumny, and that a great number of
passions thrust us on to revenge it. We have always esteemed a Victory by the
little assistance of the Conqueror, and by the advantages of the Conquered. Who
can then deny, that a man who combats with Reason alone against a great crowd
of enemies, meriteth no more Elogies, then he who is sucoured of all sides? All
the difficulty that there is to suffer comes not from the infirmity of the
person that suffers, it comes also from the power of the causes, which produce
the sufferance. Add unto that, that very often there is no hope to acquire
glory; and that one has always cause to require the satisfaction thereof by
Justice. But if the difficulty of a work augments the glory and price thereof,
it is not hard to conclude of that which I have said, that the Courageous who
repulseth the outrage, meriteth less Praise and Recompense, then the patient
that endures it. So must it be confessed, that the last proof of Christian
generosity is in the pardon of the Offense, since it is more easy to give our
goods then our resentments* We may permit without crying, that force take our
Wealth from us, for they are not tied to our flesh; but we cannot suffer
without patience, that one should ravish Glory from us, because it is glued to
our spirit. Much more it seems easy to witness Constancy, when one cuts off a
member from us, which has no annection but with a part of our body, then to
use resignation when one loses honor, which relates to the whole soul. This
Discourse makes it sufficiently to be comprehended, that Patience i^ (...)
mystery of Christianity, and that at less then the instruction of a God, we
could not have known a Virtue, which makes us enemies of our selves. But if the
generosity which we practice in suffering, meriteth glory, what praise should
we not give to the courage of those who lose without displeasure what all men
seek with so much zeal? It belongs not but unto Jesus Christ, and unto those
that are near his Cross, to bear peaceably the outrages which it is just and
glorious to repulse. Nothing can resolve us thereunto, but the example and
grace of a God, since Nature is repugnant unto it, and reason forbids not to
pursue the punishment thereof.

But to put this truth into a light which may be seen and sensible to all the
world, I think it fit to join History to reason. That which I will produce,
carries an illustrious proof of the courage which revengeth the calumny, and of
the patience that suffers it. Since all the evil comes from the side where the
North wind blows (to speak in the terms of the Holy Ghost) it is not
inconvenient to draw from thence some famous example of slander. Henry the
fourth, Emperor of Germany, having resolved to choose a Princess that might
partake with him the delights of his Empire, he fixed his thought upon one of
the daughters of Henry the second King of England. Though he had never seen
Matilda, her portrait gave him love; so must he confess that the pencil never
did better in the expression of all the parts, which make up a perfect visage.
But what! if the copy of an excellent beauty could kindle so many innocent
fires; is there not cause to fear that its Original made fatal combustions?
Love is a flame of another nature then that of the lightning, which fixes but
on the oaks and fur; she spares not the meanest fortunes, because very often
their ambition as well as their design is to burn; contrary to those humble
plants that hide themselves in the fire of heaven, for fear to be perceived of
it. Behold the misfortune that happened, (as the History relates it) to a
Gentleman of the Emperors house. This rash person having beheld his Mistress
with too much curiousity, had so little discretion as to speak of Love to a
Queen, who pessessed as much virtue as she had beauty. The refusal which he
received, gave him with the shame of his demand, a lively apprehension of the
punishment which his presumption merited. To divert the storm thereof, he
judged that he must gain the spirit of Henry, and prevent his judgment upon the
complaint which he believed Matilda would make unto him of his impudence: In
this design he spoke to the Emperor, and told him with much candor, that his
wife ceased not to solicit him to a disloyalty, the sole thought whereof, he
supposed would be culpable. In a word, that the Princess would have him for her
friend. We have s^en but very few Sovereigns that take pleasure to divide
their Crown; but we see yet fewer husbands that suffer the participation of
their bed. The woman is a Kingdom of the man; (as St. Chrysostom assures it)
if this Monarchy degenerates into a Republic, the Monarch falls into fury:
perhaps Henry would have dissembled if any one of his Provinces had given it
self to a tyrant, but his indignation witnessed well that be could not suffer
that his wife should offer her self to one of his servants. The suspicion that
he received of her upon the report of a slanderer, caused that he cast Matilda
into prison, swearing by his Scepter and his Life, that the blood of that
unfortunate Princess should wash off that spot, if no body presented himself
for the proof of her innocence. Behold then that poor Queen in a strait prison,
where the horror of death could not make her to pronounce one word of despair
or of murmur: she adored the Providence that permitted her oppression; but if
she spoke or deplored, it was but to witness the joy of her sufferance. That
she might not betray her virtue, she was contented to protest once of her
innocence, and to say, that never cither her body or her heart were divided.
They say, that jealoufie is an excess of love, and that a husband would never
fear to lose the affection of his wife, if he esteemed her not much, and judged
her not worthy to be sought. Let every one believe hereof what be will, for my
part. I maintain that this distrustful passion takes more from hatred, then
from love, since it looks but upon the ruin of its object in stead of
procuring the advantages of it. Never will any one think that Henry loved
Matilda with excess, if he considers that he persecuted her without pity; all
things were disposed for the punishment of this deplorable Princess, and they
began already to dress her a wood pile, according to the custom then* which was
that an adulterous woman should expire in the flames: the lamentable spectacle
of this sad preparation could not change the countenance of the Princess; to
see her constancy, one would judge that it was a Comedy, in which every one
acted well his part, except she who was the subject thereof. As they expected
the day which was to shut the lifts to the Champions of the Empress; there
arrived a Hermit at the Court who was permitted entrance into the prison from
whence Matilda beheld death to come. This Religious man, after he had heard the
general confession of the poor Queen, and known her perfect innocence, departed
out of the prison to appear the next day in the lists, with resolution to
defend a virtue which he saw unjustly oppressed. I will not extend the
ceremonies of this combat, it is sufficient to say, that heaven aided for this
bout the good intention of a simple in behalf of an innocent. The Calumniator
was constrained to confess the virtue of Matilda, and afterward to die upon an
infamous Gibbet* I know that this History has nothing good but its end* and
that there is nothing but the cleerness of the former ages that can justify
it. That Cavalier which presented himself for Champion to the Princess, was
quite otherwise then he seemed to be; the habit of a Religious man under which
he appeared, served as a vail to his design, and not as vestment to his
profession: and not to disguise a disguisement, it was a French Prince, who
touched with the misery of Matilda, had quitted his Court to come to defend
Innocence, after he had known by the artifice which he used, the truth or
falsehood of her accusation. As he had finished an enterprise which would be
glorious in all its circumstances, if it had not employed that unlawful means,
he retired himself, remaining unknown, as before. If the History assured us not
that it was the last of the Berangers, Count of Barcelona and Provence, whom it
names different from the others, Remond Test d'estoupe, we should not know yet
his name and quality. Those who have thought that the merit of that protection
acquired him Provence, have not well read the Records, which import expressly,
that this Sovereignty came unto him by his marriage with Douce the one of its
heir esse. All this supposed, as the History represents it, I leave now to judge
if Matilda meriteth not more praises for having suffered without murmur, then
Remond for having vanquished with good fortune. It is a spectacle which has
the eyes of men for witnesses and admirers, to see a Prince in hazard of his
life without other interest then of justice: but an Empress in infamy, and
without impatience, it is in my judgment a miracle, which may arrest both the
Angels and God himself. The arms of Remond have asplendor that shall never
perish, and the tears of Matilda a sweetness which triumphs eternally. I
admire the courage of the Cavalier, but I am ravished with the patience of that
happy unfortunate.

The Triumphant Lady: OR, The Crowned Innocence.
Tears have (I know) not sweetness, which makes us to love them; and though
them may be the marks of grief in those that shed them, they are motives of joy
to those that consider them. The sole sight of one in misery gives the
experience of this truth: But if any one remain insensible by an afflicted
person, we ought to believe either that he is not a man, or rather that he is
blind. The greatest and fairest Monster that Afric ever nourished, confesses
that the agreeable Lies of Virgil, deceived him with so much cunning, that he
took pleasure to deplore with Dido, whose feigned griefs produced true regrets
in his soul. But if it be true that all sorts of Wretches draw us to the
compassion of their sufferings, and that we resent a kind of pleasure to sigh
with them; it is much surer, when the subject of the affliction seems unto us
to merit a good or less rigorous fortune. That fair Offenderesse, who sold so
many repentances unto Greece, no sooner appeared in the midst of the Areopage,
but he was changed; and those that should courageously bend their spirits unto
Equity, mollified themselves effeminately unto love. I know that pity alone
made not this strange change, and that it was assisted with a Vice, wherewith
an old man should never be suspected, much less seized. Besides I am not
ignorant that that afflicted Beauty gained her Judges, rather by her tears and
by the compassion of her mifery, then by the luster of her Graces, which could
not but be extinct or obscured by the lively apprehension of a death as
shameful as her life. Philosophy is much troubled to observe the secret causes
of that flux and reflux of our eyes. For to say that we take of the nature of
that charitable Bird, which cannot behold a sick person without becoming so her
self, nor be in health by a face infected with the Jaundice, is to express by
an example what we comprehend not by reason: and though we should be satisfied
with this consideration, and that our spirit would yield it self to that
sentiment, we should not know nevertheless the reason of that joy which
tickles us in deploring. I confess, that compassion charging us with the
miseries of another it obl^geth us to tears, and therefore it is impossible,
that we should not cherish a Remedy which comforts us in part; or heales us
wholly. But what! Cannot one love sorrow without rejoicing at it? Perhaps that
suffering being ordinary, and as it were natural unto us, we receive pleasure
to fool the attaint thereof from whatsoever place it comes; this familiarity is
not so agreeable, that it may not be troublesome: Is it not that the misfortune
of our neighbor pleases us? certainly it could not cause in us at once
contentment and pity. If we should love the hurt of a miserable person, me
thinks we should not deplore him: if we should deplore him, who will believe
that we should love him? My Reader, I leave this curious search to give you the
subject thereof in your proper sentiment: I fear not to put you off, since the
tears which I promise you are sweet, and since I am assured that what shall
attrist you, can and ought, infallibly to rejoice you.

Poor Hirlanda, how the sad sight of your disgraces touches my heart to the
quick! And how much more willingly would I give tears to your misfortunes, then
ornament to your History! It is true, that I cannot relate your Adventures
without lamenting them; and therefore if I oblige me to describe them, I oblige
me to deplore. That which comforts me, is, that if you languish through
necessity, I sigh with compassion; and that if the malice of another makes you
to suffer, your sole virtue causes me bitterness; much more when I consider
the first source of your tears, and see an eternal providence which travels in
the accidents of your life; I draw pleasure from your sorrow, because you draw
your happiness from thence. Grant then, if you please, that I discover to
posterity an example, which the injustice of the times would ravish from it:
Perhaps you will not revive unprofitably, and will borrow some Splendor from
the Obscurity which ^ndeavoured to bury you. I fear not that the remembrance of
that which afflicted you formerly, troubles you; since you know perfectly,
that it is the very same which crowns you now. Your felicity is too pure to
mingle it self, and your fortune too constant to be shaken. I dare likewise to
promise me, that my pen can produce you new sentiments of joy, provided that it
represents unto you naturally your ancient miseries. For the motive which I
give you thereof, refuse me not the assistance which is necessary for me to
give it you: I can do nothing without your help, as I will enterprise nothing
without your consent.

But I perceive (my Reader) that this Discourse troubles you, and if I deceive
not my self, you would desire to know already the end of a History, whereof I
have not yet touched the beginning. Well then since you will deplore, I consent
thereto. I care not to defend you from the tears which are innocent, and which
I likewise esteem reasonable. Look upon the skirt of this Wood, which the
Winter has deprived of all its beauties: approach that Rock which thrusts
forth gross bubbles of water, and you shall and there the sad subject of your
plaints and tears. Believe not nevertheless that this universal death which
appears to your eyes in the withered grass, and upon the naked trees, merits
the resentments of a heart, which is provoked with the glory not to be
inhumane. That poor woman whom you see following a Flock, which was sent forth
from the Grange, rather to recreate then to feed, should furnish you a
lamentable Object of Piety. Her head leaning upon her right arm sustained with
her knee, her look immovable, and almost dead, her whole countenance and her
exterior tell you sufficiently that she has very little courage, or much
misfortune, Ask her not her condition, grief hinders her to speak; believe not
that her Equipage tells it you; these tottered Garments that defend her from the
cold, make not that she is not a Princess: Without discovering the disgraces
which have obliged her to serve, I think that it is enough to tell you that she
is miserable, to constrain you to weep. Notwithstanding I will advertise you
that she is a Saint, for fear that the excess of her misfortunes should make
you to believe her a Criminal. Perhaps if she had had less innocence, she
should have had more good fortune: but without divining, it is certain, that
her High Birth is the sole cause of her great fall. Yes, Deplorable Princess, I
doubt not at all but your Fortune would have been better, if your extraction
had not been illustrious: But too, who could assure that your Virtue would have
been Heroic, if your Blood had been Rustic? He who disposed the accidents of
your life, ought not to regulate his conduct upon the sentment of those that
cannot conceive it. For my part, I love better to adore his Providence with
submission, then to seek the Secret thereof with danger: in the one I may fear
of the temerity, and in the other I should hope of the merit.

Hirlanda Duchess of Bretany, became conceived with child of a Son, whose
Birth caused much more grief to his Parents, then it promised them solid
joys: She was not five Months gone, but her Husband was constrained to quit
her, to the end to follow the King in a War, unto which, Honor as well as his
Duty called him. There are none but those who are yet in the first tendernesses
of a chaste and innocent marriage, that can comprehend the rigors of a
separation that comes to trouble them. When the hearts are married as well as
the bodies, there is no death whose convulsions would be more unpitiful, then
those of a grievous departure: Death in taking from us life and sight, takes
from us the sentiment of all that which we love; but a departure or absence
leaves us eyes only to represent unto us the things which can displease us.
Artus (so will I name an unknown, since that name is ordinary in the house of
Bretany) being upon the point to depart, employed all the reasons which could
consolate his Spouse.

Madam (said he unto her) I am not ignorant that you know me too well to
believe that any thing of the world separates me from you, but the sole
necessity to obey my Sovereign. Since the time that heaven conjoined us, it
has made me to discover so many virtues in your soul, that I observe no more
perfections in your body: and really I may say unto you, that both the one and
the other tie me so strongly unto you, that if disobedience could be
honorable, your consideration would persuade me that it should be just. That
which aids me to overcome my repugnance, is that I know you would esteem me
unworthy of you; if I should loose an occasion, wherein I may acquire glory in
witnessing my fidelity: by the contempt which I make of dangers, you will
comprehend the account which you ought to make of my Love; since I protest unto
you, that I forget the care to conserve my life, but will never lose the
remembrance of my dear Hirlanda.

Though the Prince was generous enough, his tears and silence witnessed a
little weakness, when he perceived that his wife began to grow tender, and
that continuing to speak unto her, he continued to afflict her. It is better to
break off briskly then to unwind ones self leisureably in the occasions wherein
we fear to show forth less courage then affection. Artus made use of this
counsel: for feigning that his Journey was not pressing, he went away the next
morning at the break of day, leaving a Gentleman to bring him the plaints and
regrets of the Duchess. But surely it was impossible for him to be faithful
in his report; because to express her tears well, he ought to have her love.
One of the principal recommendations which the Prince left with his wives
Domestics; was to have a great care of the Burden she went with, and speedily
to advertise him of the success of her Childbed, in case that he should be
absent at that time.

Whilst the Duke advanced toward Paris, and the Princess continued her
regrets, I think it is not amiss to withdraw us both from the one and the
other, so should we not contribute any thing to the Voyage of Artus, nor to the
consolation of Hirlanda.

To conceive the strange accident which was to arrive in Bretany, it is fit to
pass into England. It is in that sland, which anciently bare the name of
Albion, and changed it as often as the War made her to change Masters, that the
tempest is formed which I fear. The Duke had a brother at London, who was bred
up at the King of Englands Court: Were it that his inclination had made him a
stranger, or that interest had suggested unto him to seek support against his
blood. Whatsoever it was, Gerard was absent (that was his name) when the Prince
was constrained to enterprise a long voyage. Behold the subject which made him
to visit his Country again.

I know not how it happens, that the most puissant Monarchs of the world
cannot defend themselves from the common weaknesses of nature; their Scarlet
exempts them not from the Purples, nor their Guards assure them against the
other maladies. But if we see with admiration that they are smitten with a
disease, which for having the boldness to attach Kings, takes insolently the
name of Royal, there is no cause to wonder, when the infirmities of the basest
popularity persecutes them. It is a spectacle worthy of pity, to see a Prince
gnawn with vermin, and to understand from History, that he who spoke like a
God, was eaten up of Lice, as the most miserable of his slaves. Henod is not
the only example which we have of these disasters; even those who have merited
favors from heaven, have not been dispensed from these miseries of the earth.
Constantine, for whom the eternal Providence prepared so many Miracles and
Victories, was he not seen half corrupted with the Leprosy? All those that
studied his health, could not cure him, nor preserve him from that filthy and
shameful infection. There was no remedy which was not used, but there was not
any which was not unprofitable. He that healed Naaman in Jordan, reserved unto
himself that Cure. Learn, ye Powers of the earth, learn, that God can humble
Princes, and that if you have the temerity to displease him, he has the power
to destroy you: There needs but the least of his winds (as said the holiest
of our Monarchs) to sink the King of France; at a less rate then that, he can
bring you to reason; one spark of his fire can burn you, and one drop of his
waters drown you: if he will, the Fever dryes you up; if he will, the Dropsy
splits you; and yet though your life be subject to these feeble accidents, that
proud Pomp which disguiseth but the outside, makes you to presume much of your
Greatness. You insolently think that you are not beneath your Creator,
because you are a little above the other Creatures: the hurt that you may do
unto them, persuades you that you ought not to fear any thing from his arm,
and that yours has nothing which can stop it; as if there were a great glory
to be able to do unto others, what they may suffer from them. Know then once
again, that you have a Master who brings down the proudest heads by the sole
will of destroying them, nothing being able to restrain his hand, nor to change
his counsel.

At the same time that the brother of Artus was in England, he who was the
Sovereign of that Land, was touched with so obstinate a Leprosy, that the
disease seemed to derive succor and force from the remedies which were
employed to vanquish it. That poor Prince seeing that all the industry of his
Physicians advanced as little his Cure as his Hopes, he caused a Jew to be
called, whose knowledge was very much in reputation in all his Kingdom. As he
exposed unto him his Disease, and implored his aid, this Miscreant, who would
not employ malice, if it had not all the blackness whereof it could be
capable, demanded some days to study his infirmity. A while after, this Jew
returned to the Palace laden with a great number of Remedies; which the King
used; whilst the quacking of his Esculapius could deceive his confidence. But
whether this Leprosy was of another nature then that of the Jews, who are
more subject to that malady, then any Nation of the earth, or that in truth
this Physician was but a Mountebank; he vexed himself to swallow so many
loathsome Potions, and to see himself lanced every day, as was almost
insufferable.

The Jew, who perceived it, making use of this device, but to maintain his
Fortune, took occasion to represent to his Patient, that his Infirmity being
supernatural, his Majesty should not wonder if the Medicine endeavored
unprofitably to succor him; that for his part he had a conceit that there was
Witchcraft in his indisposition: notwithstanding, that he should not despair
of his health, provided that his impatience made him not to distrust his
skills: He added, that that great God who had given him so much power upon
Nature, had not denied him to do something against Magic: But if he would be
courageous to take a Remedy which he would prescribe him, he should have no
less docility to believe without examination the infallible virtue thereof.
The King who feared not to drink poison, provided he might have hopes to be
cured, interrupted a Discourse which troubled him almost as much as his Disease.

My good friend (said he unto him) I pray thee comfort my body, and amuse thee
not to persuade my spirit; I am ready to do whatsoever thou will; command only,
and thou shall be obeyed. I put no bounds to my submission, whilst I may see
some assurance in thy promises.

Is it fatal unto Princes who are infected with Leprosy, to meet always with
Physicians that oblige them to be cruel for to be sound, and to lose humanity
to acquire a little good health? He who treated with our Patient, failed not to
represent unto him, That the first Emperor of the Christians (whatsoever the
History says of it) was cured of a Disease like unto his, by such a Remedy as
he prepared. And not to entertain you unprofitably with vain words, Know, Sir,
that you shall be cured, if you can resolve to wash your self with the blood
of a little child. There is nothing more easy (interrupted the King.) Then can
I protest unto you (replied the Jew) that there is nothing in the world, more
powerful against that corruption which ruins you. This malady having its first
source in the mass of the blood, we must endeavor to put it again into its
proper and natural constitution: Nothing can more contribute thereunto then a
pure blood, and mingled with all kinds of qualities enemies, for as much as our
great Master teaches us, that one contrary is cured by another. But because
this Remedy is exterior, and the Disease possesses the interior of the body,
we must assist it in taking something that may encounter it even in its
retreat. The King pined with impatience to hear so many words, and to see so
little effect; I conjure thee, my friend (said he) finish speedily, or I dye.
To that which I have said (answered the Jew) you must add the heart of the
fame Infant, eating it very warm, and if it can be, yet panting. The Prince,
who thought not to find a mischievous Remedy, provided that it was possible,
resented some horror, when he heard, that to recover his health, he must
become Antropophage. But surely his spirit entered into very great perplexities,
when he understood that that Infant, necessary for his Cure, was to be of high
Birth; and much more, when he was told, that the Waters of Baptism would (...)
away from his blood, the virtue which the Jew assured to be natural against the
Leprosy. What resolution should a poor sick person take, who is deceived with
the good opinion of his Physician, and transported with the desire of his
health? Whatever repugnance ours resented, he resolved to omit nothing that
might restore him, persuading himself that the life of a Monarch more imported
the good of the State, then that of all the young Lords that were in his Island,
Is there any thing that is unjust (said he) when it is necessary? So is it that
the Theology of the great ones concludes when they love better the interest of
their fortune, then the sanctity of their conscience.

But alas! Where is that innocent Victime, which is to dye? Perhaps it is not
born, yet, although they kill it already: Perhaps it plays in the bosom, of
its mother, and tastes the sweetness thereof, whilst cruelty meditates to
make it drink the last gall of Nature.

Whosoever thou art little Innocent, thy misfortune touches my heart; and I
cannot behold thy blood without shedding my tears. Finish not thy Birth, if
thou art not in the world, or haste to dye, if thou art in the arms of the
Nurse. On how much better were it for thee to perish then to appear: Death will
be more favorable unto thee, the less life it leaves thee.

And you, poor mother, Was it well done of Nature not to give you some
foresight of your griefs? I conjure you, desire not to see that dear child,
which is formed in your womb: It will be the sweet and the sorrowful subject of
your afflictions: it will be the innocent Persecutour of your heart, and the
deplorable cause of your Martyrdom; but I am to blame to trouble the
contentments that ravish you. Poor Mother, I am to blame to draw you from that
sweetness, which glues you to that Infant. Haste you to taste all the
pleasures that you can. Kiss those little eyes, press those cheeks against
yours, hide all that amiable babe in your heart, if you can. Perceive you not
that it witnesses by its tremblings and quiverings, that it fears, or that it
loves? See you not how it presses upon your bosom, how it labors to enter
once again there? Desolate mother, Look upon those little eyes; do they not
tell you that that poor Innocent is going to dye? and that mouth which cannot
speak yet, expresses it not by its silence; the adieu which it gives you, and
the cruelty which it expects?

Without doubt you are curious to know the news of our Duke, and of our
Duchess.

Before you may understand it from me, my Reader, I pray you to observe in the
brutish Discourse of our Jew, the true features of Superstition. Why must there
be an Infant of an illustrious house? Why must not this little Prince be
baptized? Perhaps that Nobility is a Simple against the Leprosy? Perhaps that
a water which has received the Benediction of heaven, takes from the blood its
natural virtue? No, believe it not, the Devil who presides at this Cure,
pretends to kill a soul, and not to heal a body. All these conditions serve but
to envelope his design, and to give color to his malice.

Let us return to our subject.

Hirlanda prepares her self to lie in, all her Court made Devotions and Prayers
for her happy deliverance; there was no person that desired not a little
Master, no body that begged it not of God. Whilst that all things were between
hope and fear in Bretany, Artus who was already come to the Army, suffered
cruel tortures in his soul; continually the Image of his dear Spouse came to
seek him, and to bring him new affrights from her: now he flattered himself
with the hope of a quick return, and annon he afflicted himself with an
apprehension that he should never see her more.

I will not conceal from you an accident which caused him much trouble. One day
as he was in an ill humor more then ordinary, he of his Domestics that
opproached him with most confidence, having surprised him in this condition,
conjured him to discover unto him what caused his grief. The Prince, who used
not to hide his heart from this Favorite, confessed unto him, that the
precedent night he had had a dream, which held him in great inquietudes. I was
not thoroughly asleep (said he unto him) but it seemed unto me, that I saw my
poor Hirlanda stretched out dead upon her bed, and a cruel Vulture seized upon
her belly, and tore out her bowels. No body appeared to succor her; for though
at times a very feeble motion, and some languishing sighs made me believe that
she lived, there was about her but two Harpies, which with their tallons and
sight assisted that dreadful Bird, whose horrible figure presents it self
continually to my memory. Behold the subject of my sorrow, and that which
afflicts me sensibly.

As he continued his Discourse, the Almoner, who was a man very capable,
presented himself in his chamber, from whence he endeavored to retire, when he
perceived them in private conference. But Artus, who was touched with the
curiosity to be instructed, and with the desire to divert himself, commanded
him to enter, and then having related unto him his Vision, he conjured him to
tell him what he thought of it. The Almoner, who had no less modesty then
capacity, forgate not to excuse himself, beseeching his Excellence to believe,
that as he had always despised Artemidorus, he never employed either his time
or pains to study him; notwithstanding he said, that he would willingly
adventure to tell him what Theology permits to believe thereof, which he
thought not unnecessary, since oftentimes we attribute too much or too little
unto Dreams. Behold his Discourse.

My Lord, Since it pleases your Excellence to hear what I have sometime
learned upon this Subject, I most humbly beseech you to believe, That only my
incapacity will obstruct your full satisfaction; and that if I were more
knowing, you should be more enlightened: And not to divert me from your
intention, I think it cannot be said, that Dreams which are the motions of the
soul, that forms it self diverse figures, or receives them, should be all
false illusions or infallible truths* Whatsoever respect the profane have had
for the vain Science which is made of it, the wisest sort of people mock
equally the Superstitious, and the Incredulous, Aristotle, whose humor is not
to believe without good caution, could not approve the opinion of his Master,
who would that all the Dreams of the night came from the Gods, and therefore
that they should be Celestial and Supernatural instructions for men: And to
speak truth (as he observes) the Dogs and other Beasts dreaming as well as we,
there is little likelihood, that such high Majesty's would abase themselves to
instruct Brute^* Philon, who always professed himself a great partaker of the
Platonicks, makes dreams to be born in the soul from the sympathy of its
motions to the course of the Universe. Syneses acknowledges a certain spirit,
which I know not, that serves them for seat and carriage, in the same manner as
the naturallists conduct vigor and life into all the parts of man: Others make
them to slide from the stars, and some dare boldly to assure that the fancies
of our spirit, are but the remembrances of the knowledges, which it brings from
without into our body.

It cannot be denied but Hypocrates has better found out the source and
principle of them, when for the most part he attributes them unto Nature, and
sometimes to its Author: he had said all, if he had added, that the devils
atingle themselves very often in our sleep; it is true, that having not
distinguished the evil genius from the good, we should confound these two
diverse causes. That there comes unto us dreams from nature, the experience of
all the nights teaches (...) that God sends them often enough, the holy
Scripture instructs (...) in it. Who would be so rash as to contest, that
those of Abraham, of Isaak, of Jacob, and of Joseph (without speaking of that
other Joseph of the new Testament) should not be the advertisements of heaven
to these illustrious Patriarks? I enterprise not to verify* that the devils
make men to dream; and that sometimes, to give them some belief of their
Divinity, they give them presentiments of their good or evil fortunes. There is
not any one that knows never so little the profane history, who is ignorant of
that which is related of Podalirus in the Pouille of Naples, of that of Serapis
in Alexandria, and of Esculapius at Pergamus. Who has not heard speak of the
Chapel of that Pasiphae, which was adored in the suburbs of Lacedimon, and
beyond Venus de Gaze, where the young maids went to dream the adventures of
their Lovers? without doubt this infamous commerce, which continues yet to this
day with the devils, upon the success of marriages, has no other beginning
but in these sacriligious observations of the idolaters. We know but too much
the impurity of these devotions: for those that propose to themselves other
ends then to know marriages, behold the ceremony of them.

Those that consult the devils, after they have sacrificed a black sheep unto
them, wrapped themselves round about with his skin, and slept so in their
temples, to the end, to oblige them both by their confidence and liberality, to
discover unto them in dreams, what is to arrive unto them: I confess, that
these false divinities expected not always, that these poor blinded souls
should render them such ridiculous homages, as if they were provoked to prevent
their merit, they devanced sometimes the devotions. And therefore when Socrates
dreamed that he entered into the town of Phthia, which was interpreted of his
death, because that word signified corruption, his Gods used magnificence. And
when Odatis loved her dear Zariader, and Zariader his fair Odatis, without
ever seeing one another but in a dream; and that a while after that Infanta
presented the viol of gold, (which was to choose her a husband) to that young
Prince, who appeared unknown in her chamber, it was an effect of their
impulsion, rather then of her prudence. I speak not of Alexander, who dreamed
the taking of Tire, in seeing a Satyr in his sleep, as those Divines
interpret it, because that Satyros signifies in the Greek language, Tire is
thine. Did not Const^ntius also receive an advertisement of his disaster, going
against the Sarazines, when he imagined in his sleep that he went forth of
Thessalonica, whose sylables (divided) make these three words, These al^o
nequin, leave the victory to another. When Astia^^ saw a vine to come forth
from the belly of Mandana, and the mother of Augustus believed that her bowels
were carried away unto heaven, the devils pretended to put themselves in credit
by the presages of a greatness, which they promised in dreams, and which the
true God destined them in truth.

But to the end that these events and such others as resemble them, may not
carry our spirit to believe that all our dreams are true, it is fit to
consider what conjectures we may innocently draw from them: and to speak in
few words what I think thereof, it is certain, that we ought as little to
suspect the truth of the dreams which come from God, as to receive those which
come from the devils, though sometimes they be free from imposture; the reason
is, that we owe our belief unto God, and our contempt to the devils.
Nevertheless, it appertains not to every one to judge of these nocturnall
visions, prudence obliges us to leave the discernment thereof to those that
govern our consciences. In regard of the natural dreams, whither they proceed
from the reflection which the soul makes upon its passed actions, or that they
have their principle in the habitude of the body it is evident that one may
recollect without crime what is to arrive unto us, since the humor which
commands within us is the necessary cause thereof, and the rest of our
precedent actions, may be the signs of those which are to follow. Behold the
bond or annexion of the accidents of our life with our dreams, and consequently
the foundation which they give to the presages which we draw from them. Dreams
proceed for the most part from the temperament, the temperament forms our
manners, our manners have an ascendant upon out actions in that they produce
them or rule them; our journal actions have much relation and power upon the
effects, whose causes are secret to us. There is no magic then but the spirit
sees our accidents in our dreams, provided, that one assures not this
infallible sight. So we learn from the conduct of the spiritual Fathers, that
one may form probable judgments, not from the act, but from the inclination of
the vice, or of the virtue of a persons dreams. Behold upon what foundation a
man that fears to sin, even in his sleep, and resists the filthy
imaginations thereof, can assure himself that he loves purity, and that an
unlawful pleasure should be troubled to surprise his reason when it awakes. The
conjectures which concern not the liberty are less suspected: therefore it may
be believed that he who dreams but of pleasant things is of a sanguine
humor, that those in whom Phlegm predominates, have in their visions but
water, shipwreck, rain and snowes; the choleric makes still almost war,
during the profound peace of his repose: and the melancholy sees not but
sorrowful objects, and horrible phantosmes. Thus the physicians can prudently
judge of the intemperature of the humor, by the assiduity of dreaming the same
things. Now the reason why we know better the excess of the temperament of
that which passes in the night then the day, it is that the humor suffers not
any diversion in its operations, whilst the soul reposes, and that being not
employed in her most important actions, she suspendeth not those of the body,
which follows ordinarily her application. I pretend not to deny, that the most
familiar source of our dreams, is in the entertainments and businesses of the
day; because that the species thereof being yet fully fresh, the spirit, which
is at leisure, amuseth it self to review them; and because that its reason is
but half awaked, it rangeth them so ill, and confounds them, sometimes with so
much disorder, that of the fairest images of the day* there succedeth thereof
but strange grotesques or confused representations. Behold, my Lord, from
whence I think that your dream proceeds, you ought not then, in my opinion,
to conclude that there is any thing mischievous to arrive to your Lady, but
rather that your imagination has not well rallied all the thoughts which have
entertained you since your departure from her. So ended he his discourse.

Thanks unto God, I have not so weak a spirit, to yield me to the presages of
an evil dream; notwithstanding, if the Vulture were a Monster, cruel enough to
figure an inhumane Prince, I would say, unfortunate Gerard, that it should be
thee. I know not whether it was by hazard, or through design, that this young
Lord was present at the discourse of the Jew. Howsoever it was, it is certain,
that all being departed from his Chamber, he went to the King, to the end to
make him apprehend how much his health-imported the repose of his State; and
that the interest of one sole child should not make so many people suffer. All
the difficulty that seemed to be in the thing, was to meet with one of a fit
Birth. Gerard, who played the Politician; judged that there was hazard in
choosing one of the Island, for as much as his death might alter the spirit of
many of his most faithful subjects. But the sick was soon assured, by the
offer which a cruel Uncle made him to release him of his pain. My Reader,
wonder not if I conceal you his name, I have no less shame, then horror to
know it, and would it had pleased God that it had never been known in the
History.

Let us withdraw from a Court* where we should be constrained to assist at the
massacre of an Innocent, it is better to pass into that of our Duchess,
where all the world rejoiced in the hope to see there suddenly a new Master.
Though Hi^landa had cause to fear her first throws, she expected
notwithstanding the pains thereof with impatience: The desire which she had to
leave a pledge of her chaste amors to the Prince, made her to say a hundred
times, that she should dye contentedly, if she might give her life to a son,
and a son to her Husband: The joy of all this House was much augmented, when it
was told to the Duchess that her Brother in Law was upon the point to arrive.
As soon as she had advertisement thereof, she ran with all the speed that she
could to meet him.

Deplorable Princess, What do you? Apprehend you not a fall, which it seems
you seek by your precipitation? Let us not retain her, joy transports her,
there can be but little moderation, where there is much affection. Scarce had
she met this dear brother at the entrance of the Castle, but she cast her self
about his neck: to tell you what she did, it would be to tell you little less
then what she would have done if her Artus had been returned. On the other
side, Gerard rendered her all the Testimonies which could be expected from a
true amity.

Madam (said he at the same time that he feigned to be able to speak) I should
have other then common words to express unto you my resentments. I am ravished
to see you, but I am the more so, in that I cannot tell it you, to see you in
the condition to be one of the happiest mothers of the earth. If I deceive me
not, you are upon the point to give us a young Artus, at least your Vermilion
complexion, and that vigor which appears in your whole body makes me
believe that you have conceived nothing but what is generous. Though you have
more need of a Midwife then of a younger Brother, who is not versed therein; I
rejoice notwithstanding to be at your lying in, to the end, to render you a
part of the offices and tendernesses which you should expect from my Brother;
it seems long unto me till I hold that little Babe in my arms. (Oh Traitor!
it will be too soon.) Besides, I declare unto you, my good Sister, that it
belongs unto me to rock him, and that I will not suffer any body to pay him
these petty Devoires to my prejudice. The sweetness of this Complement
mollified Hirlanda in such manner, that she could not reply unto him one sole
word; so was it better to answer him with the heart, then with the mouth.

Some days slid away in good cheer, and preparatives for the Lying in; nine
months being now even fully accomplished since the Conception of the Duchess.
The good mother would her self prepare the little swaddling clothes, and other
movables for her dear Infant, Whilst this happy day advanced, what did Gerard?
He put on the best countenance he could to beget in the Duchess a perfect
confidence of an unfeigned Amity. But alas! Heart of man, how perfidious art
thou? At the same time that his sister made him all the Entertainment that she
could, he mingled with it the most dangerous perplexity that her Innocence
could fear. The Midwife and Nurse, who attended the Birth of that little
Prince, were already in Hirlanda her house; since the arrival of her Brother in
Law; these were the two women that he attempted, but with so much cunning, that
his conduct passed in the beginning for a simple design only to affectionate
them to the succors of his sister, and to the ears of her child. He advised
them notwithstanding to discover nothing of his Lib^ralities to the other
Domestics; for fear that his favor might put them into jealousy; nor
likewise to his Sister, lest that it might pass with her in stead of the
recompense which she destined them. At last, after a long practice, judging
that he possessed enough the spirit of these Mercenary souls, he declared unto
them that their fortune depended on their courage, and that if they had never
so little heart, they might hope good fortune enough. The assurance to put
themselves in place where they should have nothing to fear, gave them the
boldness to enterprise any thing. And then all that he demanded from their
fidelity, was to feign that his sisters child was dead in her labor, and to
follow him in a Country, where he pretended to cause it to be brought up, for
great reasons, which obliged him to withdraw it from its mother.

At last the very moment of lying in arrived, the Convulsions thereof were so
violent for the space of a day, that it was easily believed, that nothing would
proceed thence, but the death of the poor Princess. It is true yet, that she
was delivered in a swoun, which gave opportunity enough to those whom Gerard
had gained, to betake themselves to the sea, where a Shallop attended them.
They were to imbark in a place of the Armorick, which at this day is called
Quidalet, and was then named Alethe, a word which in its Orginal signifies
Error, this place merited formerly so much veneration from the Inhabitants of
these coasts, that all the slaves which the tempest brought to this Sanctuary,
recovered their liberty as soon as they touched the borders of that happy Land.
But this good fortune happened not to those that stole away our little Prince,
for scarce were they entered into their Shallop, but a troop of armed men
boarded them; their angry Visages, and their naked swords shined so bright
amidst the darkness, which the first break of the day had not fully
dissipated, that our Fugitives could draw from thence but a fatal presage of
their ruin. Behold them then Captives, and laden with Irons in a place where
the most miserable quitted them: These poor people surprised with an accident,
which they had neither apprehended nor foreseen, doubted whether they should
lament or bless their very fortunate misfortune. The knowledge which they had
of their Crime gave them too much fear of the punishment, to rejoice at this
favorable disaster. On the other side, seeing themselves delivered from a
death which they began to taste when they were arrested, it was impossible that
the present joy should not put some good interval to the fears which their evil
conscience furnished them.

Adoreable providence of God, which conducts so wisely the misfortunes of the
wicked, that it leaves them fear enough in the bottom of their hearts to punish
them, and confidence whereby not to yield themselves to despair. My Reader, You
know the just Motive of their apprehension, but you are ignorant for a while of
that of their joy; be not troubled with that which is to arrive to our
Fugitives, there is but one Innocent amongst them: Perhaps these Strangers that
hold him, will have pity of his misery. But though they should want sweetness
to spare his life, the death which they shall make him suffer, will be a favor
to him; both because it will be more humane then that which they destine him,
and because he is less sensible of the grief, then he shall be, if compassion
permits him to grow up. In respect of them who have carried him away, there is
nothing too cruel and rigorous that may arrive unto them: let their Pirates have
all the ill will that the sea has ever maintained, it will not be too much to
punish them. I would not have you to consider a poor mother in the convulsions
of death; I would not have you think of the interest of a Prince, who is not
yet unfortunate, but with the foresight of his misfortune. It is sufficient to
make you consent to the death of the guilty, to put you in mind of their
Treason. Without doubt servants merit not for the most part the outrages which
they receive from their Masters: if they are faithful, they ought to be humane
to them. But if avarice or some other passion takes from them that quality
which hinders them to be our most dangerous enemies, because they are our
Domestics, I think that we cannot have too much severity to punish them: But
if nothing obliges us to their pardon, when their infidelity touches but our
goods, who could give us a thought of goodness in their behalf, when their
rage assaulteth our honor, or our lives?

Poor Artus, it is now that you should see your dear Hirlanda, either dead, or
dying upon her bed; it is now that you should find a Vulture and Harpies about
her. It is true, that they are gone, and that there rests nothing by the
desolate Princess, but the marks of their cruelty on her disgraced face, and
in her languishing eyes.

As soon as the sorrowful Lady came again to her self, and that grief permitted
her to sigh, she demanded her child. Alas, Madam, (replied one of her women) be
not curious to see him, he is in a condition more capable to give you horror
then consolation. It is no matter (said the poor mother) let him be brought
unto me. You will dye then (answered that subtle Wretch, who had all the
intentions of Gerard) at a less rate then that. I think that you should not
fix your eyes upon a body half formed, or to speak better, upon a lump of
flesh, which denotes as little life as humane shape; they have already cast it
into the earth. My dear Girl, tell me at least, is it Christian? Madam, you
should ask, if it be Man.

Let us not stay by this unfortunate Princess, she enters again into the Agony
of her Trances, but it is to bring forth nothing but sighs and plaints. I
assure you, my Reader, that there is no less trouble to express them then to
hear them, and that it is equally impossible for me to be the Spectatour
thereof, and the Writer. To offend neither your eyes or ears, I think it is
fit to withdraw us from Hirlanda's chamber, for I am persuaded, that you desire
to understand the Adventures of our poor little Infidel. Whatsoever curiosity
presses you, you must know many things before that: and really, though we are
troubled to see the miseries of our Duchess, it is fitter now that we are
accustomed to her evils, to suffer them in company, then so discretely to
husband our grief. I conjure notwithstanding the Reader, if it happens that he
deplores with her, not to blame me of hardness; it will not be the Artifice of
my Discourse, nor the force of my expression, that shall oblige him to this
resentment, but only the cruelty of her fortune.

The Princess was not yet up of her Childbed, but her brother in Law began to
give her more open proofs of his ill will; first by an usage very rude, and
then by words extremely injurious. O God, what a cruel displeasure is it to a
mother, to reproach her, that she is the Homicide of her fruit! This was
notwithstanding the Crime wherewith Gerard accused his sister, adding, that if
she had had as much love for her husband, as she had for a certain Gentleman
her neighbor, she would not have so ill husbanded the hopes of her house.

Poor Hirlanda! What can you say to these sorrowful news? But what could you
do when you perceived, that the Artifices of your cruel brother in Law had
changed the spirit of all your Domestics? That of the Duchess was not
malicious enough to penetrate the intricacy of that conduct; behold the natural
recital thereof. There was amongst the women of Hirlanda a Damosel, who had
always had her principal confidence; it was she that contributed most to her
ruin. Gerard having known the weakness of that maid, he gained her in such
sort to his passion, that he disposed of her more absolutely then modesty and
fidelity would allow her. This was the confident he made use of to affright her
Mistress, an hundred times a day she cast new fears into her soul, as if she
had discovered the secrets of Gerard. Hirlanda knew well that her Brother had
very much altered her Husband against her, which he expressed unto her by a
letter, whose outrageous complements made of her eyes two living sources of
tears: Notwithstanding, the Duke had not spoken so clearly, that he could
content Gerard, nor assure the Princess; but if he gave cause of fear to his
wife, he furnished the means to embroile his brother. He did it with too much
success; for that cursed confident, having told her a hundred times, that that
young Prince had commission from Artus to put her to death, she cast such an
apprehension into her mind, that having no other counsel but fear, she
resolved her self upon a flight.

Co poor Princess, go amongst the launds and forests, though you may find
there Bears and Wolves, you shall find nothing so cruel as a brother in law.
The desire which I have that those who have began to peruse this history, may
finish it, obliges me to say nothing of the sorry equipage of our fugitive,
because I am assured that the recital which I should make thereof, would give
more desire to deplore, then curiosity to read. Let us let Hirlanda go.

I know not whether Gerard was ravished with the resolution which his sister
had taken; for as much as he believed to have in her flight strong proofs
against her innocence: he made semblance notwithstanding to make search for
her, to the end, that Artus might not suspect him of collusion in his carriage.
After a diligence which might beget a belief that he had sought her, he would
go unto the Duke himself to be the messenger of so many wretched tidings: it is
not necessary to touch by parcels the addresses which he used to assist the
jealousy of his brother. I fear already, that I have left an ill example to
posterity, without needing to leave it such particular instructions of malice.
Perhaps some one will find it very strange, that Gerard employed not poison to
rid himself of his sister: without doubt there is cause to wonder at it, since
he had rage and baseness enough. Notwithstanding, to examine well his conduct,
we have wherewith to praise his evil policy; for his design being to enjoy the
inheritance of his brother: he would not give him the means of having heirs, in
leaving him the liberty to choose another wife. Behold then a man in a new
celibat, from whence he was not sure to come forth till after seven years,
which the simplicity of our ancestors destined to the uncertainty of
widow-hoods.

I should amuse my Reader with things which would give him impatience, if I
would relate what passed in Hirlanda's house, fince she quitted it. In my
opinion, it is better to seek our unhappy Princess, then to instruct ones
self with the regrets of her unfortunate husband.

He lived almost seven years in a melantholy which punished sensibly, though
slowly, his precipitation, when a troop of Gentlemen (his neighbors) came to
take leave of him for a voyage to Saint Michel. Every one knows that this
place of devotion is in the confines of those two Nations, who, for being of
very different humors, have need of an armed Saint to keep them in peace. It
is true, that the jealousy to possess so powerful a Protector, would trouble
their repose, if to content those two people, the river Coesnon lost not his in
quitting his bed, to the end, that successively this glorious Archangel might
be Norman and Britain.

As this Nobility of whom I have spoken, had rendered these devoirs to that
Prince of the Angels, one of the most considerable of the troop named de
l'Olive, took leave of his companions to visit an aunt which he had a little
further into Normandy: he was not a little troubled to find her house, which a
very great wood covered of all sides, and perhaps he had not found it, if he
had not met with a country woman, who put him into the path which led to the
castle; Inform you not of her name, it suffices to know that it was a poor
woman, who had the care of ordering the affairs of the back Court. She had led
the flocks to the field to cheer them a little; but to speak truth, it was
rather to weep with more liberty.

One cannot easily express the good entertainment which our Cavalier received
in the house of his aunt: all the neighborhood was invited to come to
contribute to that good Ladies rejoycement. The place of that abode was one of
the most agreeable residences that one could desire to be in: but to speak the
truth, the winter there was a hideous, as in any other place of the earth; all
the avenues thereof were so hindered by the waters which rouled down in its
valley, that one might believe it was not without artifice that the approach
unto it was forbidden: this inconvenience of coming forth, obliged the company
to remain in the house, and to divert it self in the halls and galleries. It
pleases me to make you participate of a passetime which meriteth your
attention, since it can as much instruct your spirit, as it contented the eyes
and ears of those that practiced it. There was a gallery in that house, which
looked upon the East, where all the Promenades of winter were formed. Those who
had given them design, had suggested them ornament. All the walls were adorned
with excellent pictures; but one should offend the Mistress of the house, to
believe that she could have suffered that what was but to recreate the sight,
should serve here to wound hearts. She had too much charity to propose naked
persons to the cruel rigours of a cold which pardoned not even those who were
the best clothed: there was not one figure which was not modest: the Painter
himself had given so much naturalnesse to their decency, that one would think
that modesty animate; but if there appeared any naked thing in the cloth, a
reasonable spirit would easily judge that the expression of the history was
more looked upon then the design of the pleasure.

One afternoon, as all the company was in that gallery, they prayed a very
understanding old Gentleman to decipher these pictures, and to serve for
interpreter to those strangers, who spoke to all the world without being
understood but* of the Learned, because the language of picture, though
sensible, is mute. After a long refusal in point of modesty, that wise
Seigneur, who would rather have concealed, then produced that treasure which
sew persons love, began his discourse in these terms; Since you will not
consider that those of my age speak sometimes too long, I run the hazard of
being troublesome unto you, by the obligation which you impose on me to be
complacent. Your curiosity will make your patience to suffer: I promise you
notwithstanding, though I cannot content the former, that I will relieve the
later as soon as you shall signify to me that you desire it. The season
invites us not to the bath, yet I must (without quitting that good fire) lend
you in the first place to that river which seems to flow from that cloth. Would
you not judge by the inequality of those floods which raise themselves one upon
the other, that they crowd together to fly? You comprehend well that this river
is no other but the miraculous labourer of Egypt, of whom the history tells us
so many wonders. That Nymph which you see at the place from whence the water
seems to come, is it not the famous Isi, unto whose tears the fable attributes
the inundation of Nile, which has no other cause but the raines and snowes of
Ethiopia. It is true that the young maid weeps, and therefore she augments
these waters; but besides that, the little which she contributes thereto cannot
make a great inundation; she has a much truer, and more sensible cause of
tears, then the death of Osiris. I perceive the little Moses, whom the cruelty
of Phara^h has condemned with all the Hebrew males unto shipwreck; his poor
sister sighs his misfortune, and attends at that river side, by her mothers
command, the sad success of his fortune; she works pity in you, I make no
doubt on it; let us not lose our tears, though after her example: though this
little Prophet has no other bark then that rush pannier, which is given him
for a tomb, he shall find a happy port, because he has God for Pilot. Behold
that Princess that walks upon the brink of the river with her maids, Chance
brings her not there, her design is to bath her self in those wholesome waters
which make women fruitful, to the end, to give an heir unto Egypt: She seeks a
son for her Father, and heaven raises her up a God, so the Scripture names this
poor deserted infant. But alas, a new danger threatens his life; I see him in
that place where the water turns from him. It is one of those monsters, to whom
Nature has not given terms of greatness, perhaps, because they increase
always in cruelty. Would you not say that this Crocodile hides himself in the
bul-rushes, to expect his prey there, and that he opens his mouth already to
devour it? Notwithstanding, though the eye judges that his floods advance and
conduct that vessel into this gulf, he ought not to fear any thing that is
within; for besides that, that this monster is well fixed to the picture, he
takes a posture that cannot give distrust* That bird which plays in his
throat, is the little Trochilus, which we call Roytelet. There is a very strait
amity between these two animals, though far different in humor, which shows
that resemblance is not always the mother of love. Consider, I pray you, the
pleasure that this dragon takes in the service of his little friend, who rids
the teeth of the remains of his dinner. The industry of the Painter appears
in this, that he expresses even the pain that this sluggish beast has to hold
up his jaws so long, but he witnesses well that he knows the secrets of
Nature, since from the back of the bird he has framed toward the palate of
the Crocodile, a very sharp feather, which threatens him with a wound, if he
give him not leisure to finish his business. We should not imagine that to
make a perfect picture, the Painter wanted discourse, in exposing a Queen to
that fierce animal. He knows well that the Crocodile has no cruelty in that
place of the Nile, not by reason of that plumme which a famous Magician cast
therein, as the history will have us believe; but because of the abundant
feeding that is there, without being obliged to seek it, as above Memphis,
where the fish is scarce. Forget not to observe, that the pensil has even put
that secret into the countenance of those women, since they all look upon the
monster with assurance. These sheep which ruminate in the shade of the sedges,
wherewith the river is palisado'd, though fearful, are without apprehension; so
perceive they not the wolf, that carries away one of their companions; nothing
hinders him to bleat, but that crafty animal, who takes him by the throat, for
fear that his cry should discover his theft: the dogs do what they can to
overtake that robber, but the perspective has put him so far off, that their
diligence is unprofitable. In the mean time the shepherds sleep at their ease,
because they know not their loss. One would swear that he who leans against
the trunk of that tree, blows; the inflation of his mouth persuades me so
almost. What say you of that tree which is inveloped only with one leaf of
Moss? That fantasy is of Art, which teaches us by that ingenious Grotesque,
the natural freshness of those leaves, and their excessive largeness.

The Interpretet made here a little pause, and looking about for a Gentlewoman
of the company, who was of a sweet humor, and good wit, he said unto her, I
fear that you have no desire to taste the fruits which are fastened to that
tree, for if we believe the Orientials, it is the tree of knowledge, whose fruit
is called amongst them Magadan, Adams apples, and really, besides their beauty
and figure, which resembles very much our citrons, their taste is very
agreeable to the mouth, and dangerous to the stomach, which denotes sin well,
that has something sweet in its birth.

The second Tablet represents that famous judgment which was the first effect
of Solomon's wisdom; two women lying together in one and the same chamber, it
happened one night, that the most negligent smothered her infant, whom she had
put in the bed by her, to give it more easily the teat. That which she did,
being awaked, signified enough that this accident was without design, and
without malice; for scarce perceived she it, but behold her at her companions
bed, from whence she took her son, substituting the dead one in his place. The
morning which discovered this deceit, put much trouble in the house. Each of
the mothers protested that hers lived, and that the other had robbed her of it.
Solomon, who began to be King, must begin to be Judge, through an affair so
confused: that woman of the two which feigned best, seemed in the judgment of
all the Counsel to uphold solidly her cause. No, said the young Prince, it is
not just that one alone possess wholly this infant, since the right of the
one, is not more clear then that of the other; to content them both, let it be
divided. To see the personages of this picture, you would judge that this
sentence took from them all their color and motion, except from the false
mother, who laughed with pleasure, approving a cruelty which was favorable
unto her. You know the subject of that picture, but perhaps you discover not
the artifice thereof. Before you consider it, I would fain tell you that the
Painter has committed a fault, not in his art, whose laws he has
perfectly-observed, but in Cronologie, placing Solomon in that miraculous
throne, which he built not but long time after this judgment. It is to be
believed, that this happy fault was of purpose, and that he would rather appear
Architect, then scrupulous in the knowledge of the times; so is there not a
piece which is not studied, be it in the body of the work, be it in the
columns, the chapters, the frize, and the rest of its ornaments. Really, if I
knew not that these Lions, which hold up the tribunal, are of gold and Iyroy, I
should fear that they were living. Let us look but on the principal of the
piece; should you not say that these two old men who are by the King, do
meditate the reasons of a sentence, which surpriseth their wisdom? In the
mean time, a soldier of the guard takes that poor little one who lives even in
the image, and holding him up by the heels, he stretches out his arm with
strength, the better to assure his stroke; his sight is fixed upon the place
where he intends to make the division to render it more easy* notwithstanding
he has a corner of his eye upon the King, participating his look to those two
objects, as if he demanded the time to let fall his stroke: it is this that
ought to take fear from you, in that he hurts not that Innocent, who though
turned topsie turvie, endeavors unprofitably to join his hands in the air by
an instinct of nature, who also turns his eyes unto heaven* from whence we
learn at our birth, that it is from thence that our assistance comes. But I
pray you to consider how his leg and left thigh falling upon his flank, make
there, with their weight, a mavelous contraction. The distention of his
stomach caused by the fall of his belly, merits no less admiration, since it
expresses even the pain of the infant. That young woman which you see at the
end of the Picture, and who holds her apron in a condition to receive the half
of that body, pretends to be the mother thereof, though to speak truth, there
is not one feature in her face that witnesses it. She seems to have left all
the fear and pity on the countenance of that good old woman that follows her:
consider, I pray you how fear withdraws her lips, to the end, that only one
tooth which is left her may appear; her front, where every moment of her life
has placed a wrinkle, heaps it self up in the midst in such sort, that you
might judge that all these lines have their center there, to mark unto her the
hour of dying. Since you are near enough to that pillar, forget not to behold
that little boy, who hides himself under its garlands and embroideries. You
believe that it is but an ornament of the hall, which is represented in the
picture, and yet to see the endeavor that he makes to raise himself aloft, and
his attention on that which is done below, you would say that he fears for all
the little boys. I know not if it be that child which is going to die that
makes him afraid, or he that you see dead in that square: his lips already
blue, and the action of that dog, which nothing but his attachment hinders to
sent him, show sufficiently that he is the sorrowful subject of that process.
Good God, how the death of him that lives yet, appears naturally in the face of
the true mother! one would easily believe that she has nothing more then these
two words to say unto Solomon, Sir, I quit my part of him; see how she
stretches her arms between the sword and her son, either to stop, or to receive
the stroke. You know the rest of the History, so that it shall not need to
trouble you more: if I had not forgotten the discretion that I promised you, I
had made an end long since of wronging your patience. Old men have short
memories, and great inclination to speak, as I have already said unto you: I
shall be so short in that which remains, that your goodness will voluntarily
pardon my former tediousness. You judge without doubt, by these trees and hills
which show themselves but half-waies, that the Painter represents us a night in
his work: this deep silence which makes the repose of all Nature, seems it not
likewise expressed unto you by the pensil: how that hare which I perceive in
that bush gathers up himself perfectly in form, and how these little birds
which cannot be distinguished, because the obscurity makes them all of one
color, sleep quietly. I should fear that that greatest, which a darkness more
charged makes me take for a Mearl, should tumble, if I knew not that a fall
upon the wing is without danger of hurt. But though the shadows would not mark
out into you sufficiently a night, in lifting your eyes toward the heaven,
which a pale and washed Azure depaints above the Picture, the stars would make
it appear sufficiently. Know you not the Bear, which shines with more
brightness then any other of these stars? behold a little lower Andromeda*
behold the Swan; I know not if it be of purpose or by chance that the Painter
has made nothing to break but the constellations, which mark unto us the
flight or retrait of some one of the earth into heaven. I should believe it
almost, if he had not lightly traced the milky way, by which the Profane assure
that the Gods go to counsel, and the Pilgrims to Saint James, us the simple
imagine. That young woman who is mounted upon an Ass, and holds a child in her
arms, it is the divine Mary, who comes forth of that Village which you see in
the bottom of the Picture. Her poor Husband follows her, leading the Ass
which carries all the baggage of the greatest and most illustrious Family of
the Universe. Perceive you not that the darkness retires at the approach of
these Torches, which two Angels carry before their little Monarch. This
imagination of the Painter is excellent, but his thought is better yet, since
he pretends to insinuate, that the Eclipse of that divine Sun which hides
himself in our flesh, appears to the world to dissipate our darkness. He
goes forthwith to invade that of Egypt, which is its true Country, since Moses
was there a miraculous night in plain midday.

This last Tablet where I see the massacre of the Innocents, carries the
subject of the flight of Jesus and of his mother: you know too well the History
thereof to believe me obliged to make you the recital of it. Regard the Action
of these Personages, you may say, that there is not one of them which cries
not, except that poor mother, whose tongue the Executioner roots out, to punish
her with her grief, and to hinder her to complain. I fear to be cruel in
obliging you to turn your eyes upon those three Soldiers, who make a Pyramide
of the heads of these pitiful Victimes. It is true, that their rage equals not
that of this other, who for fear that a poor woman should conceal her son in
her belly, tears it out gasping from her bowels. Behold another sitting, who
endeavored to feign that she has no fear, because she has no Infant: but
whilst she uses this innocent hypocrisy, I know not if that poor little one,
fearing that he should not be a Martyr, advances his arm from beneath her
coat where he was hidden. One of these Inhumanes mocketh it, and cuts it
behind, making sign to his companion to finish. See (I pray you) the despair
of that mother, who afflicts her self at this, that drawing herson from between
the hands of the Executioner, there remains in her hands but one thigh of him.
Not one appeared more content then she, who leaning her self upon her child to
cover it from the sword, received it athwart her body. This sad Spectacle
afflicts you, I make no doubt on it, so will I stay your eyes no longer there; I
desire only that you would consider the endeavor which that woman makes to
withdraw hers; one would judge that she puts it out of the Picture, so much
sally has the Painter given it; but alas! she cannot keep it from the
Courtedass, which cleaves it in two in the midst of the air.

Whilst that this wise old man entertained the company with so much
satisfaction, that it would be hard to express it, it happened that the
Chevalier d^ Olive cast his sight upon that woman who had conducted him to the
Castle^ you would have said, that all this discourse had no other design but to
make her weep; notwithstanding, as she perceived that they dooked upon her, she
constrained her eyes to an obedience, which was not very perfect, because that
from time to time her cears began again to distill. I can no longer forbear to
tell you that this unknown person was our unfortunate Hirlanda, who for seven
years remained in that house in quality of a servant; her greatest trouble
was, to let nothing appear of her condition: but though her Prudence had
always suppressed the liveliest splendor thereof, she could not so conceal
her self, but her Mistress discovered many things that made her to be
considered. Behold that which obliged her to keep her by her, and to love her
discourse. It is hard for a Peasant to act a Prince, there will oftentimes slip
from him something of the Country. A Person of Birth has no less trouble to
dissemble; though his fortune should bellow, his courage is always high. If it
happens likewise that he is constrained to humble himself to Employments
unworthy of his blood, it communicates unto them, I know not what Grace, which
ennobleth them, and hinders them to be Rustic Occupations

But alas, how much more desiteable had it been to our Duchess, not so often
to approach her that took so much pleasure in her Service? At least it cannot
be denied but this last Encounter was fatal to her; for at last the misfortune
of her poor child was not so prudent concealed but some inkling thereof was
come to her ears. She had heard it reported, that that dear moity of her self
had been ravished from her, that they had exposed it to the treacherous waters
of the sea, and that a company of Pirates had seized the vessel that carried it
away. Was not this enough to persuade her, that these Pictures which were
deciphered in her presence, were but Images of her misfortune; so believed she
that the design of this discourse looked upon her, though there was no such
thought. When they spoke of the little Moses abandoned to the floods of Nile,
Love said unto her, Poor Hirlanda, behold thy poor Infant: if she contemplated
the Massacre of the Innocents, presently she imagined that hers had met with
some Herod. The flight of the holy mother of God, and her exile into Egypt,
made her to remember the day that she left her house, and her seven years abode
in that of her Mistress. She cared not to assuage her grief in considering the
happy end of the Adventures which the Painter had represented in his Work. She
chose not in their History, but that which was proper to her affliction. Good
God, how weak is the spirit of m^n to resist an evil, and how ingenious it is
to augment its troubles!

Hirlanda, is there nothing in all these Pictures capable to consolate your
grief by the hope of a better fortune? Cherish you your misfortune so tenderly,
that you should seek with care the means to entertain it? I confess, that the
disaster of your son, cannot have more illustrious figures then Moses and those
other children; but why take you only that which is evil in their History? But
if your modesty makes you to believe that having nothing like to their merit,
you ought not to expect any thing equal to the benefits which obliges them, I
consent that you should presume little of your virtue, provided that you
conceive no: any distrust of Gods goodness. Expect not the favor^ that
appertain but to the Patriarks and Saints, but despair not of a protection,
which he denies not even to his enemies. Since you cannot think that he saves
your little Prince with the Prophets, be confident that he will not despise him
more then the Profane. If all these great miracles cannot move your spirit, nor
so many rich Pictures leave any impression in your sentments, cast at least a
light view upon these hangings; you shall see there Romulus by a Wolf that
gives him suck, and Cyrus by a dog that defends him: Hieron is exposed here to
the Hornets, and Lagus to the Vultures; but a swarm of Bees stands Sentinel for
that, and an Eagle for this. Forget not to consider Lamisses, whom Agolmond
King of the Lombards raises from the end of his Lance to the Throne, drawing
him out of a Lake where he had been cast with his six twin Brothers. Hirlanda
cannot stop her self at this.

Notwithstanding let us not believe that this happened without the conduct of
that Providence which governes the least accidents of the world. I said, that
the Lord d' Olive perceived the Duchess tears, which obliged him from time
to time to look upon her. As he considered her, a thought came into his mind,
that she was without doubt that unfortunate Princess, which vanished away in
Bretany. She seemed unto him at first extravagant, as being not able to find a
woman of that condition in a Country Chambermaid; notwithstanding considering
the features of her face and her stature, he concluded that he need no more
doubt thereof. When the company was retired, our Knight went to find out his
Ant, and prayed her to tell him the truth. The good Lady, who knew well enough
how to treat persons of that quality, replied unto him, that if God had done
her the favor to send unto her a woman of that rank and merit, she would not
fail in the duties of a most humble servant.

Lastly, not able to quit this imagination, he conjured her to examine that
stranger, and to constrain her to declare her name and Country. Not to make
unprofitable Discourses, Hirlanda confessed that she was that unfortunate
Duchess; this confession changed the whole house, for as much as she that
commanded, would now obey at her turn. D' Olive failed not to render her all
the respects that he believed was due unto her, both in regard of her Dignity,
and because of her virtue. Notwithstanding they judged wisely, that they should
not make this report to break forth at a clap, and prudence obliged them to
live in the same conduct, which appeared before.

Hirlanda was not troubled to play her part, because she exercised it many
years; but surely our good Ant suffered much, when she must act the Mistress.
A hundred times before she was aware, she rendered her great submissions, and
called her Madam in the presence of her Domestics: for our Gentleman, he
resolved to pass into Bretany, to the end to dispose the Duke to the return of
his innocent wife: Upon the point to depart, he protested that he should never
he content until he saw his Princess in the honors which she merited, and
that he should think his life well employed, if he might dye in maintaining her
Virtue. The Duchess failed not to assure him of the esteem which she made of
his Service, but that it would be an inconsolate regret unto her to see him
take pains to procure her content.

My Cavaliere (said she) I cannot dissemble to you, that your good will
obliges me, and that though I have not the means to acknowledge it, I have
heart enough to resent it. I owe to your Courage rather then to my Virtue, the
Design which you take to relieve an oppressed Innocence; but permit me to tell
you, that I more desire to live unknown then justified, and l^sse covet the
Dignity of a Duchess, then cherish the condition of a Slave. Alas, what
advantage procure you me* when you shall place we again in Artus house* Perhaps
I shall be there more happy then in the first years of my Marriage, and shall
find another Husband then he that threatened me with death? Does not Gerard live
still? And if he lives, what should I hope from him after a Turkish cruelty?
Think you that he that charge me with the death of an Innocent, whom he has
massacred, can suffer a face which reproacheth his cruelty to him? Has he not
the same motives to hurt me, and his brother the same weakness to believe him
without hearing me? O how much more desirable is it to me to remain unknown
in a house where Virtue defends me from inquietudes, then to go seek new
tempests, where I have never found repose. Would you ravish from me the
delights which I taste by your Aunt, who is to me in stead of a mother, since I
had the happiness to be known unto her? Is there any thing in the Palace of
Artus, which countervails the sweetness which I taste in this concealed life,
where the goodness of God renders it self so sensible to my poor heart, that I
doubt if the place of my Exile be not of my glory. But though so favorable a
Sanctuary should be grievous unto me, and that I should promise me more love
and fidedelity amongst my own, what is there in that sweet life that is
constant and must not end? Believe me (my Cavaliere) that fair vanity of the
Court lasts not always, we must soon or late break those fetters of Gold,
which makes so many voluntary slaves. Should you have so little goodness for
me, to persuade me to put my self again to a chain, from whence so amiable is
Providence has delivered me? When I remember the little leisure that we have
to think of God, and the necessity which enforces almost the best courages to
abandon themselves to the world, I have no less repugnance to think of my
former life, then obligation to amend the faults thereof. My Noble Sir, leave
me here where I have no Jealousy to content, no Traitor to fly, nor any
troublesome persons to defend my self from. But if I remain in a condition,
wherein I cannot acknowledge the affection which you witness to have for
Hirlanda, believe that you oblige an unable, and not an ungrateful person. I
dare likewise to assure you, that God taking care to recompense you at my
request, you shall have more cause to bless my little power, then reason to
desire to change my fortune.

The Knight de l'Olive was much troubled to bring the resolution of the
Princess to the change which he proposed to her. Notwithstanding after he had
excused the Duke of his credulity, upon this, that it is hard for a Husband to
love with passion, and to love without jealousy, he presented unto her that
the fault which he had done, and whereof he had a hundred times repented, would
hold him henceforward in distrust of all reports that might be made him.
Besides, that being himself witness of a virtue which was disguised unto him;
it would be as easy for him to reject the calumny, if it had impudence, as it
would be hard for him to take the pretenses. [After all, Madam (added he) it is
not so much your interest to pass again into Bretany, as that of all your
subjects: I omit notwithstanding that their happiness depends of your conduct;
and that never any one of your Domestics shall come forth of his misery but by
your means. Consider only what you owe to your Husband, and what you owe to
your self. I believe that you are not ignorant that his safety depends partly
on you, and that having charms enough to hinder his debauches, you should be
guilty of them, if you remove a remedy which can cure him of it. My zeal should
excuse the liberty which I take, to represent unto you your duty. For that
which concerns you, I think that no body can contradict me, if I assure that
you cannot suffer longer the oppression of your Innocence, and that you will
begin to be criminal, when you shall begin to oppose your self to your
justification. I should not care to persuade you to your return, if I foresaw
it not glorious, and knew not that it is necessary for us.

As our Cavalier had ended that last word, the good Princess drawing a deep
sigh from her heart, said unto him,

Well, since you judge it so, I consent to be yet miserable. Go, and prosper: I
see well that my God will have me to suffer, endeavor to place again the poor
Hirlanda, where every day she shall be constrained to see and show good
countenance to the Murderer of her child. I speak not of the honor which they
endeavored there to ravish from me: Innocent Victime, thy sole misfortune
touches me, because thou live no more.

A few days after the Gentleman departed to observe the time and means to
accomplish his design: He was not long with Artus, but he took occasion to
make him the Overture thereof. One day the Duke being at the Chase, as the
Knight de l' Olive entertained him very much with the happiness of his
condition, and perceived that Artus was not of his opinion, and likewise that
the Prince confessed to him that many things were wanting to his contentment. I
think, added the Cavalier, that your Excellence could henceforth desire nothing
which you enjoy not; but if any thing be wanting to your felicity, I suppose
that it is a chaste Hirlanda. At this word, as if one had pierced the heart of
Artus, he sent forth a sigh thence, which declared plainly enough that he had
touched his inclination.

My Cavalier (said he unto him) would to God that it was as easy for me to
possess her, as to desire her, I should then believe my happiness
accomplished, and you should have cause to tell me, that I ought to be content.
But if I cannot be perfectly happy but in the fruition of a good so perfect, I
am sure never to live without displeasure, since I have no assurance ever to
see Hirlanda again. Alas, how that cruel night which ravished her from me, has
given me disquiet ones! She is dead, my dear friend, and with her all my joys
are vanished. And though she lived, who knows the place of her retrait? And if
any one knew it, who could persuade her to come from thence? She should have
goodness enough to forget, that I am culpable of all the evils which she
endures, and that my credulity has made her fidelity to be doubted.

Sir, (replied de l'Olive) it is rather your evil fortune, then your evil will,
which gives cause to these displeasures. Though it touch a woman to see her
self suspected, there is left her always so much reason to penetrate, that
the umbrage of a husband proceeds from the excess, and not from the defect of
his love; and that if he were but a little jealous, he would not be very
ardent. I know well that the thought which clasheth the fidelity of a wife,
suspects her Virtue, but also it witnesses the esteem of her good qualities;
so that Jealousy offends not so much the Virtue of a woman, as it forbids the
Surprises of an envious person. I am assured that your Hirlanda is still yours,
and that if she has quitted your house, it is to conserve you the most
precious of your goods against the malice of those who have endeavored to
destroy her (...) Doubt as little of her life, as of her affection: But if your
Excellence please to command me to find her, I assure my self that you shall
see within a few days both her love and her face.

Whilst the Cavalier held this Discourse, he kindled an ardent desire in the
soul of Artus.

My Cavalier (replied lie) I think it is to no purpose to dream of Hirlanda,
but I can well protest, that if she lives, no body could render me a more
acceptable service, then to persuade her to return.

The Gentleman stayed no longer to open himself to the Duke in all the
particulars that happened to him; he related unto him how he had found his dear
Spouse in a disguised habit with one of his Aunts, where since her Quality was
known, she received all the honors that were due unto her. From this time
forward the face of Artus was wholly changed, there was seen there no other
melarcholy, but that which the impatience to see the Duchess, imprinted
therein.

Scarce were they returned from the chase, but the Knight De l'Olive was
commanded to pass again into Normandy to conduct his Mistress. It is hard to
express the regrets of Hirlanda, and of her good Hostess, when they were to
give the last adieu: nothing could sweeten their separation, but the promise to
see one another in the Spring. So must it be granted that there are no delights
comparable unto those of a life retired from the noise and crowd of the world.
It is not in the dirt of towns that heaven sheds his dew, there is but the
country which receives those pure favors, and can taste them; it is there that
God speaks to his Elect, that he entertains them familiarly; and to speak all
in a word, it is there that he possesses them without trouble. Our holy
Princess saw well what she lost, so witnessed she it enough by her tears.

The Duke having understood that his wife was but a days journey from his
house, he departed with a good number of Gentlemen to receive her with all the
testimonies of a true and perfect good will. I will not tell you that there was
a little confusion in the first salutation. Artus could not think of his too
much credulity without-blushings, notwithstanding the transport of joy overcame
all the other resentments of his soul. A thousand times he asked pardon of the
Duchess, protesting to her that the excess only of his affection had been the
cause of his error. Hirlanda, who knew well that the forgetting of injuries,
was the proof of a good courage, gave to the Duke all the assurances that she
could of having no remembrance at all of what was passed; she sought likewise
reasons to persuade him that he had not offended, to the end that he might not
have cause to fear. I pass lightly this first interview, because it is
impossible for me to express the ceremonies thereof; what I can say is only to
assure that this happy day was like unto that of the Dukes nuptials; all the
rejoycements thereof were renewed. A great number of Nobles came to the palace
of Artus to congratulate with him his good fortune, and with the Princess her
happy return.

It seemed that so much joy could not suffer any sorrow in hearts so content;
but alas, Hirlanda saw not her dear son! her grief was without consolation,
because her evil was without remedy: the poor little one was dead both in the
opinion of the father, who believed him smothered in his birth, and in that of
the mother, who had some doubt of his shipwreck. Never cast she her eyes upon
her childbed, but all her trances renewed in her heart: if any one of the women
which served her formerly, presented themselves to her, one would have said
that it was to advertise her to weep. Oftentimes she would retire her self all
alone into that fatal chamber where her dear child had been ravished from her;
and as she saw her self without witness, she afflicted her self without
compassion. Hirlanda (said she) must thou live the remainder of thy days in a
place where thou ought to die? Why did not those who snatched an infant from
thee out of thy bowels, tear out also thy heart? would their pity be inhumane,
and show that virtue it self is criminal in a barbarous foul? Oh poor
victime, how desirable would it have been unto me to expire with thee, if thou
art dead; or to languish in thy company, if thou live!

My Reader, you know well that the son of our Duchess is not yet dead, if
there be not arrived to him some new accident, and more cruel then the former
which assaulted him. I am much deceived, if I told you not that upon the point
of his embarkment a troop of unknown people entered into the vessel, and seized
upon the traitors that carried him away, as they would cast him into the sea.
This order came from Gerard, uncle to the little one, who judged this
precaution necessary to the secret of his design; it is so, that an evil action
may be assured, that it shall be soon or late recompensed, even by those that
profit by its malice, and that give the counsel thereof. But where have they
conducted that band of criminals who without doubt fear to live, because they
merit a rigorous punishment, and who desire yet to fear long, because they come
to see death? It is that which I will tell you, my Reader, provided, you will
permit me to instruct you with a thing which you shall confess to be for my
purpose.

St. Maloes, a Town of high Bretain, is at this day sufficiently known by that
famous garrison of dogs which keep it by night, whilst the floods of the sea
which guard it the day, retire themselves to leave them in faction. It is a part
of that territory, whose people are named Diublintres by Pliny, Caesar, and
Strabo. But besides that, and the great traffic which it maintains, the
Episcopal seat which John Bishop of Alethe transported there in the year 1172
makes it to pass for one of the considerable Towns of the Province: four miles
from St. Maloes is the famous Town of Monfort, whose name is great enough in
the history, by reason of the miracle or prodigy which has been constantly
observed there for the space of three or four ages, and whereof the last has
seen the end. It is enough to name the Duck of Monfort, to make all those of
the country to remember, that every year a wild Duck issuing out of the
neighboring Marsh came the first of May to the Church, where sometimes more
then ten thousand persons conducted her in procession, and from whence she
retired her self after the offering, leaving one of her twelve Ducklins to the
Curate, for a monument of her natural piety. What love soever that bird had for
her little ones, this loss was not considerable; for besides that she made a
present unto God, there always remained unto her a good number. But alas, the
unfortunate Hirlanda loses her only one, and loses him for ever, since the
sacred waters of baptism assure her not to see him again, nor ever to meet that
dear moiety of her self. My reader, I would fain that these circumstances
should design you the place where we are to find again our little Prince.

At the same time that the Nurse accompanied with her husband, and some
confidents of him that has gained them, prepared their passage for England;
God, who never forsakes the innocent in affliction, thought of the means to
take from them this precious infant. A venerable old man, named Bertrand,
governed at that time the Abbey of St. Maloes, which since is changed into a
Cathedral; scarce had this holy man taken his first sleep one night, but an
Angel appeared unto him, and communded him from God to awake his servants
presently, and to send them toward Alethe to stop fugitives which carried away
a little boy who had not received baptism. The Abbot, who knew perfectly the
voice of him whom he was to obey, called his brother, who reposed in another
apartment, and with all the diligence that could be used, without incommodating
himself, commanded him to execute what I have already insinuated. It was no
hard thing for people resolved and well armed, to force five or six rogues,
whom fear had more then half overcome; there was notwithstanding no more but
the Nurse with her husband that was taken, holding in her arms that poor
victime which she carried to death: the others were either slain in the
defense, or saved themselves in the darkness. Until then the Abbot knew nothing
of our history; but he learned of the Prisoners the birth of the child, and of
the Angel the sad adventure which attended it in England. It is not to be
doubted also, that God revealed unto him the conduct which he should take for
the future in its education: though the good old man was touched with
compassion, seeing the tears of the Nurse, who confessed not the truth but by
constraint, he caused her to be put into a prison, where she soon lost her
husband. This wicked woman, questioned about the parents of the child, feigned
that as she walked in the road, a troop of thieves had carried them away.

The good Abbot could sufficiently convict her, both by the equipage of the
little one, which was not conformable to those of her condition, and by her
tears, which without doubt would not have accused her good fortune.

How admirable is our great God in his sweet and secret providence! at the
same time that our little stranger entered into the Monastery, the sister of
Bertrand, who had a little girl at her breast, lost it, as if that innocent
creature had not lived until that moment, but to keep her mothers milk for him.
This death caused her parents much displeasure; but the Abbot, who looked upon
this, accident as a particular disposition of heaven, had not much trouble to
comfort them. Having caused his sister to be called, he said unto her,

My Daughter, you have lost your ^hild, if it be to lose her to restore her
unto him who gave her you; I blame not your tears, because they are just,
provided, that they be not obstinate. Though God could take your goods without
rendering you either account thereof or recompense, he is notwithstanding so
good, that he would not take from you a daughter, without giving you a boy in
her place. Receive him from his hand by mine, and give me this proof of your
amity, that you have no less care of his breeding, then if he were your son.
Perhaps this abandoned babe shall be the happiness of your House; and if God
give you other children, this little miserable may be the cause of their good
fortune. But though you should expect no other reward but from heaven; you have
a motive just enough to do this good office to this Orphan, since I assure you
from God, that he has adopted him for son.

As he had ended these few words, he put the little Bertrand into her arms:
Berita (that was the name of this virtuous Gentlewoman) received him with no
less respects then if God himself had charged her with him. But that which
meriteth more consideration; she no sooner pressed him on her bosom, but he
entered into her heart, having as much tenderness for him, as she should have
resented for a son, of whom she should have been the true mother I am too hasty
to tell you the name of our little one; for to speak truth, he had not yet any.
It was but the third day after he was received, that the holy old man give him
his, willing that she whom he bad chosen him for Nurse, should hold him at the
font with him. After the ceremony of the Baptism was finished, and that his
Godmother had put her dear Nursling into his swaddling clothes, there happened a
thing which drew tears from the good Abbot. Scarce had he that little Christian
in his arms, but he opened his little eyes, and then holding them fixedly
settled upon the venerable face of Bererand, he betook himself to smile, but in
a manner so natural and orderly, that one would have judged that he thanked him
for his charities. The Saint knew well that children begin to laugh at the
seventh day of their birth, and therefore this little Prince being of that
term, was to give the same signs which are ordinary to those of his age.
Notwithstanding, he would rather believe that this laughter was an effect of
Grace, then a motion of Nature, and that he expressed himself rather Christian
then Man by this miraculous joy. There was no body there that grew not tender,
seeing the good old man to weep as abundantly upon that child, as if he were to
baptize him again with his tears. He spoke unto it so many things as was
sufficient to make one swoun with tenderness, but he spoke not enough to make
himself comprehended of any other but of his brother, to whom alone he had
discovered all his secret. His wisdom made him to judge that he must keep
secret what Heaven had revealed but to him. Let us withdraw us from our little
Prince, no ill things can arrive unto him, since God interests himself in his
preservation. We cannot divine all that which passed in this retreat, but it is
to be presumed, that the Abbot who had received that infant from the hands of
the Divine providence, and put him into the bosom of his own sister, would not
neglect the breeding of it. We will leave him under so good and charitable a
Master; whilst we visit his Mother.

My Reader, I am assured if you look upon but the appearance and outside of
Hirlanda's fortune, that you will believe it now happy: all the world
endeavors with complacence to content her, and no body is so rash to
contradict her will. Artus, who was the most concerned in that she should live
content, gave her every day new proofs of his affection; he was ravished when
he could discover any thing which might please his wife; so that he gave her in
this last usage wherewith to judge, that if she had been persecuted, he had been
deceived. There was not any, even to the greatest enemy of his repose, that
would not persuade her that he had passion to serve her. You comprehend well
that I mean Gerard, author of all the tempest, which the virtuous Princess is
coming to sustain. When she returned unto Bretany, this young Lord was not
there, that was it which gave him cause to dispatch unto her a Gentleman in
post, to assure her, that if some indisposition had not constrained him to keep
his bed, he had been himself the messenger of his joy: this evil brother in law
feigned to bear a good part in the domestic rejoycement; notwithstanding it is
certain that his complement was but the pretense which he took, to make known
the spirit of his brother, and of his sister. It suffices me to insert here
one of his letters, not to serve for ill example to hypocrisy, but to give a
precaution against the surprises of his malice. My Reader, you know
sufficiently the heart of Gerard; judge, I pray you, of his words.

Madam, as soon as I had the news of your happy return, I protest unto you
that my soul, which had always been sad for your retreat, was seized with so
sudden and sensible a joy, that it was as hard for me to regulate it then, as
it is difficult for me to express it now. And really, though I had no interest
in the contentments of my Lord the Duke, and that you were unto me a person
indifferent, it is enough to know your virtue, to congratulate your
prosperities. God who sees the bottom of my heart, knows that I have no other
thought, and that as there is no man in the world that honors your merit
more then I, there is not any one that participates more in your joy. I speak
this unto you, not to make you believe that I should be in the rank which I
have touched, but to oblige you to comprehend, that, being brother as I am, I
am ravished as I ought. Besides the general reason which obliges all honest
people to cherish the happy success of virtue; and the particular which comes
unto me from alliance, I have a proper motive to like the glory which heaven
gives unto yours. I will freely confess unto you, that the fear which I had
lest the indiscretion of my zeal might have given some subject to your flight,
held me in inquietude at your return, and that I apprehended, you would believe
me an artificial enemy, for having endeavored to be a faithful servant. My
reason represented to me unprofitably, that you would judge that the emotion
which I expressed upon the accident of your lying in, was a proof that I
desired passionately the happy issue of it. I apprehended always that some
evil spirit would disguise my carriage unto you, to the prejudice of my
affection; now that you are in condition to hear from my mouth the
protestations of my fidelity, I would, if you are the object of my imprudence,
that you would be also the judge thereof. There is no punishment which I find
not sweet, provided, that my trouble might be compatible with your amity; and
that in suffering the punishment which you shall ordain me, I comfort my self
with the good will wherewith I desire that you should honor me. My friends
will make you to see that there is as little artifice in my former actions, as
deceit in my words, and you will acknowledge, Madam, that I cannot be so
criminal and bold, as to approach you, after having offended you. My fever
augments the ardour which presses me to come to render you my devoirs. Adieu,
Madam, I am as I have always been,

Your faithful humble servant. GERARD.


Oh traitor! If the service passed which thou have rendered to that innocent
Princess, must serve for a model unto those which she is to expect from thee
for the future; tell her rather that she has cause to make provision of
patience to suffer thy malice, then to assure her self of thy good will. As the
Gentleman that Gerard sent, returned, and had understood that his Master might
come without danger to salute his brother and sister in law, he departed from
the place of his abode, and came unto their house; his arrivul was a new motive
of joy to the Duke and Duchess: he had not penetrated the malicious design of
Gerard, and she dissembled it with much wisdom and pleasure. There is no
contentment like that to overcome a just anger: at the same time that we stop
the sallies thereof, we taste the delights of a triumph. Hirlanda had the
experience of these sweetnesses, therefore it was that she had not much trouble
to keep her self in the practice of so commendable a constraint. Gerard failed
not of his side to render her all the complacencies of a very discreet person,
and all the services of a very passionate friend. So that the Princess
contributing to her error through her proper goodness, and her brother by his
fine policies, she was not much troubled to lose her former sentiments, and to
believe that Gerard had no less true affection, then he seemed to make sincere
protestations. But alas, how innocence sometimes brings her self to the
disposition of her ruin; and how often would she be safe, if she were a little
distrustful! Poor Hialanda, why make you not use of the experience of what has
passed, to secure you from the evil which may arrive unto you? It is not to
offend the virtue of another, but to use ones own well; if you had a little
less confidence, you should have much more good fortune. Why endeavor we to
give suspicions and fears to our virtuous Lady? her sweetness, her modesty, her
affability, and her innocence are defenses good enough against the assaults of
malice and of envy. Let us permit our Princess to enjoy, repose and delights,
of which misfortune would have deprived her so long time.

The History observes that the Duke and Duchess lived together in perfect
intelligence the space of seven years: God never fails to do us as much good as
evil in this life, to the end that this mixture may moderate our joys, and
comfort our displeasures. It is not that he intends to give us the recompense
of our virtue, but rather a motive to hold fast in its painful combats. His
great reward attends us in heaven; in which certainly we have an illustrious
testimony of the wisdom of our Sovereign, who will not that we should possess
much wealth, whilst we have need of a Guardian. In the course of this sweet
life, the Duchess was brought to bed of a Daughter, which caused sensible
joys to her husband: notwithstanding, Hirlanda was but half content, because
he had but the moiety of his desire. The sum of her wishes was to possess a
son, to the end to sustain his House, and to carry his name to Posterity. But
alas, how little men know that which they should, they ask sometimes children
of God, and they find that they are Vipers which tear out their bowels, either
with their persecution, or with their cares.

Poor Hirlanda, have you not in your former. Childbed wherewith to oblige you
not to desire a second? Is it not enough to lose a son, without losing also a
daughter, and with her, honor and life?

Gerard seeing that the succession of his Brother went from him by the birth of
this Heiresse, he attempted to render the Conception thereof suspected, and to
deceive the spirit of his brother, as he had already done before.
Notwithstanding he would carry himself more cunningly then at first,
endeavoring to cover his evil design with some good pretense He governed
himself with so much artifice, that one would have thought him Protector of her
whom he intended to destroy. Behold how he began to contrive his plot.

Being one day with his Brother in a Garden belonging to the Castle, as he
perceived that his spirit laboure'd with some melancholy, he fained to be much
troubled thereat. Sir, (said he unto him) I wonder to see you sad in the common
joy of your House, and that you should be the only one that participates not in
the good fortune of your Family. What is wanting to your contentments, now that
heaven has blessed your Marriage? Really (replied Artus) you have hit it
the^e, and found out wherewith to comfort me; you could not better tell me,
that I have a most just cause to afflict me, then to say, that I am the father
of a daughter. I have a great Obligation to Hirlanda for this fair present that
she gives me to sustain so strongly my house.

My Reader, Judge of the goodness of this spirit, who makes his wife ^riminial
for having not brought a Son into the world. Must she not be at least a
Goddess, to content his humor? ^ince the Patriark Jacob answered Rachel, That
he was not God to give her children. I find that the plaint of our Duke is more
extravagant, then that of this good Lady; for if it be true, that the fathers
contribute more to the birth of their Heirs then the mothers, Artus is more
culpable then Hirlanda. Behold notwithstanding the murmur of many fantastic
husbands, who take occasion to persecute, or at least to frown upon their
wives, because they have no children, or not such as they desire with passion.

Our evil brother had no mind to represent this to the Duke, he contented
himself to make an answer, which indeed charged not the Princess, but left her
in suspicion to have voluntarily contributed to this defect, through the
austerities and penitencies which weaken nature. Notwithstanding (added he) we
should not blame a person, when she offends but through too much zeal;
otherwise it would be sometimes a crime to have virtue.

Behold Gerard Philosopher and Preacher: see him now Cheater and Slanderer. A
while after as he perceived that his brother continued his coldness, he
visited his sister in Law, and counseled her to render her self more
complacent to the humors of Artus, disclosing unto her the cause of his
change. It is not to be doubted but the honest caresses of a wife can do much
upon the spirit of a Husband; but if he be savage and capricious, they provoke
him more then they gain him. It is that which Gerard intended, and which he
obtained, because that the Duke being of a fierce nature, the more tenderness
Hirlanda expressed to him, the more he despised her. Besides, he began to
believe that there was artifice in these Testimonies of love, and that she
intended rather to deceive him, then to pacify him.

This umbrage was strongly upheld by an accident which happened one day to the
Prince in the beginning of his dinner: for as he opened his napkin, he found
therein a note, wherein there was but these words, Take heed of a flattering
woman. I will not tell you who was the Author of this device; but I can assure
you that it forwarded very much the Design of Gerard, which was to render the
Duchess suspected to her Husband. Since this fatal day he spoke not one
reasonable word to Hirlanda; when he met her, it was but to do her injury.

Unfortunate Princess! your disaster touches you sensibly, I doubt not of it;
since it deserves the tears of all the world, I consent that you should lament.
No, no Hirlanda weep not, it is better that Virtue command with you then
Impatience: but if you cannot deny your tears to your grief, I conjure you to
make provision of them for another time.

Without doubt it is not hard to judge, that our brother in Law was in too good
a way to stop himself; his Artifice had too much success to quit the match,
upon the point to gain it. His familiar spirit suggested him the means, which
he had not yet employed.

I have not yet told you, that the Duke had in his neighborhood a Cavalier who
was redoubtable to the whole Province: the advantages which he had had in many
Encounters, gave him the heart to fear nothing. Notwithstanding I can scarce
believe that he was perfectly courageous, seeing he was a Traitor. Gerard
thought it fit to gain this man to destroy his sister; he tried all that which
he judged would corrupt him; but it was no hard matter to acquire a man, who
was for every one that sought an opportunity to do evil. Behold then the
resolution taken to put Artus in distrust of his wife, see the conduct thereof.

After that this dangerous spirit had sounded the Dukes, and found disposition
enough in his soul to receive a calumny, he took a time one day to speak unto
him in these terms.

My Lord, if I had not more passion for your glory then prudence to dissemble
your injuries, I might be blamed for the il service, which I am notwithstanding
obliged to render you. I would the report which runs through the Province were
false, it is too common to conceal it from you; if your Excellence please to
give me leave to discover to you what I know thereof, I will avouch nothing
which I will not maintain at the peril of my life. I believe, my Lord, that you
are not ignorant what is spoken openly of the privacies of my Lady with the
Lord de l'Olive. It is not but since to day that he ought to be suspected of
you, since all his life has been but a continual plot to ruin her. Whilst
your Excellence was absent, he never was from her; when she was away, he kept
her by one of his Aunts; now that you have begun to discover their practices,
he flies your Court, either to avoid his punishment, or to dissipate your
suspicions. I doubt not but one might say more thereof, if it were not better
to give you only this advice by precaution, then to enlighten you too much by a
truth so odious.

The Traitor ended here, but to provoke more and more the curiosity of the
Duke, who failed not to press him to instruct him with the rest.

It is not without constraint that I am to finish: but since you will have it
so, I must tell you against my will, that no body believes that ever you were
father. Would to God that I had not seen those privaces, which made me to know
him that contributeth truly to the birth of the Duchess children. I should
be without doubt more discreet, then to speak unto you of it, if I were not the
most ardent, as the most obliged to serve you. But since all the world knows
this disgrace, it would be to love your shame, to conceal it from him alone
that can easily find a remedy for it. I am persuaded that your Excellence will
approve my fidelity without my pretending to a recompense for it; since I am
resolved to give you this testimony thereof, to expose my life to defend your
honor, and to maintain my word both together.

Good God, what a strange monster is calumny! But what an unpitiful fury is
jealousy! How powerful is she when she meets with a feeble spirit!

The first effect of the Imposture of this Traitor was, that the Duke caused to
be taken away from Hirlanda her little daughter.

This Virtuous Princess was in her Apartment, when a troop of Servants cast
themselves without respect into her Chamber, she held her poor little Innocent
in her arms, when the most insolent of these Rascals snatched it from her by
force.

My Reader, I assure you that Hirlanda wept not, because that the violence of
her grief seized so that desolate Mother, that she was rather as one dead* then
as one afflicted. But scarce was she come to the liberty of knowing her self,
but she began plaints and regrets, which would have touched the soul of a
Barbarian. But Artus had not even the heart of such a one; never would he
suffer that the Duchess should cast her self at his feet to implore his
justice.

Poor Hirlanda, I have nothing to say unto you in this extremity, which
surpriseth my spirit as well as yours, if not that you must resolve to dye, and
to live in Innocence I care not to speak unto you now of a Providence, which
seems to abandon you. Suffer then at least, since it is inevitable, suffer
since it is necessary.

In the horrible confusion which began to trouble that little Court, Artus
caused his brother to be called, to communicate unto him his displeasure, and
to take his advice of what he ought to do in this dangerous conjuncture.
Gerard, who knew well that the Duke was carried enough of himself unto
violence, feigned at first to repress the sallies thereof; but it was only to
the end to assure the death of the Princess, and the better to cover his base
Treachery. Perfidious, believe thou that all the world is blind, and that no
body has eyes good enough to penetrate into thy malice! He said unto him
first, that one should do nothing rashly in an affair of such importance; that
jealousy ought to be suspected when it has to do with the honor of a woman,
whose most criminal Liberties merit death; that though the disloyalty of the
Duchess should be true, one ought to take heed that her punishment might not
be unadvised; that his Excellence had means to be cleared upon this point,
without putting himself to the hazard of condemning an Innocent; that he should
give this glory of not revenging an injury before seeing it judged. And then
who would dare to assure that he who appeacheth the Crime, has not invented
it? Since he presents himself to the combat to maintain his deposition, I
think that one cannot justly refuse her party, to produce some one for her
defense. If she be innocent, she should not be oppressed, if she be guilty, you
need not fear that heaven will favor her malice.

My Reader, you comprehend sufficiently that Gerard would not be so just, if he
believed not the ruin of his sister infallible, and that if he doubted the
success of the combat, he would not tempt the peril thereof. Moreover, he
would not that he should be thought to be sullyed with the blame of a murder,
which he promised himself to perform with praise.

Great God, permit me to ask of thee, where is that Providence which watches
over the actions of men, and glories to support the Innocent? Since thou
forsakest our Princess, and that I cannot doubt of thy equity, Hirlanda is
culpable; so see I that poor Lady whom they drag to a prison. Providence of my
God! is it there that you would have her? Alas! what a great mercy would you
have done her, to leave her to dye in the woods, or to live in servitude! her
end being not shameful, would have been sweet unto her, and her languishment
supportable.

Whilst the Duchess expected, either the punishment which should dispatch
her, or a miracle to save her, permit, after having taken leave of her, that we
consider the apparel of her judgment.

It is now, poor Princess, that I permit you to weep; I would not that you
should look upon your death nor your childrens to excite your tears. Cast only
your eyes upon the sad furniture of your chamber, call the servants which are
by you; this spectacle is lamentable enough to merit all your sighs and your
regrets.

But what! Will they condemn Hirlanda upon the deposition of a Traitor! Shall it
not be allowed her to reproach this false witness, or to prove her innocence? O
how desirable would it have been to our virtuous Criminal, since she could not
expect any sweetness from her Husband, to live in the rigor of the Old Law,
where only Adulterers dyed! If any jealous person suspected his wife of
disloyalty, he led her to the Temple of Jerusalem, where the High Priest
presented her those bitter waters, which Moses describes in the fifth Chapter
of Numbers. If she were guilty and had the boldness to drink thereof, she
burst presently asunder; God giving to a little water and dust gathered from
the Tabernacle, the power to putrify her belly, and to do the same evil to her
Accomplice, if we believe the Rabbis. On the contrary, those that were accused
falsely, were cured of all kinds of Diseases, obtaining a Male child at the end
of nine months, if their marriages had been barren until then.

Poor Hirlanda, you had bitter waters enough, since your eyes were two living
sources of tears; but alas! they could not justify you to a Barbarian, who had
no justice for you.

I know not if this proof of the Jews introduced not amongst our Ancestors the
custom of purging themselves of the Crimes which were imposed on them by
boiling water; a hand pure from vice came forth from thence fairer. Our ancient
Gauls took not always the pains to heat the water, but stripping those whom
they could not convict, they cast them tied hand and foot into a Lake or River,
stretched upon a Buckler or a Cross; when the water bare up their body without
letting it sink, it approved their virtue. Charlemaine considering that a
Criminal was sometimes more light then an Innocent, forbad that Innocence
should longer be so weighed. Perhaps he would not also that that glorious tree
which had born Jesus Christ, should serve for punishment to the wicked.

The most ordinary justification was made by the means of hot iron, which was
a culter or share of a Plough. One of our greatest Kings ordained, that there
should be nine of them set in a rank, upon which they were to march bare foot
without burning themselves. The History of Almania reports, that Cunegonda
proved her Chastity to Henry the second her husband in this manner; and ours
says, that Lewis King of Germany, Nephew to our Charles the Bald, deputed him
thirty men, of which twenty should make the trial of the cold and hot water,
and the other ten of the burning iron.

Moreover we ought not to forget in this observation the custom of justifying
ones self by oath upon the bodies of the Saints, Saint Denis, Germain and
Martin. Much more all our Antiquity reverenced so religiously the person of
Pepin the Short, that they would swear solemnly upon his clothes, presuming
that he who had the boldness to approach that Royal Purple, could not be
sullied with Crime.

The most unjust proof of Innocence or of Crime, was that of Duel, so many
times forbidden, and so many times practiced. The first prohihition thereof,
which was made at the Council of Valence in the reign of Lotharius, brought
excommunication to the Conqueror, and privation of burial to the Conquered It
is not unfit to represent here, the form of these combats, to make known the
injustice of them. When a Crime worthy of death could not be proved true, nor
convicted as false, the Informer presented the Combat man to man, and the
Accused threw down the gage of Battle, which the Judge received after the
exposition of the Crime, ordaining imprisonment, both to the one and the other,
until the day of their Duel. The time come, they were brought into a close
field before noone lightly, armed at the cost of the High Justice; their hair
was cut round about their ears, leaving to their choice the liberty to anoint
themselves, to the end to be more supple. Four Knights guarded the field, where
the Champions were no sooner entered, holding one another by the hand, but they
put themselves on their knees with a reciprocal protestation, that nothing of
the world but the right of their cause, obliged them to try the chance of
Arms. After the profession of their Faith, and the assurance which they gave
not to use Sorcery, the Accused said unto him, Man whom I hold, I am innocent
of such a Crime. To which the other answered, calling him by his name, N. Thou
lie. After this fair Complement, the Marshals gave them Arms, and the
Heralds cried, Let them go in the Kings name. If the Accused remained dead on
the place, he was to be hanged on a Gibbet; if he resisted until the night, he
was declared Victorious.

Behold the Ceremonies which were observed as well on foot as a horse back:
from whence it is easy to comprehend, God being not obliged to work miracles,
that there is nothing less equitable, then these ridiculous and fatal Duels.
For besides that for the most part an unfortunate virtue is abandoned of
succor, it happened often enough that an unjust Accuser had better success then
a weak Innocent, because he had more strength and skill. And therefore I do not
wonder that the Church had darted all her Thunderbolts against the brutish
customs which expose the merit of good men to the punishments of the wicked;
and that our Monarks, in whose Courts principally this madness was in vigor,
have armed the Laws to the ruin of these public ruins.

But alas, poor Hirlanda! Though you be innocent, you must either perish
without defense, or defend your self without force; if your merit has no
support, there will be no safety.

Whilst the Duke and his Ministers employed themselves to seek out a death for
our holy Princess, she disposed her self to receive it Christianly. It must be
confessed nevertheless, that the conformity which she had to the just will of
her God hindered her not to complain of her evils. And to speak truly, if ever a
Patience has found any cause to be grieved, judge you not that it is that of
our unfortunate Duchess! Count, I pray you, all the good moments of her
fortune, scarce will you see there one day entirely happy. She entered not into
her Husbands house, but she met there a brother in Law, who made her lose
honor and repose. Remains your heart insensible after having considered a
woman of that condition, to wander all alone in the woods, and to live in the
dens; to conserve there a life which she could desire to lose? In your opinion
is it not a spectacle worthy of all the pity of good souls to see a Princess
keep the Cowes, and to employ her self about the sheep? Formerly some
Christian Ladies have bean condemned to the Stable. and to the baseft Offices
of a house; but those were not their husbands that constrained them to live in
this baseness. The Motive which caused their contempt, and the condition of
the persons, which ordained their torment, consolated all the bitterness of
their fortune. It is a pleasure to suffer of the Herod's and Neroes; but to have
Artus for Tyrant, it is to speak truly, to have wherewith to deplore. Could you
not say that God takes pleasure to deceive our innocent Princess? After that
Custom had rendered her banishment light, and that she felt no more her evils,
by reason of the long habitude of her fufferance, he sent her a Cavalier to
conduct her into a prison, where she should meet with new griefs.

Let us seek in the life of Hirlanda, the cause of her disgraces, let us seek
in Hirlanda her self: we shall find her life all pure, and all holy, and
Hirlanda in a prison: whilst a thousand persons of her birth live in delights,
she languisheth in necessity. All these considerations representing themselves
to the spirit of our prisoner, it was impossible for her not to deplore her
condition.

One day the woman that served her, being entered into her chamber, where for a
sumptuous couch, cloth of Estare, and Ballisters, there was but an old straw
bed, she could not choose but sigh. Hirlanda wondered at it, because they had
chosen her this old woman, as the cruelest of all the furies which they could
give her; this extraordinary sentiment obliged her to inform her self of the
cause of her sorrow. Madam (replied that woman) it is hard for me to command my
tears, when I think of your miseries; notwithstanding, I have always
suppressed the grief thereof whilst I believed the relief, but now that I see
you at the point of your death, I lose my constancy in losing my hope. My
Reader, permit me to interrupt this sorrowful discourse, to ask you what you
think of the answer of our Princess: I assure me that you will pardon her, if
this news put some little trouble into her soul, and if the fear of a
punishment as shameful as unjust made her change countenance: you comprehend
not well the anguish of her imprisonment, nor the excess of her ordinary
griefs, if you judge that this news afflicted her; you know not that there was
no death which would not be more sweet then her life, if you believe that the
assurance to die, comforted her not. My good friend (said she unto her) I see
well that my good fortune offends you, since you are troubled at a thing
which rejoices me: is it not a great good to depart out of prison, and to
depart thence with assurance never to come there again? Perhaps the grave is
more fearful then this prison, I should believe it, if one were sensible there,
and that its worms were more troublesome then this misery which consumes me.
But yet of what death must I finish? Madam (answered she) they prepare the
wood-pile, where you are to expire, in case there be no person that will defend
your honor in taking away your accusers life. All things are already prepared,
but not one of those that run to this spectacle, presents himself to succor
you. She asked her further if the Lord de l'Olive were not in the country; that
was the Cavalier in whom she had all the remains of her confidence; and as she
understood his absence, she prayed that Governess to cause a Priest to come
unto her to prepare her self unto death by the Sacraments, which are the buds
of the true life, and the seed of immortality. She could not refuse her that
consolation, which she enjoyed as long as possibly she could, because she
passed the best part of the day with a good religious man whom they had sent
her. All the night of that fatal morning which was to see her martyrdom, was
employed in entertaining her self with God, into whose hands she consigned a
thousand times her life and honor. Of all the circumstances of her death,
nothing afflicted her but the examen of her honesty, which was put over to the
fortune of arms.

Never notwithstanding did this courageous Princess let forth one sole tear,
nor sigh; on the contrary, imagining with her self that she was going to see
again her poor children, she felt a joy, whose transports she was troubled to
moderate: Yes, (cried she out) I shall soon see you, innocent victimes. But
that thought gave her not pleasure long, nor her virtue constancy, because it
made her to remember that these two little creatures had been the innocent
cause of her troubles and dishonours. Then opening her eyes unto tears, and her
mouth to regrets, she spoke thus to her amiable Master: My God, I complain not
to dye unfortunate; I am grieved only to die infamous; I demand not that thou
should give me life, I desire that thou would conserve my reputation.
Alas! must I, for being born in a great fortune, and for having possessed
wealth; lose honor? oh how much more desirable had it been to me to be born in
a country village, and to live in the incommodities of a strait poverty, then
to see me raised to serve as a butt unto evil fortune! At least, my pitiful
Master, why would thou not leave me in those woods where the first accident
of my marriage had cast me? I should have found there the trees and rocks
sensible to my plaints, and the Echoes would have expressed my grief to
sweeten me the sharpness thereof. What consolation were it, my amiable Savior,
to live the rest of my days in shadow and obscurity! but it was too great a
favor for a Princess, whom thou would render more miserable then a country
woman. Thou must see Hirlanda die in reproach, to see her with contentment. And
well, my God, since thou ordain'st it, I consent thereunto, protesting, that
nothing is more agreeable unto me, then that which is grievous to me: provided,
that I suffer with thy approbation, and in thy orders, I shall not suffer
against my will. Let us die, Hirlanda, let us die, since we can live no more;
let us die, since we live but by halfes: thy poor children are no more in the
world, why would thou remain there?

Our generous Princess passed almost the whole night in these sentiments, which
seemed to balance her soul between the fear, and the desire of death:
notwithstanding any repugnance which she had to die without justification, she
confented at last to lose as well the esteem of men, as her life. The break of
day scarce appeared yet, but every one disposed himself to this spectacle, the
event whereof all the world feared and desired. To see the consternation of the
whole town, one would have judged that Rennes. prepared it self for the
funerals of all her inhabitants (this place was chosen to render the action
more celebrious). There was erected a great theater for the Court, in a place
which was found then the most capable of that sad ceremony; aside of that was
to be seen one lesser, which by the apparel thereof, one would judge to be that
of the poor Hirlanda. A black cloth reaching even to the ground covered it, a
chair of velvet, two or three seats of the same color made up the fatal
furniture of this scaffold. In the midst of the theater was placed a table in
form of an Altar, to lay there a crucifix enveloped with a cipress, as with a
sad cloud which presaged but misfortune to all the Assembly. The Heaven
extraordinarily charged, seemed to be willing that this execution should be
done in the night, so little light gave the Sun. There was at the foot of the
scaffold a great number of faggots, all ready to take fire; in a word, there
wanted no more but the poor Duchess upon the pile, to make the most pitiful
spectacle that ever History has represented unto us.

My dear reader, if you have your eyes full of tears, I conjure you to dry
them, to contemplate that Nobility which appeared rather to be upon that great
Theater to dye, then to see. Behold, I pray you, that Lady which approaches,
you judge well that it is the deplorable Hirlanda, whom they lead to punishment;
her long mourning robe; the vail which covers her face, and of all sides
descends even to her girdle, denotes, that it is she her self; at least they
tell me, that this equipage was that of the Adulterers amongst the Ancients. O
God! How comes it that this word is slipped from my pen, since it has more
cruelty for the heart of my Princess then death it self I Providence of my God,
is it there then that you conduct a crowned head; which has no other crime but
its ^^^-fortune, and which perhaps might live in honor, if it could live in
impiety? Is it so then that you take pleasure to afflict those that adore you?
have you but racks and punishments for those that should expect your
recompenses? If your thunderbolts seek Criminals, behold them upon the Throne
which brave your power; behold them in the Lists, who provoke all your
vengeances. Gerard and his false witness, deserve they that you should spare
their lives? With what service have they ever honored you? Perhaps there is
but the massacre of Lambs that pleases you, and that you suffer willingly the
Tigers and Bears to tear your faithful servants. My God, I will never think it,
since thou art good, I will always believe the contrary, since thou art just.

Yet I see not any person that presents himself for the defense of Hirlanda,
and though even compassion of her evil should raise her up some Champion, it
would be only to die for company. Her atlversary has too much experience of
his forces, to hazard himself in a combat, whose success should be doubtful.
This Traitor mounted a great black horse; his Livery was of a changeable
taffats, and his shield bare in a sable field a Golden Dragon armed and
languid, which devoured a sheep Argent, with this device, Without mercy. Seems
it not unto you that all this apparel denotes the lamentable presages of the
death of our unfortunate Princess? Who sees not in this dragon, and in the
feeble animal which he devours, Gerard and his sister in law? Let us not be so
rash as to accuse heaven of hardness, never sees he our miseries without pity;
but if he retards sometimes his assistance, it is but to make us know the need
thereof, and to adore the miracle.

As the trumpet sounded for the last time, and that every one looked upon
Hirlanda's pile, a Champion appeared at the end of the lists, who cleft the
press to enter there.

The Duchess, who was half dead, began to be insensible to all kind of
motions; but those who had pity yet in their souls, conceived some good hope,
when they saw that God sent her succor. Some there were that believed, that it
was the Guardian Angel of the Princess, others would have it to be the Lord de
l'Olive. All these names were of good Augury; but whosoever it was, it is
certain that there was good reason to think that it was her Tutelar. His
Courser white as snow; his Livery green, sowed with cares of gold; his Ermine
Argent in a field of Sinople; and the soul of his device, Nothing sullies me,
signified the hope of the Spectators, the cares of the Cavalier, and the
innocence of the poor Lady. Notwithstanding, there was no body that despaired
not of the happy success of the combat, when they saw a young child, who
appeared to have more force in the attractions of his face, then in the nerves
of his arms. His grace and his dexterity to manage his horse, begat some feeble
ray of confidence, but his age yet too tender, dissipated it. My Reader, take
heed that you have not the fears of that sorrowful assembly: remember that
David was young and delicate, Goliath robustious and dreadful.

As our Cavalier advanced himself, and had rendered his devoirs to the Duke, and
to all the Nobles that accompanied him, he demanded if there was any one there
so wicked as to accuse the chaste Hirlanda: Young man (said his Adversary unto
him) you are ill instructed with the life of that woman, if you judge her such.
My Reader, perinit me to disguise unto you so the injurious answer that he
made, I feared that you would not be touched with so sensible a displeasure as
our Champion, who endeavored to turn back those ill words with a box, and the
Lie. But he must employ ruder arms; so the sound of the trumpet, and the
generous fury of the horses carried them to the combat. Their first course was
so strong, that it carried the traitor half out of the saddle, and the young
Cavalier wholly. This accident afflicted all those who wished him a happy
fortune, and gave occasion to his Adversary to alight to pierce him with his
sword; but scarce was he off before he saw him again in his saddle almost as
soon as fallen. He judged well that the time which he should take to remount a
horseback, would give this young man leisure to hurt him in exposing himself to
his stroke; behold therefore rallying all the strength that he had, he
endeavored to fight him with equal forces, in killing his horse. Great God,
forget not that it is thou that fightest for innocence, and that thou can not
abandon this young Prince without making it believed that thou will despise the
merit of virtue. Our Goliath having then stretched out his full arm, plunged his
sword so deeply into the shoulder of his enemies horse, that whatsoever
endeavor he used, he could not draw it out again. That which the wisdom of
the flesh had suggested him to the ruin of another, succeeded to his own; for
his Adversary leaping off, gave him a mortal thrust under the gorget. The
joyful cry which was raised in the Assembly, made it to be comprehended that
every one lived with the death of this Traitor: that which rested to him of
life, was but to curse his misfortune, and to declare the Innocence of the
Princess. Artus himself wept for joy of it; for though a husband be ashamed to
have lightly suspected his wife of little faith, he is ravished to see himself
deceived by the jealousy: there is no man so stupid, that would appear just,
by the conviction of a crime which caused his umbrages; in this point we love
better to be judged suspicious then reasonable.

Here black thoughts, here criminal distrusts come to acknowledge in this
event, that your murmurs have rashly assaulted the divine Providence; come to
render homage to those secret conducts which are hidden to us but to be
adoreable to us. As soon as the Heralds had received the last word of the
Traitor, they went to take the Conqueror to present him to the Duchess. My
Reader, I think that you have long desired to know this Cavalier: you have the
sentiment of all that famous Assembly of our good Princess, who desires with
passion to speak to him. O spectacle of love and joy! At the instant that our
Champion approached the scaffold of the Innocent, she had some thought that the
Conquerours Ermine was a work of her hands; the stuff and fashion rather of
the invelope of an Infant, then of the Livery of a Knight, propped well her
belief. Lastly, as he put himself on his knees before the Duchess, he declared
unto her his name, his birth, and his quality: Madam, (said he unto her) behold
that unfortunate son which has caused you so many griefs; but most fortunate,
since God makes him to day Protector of her that brought him into the world.
Let his goodness take away my life when it shall please him, it troubles me no
more to die, since you live by the means of him, who was almost seen to be the
innocent cause of your ruin. I know not if the poor Hirlanda believed the words
of the little Bertrand, or rather, the assurances which love gave to her heart,
of the truth of his adventures. Howsoever it was, she replied not unto this
discourse but with tender tears, which flowed from her eyes so abundantly, that
she could scarce see him whom she held embraced. Oh God! what sweetness is
there to taste a pleasure, when it comes contrary to our expectation!

Artus, who saw all the caresses of his wife, without knowing the motive of
them, believed at first that these demonstrations of good will were testimonies
of gratitude. Notwithstanding he could not believe, that she who had so many
reasons to appear modest and staid, should leave her self loose unto privacies
which passed the devoirs of a reasonable acknowledgment, between persons of
different sexes. Poor Artus, if thou knewst thy good fortune! As the Duke was
in this astonishment, Hirlanda presented him her Champion, and said unto him
only these three words, Sir, Behold your Son. Really, I admire not that he
wanted words, since all great joys are mute, as well as excessive griefs. When
one resents lively a passion, there is much trouble to express it. Artus being
out of his most deep ecstasies, beheld that face which he had never seen, and
which he believed nevertheless to know. All the world would have sworn that it
was the Dutchesses, if one and the same person could have two of them. Those
who penetrate a little the secrets of Nature, do know that it is the mark of a
legitimate birth in the children, when the sons resemble the mothers, and the
daughters the fathers. These are glorious ignorances to some persons, since it
is unprofitable, and likewise dangerous to comprehend things, which may in
clearing the understanding, corrupt the heart.

Whilst that the Duke and Duchess were in the examen and admiration of the
wonders which passed before their eyes, Bertrand Abbot of St. Maloes, who had
been spectator of the combat with the rest of the Nobless, advanced himself
toward them, to instruct and assure them of a truth, which they came only to
know. After he related unto them how he received their child, upon the point to
be carried away into England, he told them, that by the commandment of God he
had armed that little Prince to defend her that was accused for his birth, and
for his murder. He forgot not to add, that the Angel which declared unto him
what heaven ordained to this young Lord, had not failed to tell him what arms
he would have him use. And to the end that you believe my words no more then
the circumstances which render you your good fortune certain; I will give unto
you an irreproachable testimony thereof: This said, he commanded that the Nurse
should be brought, whom he had caused to come to Rennes to put this prodigy
out of doubt. The poor woman seeing her self at the Duchess feet, asked her
pardon, protesting that she offended not through malice; her Highness might
well forgive her, if the artifices of Gerard had circumvented her simplicity.
After this confession, she continued to report with much cleerness and candor
what had passed in the Duchess childbed, and upon what persuasions she
consented to his carrying away; there need no more doubt of a thing which had
so many miraculous proofs to support it. Artus having then saluted his dear
wife, he held her this discourse.

Madam, I confess that my soul is so divided between the admiration of that
which has passed, and the regret of that which has passed between you and me,
that I have no less shame then pleasure to see me before your eyes. I adore
with all my ravishments the amiable Providence which has conserved me him whom
I supposed destroyed, and her that I would destroy. Let his goodness for ever
be praised of men and Angels, in that he has vouchsafed to do so many
miracles, to keep me from being guilty of the death of two Innocents. Alas!
where would thou have been, my poor son, if heaven had forsaken thee? And
where would you have been, Hirlanda, if it had not powerfully succored you?
But what, have I the boldness to tell you that you are dear unto me, after
such visible marks of cruelty? Was it not enough that my rigor had obliged an
unfortunate to fly from my house, without endeavoring to make an Innocent go
out of the world? Madam. I cannot deny that my first fault renders me not
unworthy of your good will; but who should dare also to doubt that you have not
sweetness and goodness enough for both of them together? It is the only Motive
of mercy which I can represent unto you, since I have nothing in me which
solicites you not to revenge. But if you will that I fix the hope of my pardon
on any thing out of you, I conjure you by the love and tendernesses that we owe
to this dear moiety of our selves, to forget your miseries and my errors, that
you may live as happily for the future, as you have lived innocent for the time
passed; for my part, I will contribute thereunto with all my power, assuring
you that the only joy which I desire in the world, is to see you live there
content.

As he had finished, and that the Princess assured him the best that she could
to forget her misfortunes, the one and the other cast themselves at one time
about the neck of the young Bertrand, which they wet all over with the torrent
of their tears. Plato has not ill named children the glue of the husband and
of the wife, since it is true that they are not tied to their fathers and
mothers, but to unite them by that means. Artus and Hirlanda make the proof of
this sentiment.

During the sweet ecstasies of their ravishment, Gerard touched with the remorse
of his conscience, and convicted by the testimony of so many true depositions,
endeavored to save himself, as he contrived the project. But whether that the
custom was so, or that the Prince had ordained it in this manner, the Ports of
the Town were all shut, so that he was arrested in the same place, where a
little before he made account to triumph.

Providence of my God, how unjustly do men accuse thee, to say either, that
thou see not the malice of the wicked, or that thou dissemblest the excesses
thereof! as if thou were blind in thy understanding, or unjust in thy conduct.
I confess, that thou strikest not the sinner as soon as he merits it; but who
sees not that thou expectest his repentance by this delay, or meditatest his
punishment in the mean time? O how true it is that the prosperity of the wicked
melts like snow, and that nothing of his fortune remains with him, but the
delicacie, which disposes him to suffer his punishment with more bitterness. To
see the cruelties and artifices of Gerard, who would not have judged, that
Innocence could not defend it self from his persecution? To see the first
successes of his plots, who would have dared to hope for the virtue of his
sister? And yet behold Gerard in the prison, where the poor Hirlanda shed so
many tears; behold Hirlanda where Gerard promised himself so many delights.

This wicked Prince being then convicted of all the abominable practices which
we have touched, the consent of all the world ran to a severe condemnation.
Himself thought himself so unworthy to live, that he dared not to dream of his
pardon: there was none but she who ought most to pursue his death, that
endeavored to remove it. She left not out one reason that might be
advantageous to his cause, but what could her goodness suggest unto her, which
rendered not Gerard more culpable? To speak in his behalf, was it not highly to
publish that she was extremely good to pray for her Persecutour; and he
excessively wicked, to have persecuted so holy a Princess? The more sweetness
she made appear, the less he seemed to merit it; because that the virtue and
merit of those which we offend, augmenteth much their injury. It is cruelty to
be pitiful, when the compassion of a Criminal makes us to forget the interests
of an Innocent; and therefore it is sometimes sweetness to want mercy, and to
bend ones resolution against the favorable thoughts which inspire pity.

My Reader, For fear to trouble the joy which you have to see a Virtue
perfectly justified, I will not represent unto you Gerard in a prison, where
both the humane and the divine Justice have condemned him to languish all his
life, his feet and hands cut off. It is true, that his sufferance was not long,
since his life was short. The regret to have afflicted a person worthy of all
kinds of respects, and unto whom he owed all the love of the world, wrought
upon him more then could be imagined. The last sentiment which he had of his
fault, made his death to be lamented even of those who should rejoice thereof;
as he felt himself near his end, he sent unto the Duchess, to conjure her to
forget his evil conduct, protesting that he should dye with contentment, if he
might dye with that favor. Demand you not why I give to this Innocence the
name of Crowned; since she triumphs, we should not deny her the Crown.
Descend into the prison of Gerard, and you shall see there our holy Princess,
who endeavors to comfort her Criminal; she spares neither words nor caresses,
to make him believe, that this last moment of his life, razeth out the
remembrance of the many years of his persecution. To the end to take away
altogether suspicion, she would shut his eyes her self, deploring his agonies,
as if her dear Bertrand were dead.

After having rendered testimonies of so sweet a goodness to her capital enemy,
those who had been but the Ministers of his cruelty, ought not to fear any
thing of Hirlanda's resentments; so would she never consent that they should
speak of the death of that evil Nurse, who left her self to be corrupted by
Gerard. What (said that good Princess unto those that would incline her to that
Justice) have you so little affection for me, as to desire to ruin all the
proofs of my Innocence? Know you not that it is glorious to Hirlanda to see
those to live, that employed themselves to make her dye? If you love me,
importune me no more; I should be ungrateful, if I were perfectly just. So far
am I from having cause to procure her a punishment, that I believe me obliged
to give her a recompense. Has she not accompanied my poor little one in his
miseries? Has she not presented him the teat in his necessities? And not to
fix me only to the services which look but upon mine, am I not redevable unto
her for the illustrious testimony which puts my virtue out of suspicion and
fear? Behold how our Duchess looked upon the fault of another through the
fairest place that she could have. See how all those that suffer like she
should revenge themselves with her. Whatsoever evil an enemy does us, we shall
always have some Reason to excuse him, and even to like his persecution,
provided that we regard him where he is profitable unto us. But we must not
expect this discretion, but from Heroic Virtues, since the common sort of men
find too often darts of Offense, even in the most obliging favors.

One should not demand if those who had done good to the Mother and son,
received the reward of their service and good will. The holy old man Bertrand
would have no other recompense but that which he expected from heaven; but he
permitted his brother and sister to profit by the benefits of the Duke and
Duchess, who considered them no otherwise then themselves, seeing they had
been so long the father and mother of their dear Infant.

The whole Province bare a part in the public rejoycement; nothing was
forgotten that might contribute to the joy of that little Court. The Turneyes,
the Justs, the Courses at the Ring, the Dances, the Masks, and all the other
exercises of Galantry, might persuade that it was the first day of Artus and
Hirlanda's Nuptials, if they had not seen the little Bertrand, who was the
chaste fruit thereof. After some years of a life, as sweet, as the first of her
marriage had been bitter, with a common consent, the Duke and Duchess put
their Ducal Crown upon the head of their son, who failed not afterward to
labor with all his power the contentments of them both.

The History has observed nothing in particular of that which passed since
this memorable accident; but though it speaks of the good fortune of Hirlanda,
we must not believe that her greatest prosperity consisted in the petty
contentments of the earth: It is in heaven that she receives her full and
perfect recompense; it is with this recompense that she concludes that which is
worth unto Innocence, a persecution which she has not merited, and that there
is no virtue more desirable, then that which possesses nothing here below of
Honors or Wealth. Who could comprehend the sweet joys that come unto her now
from that dear solitude where she passed her exile of seven years? Who could
penetrate into the esteem of the suffrances of her imprisonment?

Virtuous Princess! There is none but you that may know the weight and value
of that precious dishonor, and of that glorious Infamy, which has shadowed
your purity, but to make the splendour thereof to appear with the more vigor.

They hold, that the most illustrious monument which rests unto us of this
strange adventure, is in the Eschutcheon of Bretany, where they will have the
Ermine to have taken a place to conserve honorably the memory of it. If it be
so that the Arms of this Province have their birth in the Cradle of Bertrand,
it seems that they have judged very fitly, that that which had served to the
safety of one of her Princes, should be employed hence-foward in the highest
marks of their glory. They say then, that after this famous event, the Ermine
succeeds three sheaves of corn bound with God, which Penthieura withholds in
the skirt of Bretany. or rather in the Scutcheon of Gules in nine Mascles d'or,
which those of the House of Rohan have received since this divorce. I know well
that some Authors make these Mascles to come from one Maclianus, who lived in
the time of our great King Lodowick. But surely, to dissemble nothing my
thoughts, I see not what resemblance there can be between his name and their
figure. Without giving the glory of all that which we have famous in France, to
Romance, we may say, that the Counts of Rohan, have chosen for Arms what was
most rare within the Territory of their Dominion, where almost all the stones
and plants are traced with certain figures which represent Mascles. Thus the
Lords of that ancient House carry Arms as natural as the Inhabitants of
Tenedos, who marked an Axe in their coat, because that the Crabs of their
Promontory Asterion, had their scale imprinted with the perfect figure of an
Axe.

Though the sheaves or Mascles have yielded to the Ermine, either because that
one of the Dukes of Bretany saw one day our Lady habited with that delicate and
noble skin, or because that the Prince of whom we speak, was enveloped
therewith; it is without doubt that the ancient Kings of arms, who were not so
knowing as the new, have failed in the enamel, and in the blason of the
Scutcheon of Bretany, since its ground ought to be of argent, and not of sable,
but rather its spots which they made of argent. As much as we may call into
doubt of what I write of the Ermine, at least we ought not to deny that it has
always been in great veneration in this Duchy. I leave out many proofs
thereof; without speaking of the Castle of the Ermine, it suffices me to
produce only one of them, to make appear that the purple was not more august
amongst the Romans, then the Ermine was sometimes so to the Bretains.

No body is ignorant, that almost all Sovereigns have instituted Orders of
Knighthood, either to witness to posterity the esteem which they made of the
things which they used in their composition, or to give to their subjects some
glorious motives of generosity: so Charles Martel invented the Order of the
Gene^; King Robert son of Capet, that of the Star; and Saint Lewis the second
of the loss of the Genet, and of the Crescent; leaving to Lewis the second that
followed him that of St. Michael. Henry the third, willing to render thanks to
the Holy Ghost for that he was born, chosen King of Poland, and the year
following called to the Crown of France the day of its Festival, he instituted
his Order of the Holy Ghost: In imitation of them, the English have found out
their Garter; the Burgundians their Fleece, and the Bretains the Order of the
Ermine, or of the Espy. Francis the second instituted it in the year 1450. The
Collar was of two circles of gold, wherein a great number of Espies were
interlaced in cross: in the last circle hung on two chains of gold an Ermine
passing upon a flowery bank with this device, To my life. I have a great
inclination to believe, that the adventure of Bertrand, and the innocence of
our Hirlanda, gave subject to this institution. The nature of that animal, more
white then snow, and who suffers rather to be taken of the Hunter, then to save
her self in a dirty place, furnishes no little resemblance to the purity of
that Illustrious Princess.

I oblige no body to receive my sentiments, but I should well dare to pray
honest men to cast their eyes upon this History. I am assured, if they do me
the honor to seek divertisement to their reading, that they will have another
opinion of Hirlanda's miseries on the end, then on the beginning of her
adventures. My Reader, your excellent nature persuades me that you have not
seen this Innocent amongst the forests, and in prison, without weeping with
her the injustice of her fortune. Without doubt her little Bertrand raised pity
in you, when you knew that he was destined to death; and that she who should
give him life, carried him to the tomb. Confess unto me freely, have you not a
little murmured in that it seemed the Providence of God did abandon the
Innocents to the cruelty of the Guilty? Fear not to acknowledge a sentiment
wherewith the greatest Saints have been sometimes surprised; provided, that you
have resisted an evil judgment, which so long a train of misfortunes has
endeavored to form in your spirit; you may pass for weak, but not for
criminal. And though you should have staggered a little, I am certain that the
end of this lamentable and mavelous History, would have sustained and
redressed your steps: I dare likewise to promise me that the triumphs and glory
of Hirlanda, will make you to wish a like fortune. Believe it not therefore
better then that of Joan of Arc, who would sigh still under the oppression of
calumny, if she were not impassible in the glory of the blessed. If it
happens that you be afflicted (without doubt it will happen) and that God
recompenseth your sufferings in this life, praise his goodness in that he
descends so to your weakness. If he ordains only that your virtue be
acknowledged, after the disguisements of envy, content you with that, and
demand not insolently where are the fruits of your merit. But if he will that
your innocence be suspected even unto that day of the last judgment, when the
great Marscarade of this life shall finish, adore with submission his Providence
which conceals our sanctity to assure the treasure thereof. Hold for
indubitable that almost all men pass in the world Incognito: those that appear
to have much merit, have too often but the show thereof. On the contrary, a
great number of persons resemble those noble strangers that traverse our France
under extreme modest habits: their quality is unknown, but their life and their
purse is assured. Rejoice you at this, that your virtue is secret; the less
splendour it shall have, the more constancy: in losing its luster, it acquires
merit.

The ill opinion that I ought to have of my works, makes me to fear that few
people draw fruit from them; but the good which I have of them that daign to
read them, makes me to hope that they will not be altogether unprofitable.
Perhaps that the villainous strokes which I give unto Calumny in my Discourses,
will inspire the hatred thereof; and that the Histories which present the Idea
of a perfect patience, will beget the love or contempt of the persecution of
tongues. Who would be so weak to apprehend that little noise which detraction
makes, or so insensible to neglect the precious merit that it produces? It
belongs not but unto him that thinks to lose, to gain; when an envious person
endeavors to ravish his honor from him. I grant, that he takes from us as
little as may be of our luster, he never touches his true subject. There is
this difference between the honest man, and the man of honor, that the first
has the true good, which is merit; and the second possesses the splendour
thereof, which consists in the esteem. I should not be of the opinion of
those that think that honor makes the last perfection of virtue, or to speak
better in their sentiment, that honor is the perfect virtue. What appearance is
there that the last feature of man should be out of him, and that ever he
should be completed, if those that look on him judge him not? Our condition
would be worse then that of the meanest works of Art and Nature, which receive
not their accomplishment from the thought which is formed of their excellence,
but rather from an interior term which finisheth them. Honor being then a
strange mark of virtue, calumny may hinder us to pass for people of Honor, but
it cannot make us not to be virtuous: in spite of all its envy, we shall be
honorable, if we have merit, although we cannot be honored, if we possess not
its favor. I dare likewise assure, that detraction, which endeavors to wound
virtue, is advantageous to its glory; not only by the encreasements that it
gives to its principle, but also by the relief wherewith it raises its rays.
They are not the beauties only of a face, which draw new graces from the
blackness that seems to disfigure them: these shadows which the malice of a
jealous person would fasten upon merit, serve not but to make it to be
remarkable, in the same manner, as there is but the Eclipse that gives us the
means to see the Sun. To judge at first, and upon the first sight, one would
blieve that these gulfs which appear in the pictures, pierce the wall that
bears them, and that these Abysines which a little oil and colors make upon
the cloth, prepare shipwreck to the eyes and imaginations that contemplate
them. And yet if we look here more narrowly and nearer, we shall find that
these precipies are at the highest superficies of the portrait, and that the
point of the most eminent mountains, has no more elevation, then the
hollowness of these deep Enfonceurs; that is, an agreeable illusion, and a
profitable deceit, which abaseth us to raise us; let us judge soundly of
calumny, and we shall see, that though she has some other design, she has
notwithstanding that effect. How many great Virtues are there which are unknown
unto us, because no body has traduced them? How many are there that glitter,
because malice has cast a cloud upon them? Not to go from my subject, and to
leave an example which merits our application: Should Hirlanda have come unto
us without her disgraces? should we have known her merit, if it had not been
combatted? A thousand Princesses of as high a birth as she, remain buried in
oblivion, in not having met with a brother in law, or in having one better then
Gerard. There is reason then sometimes to wish misfortunes; imprisonment is
then advantageous; an enemy has benefits, and dishonor, glory. But if it
happen that calumny takes truly from us what we possess amongst men, never goes
it so far as to God; the loss which we make, will be but an Eclipse in the
Ephemerides of the time that passes, and not in the book of life which remains
eternally. Comfort your self then, my Reader, if tongues do you some injustice:
perhaps you will judge one day, that those whom you make the object now of all
your hates, do merit actions of thanks from your acknowledgment. But if you
cannot have these lights in this life, and that the love of a detractor would
be a virtue too hard, I consent that you should conserve your reputation
carefully; provided, that your care be without impressment. Should you not be
blind to lose peace, which is the dear treasure of your heart, to defend
renown, which is but the invisible picture of your virtue? In case that you
should quit a little of the tranquillity of your spirit, I conjure you diminish
nothing of the Innocence of your soul. Remember, that that jealousy which with
too much inquietude combats honor, hazardeth not only its luster, but ruins
also the merit which serves for foundation unto it. The fable says, that
Jupiter brake the eggs of the Eagle which he had in his bosom, in shaking off
the mute of the bird that defiled his purple; how lively it expresses that
which you would do if you should abandon virtue, to conserve its fame? It is an
ill fashion to take away the blemishes of a face, to strip the skin off; it is
that notwithstanding which a mother does, passionate of her child's complexion,
and a man too amorous of his reputation: she wounds a flesh, which she would
purify from its defects, and he offends the merit which he pretends to
privilege from blame. My Reader, since I have but one word to say unto you,
receive this last advice from me, and believe me true, if I maintain, that the
least troublesome way to conserve the esteem of men, is to make little account
of their sentiment. Come you your self to the practice of this generous
contempt; and I am certain, that as soon as you leave tongues to speak, your
virtue triumphs; and that if you suffer quietly their malice, you assure for
ever your Innocence.

FINIS.

