Sabbatum Redivivum: OR THE Christian Sabbath VINDICATED; IN A Full Discourse
concerning the Sabbath, And the LORDS DAY.

Wherein, whatsoever has been written of late for, or against the Christian
Sabbath, is exactly, but modestly Examined: And the perpetuity of a Sabbath
deduced, from grounds Of Nature, and Religious Reason.

By Daniel Cawdrey, and Herbert Palmer: Members Of the Assembly of Divines.

Divided into Four Parts.

1. Of the Decalogue in general, and other Laws of God, together with the
Relation of Time to Religion. 2. Of the fourth Commandment of the Decalogue in
special. 3. Of the old Sabbath, in particular. 4. Of the Lords Day, in
particular.
The FIRST PART.

Ezekiel. 22.26. They have hid their eyes from my Sabbaths, and I am profaned
amongst them.

Mark. 2.28. The SON OF MAN, is Lord also of the Sabbath.

London, Printed by Robert White, for Thomas Underhill, and are to be sold at
the Sign of the Bible in Woodstreete. 1645.

The License.
THis Treatise entitled (Sabbatum Redivivum, Or the Christian Sabbath
vindicated) as in my opinion the most satisfactory of any I have seen, and that
in a point of Divinity, wherein (as appears by the many Books written against
it) the wisdom of the flesh maintains as great an enmity against God, as in
any whatsoever; I recommend unto the Press, as of excellent use in these times.

CHARLES HERLE.

The Contents of the first Part.
CHAP. I. OF the Term of a Moral Law, and the distinction of Laws, into
Ceremonial, Judicial, and Moral: And of Moral Laws, into Natural and
Positive. CHAP. II. Rules to know a Law to be Moral, though but positive.
CHAP. III. Every Law of the Decalogue, is a Moral, and Perpetual Law. CHAP.
IV. The Exceptions to the former Rule, answered. CHAP. V. Christ has confirmed
all the Commandments of the Decalogue as perpetual, Mat. 5.17. etc. CHAP. VI.
Solemn Worship is Morall-Naturall; both Solitary and conjoined, in Families,
and Churches, and how far. CHAP. VII. General Considerations about Time, and
its profitablenesse, in reference to Moral actions of importance. CHAP. VIII.
Considerations of Time in relation to Religion, and the Worship of God; how far
it may be profitable thereunto. CHAP. IX. A Determinate Solemn Time, for Gods
Worship, is Morall-Naturall; and that in the first ^ommandement: And what kind
and manner of Determination of Time for Religion, may be proved Necessary, by
the Law, or Light of Nature, and general Rules of Scripture. CHAP. X. The
Determination of the chief Solemn Time of Worship for all men, Necessarily and
Ordinarily Sufficient for the chief Time, as also of the particular day for it,
belongs not to Men, but to GOD. CHAP. XI. Two Corollaries from the former
Discourses, about Solemn Time. 1. All Times and Days are not equal, under
the Gospel. 2. Time and Place are not equal circumstances in Religion. CHAP.
XII. The Necessary sufficient chief Time for Religion, together with the
particular Day for it, is a part of Worship, and not a mere Adjunct or
Circumstance only.
Errata.
PAge 108. Line 2. And specially etc. unto the end of that Paragraph, should
have been inserted line 16. after the word pleases. p. 136. l. 33. for much
read which p. 168. l. 7. for coninuance r. continuance p. 233. l. 34. for lets
r. let p. 242. l. 16. for mahomet r. Mahomet l. 33. for if r. If p. 260. l. 19.
for puplique r. public p. 261. l. 17. after of r. it p. 266. l. 32. for
Chhistian r. Christian p. 273. l. 3. for Pimitive r. Primitive p. 274. l. 25.
for justification r. institution p. 275. l. 12. for possibilies r.
possibilities p. 276. l. 33. for Apostle r. Apostles p. 277. l. 4. for the r.
that p. 282. l. 23. for ver. 16. r. ver. 14. p. 283. l. 25. blot out not p.
296. l. 30. for them r. that l. 36. for charity r. Charybdis p. 305. l. 13. for
mianly r. mainly p. 314. l. 5. for referoed r. referred p. 318. l. 27. for
continue r. contain p. 322. l. 7. for oligatory r. obligatory p. 332. l. 25.
for Lev. 23. r. Lev. 27. p. 346. l. 28. for viz. r. both p. 352. l. 15. for
that r. the

To the Christian Reader.
WE are now (Christian Reader) to enter upon a very great work, not so much in
respect of the bulk and length (as containing under it many controversies) as
in respect of the subject matter it self, the worth and Dignity of it, The
vindication of the Christian Sabbath. In the entrance and Preface whereunto, we
think it not amiss to give thee a brief account of some particulars, which
may, not being satisfied, stand as prejudices, in the reading of the following
Discourse; and they are these. 1. What is the concernment of a Sabbath, that we
are so large in vindication of it. 2. Why after so many books of this subject
we add any more. 3. Why, seeing there are three parts more, this part comes
forth alone, without its fellows.

For the first of these; In reading of the Scriptures, 1. The Elogies of a
Sabbath.
we do observe that there is not any one part of Religion, (except but the
mystery of our Redemption) of which more is spoken than of the Sabbath; The
Elogies of it are so many, that they would easily swell into a volume, if we
listed to enlarge our selves. We shall therefore give thee but a touch or taste
of the chiefest Heads.

1. In General, it is the Compendium of all Religion.
And first of all, in general, we may call the Sabbath, and the due observation
of it, the Compendium, or Continent of all Religion: Hereupon it is very
observable, that as the commandment of it, stands in the Heart of the
Decalogue as the bond of both the Tables, so it is in other places of Scripture
joined with the chiefest Duties of both. Of the first Table in that place, You
shall keep my Sabbaths, Levit. 26.2.
and reverence my Sanctuary: Of the second Table, in that other place: You
shall fear every man his father and his mother, Levit. 19.3.
Having all the Privileges that Commend the most Substantial Laws in
Scripture.
and sanctify my Sabbaths. The Law of the Sabbath has all those privileges,
that do commend any the most substantial Laws in Scripture. It is one of the
Ten, spoken by God himself, with Majesty and Terror, written in the Tables of
stone, with his own finger; put in the Arc by his own command, together with
the rest, to signify (as even one of the Adversaries says) the perpetuity of
it.

2. In Particular.

1. The Frequent mention of it; in all parts of sacred Scripture.


More Particularly. 1. There is as frequent mention of it, as of any one
Commandment, implying, as on the one side, the Importance of it; so on the
other, Men's untowardnesse, and backwardness in the observation of it. There is
no part of Scripture, wherein there is not something remarkable of a Sabbath.

1. In the Law, or five Books of Moses.
1. In the Law, or the five Books of Moses (so called) we have first (as we
doubt not to prove) the Institution of it in Genesis. 2. The solemn
Promulgation of it, in Exodus. 3. The manner of Sanctification of it in
Leviticus. 4. The Profanation Vindicated, in the Book of Numbers. 5. Pressing
arguments for the Observation of it, in Deuteronomie.

2. Then the Historical parts of Scripture, 2. In the Historical parts.
have some Remembrances of it, either as observed, or profaned. 3. There is in
the Book of Psalms, 3. In the Psalms. Psalm 92.1.

4. In the Prophets.


a special Psalm, appointed for it. 4. The Prophets are much and frequent in
the complaining of the Violation, and pressing on the Observation of it. 5. 5.
In the Gospels.

6. In the Acts.


The Gospels have often mention of it. 6. The story of the Acts, has likewise
touches, both of the old and New Sabbath. 7. 7. In the Epistles.
The Epistles do hint and insinuate an Institution of a Christian Sabbath. 8.
And lastly, 8. In the Revelation.
the Revelation, discovers Gods right unto it, giving it the Title of The Lords
Day: All which shall be vindicated in due season, from those objections and
evasions, which the Adversaries do put upon them.

3. Besides all this, the observation of the Sabbath, 3. It is ranked amongst
Substantials.
is ranked by the Prophets, amongst the most substantial and perpetual Duties
of Religion.

4. 4. The great care of God I D^ing the commandment. 1. In the Length. 2.
Affirmatively and Negatively.
The special Cost (if we may so say) and care of God, in delivering the
Commandment, argues much worth and wa ght: As 1. In the Length and largeness
of it, to make it plain and evident. 2. That whereas other Commandments are
propounded, either Affirmatively only, or Negatively only this is both
Affirmative and Negative. 3. 3. Charged upon all sorts.
It is Charged upon all sorts of people particularly, especially Superiors, to
look well to the observation of it. 4. 4. Urged by many Reasons.
It is Urged by many Reasons: As first, Gods Interest in it, It is the Sabbath
of the Lord thy God. Secondly, Gods Example, He wrought six days, and rested
the seventh. Thirdly, His Sanctification, and blessing of the Sabbath.
Fourthly, The equity of the proportions, for Continuance, 5. With a special
Memento.
and Frequency, but one whole Day of seven, for six allowed unto men. Lastly,
it is stamped with a special Memento, in the very front of it, Remember the
Sabbath Day, etc. lest it should be forgotten, and as a Watchword of solemn
preparation for it.

5. It is called a Gift and Favor. Exodus 16.29. Ezekiel. 20.12. Nehem. 9.14.
5. The Sabbath is so far from being esteemed, by the people of God, to be a
ceremonial. Yoke or burden, that it is diverse times called a Gift, and
sometimes acknowledged as a special Favor of God.

6. The Observation has special promises, National and Personal, Temporal
and Spiritual.
6. The Observation of it has as great Encouragements by many special
promises, as any one Duty, in all the Book of God, Both National, as Jer.
17.27. Isai. 58.14. and Personal, even to unlikely persons, Isai. 56.2, 4. and
6. Both Temporal and Spiritual, in the same places, which may serve as
Comments upon the Blessing mentioned, Genesis 2. and in the Commandment, Exodus 20.

Fulfilled on our Nation.
And here give us leave a little to demonstrate the exemplification and
fulfilling of this Promise and Blessing to this Nation of ours, above any other
Nation round about us. As we do not find any other Reformed Church, has either
so clearly maintained the doctrine of the Sabbath, as ours has, both in the
Homily of the Time and place of Prayers, and in so many Authorized Writers, for
more than sixty years; or so solemnly observed it, by Command of Laws,
Injunctions, and Canons, and the Conscientiousnesse of Governors of families,
and private Christians; So we find a special Ratification of the promised
Blessing, both in Spiritual and Temporal respects.

1. For the Spiritual, Travelers of all Countries, 1. Spiritual Blessings.
that look toward Religion, do testify, that no Country among the Reformed,
has more visible Piety; and Scholars that travel amongst Books, find no
where, more exact Treatises of Sanctification, than in England.

2. For Temporal, 2. Temporal.
the world is witness how fully Temporal Blessings have been made good to us
of this Nation. And (which is singularly observable) our prosperity began to be
clear, when the Doctrine of the Sabbath, was owned as the Doctrine of our
Church by the aforesaid Homily: which that it was not in King Edwards time,
appears by an Act, Anno regni 5, 6. speaking of all Days as alike by Gods
Word. Whence we observe further, that though all the Stories of the Time,
worthily do magnify Edw. 6. in his own Person, as one of the most excellent
Princes that ever reigned, yet they speak of his reign, but as a Sad and Dark
Day, to the State Temporal, by reason of ill success abroad, and dissentions
of the Nobles at home. After which followed a black Night in Queen Mary's time,
by the bloody persecutions of her best Subjects, her Forraign-match, and loss
of all we held in France. But when Queen Elizabeth succeeding, had restored the
Gospel, and withal, the Doctrine of the Sabbath was Resumed and Professed;
the Heavens cleared up so bright over our Heads, as never had England a more
Glorious Day, even Temporally, than all her reign after.

7. The Transgression of it, is, 1. Aggravated.
7. The Transgression of that Law of the fourth Commandment, and the
Profanation of the Sabbath, is, 1. Aggravated by special circumstances, and
reckoned amongst the greatest Abominations, Ezekiel. 20. and 22. 2. Threatened.
2. Threatened, with severest vengeance, both Personally with Death, Exo. 31.14.
and nationally with fearful judgments, as Fire in their habitations, Jer.
17.27. 3. Punished.
and Desolation to their Country, Levit. 26.34. and 43. 3. And Punished
accordingly with death, Numb. 15. and Desolation of their Nation, 2 Chronicles.
36.21. and so acknowledged as the cause thereof, Nehem. 13.18. Exemplified also
in our Nation.
And if we might not b^ troublesome, we might no less Exemplify the
remarkable Judgments upon this Nation of ours, (than we did the Blessings in
former times) since the time, that people began to profane the Sabbath, and the
Doctrine of it, not only disclaimed, by some of our Writers, but also the
Profanation of the Lords Day, authorized by the Book of Sports. It is observed
by others, how many dreadful examples there have been of Personal
Profanations of that Day; and we think one main Cause of these national
Judgments, under which this Land now groans, was the public Toleration of
the Profanation of that Day; To say nothing of the manifest decay of Piety, and
the Power of Godliness, since that Edict came abroad; we think it is
considerable, that our Prosperity has begun to wither, and our miseries to
grow upon us, ever since: But enough of that, at this time.

8. A chief part of Nehemiahs Reformation, etc. Nehem. 13.15. etc.
8. Lastly, Nehemiah, that Good man, and Good Governor, makes this business
of the Sabbath. 1. A special Part of his Reformation, (as our present
Reformers have, Blessed of the Lord be they for it) reproving, threatening, and
setting watch, against the Profanation of it, by the Heathens. 2. Worth
contending for, even with the Nobles, as well as the common people. 3. As a
matter for which he expected to be Remembered of God. Nehem. 13.15.22.

And now we entreat thee (Christian Reader) sadly to consider, whether the
Sabbath, which has all these Elogies, be not worth our best endeavors, to
vindicate the observation of it, as a principal part of our Religion.

But now, it may peradventure seem strange, 2. Why any mor Books of this
subject.
why after so long silence (in the Sabbaticall controversies) and after so many
books of this subject, intended for the satisfaction of conscientious
Christians, we should now again revive that contestation, and trouble the world
with, not only a new, but a larger discourse of that kind: We shall therefore
briefly give an account of our aims and intentions herein. And our first
answer is, that this work was undertaken (as soon as any) many years ago, and
well nigh finished, when nothing was written for, but all against the Sabbath.
Secondly, here thou shall expect a larger undertaking, and find (we hope) a
farther performance, than in any, in all the tractates written for the Sabbath:
For they commonly deal but with our single Adversary, but we with all: And we
being spectators of their combats, perhaps might see better than themselves,
where their weakness lay: What satisfaction they have given to themselves or
others, we do not well know, but for our selves we must, (with all modesty and
due respect to the Authors) profess our selves unsatisfied by either party.
Thirdly, here thou shall find fuller grounds laid, for the clearing of this so
much perplexed controversy, than the brevity of others would well permit, to
say no more. Lastly, the professed non-satisfaction from those discourses, by
some, not only opposites, but friends also to the Cause. In so much as not only
the Adversaries to the Sabbath, have been confident of their Cause, as
impossible to be disproved; but also some well-willers to it, have rather
wished it might, than hoped it could be strongly and convincingly maintained.
And if we may be so bold as to give our Reason, (which we more largely show in
the following parts of this Discourse) we suppose that this is one of the
chief, because they grant their Adversary, That the Saturday Sabbath, was
literally enjoined in the 4. Commandment, which (we think) whosoever grants,
he has lost, not only the Cause, but the Commandment too. Or if some do deny
it, yet they do not sufficiently confute it, to ours, or others satisfaction.

3. Why this part without the rest.
But then a further Quaere may be, why (if we will needs be writing now) this
part comes forth alone, without its fellows. For that, be pleased to consider
our Reasons. 1. That we might not give the world some cause, to nauseate at, or
surfeit upon too great a volume on the sudden, having been so long accustomed to
lesser meals, and lighter meats of Pamphlets. Neither men's minds, nor their
leisure, nor perhaps their purses (many of them) will permit to adventure upon
larger Discourses. 2. This part, being the foundation of all the rest, if it be
strong, will do much alone, to prepare men's minds to admit of the following
parts: If it shall any way prove weak, (discovered to us by the censures of
many Readers both friends and foes) we shall endeavor to strengthen it, before
we proceed to lay on the weight of the rest of the building. 3. This, though
first in order, was last in time, in regard of the frame and composure, as
being a work of Time, and many sad thoughts, in a path little or not at all
trodden by any Authors gone before us: and so necessitating a review of the
following parts; for which (as yet) we have no leisure; yet unwilling we are,
that this, which (we hope) is able to subsist of it self, should stay for the
rest. To add but one thing more: The world, as it was not in former times, so
nor is it yet (we fear) well able to bear the following more practical
parts, till they be thoroughly persuaded of the truth of this. It is very well
known that the Profanation of the Sabbaths, amongst the Jews, was one of their
chiefest desolating sins; and they never began to be serious in observation of
it, till they had smarted seventy years in the Babylonian captivity. And till
the spirits of men be well broken, the strict, and but due observation of the
Sabbath, will be thought an intolerable burden. Success in the entertainment
of other truths, (not long since thought impossible to be effected) upon these
fearful breaches now among us, makes us conceive that this Doctrine of the
Sabbath, will be also ere long, more easily digested. And this part is on
purpose premised, as a preparatory to those more practical parts.

If any man should further be inquisitive to know, why we do so much assert and
confirm our own Positions, in this former part, with so little Refutation of
so much as has been said by the other party; Our answer, is, that most of
these Assertions (at least some) are new, and perhaps unexpected to our
Adversaries, and therefore nothing could be said by them against them: But
principally because the objections do fall upon the other parts more properly
and methodically, and there shall be considered to the full.

For a conclusion of all, by way of Preface, we have but one word or two more
to say, and that by way of earnest entreaty. 1. That thou will do thy self this
right, and us this favor, as to lay aside all prejudice in the disquisition of
that truth, which we all profess to seek, so to suspend thy censure of any
parcel of this part, till thou have seriously, not only read, but weighed it
all in the balance of a sound judgment. 2. That thou will do the Truth that
right, as to yield to, and practice what thou art convinced of. Consider what
we say, and the Lord give thee and us understanding and grace in all things
through Jesus Christ! So pray

Thine in Him DANIEL CAVVDREY. HERBERT PALMER.

March 25. 1645.
THE Christian Sabbath VINDICATED. The first Part.
CHAP. I.
Of the Term of a Moral Law, and the Distinction of Laws into Ceremonial,
Judicial, and Moral.

THe Term Moral, I. Ambiguity of the word Moral.
being but a Scholasticall Expression, and not properly signifying that, which
is usually understood by it, by any side, in this Question; We would not, by
our good will, have meddled at all with it; as having ever judged it a bone of
Contention needlessly striven about, by reason of its ambiguitie; And so, by not
being distinguished aright, having bred much mistaking one of another, and much
confusion in Discourses of this Subject. Why then we use it.
But because the World has so taken it up, that it will not easily lay it down
again, it is in a sort necessary to make use of it, and accordingly to
discourse a little of it in the very entrance of our Dispute, by showing how
diverse men take it diversely, and what we understand by it in this Controversy:
Though when all is said and done, it will be still an ambiguous Term, and
liable to mistakes and quarrels.

II. Diverse Acceptions of it. 1.
The Notation of the word Moral, (relating to a Law) signifies, in it self,
any Precept, serving to regulate the Manners of Men. And accordingly thus, 1.
There are some, who seem to take it sometimes, as that it may (and does)
extend to all the Divine Laws in Scripture of what kind soever. Thus that
learned Bishop does proceed: B. of E. Tract. of Sab. p. 26.
[Divine Law called Moral, is a just Rule or Measure imposed by GOD, directing
and obliging to the obedience of things Holy, Honest, and Just. The same is
simply Moral, or Moral only by some External Constitution of GOD. These
Positive Laws Moral, are either Personal, or Common, to all Mankind, or to
one Nation, etc.] But this we conceive to be too large a sense: for this is to
make the Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, Primr. of Sab. p. 4.
among the Jews, to be Moral. And he is told by one of his own side, [This is
to speak against the ordinary Sense and Custom of all men, 2. Acception of it.
who use to distinguish Moral, against Ceremonial and Judicial.] 2. Others
again take the word, to signify only that which is Natural; as if that only
were to be termed Moral, which is of the Law of Nature. So the Author last
named in the place cited in the Margent: Ibid.
[This Law (Moral) all men take to be the Law of Nature; and reciprocally they
take the Law of Nature for this Law.] And thus also do others take it, or we
understand them not. [The Moral Law (says one) is that which concerns the
manners of men, C.D. Disc. of Sab. p. 6. The Law Moral is the Law Natural, G.
Irons. of Sab. q. 7. p. 77.
as men: and this commands those things which in themselves are acceptable and
wellpleasing to God, etc.] But say we, the Law Natural only commands such
things; Therefore the Law Natural only (in his judgment) is to be called
Moral. This Sense of these men we think to be as much too narrow, as the other
was wide; and to be too short to contain the full meaning of the word. For
whereas Universal, and specially Perpetual, are, even by their own
confession, Characters of a Moral Law; there may (we suppose, and they too) be
found some Laws which are but Positive, and not Natural; which yet after they
were once given, did (and do) concern all men in all Ages to observe, both
under the Old Testament, and under the New: and so, we think, deserve the term
of Moral Laws. We therefore so understand the word, 3. Our description of a
Moral Law.
as to imply [any Law of God expressed in Scripture, whether it can be proved
Natural, or not; which from the time it was given, to the end of the world,
binds all succedding Generations of their Posterity to whom it was given; and
more specially obliges the Church, because the Scriptures, the Word of God, was
specially written for them, and comes specially to them.] And that there are
such Laws, even in the Old Testament, not Natural, yet in that sort
Universal and Perpetual, we shall discover, having premised briefly a
Division of Laws generally contained in Scripture.

And here, III. General Division of the Laws of God.
letting pass the Personal Commands given to some particular men or women,
for themselves, and one or two more, and obliging none but them: as that to
Abraham, To leave his Fathers house; and afterward, To sacrifice his Son: And
to Manoahs Wife, How to order her self being with child, and her Son, when
he should be borne: and some other such like; which are easily discerned by
their Extraordinary Quality, Matter, and Reasons, not appliable to others.
Letting these pass, we say, The whole of Gods Laws recorded in Scripture,
Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, also called Judaicall and Mosaicall, though
all not first given to the Jews.
may well be divided (as it is usual) into 3. Ranks, Ceremonial, Judicial,
and Moral: of which the two former are commonly called Judaicall, or Mosaicall
Laws; though diverse of the Ceremonials were not first given by Moses, nor to
the Jews only, but in Ages before them: For Sacrifices were as ancient as Cain
and Abel, (Genesis 4.) and no doubt, from a Divine command or inspiration to their
Father. And 2. the Prohibition of eating Blood, was given to Noah and all his
Posterity, immediately after the Flood, Genesis 9. Also, 3. Circumcision was
given to Abraham and all his Posterity, (and their Families) which were to
grow into diverse Nations, Genesis 17. And perhaps some others, besides these, may
be found, which were given as Laws, before Israel became a People, the People
of God. Why then they are so called.
But however, because it is certain, that whatever of this kind was given a
Law to Posterities, was renewed to Israel by the Ministry of Moses, when God
took them to be his people peculiarly; therefore these, and all other
peculiarly given to them, whether Ceremonial or Judicial, (which are not
esteemed Perpetual) are termed Judicial, or Mosaicall Laws.

IV. General Nature of Ceremonials and Judicials.
The nature of which, that we may briefly dispatch, we are to conceive, that the
Nation of the Jews, taken to be Gods peculiar people, was both a Church, the
only Visible Church that God then had upon Earth, as also a Body Politic, or
Civil Society. And in both those considerations, God himself was pleased to
be their Lawgiver; and besides the Moral Laws, which concerned them as Men,
(together with all the rest of Mankind, both toward God, and one another) He
vouchsafed to ordain them other Laws, as they were a Church, but a Church in
infancy, and under age, till the Messiah, the promised Seed, should come: and
these are usually called Ceremonials: And others also, as they were a
Commonwealth, to whom the Land of Canaan was allotted for an inheritance, and
from among whom that promised Messiah was to be borne: And these Civil Laws
are they that are usually called Judicials. But for as much as these two
considerations, of their being a Church, and a Civil State, had both of them
(as we have intimated) special relation unto Christ to come, and so their very
Land was a Typical Land, and their Nation a Typical Nation; It is hard to
give any such exact description either of Ceremonial or Judicial Laws, as
shall neither be too scanty, so as to leave out none of that kind, nor yet
enterfere with the other kind: And harder perhaps to find any Judicial (proper
to the Jews) which had not somewhat of Ceremoniality in it. But we will
endeavor to difference them as distinctly as we can; and that we do in the
manner following:

V. Description of Laws properly Ceremonial.
1. By the Ceremonials we understand, such as concerned the Jews, as Gods
Church underage; and with them, so many, whose Ancestors had received any of
them, in matters between God and them, or relating to a man's particular self,
even single; Containing in them Types and Figures of Christ, and of his Graces
and Benefits: Or, Documents of Spiritual and Moral Duties. And these were
partly belonging to the outward Worship of God, which in those times stood most
in such Typical Observances; and partly belonging to matters of common use, as
the Prohibitions of Meats, and of Touching such and such things (which those
Laws made unclean) and of Plowing the 7th. year, or with an Ox and an Ass
together; and diverse such like: By which God would train them up, in that time
of his Churches infancy, till Christ should come, as the Apostle implies, Gal.
3. and Heb. 9. We say, train them up. 1. Saint Peter speaking of them Act. 15.
says, They were a yoke on their necks, which neither they nor their Fathers
were able to bear.
To enquire after the spiritual mysteries contained in those Precepts and
Prohibitions (of most of which no other tolerable reason could be conceived by
them, but only, that God did intend them to signify some higher matters) as
also 2. to long for the coming of that promised seed, who should deliver them
from the bondage of those wearisome observances, and burdensome forbearances.
As even by the Jews writings, it appears that they did expect such freedom by
their Messiah. These we take to be properly Ceremonials.

But forasmuch as the word Ceremony is of much use in our future Controversy,
and is diversely taken by diverse men: VI. Diverse acceptions of the word
Ceremonial by others.
We will here, once for all (to avoid vain repetitions) distinguish it,
according as several men use to take it. And withal, show how far we consent
to such senses of the word, and why we dissent from them at all. It is then
taken three ways by some others.

1. For Ecclesiastical, VII. 1. For Ecclesiastical.
to signify any external Rite belonging to external Worship: as being a
Church-matter, and distinguished against things Political concerning the
Commonwealth. For God has been pleased in all times of the Church, to Ordain,
as some external Worship, so some Rites and Ceremonies belonging thereunto,
suitable to those times. And so Divines usually speak of the Tree of life in
Paradise, That it was a religious Rite or Ceremony, and namely, to be a
Sacrament to Adam in his Innocence. And in this sense, even the Sacraments of
the New Testament may be called Ceremonies, as being Ecclesiastical and
Religious Rites, commanded by God for his Worship. And it is further said by
some, That by Gods prescription, the Jews themselves had diverse Rites of this
nature, not Typical, of Christ to come, or his Grace, etc. yet Ceremonial.
[Vnder this name Ceremony, may, and ought to be comprised (says one) not only
the Types and Figures, Prim^. part 1. c. 12.. 17.
which manifestly are such: but universally all the observations of the
Ecclesiastical Policy; some whereof had no Typical signification at all, but
were only Ordinances belonging to Order, and Ecclesiastical government.] Which
though we cannot admit; as supposing all the Jewish Rites (though we be not
able to riddle every one) to have been Typical; particularly because of that
of the Apostle, Heb. 8. ver. 5. [That all things belonging to the Tabernacle,
being commanded to be made according to the pattern showed Moses in the Mount;
(...) etc.
the Priests using them, served for an example and shadow of heavenly things.]
Yet for the present we are content to Record what he grants, as useful for
some purposes hereafter, perhaps against himself.

VIII. 2. For temporary. Patt rn of Catech. Doct. p 234. D. Wall. dissert. de
Sab page 16.
2. Some others take Ceremonial for Mutable and Temporary. So the learned
Catechist gives the Notation of the word [(...)] given only for a time, and
then after to expire. And some others as they take Moral and Immutable for the
same, so by Ceremonial they understand changeable and Temporary. And if we
take it so, then all the Judicials, as they are commonly called, come no less
properly under the term of Ceremonial, then the Typicalls. But though we
believe sundry Judicials had some Typicallnesse in them (^s was touched before)
and so were partly Ceremonial; yet to rank them and the Typicalls both equally
under the term of Ceremonial, we think, is a little too much to confound
things different.

IX. 3. Figurative.
3. Others by Ceremonial, understand only Figurative (as unquestionably most of
the Jewish Rites were) but then they divide them into three sorts, as being
(they say) either 1. Memorials of somewhat past, or 2. significative of
somewhat present, or 3. Typical of somewhat to come (of Christ, his Actions,
or Passions, or Benefits, arising from both) and some Ceremonies had all these
uses, undoubtedly, as the Passover, and some others. This sense we grant (in
part) to be proper: having before described Ceremonies to be Types, Figures,
and Documents. But we shall not easily grant them, that [All Memorials of
things past, or signs of things present (no not under the old Testament (much
less under the New) are properly called Ceremonial, so as to be
contradistinct to Moral, and so to be mutable and temporary] we by moral
understanding perpetual, as we said before.

X. Description of Laws properly Judicial.
Now for the Judicials, we conceive they may be thus described to be [Lawes
given to the people of Israel, in civil matters between man and man, to order
them, as they were a body politic, to whom the Land of Canaan was allotted for
an inheritance, and from among whom the promised Messiah was to be born] We put
in those relations, to the Land of Canaan, and to the Messiah, because all the
peculiar civil Laws they had, were founded (as we suppose; and instances may
undoubtedly be given of it in very many of them) upon peculiar respects unto
those Promises. Which we the rather conceive, because some of them were
Indulgences, and some Precepts, which are not now so much as lawful to be
practiced, (much less perpetual and necessary to us:) As to instance in no
other but that of Divorce, which was an Indulgence to them, as our Savior
expressly says, and by Him thenceforth repealed, Mat. 5. and 19. and Luke 16.
And that of marying the Widow of a Brother dead without Children; which was not
so much an Allowance, as a strict Precept; but yet esteemed by Divines
generally unlawful now; as was at large disputed in the famous Case of our
King Henry the 8. having married his Brother Arthurs widow: and appears contrary
to the law of Lev. 18.16. Lev. 20.21. Which Law of not marying the Brothers
Widow, being but Positive, (as we shall anon have our Adversaries confession
for) though God made it Moral to all Generations, yet he was pleased then (as
he might) to make that forenamed particular Exception from it, among the Jews,
in regard of preserving Inheritances in Families in that Land, which he would
have distinct among them for the Messiahs sake, to know clearly of what Tribe
he came, and the like. So then we esteem those properly Judicials, which
between man and man were Relatives to the Land of Canaan, XII. Moral Laws
described.
and expectation of the Messiah. And all other, (not such, nor Ceremonial, as
before) we esteem Moral. And of these Moral Laws we are now to speak
somewhat more largely. Of which we think it convenient to repeat the
Description, XIII. The description of a Moral Law cleared, in 5 branches.
and assign some Reason of the several parts of it, and then proceed to the
Division of it, according to our Scope.

[A Moral Law, (we say) is, any Law of God, expressed in Scripture, (whether it
can be proved Natural, When we say, a Moral Law binds, we deny not, but God
may dispense at his pleasure with any Moral Positive, as in the case of Incest
before noted.
or not) which from the time it was giver, to the end of the World, binds all
succeeding Generations of their Posterity to whom it was given; and more
specially obliges the Church, because the Scriptures, the Word of God; was
specially written for them, and comes specially to them.] Here we 1. say, Any
Law of God expressed in Scripture; because the Scripture contains all the Laws
of God, even those that are called Laws of Nature, (and written plainly, or at
least in their Principles, in all men's hearts) as well as any special and
Positive Institution of God. The Scripture, we say, has all: and nothing is to
be admitted, no not under the Title of a Law of Nature, what consent soever it
may pretend to plead from the Heathens and Natural men, which is not warranted
by Scripture (in express words, or certain consequence) to be Gods Will and
Command, even now.

2. We say, [whether it can be proved Natural, or not] because we undertake to
prove some Laws perpetual, which we will not contend to be Moral Natural.

3. We say [from the time it was first given] as well, because we esteem some
Laws, granted to be Moral, and given under the Old Testament, not to be given
at the Creation, but many years after; as that against Marying of Brothers and
Sisters together, (of which we shall say somewhat anon) as also because we
suppose the Laws concerning the two Sacraments of the New Testament, and some
other Evangelicall Laws, to deserve the name of Moral, being Perpetual
undeniably, though not given till our Saviors coming in the Flesh.

4. We add, [which binds all succeeding Generations of their Posterity to
whom it was given:] that we may prevent the Quarrel of disputing of the manner
of Promulgation: For if it were given to the Parents, the Transgression must
needs be a Sin (though of Ignorance) in those of their Posterity, who having
lost the Knowledge of it, had also forsaken the Practice: And so even men
account Ignorance of Humane law, once clearly given, not to excuse totally. 2.
That we may not include any, who neither by themselves, nor their ancestors,
ever heard of a Law, if only Positive, as the New Testament Laws particularly,
(which till the Gospel be preached in a Nation, cannot oblige them) if any
Nation can be supposed never to have had them.

5. Finally, we say, [They more specially oblige the Church, because the
Scripture, the Word of God, was specially written for them, and comes specially
to them.] This adds a second Obligation, even to the Laws of Nature, and so
to all others formerly given; and so Israel was the second or third time
obliged to the Laws of the Decalogue, and some others, because they had a
renewed, (and so more undeniable) Charge of them, by Word and Writing; and
could not so much as plead Ignorance, unless wilful, through neglect of the
Scriptures, which was specially given them to be Gods Statute-book, and
Authentic Record of his Laws. Of which, so many as He was pleased to ordain
to be Perpetual, we ascribe the Term of Moral unto, as we have said.

And of these we say further, and clearly, XIV. Moral Laws divided into
Natural and Positive.
(though we have given intimations of it already) That they are of two kinds;
Morall-Naturall, and Morall-Positive. Which agreeing in Perpetuity, (as far as
we have already showed) do differ in their distinct Properties; as will
appear by their several Descriptions, to which we now proceed in their order.

And first, a Law Morall-Naturall, we think, XV. Description of a Moral
Natural Law.
may thus properly be expressed: [A Law of Things necessary to be done or
forborne, toward God or Man, our selves, or others: which the Nature of Man now
(though corrupted) either does acknowledge, or may at least be convinced of to
be such, (even without the Scripture) from Arguments drawn from those
Principles which are in the hearts of all men generally even now.] So that he
must contradict some of those Principles, which yields not to those Laws,
specially when he is rationally urged with them. Or more briefly thus: [A Law
of Nature is a Law, which may be proved not only just, but necessary, by
Principles drawn from the light of Nature, which all Reasonable men have still
in their hearts.] We choose to express it thus, rather then, as some others
do, XVI. Refusal of other Descriptions. 2 Reasons against a first.
in a twofold Variety, and as we conceive, Erroniously on either hand. 1. Some
describe it, by [being written in man's heart at the first Creation.] But this
we apprehend to be a very uncertain (not to say altogether impertinent)
Description. For if we shall consider, 1. That the Scripture no where
characterizes any particular Law by these Titles, of being a Law of Nature, or
written in man's heart at the first Creation. 2. That all men's Natures are now
corrupted; and so created Nature is to us at this day a merum Non-ens; with it
we have nothing to do in this Question, because we cannot know all that was
then written in man's heart. But will we, nill we, our present Nature (though
corrupted) must be the Judge, according to the light it has still left, XVII.
2. Another rejected.
Which Laws are absolutely necessary for all men, and so, Which are Laws of
Nature. 2. Others (and perhaps the same men at another time) describe it by
[being written in the hearts of the Gentiles of old] And so they go to seek in
Humane Authors, for the general Practice and acknowledgement of the Gentiles;
which where they find wanting, they deny such Laws to be Laws of Nature: And
under this pretense, they strongly reject (as they think) the 4. Commandment
for one Day in seven, from being Moral, (by which they will understand only
Morall-Naturall) because it was not written in the hearts of the Gentiles, not
acknowledged, nor practiced by them of old.

XVII. 2 Reasons of it.
But this description of Morall-Naturall we cannot admit, for a double Reason.
1. Because some Laws had the Testimony of all the Heathens Practice and
Acknowledgement generally, and so seems written in all their hearts; which yet
are so far from being Morall-Naturall, that they were merely Ceremonial, and
are now abolished; as the Law of sacrificing some material things to God; a
Sheep, or an Ox, or Flower, or Wine, or the like. 2. And specially, because
the most undeniable Law of Nature (or one of them) that is, or can be, namely,
the worshipping of one only God, shall not be Morall-Naturall, if we stand to
the proof of the Generality of the Heathens Practice and Acknowledgement. For
all that know any thing, know, that they generally (and even the very Jews
too, very often, before the Babylonish Captivity) worshipped a Plurality of
Gods. If therefore the Gentiles not observing nor owning a seventh-day Sabbath,
be a sufficient proof to evince the 4. Commandment not Moral, (though we
contend not for its being Morall-Naturall, as it commands so much, and no more,
of solemn Time for Continuance and Frequencie together) It will not only
thrust out also the second Commandment from being Moral, because it is
apparent that all the World, of old, made and worshipped Images; and so it is
clear, that Law was not generally written in all their hearts: But even the
first Commandment will not be admitted to be Moral, because all the World
generally worshipped a plurality of Gods: And so neither was the Law of [having
no other Gods but the Lord] written generally in the hearts of the Gentiles: We
know, some of the wiser Philosophers did indeed profess but one God, as
Socrates; but even for that (as they write) he was condemned to death by his
ungodly Countrymen. Also it is certain, that it may be proved, even from those
Principles of the light of Nature remaining in the hearts of all Reasonable men
now, [That there is but One GOD] and so, [That we are to worship Him alone, and
so but One.] Whence it follows, that as there is now no other Judge of Laws
of Nature, but our present Nature, however corrupted: so we say, the Judgment
must be made, not simply according to first Apprehensions, but awakened
Principles.

Therefore also for a further clearing of these Laws of Nature, XVIII. Degrees
of Moral Natural Laws. 1. Principles. Aquin. 2.^.94. art. 2. c. 1
we add, [That they are not all of equal evidence or clearenesse, but admit
of Degrees.] And so they may be further distinguished: 1. There are some
Principles of Nature: of which the Great Schooleman thus writes: [Although in
themselves the Precepts of the Law of Nature are many; yet may they all be
reduced to this one; Good is to be prosecuted, Evil is to be avoided.]

2. 2. Conclusions.
Some are Conclusions necessarily resulting from that Principle by way of
Demonstration. Which Conclusions, as they arise at the first or second hand, or
the like, may further be distinguished into immediate, or mediate. The
immediate Conclusions are only two: Immediate. Mat. 2^.
The first, [Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. And the
second, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. On these two Commandments,
says our Savior, hang all the Law and the Prophets.]

The mediate Conclusions are such, 2. Mediate.
as do also arise from the former Principle, but by the interposition of the
two former Conclusions. And of this kind are confessedly some, even most of
the Commandments of the Decalogue, if not all. But of this more anon.

The sum then of this Discourse of Naturally-Morall Laws, XIX. Character of
Laws Moral-Naturall.
is, That their proper Character is, [To be in themselves not only just and
convenient, but even necessary, in the Nature of the Laws themselves: for all
reasonable creatures, such as Mankind, are universally and perpetually to stand
obliged unto, toward GOD, themselves, and one another: and which very Nature,
though corrupted, may be forced to confess such.

But now besides these Morall-Naturall Laws, XX. Description of a
Morall-Positive Law.
there are (we say) others, which we call Morall-Positive. And these we
describe to be, [Laws, clearly laid down in Scripture, (in express words, or
certain consequence) which Nature, though corrupted, cannot reasonably deny to
be just, good, (and so convenient to be perpetuated, according to the Lawgivers
pleasure:) Though antecedent to His Will, some way revealed to them, it would
not, nor could not have judged them to be of themselves altogether necessary]
Nature, even corrupted, cannot deny, but that it is fit, that the Lawgivers
Will and Pleasure should stand for a Law with his Creatures: and so, though it
could have discerned no necessity of such, or such an Obligation, by the light
of Nature merely, (as perhaps even created Nature could not in some of them)
yet such equity and equality and goodness being in them, as they cannot but
acknowledge them convenient, and fit to be perpetuated, unless God have
expressed himself to the contrary. These we call Morall-Positive Laws, and
esteem them universal to all their Posterity to whom they were given, and
Perpetual to them, from the time they were given, unto the Worlds end, and so
to all the Church in after ages, unless where God was pleased to make any
particular exceptions or exemptions. And though we confess God might have
changed, or abrogated any of these Laws so qualified, yet we do not believe
that He has, unless it be undeniably expressed of this or that particular Law
in question. Of which persuasion we shall give our grounds in due season.

And now, upon this Distinction (if we be not deceived) the greatest part of
the present Controversy in this Discourse depends. It concerns us therefore
to vindicate this fully, and make good this ground, before we proceed any
further. And that there are some Positive Laws in Scripture, thus Moral, that
is, of universal extent (after they were once given) and perpetual
obligation, we thus endeavor to make manifest.

XXI. Proofs, that there are such Laws. 1. Gods Prerogative may make such.
First, GODS Prerogative and absolute Dominion over all men as his Creatures,
(as we touched before) may authorize his Will to make such Laws, and to impose
them upon the World, and that even for a proof of his Prerogative Royal and
absolute dominion, and consequently a Trial of his Creatures Obedience. And
this is in a manner acknowledged by one, that yet makes exception to this
Distinction: Primr. p. 5.
[It must (says he) be the revealed will of GOD, that matches Positive with
Natural Laws, and marks them with the silver stamp of Immutabilitie.] So we
say, it must be, and so it is, for

XXII. 2. His will has done so in several Ages.
Secondly, the same Will that was pleased to make Positive Laws universally and
perpetually obligatory to the World of the same Age, may, no doubt, make Laws
universal and perpetual for both Ages of the World: But God has done the
former, as will appear by these instances: 1. For the old World, even
beginning with Adam, and ending with Christ, (as Divines commonly make the
period) the Law of Sacrifices was an universal and perpetual Law; the
practice whereof we find in the very beginning, in Cain and Abel, without
doubt, not without some Divine command to their Father: and all succeeding
Generations, even of Heathens practiced this. 2. To Noah was a Law of this kind
given, for himself and all his Posterity, as cannot be denied, Genesis 9. To
abstain from eating blood; though afterward it was more specially renewed, and
applied to the Jews; and the Gentiles lost it, as they did other things, even
of the Law of Nature, as we touched before. 3. In the new World, beginning with
Christ, At least for this Age.
and continuing till the day of Judgment, the two Sacraments of Baptism, and
the Lords Supper, are unquestionably Positive Laws, yet universal, (as soon
as the Gospel comes to any) and perpetual; and so may be termed Moral, from
the time they were given, to the worlds end. 4. Nay, we have a Record of a Law
Morall-Positive given to Adam, even before his fall, reaching to all his
Posterity, to the worlds end, viz. The not eating of the fruit of the tree of
Knowledge. For, that it bound all men, appears by too woeful experience, all
Mankind being sinners for breaking of it in and with Adam. Therefore since God
has done thus from the beginning, to give Positive Laws, and yet make them
Moral, Universal, and Perpetual; we can see no reason, but that there may be
some other such, for both Ages of the World; Only we must look that we pitch
our mark aright, upon those that are indeed so. To which therefore we say
further.

Thirdly, that not only there may be, XXIII. 3, There are such still in force.
Confessed by the Adversaries themselves. XXIV. 1. in Sense. C. D. p. 8.
but that there are some other such Positive Laws delivered in Scripture, that
from the time they were first given, bind all Posterities in the Generations
succeeding, even in all Ages: and this by the confession of the Adversaries
themselves. 1. in sense, and 2. in plain words.

1. In sense: To which purpose, let those words of one of them be considered:
[That however all the Precepts of the Moral Law, (he means it of the
Decalogue) belong to the Law of Nature, as being agreeable to Reason (which is
the rule of humane actions) and are, in that respect, of perpetual
observation; yet all of them are not of the same rank, nor belong in the same
degree and manner to the Law of Nature. Somethings there are, which we by the
instinct of Nature presently see to be good, or bad, etc. Others there are that
require more consideration of Circumstances, and use of Discourse, to apprehend
and judge of them. And lastly, there are some, to the knowledge whereof Humane
Reason stands in need of Divine instruction. And these two latter sorts,
specially the last, though they in some sort belong to the Law of Nature, (and
were happily, at our first Creation, written in the Tables of man's Heart, in more
plain characters, and more easy to be read, then now since the fall they are)
may, in respect of the other, be termed Moral, not in regard of Nature
dictating, but in regard of Discipline, informing Nature.] He speaks here of
the last sort of Laws, under the Title of Laws of Nature, (which is more then
we will say:) But afterward, qualifying the speech, and calling them Moral,
not in regard of Nature dictating, but in respect of Discipline informing
Nature; he says the very same that we do: For Morale Disciplinae, and Morale
Positivum, are one and the same: Divine Instruction or Revelation
(contra-distinguished to Nature) and Divine Imposition, is altogether the same
in point of Laws. Tract. of Sab. page 3.
To which purpose see another of their own, Mr. Brerewood by name, who being
dead, was forced first to speak against the Morality of the fourth
Commandment: yet this Distinction he acknowledges, and applies to the fourth
Commandment: [ Moral is that which belongs to Manners; 1. by the instinct of
Nature, as belonging to the inward Law written in our hearts. Or 2. by
Instruction of Discipline, as being of the outward Law appointed by GOD, as
that of observing the seventh Day; so that it may be termed Natural, (which is
more then we yet say) as being not of the Institution of Nature, but of the
Discipline of Nature, etc.]

XXV. 2. In express words. Bp. of E. p. 27. Namely, 1. Against Polygamie.
Proved Positive, yet Moral.
Secondly, in the very words, the learned Bishop speaking of Laws Positively
Moral, says, [Some are common and general to all Mankind, as the Law of
Polygamie and Wedlock, within some degrees, mentioned Lev. 20.] And that the
Law against Polygamie, published by Adam, or by GOD himself to Adam, at the
first beginning: [For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and
cleave to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh, Genesis 2.] was indeed but
Positive, may be sufficiently concluded, by that, that many, even of the
holiest men, after Abraham, were Polygamists: Of whom it were a wild sentence,
to say, they lived continually in a breach of a Law of Nature: Can it be
supposed, that those holy men who had the light of Divine revelation often,
should generally have wanted light about a Law of Nature? or much less, that
they could have lived in a Practice against any light they had?
Divines also generally acknowledging the Negative part of the Laws of Nature
to bind (ad semper) and to be perpetually indispensable. It was then a
Positive Law, yet Moral; and therefore (though ignorantly) yet they sinned in
breaking of it, as appears by what Malachy writes, Mal. 2. And our Savior
specially argues from the institution of Marriage in the beginning, Mat. 19.

Again, for the Laws against incestuous marriages, XXVI. 2. Against incestuous
Marriages: proved Moral, though Positive.
(wherein we have at once many instances of Laws Positively Moral) That they
were, and are Moral, appears by Gods counting the Transgressions, such
Abominations, when he speaks of them; and saying, that for them the Land of
Canaan did spue out her Inhabitants, though Gentiles. And that they were yet
but Positive, appears also by the special instance of Cain and Seth, marying
their sisters: and necessarily; for there were no other women to marry: yet had
they not only leave, but charge to increase and multiply, Genesis 1. But
considering that (as was said before) Negative Laws of Nature bind (ad semper)
and are held perpetually Indispensable, It is not to be imagined, that God
would have necessitated them to break a Law of Nature: but rather for the time
have created them wives, as he did to Adam. It was therefore a Positive Law
given after that time, and so (from thenceforth) Moral, Universal, and
Perpetual: And their Perpetuity is also acknowledged by all Divines, and even
many of the Heathens.

From all which, as we have made our Distinction good; XXVII. Some inferences
from those Confessions. Page 31.
so we may also note, 1. That the Bishops 3. character of a Law simply and
formally Moral, (by which he means Morall-Naturall) [That it is of universal
and perpetual Obligation] is not sound and true, because not convertible. For
himself has given us here an instance of many Laws common and general to all
Mankind, and consequently, of universal and perpetual Obligation, which yet
he confesses to be positively Moral.

2. And further, if a Positive Law may be of perpetual Obligation, why may it
not be of immutable Institution? They were not then well advised, who cavil at
this Position, as an affirmation without ground, Hist. of Sab. part. 2. p. 177.
and without reason, or [such a piece of Learning and Contradiction, as was
never put up to show, till in these latter times.] For what is that they
quarrel at? [That a Positive Law should be immutable in it self. Dr. Ames.
Theol. 2. c. 15.. 6.
] So the Historian reports Dr. Ames his words: But the Doctor (if he look
again) did not say, it was immutable in it self, (that is his addition) but
immutabilis plane Institutionis: he meant it with respect to men, on whom it
was imposed, who have no power to change the Institution of GOD: For so he
adds, [So that in respect of our duty and obligation, it has the very same
force with those Laws that were Natural.] And again, a little after, [This
Positive Right, on which this Institution is grounded; is right Divine, and in
respect of men, altogether immutable.] Mark you Sir, in respect of men, and
Divine Institution, it is immutable, not in it self. And we heard before, that
the revealed will of God may match Positive with Natural, in regard of
Immutabilitie. But besides these, we have the approbation of this Distinction,
by other Authors: Take one more; Tract. of Tithes.
Mr, Carleton (afterward a Bishop) distinguishing of the right of Tithes, says
thus: [Morall things are so, either by Nature, or by Institution; as
sanctifying a seventh day, and Tithes] And we cannot but wonder, that these
men, who so stiffly plead for Tithes to be due Jure Divino, not Natural, but
Positive, shall yet cry out of this Distinction, only when it is applied to the
4th. Commandment, for one day in seven. Let them consider it.

XXVIII. Agreements of Morall-Naturall, and Morall-Positive Laws.
The distinction now of Moral Laws into Natural and Positive, being
sufficiently cleared, we shall only propound the further agreement of these
Laws, and then conclude this Chapter. They differ as before, and agree in 2
things, besides Perpetuity.

First, in their Authority, and force of Obligation: A Positive Law in force,
does as strongly bind the Conscience, as a Natural; (aeque, though not
aequaliter.) 2. In their Independence, both depend upon God, Page 31.
and not upon the will of man; and so are indispensable by humane authority.
The Bishop therefore misapplieth this piece of his 3d. Character, as belonging
to Laws simply and formally Moral, [That no Authority of men or Angels can
exempt or privilege any from their Obligation.] For neither can they do it in
a Positive Law.

CHAP. II.
Rules to know a Law to be Moral, though but Positive.

THat there are Laws of GOD, Moral, or Perpetual, I. What Positive Laws are
Moral.
(which we henceforth take for one and the same thing) though but Positive, we
suppose to have evinced in the former Chapter. Yet we grant withal, that
sundry Laws in Scripture, being Positive, are not Moral; and those not only,
which were special to a Person or Nation, but also some of them which were
general to the first Age of the World, namely, until Christ's coming. Diverse
of these we confess abolished, and of no obligation under the New Testament:
Wherefore, that we may make use of our Distinction (and Assertion) of some
Laws Morall-Positive, as well as some Morall-Naturall; we must in the next
place lay down, what kind of Positive Laws we hold to be still in force; and
upon what grounds we hold so of them: By giving some Rules, whereby it may be
conceived, how far we stand obliged with conscience of obedience to them. And
they are these, or some of these, which follow.

First, II. Rule 1.
[ Every Law of God (though but Positive) recorded in the Scripture, is Moral
and Perpetual, unless it be afterward found Repealed by God, or Expired in
the nature of it.] We will explain this Rule, and then prove it. 1. Explained.
This Rule is propounded of all the Laws of God generally, as recorded in
Scripture. 1. Because the Fundamental proof of it, is equally for both
Testaments. 2. Because some Laws, not only recorded in the New Testament, but
seeming to be ratified there, (as that of not eating Blood, etc. of which Law
we shall speak somewhat anon) are taken to be afterward repealed. 3. Because
some Laws or Precepts of the New Testament are esteemed expired, though not
repealed; as that, Joh. 13. of washing one another feet, Of anointing the sick
with oil, that they might recover, Jam. 5. And perhaps some others are of a
like nature.

2. We say, All Laws are perpetual, except first God has afterward repealed
them: that we may reserve to him the sovereignty of his Authority, particularly
over Positive Laws; which as they proceeded at first from his authority and
pleasure, so may any of them, or all of them, at any time, by his pleasure and
authority be taken away, and repealed again. Or, 2. It be expired: of which by
and by.

3. By Gods repealing of any Law, we understand, any sentences of Scripture,
particularly of Christ and his Apostles, declaring, that it is not the will of
God, that such Laws should any longer be counted in force; whether they be
named expressly (as in some places they are) or comprehended under those
general expressions concerning the Jewish Ceremonies, calling them shadows,
and Worldly Rudiments, Col. 2. Weak and beggarly Elements, Gal. 4. Carnal
Ordinances imposed on them until the time of Reformation, Heb. 9. and, a yoke
which they were not able to bear, Act. 15. (which latter phrase will fetch in
also some of the Judicials perhaps, such namely as cannot now be observed by
particular Christians without manifest prejudice, much less be held up by any
Christian State without real and special inconveniences.) And whatsoever
comes certainly under any of these Terms, we esteem and reckon it repealed,
though not expressly named. But whatsoever is without the limits of those
Phrases, and not particularly mentioned as abolished, we account not repealed,
though possibly it may be expired for all that; which therefore we add.

4. By a Laws being Expired in the Nature of it, we mean, when it was
manifestly given, and continued for some particular Reason, which Reason is now
manifestly ceased, and so without any repealing of it, it is of it self at an
end in respect of Obligation, (though if it have no real inconvenience in it
now, it may be freely continued still: and if the reason of it should (or
could) be revived, so would the Law be in like sort.) And thus expired are
sundry other of the Judicial Laws in the Old Testament, and those
forementioned in the New Testament.

III. Usually allowed.
And these Descriptions of a Law repealed or expired, seem to be so sufficient,
as that it is the usual practice of all conscientious Christians, specially
Divines, that when they speak of any Law of the Old Testament, as Ceremonial,
or Judicial, and so no longer in force (or any Precept of the New Testament
not now binding us) they presently propound either some express Text rejecting
it now, or at least some general sentence including it among those that are
now excluded, because of some Typical signification that it has, and the
burdensomnesse and inconvenience of it, if it should be still counted in force;
or at least, the manifest ceasing of the reason for which they conceive it was
at first given (or after continued for a while) and so that there is no reason
now, why it should be counted still a Law of God. Which, N. B.
before we go any further to add any special Proofs of our Rule, seems a
tacit confession of it, (which we desire may be well noted) in that none of
them goes about, absolutely or simply, to plead exemption from any particular
Law, whether in the New or Old Testament, but only so far forth as he goes
about to prove it to come under the compass either of such a Repeal, or an
Expiration.

But yet for all this, we believe, IV. Yet excepted against.
that this Rule does already sound harshly in diverse ears; and particularly,
we are sure that our Ante-Sabbatarians will not let it pass without Exception;
for they proceed quite contrary, as well in affirming, B. of E. p. 171.
[That a Precept Evangelical is of necessary obligation] which yet we cannot
yield without the former Qualification; nor yet do they themselves in other
places: As also specially, in that they seem peremptory, B. of E. p. 120.
[That no Precepts of the old Law merely Positive, are in force under the
Gospel, unless the same be ratified and confirmed by the Gospel] where they
suppose it is not enough to keep an old Law in force, that it is not Repealed
expressly; but they require an express Ratification of it in the Gospel or New
Testament, otherwise they take it (Without more ado) to be expired, though not
repealed: which, by their leaves, we take to be an Error, and that upon these
grounds following.

First, from the Authority of the Lawgiver, V. Proved by 4. Reasons. 1. From
the Lawgivers Authority.
which is the same under the Old Testament, and under the New; requiring the
obedience of Christians now, as well as of his People of old: so that
whatsoever Law is once delivered to the Church, and accordingly recorded in the
Law-book, the holy Scriptures, even of the Old Testament; whosoever will claim
exemption from it, whether particular Person or Church, must produce somewhat
to prove, that that Law is now (under the Gospel) repealed, or at least
expired; more then bare saying, that it is no longer in force. It is so in the
Statute Law of our Kingdom (and of all Kingdoms) if a man can allege for
himself in point of Right or Privilege, (or the Kings Council, for the Kings
Rights and Prerogatives) any Statute that was once made, it stands good for all
purposes, unless they who would gainsay it, can allege and prove that such a
Statute is out of date, by expiration or repeal. So that the proof lies
originally upon the refuser of the Law, and they that would maintain it and
urge it, need plead nothing more then the enacting of it once, till the
abrogation of it can be verified.

And if it be so in the Statutes of men, and the Positive Laws of Kingdoms,
much more in those of God, whose Authority is unquestionably more absolute, and
whose Wisdom, and Holiness, and Justice, and Goodness, is infinitely beyond
that of all Princes and States in the World.

This we take to be a point meriting exceeding much consideration, though we
find cause to doubt, it is but little considered, even by many Christians and
Divines.

VI. 2. The Old Test. is part of the Canon.
Secondly, we confirm our Rule therefore, and this first proof of it, by a
second or further illustration of it, in this manner. Because the old Testament
is a part of the Rule of our Lives, as well as the New, and Canonical
Scripture, not only by way of Story or Doctrine, but by way of precept and
command, and binds us Christians as well (though not so much) as it did the
Jews. Our Divines when they handle the Doctrine, If any say our Divines when
they maintain the Law still to be in force as a Rule, mean the Moral Law only.
We say the same too, only we argue that all that are written are Moral to us
till we have proved the contrary of any particular.
of Christ's delivering from the written Law ( viz. In the old Testament, of
which the only questition is) profess continually that he has delivered us.
1. From the curse of the Law. 2. From the Laws being a Covenant of works unto
us, whereby we should be Justified; But not from the obedience of it, or
obligation to it, as a Rule of our Practice, and that so it still remains in
force, and shall do to the worlds end. And the contrary is generally condemned
in the Anabaptists, and Antinomists, whose proper opinion it is, that they make
void all the Laws of the old Testament, unless in express words renewed and
repeated in the New Testament, and whosoever will not join with them, must be
forced to acknowledge our Rule to be good, whether the Laws be Moral Natural,
or merely Positive: as our adversaries themselves have confessed of some, and
they cannot but confess who hold the Laws particularly against incestuous
Marriages to be perpetual, which yet are not so much as named (except having a
man's Fathers Wife) in all the New Testament, the reason of which silence we
shall give a touch of by and by.

Mean time we find a learned Bishop of chiefest note in our Church after this
manner to undertake to prove, Le^ lata non irrita facta ian obligat Epis. Win
opusc. page 148.
that Tithes are due by divine right. [this Law (says he) did sometimes oblige
the Church, as cannot be denied; but it is not now Abrogated, therefore it
binds still] in which argumentation he must needs take our Rule for a ground [A
Law instituted in the old Testament not Abrogated in the New, is of perpetual
obligation, though it have no express ratification in the Gospel] leaving
therefore our adversaries at home to answer him, we add yet a further proof of
our Rule.

Thirdly, otherwise the Church of God, VII. 3. Else no Canon, till the New. T.
written.
immediately after the Death of Christ, for many years together, that is,
until the New Testament was written, had had no written Canon at all for their
practice, either toward God, or toward men; but were left merely to the Law of
Nature: For the old Testament was, it seems, quite disanulled at the Death of
Christ, at least in regard of all Positive Laws (that against Polygamie and
all) and as for the Moral, they bound not the Christians as written in the old
Testament; or (as some say) as given by Moses, but only as Laws of Nature. All
which we conceive a great inconvenience; in regard that Nature corrupted (which
is now to be the Judge, as we said before) is but a dimm Light, in those in
whom it is most clear. And whereas it may be pretended, that the Preaching of
Christ and his Apostles might sufficiently supply the want of the written Law;
we answer, that though it might to the Gentiles, who were strangers to the
Scriptures of the old Testament yet not to the Jews (and those that conversed
with them) who could never have been wrought upon to have embraced the
Doctrine of the Gospel, if it had not been grounded upon the Doctrine of the
Law of the old Testament, that is, if they that Preached it had not called for
Repentance for transgressions of the Law, and urged still to the obedience of
it, as indeed both Christ and his Apostles do upon all occasions: and without
it also, their Preaching would easily have been both forgotten and mistaken, if
there had been no grounds of Gods Law written, by and upon which to settle the
consciences of their hearers.

Fourthly, VIII. 4. Confirmed by Christ, and his Apostles.
to all which we may in the last place adjoyne this consideration, that if
those places in the New Testament be observed (some of them at least, if not
all) where it is pretended, that Christ, or any of his Apostles do ratify any
of the Laws of the Old Testament, it will be found that they contain no such
ratification as our adversaries pretend in this question. For they will appear
not to be spoken by way of such confirmation, without which those Laws ought
to have been no longer accounted in force, which in propriety of speech is a
new imposition of them. As when a King by his Proclamation confirms his former
Proclamation which was void by the death of his Predecessor, this is properly a
new imposition of the same things by his Authority, which after the former
Kings death were not of any validity at all. We say, that the confirmation that
the New Testament gives unto the Laws of the Old Testament will not be found
to be of this Nature, but rather testifications of those Laws standing in
force; and so alleging them to confirm their own Doctrine, or to be a ground
of it. As our Savior evidently Alleges a Text out of Genesis 2. to ground and
confirm his Doctrine against divorce, Mat. 19. and the Apostles in like manner,
as we shall give some other instances hereafter, rather fetching their
Authority (in part at least) from the books of the Old Testament in matters of
practice (as well as of Faith) then lending strength to them by their own
Authority.

IX. So that the very silence of the N. T. rather confirms any Law, then
Abrogates it.
And so we suppose we may, upon just reason infer, that the silence of the New
Testament concerning a Law, expressly and cleare-livered in the Old Testament,
is a confirmation rather then an abrogation of it, or an intimation that it is
expired; judicious Divines giving this for a reason of the silence of the New
Testament in diverse points, which are most vehemently urged in the old, as
against incestuous marriages fore noted (and that others are but slightly, and
as it were occasionally mentioned, as the Laws about Tithes and usury, etc.)
because they are so clearly and importunately pressed in the old. And therefore
till we see better reasons to the contrary, then any we have yet met with in
all our disputers books, we must needs hold, that all the Laws of the Old
Testament are perpetuated to this day, if there be nothing against them in the
New Testament by way of repealing them: or at least in reason, which might
plead for an expiration. And if any one think, that by this assertion, sundry
of the Laws which are usually counted judaicall will prove to be in force
still; we answer, that perhaps it may prove so indeed. And, if we may have
Liberty to express our apprehension of the Case in general, we must needs
confess, that as we believe it lies upon our Consciences in particular, to
prove any particular Law, this or that, (which we hold to be Ceremonial or
Judaicall) to be such; or else we cannot justly (nor safely) plead it to be
Repealed or Expired, if it be not named among such expressly in the New
Testament: So we are afraid, that many Divines, (not to say some Churches and
States now adays) have been a little too bold in rejecting sundry Laws as
merely Judaicall, which upon further advisement might perhaps be found Moral
and Perpetual. To which our next Rule will speak some what more fully.

But before we proceed to that, X. The Text Act. 15.28, 29. expounded
we will (as we intimated before a promise in our Margent) speak a little of
that place Act. 15. for 3 causes specially: One is, that The things there
mentioned to be Necessary to be observed, when all the rest of the Jewish
Ceremonies were discharged, are not all of one kind, but one of them is
Moral, the other three Ceremonial. 2. Because not only some persons are yet
tender in the point of eating Blood, but also the Greek Church generally hold
that Prohibition in force. Therefore we will say somewhat at least toward the
clearing of both these, as also why the Ceremonies mentioned were continued
then, if they be not now in force. 3. For that some light also may perhaps from
hence be afforded to judge of some other Laws. But all briefly, that we may
not be held too long in any Digression from the main Intendment.

We find in that place Act. 15. XI. 1. Why Fornication forbidden there, being
Moral.
four Laws by name recommended to the Christian Gentiles: whereof one is
against Fornication, (to begin with that first) And of this we say, that it is
indeed a Moral Law, and perpetual, (though if Polygamie, and the Law of
Marriage be but Positive Laws, as was argued before, this also is but Positive)
and the Morality and Perpetuity of it appears undeniably by ranking of it
every where, in St. Paul's Epistles, and other places of the New Testament,
among the most heinous sins which exclude out of Gods Kingdom, and so
Damnation being threatened to it more then ten times in the New Testament. Yet
because many of the Heathens, who acknowledged Adultery to be a grievous sin,
made light of single Fornication, and thought it a matter of nothing, and
scarce any sin at all; Therefore the Apostles, to give an Antidote for the
present to this conceit, and to prevent such mischief, do here rank it among
those things which they call necessary to be avoided, though the rest but
Ceremonial: intending afterward more fully to discover the abomination of that
in it self, and so perfectly to root it out from among Christians, as St. Paul
afterward does (as much as any one thing) labor upon all occasions to do, as
we touched before; and makes it a matter of absolute necessity to fly from it.

XII. 2. Things sacrific^d to Idols being Ceremonial, forbidden.
A second thing mentioned was Ceremonial, Namely, The abstaining from things
offered in sacrifice to Idols; which St. James calls in his sentence,
Pollutions of Idols. These were forbidden in the Ceremonial Law by way of
Document, to teach them to abominate Idols. Now that this is repealed, in point
of Conscience, appears undeniably (notwithstanding this sentence here, Act.
15.) besides other places, by that, 1 Cor. 10.25, 27. where he bids them eat
any thing that is sold in the Market, or that was set before them at a Heathens
house, asking no question for Conscience sake, even though the thing perhaps be
thought to have been offered in sacrifice to Idols, as the next verse implies.
Yet was the restraint of eating those things necessary for a while, for a
double or treble scandal which else might ensue.

The first, (and chiefly intended in this place, Act. 15.) was in reference to
the Jews, lest they should detest Christians as favorers of Idols.

A second, in regard of weak Christians, who not informed of their Liberty
fully, might have judged those that did eat such things, unconscionable; as
also some of them be drawn to eat in like sort, even against their Consciences,
by others example.

A third, in regard of the Heathen Idolaters themselves, who thereby might he
hardened in their Idolatrous Worship, as thinking that Christians did in some
sort allow of it, since they would vouchsafe to eat of their Sacrifices. And in
all these respects, even S. Paul, who in the place before mentioned allows the
eating of such things simply, without scruple of Conscience; yet both in that
Chapter (and Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 8. though respecting weak Christians) enjoynes
still a forbearance, so long as the eating might be scandalous to any. And now
to us, this particular Law is not only repealed, as I said before, but expired
also, there being now no such things among us, as any meat offered in sacrifice
to Idols, only the general respects of scandal, bind us still, according as
occasion may be, as those places do abundantly urge.

A third thing was, not eating things strangled, XIII. 3. Things strangled.
and this was also Ceremonial, being specially forbidden, because the blood
was not powered out of it, Lev. 17.13. and the repeal of it may be clearly
evidenced, not only from the former place, 1 Cor. 10.25, 27. Which is general,
but also from the 1 Timothy 4. and Col. 2. which allows plainly all kind of meat;
yet this also was necessary to be forbidden, so long as blood was forbidden, of
which we come now in the last place to speak.

The fourth thing then here mentioned, XIV. 4. Eating of Blood. Repealed, as
appears by four reasons.
was the not eating of Blood, the most ancient of all the other, being as old
as Noah's age, immediately after the flood. Genesis 9. and oftimes urged by Moses,
and mentioned in the Prophets with all earnestness, and severe threatenings,
and gracious promises. Yet that this also is repealed, may appear; not only,

First, Because blood, having a nourishing quality, and being by God, in
Nature, made fit for meat (as appears by experience) it comes fairly within the
compass of those General sentences, allowing all kinds of meat, mentioned
before. But specially, because,

Secondly, it was, at the very first institution, a document of a spiritual
thing, namely, to teach them to abhor shedding the Blood of men, and
accordingly it is joined with it, Genesis 9. as if God had said more plainly,
Because I will inure you, not to shed the blood of men, I do forbid you to eat
the blood of any Beast, or Foul, or other Creature, the flesh of which I shall
allow you to eat: like that Law, afterward given to the Jews. That they
should not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, that treads out the corn, which (says
the Apostle) 1 Cor. 9. was written altogether for our sakes; that the Ministers
should be maintained. Seeing then the forbidding of Blood was a part of the
Pedagogy, of the Infant-Church, of the Old Testament, it is fairly argued, that
it is now ceased when that Church is come to age.

Thirdly, because, Blood was also expressly made a Type of the Reconciliation
of Christ, by his Blood shedding, and in that respect was forbidden to be eaten
or drunk, God would reserve it from common use, Lev. 17.11. etc. therefore
Christ being now come, and having fulfilled the Type of Reconciliation; that
restraint seems to be taken away, and Liberty granted to eat Blood now, as well
as we may eat the fat or suet which yet was also forbidden to be eaten under
the Law, for the very same reason, because it was reserved for sacrifice, Lev.
3.16, 17. Lev. 17.23. etc.

Fourthly, whiles Blood remained forbidden it seemed necessary to draw with it,
the prohibition of things strangled, as was noted before: Now all things
strangled being allowed (as was noted) blood seems to be so too.

XV. The reason of its present restraint.
But for the present restraint of this, there was special reason, above any of
the other Jewish Ceremonies: because of the antiquity of the Law mentioned; and
Gods importunity to have it observed, so often as he does mention it, which is
often, in the books of Moses. And Saint James expresses that to be the reason
of his propounding that Sanction for the continuance of these things, Acts
15.21. because Moses was read in every City, and so a sudden taking Liberty in
these things, would have been greatly scandalous to the Jews, who, while their
Common wealth stood entire, and they were nationally yet the people of God,
were to be specially respected, by the Gentiles, that lived among them, any
where. And this, above all the rest, would have been scandalous to them,
because they held all Nations, to be tied to the Precepts given to Noah, and
abhorred them that observed them not, more then they did for the Ceremonies
given by the hand of Moses, or even for circumcision it self, though given to
Abraham. But now the Jews Common wealth being destroyed, and God having
rejected them from being any more his people, and that Doctrine of Christian
Liberty being fully published, Christians that understand their Liberty, need
no longer forbear the eating of it; It being repealed upon the grounds
forenoted.

XVI. Second Rule of a Moral Law, though Positive.
And so having dispatched this not unusefull digression to our main purpose, We
return to the prosecution of that: and so for the yet better and more clear
discerning of Moral Laws, though but Positive, We propound this second Rule
[Every Law of God, though but Positive, which is Substantially-profitable for
all men in all Ages to be obliged unto, is Moral, that is, Universal and
Perpetual, unless a clear and certain repeal of it can be showed in
Scripture.] The sense of this Rule is delivered by great Divines, in those
usual sentences of ['Tale Praeceptum, qualis Ratio Praecepti.] And, Episc.
Winton. op^sc. p. 145.
["Ratio immutabilis facit Praeceptum immutabile.] But because those
Expressions are liable to Exceptions, and have been excepted against by diverse
Disputers in this Question: We rather choose to deliver our selves otherwise,
and as we have set our Rule down: whereby we conceive, the usual Objections
against those Sentences are sufficiently prevented, or may be readily answered.
And this, as we suppose, will be clear, when we have a little explained the
Terms of this Rule also, and added a few grounds for the confirmation of it.

1. Then, by Profitable, we understand that, XVII. Explained, 1. What is meant
by a Profitable Law. All the Laws of Nature are undoubtedly profitable. And
some may become so, which are but Positive. XVIII. 2. How it becomes
profitable. 1. As a supply of Wisdom.
which being practiced, not only possibly or probably may, but certainly and
infallibly does tend to the securing and advancing, either 1. of the glory of
God, and the good of Souls, (which go ever together) or 2. the general good
of humane society: or 3. even a man's own personal good, in regard of his
body, and outward condition: According as the concernment of the Law looks at
any one, or more of these; and the more of these it looks to, the more
profitable it is, and the more certainly Moral and Perpetual.

2. It is to be considered, how a Law, that appears not to be of absolute
Necessity, and so not properly Morall-Naturall, in the specialty of it, may
come to be so profitable to any of the ends forementioned: and that we conceive
may be in a threefold respect.

1. As it may be a happy supply of Wisdom to men, in limiting or bounding
those things, that (even necessarily) must be limited some way, and which Man's
wisdom, specially as now corrupted, is greatly, if not altogether,
unsufficient to set the bounds of; and wherein yet, if there be not a wise
determination, there may be a very great prejudice to some or other of those
important ends. Herein now, the wisdom of God, being uncontrollable,
interposing it self by a Law, both makes that Law, and assures it to be
undeniably profitable.

2. XIX. 2. As a remedy of Unwillingnesse.
As it may be a sufficient remedy of men's unwillingnesse to practice that which
is so profitable. Experience shows, that our want of Zeal to God, and our own
Souls good, and want of Charity one to another, or even of constant respect to
our own true Natural good, betrays us to sundry faults, where we are left at
liberty, without any express Law of God. The Laws of Men, even though Penal,
being not strong enough to hold us in, in many things; and not able to reach to
many others. And though it be true, that God has given a general command to
obey Superiors in lawful things; yet is that Command so agitated by Disputes
of men of all sorts, that in conclusion it is exceeding little practiced any
where, unless it be in those things which a man's own mind consents to be every
way profitable for himself, which very rarely happens. Therefore the
unquestionable Authority of GOD, giving out a Law in any particular, not only
silences all Disputes, but awes all Consciences, (far more strongly, and
immediately, then the best Law of Man can do) even of those that are
unwilling, if they be not altogether hardened, or asleep: and so secures the
Practice, to the fullest advantage, according to the nature of the
Profitablenesse of the Law.

XX. 3. As securing liberty to the willing.
3. As it may be a sufficient securing of a desirable Liberty or Privilege to
the willing, to practice that which may be profitable in any of the respects
fore-noted: or to forbear the contrary. And in this also, experience shows
abundantly, That when things are left more at large, many are interrupted, and
many altogether hindered from those things which they greatly desire to do,
and which would be really profitable to be done; and are oftentimes not only
tempted, but even forced, in a sort, to do contrary to what were so profitable
to be done, if they had clear liberty, from sufficient Authority. Therefore,
here again, the undeniable Sovereign Authority of God the Lord of all, comes
graciously to authorize by that Law, such to enjoy their desired freedom, and
to plead his pleasure for their liberty to so good purposes; and withal, gives
them assurance, that if they do suffer any outward inconvenience from men, or
otherwise, himself will recompense it to them again, at least unto their
souls: and so the Law is still most undoubtedly profitable.

XXI. 3. What is meant by Substantially Profitable, To difference it.
Thirdly, Now by substantially-profitable, we understand such a Law, whose
utility flows not merely from the absolute and almighty pleasure of GOD the
Lawgiver; though his Wisdom and Authority be the prime and principal cause of
all profitablenesse of any Law, (and so of these, as we discoursed but even
now.) But it arises partly from the nature of the Practice or Forbearance, and
so from the matter of the Law, in it self, according to Reason, and humane
judgment. And so by putting in this word, we difference the Laws we now speak
of.

1. From all the Ceremonial Types and Documents forespoken of, XXII. 1. From
Ceremonial Types, etc.
even that of not eating blood, etc. For we deny not, but in as much as God
appointed those for a time, they were for the time, in that consideration,
profitable unto those Typical ends, and so (reductively) to his Honor, and
Souls good. But this was not in the nature of the Observances themselves, or
the substantiality of the matter of those Laws toward Gods honor; but merely
in regard of his Pleasure, appointing them for that time. And therefore the
Apostle speaking of them generally, and giving a reason of their change and
abrogation, says, [ It was for their weakness and unprofitablenesse, Heb.
7:18.] But the Laws we speak of, and of which our Rule proceeds, are only such
as may be found to have in themselves, and the nature of the things, (if
warrantably practiced, though not peremptorily commanded) some substantiality
and reality of Profitablenesse: But much more being commanded by God himself,
for the Reasons expressed.

2. This word Substantial, differences Laws of this kind, XXIII. 2. From any
annexed Circumstance.
(viz. Morall-Positive) in regard of their Substance, from any Circumstance
annexed to them, even though it were at their first delivery, and namely from
the Particularity or Individuality of the Object of them (as suppose, the Law
of Tithes to be of this kind, the Particularity or Individuality of it, in
respect of Cattle, ( Lev. 27.) was the 10th. or last of 10. that passed under
the Rod) which in reference to the nature of the Law, is plainly but a mere
Circumstance, and no ways of the Substance of it, nor conducing to that
universal and perpetual Vtility, which flows from the Matter and Substance,
(which in that of Tithes, was the paying God a tribute or rent of their
estates, multiplied by his blessing; and was afterward by Him applied to the
maintenance of his Ministers, Number. 18. Unto which ends, the Proportion, viz. a
tenth part, was plainly profitable, but the Order, the tenth under the Rod, not
at all, but merely at Gods pleasure.) And therefore, while that Particularity
or Individuality, being a mere Circumstance, comes to be abolished or changed,
the Law it self, in its substance, may be perpetual, as being perpetually
profitable.

XXIV. 4. Unless a clear Repeal be showed in Scripture.
4. We add in the last place, Unless a clear and certain Repeal of it can
be showed in Scripture. This we put in, 1. That we may eternally reserve to God
the honor of his Soveraigntie, in taking away, as well as in making any such
Positive Laws, at his pleasure: and of his infinite Wisdom, who may see cause
for that, which we see none for; and so if he declare any Law repealed, though
we should otherwise have thought it substantially profitable, yet we will not
argue it perpetual, contrary to his express pleasure manifested unto us. 2.
But then, we mention a clear and certain Repeal, that such Laws, as we
speak of, may not be rejected upon slight and easy pretenses, or such general
intimations only, which (according to the manner of interpreting Scripture) may
well bear another sense; and so may leave such Laws so substantially
profitable, wholly untoucht. In a word, if the pretended Repeal be
questionable upon grounds from other places of Scripture, We conceive, that the
Substantiall-Profitablenesse of the Law in controversy, being perpetual for
all men in all Ages (as we say) does argue, that such a Law is not included in
the Repeal, N. B.
but remaining in its strength, among the Perpetuals. 3. We here make no
mention of Expiration, as we did in the former Rule; because the Perpetual
Substantiall-Profitablenesse of the Law, does directly contradict the
Expiration. It must then be in force as Perpetual, unless (as we said) a
clear and certain Repeal of it can be showed in Scripture. And so these
things, being thus explained, we suppose a few words may suffice to confirm
this Rule, considering the Proofs formerly laid down to stablish the foregoing
Rule.

XXV. 2. The second Rule proved, 1. by the former Rule.
For if every Law written be Perpetual (though Positive) which is not after
found repealed by God, or expired in the nature of it; and the substantialitie
of the Profit of the Law evinces it not to be expired, and withal
distinguishes it from the Ceremonial Types and Documents, (which are the
maine, if not the only subjects of a Repeal) what can be pretended, why we
should conceive it to be repealed, unless it be clearly and infallibly
mentioned in Scripture to be no longer in force? Let a man study to say what he
will, or can, if it be to the purpose, to show any Law (contended for by others
to be Moral) not to be Perpetual; It must argue it some way inconvenient and
prejudicial, as a real (and unnecessary) burden to us now: And this then will
discharge it out of the rank of the Laws we argue for, which we all
substantially-profitable for all men in all ages: for inconvenient and
prejudicial are contradictory to substantially-profitable. If therefore any
who excepts against a Law as not perpetual, can prove it really inconvenient
and prejudicial to be observed, we dispute not for it in this Rule, but
relinquish it, as out of out intention. But on the contrary, if we can prove
any Law so substantially-profitable, as we have discoursed; then all
allegations of its Inconvenience and Prejudice will be frivolous and vain, and
the Law will be found perpetual, as the Profit of it is.

Only we must a little carefully observe, XXVI. And cautioned.
[That if the substantiall-profitablenesse of any Law, argued thereby to be
perpetual, do concern Religion, that is, Gods honor, and the good of
Souls: A worldly inconvenience, or some outward difficulty attending the
observation of it, will not be sufficient to discharge it from being of
perpetual obligation:] For as much as God and our Souls are undoubtedly to be
preferred before any worldly convenience or inconvenience: And likewise by
reason of our present corruption, there is scarce any Law of God (even of these
that are Morall-Naturall) but the observation of it is often, if not
perpetually, attended with some outward difficulty and worldly inconvenience;
which is one main reason that makes self-denial (namely in carnal and worldly
respects) to be the first lesson of Christianity and Godliness. 2. In like
sort, [If the profit of the Law concern the general good of Humane society,
even in worldly respects; then a man's particular worldly inconvenience or
difficulty, (or burden) in the observation of it, is not sufficient to
discharge that Law neither from being of perpetual obligation:] For as much as
a private and personal convenience or benefit must give place to a general or
public; and one, or a few, must be contented to suffer some inconvenience,
rather then put many (or all) to a like, or greater prejudice. 3. Withal, that
though God in his gracious indulgence has allowed the intermission of some of
his services, (and so dispensed with some of his Laws that concerned himself)
in a particular case of Necessity, for the good of men's bodies; and so allowed
to do such things, in these cases, as in a Direct and Natural (that is,
Physical) consideration, are necessary for the Bodies safety and good, (or
even for the preservation of the lives of Cattels, and showing them mercy; Or
saving from present, and otherwise inevitable destruction of any of a man's
goods.) Yet [The hazard, or even certainty of Persecution, though to the loss
of all a man's substance, or even of his life, is no sufficient ablegation to
discharge any profitable Law concerning God, and the Soul: so as the pretense
of such inconvenience of Persecution, to be undergone in or for the observation
of that Law, should argue that Law not to be in force now.] For as much as 1.
even all the undeniably Perpetual Laws, (those that are most Morall-Naturall)
whether belonging to the first or second Table, as the not worshipping other
Gods, or the not murdering an innocent, or not committing Adultery, Incest, or
Sodomy; might be, and would be made void, upon this pretense, That they were
inconvenient Laws, and prejudicial to men's lives, in such and such cases. 2.
We find also, that Daniel, in that case of Testimony, and hazard of Persecution
to extremity, would not forbear his three times a day solemn Prayers, and
that upon his knees, in his Chamber, and his windows open toward Jerusalem;
though he knew his enemies might by that means surprise him, and accuse him,
and cause him to be cast into the den of Lions: yet did he hold himself bound
to the Law of Outward Worship, daily, and even in that open manner, (though the
looking toward Jerusalem was but a Ceremony ordained by God upon Solomon's
prayer, 1 King. c. 8.9.) 3. Also the Maccabees did not think that Persecution
did (or could) discharge even the Ceremonial Law of not eating Swines flesh;
but for it endured all extremity of Torments, as the Story relates, (and for
it they are ranked among the Worthies of the Old Testament, who lived and dyed
in Faith, Heb. 11.) Much less then can any such hazard, or even the enduring
of Persecution, be counted such an inconvenience, as should suffice to disprove
a Law substantially-profitable (for Gods honor (specially) and Souls good)
from being Moral and Perpetual, unless (as we said at the first mentioning
of the Rule) God have clearly and certainly repealed it in his Word. XXVII. 2.
By further Reasons Men continue profitable Laws.
The further proof whereof we thus briefly lay down:

1. We find, that among men, nothing moves a wise, and just, and gracious King
or State to take away any Law (though not made by themselves, but by their
Ancestors, and specially if made by themselves) that they find still profitable
for the honor of the Sovereign, and the real good of the Subjects. And that
as the Imbecility of Humane wisdom to foresee all future conveniences or
inconveniences, makes all Humane Laws mutable in themselves: So only the
emergent or seeming appearances of such inconveniences, as were not when the
Law was made, makes them be taken away actually, by such as are not Tyrannous
nor unwise. Therefore we cannot imagine (unless we find it syllabically and
undeniably expressed) that God should do otherwise then perpetuate those Laws,
which according to that wisdom he has (from Reason and Scripture together)
vouchsafed unto us, we cannot but judge substantially profitable for us and all
men now, as well as they were for his people of old. We know he can never be
deceived, so as to mistake the profitablenesse of any Law: neither can he ever
fail in his love to his own honor, or the good of his Church in any
generation. Though therefore we still grant, that if it be infallibly certain,
that He has repealed any Law, We are deceived, if we still think it
substantially profitable: and must conclude, that by such Repeal he has
pronounced the contrary of it, according to his unsearchable wisdom,
infinitely exceeding ours. Yet still (upon the same grounds of his infallible
wisdom, and never failing love to his own honor, and his Churches good) we
cannot believe any such Repeal, unless it be undoubtedly clear and
undeniable: The rather, because, --

2. XXVIII. 2. Laws not substantially-profitable, yet clearly repealed.
We find such clear and undeniable expressions in the New Testament, of the
Repeal of sundry Laws of the Old Testament, which had apparently no
Substantiality of Profitablenesse, (according as we have described it) but
their service and profit depended merely upon Gods particular appointment; as
Circumcision, and the forbearing of Meats, and the offering of Sacrifices for
Sin, and many such like; which also had a reality of burden in them, which God
was yet pleased to impose upon them, till Christ the promised Seed would come.
Yet, I say, God vouchsafed clearly to declare by his Apostles, (and in his
Word, in their Acts and Epistles) that he has repealed these, as now no longer
profitable, and as burdensome. Therefore we conceive, that His not expressly
naming, nor undeniably including under any general sentence of Repeal, any
such Law, as our best and most serious consideration cannot but still esteem
singularly profitable, (particularly for His honor, and our own Souls good)
is a certain and undeniable intimation to us, that He would have us esteem
them still in force, and not repealed.

XXIX. 3. The Objection of Christian Liberty, prevented.
3. We conceive, that the most usual Objection and Pretense of Christian
Liberty under the Gospel, purchased by the death of our blessed Redeemer the
Lord Jesus Christ, is so contradicted by the Explication we have made of
Substantially Profitable, that we cannot imagine how it can any way serve to
discharge or disprove our Rule: For can that be properly called Christian
Liberty, to be loose from the Bond of those Laws, which to observe, is
undeniably singularly profitable for the advancement of Gods honor, and the
salvation of men, or for a general good to Humane Societies, or the like? What
is Licentiousness, if that be Christian Liberty? Or is it imaginable, that He
who dyed properly to procure all good to his people, and chiefly to their
Souls, should intend by his death to dissolve the obligation of any such Law,
which is substantially profitable for their spiritual good? Were not this
rather to bring prejudice to them, and inconvenience, then spiritual benefit?
And on the contrary, it is certainly a happy Privilege, and a true Spiritual
and Christian Liberty, (worthy to be sued for to God and Christ with all
importunity, if it were a matter liable to be prayed for) to have the bonds of
such profitable Laws still tying us fast, how willing soever the carnal heart
of any would be to be rid of them. And this is the cause, as we conceive, why
St. James, speaking of the Law generally which Christians are still bound unto,
calls it twice, the Law of Liberty, chapter 1.25. and 2.12. And so a matter of
thanksgiving rather, that we are still partakers of the benefit of it, then of
complaint of it, or quarrel or dispute against it, or refractorinesse to obey
it.

XXX. 4. Some Laws profitable perpetuated for substance, though some
circumstance about it repealed.
4. To all this we may add, that we find God so careful of the perpetuating of
some Substantially Profitable Laws, that even when he has thought good to take
away some particularity and circumstance about them, and namely the individual
object of them, and to abrogate and abolish that; yet he vouchsafed to continue
the Substance of those Laws still under the New Testament: and for that
purpose, himself ordained new Particularities, new Individual Objects,
whereby those Laws should subsist; and made only a change in the
Circumstances, and no diminution nor alteration at all of the Substance of
those profitable Laws. Of this I have a double undeniable instance to produce;
one of the Ministry, the other of the Sacraments. 1 It cannot be denied, XXXI.
1. In the Ministry.
but it is a Substantially Profitable Law for all men in all Ages, [That there
should be some men set apart to minister between GOD and his People; and the
People submit to them, being appointed of GOD to that office, and depend upon
them so far as GOD ordaines.] Accordingly, (besides Melchisedek mentioned to be
a Priest of the most High GOD, Divines generally hold, that before the
Leviticall Law was given, every Father of a Family had the office of a Priest
or Minister of God to his Family, even from Adams time.
in Abraham's time, Genesis 14.) GOD, as soon as ever he took Israel to be his
people, had first the firstborn to be his Priests, ( Exodus 24.5. and Number. 3.
etc.) and afterward the Tribe of Levi; and the Family of Aaron, (besides also
his raising up extraordinary Prophets, for part of that office.) But these
Levites and Aaronites, though he has under the New Testament taken away from
being Hereditary Ministers of his, and so abolished their Order: yet has he
not left his Church without Ministers; But Christ himself upon Earth, chose,
and sent some in that employment, and appointed them to send others in
succession, which accordingly they did, (as the Acts and Epistles show) and
likewise continually gives gifts to men to that end ( Ephesians. 4.) and so upon
those, who are according to his Word ordained to that Office, lies the
Substantial Duty of GODS Ministers, even the same for substance that was from
the beginning, namely to teach, and pray, and judge the People in things
pertaining to GOD, according to his Word: And Gods people are bound to submit
to them, and depend upon them, (answerable to the rules of the Word) as well,
and as much, as they of old were to his Ministers in those times. And all this,
because of the substantial profit of those Laws for Gods honor, and men's
souls; as the terms of Ambassadors, Watchmen, Shepherds, Husbandmen,
Builders, Fishers, and the like, do abundantly testify. So that a
substantially profitable Law appears to be perpetuated, even where God makes
some change about it. And if we consider, that God did once speak to his people
generally by his own Majestic voice, (Exodus 20.) and oftentimes of old to
Particulars, by Dreams, and Revelations, and by apparitions of Angels: There
was no necessity, neither on Gods part, nor Men's, that such Laws should be
made, or any such Office of Men established; But it was only the pleasure of
God, and a Positive Law of his, (desired also by the people, as we find Exodus
20. after they had heard that dreadful voice: and in answer thereunto, He
promised a succession of Prophets, Vide Calv. in locum.
and specially Christ the great Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.) Yet for the substantial
profitablenesse of it, perpetuated by God throughout all Ages; and acknowledged
and practiced even by all the Heathens. Yet by no Argument can it be proved
Morall-Naturall, as I suppose.

XXXII. 2. In the Sacraments.
2. The other Instance is yet more (if need be) undeniable, for a Positive Law
to be perpetuated, because substantially-profitable for all men in all ages.
And that is the Law of the Sacraments, of being Seals for confirmation of a
Covenant between God and men. Of this it cannot be said there is any necessity
in regard of God, who knows all men's hearts, before, and without this: nor yet
absolutely in regard of Men; For all Orthodox Divines hold, men may be (and
are) saved without them, if they be not willing contemners of them: They are
then necessary, only necessitate Praecepti, not Medii. And the nature of them
is such, as that God himself must appoint them, or else they are so far from
being necessary or profitable to advance his honor, and Souls good, that they
are unlawful to be used: (Men may not make or appoint Religious seals of the
Covenant between God and them.) The using then of any such, comes from Gods
Positive Law. Yet because in his Wisdom and Grace he saw it would be
profitable for his Church to have such Seals of the Covenant between him and
them: And accordingly, we are able to discourse of a substantial profit of
such seals of Gods appointment, to strengthen our faith, and engage us the
more solemnly and strongly to him, and that from time to time. Therefore God
not only gave to Adam in innocence the Tree of Life for a Sacrament, as
Divines generally hold: But after his fall, Sacrifices, which had certainly the
nature of Sacraments and seals of Gods covenant: And now under the New
Testament, though he has abolished the old seals of Circumcision, and the
Passover, (and Sacrifices) yet he has not abolished the Law of Sacraments, of
Seals in general, (though also that Law be no where expressly laid down in the
general, but under the particular Seals of each Age) But has only changed
the former Individual Objects, and set up (himself) new ones, Baptism, and
the Lords Supper: Unto the Laws of which (even the general Laws of Seals,
to be gathered from the Old, as well as the New Testament) All his people are
still bound, because of the substantial profitablenesse, as well, and as much
as they of old were, Though not to the specialties which appear peculiar to the
old Seals. Still then, we find God Perpetuating, Substantially-Profitable
Laws, even although he change some circumstance about them.

We will therefore conclude this discourse (and this Chapter) with this
Epiphonema from both our Rules. That, XXXIII. An Epiphonema for conculsion.
as we being Subjects of the great Lawgiver, dare not plead our selves loose
from any Law of his which we shall find in his Word; and specially not from any
such substantially-profitable Law, without we can be sure he has discharged us
of it, (according as we have discoursed of expirations and repeal.) So upon
this supposition, We shall not need be overcurious in distinguishing
Morall-Naturall, from Moral Positive, for both will come to one effect to us.

CHAP. III.
Every Law of the Decalogue, is a Moral and Perpetual Law.

WE have one Rule more to add, I. The third Rule, Every Law of the Decalogue
is Moral.
to know a Law to be Moral, though but Positive, and that is, [Every Law of
the Decalogue, or every one of the ten Commandments, is a Moral and
Perpetual Law.] This Rule we find, does not pass current with the contrary
party, and only or principally because of the fourth Commandment, which they
are unwilling to honor with the title and dignity of a Moral Law; without
some qualification or distinction. The others indeed they yield Moral, but not
this, as knowing they loose their whole cause, unless they refuse the fourth
Commandment. We therefore, who have undertaken the special defense of the
fourth Commandment: must take special pains to maintain the whole Decalogue
together (and so that Law, as one of the ten) to be Moral and Perpetual, by
arguments which are common to all those Laws together. Concerning which we
thus proceed.

First for the stating of the Question, II. The question stated.
we premise this consideration. That by any of those Laws being in force, we
mean, that it is in force in the Words of it, according to their Litterall and
Gramaticall sense, and not in any mystical or Spiritual meaning; or forsaking
the words to fly only to a general equity, as some speak. For both all Lawyers
say, and reason it self shows: That a Law is no longer in force, then the
Words of it are in force: at least those that contain the substance of it. And
therefore to forsake the Words, and fly only to a Spiritual meaning or
general equity: is in true construction, As well may we say that the whole
ceremonial or Judicial Law, is still in force, as any command of the
Decalogue whose words are not in force, but only a Spiritual meaning, or
general equity.
to fly from the Law, and forsake it altogether, and pronounce it Void. For
the Spiritual meaning, or General equity, are precedent to a particular Law:
and have no need of such a particular Law to confirm or hold them up. For they
would have been in force, though that particular Law had never been: we mean
though those Words (which now are said to be void) had never been given for a
Law; and are no less strong when that particular Law is made void altogether.
So that that particular Law is altogether made void, when the Words of it are
rejected, as no longer obligatory, Therefore we say, by a Law in force we
understand the Words of each Commandment, in their substance, and according to
the Literal and Gramaticall sense of them, which that we may evince to be true
of all the Ten Commandments, we thus argue.

III. 1. Argument. From the Testament of the Church in all ages.
First, we Allege the Testimony of the Church of God many ways notified. 1. In
the Universal usage of the Name of the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments,
(derived from God himself first, who so denominates, then Exodus 34. Deuteronomy. 4.
and Deuteronomy. 10.) Taken up by all Churches at this Day, and continued through all
Ages of the Church unto this day. 2. In putting all of them, in the Words and
syllables, into their Catechismes to be taught in the very Words of them, unto
all Children and ignorants, (only indeed the Idolatrous Church of Rome, has
left the 2d. wholly out of their Catechismes, as too grossly contradicting
their abominations of Image making, and Image-worshipping.) 3. Accordingly,
Expounding all of them in all Catechisticall Sermons and Treatises. Though in
them we confess, they do diverse of them, Forsake the Words of some
Commandments, and particularly of the fourth too much. 4. But further, the
Reformed Churches in many places, if not in all, have all the Ten
Commandments at large written upon the Walls of their Churches, that he that
runs may read them, and learn (even from thence) that they hold them all
perpetual. 5. They appoint them to be all publicly repeated in the Church
every Lords day. 6. Our Church of England has gone beyond all in this, This
was penned while the book of Common Prays was in use in the Church, and highly
magnified by those who are Adversaries in this Cause: against whom it still
remains a convincing Argument.
requiring, besides all the former things, 1. A promise of the observation of
them by the child that is to be baptized, (viz. from the Sureties in the
childs name.) 2. The Sureties that present the child to Baptism, by a
particular charge after it is baptized, That they see it be taught, as a chief
necessary thing, the Ten Commandments in the English tongue. 3. After the
solemn public rehearsal of them severally and distinctly, all the
Congregation to say, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep
this Law. 4. And finally, at the close of all to say, Lord have mercy upon us,
and write all these thy Laws in our hearts, we beseech thee.

In all which it cannot be avoided, but it must be acknowledged, IV. Otherwise
guilty of a double sin.
1. That All generally agree in avouching our Rule, [That all the Decalogue is
perpetuated to this day: and every one of the ten Commandments, in the very
words of it, concern us all as well at this day, as any people or persons in
any former age since it was first given] Or else they are very unwise in all
this, to say the least that can be. But indeed more must be said: For hence it
will follow also, 2. That if the whole Decalogue be not now in force, and that
there be not ten Commandments now perpetual, but nine or eight only: and so if
the words of any one of the ten be not now at all in force, no more then the
Law of the Passover, or those of the other Jewish Festivals, (as some private
men have been bold to speak this kind of language) then is the Church
universally in all Ages, and at this day in all parts of the World, undeniably
and grievously guilty of a double sin:

1. In laying a fearful stumbling block before all her children, 1. In laying
a stumbling block before children.
in the very name of the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments, there being not so
many now to us: And specially in teaching all ignorant persons the words of
them all, and most of all, the words of the 4th. Commandment, (which are so
many and so plain, for but six days work together, and then a seventh days
rest to be kept holy) which while they hear, and must learn, and repeat the
words constantly; they cannot but think, but the very words bind them, and not
a mere general equity only, (or we know not what spiritual meaning) far
remote from the words: For that they believe, that should only have been taught
them now, if that only had been in force; and they not to be troubled to learn
a great many words, which do not at all concern them, (there being no such
thing to be looked to, as the words pretend commanded by God) and which are
only apt to ensnare their consciences in needless superstition and
scrupulositie. Therefore we must needs confess, that though the Church of Rome
be Idolatrous in making and worshipping of Images, yet are they wiser in their
generation, and more true to their Principles, in leaving out the second
Commandment wholly, and never teaching it at all to their children, and common
people, than those Churches should be (and are) that hold any one of the
Commandments, not now in force, according to the words of it, and yet still
teach them in their Catechismes, and cause their children to learn them.

2. In taking of Gods name in vain.
But secondly, hence must also needs be concluded, That they are all also guilty
of a fearful taking GODS Name in vain, to teach those words for his
Commandment, which has not been his Commandment these 1600 years: And our
Church most of all, in making all, from day to day, ask GOD forgiveness for
that which is no fault, (for where no Law is, there is no Transgression) and
praying to him to incline our hearts to keep this or that Law, and to write all
these Laws in our hearts, as His Laws, if any of them be no longer a Law to
us, nor to be kept by any necessity of his Divine commandment. What, say we,
can this be judged to be less then an horrible taking of GODS Name in vain,
contrary to the express words of one of the ten Commandments, the Third
namely, (immediately foregoing the questioned quarrelled Fourth) which also is
undeniably perpetual, even by the Law of Nature.

These things we earnestly wish all Disputers, and namely of the Reformed
Churches, and most specially of our Church, seriously to weigh, and to put it
home to their Consciences, in cold blood, whether they will cast all those
imputations upon the whole Christian Church, and upon our own particularly: or
how they can avoid it, if a very Heathen were to be Judge in this particular,
unless they grant, as we here argue, that all the Commandments of the
Decalogue are severally and jointly, in their words and plain sense,
universally and perpetually Moral.

V. Why this Argument is first.
And this Argument we have first propounded, not as preferring the Testimony of
the Church before the Scriptures, or Scripture-reasons: but a little to
balance the Prejudice of Disputers, who charge us with Novelty, and
Singularity, and Judaisme, and Puritanisme, (any thing to make our Cause
odious) when yet we maintain nothing in this, but what we have been trained up
to by our Catechism, etc. and necessitated unto by the forementioned
considerations of the Churches recommendation of the whole Decalogue, and all
the words of it. And for our part, we must confess, that (besides our Churches
particular recommendation of the fourth Commandment, in the Homily of the
place and time of Prayer, of which hereafter) the perpetuity of the whole
Decalogue is so necessarily involved in all these Acknowledgements, and
Professions, and Practices, that we wonder where their Logic, their Reason, or
their Divinity and Conscience has been all this while, that could subscribe
to the Book of Common Prayer, and urge others so to it, as they have done, and
yet not hold the words of the fourth Commandment perpetual. And if we were of
their opinion, we know not which way we should ever dare so much as to read the
Ten Commandments publicly, (unless as a story in the 20. of Exodus or 5. of
Deuteronomy.) much less ever teach any child or ignorant person any Cathechisme (of
any of the Reformed Churches) which contains all the words of all the
Commandments, (the Fourth and all) thereby to teach them any words which are
now wholly out of date. And if the shifts our Disputers have made to evade from
the force of this Argument, do satisfy their own Consciences, we shall rather
still admire then envy them. To themselves we now leave it. Mean time we forget
not the usual grand Objection, That if this be so, then we must still hold to
the Jewish seventh day. But that we deny for the present; and there is a proper
place reserved for the full scanning of that, to which we refer it.

And so proceed to a second Argument, VI. Arg. 2. From the eminent privileges
of this Law.
which we thus propound: [Those Laws (though but Positive) which God in a most
extraordinary and singular manner has honored and privileged above all other
Laws, namely by a most rare and admirable delivering, recording, reserving,
are Moral and Perpetual: But such are all the Laws of the Decalogue: Ergo.]

To strengthen this Argument, we will first illustrate the Minor in the
several parts of it, and then further press and confirm the Major.
Accordingly we propound (as we have named) three things, as most rare and
singular privileges, wherewith God has honored these Laws of the Decalogue,
and no other.

1. In the delivery; in respect
First, In the Delivery, it was with the greatest Majesty that ever God showed
from the beginning of the World, and that again in a threefold respect: 1. Of
the Auditory; 2. Of the Terror accompanying it; 3. The Voice.

1. Of the Auditorie.
1. For the Auditory, which was the whole multitude of the People of Israel
then, six hundred thousand men (besides women and children, to say nothing of
the mixed multitude that came with them out of Egypt, Exodus 12.38. and were
still among them, Number. 11.4.) All these gathered together at once, (after a
three days solemn preparation of them for that very purpose, Exodus 19.) to
hear this Law of the ten Commandments, and nothing else.

2. The Majesty and terror.
2. For the immediate Antecedents and Concomitants of the Delivery, most
terrible Thunders, and the voice of a Trumpet exceeding loud, which so affected
their ears, that the people trembled in the very Camp, before they came to the
Mount, Exodus 19.16. and most frightfull lightenings, and fire, and the mountain
of Sinai altogether on a smoke; which so affected their eyes, that they
afterward cried out, This great fire will consume us, Deuteronomy. 5. And the whole
Mount quaked and shak'd so, as with the terror of all together, even Moses
himself said, I Exceedingly fear and quake, Heb. 12.21.

3. The voice of God himself.
3. For the Voice delivering those Ten Commandments (and no more) most
dreadfully great, and said to be, in a special manner, the voice of GOD, which
they that heard it, desired and prayed never to hear any more, lest they
should die. Nor was there ever since the Worlds foundation till that day, nor
since that day to this, nor ever shall be again, till the last day, the day of
the Worlds dissolution, (when an account shall be taken of the transgressions
of this very Law) such a concurrence of wonders, in so mighty an assembly; so
Majesticall a Preacher, and so terrible a combustion and concussion of Heaven
and Earth, the while these Laws were delivering.

VII. 2. The writing of them by God himself.
Secondly, These Laws being thus pronounced and given out, God in the next place
takes a most singular order for the recording of them, trusts not Moses himself
with the writing of them, but a first and second time Himself writes them, and
that upon two Tables of Stone; and the second writing is more observable then
the first, as more abundantly testifying, that God meant to have it observed,
that Himself would write these Laws, which yet He did to none else besides
these: for though he put Moses to hew new Tables of stone, Exo. 34. (after that
he had broken the first, in zeal and indignation against Isreal's idolatry in
the Golden Calfe, Exodus 32.) yet he puts not over the writing upon the Tables
to Moses, but Himself, we say, with his own finger (as the Scripture phrase
is) did write them again, and so (again we say) He never wrote any other Laws
besides these.

Thirdly, When they were thus written, VIII. 3. The reserving them alone in the
Ark.
He does not (as we may say) trust any Man, or Men, with the keeping of them,
but takes a most singular order to have them most remarkably under His own
custody, His own hand or wing; for He appointed an Ark to be made, on purpose
to keep them in, which Ark was the principal sign of His presence, among that
people, until the Babylonish Captivity, and his prime Ordinance, and called
his glory, his face, his strength, in diverse places of Scripture; and was also
covered with the Mercy-seat or Propitiatory, which was a most singular Type of
Christ. In this Ark were these Laws kept, and no other, nor nothing else: as
to intimate, that of all the Laws, He took most care for these. And so, giving
to these Laws first (of any number of Laws together) the Title of His
Covenant, and of the Testimony, See 1 King. 8.6.21.
(and though other Laws afterward were taken into the Term of His Covenant,
and the Scripture mentions His Testimonies in the plural, yet there was
somewhat eminent in these, as being first so entitled, and so most properly
those terms belonged to them.) From thence was the Ark called the Ark of the
Covenant, and the Ark of the Testimony; and even the Tabernacle called the
Tabernacle of Testimony, as implying still, that these were the chiefest Laws,
which he most regarded of all that he gave out to men. And thus we suppose the
Minor is sufficiently confirmed.

And by considering of all these together, the Major may be put out of all just
Question; in as much as it cannot (we suppose) with any reason be imagined,
that God, intending to make some of his Laws perpetual to the worlds end,
should single out these Ten from all the rest, and give them this pre-eminence
in all these respects, as He does, above all others, and call them (together)
again and again, the ten words, (the Decalogue) and not mean to make them, and
every one of them perpetual: As also declare, that even by these very things,
He would have them all to be taken for perpetual, by all his people, until
the Worlds end. Each of these Prerogatives (single) has a great weight in it,
to recommend these Laws; But all of them together do make such a strong
chain of obligation, and do so wonderfully difference these from all the
rest, as that we cannot but think that any conscience, that desires to give
God, our great Lawgiver, a good account of his obedience, and holding himself
bound to any of the Laws of God, had need to produce a most certain
demonstration, against any of these Laws, to prove it to be repealed, if he
will reckon himself no longer tied to it. We say, he had need have a
demonstration, not merely against any circumstance annexed to any Command, or
any particularity belonging to it; but against the body, and substance, and
formal words of it: which because we have not yet met with in all our
Disputers books, we dare not count our selves loose from the bonds of any one.
And what they say against the Fourth in special, we shall hereafter consider
in due place. Mean time we forget not that there are Exceptions against both
the Propositions of this Argument, IX. The Argument confirmed, by
which we shall speak to, when we have first produced a fourfold further
Testimony to confirm our Major: 1. A Prophet; 2. An Apostle; 3. An Ancient
Father; and 4. One of our Adversaries.

1. The Prophet Jeremie.
1. The Prophet is Jeremiah, who, in the name of God, chapter 7.21. thus calls for
obedience to these Laws, as preferring them far before Sacrifice, etc. [I
spoke not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them
out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt offerings and sacrifice; But this
thing I commanded them, saying, Obey my voice, etc.] Now what is properly the
voice of God, distinguished from the law of Sacrifice, and the like ceremonious
commandments, but the Ten Commandments, which were delivered by the voice of
God? And because they were His voice, therefore they were of singular and
perpetual regard.

2. The Apostle James.
The Apostle is St. James, who in the 2. chap. of his Epistle, urging to the
obedience of all the Commandments of the Law, one as well as another; and
saying, that otherwise, he who offends in one point, is guilty of all, ver. 10.
That we may be sure to know what Law he means, Jam. 2.10. explained.
he instances in two of the Commandments of the Decalogue; and to prove his
saying good, he alleadges this Reason for it; That He who spoke one of these,
spoke also the other, ver. 11. [He (the same God) who said, Thou shall not
commit Adultery, said also, Thou shall not kill, etc.] Where plainly he does
two things: One is, that [He makes all the Laws which GOD spoke together, (as
He did these two he names) to be Perpetual alike; because they were spoken
alike (one as well as another) by the same Lawgiver GOD, at the same time, and
in the same manner.] The other is, that [He makes this an argument of their
Perpetuity, that GOD did speak them:] Which must be understood of his speaking
of them in a singularly Majesticall manner, as we have showed above. And we
say, that whosoever shall go about to interpret the word [said] of any other
kind of speaking then this, (if referring it to God) will wholly make void the
Apostles argumentation, and make him bring for a proof that which had no
strength at all in it: For (thus) a Ceremonious Jew might have retorted this
Argument upon him; He that keeps not Circumcision, breaks the whole Law; For He
that said, Thou shall not commit Adultery, said also (even to Abraham, long
before He gave that Commandment to Israel) Every man-child among you must
needs be circumcised. What answer can now be made hereunto, to preserve the
authority of the Apostles argument, but this, That he means it of GODS
speaking in his Majesty, when He delivered the ten Commandments: And so
whatsoever He said at that time, and in that manner, does stand still in force,
and even by virtue of such a Majestic speaking and delivery of it. But of
other kinds of speaking it holds not.

But if any object, that the Margent of the Text reads it, And vindicated.
That Law which said (and that the Article () will agree to (...), which is
expressed in the verse before, as well as to (...), which is not named) we
answer; This variation will neither prejudice our cause, nor our Argument at
all, if it be rightly considered. For of what Law speaks the Apostle? It must
needs be granted, of the written Law. Where say we either in the Book of Moses
at large, or particularly in the Decalogue; and so in the two Tables of stone.
Not the former; for then the forementioned Ceremonious Jew, might again have
come upon him with this: That Law which says, Thou shall not kill, says also,
Thou shall not eat swines flesh; so by eating swines flesh, a man is a
transgressor and breaker of the whole Law; For this is as well found in the Law
of Moses, written by him, as the other: Therefore of necessity, it must be
meant of the Decalogue, the Law of the Ten Commandments, considered as one
Law together, and so, though the several Commandments be so many distinct
branches, with reference to each other; Yet are they joined, in one bulk, and
body together, as one perpetual Law, as spoken altogether, and written
altogether; and that in such a manner, as no other Laws were: Neither will it
be possible to satisfy the Apostles drift, and make his argument good, unless
we thus interpret it. And therefore we must needs take Liberty, to account,
both Papists transgressors, for breaking the 2d. Commandment: Because he that
said (or that Law that said) Thou shall have no other Gods but me; said also,
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image. And so our adversaries,
transgressors, for breaking the fourth Commandment: Because he that said (or
that Law that said) Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain,
said also, Remember the Sabbath Day to Sanctify it, etc.

Prim. p. 180. 181.
Nor is this place eluded; by the answers, which one of our adversaries
attempts, or rather makes a show, to give it: For he meddles not at all, with
the Force of the Apostles argumentation; But insists principally upon the
words, of offending in one point; having first denied the inobservation of the
Sabbath, to be, under the New Testament, a sin, because the Law, so far as
it commands the Sabbath, obliges not any more.

Mean time he touches not at all, in his answer, the strength of the reason,
whereby the Apostle proves his sentence: But contrary in the allegation of our
argument, he enervates both it, and the Text it self particularly, ( viz. The
scope of it) namely, by altering the Apostles words, and instead of instancing
in two Commandments of the Decalogue, as the Apostle does, verse. 11. (wherein
we place the strength of our argumentation, as we have said before) he only
generally says, and that in another Character then the Text is in (as if it
were our inference, not the Apostles) [The same God which injoynes the one of
these Points, has enjoined all the rest.] By which general expression,
because a heedlesse reader may happen to be deceived; we make bold to ask him,
what points be those the Apostle means? Did not he himself say for us, that he
speaks of the Law of the Decalogue? (and if he would deny it, the instances,
verse. 11. will constrain him again to grant it) whereupon we urge him thus,
further. If Saint James speak of the Decalogue, then of the words of the
Decalogue, as God said them (or as the Law said them) as they were spoken by
God, and written by him. And if so, then either he must deny (the fourth
Commandment, to have been with the rest, spoken by God, and written by him) or
deny Saint James his argument, (that because one Commandment of the Decalogue
binds now, therefore another does;) or deny his own denial, that the fourth
Commandment in the very words of it is now in force: let him take his choice.
And if now himself or any for him think to urge us by the same argument, to the
old Jewish seventh Day, as commanded by the fourth Commandment, which they do
often, and continually, we must as often and continually deny, that it was
commanded in the Decalogue directly, and as the substance of the fourth
Commandment, and of this we shall give good account in due time and place.
Mean time, we let pass the residue of what he says to this place of Saint
James, because it goes altogether upon that supposition. And counting our
selves to have made good our two first Testimonies, of the Prophet and Apostle;
we come to a Third, of an ancient Father.

Namely, Irenaeus, who thus speaks for us [God, 3. Irenaeus. ^. 4. c. 31.
the better to prepare us to Eternal Life, did by himself proclaim the
Decalogue, to all the people, equally, which therefore is to be of full force
amongst us, as having rather been enlarged, then dissolved by our Saviors
coming in the flesh.] Upon which words, the Historians evasion, is frigide,
and flash, when thus he glosses. Hist. of Sab. Part 1. p. 66.
[Which words of Irenaeus, if rightly considered, must be referred to that part
of the fourth Commandment, which is indeed Moral; or else the fourth
Commandment must not be reckoned, as a part or member of the Decalogue,
because it did receive no such enlargment, as did the rest of the
Commandments, by our Saviors Preaching, but a Dissolution rather, by his
practice.] But this Gloss corrupts the Text, making an exception, where the
Father made none; and besides, it proceeds upon a misprision of the sense and
scope of that Commandment, supposing the seventh day Sabbath, to be directly
commanded in it; and one in seven to be but Ceremonial: whereas the contrary
(we hope) shall be manifested in both: which if it be done, this Commandment
has as well received enlargement, as the rest, By the substitution of the
Lord's Day, in stead of the old Sabbath, and the Religious observation of it.
But of this, in time and place convenient.

4. The adverse party themselves, C. D. p. 8.
Lastly, One, even of our Adversaries, thus pleads our cause: [The Precepts of
the Moral Law are summarily comprehended in the Decalogue, which have this
Prerogative peculiar to them, that they were delivered, not by Moses, but by
God himself, and by him written in Tables of stone, and preserved in the Ark,
to show their degnity above others, and to note out the Perpetuity (note that)
of observance which was due unto them.] This is an ingenuous confession, if he
would be constant to it: But whether it be his misprision, or his misdevotion
to the fourth Commandment, he afterward comes in with his Exceptions, That
this is to be understood of the Decalogue, as far as it is Moral. Though in so
saying, he does either expressly contradict himself, or speak nonsense in one
of these Assertions. But because this Exception lies chiefly against the fourth
Commandment, we will remit it thither: And now proceed to consider the common
Exceptions against the two Propositions of this Argument of ours, which are
these that follow in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
The Exceptions to the former Argument, Answered.

THere are many Evasions attempted to escape the force of the Argument laid down
in the former Chapter, from the peculiar Privileges wherewith God was pleased
to honor the Decalogue above all other Laws. Herein the learned B. of Ely is
most abundant; therefore we must principally encounter his. And his Exceptions
lie against both Propositions. 1. Against the Minor he excepts two things.

I. Except. 1.
[It is doubtful (says he) whether God himself spoke these Laws, or an
Angel, etc.]

Moses, who wrote the story, makes no doubt of it: his words are express: [
GOD spoke all these words, Exodus 20.1.] And v. 22. [The LORD said unto Moses,
Thus shall thou say to the children of Israel: You have seen that I have talked
with you from Heaven.] Accordingly so Moses tells us again, Deuteronomy. 5.4. [The
LORD talked with you face to face, in the Mount, out of the midst of the fire.]
And ver. 22. [These words the LORD spoke unto all your assembly, etc.]
Moreover, does he not put a great deal of Emphasis upon GODS speaking, Deuteronomy.
4.32, 33. [Ask now of the days that are past, that were before thee, since the
day that GOD created man upon the earth: and ask from one side of the Heaven to
another, whether ever there has been any such thing as this great thing is? or
has been heard like it? Did ever people he are the Voice of GOD speaking out
of the midst of the fire, as thou have heard, and live?

2. When did ever any Created Angel say, [I am Jehovah Thy God] says not God
himself (by the Prophet Esa. 42.8.) [I am Jehovah, That is my Name, My Glory
will I not give to another?] And as all the Prophets when they deliver their
messages in Gods Name, say still [Thus says the Lord:] So do we not find the
Angels exact in reserving to God his Honor, and taking none of it to
themselves? (So the Angel that spoke to Manoah, says. If thou will offer a
Burnt-offering, thou must offer it unto the Lord, Judge. 13, 16.) But here he
who delivers these Commandments, speaks as from himself.

3. Is not this inference strong. If God himself spoke to Moses the other
Laws, then himself spoke the Decalogue to all the people? As appears by the
place forecited Exodus 20.22. where he begins to deliver other Laws. And that
this was God himself, seems undeniable from Exodus 23.20, 23. Where he promises
to send an Angel, his Angel. Now an Angel sends not an Angel, nor calls
another Angel, mine Angel. But only God himself does. Also Divines usually
say, that Angel (of whom also Saint Stephen speaks Act. 7.38.) was Christ,
called the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. Now surely an Angel sends not
Christ. But God the Father only.

4. He who promises to shake not the Earth only but also Heaven, Hag. 2. verse.
6. as the Apostle relates it, Heb. 12.26. was the same, whose voice on Mount
Sinai shook the Earth. But that promise is Gods unquestionable. Therefore it
was Gods voice that shook the Earth, at the delivery of the Law by him.

But he urges that Saint Stephen, Act. 7.38. II. Inst. ^,
Speaks of an Angel being with Moses in the wilderness, and v. 53. of
receiving the Law by the Disposition of Angels, and Gal. 3.19. The Law was
ordained by Angels, and Heb. 2.2. If the word spoken by Angels was steadfast,
etc. All which places seem to ascribe the speaking of the Law to Angels.

Jun Paral. 92. Lib. 1. In dispositionibus. 1. in mediis agminibus, sive inter
mediis acies angelorum stipantium honoris et officij causa imperator^m sinon,
etc.
We answer 1. For the place Act. 7.38. we have already touched it, and it
mentions nothing of giving the Law by that Angel. (Whether Christ, or a
Created Angel) but the promise of him was after the Decalogue delivered, as
the place expressly shows. 2. for verse. 53. The Original Words are [(...).]
Which the learned Junius renders, [You have received the Law in the midst of
the ranks of Angels] namely who accompanied God their Sovereign Lord when
himself came to deliver the Law; which as it agrees with the speech of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 33.2. and Psalm. 68.17. and so with the Truth of the story. So has it
nothing incongruous to the Words, and reconciles the seeming difference between
Stephen and Moses. 3. For Gal. 3.19. the same answer may be made, as it is by
the same learned writer, [(...)] is to be rendered, [Among Angels] they
attending God when he Ordained and Delivered it. 4. That of Heb. 2.2. is not
spoken of the Law of the Decalogue, neither is the Word Law mentioned, (nor any
circumstance that may fetch in that Law as necessarily meant there) but it is
understood of the several messages which the Angels delivered to several
Persons under the Old Testament. So that there is no necessity to ascribe the
delivery of the Law of the Decalogue to Angels: viz. that their voices were
used in the delivery of it. To which purpose also, may be added, that it seems
improper that Angels in the Plural Number should have been employed in
speaking the Law: For without an extraordinary guidance of God, many speakers
at once, would have bred confusion of sounds, and by an extraordinary guidance,
one would have sufficed, and why then should many have been employed? Specially
when the Israelites took no notice of any employed at all (if any were) but
took it as the immediate voice of God.

III. Inst. 2.
And whereas the B. of E. urges further. [That Christ tells the Jews John 5.37.
Speaking of the Father, you have neither heard his Voice nor seen his Shape.]

time contended with Christ. He says not, Your Fathers heard not his Voice,
But You. For it is also most certain, that at Christ's Baptism, John Baptist
heard the Voice of God the Father, and so the three Apostles at Christ's
Transfiguration; saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.
Who else could say so? There is nothing then to disprove Gods speaking with his
own Voice, when the Decalogue was given.

After all, if any be not satisfied, but that they still conceive that
Decalogue was not spoken by Gods immediate Voice, but by the mediate
Ministration of Angels, we yet further add, that this being granted, there
remains yet so remarkable a difference between the speaking of these Laws of
the Decalogue, and all others, as is undeniably evident by what has been in
the former Chapter discoursed of it, and Moses, as we said in the beginning of
this, puts such a mavelous weight upon the very manner of delivery and
speaking of them: As that we cannot judge otherwise, but God so Honoring these
Laws above all others, He meant to make them sharers in perpetuity with the
most lasting of all his other Laws, which he delivered to Moses alone with
none of all this state.

2. IV. Except. 2.
[He denyer that the Decalogue was the only thing in the Ark] saying, that the
Pot of Manna, and Aarons rod that budded, were placed there also; and that the
Book of Deuteronomy, was placed in the side of the Ark, Deu. 31.26. For the
latter, the Jewish Masters It was placed by the side of the Ark, in a cofer,
not that is, not within it. But for the former; not only he, but his Authors
cited are mistaken, for the Scripture expressly says, twice at least, that
there was nothing in the Ark, but the two Tables 1 Kings 8.9. and 2 Chronicles.
5.10. And the places that are cited for the particulars, say no more, but that
the Manna was laid up before the Testimony, Exo. 16 35. and that Aarons rod was
laid up before the Testimony. Number. 17.15. That is, by the Ark, within the
veil, as all the twelve Rods had been v. 4. but not within the Arc.

3. For the Apostles words Heb. 9.4. which seems to place these the Pot of
Manna, and the^of Aaron, (...) at the first placed within the Arc, by Moses,
and after taken out by Solomon, and that the Apostle speaks of it, as it was at
the first placed within the Arc. But these are over-bold conjectures, and
contra fidem historiae. Others therefore reconcile this difference better thus.
That in the Apostles words, ((...) wherein) the Relative being Faeminine, it
may and must agree to the remoter Antecedent ((...) Tabernacle) and not to the
nearer ((...) the Arc) and so it is to be read, in the Tabernacle, were those
and those things named. And that the Greek may be so taken, Junius, in his
Paralels, gives instances: to which we may add this undeniable one, 2 These.
2.9. (...) whose coming, etc. where the Relative must of necessity be referred
to the remoter Antecedent, unless we will confound Christ and Antichrist. So
that to us it is undoubted, that Nothing at all was ever in the Arc, but the
two Tables of the Covenant; which Moses put in the Ark at Horeb, as the above
cited Texts have it, and so those Laws were most singularly kept by God, and
withal, sheltered by Christ the Propitiatory, as figuring, that He should
confirm all, (and not abolish any of) the Laws written in those two Tables;
as we shall hear more afterward, that He has expressly done.

V. Except 3.
There are other Exceptions taken to the Major, and they are these which follow.
1. Concerning Gods speaking. [But grant the thing, says he, that God himself
did proclaim the Decalogue, yet this will not confirm those Precepts to have
been simply Moral: For what sufficient reason can be rendered, why God himself
may not deliver a Positive Precept by his immediate voice, as well as a Precept
simply Moral: He spoke to Abraham, to Job, to Moses, face to face; yet that
made not all his Dictates simply and eternally Moral.

Gods immediate voice does make all the Precepts of the Decalogue simply
Moral, that is, Morall-Naturall; It is enough for us, if it make (or show)
them to be Positively Moral.

Gods speaking, as his manner of speaking, to all the people at once, and in so
glorious a manner.

Gods speaking, but upon his writing also, and putting into the Arc these
Laws, and no other. Of which we cannot conceive any sufficient reason can be
rendered, why He would (as we may say) take all this pains, and show all this
State and Majesty about these Laws, singled out by themselves, but that he
intended a great deal of difference, between all these Laws so graced, and at
least some of those he vouchsafed none of this honor unto, which what it
should be, but Perpetuity, we cannot imagine.

For whereas it is further said concerning Gods writting. VI. Except. 4.
[That Gods writing of some Laws, and Moses writting of other Laws, made not
a Formal difference, between those Laws, for many Laws written by Moses,
were Properly, and Perpetually Moral, as [Thou shall not hate thy Brother in
thy heart] Lev. 19.17. and diverse of the same kind.

We answer first, We do not say that God alone wrote Moralls, only
Ceremonialls, and so that God wrote all the Moral Laws; for it is not denied,
but Moses wrote some Moralls: But this we say, that God wrote only Moralls: not
any Ceremonialls.

The Force or Emphasis, lies not simply in Gods writing them Hos. 1.12. Ier.
22.30. Ioh. 19.27.) but also in that he wrote them upon Tables of Stone, the
durablest matter, and also reserved them, and none of the other Laws in the
Arc, which we esteem too Great a Dignity for a perishing Law. Since then
among the other Laws, written but by Moses, in a Book, together with these,
some were to be Perpetual; we must needs think that God so singularly,
Speaking, Writing, and Reserving These, meant they should continue, as long as
any other Laws whatsoever.

3. Those Moralls which Moses wrote, were but Comments and most of them plain
Deductions from those Originalls; All of them being reduced to the Decalogue,
as subordinate Laws to their Heads in every kind; as the Schoolmen have long
ago acknowledged, and our Divines do usually express.

Again it is excepted [ There can be no sufficient Reason rendered wherefore a
Temporary Precept, VII. Except. 5.
may not as well be written with Gods finger, as delivered by his internal
Inspiration.

Our answer to this is ready; There can no Reason be given, Solut.
why God would write any Precept at all, but his own good pleasure: But this
we say still, there is not any instance to be given, of a Precept written with
Gods Finger, but only the Decalogue; (Nor yet any other part of the Scripture,
whether of the old, or New Testament, but his Prophets and Disciples wrote all)
and why then did He write these? But that He would hereby declare, the
Perpetuity of all these Laws. The rather, because there are some other
Positive Laws, (as we have noted before) acknowledged Perpetual, which yet
were not written by God in Tables of stone. How much more those, that partake
in this privilege with other Laws, to be written by God himself, in Tables
of stone, etc.

VIII. Except. 6.
It is further pretended [Gods writing was His Framing, and creating by his
Power, the External Letters, and Characters of the Ten Commandments: But it
appears by the example of Jonah his Gourd, and many other things immediately
formed, that all such things are not Eternal.]

Solut.
To this we answer briefly thus: This is nothing to the purpose, For we do not
think, the world shall be eternal, because immediately Framed by Gods Power;
much less Jonah his Gourd: But it is another matter to frame the Characters of
Laws, which inevitably note out some intention of continuance; and to frame so
the Characters of these Laws (and none other) by his immediate Power in Tables
of stone: may well argue that none other Laws should be more Perpetual then
these; and that is enough for us. [To note out (as one of themselves has told
us) their dignity above others, and the Perpetuity of Observance, which was due
unto them.]

IX. Except. 7.
[Writing in Stone was to note out the hardness of the Peoples Hearts, not the
Perpetual Obligation of the Laws, see Ezekiel. 11.36. 2 Cor. 3.14. and Joshua
had Moses Law (wherein were many Ceremonialls and Iudicialls) upon stone. Ios.
8.32.]

Solut.
Again we must say, not writing simply in stone; but the Lords writing in
stone, argues the Perpetuity of it; what men writes in stone may be perishing,
like themselves, even though it should out last the writer. But doubtless if
we should see a King, or State, command to have some Laws, and not others
written upon stones, or like durable matter, we could not but think, that they
meant to have those Laws to be (and be accounted) among the chiefest of their
Perpetual Laws; How much more when God shall do it himself? The rather
still, because these Laws, were not like those, by Joshua written in stone,
for every one to read them; But laid up in secret, in Gods Privy Cabinet, his
sacred Arc. So though the writing of them in stone, might partly note the
hardness of the Peoples Hearts: yet the writing them by God himself, in stone,
and laying them so up, may appear to be specially to note out their Perpetuity.

But he still goes on, and we follow him. X. Except. 8.
[If Gods immediate speaking, and writing, argues such Precepts, to be
Perpetually Moral, Then, his not speaking, and writing argues others to be
Temporary: For proper signs and affections, conclude both Affirmatively and
Negatively: But the consequence is false; Ergo the Antecedent.

To this we answer first, By denying the sequel: God may write Moral
Precepts, and command others to write Moral Precepts also, and yet God may
write only Moralls; There is a clear difference, between these two
Propositions: Only God writes Moralls; and God writes only Moralls: The latter
may be true; The former is certainly false.

2. The confirmation of the sequel, is Petitio Principij, taking Proper sign,
or Affection of a Moral Law: A sign it is, not ex natura Rei, but by the good
Pleasure of God, who never was pleased to write any other, etc. and therefore
it will not hold both ways: God writ this, Ergo it is Moral, God writ not
this, Ergo it is not Moral. It is sufficient that God would give us this, as a
sign of the Decalogues Perpetuity, that himself did honor it, with his own
voice, to all the people, wrote it with his own Finger in stone, and commanded
this alone to be put in the Arc; which privileges, were never afforded, to
any other Laws Ceremonial, or Judicial; nor the rest of the Moralls, and
therefore these to be taken to be Moral, at least as much as any that wanted
all these Privileges.

Others do thus except against this Rule [If the Proposition be of the sound,
and syllables of the Decalogue, XI. Except. 9. G. Irons. p, 81.
so that whatsoever is written in the letter thereof, is affirmed to be Moral;
it is utterly untrue, for what think you of those words in the very front of
the Decalogue, I brought thee out of the land of Egypt, etc. are they Moral?
If any say these words are a Preface, not a Law, he speaks nothing to the
purpose, page 83.
for the Proposition is Universal of whatsoever was written in the Tables of
stone with Gods own Finger, etc. Our adversaries confess the taxation of the
Seventh day to be Ceremonial, though in the very heart of the Commandment,
and written with Gods own Finger.]

Our Proposition is not so universal of whatsoever is written in the Tables of
stone: But thus, all the Commandments of the Decalogue written in Tables of
stone, are Moral; not all the Reasons of those Commandments. A Moral or
general Commandment may be pressed on some, to whom it is given by a
Ceremonial or special Reason, and contra, without any alteration of the
nature of the Commandment.

The difference of Laws which we now seek, respects not only us Christians,
but the Jews also, that God would have them know, and us also, that those
Laws were the principal, and most respected by himself, and most carefully
to be observed by them, and us. The Preface and Promise, at most, can but
intimate, That those Laws were in a special manner given to the Jews, which
is not denied: but the manner of speaking, writing, keeping, may strongly
argue, God meant them for Perpetual.

C. D. (as we showed above) one of his own side, [The writing in Tables of
stone, etc. was to signify their perpetuity and dignity above the rest.]

[All the Commandments of the Decalogue are Moral, but every one in his
proportion and degree, and so is that of the Sabbath.] We add, in the letter
of it, viz. for one day in seven. As for the proportion and degree, whether
Natural or Positive, we now contend not; Only we let him know, that his
Adversaries (as he calls them) do now deny, that the taxation of the seventh
day (or last of seven) to be in the heart of the Commandment, or written by
the finger of God.

XII. Except. 10.
Another Exception is, That the Ark it self was lost at the Captivity;
therefore the Argument is not good: The Decalogue was put and reserved in the
Ark; Ergo, perpetual.

Solut.
To this we say, we did never imagine, that the Ark and Tables must necessarily
be preserved till the end of the world; but it was sufficient to denote and
signify their precedencie and perpetuity, that God was so careful to speak,
write, and reserve those Laws. Though this be no convincing Demonstration to a
Caviller, yet to Reasonable men it will, no doubt, pass for more than probable.

CHAP. V.
Christ has confirmed all the Commandments of the Decalogue, as perpetual.

ANother Argument for the Morality, that is, I. Arg. 3. Christ has confirmed
the Decalogue. Mat. 5.17.
the Perpetuity of the Decalogue, may be raised from our Saviors own
confirmation of it. His Authority (to be sure) is beyond all question. And we
find Him confirming it to continue to the end of the World, Mat. 5.17, 18, 19,
20. Thus we argue: [That Law which Christ himself has ratified to continue to
the end of the World, is Moral and Perpetual. But Christ has so ratified all
the Decalogue in the place forecited. Ergo.] The Minor is that alone which we
are required to prove; which we conceive to be certain, from no less then 6.
Grounds laid down in that place for the Confirmation and Ratification of it.

1. He takes hainously, and cannot endure, II. The Text explained.
that it should be thought [He came to destroy the Law and the Prophets.] Where
by the Law, He means the Moral Law, (of which the Decalogue was the sum and
substance) and by the Prophets, the Precepts and Doctrines of the Prophets, who
were the Expositors of that Law, clearing the meaning of the Law in sundry
particulars, and backing it with applicatory reproves, and particular
threatenings and promises. That He came to destroy these, and make them of no
force or obligation, 1. Libertines were willing to conceit of Him; And 2. The
Pharisees were likely to impute to Him; 3. Weak ones might possibly from their
speeches conceit. Either, or any, who so spoke or thought of Him, He here
checks, and expressly forbids them [To think that He came to destroy the Law or
the Prophets] so as to loosen the bonds that men were tied in by them. So the
word (...) to dissolve, properly notes.

2. In stead of this, He expressly and peremptorily professes, [He came not so
to destroy, to dissolve them, but to fulfill them] Namely, in His own personal
observation of them; and so to leave them still in force for perpetuity, for
others also to observe after His example, which He often elsewhere propounds as
an example for others to imitate and follow, even all that mean to be His
Disciples, and receive good from him.

3. Hereunto He further gives testimony, by adding (His wonted solemn
Asseveration to confirm the waightiest Truths) [Verily I say unto you.] And
what is it that He says further? [Till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one
title shall in no wise pass from the Law till all be fulfilled.] What would
one think could be plainer than these words to confirm, That till heaven and
earth were at an end, the Law and the Prophets (the Precepts of both, even the
least things of them) should bind men to fulfill them? And this He himself
would do for His part, while He lived upon Earth; (as the word [For] joining
this verse to the former, shows) And after leave to His Disciples, to make
conscience also of fulfilling them.

4. And having so expressed himself, for himself, and laid down the doctrine
of the Laws perpetuity to the Worlds end, generally; He grows (as we may
say) more vehement, and proceeds to an application of it to His hearers, and
that in a twofold gradation: 1. He denounces a most severe threatening against
all willing Transgressors, and so all willing Teachers of others to be
Transgressors of any one of those Commandments, even of seeming smallest
importance, (as small as a jot or title) [Whosoever therefore shall break one
of the least of these Commandments, and shall teach men so, shall be called
the least in the Kingdom of Heaven.] Menacing them with the loss of Heaven,
and forfeiture of any right they might seem to have in it, being willing
breakers or teachers of others to break them; as the 20. verse also confirms.

5. Adding, secondly, a most gracious Promise to so many as should carefully
and conscionably, by life and doctrine, honor every one of the Commandments.

6. And 3. Finally, He applies all to His Hearers particularly, with special
opposition to the doctrines and practices of the Scribes and Pharisees: [For I
say unto you, that except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.]
The Scribes and Pharisees were outwardly exceeding strict in observing the
Letter of all the Commandments. But in their interpretations of them, and
inward affections concerning them, they were too too loose. Therefore Christ
gives a severe comminatory warning, not only of matching them in outward
obedience to the very words of the Commandments; but of exceeding them in the
right acknowledgement of the latitude of them, and answerable care even of
inward observance to them, (as His following Sermon expresses many
particulars) Or else they must never look for any share in the Kingdom of
Heaven.

In a word, before we come to the Exceptions, III. The Context considered.
we desire the Reader but to note the evident connection of these 4 Verses, by
the word (for) v. 18. and (wherefore) v. 19. and again (for) v. 20. and so the
light which each of them afford to the other, to secure the whole from all
cavills. And so,

1. What he styles the Law and the Prophets, v. 17. He calls only the Law, v.
18. and v. 19. These Commandments: and v. 20. Mentions Righteousness, namely
of Practice and Conversation; which is in obedience to the Commandments of the
Law.

2. That which He calls a jot or a title of the Law, v. 18. He calls one of
these least Commandments, v. 19.

3. That which he calls destroying of the Law, v. 17. He calls breaking of the
Law, and teaching men so, v. 19.

4. That which He calls fulfilling, v. 17, 18. He calls doing and teaching, v.
19. and Exceeding the Righteousness of the Pharisees and Scribes, v. 20.

5. Lastly, That which He calls being least in the Kingdom of Heaven, v. 19.
He calls, in no case entering into the Kingdom of Heaven, v. 20. And what now
would, or could a man wish for more complete, to ratify the whole Decalogue,
which was undoubtedly the principal part of the Law and Prophets: unless He
had named it in express words here? or after interpreted every one of those
Commandments severally, as He does diverse of them in the following part of His
Sermon, even beginning in the next verse.

But yet this Argument and Text, as clear as it seems, IV. Excep. 1.
cannot escape their manifold Exceptions. In Answer whereunto, we shall
necessarily make use of those things which we have summarily laid down in the
Explication of these verses, without any just imputation of Tautologie, being
forced to it by their quarrelsome Cavils.

First, they say, [Here is mention made of the Prophets too; C. D. p. 12.
And so the Law and the Prophets, B. of E p. 61.
is as much as Moses and the Prophets; which is a Periphrasis of the Old
Testament, and contained the predictions of the holy Prophets, who lived before
Christ: and these He came to fulfill.]

Solut.
To this we answer first, with respect to the Predictions of the Prophets,
pretended here to be also intended. There is not the least Reason in the Text
for this Pretense. For, 1. Who did ever doubt at that time, or make any
question, whether Christ came to destroy the predictions of the Prophets? 2.
What sense is there in this speech, to say, I came not to destroy (or whosoever
shall destroy) the predictions of the Prophets, in the 19. verse, and teach men
to break them. But of the Laws delivered by the Prophets, both those may be
congruously spoken. 3. That the Law and the Prophets are sometime a Periphrasis
of the Old Testament, in the Gospel, is not to be doubted; and that it may be
so taken here, in a right sense, is not denied; That is, the Law expounded and
confirmed by the Prophets. So that by Law and Prophets is meant in substance
the same thing, that is, that part of the Prophets which was doctrinally
practical, namely, confirming and expounding the ten Commandments, and other
substantial Laws of God, which are reducible to them. And this may more
easily be received, if we consider, that in the next verses, 18, 19. in one He
names only the Law, and in the other only the Commandments: One title of the
Law (not the Prophets) shall not pass: and, whosoever shall break one of the
least of these Commandments (not the Prophets.) 3. The Instances which our
Savior gives after, in his following discourse, depending upon this, are all
in Laws, and not in any Predictions of the Prophets. To conclude: Though it be
true, that Christ came to fulfill the Predictions of the Prophets, yet we
cannot see the least reason why this should be intended here.

V. Excep. 2. Ibid. Prim. p. 174.
But then it is more strongly suggested [That by Law here is not meant only the
Moral Law, but the Ceremonial and Judicial also, and all that is contained
in the Books of Moses, these be fullfilled also.]

Solut.
To this we answer: That Christ came to fulfill the Ceremonial and Judicial
Laws, is also true, But that he intended them in this place, we take to be
most false, for these ensuing Reasons.

1. The whole Sermon of our Savior in the former part of this Chapter, and in
the following part, the Instances which He gives, concern Moral Duties, and
Moral Laws; and not one instance of a Ceremonial or Judicial Law can be
shown, (which had been requisite, if Chaist had intended them) unless it be to
show them now to be abrogated, that is, to be destroyed; as we shall see by and
by. Now this is granted by one of themselves, Prin. ibid.
[That sometimes, to wit, when a Moral matter is in hand, the Scripture by the
Law and the Prophets understands only the Precepts of the Law and of the
Prophets, pertaining to this Morality. As Mat. 7.12. [All things that ye would
that men should do to you, do you even the same to them, for this is the Law
and the Prophets.] But sometimes, when the speech is of fulfilling of things
foretold, or figured of old, by the Law and the Prophets, are to be understood
only the Prophesies, and Typick Ceremonies of the Old Testament: as Mat. 11.13.
etc.]

But we assume; In this place there is speech only of Moral matters, and not
of fulfilling things foretold or figured. Therefore by Law and Prophets, is
understood here only the Precepts of the Law and Prophets, pertaining to this
Morality. Yet see how feign he would elude his own grant: Thus he says. [I
say, VI. Inst. 1.
that by Law and Prophets here, are to be understood not only the Precepts
concerning the Moral Duties of this life, but also the Ceremonies of the Law;
as may be clearly seen by those words of our Savior, which are general, I am
not come to destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill them. Now the
Ceremonies are a part of the Law of Moses, etc. The conjunction of them in a
general matter, such as this is, shows, that by the Law we must understand
all that is contained in the book of Moses. Solut.
] But we desire him to consider whether this be not a flat contradiction to
what he said before: That when a Moral matter (that is, a general matter) is
in hand, the Scripture understands by Law and Prophets, only the Precepts of
both, tending to this Morality. And besides, might not a caviller plead the
same against his former Instance, Mat. 7.12. and so cast off that Law as
Ceremonial? The ground of this Error lies in this, that he fallaciously
concludes thus: Christ came to fulfill the Ceremonial Laws, and the
Predictions of the Prophets, therefore Christ intended both these in the verses
before cited: which is a flat inconsequence; and he goes not about to prove it;
VII. Inst. 2.
And yet he peremptorily goes on to add, [That the Predictions, Types, and
Promises are here as much, nay much more to be understood, then Moral Duties;
as may be evidently seen in the words of our Lord, Till Heaven and Earth pass,
etc. It is certain that these words, jot, title, or prick, cannot be taken
properly, because not capable of accomplishment; but by them Christ
understands the least things propounded in the Law. Sol.
] But here is no evidence at all, though much confidence: For we say not, that
Iota or Title are properly taken, but by Christ meant of the least things
propounded in the Law and Prophets: but we add, in the Law Moral, of which he
only speaks before and after. And exdresly, v. 19. [The least of these
Commandements] not these Ceremonies, or these Predictions, or Promises: and
that was our Saviors meaning by those words, Iota, or Title. Yet something
more he adds. VIII. Inst. 3.
[This sense; The heaven and earth shall pass, rather then whatsoever has
been figured, promised, and foretold by the Law and the Prophets shall not be
effected and fulfilled; is manifestly more suitable to the words, then this; The
heaven and the earth shall rather pass, then the Moral Commandments shall
not be kept and executed. Sol.
] It is, we confess, an easy thing for witty men to put pretty fair Glosses
upon Texts of Scripture, which were never there intended. The meaning of our
Savior is thus to be conceived [I am so far from coming to destroy the Law,
that I came to fulfill it to the utmost title: and heaven and earth shall
sooner pass away, then I shall break the Commandments in my own person, or
teach or allow others to break them, which were to destroy them.] And that this
is His meaning, the 19. verse does manifest: [Whosoever therefore shall break
one of the least of these Commandments, and teach men so, etc.] As if He
should say, I may not break or destroy the Law my self, nor do I teach men so
to do; Let others take heed they do not. Now if Christ had meant it of the
Ceremonials, which were presently after his death to expire: would he have said
thus; I came not to destroy the Ceremonial Law, and woe be to him that shall
break it, and shall teach men so? We cannot believe it. Yet still He labors to
make good his own Interpretation, by Luke 16.17. [Where the same words are
used; IX. Inst. 4.
and the Evangelist shows of what points of the Law Christ did speak, to wit,
of the Types and Prophesies: for in the 16. verse He had said, the Law and the
Prophets were until John: where we must understand the word (Prophesied) which
St. Matthew adds, chap. 11.13. And after this, S. Luke adds these words as
spoken by Christ to that purpose; And it is easier for heaven and earth to
pass, etc. Where by one title are to be understood all the Figures and
Predictions contained in the Law and Prophets.] But to this we say two things.

1. The place of Luke and Matthew are not Parallel, The place with Mat. 11.7.
etc. is Luke 7.24.
nor were time, or of the same matter, as is evident to any eye that compares
them together. Therefore it is not necessary that the word Prophesied, must be
understood, in St. Luke the word (were) added by our Translation, being
sufficient.

2. The matter of which our Savior spoke before in St. Luke Moral, viz. to
beat down the Coveteousnesse, and Pride, and Scorn of the Pharisees, therefore
by his own former grant by the Law and Prophets Luke 16.17. must be understood
only the Precepts of the Law and Prophets concerning that Morality. Nor is
there the least Color for any Ceremonial Law, or Prediction, or promise to be
intended in this place, Luke 16.16, 17. etc.

But here is one Exception more to our first general answer: Inst. 5. Prim.
176. and others.
[That (forsooth) the instances made by our Soviour in the following part of
the Chapter are not all Moral Laws. For in the 23, 24. ver. He speaks of
Sacrifices and Altars: in the 31. ver. He brings and expounds a Law Judicial
concerning Divorce, and ver. 38. another Judicial of retaliation.

This we shall thus discharge: First, in the 23, 24 ver. He speaks Sacrifices,
and the Altar. But does not bring or Expound any Law concerning those things,
much less any confirmation of them; but they are brought in by way of allusion
to the Practice of those Times: by the Legal Expressing the Evangelicall
service. A thing usual with the Prophets, and useful for their understanding
to whom he spoke, who knew as yet no other.

For the residue, We say, 2. There is yet no instance of any Ceremonial
Expounded by Christ, much less confirmed, nor of any Prophetical Prediction.

3. As for Judicialls instanced in, If we granted them both such, Explication
of the Moral Commandments to which they did belong. And then one of them, to
begin with (which we desire him seriously to consider) mentioned, not to be
confirmed, but rather to be destroyed from this time forth. For the Law of
Divorce mentioned ver. 31. Is by our Savior quite disallowed and disannulled.
[It has been said (viz. by the Mosaicall Law by way of indulgence) whosoever
shall put away his wife. Let him give her a bill of Divorce; But I say unto
you, whosoever puts away his wife, except for fornication, causes her to
commit adultery, and he that marries her that is put away, commits adultery.]

As if he had said, I now put an end to that Law, and bring you to the Law of
the Decalogue.

XI. The Law of Retaliation why here alleged.
As for the Law of Retaliation, If it were certainly a Judicial Law,
understanding by Judicial, a Law of the Jewish commonwealth,
(contradistinguisht from Moral and Perpetual) we must yet deny that it is
alleged formally in this place by our Savior: But rather, the words he cites
were from a profane tradition of the Scribes and Pharisees (whom he undertakes
to confute in all this part of his Sermon) that under color indeed of Gods Law
of Retaliation, did teach the people, that it was lawful for them, to be their
own carvers in private revenge; So long as they went not beyond the bounds of
Retaliation; and withal, that they might at least without scruple at all times
pursue those that had wronged them, and require the Majestrate to deal with
their adversary, as he had dealt with them. Both which malicious glosses,
derived from that Law, our Savior at once confutes, (as contrary to the Moral
Law, both of reserving the Majestrates place to himself, and of not revenging
ones self, nor bearing grudge, Lev. 19.18.) By saying [" But I say unto you,
resist not Evil, etc.] So that Christ does neither speak against, nor for the
Law of Retaliation, nor indeed of it directly and primarily in this place, But
only forbids private retaliating, or at the most, malicious pursuit of another,
to have the Law of Retaliation executed upon him by the Majestrate. And not at
all Expounding that Law, but only occasionally mentions it, as perverted by
them. So still it will remain that all the Laws that Christ Expounds are
Moral, and so no other are meant in those verse. 17, 18, 19. Proved Moral 1.
by Testimonies.
whence we fetch our argument. But if this will not satisfy our disputers, we
must then further tell them, that we cannot grant the Law of Retaliation not to
be Moral. Even themselves dare not deny it, of one branch. Life for life, in
case of wilful murder. Learned interpreters shall speak for us in this
point. Kemnitius, Musculus, Pareus, Cartwright, upon the place.

The Komnit. Har. p. 575. Est enim naturalis etiam aequitatis ne paene sit
mayor delicto. Et paulo postca. Manifestissimum igitur et centissimum est;
Legem Dei, de publica vindicta Magistratui Mandata, h^c Loco a Christo non
Abeleri aut Damnar^.
First of these having quoted the text, Exodus 21. Lev. 24. and Deuteronomy. 19. where
this Law is found, adds, [That it is also Natural Equity, that the punishment
be not greater then the fault.] And then recites a saying of Aristotle in his
Ethics lib. 5. Describing the Justice of Rhadamanthus in this old verse
[(...). Si quae fecerunt, eadem patiantur et ipsi. If what they have done they
be made to suffer.] And a little after he says, [It is most manifest and
certain, that the Law of God concerning public punishment of offenders
commanded to the Magistrate, is not in this place Abolished nor Condemned by
Christ.]

The Musc. p. 111. Lex ista omnino necessaria erat, et, etiam number est, ad
coercendos reprobos, etc. and p. 112. Christus non Legi ipsi, qua nihil potest
esse Iustius, sed perversae Phariseorum opinioni repugnans, etc.
Second is yet more plain. [This Law was altogether Necessary, and is so
still, to keep reprobates under, and take away evil from Gods people.] and a
little after; [Christ does not contradict that Law it self, then which nothing
can be more just, but the perverse opinion of the Pharisees.]

The Pareus page 121. Non sustulit Christus in judicijs Christianis talionem.
Third no less expressly. [Christ did not take away Retaliation, in Christian
judicatures.

The Cartwright, Part 1. Harm. page 399. Iustissimum legem iniquissimam
reddiderunt, et mel Legis in absynthiam converterunt.
Fourth says that [Christ shows, that the Scribes and Pharisees had drawn
the Magistrates duty to every private man's Power,] and so he says, [They had
made a just Law to be most unrighteous,] and afterward he wishes to consider
the justice of the Law most accurately fitted to suppress and keep under
violence; And again, [As by all men's consent, he is to be punished with death,
that has caused another death, so it is for a hand or eye -- And if this Law
were now put in execution before all men, Men would be slower to maime or
dismember others.]

These Proofs are not bare assertions of the Authors, XII. 2. By reason.
but backed with Perpetual Reasons. To which we know not what, besides men's
contrary customs, can be alleged to disprove them.

In conclusion, whatsoever men talk of the Ceremonialls and Iudicialls
included in verse. 17. we would desire them but to remember that (as we showed)
Christ does even now destroy the Law of divorce, and then let them make sense
of this if they can [Till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot or tittle of the Law
shall not pass, and yet I now destroy the Law of Divorce] which is to put upon
Christ a flat contradiction, besides that which reflects upon ver. 19. of which
by and by. Therefore we must conclude, if Christ in this Sermon Expound no
Ceremonial or Judicial, and one Judicial he plainly destroys; XIII. The
second proof of the general answer.
Then ver. 17. He only speaks of the Moral Law.

Our 2d. Proof of our general answer is taken from verse. 19. thus. If our
Savior speak in the 17. and 18. verses, of the Ceremonial Laws, as well as
of the Moral, then the Disciples of Christ (and the Church succeeding) must
needs run under his sentence in the 19 verse, for breaking, and teaching men to
break some part of the Law, of which he spoke. For it is evident the Apostles,
St. Paul especially, did break, that is Abrogate, pull down, destroy the
Ceremonial Laws, presently after his Death. [If I build again the Things
(...) which I have destroyed] speaking of the Ceremonialls; Gal. 2.18.
and many more such places. If it be said, Christ came to fulfill the
Ceremonial Laws in his own Person, and so came not to destroy them in his
practice. This indeed is most true, but nothing to the purpose, for he did come
to destroy them by his Death and Doctrine; by himself or by his Apostles, who
(as we said) did both break, destroy, and abrogate them, and also teach men so
to do. But take it of the Moral Law only; and he did come, not to destroy it,
as well as to fulfill it in his own Practice, that is to confirm it, not only
by his Personal obedience to it, but also by his Doctrine, as the vindication
of it, from the false glosses of the Pharisees, does clearly manifest. Now let
a reasonable man judge, whether it is likely that Christ speaking before of the
Moral Law, or merely Moral matters, would so suddenly, without any just
cause, digress to speak of the Ceremonial Laws, and that in such a frame of
words, as are, as well false as true. False in one sense, and true in another.
Or that he would say, I came not to destroy the Ceremonials, and presently
threaten those that should break one of the least of those Commandments, and
teach men so; whereas the Ceremonials were ere long to be Abolished and
destroyed. And then on the otherside, commend and promise much to them, that
should keep them, and teach men to keep them, even those Commandments which
were certainly and necessarily to vanish, and pass away. So that this 19 verse
alone, had our Savior said no more, had been sufficient to confirm the Moral
Law (whereof the Decalogue is the sum, called often, and in especial manner
the ten Commandments) to be in force to the worlds end, saying, [Whosoever
shall break one of the least of these Commandments, and teach men so, shall
be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven,] and contra. For we would ask
of what Commandments speaks our Savior here? Of Ceremonial? Or Moral? Not
of Ceremonialls for certain; for they were to be broken and to be preached
down, and the threatening would rather fall upon them that should observe them,
and teach them to be observed as necessary Commandments still in force.
Therefore he speaks of Moral Laws only, the least whereof might not be
broken, or taught to be void, till the worlds end. This sentence therefore
alone is sufficient to confute, and falls heavy upon Antinomists, who fear not
for to teach, that Christ came to destroy, and has destroyed the Decalogue or
Moral Law, as well, and as much as the Ceremonials, whereas he says expressly
[whosoever shall break one of the least of these Commandments, and teach men
so, shall be called least, that is, none, in the Kingdom of Heaven] And let
them, who in part comply with them, in affirming the fourth Commandment, to be
Ceremonial, and consequently, abolished, consider how they will avoid, the
same censure of our Savior. Let us hear what they say.

Thus one would avoid it [Granting them, XIV. Excep. 3.
that Christ in those words had regard to the Decalogue only, I answer, that he
speaks of dissolving and overthrowing of those Commandments, Prim. p. 178.
and condemns all that dare to do it. But to abrogate the Sabbath Day,
enjoined by the fourth Commandment, seeing it was a Figure and Type, and that
by fulfilling it in himself, and in his faithful servants, the truth thereof
figured by the outward Sabbath, to free them from the necessity of the
observation thereof, was not a dissolving of i^, etc.]

But we reply 1. We say not, Solut.
Christ in these words had regard to the Decalogue only, but to the Decalogue
primarily, and to all other substantial precepts, explicatorie of it, whether
in Moses, or in the Prophets. 2. If you grant (what we have proved) that Christ
means it of the Decalogue only, or chiefly, (we now add, If he speak of it at
all) you are one of those, that dare to dissolve and overthrow one of the
Commandments, and teach men to break them. For what is to dissolve or
overthrow a Law, but to make all the words of the Commandment void? Otherwise
the Laws of the Passover, and all the Ceremonial Sabbaths, are not to this
day dissolved, nor did the Apostles teach men to break them. The contrary
whereunto, is evident to all the world. Now do not you your self, and others
of your side hold the fourth Commandment to be one of the least Commandments,
and even wholly Ceremonial, in the substance and letter of it? and teach men
expressly [That it is no inconvenience to say, Prim. p. 138.
that of ten Commandments in the Decalogue there are but nine Moral, that
oblige us now.] Can you then in reason deny, that you break one of the least
Commandments, and teach men so? If not, then we desire you, in the fear of
God, to consider well, how you will escape our Saviors condemnation, by your
own confession.

XV. Inst. 1. page 179.
Thus you go about it. [Of necessity, the broachers of this argument must
avow, that Christ does not in this place blame all inobservation of the
Sabbath, nor establish the observation thereof absolutely and for ever;
Therefore this limitation must be added, that Christ's intention is to forbid
the transgression, and to command for ever the observation of the Commandment,
touching the Sabbath, as far as it may and ought to oblige us, according to the
terms of the Gospel, that is, (say you) so far only, as it commands that
Gods public worship be practiced for ever, as it shall be established by him,
and that an ordinary day be appointed for that purpose.]

Sol.
To this we say. 1. We do not avow, that Christ, in this place, does blame all
or any inobservation of the Seventh Day Sabbath, much less establish it for
ever; For we hold, even from this place, (and shall maintain in time
convenient) that the Seventh Day Sabbath, was not the substance of the fourth
Commandment, but the observation of one day in seven, and this we say, Christ
does, in this place, establish for ever. 2. We add to your limitation, that
the public service is not commanded by the fourth Commandment (that is
another of your mistakes, as shall in time be manifested) but by other
Commandments, though the time of the fourth Commandment, in part, and
chiefly, if it may be, is to be employed in public worship. And therefore
when you yield, that Christ speaks of the Decalogue only, it is, in your
interpretation, to confess, that Christ has made void and destroyed one whole
Commandment of the Decalogue; which yet Himself denies, and threatens them
that shall dare to do it. You cannot avoid this, by saying, He fulfilled in
himself the truth of the thing figured by the outward Sabbath, For if He
destroyed the old Sabbath, which you say was the substance of that
Commandment, and Ceremonial; still it will follow, that He destroyed the
Commandment, although He did fulfill the Figure. Think on it.

But it is further said, XVI. Inst. 2.
[That our Lord Christ passes most conveniently from the Ceremonies, which the
Scribes and Pharisees accused him falsely to destroy, to the Moralities which
they destroyed in effect. Therefore I say unto you, Except your righteousness
exceed, etc. v. 20.]

But 1. This sense is very preposterous; for the whole preceding Moral
matters, and therefore He must rather pass from Morals to Ceremonials, then
contra.

2. True it is, in the 20. verse He speaks of the Scribes and Pharisees,
Ceremonials, but rather as accusing them of the breach of Morals, with
reference to the 19. verse, ["Whosoever shall break one of the (...) of these
Commandments, and teach men so.] q.d. The Scribes and Pharisees are instances
of what I mean; For they by their corrupt Glosses of the Decalogue, do both
destroy and break the Commandments, and teach men so: however they were exact
in Ceremonials, and their own Traditions. Except therefore your righteousness
exceed theirs, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. It cannot be showed, that the Pharisees did accuse our Savior Chemnitius,
in his most learned and judicious Harmony upon the Gospels, shows that the
Contests John 5. and Mat. 12.1. etc. and v. 9.10. etc. were all before this
Sermon upon the Mount: which being granted, then is the Argument more strong
for the confirmation of the fourth Commandment. Think not that I am come to
destroy the Law; I am come to fulfill it, and confirm it. Therefore whosoever
shall break one of the least of these Commandments, (be it the Fourth, or any
other) and teach men so, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

XVII. Excep. 4. C. D. p. 12.
There are yet some other Exceptions, as this for one; [If we grant them, that
by the Law is meant only the Decalogue, and that our Saviors fulfilling, and
not destroying the Law, was the ratifying and perpetuating of it; we shall
condemn the Christian Church, for altering the day, from the seventh, to the
first day of the week: which cannot stand with our Saviors speech, who says,
that not one jot or title shall pass from the Law.]

Solut.
To this we answer, 1. They that make the substance of the Commandment to be
the seventh day, cannot justify by any means the altering of it to the first,
but must needs make void the Commandment, contrary to our Saviors
asseveration, [That till heaven and earth pass, one jot or title of the Law
shall not pass.] For it is a certain Rule in Laws, When the substance of a
Law is abolished, the whole Law is quite abolished. Let him consider it. 2. But
if we hold, that the fourth Commandment commands only one day in seven to be
our Sabbath, not one jot or title of the Law is passed. And the Church is
justified in her altering of the day, having sufficient Authority going before
her in designing of the day. Of which more hereafter.

XVIII. Excep. 5. B. of E. p. 64.
But it is further excepted, [Our Sabbatizers must first of all make
remonstrance, that the fourth Commandment of the Decalogue is simply and
formally Moral, before they presume to affirm, that the same is a part, jot
or title of the Eternal Law, which Christ commanded to be observed to the
worlds end.]

Solut.
This is easily answered: 1. It is not necessary to prove it simply and
formally, that is, Naturally Moral: It is enough, if we can prove it
positively Moral; for himself has confessed, that there are some Laws
positively Moral, which are universal, and bind all mankind, p. 27. as that
against Polygamie, and wedlock in some degree. And therefore he plainly
contradicts himself, when p. 63. he says, [That Christ has freed and
delivered the Christian Church from the Eternal observation of all such Legal
precepts as were not simply and formally Moral.] But those Positive Laws
aforementioned, he says, are universal, and bind all mankind. And now we
infer, If Christ did not destroy, or free men from some other Positive Laws,
how is it probable, that He came to destroy or free men from the obedience of
any Positive Law of the Decalogue, which is confessed to be meant, at least in
some part, by the Law, in our Saviors discourse.

2. It concerns our Anti-Sabbatizers more, to prove that the fourth
Commandment is Ceremonial in whole, or in part, or else we fear they will
fall under the heavy censure of our Savior, for making void more then a jot or
a title of a Commandment, even a whole Commandment of the Decalogue, both
breaking it themselves, and also teaching others so to do. We wish them sadly
to consider it.

And whereas it is excepted by some, XIX. Excep. 6.
[That Christ in all this long Sermon of three whole Chapters, makes not the
least mention of the Sabbath, or fourth Commandment, and so seems to exclude
that out of the number of those Laws He professes to ratify.]

We briefly answer, 1. That there is no express mention of the

2. It is too much boldness in any to prescribe words to Christ, least
Commandments, even of a jot, or title. Lawyers warn, not to except, where the
Law excepts not. And a man would think, Christ had here sufficiently warned men
not to exclude any of the Commandments: But it is not enough with them, it
seems; At their peril then be it. We dare not be so witty.

3. We may see reason why He now mentions not the Sabbath, Sabbath, their fault
was Superstition. This He thought good to encounter elsewhere, as He does on
diverse occasions. But now He was in another way, and so contents himself with
the general, including it under the Law and the Prophets, which who so reads,
will hardly miss, reckoning it a Commandment, and none of the least neither.

We have but one thing more to note, XX. An Animadversion.
and we have done with this Argument: and that is, to consider a little some
words by one let fall, C. D. p. 14.
in resolution of this Text of Scripture. Thus he says: [Christ fulfilled the
whole Law by his actual and personal obedience to it, and by supplying the
defects of it, that it being unable to justify us in it self, might by the
help of His grace, and accession of faith in Him, be able to perform that
which otherwise it could not.] To which we say, That the Law should be able,
even by the help of Christ's grace, and acceptance of faith in Him, to justify
us, Is a Doctrine new and strange to the Reformed Churches, and derogatory
greatly to the satisfaction of Christ in his death. The Apostle says expressly,
[ All men are sinners, and are justified freely by Gods grace, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3.24.] And elsewhere he is so far from
saying, that Christ enables the Law to justify us, that he says, [ If
Righteousness be by the Law, Christ died in vain, Gal. 2. ult.] But it has
been ordinary with these Disputers to let fall now and then such drops of
Popish Doctrine as this is, to what end, the World will judge.

XXI. The Conclusion, by way of Recapitulation.
And now we will draw up the sum of this Chapter, in a few brief sentences.
1. It is clear, that Christ by not destroying the Law, means, not abrogating
it, not preaching it to be void. 2. That He speaks not at random of an
uncertainty of a Law, about which one might dispute what Law He meant; but of
the known Law of God, that is, the Law written, and of the words of it. 3. That
He means not the whole Law written by Moses; for a great part of that He did
come to destroy, to abrogate and make void: And his Disciples preached it to be
void, and Himself, now at this very time, does so about the Law of Divorce. 4.
Therefore He means it properly and undoubtedly of the Decalogue, which was most
properly called the Law; though also withal, of those other Precepts which are
substantial and apparent explications of it, which the Prophets likewise
confirmed, in their practical Sermons, by exhortation, reproof, promise, and
threatening. Which then amounts plainly to our Conclusion, [That Christ in this
place confirms the whole Decalogue, and every one of the Commandments of it,
in the very words of it, as Moral and Perpetual.]

CHAP. VI.
Solemn Worship is Moral Natural; both Solitary, and Conjoined, in Families,
and Churches; and how far.

HAving in the former Chapters laid the foundation of our Dispute about the
fourth Commandment; I. Connection of the former discourses with the following.
by Asserting generally the Perpetuity of sundry Laws of God in the Old
Testament, even though but Positive: and particularly of such Laws as are
Substantially profitable for all Men in all Ages to be bound unto: (unless it
be found clearly that God has repealed them.) As also by name, of the whole
Decalogue. Before we proceed to apply all this to the fourth Commandment in
hand, We esteem it Necessary to add further a 2d. General consideration,
namely of the Nature of Time, as it relates to the Worship of God. Which if we
can lay down clearly and strongly, (as by Gods help we hope to do) we suppose
we shall have made our groundwork so sure, as that no underminings or
batteries of our adversaries will be able hurtfully to shake our building.

But to this end, II. Necessity of discoursing about Solemn Worship.
we must also first speak somewhat of the Worship of God it self, His
immediate Worship. The rather, because, though our adversaries do not
altogether deny any of that which we shall say about it: Yet we find not, that
they express usually some things so fully, as we conceive it Necessary they
should be expressed and understood; and withal, because they do in effect deny
any other Solemn Worship then Public, which we take to be a great and
dangerous error, and greatly prejuditiall also to the right understanding of
the controversies in hand. We will therefore (to make the way plain before us)
begin with a brief discourse concerning Solemn Worship: in the manner
following.

Though the Nature of man be much defaced by the Fall of Adam, III. Principles
of Religion in all hearts.
yet are there (as all men do acknowledge) some prime Principles of Religion
found in every soul, (whether left, or reimprinted, we now dispute not) which
can never be wholly blotted out. Among which, there are these two most legible
upon the Tables of the Heart.

1. That there is a God.
1. [That there is a God.] Which even the most Barbarous and Savage people of
the World in all Ages; and even the worst of Atheists, at some time or other,
have been forced to acknowledge. The Frame of the Greater World, Yea the Frame
of the Lesser World (Man,) do Preach to every one vocally, and as it were
proclaim, a Deity, Romans 1.20.

IV. 2 That he must have Worship.
2. [That this God must be Worshipped by all reasonable Creatures capable of the
knowledge of him, and so of Worshipping him.] And this results from the former.
For nature it self, cannot but conclude thus, If there be a God, it is but
reason he should be honored by all his Creatures that are capable of
understanding, what it is to honor him. There is then a Natural Homage and
Allegiance due to God from all mankind, by the very Law of their Creation, and
particularly the Praising and Magnifying of Him, and so the performance of all
other duties toward Him, that He prescribes men to Worship Him by, both with
Soul and Body.

V. The Worship of God two fold. 1. Ejaculatory described.
Now this Worship of God may be further distinguished into Ejaculatory, and
Solemn; Ejaculatory, is [That which a man may tender to God, either with the
Heart alone, or with the Tongue also in Prayer, Praises, Singing, etc. even in
the midst of Worldly employments, sometimes.] Experience shows the possibility
of this sometimes, and but sometimes. For some worldly employments, (as study,
and diverse others) do so wholly take a Man up both body and mind, as without
sensible interruption, a Man cannot have leisure to tender so much as an
Ejaculation to God for a while, and much less to speak of him. But other
employments do admit (now and then, at least) much freedom both for the mind
and tongue; So that even while the eyes and hands are busied in worldly work,
as ploughing, or spinning, or weaving, and the like, one may, without any
interruption of what they are about, lift up the soul to God, and the voice
too for God, and so worship Him immediately, while withal they worship him
mediately also in a worldly calling.

VI. Proved to be a duty for all men.
Now unto this kind of Worship of God every one of mankind is undoubtedly bound,
as much as it is possible for them to perform it. And namely by those general
Precepts (which bind [Semper] as the schools speak, that is on all
opportunities; though not [ad semper] at all moments, without intermission;)
[Pray without ceasing. Rejoice evermore. In every thing give thanks. Trust in
the Lord at all times. Meditate in the Law of God day and night. Speak of it,
when thou sit in the house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou
lie down, and when thou risest up. And by that universal of all others,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength.] All this, we say, infallibly
calls for such Ejaculatory worship, as much and as often, as a man can possibly
have leisure; and at all seasons, when he shall not thereby be interrupted in
his necessary attendance upon his body and bodily occasions. I say not that
these commands require no more but Ejaculatory Worship: But so much infallibly
they do require; and without this, they are not satisfied, how much or how
often soever any one do tender Solemn Worship unto God. And so indeed it is
both our misery and our sin, That though in the Solemn Worship of God, we
are apt, (too apt, God knows) to fall upon thoughts of the world, of our
worldly callings and businesses, at least, (besides worse matters:) Yet in our
ordinary callings, we seldom remember God, as we might, and should. It being
too true, of all in a degree, which is the common Character of the ungodly, [To
forget God, and not to have him in our thoughts.]

But however, VII. 2. Solemn described.
be it at the best that can be imagined with us in this kind; this Ejaculatory
Worship, is not all the homage we owe to God; But we stand further bound (even
every one of mankind) to tender also Solemn Worship unto him. And that is [The
presenting the whole man soul and body both, together unto God; Taking ones
self wholly off from all worldly things, and devoting themselves with all
their strength, altogether, for a while, to the service, and Worship, and
enjoyment of God: Setting aside all other businesses quite, to attend merely
upon that, for so long.]

And this to be a duty, as well as the former, VIII. Proof of it being a duty
obliging all men by two Reasons. 1. God is Lord both of soul and body.
not only the forementioned Precepts evince, special that of loving God with
all thy heart, etc. besides manifold more in Scripture; But even the Law of
Nature necessitates to it, whether we consider God, or our selves, our souls,
specially.

1. God, being our Creator, (not of our Souls only, but also of our bodies)
and Lord of all that man has, The glorifiing of him both with the soul, and
body too, is (and must needs be acknowledged) the Principal end of Man's
Creation. For God made Man, as all things else, Principally for himself, for
His own Glory. And so it cannot be enough, that man, should serve and Worship
Him, by the by only, or by fits and snatches merely, in Ejaculatory Worship;
while they are mainly busied and intent upon somewhat else: But his Sovereign
Majesty and Dominion, requires also, sometimes, such a Solemn and serious
attendance upon him, for the Illustration of His Glory: as that a man should
mind nothing else that while; nor yet suffer any part or Member of His hand, or
foot, or eye, or any, to be at all busy about any thing of the world: As
hereby acknowledging kimself wholly and altogether to belong to God, and to
hold all that he has, even his whole being from Him.

IX. 2. The good of man's souls repuires it.
2. Neither is it to be forgotten, that even the good of men's souls, (for which
in the second place, Man was made and sent into the world) requires the same.
For since the fall of man particularly (and even before) a full enjoying of
God, which is the souls happiness, cannot be had (no, not such as this life
is capable of) in the midst of worldly employments, though a man do now and
then, even as often as it is possible for him, by lifting up his soul to God
in Holy Ejaculations, get a little comfort and sweetness. Therefore in this
respect also, it is necessary for men sometimes to attend wholly upon God
(specially we say since the fall, being now fettered with so much corruption,
and filled with so much vexation) and to have no diversion, from any thing that
his hands, or eyes, or any part of him are busied about: But that the whole
soul do wait upon God, and the whole body also, in a due and serviceable
proportion; that so he may by such Solemn Worship of God, have a full draught
(as I may say) out of the Fountain of Gods Goodness, and satisfy his soul
with a more complete fruition of His Divine Grace. Or rather (to speak
according to the unhappy condition, that all mankind are now naturally in, by
reason of sin and corruption,) to seek to recover his lost happiness in
God, by seeking Reconciliation with Him; and the regaining, and so retaining of
his Favor in the use of such Holy means as himself has appointed to this
end, namely the Ordinances of His Worship. These things the Law of Nature
teaches and commands to all men universally without exception, or exemption of
any. And they must be Brutes, or Atheists (or both) that deny them.

Moreover, X. Solemn Worship distinguished into Solitary, and Conjoined; and
that into Domestical and Ecclesiastical.
in as much as Worship may be presented to God either by any one single person
alone, or by diverse joining together in the tendering of it: which usually,
though not so properly, is expressed by the terms of Private Worship, and
Public, (we had rather say, Solitary, and Conjoined: and then divide the
latter into Domestical or Family Worship, and Ecclesiastical or
Congregationall.) It is further considerable, what of any of these is to be
acknowledged a necessary duty for all men, even according to the Law of Nature?
And for this we say, 1. Generally and briefly, How far each of these is a
Necessary Duty.
That as far as any of them are possible to be performed, all mankind stand
bound to tender them respectively, that is, so much, and so often as they have
no just and necessary impediment. 2. Particularly for each of these severally.
1. Every one is bound to tender to God solemn worship by themselves alone. 2.
Every one that lives in a family, where he may have others to join with him in
solemn worshipping of God, is bound to that also, to join them to him, and
himself to them, in presenting some solemn worship to God. 3. Every one also
that lives in a convenient nearness with others, with whom he may join in an
Ecclesiastical or Congregationall assembly, to worship God solemnly together;
stands bound in like sort hereunto; and may not always absent himself from
them, but some time or other it is his duty to join with them in such solemn
Worship, even notwithstanding any danger of Persecution, and that the place of
such Worship be but a private House or Chamber, or a Field, or a Wood, or a
Cave, as it fared with the Primitive Christians. And of each of these we
conceive proper Reasons to evince the necessity.

1. For the first of these, Solitary Worship, XI. Solitary Worship: which is
not owned as Solemn, by our Adversaries.
(ordinarily called Private Worship) A man would think, none should offer to
deny it. But in our Disputers books, I am sure it is very ^^intly and seldom
acknowledged, (and the second less, rather then more:) And by their language,
neither Solitary, nor Family Worship is owned, under the notion of Solemn
Worship. For as much as it is usual with them, that when they any where name
Solemn Worship, they add (Public) to it. As being afraid, left if they
should grant any other Solemn Worship to be a Necessary Duty, besides Public
(whereby they mean Ecclesiastical, as appears by their Discourses upon it) It
would enforce (as indeed it will, as we shall see) a necessity of a solemn
time for it, as well as for the solemn Public Worship: And then their
general Morality of the fourth Commandment, which they have devised to be
only for the Public Worship, will be found too scanty, and their whole Cause
be endangered to fall to the ground, as we shall make it appear hereafter.
Therefore we must needs take a little more pains to prove both Family Worship,
and even Solitary Worship to be necessary duties, and part of our homage to
God, and even to be Morall-Naturall, and withal to deserve the name of Solemn
Worship. And afterward we will say somewhat also of the necessity of Public
Worship likewise: and so conclude the whole Chapter.

XII. Solitary Worship proved a duty three ways.
1. Now for Solitary Worship, such as is performed with the whole man, setting
himself altogether apart from all worldly businesses and distractions, to
attend upon God immediately, and tender both Soul and Body to Him: That this
is a necessary duty, appears from the grounds before laid, in a threefold
respect. 1. That it is altogether unreasonable to imagine that God should lose
any of his honor from any man single, because there is no other company to
join with him in the solemnity of Worship. 2. It is also unreasonable to think,
that a man is not bound to seek the recovery of his souls lost happiness, in
his enjoying God, and conversing with Him in duties of Worship, to be performed
both with Soul and Body, because he is alone, and has none besides himself
that will have any regard to further him and themselves together in conjoined
Worship. 3. Otherwise it were not absolutely a Morall-Naturall duty to worship
God solemnly (that is, with the whole man) at all. For every such duty, which
we by the Law of our Creation owe absolutely to God, cannot but be perpetually
possible and universally to all, He being perpetually existent and present with
us, and we with Him. But solemn Family Worship (and much more solemn Public
or Ecclesiastical Worship) is not universally and perpetually possible to all.
And so no other solemn Worship is possible to them, but only Solitary. And if
that be not to them a Morall-Naturall duty, then none is absolutely so, For it
is clear, a Christian may be (and many are) forced to live many years in such
a place, among Turks or Pagans, (as a Captive, or the like) where there is no
possibility at all of having any other to join with him in the worship of God,
no not secretly, much less publicly. So that though we deny not, but Public
(that is, Ecclesiastical or Congregationall) solemn Worship is so far forth
Morall-Naturall, as it is Possible. Yet we maintain, that Private (that is,
Solitary) solemn Worship is more Moral and Necessary, yea firstly Moral,
being not only Necessary, as the the other is, when it may be, but certainly
Possible for every one of Mankind to perform; which the other is not, at all
times, and in all places, when a man will.

And now that such Solitary (or Private) Worship deserves to be called and
counted Solemn Worship, XIII. Well called Solemn.
appears from the description of Solemn Worship forementioned, against which
no just exception can be taken. As also by the instance of Daniels prayers,
which though performed by himself alone in his Chamber, yet cannot reasonably
be denied to have been Solemn Worship, being three times a day constantly, and
on his knees, and his windows open toward Jerusalem. Also his setting himself
to seek the Lord by fasting, (though alone, c. 9.) Can it be reckoned less
then Solemn Worship? We add, if many Christians, all a Country or Kingdom
over, should agree to fast and pray upon one particular day, every one in their
Chamber apart and alone, this were without doubt a very Solemn service and
worship, yet Solitary and private. We conclude then, that as there is such a
Duty required of every one apart, at least sometimes, which we call Solemn
Worship: so such a Duty being performed with the whole man, is worthy to be
called and counted Solemn. And if Solitary Worship may deserve to be called
Solemn, then surely Family Worship also is justly to be counted Solemn. Such
was the eating of the Passover, which was ever in private houses: and Esthers
Fast with her maids, Est. 4. three days one after another: and the Humiliation
mentioned Zach. 12. every family apart, and their wives apart; which seems to
be a Solitary Worship, yet Solemn undoubtedly. So that all Solemn Worship is
not Public. But if any one would yet list to wrangle about the word Solemn,
let him but give us another fit word to describe such Solitary (or Private)
Worship of the whole man tendered unto God so seriously: and it shall serve our
turn sufficiently for the end we intend it for, as we shall see hereafter.

Mean time we say, that conjoined Worship, XIV. Family Worship proved a duty.
where it is possible to to be performed, is also a necessary duty, even so far
forth Morall-Naturall, and that in both the kinds of it, Domestical and
Congregationall.

For in the second place, The Honor of GOD, and Good of Souls, do also
require Family-VVorship from all such jointly, as live in Families, where they
have any to join with. This appears, 1. Because it being God that has placed
men in a Community, (setting the solitary in families, as the Psalmists phrase
is, Psalm. 68.) it cannot be justly conceived that He should do this merely for
their worldly conveniences; but rather chiefly that they should improve their
society one with another to His Glory, who is the Lord of them all together, as
well as of every one of them single; and so that they should worship Him
jointly together, as well as each of them solitarily and apart. To which tends
undeniably the forenoted charge given Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These words that I command
thee this day, shall be in thine heart, and thou shall teach them diligently to
thy children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in the house, Deuteronomy.
11.18.
and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou
risest up. For though it comprehend plainly Ejaculatory Worship in part, as we
have noted before, yet it reaches further; specially being added immediately
unto the great Commandment, ver. 4. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And indeed, how can
any man love God with all his heart and soul, and not be willing to join
others to himself, and himself to others, as much as may be, in the worship
of God? And how does the Master of a Family love God with all his strength,
that imployes not his authority over all his Family to call them to worship God
even in the Family, with himself, at least some times. (I say, at least some
times; for we yet are but upon the Duty; the consideration of the Time is to
come afterward.) Therefore also we find it a part of the unhappy character of
Pagans, Jer. 10.25. Whereas some, to elude the strength of this Text for
Family-Prayers, allege, that Psalm. 79.6. the words are: the Kingdoms that
call not upon thy name; and so by Family here, is meant no more then there by
Kingdoms. I answer, The parallelling the two plates proves the thing more
clearly: for as the Kingdom is not said to call upon Gods name, unless the
King command public meetings to that end, and that is counted a Heathenish and
ungodly Kingdom: so is it with a Family, where by the authority of the
Governor there are no joint meetings to pray to God.
devoted to the wrath of God; The Heathen that know Thee not, and the Families
that call not on Thy Name. And indeed, how has the Family that knowledge of
God, to be, 1. Their great Lord and Master; 2. The Author of their Peace among
themselves, that the Governor is gentle to the inferiors, and the inferiors
dutiful to the Governor and Superior 3. The Author of all Blessings to them
all, Of health and strength to follow their business, of success and comfort
in them: How I say have they the knowledge of God, if they agree not together
to join in Worship of Him their Lord, and in tendering Prayers and Praises for
such things as they expect and receive from Him.

2. The Good of souls calls for this also, Every one needing help from
others, and all being helped by the Solemn services jointly presented to God
in the Family. 1. In minding one another, by mutual testification, of the
common Allegiance and Homage they all owe to Him their great Sovereign, and so
preventing the forgetting of Him. 2. Withal affecting one another by example
of reverence and devotion. 3. They being also, infallibly taught, and minded
of, and provoked to, some particulars of Duty, and furnished with some matter of
comfort, by every such service performed jointly, (supposing that every ones
heart joins faithfully in it) which before they were either ignorant, or
forgetful of, or backward to, or should have missed, if they had been wholly
and ever alone. As reason cannot but insinuate, and experience continually
shows. It remains then, that Domestical and Family Worship is a Necessary
Duty, and as far as it is Possible, even Morall-Naturall. XV. Public Worship
proved a Duty.


3. So is also, Ecclesiastical or Congregationall Worship, which is usually
called Public Worship, Even for the Reasons forenamed, Gods Honor, and
Souls Good. He is Lord of all societies (and the Author of them) as well as of
Families. And so is to have a tribute of Worship and Glory from all jointly,
The Lord having universal Dominion over all flesh, should publicly be
worshipped, by societies of men. G. Irons. p. 261.
as well as from any severally. And Love to God cannot but promote this as much
as is possible. And the mutual blessings expected and received by greater
Communities, (as well as Families,) do require the like, according to just
conveniences. Which is so assuredly of the Law of Nature, that all Nations that
have ever been heard of, have had their joint Public Solemn Worship, And have
had Persons, set apart purposely for it, (Priests, or Ministers) for the more
complete performance of it. Finally both Reason and Experience declare, that
the good of Souls both calls for public (Congregationall) Worship: as also
commends it as exceeding profitable and advantageous. Not only in that they are
hereby yet more affected by a more General Example, recommending the Worship
of God, but also, because by the Solemn Ordinances, of Prayer, the Word, and
the Sacraments Administered and Dispensed, and used in Public, multitudes, are
at once taught, and minded of, and provoked to the Duties they owe to God and
Man, better then their own solitary thoughts and endeavors, (or only their
Families helping them) could ordinarily have attained unto. And this so much
the rather, because of the gifts, which God to this purpose has endued His
Ministers with (who by His appointment are set apart, mainly for the Public
Worship,) exceeding those which others have usually or ordinarily. Yet by the
advantage of Public Worship, every particular Person present, both enjoyes
the benefit of the Ministers gifts, of Prayer, and specially of his knowledge
and wisdom in interpreting the Scriptures and rightly dividing them, for the
edification and consolation of every one; and so may reap in one hour the
strength of that which has been growing diverse years; and feed upon that
which has been gathering diverse days. More we shall not need to add
concerning this, at this time: Because every conscience both feels the gain
and increase of spiritual good and comfort, by the public Ordinances, as also
by their earnest desire and seeking after them, proclaim it sufficiently to
others. As also because to this (generally) our adversaries are frequent
enough, in affording their Testimonies. And therefore also we will here spare
the pains to quote any of them. Hereafter we shall have occasion to make use
of some of them. Now we shut up this Chapter; with summing up for a conclusion,
That both Solitary and Conjoined Worship, in Families and Churches are Solemn
and Necessary Duties, required of all men, (so far as has been said) and so
Morall-Naturall. And now what time is required for all this, we shall consider
in the Chapters that follow.

CHAP. VII.
General Considerations about Time, and its Profitablenesse, in Reference to
Moral Actions of Importance.

THe Necessity and Morality of Solemn Worship having been in the former
Chapter discoursed of; I. Scope of the ensuing discourses about Time.
We are now to take in hand the consideration of the Time, which may be, or is
to be allotted to it, both generally, and for the performance of the several
kinds of Worship Noted: Driving it to this scope, to show by the
Profitablenesse that may be in a wise determination of Time for Religion and
Gods Solemn Worship. [That the determination of one day in seven for a
Sabbath, (which we find in the fourth Commandment:) is a Law substantially
profitable for all men in all ages to be bound unto.] Which then, (upon the
grounds formerly laid, of the Morality of such a Law, though but Positive,
unless God be found to have clearly repealed it) if we can vindicate from the
supposed repeal, which some contend for, (as we believe we shall) we shall
have demonstratively proved the perpetuity of that fourth Commandment in that
Consideration; and gained the Principal Fort striven for in this Cause. And
then the residue will be easy to be dispatched and made ours.

To this end, we suppose it convenient to discourse first, II. Why we first
handle it generally with respect to Civil Actions.
concerning Time in general, as it may refer to humane Actions, even Civil;
and that for two Causes. 1. That hereby, if it be possible, we may gain upon
men's prejudices, and take them of, while we make it appear, that we wrest not
things about Time to our purpose beyond the Nature of them; but that whether we
ever meddled with Religion or not; Yet the considerations we shall note, are
real and certain even in ordinary businesses and civil affairs. And so
bringing our Cause before the bar of Reason and Nature (to which our
adversaries have appealed, from the words of the Scripture,) we may take from
them all evasions, and ways of shifting. 2. That hereby the whole matter may
be more clear and distinct, for every one to conceive and bear away; when it
is first set down generally with an Application to Civil Actions, and
afterward particularly showed to agree to matters of Religion and Gods Solemn
Worship.

III. Why we use so many distinctions and divisions; And apply them a second
Time. Melim est doctos onorare notis, quam rudes fraudare discendis. Leo
Magnus. Phil. 3.1. To write the same things, to me indeed it is not grievous,
But for you it is safe.
And if in the former part we shall seem to some, somewhat too curious in
spinning out distinctions and divisions, we crave a respite of such censure,
until we have added our Application: wherein it will appear, that not one of
all those divisions, how nice so ever it seems, but has some Profitable (not
to say Necessary) Use, toward the clearing, and giving light to, this most
important controversy. On the contrary, if we be charged by others to
tautologize in our Application of things to Religion in the following part; We
wish such to consider, that many of the Notions being New, and not of ordinary
observation; it may be more excusable to say some things a 2d. time over, which
pregnant wits might have sufficiently understood and remembered by once
mentioning them, then by a single mention of any thing of importance, to
endanger the loosing of any ordinary readers apprehension or memory, in a
discourse of such length and weight as this is. These things thus premised, we
fall to our work, to scanne the Nature of Time in reference to Humane and
Moral Actions.

IV. Time an adjunct, yet may be substantially profitable.
Time generally considered, is a natural adjunct, and circumstance
accompanying Humane Actions of what kind soever. But yet such a circumstance,
as has, (according as it may be ordered) a real, as I may say, a substantial
influence into the businesses, for which such Action is performed; and so may
be substantially Profitable unto the maine business; even according to
natural reason, and in a constant course; supposing the business not to be
effected by one single and momentaneous Action.

V. This consideration has been hurtfully neglected. And Place unfitly
paralelled with Time in Religion.
Which reallity of the effect of Time toward Moral Actions, being not observed,
or not regarded by disputers in this Cause, has bred much confusion, and
occasioned manifold mistakes: as appears, even by that one most common
Assertion of all the adversaries. [That Time and Place are equal circumstances
in Religion,] Which how false it is, and how prejudicial, not to our Cause
only, but to Religion it self; If we do not (anon) demonstrate beyond the
possibility of any reasonable denial, we shall despair of ever prevailing in
the Cause we have undertaken. But on the contrary, if we shall make manifest
(as we are confident, by God help, we shall) That the one (namely Time) is of
exceeding importance in Religion, even without respect to any particular
institution or determination of it from God or man; and for that cause, calling
necessarily for some determination, which, if wisely ordered, and strongly
authorized, makes it undeniably and most singularly profitable to the soul and
spirit, and so to Religion. And that the other, namely Place, to have nothing
at all of importance in it toward the soul and spirit, beyond the Natural and
Physical conveniences of the body, (except 1. the Typical references of
Places, expressly commanded by God himself, as the Tabernacle and Temple: And
2. the Memorial of any act of Gods providence, or the like, at Gods
appointment, or from the institution of men, which are merely accidental
things, and wherein also Time does fully match Place, having been as well as it
allotted to the same purposes, while withal, we say, it exceeds it, beyond all
proportion in other respects) We hope we shall have gotten so main an
advantage in our Cause, as that we shall very much prevent all possibility of
future Reply.

We say then, That Time being considerable in Philosophy, VI. Three distinct
respects of Time observable in actions.
under a double Predicament: One is that of Quantity, or the Proportion of
Time; which again has a double respect, 1. Of Continuance so long together; 2.
Of Revolution so often again. The other is that of Quando, or the season of
Time: Hence arises a threefold common affection, or respect of Time,
observable in every action or business: 1. Quamdiu? The extent of Time, 1. The
length.
How long together it is continued? 2. Quoties? The frequencie of Revolution,
2. The number.
How often it is reiterated and repeated? 3. Quando? The season or order of
Time, When it is begun? 3. The order. All which are very much confounded and
jumbled together in the Discourses of our Disputers, to the great
disappointment of a right conceiving of the Truths in question.

We say, the season when it is begun; for the season when it is ended, belongs
properly to the Continuance, or Quamdiu.

Now each of these respects of Time may be conceived, VII. All three considered
as denominated by Nature, Art, Accident.
either according to denomination of Divisions, taken either 1. from Nature; 2.
Or from Art; 3. Or from Accident. 1. From Nature, as years, months, days,
which are distinctions of Time observable in Nature. 2. From Art, as hours and
minutes, into which, not Nature, but Art divides Time. (And to these, for the
avoiding of an uncertain dispute, we are content to add Weeks. Though there
be some great Scholars that have given more then an intimation, that the
division of Time by Weeks (that is, by seven days) is a more exact Natural
division according to Days, then either Months or Years. But this we leave
for the present to those Authors to maintain.) 3. From Accident, as any
remarkable thing past, or which may occasionally happen, or continue; and the
like. We may, and do often speak of the Respects of Time, according to such
Accidents: As of the Continuance, while such a thing continued; and the
Frequencie, as often as such a thing happened, (or the time came about, wherein it
happened) and of the Beginning, when such a thing fell out, and the like. And
whenever we speak any thing distinctly of any respect of Time, we do and
must needs speak of it in some or other of these phrases, denominating it so by
Natural, or Artificial, or Accidental divisions. 3. Also one and the same
denomination may sometime be applied to all the respects of Time in a distinct
and several consideration: As to say, Such a man stays at home on Fridayes,
implies 1. the continuance, all day: 2. The frequencie, every week: 3. the
order, which day of the week.

VIII. Time is indeterminate, or determinate: Each respect having a double
limit.
4. Moreover, Time, in each of the forenoted respects, is further considerable
two ways: 1. As indefinite and indeterminate: 2. As definite and determinate.

And either way according to a double limit or term, in regard of which it may
be determined or not, which we may call 1. Initiall. 2. Conclusive.


The Initiall term or limit of the Quamdiu, or Continuance, is the least or
shortest that is or may be for that action or business. Quoties, or
Frequencie, is the seldomest Revolution. Quando, or Season, is the latest
Beginning.


Contrarily, the Conclusive limit or term of the Quamdiu, is the longest
Continuance. Quoties, or Frequencie, is the oftenest Revolution. Quand^, or the
Season, is the soonest Beginning.


Also between these Terms there is great latitude oftimes, and much variety of
degrees in each of the respects of Time forementioned.

Now by Time indeterminate, we understand, IX. Indeterminate Time described.
that which is altogegether uncertain in any respect, before the action to
which it belongs is performed: uncertain for the Continuance, until the
action be finished: uncertain for the Frequencie, (whether oftener then once)
till a man actually go about the action or business a second time, and so
forward: and uncertain for the Season, when it shall be begun or gone about,
till the very instant of settling upon it. And such indeterminate Time is
observable, in the several respects of Time, in many actions, and businesses
of several kinds.

By determinate Time (contrarily) we understand, That, X. Determinate Time,
threefold.
which before the action is performed, is appointed out in any respect for that
action or business: which may be from a threefold Efficient: 1. The Nature of
the Action. 2. The Command of a Superior. 3. A man's own peremptory Resolution.


1. Sometimes the nature of the action, XI. 1. By the nature of the action.
or business to be performed, determines the Time beforehand, in one or more
of the respects; when according to Nature it cannot be done, But 1. in such a
continuance of time: as a man cannot read over a Chapter of such length, but in
a proportionable continuance of Time spent in it. And so, 2. when the business
in Nature is not dispatched by one action, how much Time soever a man allot to
it: as some Land must be ploughed over more then once, or else it will bear no
good Corn. And likewise, 3. when the business is lost, if not begun at such a
season: as they say of the gathering of Saffron, if it be not taken in the just
day, it is lost. All these are determinations by the Nature of the action or
business in it self.

2. Sometimes Superiors, XII. 2. By a Superior.
having sufficient authority to oblige to the observation of any respect of
Time, do accordingly (at their pleasure) determine it, and command inferiors
to apply it answerably to such action or business as they assign.

3. XIII. 3. By a manselfe.
Somteimes a man's own peremptory resolution determines the respects of Time
(for any action or business) to himself. And these two latter do specially
make Time to be properly called determinate.

And now although it be true, that, when an action is once done, or a business
finished, it is all one, in Natural reason, whether the Time belonging to it
were antecedently indeterminate, or determinate, as being then exactly equal
one to another, and as exactly measurable or computable one to the other. Yet
is there between them beforehand, even in Civil actions, a great and
remarkable difference, (namely, as much as between may and must) for which they
deserve to be carefully observed and distinguished into their natures and
degrees.

XIV. Indeterminate Time is attendant on business.
To begin with indeterminate Time. The nature of this is, to be merely an
attendant upon actions and business, and a mere circumstance. Necessary
indeed, but not in any Ethicall or Moral consideration, but merely Physical
and Natural (as a shadow is a necessary, that is, a natural attendant upon
any body in the sunshine) in as much as it is simply impossible in Nature to
perform any action, without the concomitance and attendance of Time. But on
the other hand, the nature of determinate Time is, to be a commander of
business, requiring the aitendance of such actions as are for the business.
And it is as necessary Ethically to perform some such actions according to the
determinations of Times, as it is Physically to have some Time to accompany
actions.

But withal it is to be observed, and the observation will prove of much
weight (as we shall see) That even indeterminate Time, to some businesses, (and
namely such as admit of variety of degrees) may prove a circumstance of much
importance to the advancement, or disappointment of a man's end in his actions,
even according to Reason and Nature, and in an ordinary and constant course. We
will instance in the business of Learning, which to attain to, is a Students
business, and his end, (though not ultimate) and unquestionably admits of
great variety of degrees. And toward it diverse actions are directed, as
attendants on his Masters or Tutours teaching, and to give him account of his
learning; and conversing with his Fellow-Scholars, or Fellow-Pupils, or
Fellow-Students, in acts and exercises of Learning, Disputations, and Orations,
and the like: As also studying, reading, and meditating by himself, XV. Yet
profitable even voluntarily applied: Proved.
for his further progress and increase in Learning.

Now to all this we say, even Indeterminate Time may in some respects be of
much importance toward the furtherance or hinderance of his business of
Learning, according as any voluntarily (without any antecedent determination)
applies himself, and imployes his Time. Namely, this is true of the two first
respects of Time, the Quamdiu, or Continuance, and the Quoties, or Frequencie,
(which are the two affections of the Quantity or Proportion of Time.) These are
in themselves, though indeterminate, very material, and as we may say,
substantial circumstances in the business of Learning. But it is not so with
the Quando, or season of Beginning. For take that altogether indeterminately,
and it is of no value or efficacy at all, to the speeding, or putting back of
Learning, that is, not in it self, though, perhaps it may be somewhat by
accident. A little further to explain these things, will be worth our pains:
and so we will consider each of these respects severally, as also join the two
first together, as far as they agree in this Observation in hand.

Here then, 1. we affirm, that [the Quamdiu, or continuance of Time, XVI. 1. In
the Continuance.
even altogether Indeterminate and uncertain beforehand, and only prolonged by
a man's own will, according to present affections and occasions, or shortened
accordingly, does answerably promote a man's Learning, or defeat it.] For
infallibly, the longer (supposing his bodily spirits not tired) a Student
continues attending his Tutour, and receiving directions and instructions from
him, or exercising himself with others in matter of Learning, or hearing them,
or studying by himself; and so in any of these (or all these) continues the
pursuit of Learning, the more he prospers: and the less while he continues,
the less he advances in such learning. So that a man may both foretell of two
Students of equal capacity, (and opportunity of helps) that he who has
bestowed, even altogether voluntarily, and without any antecedent
determination, a longer Time, such Day, upon Learning, has gotten more that
Day, then the other that bestowed less Time. As also by observing the
progress of two such, any Day, he may, even without all examination which of
them continued longest at his study, (or with his Tutour, and the like)
conclude and pronounce demonstratively, That he who has profited most, did
continue longest; and he who has profited less, did continue a shorter time.

2. We say the like of the Quoties, or reiteration of Time, XVII. 2. In the
Frequencie.
even altogether uncertain and indeterminate, (till a man's own mind made him
voluntarily return to his study) That the frequencie of such return to study,
and to his Tutour for help, and the like; or the seldomnesse of it, does
exceedingly set forward, or keep back a man's Learning. For infallibly, he that
reiterates it every day, twice a day, (or so) prospers and goes on; and he that
returns to it but once or twice a week, or month, or year, makes little or
nothing of it in comparison: Other things being equal, as we touched before.
So that here again a man may both foretell and judge infallibly between two,
(otherwise equal) which is or will be the better Proficient, namely he that is
more frequent in returning to his study, and he the worse that reiterates it
(remarkably) seldomer. Also by discerning their different progress, he may
without examination say demonstratively, Such an one studied more Days in a
Week, or Month, or Year; and such an one fewer.

XVIII. 3. In both.
3. Insomuch, as taking these two Considerations of Time together, they are the
usual Periphrasis of a good Scholar or Student, [He is one that continues and
keeps close to his study for a good while together, when he is at it; and is
diligent in returning to it constantly day by day, Or in going often to his
Tutour, or frequenting Acts and Exercises, and the like, whereby Learning is
gotten.]

XIX. 4. An evidence of Affection.
4. Withal, it is not to be forgotten, That even such [Voluntary applying of
Time indeterminately, much, or little together, and often, or seldome] where
there is no necessary or just impediment, is a most evident and undeniable
demonstration, what special affection a man has to Learning, much, or little.
Neither is it almost possible for a man to express his own love (or another)
to Learning, or want of love to it but by employing at least somewhat about the
Proportion of Time; the Continuance, long, or short; and the Reiteration,
often, or seldom, for such employment.

XX. 5. And Wisdom.
5. Finally, This application of the continuance and frequencie of Time to any
thing, has so great an influence into all business of importance, that we
usually count a man wise, or unwise, according to the spending of his Time,
(even voluntary) Reckoning him vain and lightheaded, that setles not for any
remarkable continuance, to some one business or other; or that pursues one
thing to day, and another thing to morrow, and a third thing the third day, and
so returns not in any frequencie to the same employment, particular or
general. And esteeming him wise, that does the contrary.

But now, none of all this will be found concerning the Quando, XXI. But not in
the Quando, unless by accident.
or season of beginning, any Time, to set to study, or the like, voluntarily
and indeterminately, It is not at all of any importance, that is, not in it
self, though by accident perhaps it may be somewhat, as was touched before. By
accident, we say, it may be of some importance, and that in three cases
specially. 1. When his body, and bodily spirit may be more fit, or unfit, by
beginning sooner, or later, at this hour, or that. 2. When at such or such a
season, a man may have more or less help, from his Tutour, or others, then at
another time. 3. When the delay, or hastening the beginning to study, falls in
with, or crosses the other respects of Time forespoken of, (which are in
themselves of importance) as when a man thereby shall have liberty and
opportunity, or not, to continue longer, or reiterate oftener his study, and
the advantages of getting Learning. But all these are accidental things, and
not constant to such seasons of Time; wherein indeterminately and voluntarily
study may be begun, or a Student may repair to his Tutour, or the like.

And so setting aside such Accidental Considerations, It will, we say,
appear, that in the Quando, or beginning of Time, (according to any
denomination of Nature, as this or that Day; or of Art, this or that Hour, as
we spoke before) there is no materiality at all toward the advantage, or
disadvantage of Learning. One part of Time (according to which, every moment, a
new Quando begins, wherein a man, if he please, may begin to study) is as
behovefull as another, one Minute as another, one Hour as another, one Day as
another, and none more then another. So that here a man can neither rationally
foretell, nor conclude any thing, (as he might in the former respects) what
Progress, much or little, a man has made: Nor 2. whether more or less,
compared with another, who begun at another season, sooner or later: Not yet 3.
what Affection he has to Learning; For a man may sometimes begin to study in
the Morning early, merely by having nothing else to busy himself in at that
season; and he may forbear to begin, not for want of affection, but through
interruptions of other business: Nor 4. by seeing any ones progress in
Learning, can it be judged (unless from some accidental thing withal) what
Day or Hour he began to study; or which Hour or Day he took for study, out of
any number, if he intermitted any. And so 5. in conclusion, it appears, that
the Quando, or Season of beginning (at this or that particular Time)
indeterminately, and voluntarily (without respect to some accident that may
fall in with it) is a thing merely indifferent, and no matter of wisdom, or
importance at all toward Learning, or any other like business.

Which difference, between the Quando or beginning of Time even indeterminate,
and the other two respects, of the quantity or proportion of Time, the
Continuance and the Frequencie, must be remembered against hereafter. For it
will be of special use, to more purposes then one.

XXII. Time determinate distinguished.
And so we proceed to the consideration of Time determinate, and specially as it
is determinate by the command of another; or by a man's own peremptory
resolution. And so the determination of the Affections or Respects of Time
admits of a double difference, namely in regard 1. Of the Respects themselves.
2. Of the manner of determination.


1. In regard of the respcts themselves.
In regard of the respects themselves, Time may be determined. 1. In any one of
these respects, single. 2. In any two of them jointly. 3. In all three of them
together.


1. There may be a determination of any one of these affections of Time single,
the other being left undetermined, as -- 1. Any one alone.
1. Of the Quamdiu, or Continuance, alone, saying, [Let an hour together be
bestowed on study] not determining whether more then once, or when for the
season. 2. Of the Quoties, or Reiteration alone, saying, [ Every day bestow
Time on study] not determining how long at once, or what hour. 3. Of the
Quando, or Season of beginning alone, saying, [ At seven in the morning begin
to study] not determining how long to continue, or whether oftener then that
one day.


2. Any two jointly.
2. There may be a determination of any two of these respects of Time jointly,
and the third left undetermined, as -- 1. Of the Continuance and Frequencie
jointly [Let an hour^ together each day bestowed on study,] not determining at
what hour to begin. 2. Of the Continuance and Beginning jointly [Let an ho^^^
together beginning at seven in the morning be bestowed study.] not
determinating whether oftener then that one 3. Of the Frequencie and Beginning
jointly [ Every day begin at seven in the morning to set about study,] not
determining how long to continue.


3. Likewise there may be a determination, 3. All three together.
of all the three Respects of Time together, saying [Let an hour together each
day, beginning at seven in the morning be bestowed on study.]

Again, XXIII. 2. The manner of determination.
in regard of the manner of determination of these Affections or Respects of
Time, (any of them or all of them) there are considerable differences, for it
maybe 1. Remiss and at large. 2. Strict and exact.


A remiss determination, 1. Remiss.
is when Time (in any of the respects) is so determined in some General
expression, as that both the terms or limits are left undetermined, as to
appoint -- 1. For the Continuance [Let a good while, or a little while together
be bestowed on study] not determining how long, or how little while, clearly.
2. For the Frequencie [Often, or seldom, bestow Time upon study,] not
determining how often, or how seldom, particularly. 3. For the Season [Begin
betimes, or late to set about study,] not determining, how early or how late,
distinctly.


A Strict and Exact determination, contrarily is, 2. Exact or strict ^hreefold.
when both the limits are (or at least one of them is) so particularly and
punctually expressed as no doubt can be made, how long or short, often or
seldom, early or late, is required for study by the determination, as namely,
in all those mentioned, of one respect single, or two, or all three.

Yet again, this strict and punctual determination, admits of some variety,
for it may be three fold; 1. Initiall. 2. Conclusive. 3. Exclusive.


We call that an Initiall determination, 1. Initiall.
when the Initiall term of the Respects of Time, is expressly mentioned and
determined, that it must be so long, so often, and so soon, and no less
while, nor no seldomer, no not later; But yet with an intimation, that somewhat
more is (and will be) required, in each respect, or in any, by some other
determination, though not by this.

2. Conclusive: This adds strictly the conclusive term to the Initiall.
On the other side, we call that a Conclusive determination, which though it
forbids not, more then the determination Names for Continuance, Frequencie, or
soon beginning. Yet strictly commands no longer, nor no oftener, nor no
sooner, only commands so long without fail, and so often, and so soon, and
forbids a shorter Continuance, a seldomer revolution, and a later beginning.

3. Exclusive.
Also we call that an Exclusive determination, which both affirmatively and
negatively, by way both of command and prohibition, prescribes so peremptorily
the limits on all sides, as that nothing is allowed on any respect otherwise
then is expressed. As that the Continuance must be so long infallibly, and no
longer, as well as no loss while; and the Frequencie so often, and no oftener,
as well as no seldomer; and the Beginning, on that season, or point of Time,
and no sooner, as well as no later, according to the direct words of the
Determination, as to say [Bestow six hours upon study] every month, the first
of the month, from six in the morning, till noone, without variation,
augmentation or diminution.

XXIV. Yet admitting a reservation.
After all, it is to be observed, concerning all these determinations of Time in
any respect. That every one of them may upon the pleasure of the determiner,
(if it be a Superior) either declared concurrently with the determination, or
any Time after, admit of a Reservation, or dispensation, for some particular
thing or occasion, which may interrupt somewhat the determination, in any
respect, according to the manifestation of such pleasure or allowance of his:
And for the residue, the determination may remain firm and obligatory to all
purposes. As a Master may determine his scholar to study a whole week together
every day, from six in the morning, to six at night, and yet admit the
interruption of meal Times, and such like occasions of necessity.

XXV. The profitablenesse of this determination, by the 5. Causes of it.
And now, having thus laid down the maine distinctions that belong to Time
generally considered; We come to make further way, toward our scope, by
considering the special profitablenesse of determinate Time in one or two, or
all the three Respects; and that in a threefold Gradation, suitable to the steps
we have already trodden. 1. The profitablenesse (or even necessity) of having
any determination of Time at all, for any humane business, and namely for
Learning, to keep still to that instance. 2. What kind of determination of any
one of the respects of Time, single, or of any two of them jointly, or of all
three of them together, is profitable (or necessary) for it? 3. What manner of
determination, Remiss, or Exact, Initiall, Conclusive or Exclusive, is
specially profitable (or necessary) toward it, according to the rules of
Natural Reason and experience.

The first of these is discernable by the Causes, that show generally a
profitablenesse, (and even a necessity for some persons at least) of having
some determination of Time for Learning, or any such like business. Which
Causes may be reduced to 5. Heads. And one or other of them is perpetually to
befound in all wise determinations of Time for any business whatsoever; and
commonly diverse of them concur to the profitablenesse, and specially to the
necessity of such determination.

1. The importance (and specially the necessity) of the business; XXVI. 1. The
importance of the business.
learning to be attained by a professed Scholar or student, is the fundamental
ground of a wise and profitable determination of any respect of time for it.
This makes it worthy to have time set apart for it, which else were vain and
foolish.

2. The impossibility of attending that business, XXVII. 2. The impossibility
to attend it and other business.
the pursuit of Learning, Sufficiently, together with other businesses, (also
important and necessary in their nature and degree,) at the same instance of
Time: Each of them taking up the whole Man for the while: This is a further
Recommendation of the convenience and Profitablenesse, of some Determination of
Time, at least for one of those businesses, and namely for that which is most
important, (as we suppose Learning to be a professed Student) that that may be
so far secured thereby, and then in the residue of Time the other business
(or businesses) may also be conveniently attended.

3. The unwillingnesse of mind in such, XXVIII. 3. The unwillingnesse to it.
whom that most important business concerns, to be at all (or sufficiently)
conversant in it; (which unwillingnesse is found often enough in sundry
professed Scholars and Students) Recommends not only as profitable, but as
Necessary (equally with the necessity of that business of learning, to such
spirits,) that there be some determination of time allotted to it: and namely
such, as may conveniently Secure and Promote the attainment of necessary
learning for them.

XXIX. 4. The danger o^ interruptions.
4. The danger of interruptions, preventing the setting about such business (of
learning) or calling of from it, when one is about it: (Even such
interruptions, as are unworthy to hinder or divert, and yet are apt to be
allowed by minds not over desirous of pursuing learning;) adds to the
Profitablenesse (and necessity) of some determination of Time for it; which may
forbid, and so disappoint, the admitting of any such unnecessary preventions
and interruptions of learning, and study.

XXX. 5. Want of Wisdom.
5. The want of Wisdom, to resolve steadily upon the sudden, and Judge
constantly at the instant, what Time or Times are necessary or sufficient to be
employed for the Attainment of Learning, and to leave sufficient for other
businesses; Makes up not the profit only, but also the necessity of having a
convenient determination of Time for Learning. Whereby both the Unwilling may
be put from his frivolous excuses, and vain pretenses, whereby he would cover
his unwillingnesse: As also a Man willing to share his Time prudently between
his variety of Businesses, may not be disquieted (as otherwise he would often
be, whether he studied or studied not) but his mind may now rest satisfied,
that there is a fair allotment of Time for his chiefest business of Learning;
as also conveinent room left for other businesses of importance, which may be
shared among them either determinately again, or otherwise, as occasions are.
These are the causes that recommend as Profitable, or even call for as
Necessary, some determination to be made for some persons, in matter of
learning, either by themselves, or by some Superior over them.

XXXI. For the kinds of determinations.

The determination of the continuance and frequency is very profitable.


In the next place to speak of the kinds of determination in regard of the
respects of times themselves. It is to be considered,

1. That those respects of Time, which have in them a Materiality, and
Substantiality, toward the business of Learning; when they are but
Voluntarily, and Indeterminately Applied to it (as has been showed of the
Quamdiu or Continuance, and the Quoties or Frequency) as they cannot loose of
their Validity, by being determined (if it be wisely done in regard of degrees)
so may they undoubtedly be Profitably determined: and upon the former
suppositions must be Necessarily (and that whether we take them singly, or
jointly, as we shall see by and by) For such a Determination, wisely ordered,
makes the Profit that may arise from the observation of such proportions of
Time, Certain, which was before (in the most willing) Contingent, because of
the hazard of interruptions, or want of wisdom: and in the Unwilling, was not
to be hoped, would be had at all, because it is certain without some
determination, they would not observe any such Times at all.

2. But now for the Quando, the Season (or Order) of beginning: XXXII. Not of
the Quando, but by accident.
As we have showed that there is no Validity or Efficacy in it (except by
Accident) toward a man's benefiting himself in learning, (or any like
business) so it is observable, that a determination of it, is no further
Profitable (or much less Necessary) or capable of any exercise of Wisdom about
the degrees of it, then so far as it may appear that any Accidental respect,
does or will make it serviceable, and beneficial: As having (or being likely
to have) 1. More freedom and better temper of Spirits at that season then at
another: Or 2. Better help and less interruption: Or 3. Better security of
observing the other respects of continuance and frequency, being before
Profitably determined. Unto which last purpose, although it seem necessary,
that there be some determination of the Quando or Season, as to the observing
of an hour certainly every morning for study, it seems in a sort necessary to
determine the particular hour, least it else be slipped: Yet in exact
consideration, this needs not absolutely be done beforehand, by another, or
ones self: For even the nature of the former determination does it thus far
sufficiently, that even it determines the last hour, if a former were not
observed. And so still the determination of this or that particular Quando, or
season (or order) of beginning is of it self of no substantial profit toward
Learning, or any such like business.

3. Whence it follows clearly, XXXIII. Therefore an alteration of it, is not
hurtful.
That whereas a determination of the Continuance and Frequencie of Time for
Learning, cannot be altered in any remarkable degree, without an answerable
alteration in the profit of it, (whether more or less according as the
determination now is;) and so being once wisely made, remains constantly so
far forth profitable for Learning: It is quite otherwise with the season or
order of Time. For of the determination of that, there may be a remarkable
alteration, (as from the last hour to the first, or from the second day to the
sixth, or the like;) and yet no alteration at all in the profit of it: There
being still as much advantage, ( substantially in the Continuance and
Frequencie unaltered, and accidentally in the new season determined) for the
getting of Learning as there was before. And so, if any new accident recommend
a new season, in the least degree, it may without any prejudice at all to the
maine business be removed to that; while yet the determination of the
Continuance and Frequencie is suffered to remain, because of the constant
profitablenesse of it.

XXXIV. The profitablenesse of the determination of the Continuance as largly
as may be.
4. In a business, which requires intention of mind in the pursuit of it (as
it is most unquestionably in matter of Learning) a determination of the
Continuance in some sort largely, is certainly profitable; and moreover it is
even necessary, that it be determined in so large a proportion as may
conveniently satisfy the intendment of the occasion: (if it were but even
once, and so one single Continuance determined without any joint Frequencie or
revolution) even as much as any one single Continuance can. Neither can any
such Continuance be too largely determined, unless a man's natural Spirits
will not hold out to the whole length of the Continuance, or that some other
business of present necessity should call for a share, during that
Continuance: (Both which cases may yet perhaps be satisfied by a Reservation
made for them, and so the determination of the Continuance may hold on
notwithstanding.) But except those cases, we say again, that the determination
of a large Continuance is most mainly profitable (and necessary) even the
largest that can be; by reason. 1. That the mind is not always in temper
readily to apprehend the Notions of Learning, even when a man sets himself to
it; coming newly from other business which has filled his head and heart
with conceptions different enough from that which he now setles to: And so if
he have not a convenient. Continuance determined, he may get little or nothing
at all at that Time, being taken off again before his mind fixes strongly and
thoroughly upon the matter. 2. For that also diverse pieces of the business of
Learning are difficult enough: So as if a man have not a conveniently large
Continuance, to digest the Notions thoroughly, he may soon loose and forget,
even those which he seemed to have gotten; and even though his returns to his
study should be very frequent. Short snatches and sudden fits, how often soever
reiterated do (in experience) make a student but a slow proficient. Neither
indeed do we usually count a man a good student, that does not allot, (or at
least voluntarily employ,) a considerable Continuance of Time to it, how often
soever he takes up a book in his hand to study, or makes frequent returns to
it, as well as frequent interruptions from it.

The same profitablenesse (and even necessity) of a very large Continuance
determined is evident, where a business calls for variety of actions toward
the advancement of it: As for a students progress in Learning to attend upon
another to read to him and instruct him, Also 2. to attend, and bear part in
disputes and conferences, and other exercises of Learning, private and public
(according to opportunities,) And 3. specially to study alone, read and
meditate and write by himself: All these require the largest Continuance that
may be, to secure and promote the general business of Learning, by affording
a convenient space, not only for the prosecuting of each of these, but also for
the drawing out of every one of them so competently as to make the mind a
gainer in Learning by them all, severally and jointly.

5. Furthermore, as where the business is permanently of importance, XXXV. The
profitablenesse of the determination of the Frequencie as largely as may be.
and not wholly dispatched by one attendance upon it, how long so ever the
Continuance be extended; (As it is with the business of Learning to the
professed Scholar, which is still of as much importance and necessity as ever;)
There it is profitable (and even necessary) that there be some determination of
the Frequencie of Revolution, such namely as may conveniently secure and
promote the business of Learning; as was in part touched before: So we are to
observe more particularly; That, where the business is also liable to decay,
and to be put backward (as well as capable of advancement) Which cannot be
denied in matter of Learning, a man may loose as well as gain, decrease as
increase in it: There it is profitable (and necessary) to have a determination
of very great Frequency of returns to it, even as Frequent as can be imagined
compatible with other necessary businesses; [As to say with the Painter nulla
dies sine linea,] a Frequencie of every day, or twice every day: Even though it
be but a single determination of it alone.
even although by reason of other necessary businesses, which must also have
their Times and Turns as often, it be convenient not to make any determination
of the Continuance at all, (or at least only Remiss) with these so frequent
returns, but leave that to occasions, which even so will sometimes serve to
afford a man that is any thing willing to follow Learning, fair Continuance to
attend it, when he is once at it, and so make by fits a very remarkable gain,
when interruptions call him not off, for a good while together, as now and then
it will happen. However, the very Frequencie of Returns will greatly help to
prevent much decay in Learning, and keep him in breath toward it, and in it.
Specially if there be (besides this single determination of so great
Frequencie) added a joint determination of a convenient large Continuance, with
a convenient frequent Return: Of which our next Consideration is to speak.

XXXVI. The Profitablenesse of a joint determination of the Continuance and
Frequencie both, with convenient largensse.
6. And upon the former suppositions of the importance of the business of
Learning permanently, and its requiring intention of mind to get and retain
the notions of it, when one is about it, and prevent decays afterward, it
cannot be denied, but such a joint determination of a large Continuance
frequently, is profitable and necessary for it, besides the single
determination of the great Frequencie forementioned: Or else, considering the
Unwillingnesse, and danger of Interruptions, and want of Wisdom forenoted;
There will be not only no considerable advancement in the business of
Learning, but infallible decays also, though perhaps not greatly sensible
soon, yet after a while discernable to every eye that looks after it. Withal
it is to be noted, that such a joint determination of a large Continuance, with
frequencie of Return, cannot but be [The chief determination of Time] for the
prosecution of that business of Learning, XXXVII. Such a determination is the
chief and most substantially profitable of all other.
that is, the most substantially-profitable determination of all other,
supposing the degrees of both be rightly ordered, in reference to men's natural
abilities to hold out so long at once, and other necessary businesses to admit
of so frequent a continuance to be determined for that. We say, such a
determination is the most substantially-profitable of all other, as having in a
just and convenient proportion the strength of both the profitable respects of
Time, the Continuance and Frequencie joined. And so the Time accordingly
determined by it, may fitly be termed, [The necessary and ordinarily sufficient
chief Time determinate for Learning.] As without which no other Time is
sufficient, nor any other extraordinary Time, so necessary for the general
business of Learning; and the necessary ordinary Time every day, being not so
chief a Time for gain in Learning, as wanting a determination of the
Continuance with all. This then, being wisely determined, must needs be the
chief Time, and is both necessary, and for the chief Time, ordinarily
sufficient. Therefore it is very considerable, by what Rules of Wisdom it may
be made. Of which, besides what we have implied already, of the holding out of
natural abilities so long, and other businesses not refusing so frequent a
Continuance, to be determined for this one business of Learning; We have a
particular Consideration to add, On which side the weight should be put in
this joint determination, whether on the side of the Continuance to determine
the largest Continuance that may be, with a convenient Frequencie, or a very
great Frequencie with a less or shorter Continuance? Of which we thus propound
our apprehensions.

7. Where the business requires various actions toward the advancement of it,
XXXVIII. In the joint determination of the Continuance, and Frequencie. The
largest Continuance, with a conveniencie, is more profitable then the greatest
Frequencie, with a less Continuance supposing the proportion in general to be
equal in both.
and each of them requires intention of mind to a right performance of it, as
it is evidently with the business of Learning, as has been noted; And that
withal there are diverse other businesses of importance, which must have also
frequently their just spaces allotted to them: There, of the two, it is more
profitable in both considerations, (of promoting Learning, and serving others
occasions and businesses) to have the determination weigh most upon the side of
the Continuance, and make that as large as may be, with some competent
Frequencie, rather then to make the Return more frequent, with a remarkably
shorter Continuance. This, we conceive, may easily be made good, if we suppose
any proportion of Time, in the whole equal, to be divided first between a
large Continuance, and less Frequencie; 2 between a shorter Continuance, and
greater Frequencie. As for instance: A whole Day, of ten or twelve hours, or
more, as a man's natural spirits are able to hold, (even with the reservation
of a dining time, if he will) will be more profitable for the advancement of
Learning, though but with a determination of a scanty Revolution, once in a
Week, (remembering withal the former supposition of a single determination of
some Time every Day, or even twice a Day) then to share those ten or twelve
hours between five, or six, or seven Days in a Week, and so make each Day to
have but between an hour and two hours continuance at the most: For the
former shall have full scope for all variety of actions forenamed toward
Learning, and for his mind to settle it self fully to improve each of them:
The other can only meddle with one or two at the most, to do any good of it,
and oftentimes shall find the greatest part of his Continuance spent, before he
can thoroughly bring his mind to fix upon it to any purpose. And if we suppose a
less Continuance, still the thing will be more clear. Also on the other hand,
considering other businesses, it will be far the more profitable determination,
to take the chief Time for Study and Learning, at one large Continuance less
frequent, then with more frequent revolutions and returns of less
Continuance: For the frequent returns, though with the continuance of no more
then an hour at once, (or even less) would prove very often greatly
prejudicial to those other important businesses; and so hazard either the
disappointing of them, or the trenching upon the determined hours for
Learning: whereas the larger Continuance, and less frequent returns, would
have been more out of danger both ways, and prevented the inconvenience of
either incroaching upon the other.

XXXIX. The same Quando profitably determined to many.
8. Where the business equally concerns diverse, who live in a neernesse one to
another, and so may, (and accordingly should) help one another; and
contrariwise may possibly interrupt and hinder one another: As it is with
Scholars in a School, or Students in an Universitie: There, as the common
concernment of the business equally recommends as profitable (and necessary)
the same joint determination (upon the former suppositions of consistencie with
Natural spirits, and other necessary occasions) from that known Axiom, [A
quatenus ad omne valet consequentia:] And the cause being the same to all,
brings forth the same effect for all. So is it Profitable and even Necessary
(from those accidental occasions) to have not only some Quando, Season (or
Order) of Beginning, determined with the Continuance and Frequencie, and so
make a complete determination of all the three Respects of Time together: But
also to have the self same; as the same Day in a Week or Month, the same
Hour of the Day, and the like, for Beginning, and so to run along together
till the end of the Continuance; at least so far forth as may secure the
possibility of helping one another in Learning, and prevent the hindering one
of another; In that all, from the first to the last, are to be so busied about
Learning, as none is allowed to interrupt another, or admit of an interruption
from another wholly out of the way of Learning. Thus far, we say, a
determination of the Quando, the Season, or Order of Beginning, may also be
profitably determined, with the other respects of Continuance and Frequencie:
and when it is so, then is it a most complete determination, which is so made
of all three, for the kind of it: Though still for the degree (or
particularity) of the Quando, Season, or Order, there is no special
profitablenesse in this, or that; but another might, and would have done as
well. XL. For the manner, 1. An exclusive determination is not profitable.


In the third and last place, we must also say somewhat, what manner of
determination may be conceived profitable, of any of the forementioned kinds.
We say then,

1. Where the business is of so chief importance, all a man's life time, as
that the more it prospers, the better it is with a man, (as it is in point of
Learning, with a professed Scholar) There, an exclusive determination cannot be
profitable, (much less necessary) relating to the generality, or whole, of the
business of Learning, (how large soever the proportions be made either for
Continuance or Frequencie) as that a man may never look after Learning, longer
at once, nor oftener, nor sooner, then the determinations express. Though for
some particular cases, by accident, (as to a sickly man, or in the foresight of
some other business of special weight) it may possible be fit, and even
necessary. XLI. 2. An Initiall is,


2. Where there is wisdom to make a determination, and not to trench upon
other necessary business; There it is (so far) very profitable to make at
least an initiall determination, clearly of so much Continuance, and no less
while together; and so often Returns, and no seldomer, (and even of so soon,
and no later Beginning.) And upon the former suppositions of Unwillingnesse,
and danger of Interruptions, and want of present Wisdom at all instants, it
is even necessary to make at least such an initiall determination. For so (and
so only) shall the unwilling be necessitated, and certain, to afford to the
pursuit of Learning such a proportion of Time; and the willing shall be at
liberty for it, and secured from others offering, or at least from their own
admitting any unnecessary interruptions.

3. Where there wants either 1. Wisdom, XLII. 3. Not a Conclusive to some.
to discern certainly how much Time is ordinarily necessary and sufficient to
be employed in pursuing the business of Learning; Or 2. Willingness to
employ. Time in it; Or 3. Sufficient Authority, to awe unwilling Inferiors,
whom the determination must concern: There a conclusive determination of the
chief time for Learning, in all probability cannot be profitably made by such
persons. For either through want of Wisdom, they will miss the just degrees
and proportions for Continuance, or Frequencie, or both, and they may err on
either hand: Or through Unwillingness, they will be sure to determine the
proportions too scantly, too short, or too seldom, or both: Or lastly, their
determination, how wisely soever made, will be to little or no purpose; For the
want of Authority will make it be despised infallibly, by the unwilling; And a
determination not observed, (specially not likely to be observed, beforehand)
is all one in effect with no determination at all. As appears often in
Scholars, when their Masters or Tutours are absent, and leave them to such as
they stand not in awe of. XLIII. 4. Though to others.


4. Contrariwise therefore, a conclusive determination of the chief Time for
Learning, made by such as have sufficiency of Wisdom, and 2. Affection to
have it promoted, and 3. Authority to awe inferiors to observe it, is certainly
a profitable, even a most singularly profitable determination. In that hereby
all, of all sorts and dispositions, whom such a determination concerns, shall
have their own want of Wisdom supplied, and a necessary and sufficient tie
laid upon the unwilling; and affording the willing a welcome and pleasing
liberty and security to the utmost of ordinary convenience. XLIV. 5. A remiss
determination is profitable to try affections.


5. Where one is willing to try others affections, to the business of
Learning, (specially Inferiors) There a remiss determination may be so far
profitable to be made, in any of the respects of Time, or in all, (As, Continue
a good while at your study, when you are at it; Or, Study often; Or, begin
betimes in a morning, for fear of wanting Time, or being interrupted) yet
particularizing nothing in any respect. Thus much (generally recommending the
business) may be a pregnant trial of their willingness or unwillingnesse:
For the willing will readily improve this, to a remarkable advantage: And the
unwilling will shift and make excuses, as if still uncertain what they were
determined unto: and so discover their want of affection, as the other their
good affection to it. But otherwise, this manner of determination is in no wise
sufficient, for the whole, or even for the chief Time for Learning, toward
either 1. the unwilling, or 2. those that are in danger of Interruptions, or 3.
those that want Wisdom, (as was forenoted) to share that Time equally between
the varieties of business, and so to secure sufficiently their maine business
of Learning.

6. XLV. A particular determination may be taken away.
A determination for a particular action within the compass of the bussnesse
of Learning, I may possibly for a while be profitable for that; and afterward
be so no more: and so though it might have been of some use still in some
respect, yet withal it may now become a burden convenient to be taken away.
Notwithstanding which, a conclusive determination for the chief Time for
Learning, may (upon the grounds forenoted) remain perpetually and undeniably, a
substantially-profitable determination: and for this cause may be perpetuated,
when others are discharged of lesser consequence, and whose primary immediate
end now no longer recommends them so profitable as they were before.

7. Finally, XLVI. A reservation is profitable when interruptions are foreseen.
(to end these Considerations about the manner of Determinations, and withal
the whole about Time generally:) Where there is evidently to be foreseen some
necessary Interruptions, that will certainly, (or may in likelihood) call off
from the strict observation of the Time determined in any respect: There it is
profitable, ( and even necessary) to make it with sufficient reservations,
general or particular, for all such necessary Interruptions, (as refreshing
the natural spirits by eating or drinking, or the like; or dispatching any
pressing sudden business) and after those occasions satisfied, that the
strength of the Determination shall return, and stand in its proper force and
validity, for the residue of the Time determined. Which will prevent its being
really burdensome, and all pretenses that it is so, when there is no cause to
complain.

And now how far all these Considerations of Time in Nature are appliable to
Religion, and the solemn Worship of God, XLVII. The conclusion.
though we cannot doubt but judicious eyes do much discern already; Yet for
the satisfaction of all Readers, we must distinctly and particularly set down
in the ensuing Chapters; And hope to do it so clearly, as to give satisfaction
to the most, if not to all; which in matters of Controversy, indeed, seldom
happens to the most rational Discourse.

CHAP. VIII.
Considerations of Time in Relation to Religion, and the Worship of God: how
far it may be Profitable thereunto.

We come now to apply particularly unto the Worship of God, what we have
before laid down in General, concerning Time, in relation to Moral Actions.
And this we do by these steps following.

I. Time employed in Religion, is either Common or solemn.
1. Time in reference to Religion and the Worship of God, is considerable two
ways.

1. As an attendant upon Duties of Worship, which some call Common Time. 2. As
requiring Duties of Worship to attend it, which is called Solemn Time.
Common Time is that which attends actions.
This distinction, is in part the same with that formerly laid down of
indeterminate, and determinate Time. For all indeterminate Time is Common Time,
and merely an attendant upon Duties of Worship. And all Solewne Time, which
requires Duties of Worship to attend it, is determinate Time, namely
antecedently determined by God, (in Nature, or in His Word) or by some
Superior among men, or by a man's own resolution or vow.

But now in Religion, some kind of determinate Time, comes more properly under
the notion of Common Time, then of Solemn Time. And so neither are
indeterminate and common Time, terms altogether reciprocal, and convertible;
Nor yet determinate and solemn Time. For some determinate Time, such namely as
is in any respect determined by the nature of any Duty of Religion, viz. of
the Worship of God, is as merely an attendant upon the Duty, as any
indeterminate Time, being according to the description of indeterminate Time, a
mere circumstance; and necessary to the Duty, not in any Theological
Consideration, but merely Physical and Natural, it being simply impossible in
nature to perform those Duties without such concomitance and attendance of
Time. As the Continuance of Time for the reading of a Chapter, or of such a
Liturgy, or the like, is plainly determined by the Nature of the Action, and
Physically necessary to the Action, and so no more but common Time. So that by
common Time, we understand both all indeterminate Time, voluntarily and
uncertainly applied to Duties of Religion, as also whatsoever Time the nature
of any Duty of Religion does of it self determine in any respect. And by
solemn Time, we understand, only such determinate Time, as is either by God,
or Man, (a Superior, or ones self) Antecedently determined, either for any
one Duty of Religion or Worship in special, or generally for any Duties of
Religion whatsoever.

2. This being thus laid down, it follows; II. This falls not properly under
a Law.
That Time in the first Consideration, of indeterminate and common Time, cannot
properly be said to fall under the Law of God, or that any Commandment of His
should at all meddle with it. As well because, 1. It is no less then ridiculous
to make a Law, or even give a single command about that which whether we will
or no, will be sure to accompany our actions. The Law in this, takes order only
for the action, this or that Duty to be performed; and that carries Time (such
indeterminate and common Time,) along with it, infallibly and unavoidably. As
also. 2. for that the Command of God (or even of Man) being the efficient cause
of the determination of solemn Time, it is a formal contradiction to say,
[That any Precept or Law Commands any Time, altogether indeterminate.] For as
soon as it medles with it, it makes it determinate, (and solemn) it
determines it, in one respect or other, at least remissely and within a
latitude: As when we bid a man, take Time to Pray, or read in the Scriptures,
or meditate of the Sermon he has heard, or learn a Catechism; or any such
like thing, though without any seeming determination of the Time in any
respect: It is yet certainly in true construction of the phrase, an implicit
determination of some Time, at least of the Continuance and beginning both,
within some latitude: or else such command of taking Time is altogether
frivolous and idle. In that (as has been said) it abundantly suffices to
command the Duty; and then Time (such indeterminate and common Time) will be
sure to attend it. And this will appear, if the question be but put, why one
did bid, take Time. The answer must be, Either because the thing will require
some remarkable Continuance: Or that a man is not forward to begin to set about
it, or the like; To remedy which, such command is given, bidding a man
determine some Time to himself for such an action. And specially their whole
aim in their discourses, is to have the Continuance to be wholly left to the
Churches determination, as a mere appendix to the Public Worship.

III. Yet this seems all our Adversaries grant Moral in the fourth
Commandment.
3. All this notwithstanding, it may perhaps be questioned by him that shall
advisedly read our adversaries books, Whether they setledly grant any more then
such indeterminate (or common) Time, to be the Morality of the fourth
Commandment? Namely, That, it being Morall-Naturall (as they speak) to have a
Public Worship. It is also, consequently, to have a Time for it. But they
admit not, that the Law of Nature (or the fourth Commandment Morally) does
command any determinate Time in any respect: any determinate Continuance, or
determinate revolution, or determinate beginning of Time; but leaves all (they
say) to the Church to determine what it pleases. Now this, so far as we can
understand, is to command nothing of Time at all; having before proved, that
such Time, (indeterminate and common) falls not at all under a Law properly.

IV. Though they call it solemn Time.
We confess they also talk often, of a solemn Time for Worship, of a set,
regulated, stinted, sufficient Time: And much further too they seem to go now
and then, as we shall see hereafter. But then again it other Times, they seem
quite to fall off from all, while they speak only of a necessary sequel of a
Morality, and make Place altogether equal in Religion with Time; and Time to
be a mere adjunct and circumstance, A Time is due to Gods Worship, as to all
other things. C. D. page 22.
wholly left to the Church, and to be no otherwise due to the Worship of God,
then to all other Things. And what can this be more then indeterminate and
common Time merely? Which belongs no more to the fourth Commandment, (or even
to the first Table,) then it does to the fifth Commandment, or the whole
second Table, for the affirmative part of it. For God (to instance only in the
fifth Commandment) enjoining to Honor Father and Mother, and one part of
Honoring them, being to give attendance upon them, and to do that which they
set us about, (which cannot be done but in Time, as all know) this, of
necessity, carries Time along with it, viz. Indeterminate and common Time,
(which is only a necessary (that is a natural) sequel of a Morality, as they
speak of their Time in Religion,) and to be determined only by their command;
and so for all other Superiors. Such Time then is the Morality of the fifth
Commandment, as much as of the fourth: But indeed of neither; being only a
Physically necessary attendant of every Duty to God or Man. And the obeying of
Superiors, determining any such Time for such Duty, comes under that
Commandment, which requires obedience unto Superiors; which is the fifth
Commandment: Though the Duty it self to be performed, belong to the first
Table, as being a Worship of God. But of this more hereafter, only we hold it
necessary, here to give a touch to this, which is perhaps one of the
fundamental mistakes in this question. Into which error (besides their
misdevotion to the Quamdiu, specially of the fourth Commandment for a whole
day to be sanctified,) the great schooleman seems, to have led them the way,
who thus resolves. [ It is Moral, says he, that man should depute some Time
of his life for the service of God: Aquin: 2.2. q. 122. a. 4. ad 4.
for there is in man, a kind of natural inclination, that to every thing
necessary there be a Time appointed: as to our bodily refection, sleep, and
the like.] But this is both improperly, and impertinently spoken, (under
favor:) Improperly, to say, It is Moral to depute or appoint a Time for every
action; which whether it be deputed or not, by an absolute necessity of Nature,
must and will attend upon every action, as an inseparable adjunct thereof.
Impertinently, to make that the Morality of the fourth Commandment, which may
be as well said (in his sense) to be the Morality of the fifth, or any else of
the ten in the affirmative part (as we showed before;) and as well, of deputing
some place for the service of God; which he that should say were the Morality
of the fourth Commandment, should speak both impertinently and falsely. For
Place, so considered, belongs not (no more then Time) to any one particular
Commandment of the Decalogue, fourth, or fifth, or any; to none properly, in a
Moral sense (as we here take it,) but to all, one as well as another, in a
Physical sense, necessarily, that is, unavoidably, whether it be appointed, or
not.

4. Before we pass from Time indeterminate, V. Great efficacy in Time
indeterminate applied to Religion.
we must by no means forget, the efficacy that there is in the quantity or
proportion even of such Time, as it may be voluntarily applied, by a man's
affections toward Religion, and the businesses thereof, which is Gods Glory,
and the Souls Good together: (which conjunction of those two Gods glory, and
the souls good, it is necessary often to remember throughout this whole
Controversy; the rather because our Adversaries seem much to forget it in
their books, making very little and seldom mention of the Souls good in all
this Question) Now we say, both these businesses together, may be, and are
exceedingly forwarded or kept back, according to a man's voluntary lengthning
out, or shortning the Continuance of his attendance upon God; where it is left
free, and his spirits are able to hold out, and so by the frequent Reiteration
or seldomenes, where there is no just impediment. He who so gives God longest
and oftenest Time, unquestionably honors Him most in his heart, and increases
in it: And he less, that bestows a scantier and seldomer Time upon Gods
worship, of his own accord merely.

And this is yet more evident with Relation to the souls good; which
consisting: 1. In knowledge of matters of Religion: 2. In Memory of them: 3. In
Affection for God, and against sin: 4. In Comfort: (And all these Tending to,
and Ending in Eternal Salvation) All this is most remarkably and Infallibly
Advanced, or kept back by the Continuance of Time, longer or shorter, and the
Reiterations, oftener or seldomer (even Indeterminately and merely voluntarily)
of attendance upon Religion, and the Duties of Gods Worship. And accordingly a
man's love and affections to God, his Religion and Worship, and his own souls
good; may be, and are exceedingly tried and demonstrated to his own conscience
(or to any other that knows it) by the enlargement or straightning of his Time
Voluntarily, and the Repetition of his attendances on Religious performances,
usually or rarely. He that bestows much and often Time upon such Duties, even
Voluntarily, and not being Determined to them before hand, does Infallibly love
the Duties: and he loves them not, that having no just hindrance, does not
bestow much and often Time upon them, even of his own voluntary accord, without
any Antecedent necessary Determination. Also, (supposing an Equality of
Ability, and Blessing:) a man may judge who bestows most and oftnest Time upon
Religion, by the increase in knowledge and Piety: And who is wisest for his
soul, and will make best progress in Piety by observing the Continuance and
Frequency of Time Voluntarily bestowed upon God and his Worship. So that these
two respects of Time, the Quamdiu or Continuance, and the Quoties or
Frequencie, are in themselves, and in their nature, even Indeterminately and
Voluntarily applied, very Material (and, as we may say, Substantial)
circumstances to Religion, as we said before for learning and such like Civil
businesses (And much more then, if wisely and strongly Determined, as we shall
see afterward)

But so is not the Quando, or season of beginning, VI. Not of the Quando
unless by accident.
indeterminately and voluntarily: For so it is of no efficay nor value toward
Religion in its nature: Although by accident it may sometimes prove
considerable, as 1. by hastening, or delaying when a man's bodily spirits are in
Temper, or Distemper: Or 2. He may have more or less help toward any duty of
worship: Or 3. The Continuance or Frequent Reiteration of any Duty (or Duties)
may be thereby furthered or hindered: Or 4. That he shall gain or lose
altogether an opportunity of performing some particular Duty of Solemn worship
to God. Such like accidents, may commend or discommend possibly, the have or
delay, of beginning to Worship God at any Season voluntarily; but else in it
self, the Quando, or Season of beginning, indeterminately, is of no importance
to the glory of God, or the good of Souls. Neither yet is it any proof of a
man's affection or disaffection to Religion, or any Duty of Gods Worship. For a
man may begin it at this or that Season, either out of willingness to take in
hand the Duty, or out of willingness to be soon rid of the Duty: And he may
defer it out of fear of interruption, and that he may be freer and fitter for
it after a while: Or out of unwillingnesse to perform the Duty at all. Of
which our unhappy Experience affords every man too many instances, even in his
own heart. So that this difference (formerly noted in Civil actions) between
the Quando, the Season of beginning, and the other two respects, the Quamdin or
Continuance, and the Quoties or Frequency, is also clear in Religion, That
these (even Indeterminate) are of maine importance and very material
Circumstances in their Application: and the other is of no Validity in it
self, toward Religion and Gods Worship; which Notion we shall anon make just
use of more then once, in convenient place.

And now we come to our second Consideration of Time in Relation to Religion,
and the Worship of God, VII. Solemn Time.
which we call Solemn Time. The nature of which we describe to be [That it
requires Duties of Worship to attend it] that is, That whosoever be the
Determiner of any of the respects of Time, (...) does by his determination,
oblige and necessitate (as far as his Authority reaches) to Duties of Religion
and Solemn Worship, according to the respects of time determined, As namely --
1. For continuance.
1. The Quamdiu or Continuance being Determined, and made Solemn (as for
instance an Hour together) it requires, or the Determiner by it, and for it
requires, Duties of Worship, and of Religion, to fill it up, viz. wholly: And
so either -- 1. Some One duty to be extended to it, to all the Time, as to pray
or read the whole hour long, Or -- 2. Diverse Duties to be multiplied for it, as
Praying, Reading, Singing, or the like, which together may be drawn out to the
whole length, of the Continuance (the hour) determined.
2. For Frequencie.
2. So the Quoties or Frequency, being Determined and made Solemn (as for
instance, three times a day) it requires, or the Determiner thereby requires, a
Reiteration of Duties of Religion and Solemn Worship, either -- 1. The same
that were formerly practiced, as Prayer, or Reading: Or -- 2. Others of like
Religious Nature, Hearing or Teaching others, or singing to God as often as the
Determined Revolution comes about.
3. For the Quando or Season.
3. Also the Quando, or Season of beginning, being Determined and made Solemn,
(as for instance; Such a day of the week, the first day, or the last, or such
an hour) it requires, or the Determiner accordingly requires, at that Season, a
present performance of some duty of Religion, either -- 1. Any one, if there
were no express mention of this or that particular Duty, together with the
Determination of the Season: Or -- 2. That particular Duty which was then
mentioned if any were so, as: At such an hour, pray: On the 14. day of the
first Month, keep the Passover.



VIII. It is more or less Solemn, as more or less strictly determined.
This we say, is clearly the nature of all Solemn Time, that is, of all Time
Determinate, if Antecedently determined either by God or man: And all such
Determinate Time, is properly Solemn, and more then Common Time. Even though
the Determination be but Remiss, and but in any one Respect: But according as
the Determination is more or less complete, either in regard of the respects
combined, or of the Exactness of the Determination; So the time may be counted
more or less Solemn. And so a Determination of any two of the respects of
Time jointly, makes it more Solemn then of any one alone; and a Determination
of all three together, more Solemn then of any two: Also a strict and
punctual Determination makes it more Solemn (in any of the respects, or in
all) then a Remiss Determination does. And a Conclusive Determination, yet
more Solemn then an Initiall Determination. And lastly an Exclusive
Determination (as much as it may be found or admitted upon any consideration
general or particular, of which we shall see somewhat anon) makes it most
Solemn of all.

But still it must be remembered in each respect, IX. It requires Religious
duties to attend it.
That as (according to our former discourse) Time Indeterminate, and Common
Time, attends naturally upon duties of Religion, in as much as it is not
possible in nature to perform them at all without such attendance of Time: So
Duties, at least Indeterminate, attend Religiously upon Solemn Time: in as
much as it is not possible, in Religion, to observe it aright, without such
attendance of some Duties or other. And Duties of Worship are as Necessary
Theologically to the observation of Solemn Religious Time; as Indeterminate or
Common Time is Physically Necessary, to the performance of any Duty: So that
unless the Determination of that Solemn Time be in it self sinful (as in
some considerations it may be in men's Determinations, as we shall see) It would
be sin, not to present or proportion Duties, according to the Determination
made; namely, 1. During the whole Continuance: 2. Upon every Revolution: 3. At
the particular Season of the Time Determined.

Only it must not be forgotten, That, X. Yet admits of a Reservation.
If any Authenticke Reservation, or Dispensation, were made together with the
Determination of such solemn Time in any respect; Or be sufficiently delivered
afterward by the Authority that makes that Determination; namely and specially
by God (whose Authority is most sacred, and undeniably absolutely supreme in
every thing) or even by any Superior: Such Reservation or Dispensation, for
any particular case to interrupt the Determination and solemnity in any
respect, may be, and ought to be allowed, without imputation of sin, or check
of Conscience; and yet for the residue, the Determination to stand strong and
firm. Of which we shall see some considerable Instances hereafter. And the
like is to be yielded, where a man's own Vow has determined any Time to
himself: If the Reservation were made together with the Determination. But
afterward he has no power to put in a reservation at his own pleasure upon the
change of his mind: Only he may make use of any such, as Gods command in some
other consideration may necessitate him occasionally to give way unto. As for
instance: A man may by Vow determine to himself such a Day wholly to be spent
in Humiliation, Prayer, and Fasting. From this now no mere change of his own
mind afterward, nor ordinary occasion of wordly business can dispense with him
for any part of the whole Day: Unless with such Vow he did reserve a liberty
to admit such or such Interruptions. But the Providence of God may interrupt
him; and he then without any present sin, may give way to some necessary
occasions, which admit not of a delay, whether concerning others or himself.
Such namely as God not only allows, but even commands to interrupt any Time by
Himself determined: as, Quenching of a Fire, Resisting of an Enemy, Affording
necessary help to a sick person, a traveling woman, or the like. And if there
were any sin, it was in making the Vow too strictly without such Reservation.
But where God has not appointed a Reservation, in Times by Him determined,
there a man's own Vow making a Determination of Time to himself, will tie him
fast, so far as he made no Reservation together with the Determination it
self; even though it should prove some kind of outward inconvenience or
prejudice to himself to observe it so strictly. For as an Oath to man, because
God is called for a witness in it, will bind him fast that makes it, though it
be to his own hindrance outwardly in some degree: unless the matter of the
Oath appear (when it should be performed) to be against some Commandment of
God. So a Vow to God much more will bind any man, though he cannot keep it
after, without some inconvenience to himself: unless, we say, it cross any
other Command of God, in regard of some other necessary duty, or the like.

XI. The profitablenesse of such a Determination for Religion.
And now we are to proceed to consider (according to the method of the former
Chapter) what Profitablenesse, or Necessity generally there is or may be in any
Determinations of Time solemnly, for Religion, and Solemn Worship, (and that
both Conjoined and Solitary Worship) with reference also both to the kinds of
Determinations in regard of the Respects of Time themselves, and of the manner
of them likewise; according to Rules of Religious Reason, and Experience, and
the Law of Nature, and Scripture.

Here first, All the causes of a profitable and necessary Determination
forenoted, agree clearly and undeniably to commend a Determination of solemn
Time for Religion, and even call for it as necessary.

1. It is without doubt a most important and necessary business, XII. 1.
Religion and Gods worship is a most important and necessary business, and most
worthy to have Time determined for it.
to tender Worship to God solemnly, and accordingly to promote the Souls good.
It is the most important and most necessary business of oll other: Gods
Worship is the primary and chiefest end of Man's Creation, Being, and coming
into the World, and continuing in it. And the Souls good is the secondary and
next principal end of Man's life and abiding in the World. His worldly
businesses, and even the good of his Body, come but in the third place to be
matters of necessity or importance. If therefore for any thing it is or can be
profitable and necessary to have Time determined, it is for Religion certainly,
and for worshipping of God, in the first place; that He may have glory from us,
and our Souls blessing from Him. And this Profit and Necessity for our Souls,
is now, since the Fall, exceedingly increased; because thereby we fell from all
our happiness in regard of our Souls. And so if any pretense could be
alleged, that it was not necessary for Adam in innocence to have any
determinate Time for Solemn Worship, (to which Question we shall give some
occasional touches as we go along, it not now deserving a long dispute)
However, we (to be sure) who are in a lost condition by Nature, stand in need
of Time to be determined for our Souls to seek again from God (by solemn
waiting upon Him) assured Reconciliation, and recovery of our lost felicity in
Him.

2. By what we have in the Chapter concerning Solemn Worship, XIII. 2. It is
impossible to worship God solemnly, and do any other business the while.
discoursed, It appears sufficiently, that it is impossible to attend it, and
other businesses of the World together at the same Time; Not only because
diverse Worldly businesses, in the nature of them, take up the whole of Time,
(or the whole of a man for the Time) while they are doing; and so leave not
room for so much as Ejaculatory Worship, or any thing toward God, or the Souls
good, for some instants: But also, for that it is the proper nature of Solemn
Worship (even though Solitary) to take up the whole man, and so the whole Time,
whiles that Worship is presenting; and it is so much profanesse, as a man
(unless in cases by God allowed) interrupts for the least moment of Time, his
Solemn Worship, or affords any of that Time to any thing but God and his Soul.
That therefore there may be some fit Time for Solemn Worship, N. B.
and other fit Time for Worldly business, it is clearly profitable to have
some Determination of Time for Religion, and in a degree necessary. It is
Heavenly-mindednesse, and a gilding of our Earthly employments, to intermingle
Ejaculatory Worship with them: But it is Earthly-mindednesse, and adulterating
our Solemn Devotions, if we willingly meddle with any Worldly thing the while,
or lend any part of our bodies to it.

XIV. 3. All men are naturally unwilling to employ any time upon Gods solemn
worship at all.
3. But the unwillingnesse of all men (through their natural corruption, ever
since the Fall) to attend upon God even at all, or to take any just care of
their own Souls, puts it out of all question, not only for Profitablenesse,
but even for Necessity, to have a Determination of Time for Gods worship, and
the Souls good. No Schoole-boy is so unwilling to go to his book, no
Gally-slave so unwilling to tug at his oar, as we are all now naturally
unwilling to wait upon God, or to tender him any solemn service, at any time,
all our lives long. As therefore without some Determination of Time to those
for their businesses, they would never set to them at all: So no more would we.
And thence it follows, that some Determination of Time for Religion, is as
necessary as any part of Religion it self: Not to say now [That it is a part
of Religion to observe some determinate Time] which yet we must say anon, and
shall prove also, as we conceive, demonstratively; though the contrary be
usually asserted even by diverse Divines, who are otherwise Orthodoxe, about
determinate Time. But however, we say, To men unwilling to bestow any Time at
all upon God and their Souls, it is altogether necessary that some Time be
determined for it, or else it is certain they will at no Time apply themselves
to the service and solemn worship of God. Those that in fear of present death,
(and so of Hell) do fall to any service of God, apprehend that Time determined
to them, by the ^^^^nesse of their end; Or determine it to themselves, as
apprehending an undoing eternally if they let it slip. But still that supposes,
that whereas before they were unwilling, they are now become willing to serve
God, and so we say, themselves determine Time to themselves: which otherwise
they never would do, nor yet employ any Time indeterminately upon it. For that
is voluntarily, whereas we now speak of men unwilling.

4. XV. 4. All men are in danger of manifold interruptions hindering solemn
Duties of Religion.
Unto this is further to be added the Consideration of the manifold
interruptions that men are liable unto, hindering the performance of solemn
Duties of Religion, and often offering to call them off from them, even though
they be somewhat willing to perform them; and much more hazarding the
prevention or divertion of such performances, if they be unwilling; unless
both the one and the other be necessitated by a determination, to such a
Continuance of Time, and such a Frequencie of reiteration, and (even for the
sake of those, or such like accidental Considerations) to such a particular
season of Beginning, such a day in the week or month, or hour in the day.
Hence diverse, who have been careful of their attendances upon God daily, have
been forced to determine to themselves, certain proportions of Time, both of
Continuance and Frequencie, even by vows (though with some reservations for
extraordinary occasions,) and even for the Quando also, or particular season,
or hour, within some latitude; and have found great profit in it, as being the
only sufficient remedy of interruptions, which they have been wont to be very
much troubled withal. Therefore much more is it profitable and necessary, to
have (generally) some kind of determination settled, to deliver, from the
mischief of interruptions, all and every sort of men.

5. Finally the want of wisdom, to share constantly, XVI. 5. All men want
wisdom to judge always at the instant, when Time is convenient for Religion
and Gods Worship.
without Antecedent deliberation, and so some Antecedent determination (by
themselves or others) just proportions of Time, between God and the World,
Religion and Earthly businesses, the soul and the body; makes up completely the
profit and necessity of some determination for Religion, Gods solemn Worship,
and souls good. The most willing to serve God and bestow Time for their souls
good, yet are not wise enough to judge always on the sudden, that such a
Continuance is enough, or not enough, or such a reiteration sufficient, or too
often; or such a season convenient, or inconvenient. And much less then such
as are unwilling. And least of all, when any seeming important interruption
offers to divert, or put an end to any service of God, one is about, or going
about. Therefore still a determination, is both Profitable and Necessary to
divide somewhat steadily between these contrary businesses of God and the
World. So that to conclude this General Consideration. 1. The Importance of
Gods Solemn Worship. 2. The Impossibility of attending it, and other
businesses together, which yet are important also in their degree. 3. The
Unwillingness of all men naturally to perform any Worship to God at all. 4. The
Manifold interruptions from other men and other businesses endangering to
hinder from worshipping of God solemnly. 5. And lastly, The want of wisdom, to
devide on the sudden, betwixt so various businesses: All these together
proclaim some determination of Time for Religion, as most Profitable and
Necessary.

XVII. For the kinds of determinations.
The next maine Consideration, is of the kinds of determination, in regard of
the respects of Time themselves. In which (and in the third Consideration that
concerns the manner of determination,) we will in the residue of this Cha.
discourse only of the Profitablenes of such determinations, and leave the
Necessity of them to the next Chapter. Whereby we shall keep this Chapter from
being over long, as also proceed more distinctly and clearly in the whole
matter.

XVIII. 1. The Continuance and Frequencie of Time, are Profitable respects of
Time to be determined for Religion.
1. Then, from the grounds laid before about Time in General, and as applyable
to Learning, and from the Profitablenesse of the Continuance and Frequencie of
Time, even indeterminately, applied to Religion; (noted in this Chapter) it
appears, that those respects of Continuance and Frequencie are both severally,
and jointly, respects, that in themselves and their own nature may be
substantially Profitable to be determined for Religion; And that in them there
is such a materiality and validity toward the businesses of Religion, the
Honor of God, and the souls good, as that a Man's profiting in Religion does
mainly depend, (other things being alike) upon the convenient largeness of
Continuance, and Frequencie of reiteration of Time to be determined for these
purposes. For if it be large and often, he cannot but honor God, and benefit
his soul much, by a conscionable observation of it. And if it be scanty and
seldom, he does honor God but a little, and can get but a little good to his
soul, if any at all. Specially remembering (which must never be forgotten in
this argument,) that no unwilling person does or can, afford God or his soul
any more Time, then what he conceives himself to be determined unto; by some
vow of his own, or Gods command, or some Superiors, whom he dare not disobey.
So that whatsoever is left indeterminate to such, is to be reckoned as nothing,
as never, any of it, employed for God and the soul. Therefore the
determination of the Continuance and Frequencie of Time for Religion, is so
Profitable, that it cannot be too large or too frequent, if it leave but enough
for bodily necessities, and and other necessary worldly occasions: Religion
also being the chief and most necessary business, as has been said.

2. But now for the Quando, XIX. 2. The season or order of beginning, has of
it self no substantial profitablenesse toward Religion, though accidentally
it may have some.
or Season of Beginning (what day of any number of days, or what hour or part
of any day:) there being no validity or efficacy in it indeterminately and
voluntarily applied to Religion, (as we have also showed) unless merely by
accident: A determination of it, is no further profitable, then as it may
Accidentally serve to secure the other respects of Continuance and Frequencie
before determined: As if some hours, four, or six of a day were determined, It
is profitable that the beginning be determined somewhat early, that so
interruptions may not prevent the observation of so many hours. Also if a whole
day be determined (as for solemn humiliation once a quarter,) It is profitable
to determine some particular day, some while at least before hand, least
interruptions of business, not so well ordered as might have been, upon
foresight of such a day determined, do disturb the orderly and religious
observation of it, even by himself alone. Also so far, as in any other
accidental respect a man can foresee any help on such a day or hour, or the
freedom of his own spirits, or better disposition of body, or the like, it
may be profitable to him to determine such a season of beginning for himself.
Otherwise it is not ordinarily profitable at all, what particular season,
whether it be this day or that, the first, or third, or seventh, or tenth of
that revolution, or this, or that hour, or beginning of such Continuance, that
is before determined. God nor the Soul gain not, nor loose not either way.
XX. The Quando season, or order of Time (that is the particular days) may be
accidentally profitab^y determined, namely to preserve the memorial of some
work of God, on such a day; and accordingly to help to affect with
thankfulness, specially when appointed by God to that purpose.


But we must not forget that in Religion, or toward it (that is toward some
particular Consideration in Religion,) there may be some Accidental profit in
some determination of the Quando or Season of Beginning some solemn Worship,
(like unto which there is nothing for study or any civil business,) which we
touched in the beginning of the foregoing Chapter. Namely, some Memorial of a
special work of God done upon that season, that day. Of which sort God
instituted diverse under the Old Testament undeniably: and we say he did also
one such Day under the New Testament the first Day of the week, (called
therefore the Lords Day) in stead of the Old Seventh Day-Sabbath; which was in
memory of Christ's rest from the work of redemption, as the former of Gods rest
from the work of Creation. And men also both under the Old and New Testament
have instituted some particular days in memorial of Gods works, as upon such
days: as the days of purim in the book of Ester, and the feast of the
dedication, mentioned Joh. 10.22. and instituted in the Time of the Maccabees,
as we read, 1. Mac. 4.59. And, no man doubts but the Christian Church has
instituted diverse such days of memorial: Our Adversaries affirming it, even
of the Lords Day it self, But that we shall dispute with them about in due
season. Now for the profit of these institutions, so far, and so long as God
commanded (or commands yet) any; there is, no doubt, some profit in that: by a
spiritual blessing, even upon that day above another, not commanded by him.
All his Ordinances being ever accompanied with a blessing unto, and upon the
right observers of them; and accordingly at the very first institution of the
Seventh Day Sabbath, God is said to bless it, as well as to sanctify it: Nay
first to bless it, then to sanctify it, (though it was doubtless the same act)
as of purpose to secure the blessing to the observers of its sanctification.
(Genesis 2.3.) And withal it may serve in a degree, to quicken, not the memory
only, but the affections also toward God for such a benefit, as the Worlds
Creation, and so for the other benefits, of which some other days were
appointed memorialls. Gods command, certainly, make these memorials lively and
operative for these purposes, so long as he would have them to be so used.

XXI. How far, and in what case, the Quando or particular day appointed by man
only, for a memorial of any work or benefit of God may be Profitable.
As for days instituted by men for memorials, some little profit there may also
be in determining the particular day in a revolution; as somewhat serving to
quicken and affect the mind with the occasion. But then this must also be where
it is certain and clear that the day determined, is answerable to the day of
the benefit; Or else if that be doubted of, it is like to affect but very
little indeed: And the services also of the Day must be specially and
affectingly applied to the occasion of the memorial; Or else again there will
be very little (if at all any) profit by the determination of such a particular
day.

Likewise it is to be remembered, that upon the particular Days which God
instituted under the Old Testament, XXII. The Quando, or particular days,
appointed by God under the Old Testament, were ordained by Him, partly for a
Typical signification, and so also had an accident^ll profit. But it is not
(...) with any under the New Testament appointed by God, and much less of any
appointed by Men.
He was pleased to put some particular typical signification, relating to
Christ (the body of all those shadows) as the Apostle generally tells us of
them all, Col. 2.16. So that He made them for the time being, (for that
infancy of the Church) yet more profitable in this consideration of being
Documents of some of the Mysteries of Christ. In which use, no Day appointed by
Man of old, ever did or could serve for any Profit. Neither does any Day now,
either of Gods, or much less of Man's appointment: God having put an end to all
Typical uses, by the coming of Christ in the flesh, and His suffering, and
resurrection. But we say, before His coming, even the Quando, or seasons of
Times determined by God, had some profit in them, in those two Considerations;
and the Lords day has still as a memorial appointed by God. But these are
still but accidental Considerations, (as we said before) and not having that
direct and substantial influence into Religion, that the Continuance and
Frequencie of Time determined has; and namely, that the Continuance of a whole
Day, in the frequent revolution of a Week (of seven Days) has: which we say,
was (together in Time) determined (Genesis 2.3.) with that seventh Day in order
for the Quando or particular Day for that World: But before it in Nature, (the
particular Day, that Seventh, being in Nature after one of seven) And
undoubtedly, one Day of seven was determined in the fourth Commandment; And we
say, That, and no more, directly and substantially commanded and determined
there; (and hope to prove it sufficiently in due place and time) as being of
substantial importance to Religion, and the worship of God; which God then
gave out his Commandments to settle the substantials of, N. B. All other
Commandments of the Decalogue are wholly substantial, and so perpetual. The
Fourth then being substantial for one day in seven for Religion, This may
conclude that to be the whole substance of the Commandment, and not that
particular seventh day, which has no substantiality in it; And then that one
day in seven is likewise perpetual.
(as appears by all the other Commandments of the first Table; and by all the
Commandments of the second Table, being substantials of duty to Man.) And that
the 7th- day Sabbath, though then in force, was not at all directly commanded
there, nor as any part of the substance of it: as being not of any
substantiality toward Religion, more then any other day of the seven; Would
then have been, if then commanded by God, as that was before that time; Or then
the Lords day is now, supposing it commanded now, as we do, by God, or even
commanded only by the Church, as they suppose, if it be but certain that the
old Day is no longer in force. In a word, This is that we say, and think we
have clearly proved from the nature of the respects of Time toward Religion,
(as before toward study for Learning, or any other Civil business). That the
Quando, Season, or Order of Beginnings, viz. This or that particular Day, first
or last of seven, or of any other number, has no Materiality or Substantiality
in it toward Religion, to make it be profitably determined, rather then such
another of such a number, but only accidentally: And so in this Consideration
to be greatly inferior to the Quamdiu, or continuance, as also to the Quoties,
or frequencie of revolution, which are so mainly profitable, as we showed
before.

3. Whence it follows clearly (as was also said before in relation to
Learning) That whereas a Determination of the Continuance and Frequencie of
Time for Religion, XXIII. Therefore there may be an alteration of it, without
hurt to Religion.
(whether of either of them singly, or both of them jointly) cannot be altered
in any remarkable degree, without an answerable alteration in the Profit of it
toward Religion; namely the Profit must needs be greater, if it be altered from
a less proportion to a greater, as from half a Day, to a whole Days
continuance, and from the Frequencie of one Day in seven, to one in six or
five: and so the profit will be less, if altered from a greater proportion to
a less, as from a whole days continuance, to 3 or 4 hours only of a day; and
from the frequencie of one day in seven, to one in eight or ten only: and
consequently, a determination of these respects of time, remains in the nature
of it, constantly and perpetually profitable to Religion: It is quite otherwise
with the Season or Order of Time for Religion. For of that there may be a
remarkable alteration, as from the last Day of seven, to the first of seven,
from Evening to Morning, It is ususually taken for granted, that the Sabbath of
old began in the Evening. This we do not affirm, nor yet altogether deny; but
shall consider it hereafter. But now we speak of it by way of supposition, that
it ^^d so begin.
(or the like) and yet no alteration at all, (unless in some Accidental
Considerations forenoted) in the Profit of it. In as much as still God and the
Soul may have the same proportion of Time, both for Continuance and
Frequencie, (singly or jointly) and so as much substantial advantage, and no
more, be toward Religion, in the alteration of the Season or Order of
Beginning, as was before this was altered. We say again, there is no
substantial convenience or inconvenience, profit or disadvantage to Religion;
in the perpetuating or changing the Season or Order of Beginning, from one Day
of the Week to another, or from Evening to Morning: Whereas we say, It makes no
substantial change in the profit, to alter the Beginning from Evening to
Morning; We yet conceive an accidental profit by it, in that by the means of
the beginning in the Morning, we are sure to have the Continuance (if for a
whole Day) not to be ended while we are awake. The profit of which we shall
argue hereafter.
But that if no accidental Consideration recommend a Change, that Season or
Order of Beginning may be perpetuated under the New Testament, which was under
the Old, without prejudice to Religion: And if any Accidental Consideration
do recommend a Change, that Season or Order of Beginning, the Day, or Time for
beginning the Day, may be changed, and that fitly; so it be done by sufficient
authority. Also in that change, It is all one, what Season or Order of
Beginning be placed in the stead of the former: unless there be some
particular accidental consideration that recommends one rather then another,
and then that, for that cause, is fittest to be chosen and determined
accordingly. And these things we affirm of the alteration of the Season or
Order of Beginning under the Old Testament, from the last Day of the Week, to
the first Day of the Week, and from beginning in the Evening, to beginning in
the Morning. This alteration is without any substantial prejudice to Religion,
so long as the Determination of the Continuance and Frequencie jointly, (that
is of one whole Day in seven) remains unaltered: Also it is without any
substantial profit; For still there is just the same, and no more nor less
advantage toward Religion, Gods honor, and the Souls good, that there was
before. And God altering it (as we say, He has done) the Authority is
unquestionably sufficient. And we have also sufficient ground recommending such
an alteration, and such a choice, (even supposing, as our Anti-Sabbatarians
do, that God has put over this authority to the Church) not only from the
Type annexed to the old Day; but from a greater benefit, then that which the
Old Day was a memorial of; namely the Redemption of the World being above the
Creation; and this Redemption completed in the morning of the Resurrection day:
while withal, the number of a seventh-day perpetuates also sufficiently the
memorial of the old Creation, and so we have a memorial of both benefits
instead of one. Unto which we add, that if the Church had that supposed
authority of altering the Season or Order again, (which some still ascribe to
her.) and that it could see any just consideration recommending the alteration
of the Lords day; the first day of the week, to any other day of the seven; or
the beginning of it to any other part of the day: We would not stick to grant
them, that there were no substantial prejudice to Religion (or the 4th.
Commandment) Provided, they meddled not with the Continuance of a whole Day,
(at which yet the Adversaries greatest spite is) nor the Frequencie of one in
seven, which are, as we have said, and had need to say often, and again and
again, most substantially profitable to Religion. Provided also, that they
begin it as soon as men wake, that so no part of the day may be out of the
compass of the determined Continuance. Which how profitable it is, we shall
say somewhat by and by, and more in another Chapter. But these things about the
changes of the particular day, and of the beginning of the day from evening to
morning, and by whose authority it is, and must be done, we shall discourse
more hereafter in the proper order. Mean time, these being the general grounds
in Religious reason, for the alteration, or not alteration of any of the
respects of Time once determined by God, We thought it needful to give this
intimation of it here, and so leave it to the Readers consideration: while we
proceed to our other considerations of these respects of Time in themselves.

XXIV. It is very-fitable to Religion, to have that Continuance of Time
determined for it (even single) so it be with the largest that may be.
4. We say then further, (that we may first take a view of the Profitablenesse
of the two maine Respects of Time single, and then afterward jointly,) That in
a determination of the Continuance for Religion, (even singly considered,)
There appears an undeniable Profitablenesse: namely so far forth as it is
large; even as large, as it can possibly be made, not laying an unsupportable
burden upon the Natural Spirits, nor trenching upon any present or certain
Worldly Necessity, that would call for a parcel of Time during that
Continuance. Yet in either case, if a Reservation for a short interruption will
suffice to satisfy those Necessities, It may still be counted a determination
of so long Continuance, or Time for Religion, (as for instance, a whole Days
Continuance.) notwithstanding those Reservations. We say then (again) that
excepting those cases, the largest determination of Continuance, is Profitable,
and more Profitable unquestionably then a less Continuance would, or could be.
The illustration of this will be of use; and therefore we thus further express
it, by a General Argument. [ That which does best afford, and most secure, (by
being largely determined) a full convenience. 1. For all kinds of Worship,
solitarily, and conjoined in families, and the public Congregation; and. 2d.
The full improvement of all Duties of Worship, to Gods Honor, and the Souls
Good, for knowledge and spiritual Affections; is most Profitably determined
with the largest that may be. But the Continuance of Time does all this, by
being largest determined. Ergo, It is most Profitably determined with the
largest that may be,] The minor alone, is that which requires clearing, and
that may be thus further done. Suppose a whole Days Continuance be determined,
Here then is afforded, and secured, a full convenience. 1. For Solitary
Worship, every man or woman by themselves (without danger of hindrance or
interruption ordinarily, as not lawful to be admitted, no not if other men
would offer it. 2. For Family Worship also. 3. And the like for Public Worship
in the Church; and in all these. 4. For all varieties of Duties;
Solitary-prayer, and Reading, and Meditation; Family-prayers, Readings,
Instructions, Publike-prayers, Reading and Preachings of the Word,
Catecheticall-examinations, Singing, Sacraments. 5 For a full room to perform
all these, with seriousness, and solemnity, as we use to say. (Where note,
that even our ordinary pharse commends the Continuance of Time, as that which
adds to the solemnity of any Duty, and so implies it to be the chiefest
Consideration of solemn Time.) 6. For a full Room to prepare the Heart for
all these Duties, and. 7. To work the good of them upon the Heart effectually;
to settle the knowledge of things taught, and the Remembrance and Affection of
all that one has been conversant in, whether alone, or with others.

Now all this is so much the more remarkable, XXV. For diverse reasons.
if we consider 1. The extreme Ignorance that is in all men by Nature, and
remains in very many that live within the visible Church. 2. The number of
things to be known for Faith and Practice, to make a man able and willing to
Worship and serve God a right, and secure his souls salvation. 3. The dullness
and stupidity of many, (of most) of the common sort, specially who cannot read.
4. The indisposednesse of men's minds Naturally (besides their unwillingnesse)
being full of the world, and thoughts of worldly profits, pleasure and honors;
and these worldly thoughts not suddenly, or in an instant, chased away or made
to give room to thoughts of God: As is too much found in sundry short tenders
of devotions, N. B.
as before and after meals, being too often nothing but outward formalities,
and inward profaneness, as even men's carriage the while, does sometime
ploclaime, and their language instantly after, as much. 5. The great intention
of mind, required in all the Worship of God, and the most lively spirits and
strength that should be in it, according as God seeks Worshippers to Worship
Him in Spirit, and requires the love (and so the service) of all our Souls,
Hearts, Minds, Strengths,

6. The souls pronesse to loose suddenly any knowledge or affection it has
gotten, if it be not thoroughly settled and riveted upon the mind and spirit, and
particularly, sometimes, If objections and temptations be not soundly and
thoroughly answered, and resisted, all that a man has learned or thought of
comes to nothing. All this together greatly recommends the profitablenesse and
advantage of a large Continuance determined for Religion. And if we shall look
upon experience, we shall find this confirmed in all sorts of men, when a man,
that does not merely vex out the Time; (which he seems to afford to God and
his Soul;) attends diverse hours upon religious performances; his heart cannot
but be heated and stirred according to the particular matters, that have taken
up those hours; and some remarkable impression must needs remain upon his
heart, for a while (at least) afterward. What others then speak to him; or
what specially he speak to his own heart; is like striking when the iron is
hot, and that (if any thing in reason) is likely to work a settled work upon
his spirit, to be still more and more for God and his soul. Whereas those that
are taken off from religious thoughts by worldly, any thing soon; do
apparently in experience, loose a great part (not to say, all, sometimes) of
the benefit, namely, of the spiritual light of knowledge, and heat of
affection, that they might have gotten in a longer Time, or seemed to have
gotten in that Time which they did bestow upon Religion in a Continuance.
Christians will confess this; and worldlings manifest it. And particularly
ignorants, who live in a neglect of the Sabbath, (either through their own
fault, or their superiors,) do by their excuses of their ignorance, bear
strong witness to this. Their language is, [We are dull headed, and hard to
learn any Catechism, being not book learned; and we have no Time to learn.]
Their meaning is chiefly, they have not leisure, to allot a sufficient
Continuance of Time at once, being called off by one business or other, when
they would (as they pretend) or do set themselves to learn. And there is much
of truth in this, if they acknowledge not, (and so improve not) the Sabbaths
Continuance, which rightly used, would much advance them even in one Day, And
so still all pleads the profit of a large Continuance determinated.

5. XXVI. It is very profitable to Religion to have Frequency of times
Determined (even single) so it be as great a frequency, as may be consistent
with a man's worldly necessities, as once or twice every day.
In as much as Religion and the Solemn worship of God for his honor and the
good of men's souls, is a business Permanently Necessary all a man's life long:
It appears also, that it is profitable to Religion to have a Determination of
the Frequency of return to the Duties of it: Even as great a Frequency as can
be imagined compatible with the formerly mentioned Necessities of Natural, and
worldly businesses: Specially to secure a man, that his Knowledge of God, and
Affections toward God; in a word, his acquaintance with God shall not be lost
or diminisht; As the intervention of Worldly businesses, being so directly
opposite to thoughts of God for the most part (specially in spirits and hearts
so corrupted, as ours now are) cannot but put in hazard. The proper prevention
whereof, lies mainly therefore in the Determination of as great a Frequency of
return, as may be; as suppose every day, or every morning, and every evening,
that is, twice every Day (viz. of those Days, the maine of whose Continuance
is taken up for worldly businesses) according to the Ceremonial Law of the
Morning and Evening Sacrifice, which carried along with the Duties, the
Frequency of the Time of tendering them (together with a Remiss Determination,
that is, within a Latitude of the Season also) And such Determination of the
Frequency, even though there be nothing of the Continuance Determined at all
(or only Remisly, if any) is, we say, Remarkably Profitable, to prevent
strangeness in the Soul, toward God: For while, the not-Determining of any
Continuance jointly with such Frequency of twice every Working-day, will
assure, that it may be observed without any prejudice to a man's worldly
businesses; which ordinarily (certainly) cannot but admit a looking up to God
even Solemnly, every Day between morning and noone, and again between noone and
a man's lying down to sleep; so that a man be Free to continue no longer, then
his occasions will then permit: This very Frequency will yet keep the soul,
happily, in breath, and in dutiful respects toward God. And withal, will now
and then afford him the Advantage of making some Remarkable Profit, by
Voluntary enlarging the Continuance of Time for Devotion, when being at it, he
finds no particular business, calling him of, perhaps for an hour or more
together. However, let the Continuance be never so short, yet if a man do but
Affectionately tender Solemn Worship, in such Frequency Determined of Morning
and Evening every Day: It must needs preserve from a Total Decay and
strangeness toward God, which in a very seldom return there would be very
great danger, if not certainty of: and so proportionably, according, as such
Determination of the Frequency single, were more or less Frequent: the
prevention or danger of decay in Religion would without doubt be. And so the
Profitablenesse of the Determination of a very great Frequency (even single) is
apparently Evident. And specially, it may be, and will be so, if (besides it,)
there be for Religion a Determination made, jointly, of the Continuance with
convenient largeness, and of the Revolution, also, with Convenient Frequency.
Of the profitablenesse of which joint-Determination, XXVII. A joint
determination of both the Continuance and Frequency in a convenient largeness,
is singularly profitable to Religion: Even the most Profitable of all other,
making the proportion so determined, the chiefest Time for Religion.
we are in the next place to speak.

6. And upon the former Suppositions, it can with no Reason be denied, but such
a joint Determination of the Continuance and Frequency, in a convenient
largeness, is not only Profitable to Religion, but the most Profitable
Determination of all other: The Determination of the greatest importance, to
the maine business of Religion, Gods honor, and the good of men's souls; as
taking in the strength of the two Substantial respects of Time, the
Continuance and Frequency joined. And accordingly the Proportion of Time,
therein Determined, is the chief Time for Religion, of all other. Therefore
concerning this Time (or this Determination) it is a consideration of the
greatest weight; by what Rules, it may be ordered wisely, and made in a
Convenient, and just, and Profitable Proportion, or observed to be so: (if we
speak of any already made) as namely of that of One days Continuance in the
Revolution of seven: which we say was the Substance of the fourth Commandment:
Now here there may be a double consideration of the Wisdom and Convenience of
the Proportion of Time, so determined between the Continuance, and Frequency
jointly. One is in regard of the total proportion Determined for Religion, and
so secluded from worldly business, how so much in the whole (as for instance,
the proportion of a Day in seven or the seventh part of time in the Revolution
of seven days) whether that be a wise and Convenient and Profitable
Determination, and not certainly too much, or certainly too little, for the
chief Time for Religion: And by what Rules to judge it either Way. But this we
leave the Discussion of to a following Chapter, where we shall endeavor to
beat it out clearly, and at large. The other is, in regard of dividing and
sharing such a proportion (as a Day comes to in seven) between the Continuance
and Frequency: On which side the greatest Weight should be put, whether on the
Continuance, to make that as large as may be, and so put it all into one day
(as in the fourth Commandment:) Or on that side of the Frequency, and make it
as Frequent as may be, every day of the seven, or even eve^^ Morning, and
Evening in each of the seven days, and so make the Continuance shorter; as it
must needs be according to the greater Frequency. Of which we thus propound our
apprehensions, in justification of the Wisdom of that Determination of God (and
so the Profitablenesse of it) of One whole days Continuance, only once in
seven days; rather then oftener for Frequency, and with less Continuance. We
say then --

7. That if we pitch upon an equal Proportion for the whole, XXVIII. The
largest continuance with a lesser Frequency, is better then the greatest
Frequency with a less continuance.
(as this for Instance) it will appear more profitable by far to have the
largest Continuance that may be, with a Frequency somewhat remote (as it is in
the fourth Commandment) then to have the greatest Frequency that may be with a
Proportionably less Continuance. And this may be evidenced, both in Reference
to Religion, and also to worldly businesses; In both Respects it will be found
the most Profitable Determination, to have it all upon one Day, rather then
divided into parcells upon every day of the seven, or proportionably, upon six,
or five, or four, or three, or two days of seven. We suppose the Proportion of
a Day, is about 14. or 16. hours, namely the Ordinary waking Time of a Day,
(which only can be applied solemnly to Religion, as we shall see afterward:)
Now this, divided between two days, is seven or eight hours a piece; between
three days is five hours a piece or little more; between four Days about four
hours a piece, between five days about three hours a piece; between six Days
about two hours and a half a piece; between all the seven Days about two
hours a piece, XXIX. 1. With respect to Religion it self.
or little more.

Here now if we first consider the Businesses of Religion: We have already
showed the great Profit, of a whole days Continuance, for the diverse kinds of
worship, Solitary, Domesticke, and Public, and for variety of Duties in each
kind, and complete improvement of them all, by full space for each, and before
the public (particuly) to prepare for it; and after it, to make the utmost
benefit of it. But if we abate any of this Continuance by multiplying the
Revolution more Frequently; and specially the more we abate of it, by the
greater Frequency, as of five or six, or seven Days: Some (at least) of this
benefit must be prejudiced; either the Public, or else the Domesticke, or at
least the Solitary worship, must be neglected in some of those revolutions: Or
if all be still performed, yet much more slightly, because so scanti^, and only
some Duties in each kind, and not all that might well have been in a whole
days Continuance, or a very small pittance, afforded to the several Duties,
and so a very weak profit to redound particularly to men's souls, by the
observance of such Times. The heart would often not be brought in frame, till a
great part of the Duty, and perhaps of the whole Time for the various Duties,
were over-past and gone. And another while, that which was gotten of knowledge
or Affection, would straightway be lost again, by Diverting the mind suddenly
unto worldly Cogitations: As is more then evident unto the consciences of
Christians, when after a Sermon heard on the week day, at the Market; they do
(whether Necessarily or Voluntarily) immediately lay aside the thoughts of it,
and engage themselves in worldly businesses. In such cases, it is a very, very
little Profit, that their souls make by such attendance upon God (though for an
hour or more together, and with the best help of the public Ministry:)
unless the matter did very much suit with their present affections, and so
sinkes more then ordinarily deep into them; Or that they specially call
themselves to a serious account, the next free hour they have, to settle it
upon their minds and consciences by meditation and Prayer: And this they have
often no leisure for on the week days, till they have even forgotten the most
of what they had heard. But now in the Continuance of a whole Day, they have
not only leisure, but in a manner a Necessity of laying to heart, what
specially they have learned in the public Ministry. For all worldly
businesses, discourses, or even cogitations, being then unseasonable and
unlawful; they have now no manner of excuse, if they meditate not, of what
specially may and does concern their consciences, and of which they have been
that day instructed and put in mind. And if they live among any that regard
God at all, they may have help from them (for remembrance and affection both)
by conference of what they have heard, even at meals: besides other Times.
Neither can they have any discourse so proper as of that usually, nothing of
the world being then allowed (ordinarily) as was touched before. A great deal
more might be said to evidence the singular profit of having the Continuance
with the largest that may be. But we shall have occasion to speak of it again
in the next Chapter, and so we forbear to amplify things now. Only we must not
forget to note, that if we shall take our Adversaries proportion upon the Lords
Day, namely three or four hours, (which is about that proportion, which the
practice of our Church generally allots for the public worship) though we
remember not, that they any where vouchsafe to name such a Proportion di^tly:
If we say, we shall take this proportion, to be solemnly observed in a weeks
Revolution: The matter in hand will be much more clear, that the whole
proportion is more profitably determined together in one Continuance, within
such a Revolution, then to have it broken into smaller Parcells, by reason of
the multiplication of the Frequency. For this Proportion of three or four hours
in a week, is but about two hours of a Day, if divided between two days: and
if between three days, about an hour and a quarter: If between four days,
about an hour in a day: If between five days not an hour for each day. If
between six days, not three quarters of an hour for each, and if between 7.
days, about half an hour for every day. Here now, whereas the whole three or
four hours would afford some discernable, Profit if all upon one day, and so
make it one Continuance (admitting them also a Reservation for going home to
dinner) because there would be some convenient room for the varieties of
public duties (though none at all, according to their account, for the
private) and so it might work somewhat upon them: yet if it came to be
lessened by division into more days, and so more Frequent Revolutions: There
would be either an exclusion of Prayer, or Reading, or Singing, or Preaching,
or Catechizing one or other of them (not to name the Sacraments, which are not
usually every week, but Baptism only occasionally, and the Lords Supper
seldom oftener then once a month in any Church) which would so far forth
prejudice the good that might have been gotten, by that which is so omitted; Or
else very much scanty each of them, and so weaken the good to be received by
every one of them singly, and jointly.

XXX. 2. With respect to men's worldly businesses.
But withal, on the other hand, the considerations of men's worldly callings,
and necessary businesses would suffer no less (if not more) sensible
prejudice; by dividing the Time between more days, then if it were all put
into one. It would hinder journies, and day-labourers, and all men of much
business exceedingly. For the public worship being then to be waited on, it
could not be (in most places of the country particularly, and for the sake of
weaker bodies) till about nine a clock in the morning, or toward three in the
afternoon (if the beginning were not in the morning) and this would
marvelously disappoint traveling, and indeed every work, which could no^ at
the clock striking (as one may say) be laid down; and the ^^r those that
dwell a mile or two from Church, as much Time would be spent in going to the
public worship and home again, if not more, then in the worship it self; and
so it would be a most grievous interruption and hindrance to all their worldly
businesses. Neither doubt we, but if the consent of men were asked one by one,
the most part by far, both of good and bad, the willing, and unwilling, those
that love the service of God, and the business of their souls, and those that
love it not; All would give their voices, to have the whole Time (how much or
how little soever the porportion were for hours) upon one Day in such a
revolution, rather then upon more frequent Days with a shorter Continuance,
that so they that love Gods worship, and their souls good might have more full
scope for that. And they that love the world better, might have the less
interruption in their worldly businesses, and more freedom to follow them.

From which discourse, before we pass to another Consideration. XXXI. A
consequence from thence.
Let us make bold to put the reader in mind of a consequence, that we suppose
will undeniably follow, if these premises stand good, namely, That unless
fourteen, or sixteen hours be too large a proportion to be determined for Gods
Honor, and the good of all men's souls, within the revolution of seven Days:
then the dermination of one whole Days Continuance (for so many hours) in
such a revolution, will prove so substantially a profitable determination for
all men in all ages; [As they will find it a very hard task, that will
afterward go about to prove, either that this determination was not from the
beginning, considering what is said (at least toward it) Genesis 2. Or that it is
not perpetuall] since there is certainly no express repeal of such a
proportion, of Continuance within that revelution. And whether now under the
Gospel, such a proportion be too large in the whole, as we wish the readers
conscience to bethink it self seriously even now that he is upon this
discourse: So we shall give him a further occasion to resolve, in a Chapter or
two after. Mean Time, we have one Consideration more yet to add, about the
kinds of determination of these respects of Time; and which is the last of this
sort.

8. XXXII. How the determination of the Quando or season is profitable.
As a joint determination of the Continuance and Frequencie so largely, as has
been said, must needs be Profitable for all men alike, because all men are a
like concerned in the Worship of God and care of their souls good, (To which
tend all the determinations of Time religiously:) so it cannot be denied, but
upon the supposition of such a determination, there will be at last a
Profitablenesse (accidental,) not only of some Quando, season or order of
beginning, but of the same, for all that live near one another; at least so
far, as to secure the helping one of another in family, or public Worship,
and to prevent hindering one another, even in solitary Worship, or the admitting
of hindrances one from another. Only it is to be observed withal, that as all
accidents are in Nature after the substances to which they are accidents,
though they are often together for Time; And again all separable accidents may
be after in Time: So this accidental determination of the Season or order of
Time for Religion, is in Nature after the substantial determination of the
Continuance and Frequencie, even though possibly, it was in Time determined
together, as the Seventh Day from the Creation, together with one Day of seven,
Genesis 2. Supposing, we say, the particular Day determined to Adam the same
moment with the other, yet was the determination of it after it in Nature, as
being but merely accidental to the business of Religion, for which
infallibly, the determination of one Day in seven was made. And if what we have
discoursed of the alteration of the order without prejudice to Religion, be
good, it might possibly be determined some while after in Time. But however, it
must not be forgotten, that the particular order or season of beginning (this
or that Day) is only accidentally, and in no sort substantially profitable to
Religion, as has been proved before.

XXIII. For the manner of Determinations.
And so we come to the third and last main Consideration about the
Profitablenesse of determinations of Time for Religion; namely about the manner
of determination of any of the respects of Time, or all of them.

1. No Exclusive Determination is profitable.
1. Here is specially to be noted, That no Exclusive Determination for the
general business of Religion, can be conceived to be Profitable. That is, It
cannot be profitable to have a Determination of so much Continuance at once,
and never longer, as well as not shorter; and of so frequent a revolution, and
never oftener, as well as no seldomer; and at such a season, or in such an
order for beginning, that is, on such a particular Day, or part of the Day,
Evening or Morning, this or that Hour, and never sooner, as well as no later;
never at any other Hour, or on any other Day. This, we say, cannot be
profitable to Religion; because Religion, in both the intendments of it, Gods
honor, and the good of men's souls, is every man's chiefest and most important
business of all other, all the time of his life. The attendance therefore upon
this, must never be forbidden strictly (which is in the nature of an Exclusive
Determination) in any respect: But it is ever lawful (not now to say
necessary) to prosecute the business of Religion, both voluntarily, without
determination of the Time beforehand, as also to determine Time for it, where
the necessities of a man's worldly condition, and worldly employments, can and
does admit it. It is true, that if God had made undeniably any exclusive
determination for the general of Religion, we must not have argued against it;
for as much as His Will (so far as we can know it) is the only Rule of Good.
But according to the Principles He has put into us, both in Nature, and from
Scripture together, We cannot possibly conceive it profitable to His Honor,
which is infinite: ( His glorious Name is exalted above all blessing and
praise, Neh. 9.5.) to have a restraint put upon mankind, never to employ Time
upon His immediate service, longer, or oftener, or sooner, then according to
any particular strict Exclusive Determination: Much less profitable to Men,
their Souls being their best part, and their good being advanced even toward
an eternal happiness the more, the larger proportion of Time is by them
employed in Religion. Therefore also no such Exclusive Determination is to be
found any where in Scripture, with relation to the general business of
Religion. Only for some particular occasions of Worship, God was pleased of old
to determine some Time exclusively, as the eighth Day from the birth of a Child
for Circumcision; and the eighth Day for the sacrificing of the firstling Males
of Cattle, neither sooner, nor later: and some others of the like nature may
be found. Bur these also, (which is a remarkable note) are only Determination
of the Quando, Season, or Order of Time. And no such (that we can remember) are
found Exclusive, even for particular occasions of Worship, either for the
Frequencie, (unless such, as were only once in a year to be performed as the
Passover, and such like feasts of memorial of particular benefits: or once in
a life, as Circumcision of old was, and Baptism is now held to be) or much
less for the Continuance, it being never forbidden (to say no more now) to
give God the longest Continuance at any Time, when any Continuance at all was
determined. But infallibly certain it is, as we said, that for the general
business of Religion, the Scripture knows no Exclusive Determination. Also it
is not possible for Man to obtain any such Wisdom, (unless God would
miraculously reveal it, which cannot be imagined in this case) that he should
be able to say antecedently, [My worldly occasions, or other men's, will never
at any Time while we live admit any more, or oftener, or sooner, then this
particular Continuance, Frequencie, and Season expressed in this or that
Determination, made, or to be made, by us, or any other.] No Exclusive
Determination then can be conceived to be profitable for the general business
of Religion.

All which we note, as well to prevent the mistake of any unjudicious
Conscience, who, specially by the suggestion of others, might fancy perhaps
the fourth Commandment injoyning one Day of seven for Religion, to be an
Exclusive Determination; and that it were forbidden to employ any other Time
(considerably) upon Gods worship, or looking after their souls; as also (and
that chiefly) to confute the untowardnesse of some profane Cavillers, Objection
prevented.
who though they are far enough from observing the Continuance and Frequencie
Religiously of one Day in seven, according to the fourth Commandment; yet
dogmatically and most perversely contend, that if that Commandment be in force
for one Day in seven for Religion, then it is also for six Days working and
following worldly business, equally necessarily: And that so it is equally a
sin to go to hear a Sermon on a Weekday, as to work upon the Sabbath; and
that the fourth Commandment forbids the one, as well as the other. Now this
were to make the fourth Commandment an Exclusive Determination. The contrary
whereunto may sufficiently appear from what has been already said. Yet for
more complete conviction (and perfect rooting out any such scruple in the minds
of any that are not wilful) we add, [That it is most evident, That God never
meant the fourth Commandment for an Exclusive Determination] nor was it ever
so, no not to the Jews, (and therefore neither can it be so to us now) as both
Gods other determinations, and Men's also, even strictly, besides remiss ones,
does undeniably manifest. For we find in Scripture, that not only before the
fourth Commandment (given with the rest, in that Majesticke manner on Mount
Sinai,) the Feast of the Passover, and herein two Days, the first and the
last of unleavened Bread, were determined by God himself, Exodus 12. But
afterward in the Books of Moses. He besides determined the Feast of Weeks, and
that of Tabernacles (this again having two Days, the first, and the last as
Sabbaths) and the Days of the New Moons, every month, and the Day of
Atonement, yearly, and daily also (every Day) a double Frequencie of Time, for
the Morning and Evening Sacrifice. All much Times, were indeed specially
instituted for particular reasons, (except the daily Frequencie of the Morning
and Evening Oblation) and had to the Jews, Typical relations, each of them,
in the particularities of their seasons, and the manner of their observations:
Yet also were all those Solemn Days serviceable likewise to the General
business of Religion, for increase of Knowledge of God and Affection toward
Him, (though in no proportion, comparable with the Weekly Sabbath, by reason
of their Rarity and its Frequencie) as appears both in reason, and by the
Shunamites using to go to the Prophet upon the New Moons. By all which it is
most undoubted, that God meant not the determination of the Weekly Sabbath,
for an Exclusive determination of Time for the General of Religion. As also by
that Holy Men did yet further determine Times, for themselves (as David, and
Daniel three Times every Day for Prayer) and for others too, as the Days of
Purim, and the Feast of Dedication forenoted, and Extraordinary Days of Fasts,
upon extraordinary occasions: Besides all voluntary Times, employed by pious
souls, every where intimated. Likewise the General Precepts of [Praying
continually, and without ceasing] (and many such like, formerly mentioned, and
others to be named anon) do certainly imply, that men ought to bestow more
Time upon Religion, Gods solemn Worship, and their own, and others souls, (as
they can redeem opportunity,) then God has expressly determined, these being
remiss determinations (as we shall show by and by, together with the reason of
them.) There is then no such thing as an Exclusive determination to be fancied
with relation to the General of Religion; as being expressly contrary to all
the Rules, and practice of it in Scripture, and the Church in all ages. Only we
grant, (and desire it may be remembered) that no man may determine (either for
himself, or much less, for others) Time in any of the respects, So as 1. to
March for Holiness and Necessity, with Gods determined Times; which is the
fault of the Popish Holy Days, all of them, besides the Idolatry of some of
them, being specially intended to the honor of Creatures, Angels, and Saints,
the blessed Virgin, and others. As also in their Canonical hours they put
special Holiness. Or 2. thereby to hinder the necessary businesses of men's
worldly callings: wherein again the Papists offend, in making their Holy Days
so frequent, as that they are exceeding burdensome, specially to the poorer
sort. And this also is possible to be a fault, even in voluntary attendances
upon Religion sometimes; If any do it so, as thereby to neglect their callings
ordinarily and remarkably, they offend; though not against the fourth
Commandment properly; but only against the indulgence therein granted of six
Days work ordinarily; and directly against the eighth Commandment (or any
other) that properly concerns their particular callings. But, avoiding these
errors; we say, no Church, nor no Man, is to be blamed, but commended rather,
for determining, (or voluntary applying) any Times for Religion, the solemn
Worship of God, and looking after the souls good; the weekly Sabbath, (or
Lords Day) of Gods determination, being not Exclusive, nor any other, as we
have said.

XXXIV. 2. An initiall determination is certainly profitable.
2. In the next place, we affirm that an initiall determination may be
certainly profitable to Religion. Namely, ["Where there is but so much wisdom,
that by determining so much Continuance, or such a Frequencie, (or such a
Season,) there will be (or can be) no prejudice, to bodily necessities, and
necessary worldly occasions.] Not as concluding, so much, and so often, to be
enough, for the whole, or chief Time for Religion, (for that were to make it a
Conclusive determination, of which our next Consideration is to speak;) But
that so much, and so often, may infallibly be allowed; And therefore so much,
and so often (at least,) may be determined, and as for a beginning, for which
cause we count the term of an initiall determination proper. And this will,
according to the proportions of it, be so far forth serviceable, and
profitable to Religion, and particularly against unwillingnesses, and
unnecessary interruptions. As for instance; it may be, at least for some men,
and so has been found in experience, very profitable to determine to
themselves, at least a quarter of an hour in the morning every Day, and as
much at night, or toward night, for Religion, and solitary attendance upon God:
And such a like proportion (or more) for their Family-devotions, morning or
noone, night or evening. That at least, we say, so much, so often, shall be
employed, and when they have freedom, they may enlarge the Continuance,
specially (or sometimes even the Frequencie) voluntarily, and according to
occasions. And this is properly an initiall determination; and it cannot be
denied, but such an one, may be profitable, as has been showed.

XXXV. A conclusive determination, is not profitable in some cases.
3 Now for a Conclusive determination, and namely of both the Continuance and
Frequencie jointly; seeing that it is the chief determination of Time for
Religion generally, or the determination of the chief Time for the General of
Religion (which come all to one, as has been intimated before:) There is a
twofold Consideration to be noted: one showing in what cases, such a
determination can with no probability be conceived to be profitable to
Religion: The other declaring upon what conditions, it may be certainly and
infallibly profitable. For the first of these, this we say, [That a Conclusive
determination of the Continuance and Frequencie of Time jointly, cannot in all
probability be profitably made by such persons as want either such wisdom, or
willingness, or authority, as is plainly requisite to a determination of this
Nature, viz. of the chief Time for Religion.]

For 1. if they want wisdom, 1. When men want wisdom.
either to set out the whole proportion, as how many hours in all in so many
Days, or to distribute this proportion fitly between the Continuance and
Frequency: as they may err in either case, and on either hand in either case;
so in all probability they are like to err one way or other. If they be
affectionately zealous for Religion, they may possibly err, in determining too
large a proportion, too long a Continuance, and too frequent a Revolution. On
the other side if they be sollicitous for worldly business, they may determine
too little a proportion, and so too short a Continuance, or too seldom a
Revolution, or both. And if they mistake not the proportion, and that they
should not consent to what we before discoursed of the greater profit in the
largest Continuance, as perhaps some may not assent to it; then again they may
err (perhaps not a little) in sharing the proportion between the Continuance
and Frequencie; and both fail of advancing Religion so much as they might have
done, as also greatly prejudice men's worldly businesses, which in conclusion,
may happen to fall upon Religion again: For that men in those cases will be
apt to make too bold with the religious Time, under pretense of necessity at
least. In a word, this Time, being to be the necessary and ordinarily
sufficient chief solemn Time of Worship, Where there wants wisdom to judge.
1. What is necessary, and 2. What is ordinarily sufficient for the chief
solemn Time, in regard both of Continuance and Frequency jointly; It may as
well be conceived that a blind man will find the right way, where there are
diverse turnings (of which he is not aware) as that there can be a profitable
Conclusive determination made for Religion, by such Persons. XXXVI. 2. Or
willingness.


2. If they want willingness to employ Time in religious Duties themselves,
and so to have others employ Time in it; It is yet much more certain, that the
determination will not be profitably made. For they must needs, both be apt to
think not so much, or so often to be necessary, as indeed is, (and so to
misse-judge the whole proportion) counting much less, or seldomer sufficient,
then they should do: As also, howsoever, for want of affection, to forbear to
determine themselves or others, to any such proportion, as they have no will
should be observed. Of which there needs no other proof, then that of too many
pretenders at large to Religion; that are so far from determining any Time to
themselves or their families, where they think themselves wholly left at
Liberty, that they never so much as observe any voluntarily in any constancy,
and much less, have any families-devotions (scarce thanksgivings before or
after meals) at all, through the whole years, or their whole lives. What
likelihood then can there be, that such, or even much better then they
(supposing them to be yet in the rank of the unwilling) will ever make a
profitable determination of the necessary and ordinarily sufficient chief
solemn Time for Religion. As soon will a covetous man tax himself and his
posterity to as much, as is fit for such to pay, weekly and yearly, even to the
worlds end; who yet by his good will, cannot afford to part with a far
smaller proportion; and grudges at any thing that is laid upon him, though
far short of his due.

XXXVII. 3. Or authority.
3. Also if any want Authority, to secure themselves in the Time determined, or
to awe unwilling inferiors, as also to awe and satisfy their minds somewhat
by the clear equity and reasonableness of the proportion determined, and
distributed between the Continuance and Frequencie: The determination, in all
probability, cannot be profitably, even though it should be wisely, determined.
For it would never be constantly observed by any whom it was made for. If
inferiors made it to themselves, they would be often taken off, by the command
of untoward superiors: And they would not know what to do, because they are
not Masters of their own Time. Again, It is certain before hand, that all
unwilling Inferiors would despise it, and neither observe it themselves, nor
suffer others (that they had under them) to observe it, if they stood in no Awe
of the Authority commanding. And such a thing foreseen, concludes any
determination (or Law) to be so far forth altogether unprofitable. Likewise,
what ever wisdom, or worldly Authority such should have as made that
determination; if they made it not with such clear evidence of equity and
reason on both sides, that so much, and so often were necessary, and no less
nor no seldomer; and again that so much, and so often were ordinarily
sufficient for the chief solemn Time, and no more at once, nor no oftener
were requisite, the unwilling would be sure not to regard the determination
when they were out of sight and hearing: as not holding themselves bound to so
much, or so often; and so it would be still unprofitable in reference to such:
And on the other side, the conscientious would be doubtful whether so much,
and so often were ordinarily sufficient for the chief solemn Time; and so
neither would attain a sufficient Profitablenesse to them.

4. Most of all, Such a Determination, in all probability, XXXVIII. 4. Or all
these.
will not be profitable, if made by such, in whom there is a want in all these
respects, of Wisdom, Willingness, and Authority sufficient for such a
Determination of such consequence and importance as this is of. And now whether
any man, or number of men (even within the Church) may not be found wanting in
some, or all, of these requisites, to make such a Conclusive Determination of
the Continuance and Frequencie of Time jointly, to make up the ordinarily
sufficient and necessary chief solemn Time for all men, as we shall discourse
in a following Chapter shortly. So we refer it to the Readers conscience in
the mean while: And go on to add the other Consideration opposite to this;
Namely,

4. That that cannot but be a singularly profitable Determination, XXXIX. When
all these meet the determination Conclusive, is very profitable.
which is made Conclusively in both the respects of Continuance and Frequencie
jointly, by such, whose Wisdom, Affection to Religion, and Authority, is
every way undoubted. For hereby all scruple, and pretense of scruple, will be
taken away, about the necessity and sufficiency of this Time so determined for
the ordinary chief solemn Time for Religion; and the Unwilling will be as
much awed, as by any other Law whatsoever; and the Willing have a full and free
liberty to attend it, rejecting all unnecessary Interruptions from whomsoever.
Now all this is unquestionably true of God, who did determine in this sort
conclusively, the Continuance to be a whole Day, and the Frequencie jointly,
that it should be one in seven, (in the fourth Commandment, undeniably to the
Jews) as the necessary, and ordinarily sufficient chief solemn Time of
Worship. Therefore also we can think no otherwise, but that this Commandment,
in this regard, is a substantially-profitable Commandment for all men in all
ages to be bound unto. And because we find not any certain Repeal of it
afterward, we cannot but think, according to our Rule formerly laid down about
such Laws substantially-profitable, that it is Moral and Perpetual. Neither
doubt we but the conscientious Reader will be of the same mind too, if we can
prove (as we even now intimated) that no man, or number of men, to whom this
may be supposed to be left by God under the New Testament, can make the
Determination in any proportion so profitable for Religion, Gods honor, and
the good of all men's souls and consciences. But of that, as we said,
hereafter. We have yet some further Considerations to add, about the
profitablenesse of the manner of Determinations. The next is,

XI. A remiss determination is profitable for trial of affections.
5. A Remiss Determination, namely of the Continuance or Frequencie of Time for
Religion, may also be profitable, partly to recommend the importance of
Religion, to be attended as a chief business, and particularly in such and
such Duties which are named, as being of chiefest importance to Religion: and
partly withal to intimate a mind in the Superior that makes it, to try the
affections of Inferiors to the business of Religion generally, or any
particular business of Religion, which such Determination may particularly
concern; by intimating somewhat generally about the proportion of Time for it;
but referring the speciality of it to their minds. As we thus find God making a
Remiss Determination of the Continuance for Prayer, Col. 4. [Continue in
Prayer] which implies some convenient proportion of Continuance to be
ordinarily allotted to it, but leaving the specialty of it to men's own
affections, which accordingly are exceedingly tried by such continuance
voluntarily prolonged. They whose affections are strongest to the duty, and the
business of the duty, conversing with God, and wrestling with Him for all
manner of blessings, do undoubtedly continue longer, and those whose
affections are weaker, do continue less while. Understanding this of the
right praying of the heart and soul, and not the lip-labor of the tongue, or
the outward continuance upon ones knees, (suppose even in secret) where the
mind is distracted by many fancies. For so a man may continue a long while
about the duty, and yet continue but a little while in the duty; Pray but a
little while, for want of godly, at least strong affections. But if a man pray
all the while he is at prayer, It is undeniable, that he has the strongest
affections, that continues longest. So also God has been pleased to give out a
Remiss Determination for the Frequencie of reiteration of Prayer, [Praying
alwayes] Ephesians. 6.18. Of Meditation; [Thou shall meditate therein day and night]
Jos. 1.8. And of the Lords Supper often, by those phrases, [ Do this as often as
you drink it, in remembrance of me. And, as often as you eat this bread, and
drink this cup, 1. Cor. 11.25, 26.] Where the two former for Prayer and
Meditation imply a very often reiteration, yet not prescribing exactly the
number how often: and the other for the Lords Supper, intimating some
Frequencie, yet not determining specially, so, or so often. So in each leaving
the specialty to men's affections (and occasions.) And no man can deny, but here
also, it is a singular proof of men's affections to God, in His sight, when
they look up to Him, and meditate of Him very frequently. They doing it most
often, that have strongest affections; because also it may be done suddenly in
the midst of worldly businesses many times; and in diverse worldly businesses, a
man may continue a remarkable Time in Ejaculatory Prayers and Meditations, and
not hinder himself a jot, which now he that has present, and strong
Affections for God will not fail to do. And he who does it but seldom, does
hereby discover (at least to God, who searches the hearts) that his Affections
are but weak and faint to Godward. And so it is for the Lord Supper, he that
comes oftenest (as a man ought, with spiritual remembrance, and inward
celebration of Christ's Death, and spiritual hunger and thirst, after the
benefit of it, to be anew sealed to Him by the Sacrament) manifests
unquestionably, most spiritual Affection to Christ: And he who comes seldomer,
shows his Affections to be more slight and slack (understanding it still,
where there is no just present impediment.) And for the trial and discovery of
such variety of Affections toward Him, (besides other Reasons which His
infinite wisdom may have) God is pleased to make these Determinations
remiss, and no more. And for the purpose of such Trial, (from which a man's
own conscience, upon examination, may gather profitable admonition and comfort)
such Remiss Determinations are specially profitable, as we have showed.

XLI. Supposing the former determinations made: e^se not.
But we must add withal to this Consideration, that to the main and general
business of Religion., (Gods worship, and the Souls good) such Remiss
Determination of the Continuance and Frequencie of Time for it, (if there were
no other Determinations, none strict, and even conclusive, to make up the
ordinarily sufficient, chief, solemn Time of Worship) it could not be
profitable; because in no wise sufficient for persons so unwilling, and so
unwise, and so liable to Interruptions from worldly businesses, and other men's
importunities, as even the best men (and much more the ordinary sort of
mankind) are all their life long: As will appear more fully in the next
Chapter, in which we shall discourse at large of the necessity even of such a
Conclusive Determination to Religion. But upon the supposall of such a
Conclusive Determination for the chief solemn Time for Religion, other
Determinations made but even remiss, may stand in good stead, and prove very
profitable, oftentimes, even beyond ordinary expectation, as experience shows
in those that are willing to take the advantages of them, as was intimated
before.

XLII. Particular determinations for particular ends, may be removed.
6. Furthermore, it is also to be observed, that as we said before in point of
Learning, Determinations of Time for particular intendments toward Religion,
although withal of some use and profit for the general business of Religion,
may so grow out of date, upon those particular intendments being satisfied, and
so the special and principal reason of those Determinations being ceased;
that it may be convenient to remove and take them quite away; partly as
burdens, not so suitable to the state of the New Testament; but specially, lest
their Perpetuity should eclipse the glory of Christ, of whom they were
shadows, (as well as other Ceremonies.) And accordingly so we find in the
Epistles of S. Paul, Romans 14. Gal. 4. Col. 2. a Repeal of all the Jewish
Festivall-Dayes, New Moons, and others, (including also the Jewish Quando, or
particular Day of the seven, which was for the Weekly Sabbath) Their main
intention being for particular ends, and purposes typical; The Apostle saying
of them all, Gal. 4. That they were weak and beggarly elements. And Col. 2.
Shadows of good things to come, but the Body was CHRIST. And so Christ being
come, and the Church come of age, out of her state of infancy, God thought it
not fit to continue these any more, nor any thing in the stead of any of them,
except only of the Seuenth-day Sabbath; because it was a Circumstance, which
did belong to the Substantial Determination of one Day in seven, (in the
fourth Commandment, which was the Conclusive Determination for the chief
solemn Time) Therefore in stead of it, He set up a new particular Day, the
first of the seven, (as that was the last) called in the New Testament by the
name of the first Day of the Week, and the Lord's Day. This, we say, was done,
because the Substantial Determination of one Day in seven, could not be
observed, without some particular Day also determined for it. But the others
God wholly took away, as being no way proportionable in Profit with that; and
as being willing to leave His Christian Church now come to age, at some more
liberty then before, to present Him with voluntary Determinations of Times of
attendance publicly, (as all Churches have had some of their own, even those
that have rejected the name of Holy Day or Festivals, yet have they had
(sometimes, even weekly) Days wherein they have had Public Prayers, or
Preachings, or both.) And also privately, each one has more to show his free
affection, when so many Days were not expressly determined by God, as there
were before. Yet still He would not take away that Conclusive Determination of
one Day in seven, for the most singular and substantial profit of it, which we
have partly showed already, and shall do more in the following Chapters. As
also we shall hereafter further discourse upon those places of St. Paul, which
our Anti-Sabbatarians do so earnestly urge against the fourth Commandment for
one Day in seven, to include that also, though there be not the least
intimation of any such thing there, further then concerns the particular Day
then observed, as we shall show. Mean time, in this place we held it necessary
to touch the remarkable difference between the Determination of one Day in
seven, (as the Conclusive Determination for the chief Time for Religion) and
all the rest; and how conveniently, they being repealed, it may be perpetuated:
as also, that It being perpetuated, their repeal brings not any prejudice to
Religion, there being such reason for it; but a benefit rather: which cannot be
conceived of that for one Day in seven, XLIII. A reservation for necessary
interruptions, may be profitable.
in any such sort.

7. And now in the last place, to shut up these Considerations of the
Profitablenesse of the Determinations of Times for Religion: That, (which we
have diverse times insinuated already) we now assert the Profitablenesse of;
Namely, Of a Reservation for necessary Interruptions, both ordinary, and
extraordinary. This, we say, may well be conceived profitable, to be adjoined
to all kinds and manners of Determinations for Religion: for that by this
means, both they will be the less burdensome by much, though they be
otherwise large for the proportion, and strict for the manner of Determination,
and scarcely liable to a pretense of burden; as also the Determinations
themselves in the residue of the Times, will be a great deal more certain to
be observed, by this allowance of such really important necessities. The taking
away of an excuse, saving sometimes the main of a Duty; which else, under the
pretense of prejudicing a necessary present business, would have been wholly
neglected, as an unreasonable command. Accordingly therefore, we find
sufficient intimations in the Scripture, and particularly by our Saviors
pleading with the Pharisees on that occasion, That works of mercy to any of
Mankind, and even to a Beast, as the lifting them out of a pit, or even leading
them forth to water, are Reservations made by God himself, out of the
strictest Determinations of Time for Religion, namely, out of the Sabbath. And
the same Equity is generally held by the strictest Divines, to extend to all
such businesses of Necessity, which could neither have been done the Day
before, nor can be deferred to the next Day: As the quenching of a fire
breaking out in a Hay-stack, though in a field, and remote from any dwelling
house, and the like. Further particulars of which Reservations, to be gathered
from the instances of our Savior, and His discourses about them, and other
general expressions, we shall have occasion again hereafter to examine: As
also, that to us now under the Gospel there is some further allowance in this
kind, then was to the Jews of old; We being more freed from all real
burdens, then they were. Only it must still be remembered, that Gods indulgence
herein must be so far from making us think the Determinations to be of no
force, (as our Adversaries most absurdly argue against the whole Doctrine and
Law of the Sabbath, from those expressions of our Savior about these
Reservations, as we shall see) that we ought rather to esteem our selves the
more obliged to them: since God is so graciously pleased to condescend to us,
as to prefer our natural and worldly necessities in such cases, before His own
immediate services: But doubtless, if we think His services, and our Souls
necessities, any matters of regard at all; we shall not see any just ground to
think, that God ever meant by such Reservations for particular cases and
occasions, to lay all Time level, and refer all to men's courtesies, whether
they will give Him any back again, or how much, or how little; often, or
seldom.

And so we have done at length with this Discourse about the Profitablenesse of
Determinations of Times for Religion generally, XLIV. The Conclusion.
together with some Intimations of Application more particular unto the
Determination of one Days Continuance in the frequent revolution of seven
Days, according to the fourth Commandment: But the full application cannot be
made, till we have added also the Considerations that concern the Necessity of
this or that kind of Determination, and this or that Manner: and likewise
scanned, whether the chief Determination for the necessary and ordinarily
sufficient chief solemn Time can be profitably made by any other but God
himself. To which two Points we shall speak, by His assistance, in the two
following Chapters. And if in this already, or in any that follow, we shall
seem to any too prolixe and tedious, We must desire them to consider, that the
Argument is not only of great importance, but also has hitherto been handled
very confusedly in this Point about the Nature of Time, (which yet is one of
the main hinges upon which the whole Controversy depends) even by all the
Adversaries, as well as the friends of our, or rather of Gods cause, for His
Solemn Time, and Day of Holy Rest. We have therefore been desirous to beat
things out so, as that any attentive Reader may see clearly the way we go, and
the strength of the Arguments on which we ground our Cause: that so far as is
possible, and as God shall vouchsafe to bless, we may satisfy all
Consciences, even of ordinary Readers: which we much misdoubt we should not
have done, if we had strived to contract our selves unto the quicker
apprehensions of the more pregnant wits: while withal we assure the one and
other sort, that we take no further delight in expatiating either in matter or
words, then we judge it necessary to the clearing of doubts, which others, or
our own minds have made about the whole, or any part of this undertaking.

CHAP. IX.
A Determine Solemn Time for Gods Worship is Moral Natural: and that in the
first Commandment: And what kind and manner of Determination of Time for
Religion, may be proved necessary, by the Law, or Light of Nature, and general
rules of Scripture.

I. Determinate Time is, 1. Moral Natural.
THE General nature of Time in Religion, as well as in civil actions, and the
Profitablenesse of the Determination of it for Religion, as well as for
Learning, or any other civil business, has been in the foregoing chapters at
large considered and discoursed of. Now we are to proceed to a higher step
concerning it: Namely the Necessity of its Determination for Religion, Gods
honor and the good of men's souls, of which though we have also spoken
somewhat in general already: Yet are there further considerations to be set
down about it; and particularly, [What kind of Determination, of any one of the
respects of Time single, or of any two of them jointly, or of all three of them
together, is necessary for Religion? As also, what manner of Determination,
Remiss, Initiall, or Conclusive?] according to what may be proved from
General rules of the law and light of nature, Applyable to all men in all
ages, all the world over: and general rules also of Scripture, without
allegation of the fourth Commandment, or any such determination expressed in
Scripture. But only to consider, whether those general rules will not
necessitate us to have recourse to the fourth Commandment for the
determination conclusive of the Continuance and Frequency jointly, for all
mankind now that come to the knowledge of it, as well as for the Jews of old;
and to the first Day of the week, the Lord's Day, for the season or order of
beginning to count, and so for the particular day to be necessarily observed by
all Christians to the worlds end: As also to make us acknowledge that the same
Continuance and Frequency of one Day in seven, was given to Adam and all his
Posterity (according to Genesis 2.) together with the last Day of seven from the
beginning of the Creation, for the season and order. And this is the task of
this and the next Chapter, chiefly for the laying down the Positive grounds of
our tenants generally, reserving the discussion of particular exceptions and
objections, to the following parts, where we shall deal with the severalls in
their order distinctly.

To begin then, II. 1 Explained.
we propound two Positions in the forefront of this discourse about the
necessity of Determinate Time for Religion, (according to the Title of this
Chapter,) whereof the first is [Some Determinate solemn Time for Gods Worship
is Moral Natural.] This we must first Explain, and then we shall set upon
the proof of it. For explication, we desire it may be observed. 1. 1. Meant
only of the Continuance and Frequency.
That We affirm it only in regard of the quantity or Proportion of time: but
yet of that, in both the respects of it, the Quamdiu or Continuance, and the
Quoties or Frequency: That some Determinate solemn Continuance is Moral
Natural; and again, some Determinate solemn Frequency, is commanded, by the
very Law of nature; namely, (according to our former description of the law of
nature c. 1.) [That every reasonable man, notwithstanding the present
corruption of his nature, may be forced to acknowledge it necessary to be given
to God in duties of His immediate and solemn worship, in regard of the
importance of those respects of time for Religion, Gods Honor and the good of
men's souls: And that accordingly, duties must attend those Determinations of
Time to fill up the whole Continuance and answer the revolutions.]

But we say no such thing of the Quando, season, III. Not of the season.
or order of beginning, by it self considered, as not being of it self, any way
material to Religion, as has been discoursed before. Only when the other
respects are discerned to be determined, there will also appear some kind of
necessity, of some Determination of this also, at least to secure men's helping
one another, and prevent their hindering one another, who live in a neernesse
together, as we shall see more hereafter. IIII. 2. Of those both single and
jointly.


2. We affirm this Determination of the law of nature, not only of each of
those respects single, (of some Continuance, and some Frequency,) but of both
of them jointly (that some Determination of such a Continuance so often; V. 3.
Not remiss only, nor conclusive, nor exclusive, but only Initiall.
and of such a Frequency with such Continuance) is Moral Natural, and made by
the very law of nature.

3. That by the Determinations, which we maintain (in this position) to be
made by the law of nature of these respects of time: As on the one hand, we
understand more then a remiss Determination, (to say, as many disputers do,
only a convenient Time, or a sufficient Time,) leaving both the terms and
limits, for length or shortness of Continuance, and for Frequency, or
seldomenesse of Revolution wholly undesigned: So on the other hand, we mean
not a conclusive Determination, assigning exactly the limits on both sides, (
much less an exclusive determination, of which sort we have before noted, that
we find none absolutely given out by God any where in reference to the general
business of Religion,) But only such Determination, as we have before termed
Initiall, wherein the Initiall term of either of those respects of Time, of
the Continuance and of the Frequency, is determined; that is, the Continuance
to be so long together at least, and no less while; as also the revolution, so
often at least and no seldomer: So requiring somewhat both for Continuance and
Frequency strictly, and implying withal somewhat more in each respect: but
leaving that somewhat to some other Determination of God or man. More plainly,
we mean, that the Law of nature determines the Continuance in regard of the
shortest proportion, [That so much together at least cannot but be necessary to
be presented to God at one time or other of every manslife:] and so again,
[That so often at least in a revolution to wait upon God solemnly in duties
of Religion and Divine Worship, cannot but be necessary to every man during his
life upon earth.]

VI. 2 Proved of the Continuance single.
And now we come to prove our Position: 1. For the Quamdiu or Continuance single
[If there may be sin against the law of nature in giving God too little time at
once, in waiting upon him in the duties of solemn worship, then some
Determined solemn Time is Moral Natural in regard of the proportion of
continuance in his worship; But there may be sin even against the law of nature
in giving God too little Time at once. Ergo.]

The consequence of this argument is undeniably confirmed, by those sentences
of the Apostle; that whosoever sins, transgresses the law, for sin is the
transgression of the law; and where no law is, there is no transgression. So
that if to give God never above half a minute at once, in waiting upon him in
any solemn worship, be a transgression and sin, even against the law of
nature, then the law of nature Determines a solemn Time, at least somewhat
above that Propotion of Continuance; and so a whole minute, or three quarters
of a minute (or the like) is a Determinate solemn Time by the law of nature,
and moral natural: or any other proportion of continuance that can be named,
or imagined smaller then this, will serve to illustrate and confirm this
consequence.

The Antecedent is no less certain, and clear, what ever conscience of the
most corrupted man be called to judge, (if he wholly deny not a God, and a
worship due to him) for all men cannot but confess, that it were sin never
throughout a man's whole life to give God above half a minute at once, or a
quarter of a minute, or any less proportion of continuance, if less can be
mentioned or observed: (As for instance, that of the Publican, Luke 18. when he
smote his breast, and cried, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, this was a
solemn Worship, and continued a little longer then an instant, and so was
measurable for Continuance, but never to give God a larger Continuance, cannot
but be acknowledged a sin.) Ergo, our conclusion is firm, that some
Determinate solemn Time above that proportion of Continuance, is
Morall-Naturall, and determined even by the law of nature.

The like argument will serve (mutatis mutandis) for some Determinate solemn
Time in regard of the Quotie, VII. Of the frequency single.
or Frequency single. [If there may be sin against the law of nature in waiting
upon God too seldom, then some Determinate solemn Time is Moral Natural in
regard of the Frequency of revolution; But there may be sin against the law of
nature in waiting upon God too seldom, Ergo.] The consequence is proved as
before. That where no law is, there is no transgression, no sin, etc. So that
if it be transgression and sin even against natures law, never through a man's
life to wait upon God in his worship above once; then the law of nature
Determines a solemn Frequency above the proportion of once; and so twice at
least in a man's life is a Determinate Time by the law of nature, and so Moral
Natural.

The Antecedent is also undeniable by any one that has not altogether
forsworn all conscience, and renounced all Religion in regard of God. For
whether by waiting upon God, we understand presenting unto him, Eiaculatory
Worship, which may perhaps be dispatched in an instant, or imperceptible Time,
or solemn Worship, which cannot but take up some more remarkable Continuance:
In either sense, and in both; none can choose but acknowledge, that it were sin
never throughout a man's whole life to wait upon God but once, even though that
once should be continued as long as ever any man in the world did wait upon
God, even forty days and forty nights, (as Moses did miraculously upon Mount
Horeb, once and a second time.) Therefore this Conclusion is also infallible,
That some determinate solemn Time above once, for Frequencie, is
Morall-Naturall.

VIII. Of both joint^y.
Again, the same Argument will also serve to prove a joint Determination of
somewhat, both for Continuance and Frequencie together, even by the Law of
Nature: thus: [ If there may be sin against the Law of Nature, in waiting
upon God too little while at once, though one do wait upon Him often: and, in
waiting upon Him too seldom; though one do wait upon Him a good while together
for once; then a determinate solemn Time is Morall-Naturall, both for some
Continuance, and some Frequencie together. But there may be sin against the
Law of Nature, in waiting upon God too little while at once, though one do
wait upon Him often: and in waiting upon Him too seldom, though one do wait
upon Him a good while together for once. Ergo.] The Consequence stands good
upon the former proofs; so also does the Antecedent: for what heart can deny,
but the Continuance of half a minute were too little at once constantly for
Gods worship, though a man did reiterate it for Frequencie, every Day, and even
diverse times every Day. And again, who can but acknowledge, that to worship God
solemnly but once or twice in a man's life, were too seldom, how long soever he
continued at it, when he did worship Him. The Conclusion then is beyond
gainsaying, That a Determinate Solemn Time is Morall-Naturall, both for
Continuance, above a quarter of a Minute; and for Frequencie, above once or
twice in a man's life time.

IX. An Objection prevented two ways.
If any now wonder, why we have troubled our selves, or our Readers, with so
many words, about so plain a matter as this seems to be, which also all that
handle these Disputes, seem to grant abundantly; We desire such to receive
satisfaction from a twofold Answer, which we offer in this behalf.

X. Answ. 1.
First, that throughout this whole Discourse, we choose rather to prove what we
assert, than to be beholding to our Adversaries for granting it; as well to
satisfy the consciences of all Readers, as for that we know not whether our
Adversaries in this question of the Sabbath will be always so liberal, as to
grant all that now in their books they sometimes do. Which we are in more
suspicion of, because we find (as we shall put them in mind often in the
ensuing Discourse) that they do ever now and then retract their grants of
diverse things, which if they would steadily have held to, they would have been
forced to have come unto us in the maine; as we hope to give them to understand
ere we h^ve done.

2. But withal we cannot choose but profess, XI. Answ. 2.
that in particular we have not as yet been able to observe in their writings
any such constant and clear confession of these things we have now taken pains
to prove, as we conceive necessary to be expressly set down for a right
foundation of understanding of these disputes. For though all of them usually
affirm in sense (if not in express terms) That one Day in seven (for
frequencie) is very agreeable to the Law of Nature: and that less then one in
seven it may not be: and that Christians must not give God less then the Jews
did: and such like speeches, which we shall note hereafter in their due place:
And some of them offer also now and then to say, That a Day (which when we
speak of, we mean for Continuance a Day together) is of the Law of Nature,
which is more then we yet have said. Yet soon after, like men that have trod
upon a Quagmire (or a Serpent) they step back again; and as having granted more
then they can well afford us, or then indeed will well stand with their cause;
they fall off again to mere generals and uncertainties, under the notions of a
sufficient and convenient Time, and such like doubtful phrases; which without
some particularizing, come in effect to nothing more then a more then a mere
indeterminate Time, (as we have noted in the former Chapter) and never so much
as grant explicitly and clearly any distinct Determination at all by the Law
of Nature; either for the Continuance, so much as a Minute at once; or for the
Frequencie, once in a Year: which has made us apprehend it necessary to set
down somewhat at least of our own, by way of groundwork, and lay our
foundation as low as may be, and so try what we can further build upon it, in
due season. While withal we doubt not but we may rise diverse steps higher
(both for the Continuance of Time, for Worship, and for the Frequencie) then
those we have discoursed of hitherto: As namely, That all men will confess,
that 1. for the Continuance single, the Law of Nature does determine every man
to somewhat more then a quarter of an hour, then half an hour, even to a
whole hour at least, as to a necessary proportion to be given to God, at one
time or other, during a man's life; and that it were sin even against the Law of
Nature, if a man should never in all his life give God a whole hour at once.
And 2. for the Frequencie single, that the Law of Nature does determine every
man to somewhat more then twice in his life, even more then twice in seven
years, more then twice in every year of his life, every quarter of a year,
every month, even once at least every day, as a necessary proportion to be
given to God in a Revolution: And that it were sin even against the Law of
Nature, to worship God seldomer then so, in some manner. Also, 3. Putting both
these Respects together, and the Law of Nature does still determine every man
to at least an hour together; We say not every Day, but at least every Month,
as a necessary proportion to be given to God: and that less at once every
month, or seldomer so much as an hour, were sin even against the Law of
Nature. And this we are persuaded even very corrupted Nature will not find in
their hearts to deny, nor can they, upon the former Principles of Gods being
the Lord of all our Time and our Happiness. And further also then so we might
perhaps go; but we are not willing to particularize too far by way of guess,
because nothing certain can be concluded on uncertainties. Therefore we will
rather make trial, whether the Law or Light of Nature will help us any further
in any certain Determination of any more distinctly, then we formerly asserted,
in the explication of this first Position.

XII. 2. It is Moral by the first Commandment.
But we think good first to interpose our second Position (noted in the Title of
the Chapter) [That the Determinate Solemn Time forenoted, and argued to be
Morall-Naturall, is within the compass of the first Commandment.] To prove
which, we propound this ensuing Argument.

XIII. Argum.
[That which requires, that we give not God too little Time at once, or too
seldom Time in a revolution, comprehends under it such a Determinate Solemn
Time, as has been mentioned, both for Continuance and Frequencie: But the
first Commandment requires, that we give not God too little Time at once, or
too seldom Time in a revolution: Ergo.] The Major is clear from the former
grounds, in that the Sin and the Duty must needs come both under the same
Commandment. The Minor may be two ways confirmed.

1. 1 Confirmation.
[That Commandment which requires an acknowledgement that the Lord is our God,
and the sovereign Lord of us, and all our Time; requires that we give Him not
too little Time at once, or too seldom Time in a revolution: But the first
Commandment requires that acknowledgement, that the Lord is our God, and
sovereign Lord of us, and all our Time: Ergo.] The Major is certain; because
the sin of giving God too little Time at once, and too seldom Time in a
revolution, is contrary to the forementioned acknowledgement. The Time being
therefore too little, and too seldom, for Him and His worship, because He is
the supreme Lord of us and all our Time; and, as we said before, the Sin and
the Duty must needs be both under one Commandment. The Minor cannot be denied;
in that the affirmative part of the first Commandment being expressly, to have
the Lord for our God, This necessarily includes the acknowledgement of Him to
be our absolute Sovereign, and Lord of all our Time, and whatsoever else we
can call ours: or else some other must be acknowledged Lord of it, either our
selves, or some other creatures: and to affirm that, were to make such
creatures our God. Therefore the owning the Lord to be our God, requires and
comprehends such an acknowledgement, and such duty, and forbids such sin.

2. The second confirmation of the Minor of the first Syllogism, XIV. 2
Confirmation.
may be thus conceived: [That Commandment which requires the acknowledgement,
that God is our Happiness; requires, that we give Him not too little Time at
once, or too seldom in a revolution for attendance upon Him, and converse with
Him: But, the first Commandment requires that acknowledgement, that God is
our Happiness: Ergo.] The Major is manifest from the former grounds again;
because the sin of giving God too little Time, or too seldom Time, is contrary
to that acknowledgement, of Him being our Happiness. For what ever a man
counts his Happiness, he does (and can do no otherwise then) devote much and
often Time to it, to attend and enjoy it, being carried to his Happiness with
all his strength. And Love, which is the immediate offspring of such
accounting any thing our Happiness, both commands a man's Time, and all else of
him, in thankfulness, and kindness, and wisdom, for the service of, and
converse with, that object loved. Neither can love afford to offend in giving
too little, or too seldom Time; But it is a sin against love, and a
manifestation of the want of love, (so far forth) to scanty or abridge Time,
either for Continuance, or Frequencie. The Minor is no less easily proved;
Because that is plainly our God, which to serve and enjoy, is our happiness.
As for that reason mainly, Money is called the covetous man's god; Honor, the
ambitious man's god; Pleasure, the voluptuous Epicures; and he whose happiness
it is to pamper his belly, is he that makes his belly his god. In like sort we
have not the Lord to be our God, (which the first Commandment requires)
unless He be our happiness; or which comes to all one, unless to serve and
enjoy Him, be our happiness. As then Profaneness, Covetousness, and
Worldly-mindednesse, are sins against the first Commandment undeniably; and
they so take up the Time for our own carnal self, and the creatures, as that
they are the causes, and the only causes, why any gives God too little, or too
seldom Time: so they prove, that the sin of giving God too little, or too
seldom Time, comes under the compass of the said first Commandment; and
consequently, that that first Commandment requires such a determinate solemn
Time as we have spoken of, XV. A Consequence thereof.
for Continuance and Frequencie both.

And this which we have now asserted, considered by it self, we conceive that
every one (even our very Adversaries) will, and must grant us. But when we
shall come to make our Inference from it, Namely, that not only a Remissely
determinate Time for Religion, but even an Initiall determination both of some
solemn Continuance of Time, and some solemn Frequencie of Revolution, being
commanded in the first Commandment, (both singly and jointly) it will thence
follow, that nothing is left for the fourth Commandment, but only the precise
and conclusive determination of a whole Days continuance, in the revolution of
seven Days, as the chief Time for Religion: and so if the Commandment be not
in force now for one Day in seven, it is altogether void, and there are not now
ten Commandments, but only nine.] When, we say, we shall thus urge them from
hence, (as we suppose we may most justly and strongly) they will interpose some
Exceptions against this Position of ours concerning the first Commandment
including such Determinations of Time, as we have named; of which kind we have
already met with some from some Discourses: We shall therefore in the next
Part, where this application is properly to be made, propound such Exceptions,
as we can conceive may be made against it; and accordingly, as we hope,
sufficiently satisfy them: And then so many as dare not directly take away the
fourth Commandment wholly, will be forced to yield it in force (as we contend)
for one Day in seven, even from this very Argument, besides all others. Mr.
Broad, indeed, has ventured to be so audacious, as to reject this Commandment
wholly; and one or two more of our Disputers do now and then speak very
broadly toward it, as shall be noted in due place. But we suppose, the most
even of those that as yet consent not with us for the perpetuity of one Day in
seven, are not yet grown to that confidence, but that they will rather yield to
our assertion of that, then altogether to throw away the Commandment. For
their sakes it is, and for other conscientious Christians, who count themselves
bound to cleave to the whole Decalogue, (for the Reasons before alleged in
the 2. 3. 4. and 5. Chapters) that we take pains to maintain, that All Time,
which is now by our Adversaries avouched to be Morall-Naturall, belongs to the
first Commandment; and may be justified without any fourth Commandment at
all: And that therefore, it needs not, nor should not be now added, to a
purpose, which is already satisfied, and is not at all expressed in the words.
So that if we will have and hold a fourth Commandment still, we must hold to
the words of it, and so to one Day in seven, which is that we dispute for.

In the mean time we proceed to consider, XVI. How far Nature will carry us
further, in determination of Solemn Time.
whether the law of nature will carry us any further in this matter of
Determinate and Solemn Time for Religion? and how far? As also whether the
light of nature will not afford us some further direction about it, where to
seek a further direction after that the law of nature has nothing more to say
distinctly of it? Only first, Let us say a word concerning the Term of the
light of nature, The Light of Nature, and Law of Nature distinguished.
as different from the law of nature, and because we add it to the former. Of
which we say, [That by the light of nature we mean, The understanding that men
have by natural principles in their minds, (even notwithstanding the present
corruption of nature) whereby their Consciences, either of themselves, or
awakened by others discourses, come to prescribe the Laws of Nature to them:
making them see by way of conclusion from those principles a necessity of duty,
to or against such and such things, even though they have not heard of the
Scripture, or give no credit to their authority.] So that the Principles of
reason concerning God or man, are the light of nature, and the Practical
conclusions drawn from thence are the Laws of Nature.

XVII. A caution to be observed in Arguments from the Law of Nature.
2. Withal, Forasmuch as we have diverse Times asserted (and that undeniably)
[That God is the Sovereign Lord of us and all our Time;] and that it is also
certain, [That he has no need of us at all, nor of any of our Time] Therefore
whatsoever we shall argue as necessary by the Law of Nature to be employed in
Religion and the Solemn Worship of God, we do not intend it in that sort, as
though God could not appoint it otherwise, if he so pleased; and so if any
certain word of his can be showed, that he will not have now, this or that
Proportion of Time: It is not our purpose to argue for it, against that
express word of his, no not under the pretense of the Law of Nature, or ought
else that can possibly be alleged. But our intent is on the contrary, so to
discourse of the Law (and light) of Natures determining of Time, or directing
about it, as may urge the Consciences of Men, where the Scripture is silent, or
is not heard in the case; and so from the rules even of Nature to drive them to
have recourse to the express words of Scripture, in those cases, where Nature
is either at a loss, or may seem even to require more, then in our present
state on earth, man is able to give. So that we shall take these things for
undoubted truths. 1. That whatsoever Proportions of Time the Law (and Light) of
Nature call for to be employed in Religion, are altogether necessary, so far
forth as they are possible, to men that have also necessary worldly businesses,
unless the Scripture express Gods will, by way of Precept, or at least, of
indulgence to be otherwise. 2d. That if God do in the Scripture expressly give
us (now under the Gospel) an indulgence, of any proportions of Times for
worldly businesses, that so far as himself recalls it not, by other Rules of
his in Scripture, The Law of Nature is not to be urged as necessitating, to a
religious employing of those Times within the compass of that indulgence,
further then those other Rules of Scripture do again enforce. 3. That men
have no pretense to urge an indulgence granted in the old Testament (and
particularly, that of six days laboring about worldly business, ordinarily
and for the most part, which is the express indulgence of the fourth
Commandment,) and withal to reject the Commandemet it self for Religious
Time, to which this indulgence is but an appendix, or adjunct. For that the
indulgence cannot in reason be longer lived then the Commandment to which it
belongs. If therefore that be annihilated and repealed, so is the indulgence
also, that appertained to it. And then if a new one can not be found, we must
either have recourse to the fourth Commandment again, as we do, and would
persuade them also to do, or else we must trust only to the Law (and light) of
Nature: Which what command, or indulgence of it self, it will, or can give us,
we now come to consider.

And that in some distinct questions. 1. XVIII. Four general questions
propounded.
Whether to the initiall term of Continuance and Frequency (that is the
shortest and seldomest proportion) to be determined for Religion, which we have
already proved done by the Law of Nature, we may not find some further certain
determination by the Law of Nature of the Conclusive term of Continuance
single, and so a conclusive determination of the longest Continuance considered
single without any Frequency of Revolution. 2. Whether also the same may be
found of the Conclusive term of Frequency, and so a Conclusive determination
made of the greatest Frequency single, without adding any Continuance to it?
And if not, yet how far the Law (and light) of Nature will lead us toward
it? 3. Whether then the Law of Nature can possibly make a Conclusive
determination of both those respects of Continuance and Frequency jointly, and
so to make up the chief solemn Time of Worship? And if not, yet whether the
light of Nature will not tell us, that such a determination must necessarily be
made for Religion? And accordingly, what conditions this determination must
have: which will direct them whether any General Rules of Scripture added to
the light of Nature can suffice to the making of this determination, by any man
or number of men? Or that we must needs seek for an express determination of
it in Scripture, which then can be no other, but that of the fourth
Commandment for one Day in Seven. 4. And finally, whether, after this settled,
the Law (and light) of Nature, will afford us any help toward the
determination also of the Quando, season, or order of beginning; the particular
Day of seven, and the beginning of the Day at evening or morning: or send us
for this also to the Scripture. And so we shall at last meet a most complete
determination of all the three respects of Time together for Religion, and so
the most solemn Time that can be: Of all which in their order, and with all
convenient brevitie.

1. Here for the first of these, the longest Continuance singly considered; We
suppose, XIX. 1. Nature determines for the longest Continuance, a Day.
if we can light upon a Continuance with these three Qualifications, namely,
Which 1. is limited in Nature, (as Nature is distinguished from Art, and so may
be taken notice of by all men that have Natural Reason, though they have no
Art, or skill in Astronomicall Distinctions of Time.) 2. Which is possible to
be employed, all of it, in the Worship of God, according to Nature, (as Nature
is distinguished from Corruption, and imports Physical natural abilities, and
natural spirits, that may hold out to the end of the Continuance in businesses
of importance.) 3. And which is the Longest Continuance, generally possible,
according to Nature, for all men so to employ: We have then found that we seek
for; And that the Law of Nature does certainly (and conclusively) determine
such a Continuance to be employed in Solemn Worship, one Time or other in a
man's life. And that, in a word, we conceive to be a Day: For as for a Year, or
Month, which are also Natural limitations of Time; they are too long for any
Natural abilities to hold out unto, (even taking in the naturally necessary
reservations of meat and sleep) to employ them wholly in the solemn Worship of
God. It must then either be a Day, or nothing.

XX A Day described.
Now by a Day, which, we say, is a Continuance limited in Nature, and may by
Natural Reason, without Art, be taken notice of; We understand not that Time
of Light, which is distinguished from the Darkness of Night, and is longer,
and shorter, in several Countries and Climates, at the same time of the year,
and in several times of the year in the same Country and Climate: But such a
Continuance of Time, whether of Light or Darkness, may be, and is, in all
Countries, and all seasons of the year, termed a Natural Day. Now this
Natural Day, we think, we may express or describe two ways fitly. 1.
Physically, 24 hours.
1. By a mere Physical or Astronomicall Consideration of the revolution of
the Heavens, and namely of the primum mobile, in the space of 24 hours, as we
count it. And this space of 24 hours, is generally by all (or most) termed a
natural day; and the revolution of it, though not precisely to a minute, is
generally possible to all men to observe, in what Climate soever they live, and
how long soever the Sun is present with them, or absent from them, even though
they understand not so much as the Terms of Astronomy: As may easily be made
good, even by experience of Shepherds, who can usually, by seeing the Sun, any
Time of the Day, tell what Hour it is (neer-hand) without any Dial, 2.
Practically our waking Time.
or mark on the ground, only by looking up to it. 2. Or by a Consideration
partly Ethicall and Practical, that is, [That Time within the space of 24
Hours, wherein men are awake] which is properly and only the Time of business
any Day: And which waking Time is the only Continuance possible, according to
Nature, to be employed in the Worship of God, (or in any other business, as we
said.) For it is not possible, we know, to employ our selves in any business,
or service of God, not being awake. Now this waking Time, specially so much as
is between that waking in the morning, which is for all day as we say (when a
man presently rises, or at least sets his mind a work straight upon some
business, or pleasure,) and that sleeping Time, when a man lays himself
down to sleep for that night; is in common speech also termed a Day. And men's
businesses, their daily work and labor, particularly of household servants,
apprentices and others, are usually during that whole Continuance.

And now of both these descriptions of a Natural Day, we say, XXI. These are
both one in our sense.
That for the matter we have now in hand, they are in true construction but one
and the same. Specially if we remember, that which we have heretofore laid
down about the determination of Time generally in any respect: That it admits
of some reservation or dispensation, according to the pleasure of the
determiner, sufficiently made known. For so the Law of Nature, that is, God in
Nature, determining as we suppose, a Days Continuance for solemn Worship,
does yet admit of a reservation out of the 24 hours Continuance constantly,
not only for the necessary or comfortable eating Times, (unless God do
specially command a Fast upon that Day:) But also specially for the necessary
sleeping Time, within the compass of 24 hours. And so all the remainder of
that Time of 24 hours, namely the waking Time, before mentioned, is properly,
and only, the Day for business, and so the Day which is determined, as we say,
by the Law of Nature for Gods Worship: solemn Worship, as much as may be; and
Ejaculatory, in meal-Times, by speaking and thinking of God upon every turn;
and not settling the thoughts or words upon any worldly object or business
unnecessarily; that so God may have all that can possibly be tendered Him, on
His solemn Day. XXII. An objection answered two ways.


If now any shall object, that if we make the waking time of men, within 24
hours, to be such a Day, as the Law of Nature determines for Gods worship:
Then, whether it determine only one such Day in a man's life, or more, (of which
we yet dispute not, but shall do anon) It determines not equally to several
men, but to some a longer Continuance, to some a shorter: because all do not,
nor cannot wake a like Continuance; but some more, some less, according to the
natural abilities and tempers of their bodily spirits; some being not
satisfied, without they have more sleep then others stand in need of: And that
it seems an inconvenience, to say, That the Law of Nature does not bind all men
equally.

XXIII. Answ. 1.
To this we answer briefly, 1. That it is no inconvenience to say, That the Law
of Nature, in one sense, equally binds all men; and in another sense, it does
not bind all men equally: [aeque, non aequaliter, as we spoke before in another
matter:] and that about the selfsame thing. Namely, that it may bind all men
to the same proportion, Geometrical, as the schools speak; but not to the
same proportion Arithmeticall. As for example, the Law of Nature, binds all
rich men equally, in one sense, to releeve the poor: But in another sense, it
binds them not all equally. It equally binds them all, in a Geometrical
proportion, that is, according as they are able to spare, and others need: But
it binds them not all equally, in (or to) an Arithmeticall proportion, that is,
just so many pounds, shillings, or pence; because all have not alike to spare.
So in this case, the Law of Nature equally binds all men to give God a Day,
that is, such as Day as they are able, such a Day as their Natural spirits can
hold out unto; as they are able to continue waking, in the service of God: But
it does not bind all then equally to the same proportions of minutes, because
all are not able to wake equally, one as long as an other. But so far as men
are able, it binds all equally, all being bound to serve God in the Day with
all their strength, the strength of all their Natural abilities. And so much,
we shall presently see, The Law of Nature, commands every one of mankind; (and
more then so much, it does not command;) whether the Continuance be longer or
shorter, compared with others.

XXIV. Answ. 2.
2. But with all we say, If any one of mankind, through neglect of the service
of God or misse-devotion to it, do willingly sleep more, and wake less Time
then he need to do: (whether, again, the Continuance, compared with other
men, be longer or shorter,) he is and will be found a transgressour against
this Law of Nature: For this is but corruption in him, though perhaps he may
pretend Natural infirmity. But of that, and all other such like pretenses,
this Rule, in a word, may be a certain and sufficient judge, That what
Continuance soever a man is able to keep himself waking in a Day, about any
worldly business, or matter of pleasure (gaming or the like,) he is able to
keep himself, according to Nature, the same Continuance of Time in the
service of God, in one or other exercise of Religion, which Naturally weary not
the spirits, more then worldly matters; but rather less then many worldly
matters; and the varieties may refresh and do greatly, the mind, so far as
carnallity and corruption oversway not. And therefore, in the first stating of
this position concerning a Day to be determined by the Law of Nature, we
distinguished, Natural abilities, from corruption. For we take it for a most
undeniable Truth, That corruption does not hinder the Law of Nature from
commanding to the utmost of Natural abilities, (as long at least as it exceeds
not them,) For the loving and so serving, God withal our strength (as was
touched before) is infallibly of the Law of Nature; and yet no man's corruption
now suffers him to yield God so much love and service. This also made be made
good in manifold particular instances, That the Law of Nature does command us
to do things, which now according to Our corruption it is impossible for any
man to do. As to pray, or read, or hear the Word, (when ever he does any of
these Duties,) with a steady fixed heart and mind, without any distractions or
worldly thoughts at all, that while (for that they are, so far forth, a
taking of Gods holy name in vain,) Yet this no man is able now to do, as all
men's consciences will confess, even though they employ but a very short
Continuance in it.

And now we come to prove, XXV. An argument to prove that nature determines a
days continuance.
that a Days Continuance for Religion is determined by the Law of Nature, from
grounds and principles in Nature which we have formerly made use of. [If it be
sin against the Law of Nature, never in a man's life to give God a whole Day at
once; then the Law of Nature determines to every man, a whole Days
Continuance, once at least in his life, But it is sin against the Law of
Nature never to God a whole Day at once. Ergo.] The consequence is undeniable.
The Antecedent is thus further made good. [That which is contrary to the
acknowledgement of Gods being the Lord of us and all our Time, and Gods being
our happiness, is a sin against the Law of Nature. But never in a man's life
to give God, a whole Day at once, is contrary to those acknowledgements. Ergo.]
The Major is most plain and certain, The Minor also may be infallibly proved.
Because those acknowledgments call for as much Continuance at once, as Nature
can possibly determine and possibly give at once, where all that a man has is
due, that debt cannot be satisfied, unless all be tendered to Him. So unless
all the Continuance of a Day be tendered to God, he has not all that is due to
Him as Lord of all our Time. Also where a man acknowledges his whole happiness
to lie, that cannot but carry him, with the whole of his strength, to the
utmost Continuance Nature has to give: For all that a man does is toward his
happiness; and nothing can draw his mind from it, while his acknowledgement of
it fails not. Now we have already showed, that Nature can and does determine
such a Day to every man for business (of what kind soever,) and that it can
give it wholly to God, employ it wholly in the service of God (taking in
specially, the Reservations of any necessary refreshings, which Nature, and not
corruption calling for God allows, and any extraordinary other Necessary
interruption, as we have formerly said.) Therefore, never throughout a man's
life to give God that which Nature, is so able to give Him, is against those
acknowledgements of Gods Sovereignty and His being our Happiness, and so a
sin against the Law of Nature.

XXVI. An objection answered.
If here it be objected, That the same Argument will as well prove the whole
Continuance of every Day of our life, as of one Day: which yet it does not do,
nor cannot; because our Natural necessities, allowed by God, and even
commanded by the Law of Nature, (as it concerns the second Table duties)
admits it not. And therefore the Argument is either false, or impertinent, or
both.

We answer, that the Objection furnishes us with sufficient justification of
the Arguments both truth, and pertinencie. For we grant, according to the
Objection, that God, in the Law of Nature, commands to attend necessary Worldly
businesses, as well (we say not, as much, that is, as absolutely necessarily)
as His services, and the pursuing immediately of the Souls happiness, in and
by them Therefore in sensu composito, it is not true, that the Argument proves
the whole of every Days continuance to be determined by the Law of Nature, for
Religion, and Gods immediate worship. Although, in sensu diviso, it proves of
every particular Day, (that is, this or that Quando) as well as of one. But we
propound it not of any particular Day, in respect of the Quando or Season, this
or that Day; but only of one single Continuance of a Day. And so it is both
true, and pertinent. It is true: For though natural necessities of Worldly
businesses will not admit the whole Continuance of every Day, one after
another, (that is, the Quoties or Revolution joined to the Continuance, which
we meddle not with in the Argument) Yet they will certainly admit one Day in a
man's life: we mean, ordinary businesses will, (and for extraordinary
necessities, we grant, as before, Reservation for them, if they should fall
out, when a man were upon that one Days devotions.) Therefore still Nature can
give such a Day; and therefore again we say, It is true, that the Law of Nature
does determine it. And as for the pertinencie of this Discourse, we shall show
it by and by.

A second Objection may be made; Namely, XXVII. Another objection answered.
That what is necessary by the Law of Nature, is always, and certainly so: But
so is not this: because, for any thing the light of Nature can see, or say, God
may have declared, that He will not have a whole Day, at any time, at once: and
then the Argument will overthrow it self; He being the Sovereign Lord of in
and all our Time.

But to this we answer two things. 1. That we have in part already prevented
this Objection; because, before we propounded this Question, of our judging of
the Law of Natures determining a Continuance of Time conclusively for Religion,
we propounded it under the favor of Gods allowance of it, even because all
Time is His, and He has no need of any service of ours. Therefore the Argument
is intended but so far forth, as God has not refused a whole Days continuance
at once to be tendered to Him in Solemn Worship. 2. We add, that unless we had
such an express refusal in Scripture, we cannot conceive how the Light of
Nature can suppose any such thing, as, that God should not allow His creatures
to attend upon Him so long together at once, as their natural abilities are
able to do, and their ordinary worldly necessities (with the allowed
reservations) do certainly admit: That it can stand, we say, with His Honor,
to refuse and forbid a whole Day. The rather, because none of our Adversaries,
notwithstanding their displeasure is mainly against the Continuance of a whole
Day, B. of E. p. 255. C. D. p 5^. G. Irons. p. 268.
did ever express any imagination, that it should not be lawful to observe a
whole Day: Only they will not admit it necessary. But, though we contend not
for a necessity from the Law of Nature, for a whole Day every seven Days; yet
if it be certainly lawful, to have one whole Day in a man's life, (as they more
then grant, while they yield it ordinarily lawful every Week) We suppose, the
Argument foregoing will prove so much necessary, even by the Law of Nature, as
we have said.

XXVIII. A third objection answered.
One Objection yet remains, That two half Days may do as well as one whole
Day, as being the same proportion in the whole.

We answer diverse things: 1. We suppose we have already in the former Chapter
proved, That the longest Continuance is more profitable to Religion, as also
more convenient for leaving freedom for worldly businesses at other times,
then to divide the proportion of so many hours between diverse Days. 2. For
any man unncecessarily to break off the continuance of his attendance upon Gods
solemn Worship, is undeniably to discover want of Devotion to the Service of
his Lord, and want of affection to God, his happiness. If a Necessity take him
off, for a little while, or for longer, the Reservation (which we have often
named) acquits him of sin; but it may, and should be a grief to him: Else
Christ would not have bidden His Disciples, [ Pray that your flight be not on
the Sabbath, Mat. 24.20.] Implying, it ought to grieve them, though it were
lawful: (of which place we shall speak fully in due time.) But therefore we
say again, To break off unnecessarily, when a man has free liberty to attend
on God, is a sin. 3. Besides that, He knows not whether he may not be
hindered to morrow, or when he would make up his other half Day, and so lose it
altogether; or be so long put off from Day to Day, till a great deal of his
Affections gotten or quickened in the former half Day, be quenched again and
lost. A careful Tenant, when his Rent is due, and he has it all ready, will
not bring half, and leave the rest to another time, lest he be robbed in the
mean while, or be forced to spend it, and so want it when he should pay it. If
a man be bound to give God the proportion of a whole Day, as this Objection
grants; and that by unnecessary delaying, he should die, having tendered but one
half Day, when he might have given the whole, he dies in a sin. Therefore
for certainty, two half Days are not so good as a whole Day. 4. If after that
one whole Day, a man can certainly have freedom for another half Day, (we
add, or even for another whole Day) the Argument will again hold for that
half Day also, or that second whole Day, and so will add such a Frequencie to
the Continuance. But this were lost, we mean the benefit of the second half
Day, if upon an unnecessary breaking off at the former half Days end, (or not
beginning till half were gone) this second must go to make up the former
proportion of a whole Day: whereas here had been half a Day clearly gained to
Religion, if the former Day had been wholly observed. Therefore we conclude,
that notwithstanding all these Objections, [ A whole Days continuance, at
least once in every man's life, is determined to him for Religious attendance
upon God, in that sort that has been discoursed.] Other Arguments there are,
which will help to evince the same, as we suppose. But we shall have occasion
to propound them hereafter in place convenient. And we conceive, we have
sufficiently proved it here by this one.

And now if any ask, To what purpose is all this pains, XXIX. A scruple
removed.
seeing that this has not come hitherto into an express Controversy; but
rather by some of our Disputers words seems to be granted, (as we have noted.)
We answer, That as the inquiry is pertinent to such as look narrowly into the
nature of Religious Time, as we profess to do: So we conceive it may be very
useful to our main Controversy, which (as we diverse times noted) is
principally about the Continuance, whether it be to be a whole Day at once, or
less: and for the sake of this, all the other Disputes are brought upon the
stage. Now we suppose, that this being evinced, and upon those grounds that
have been produced; It will hence follow, when we come to join the Frequencie
to the Continuance, in a Conclusive Determination to be looked after, of both
these Respects of Time jointly, to make up the chief Solemn Time for
Religion; that whatever the Revolution be for number, yet in all probability
(to say no more yet) it must be of a whole Days Continuance, unless it can be
found, that God has now altogether rejected a whole Day; or that Worldly
Necessities (even with the benefit of Reservation on the Day, for some) will
not now admit so long a Continuance for Religion, though they did of old. For
if God have not refused it, nor can worldly necessities exclude it, we see not
but the Law of Nature will be calling for a Revolution and Frequencie of a
whole Day; though we say not, that it can pitch upon the Frequencie of a
Seventh Days revolution. Of which more anon.

XXX. Another scruple satisfied.
If any, after all, shall say, That we have forgotten to put into this Argument,
one thing, before mentioned in the way to it, namely, That the Coninuance which
the Law of Nature determines conclusively, is the longest Continuance that
natural abilities can hold out unto at once: which we have not yet affirmed of
a Day.

We answer in a word, 1. That we conceive it needless to take much pains to
prove, that the a Day of 24 hours is the longest Continuance at once, that the
natural abilities of all mankind generally is able to bestow upon the worship
of God, or any other business. For if sleep be so necessary, as it is
ordinarily to all men, within that time, (which is a most formal interruption
or breaking of the Continuance of any business) as that not one of a hundred
perhaps does or can watch, at any time, a whole 24 hours together: Then much
less can it be imagined, that all men should be able to hold out to a longer
Continuance, without such naturally necessary interruption. 2. Also that we may
justly say, that after such a formal interruption, (as sleep, upon the
necessity of Nature is) and a new Day in Nature beginning: The next Time,
suppose any were further determined upon a man's waking, were rather belonging
to the Quoties or Frequencie, as being a Revolution of a New Day, (as we said)
then simply to the Continuance, so notoriously interrupted and ended, from a
necessity of Natures making. Though also, if there were an express and
distinct determination further upon that second Day, of any Continuance of
Time; then that determination were not neither a single determination of the
Quoties or Frequencie, but of it, and the Quamdiu or Continuance jointly: As in
the Fast of Ester, three Days one after another.

XXXI. How far Nature determines the Frequencie.
And so we proceed to our second Question, about the Law of Natures
Determination of Time, namely about the Frequencie; How far the Law of Nature
will lead us toward a Conclusive Determination thereof, that is, of the
greatest Frequencie, even single, without any Continuance added to it: and
whether it can as well make a Conclusive Determination of the Frequencie, as we
have showed that it does of the Continuance.

For resolution hereof, although it may seem fair to affirm, That (if we
shall speak according to the Natural divisions of Time, and so the Natural
revolutions, distinctly observable by Natural Rules, even without art, among
all men all the world over:) the Law of Nature does determine, even
conclusively, the Frequency of every Day; that is, so often the Law of Nature
does require for the Worship of God, from all men, by way of command, but no
oftener (though not forbidding oftener, but only seldomer;) because Nature
seems to have no Frequenter distinct revolution then a Day; And that it has,
and is able to observe and take notice of; and accordingly is able to Worship
God, even solemnly so often; There being no impediment imaginable, why within
the Revolution of every Day, a man may not give God some solemn Worship. But
we say, though this seems a fair assertion, and suitable to what we had
before, of the Natural Continuance of a Day, yet if we shall speak
Practically and Ethically (as we did partly before of the Continuance) we must
deliver our selves somewhat otherwise; and indeed so we must also in a mere
Physical or Astronomicall consideration of the Revolution of a Day.

And 1. XXXII. Twice a day, at least.
then in that consideration we say that the Law of Nature, if it make any
Conclusive determination of the Frequency of Time for Gods worship, it must be
of twice every Day. Because there is indeed a twofold revolution or Frequency
observable in every Day Naturally; the beginning, and the end: In each of which
it is undoubtedly possible to tender to God some Worship: And so it is
Practically; A man's first waking, and his lying down to sleep, are two
distinct observable Revolutions, appliable to Gods Worship, we do not now here
speak of the Quando, whether Natures Law does command to take the first Time
of waking, and the last Time before sleep, for solemn Worship (that may be
considered afterward) But we say that these two are distinct and observable
revolutions of Time in every Day: And so each of them affording a remarkable
possibility of Worshipping God: The Law of Nature (upon the former grounds of
Gods being our happiness, and the Sovereign Lord of all our Time) cannot but
determine both those Times to make a Conclusive determination of the Frequency
(if any such may be made) or at least an Initiall determination; that is, so
often at least as twice in every Day, once in the morning, and once toward
night, the Law of Nature does determine for solemn Worship to every man. This
we mean of such Days as we call working Days, out of which Natures Law
determines twice every such Day, to tender some solemn Worship to God; As well
as it does the whole of one Day (in a man's life) as we discoursed before; of
which Day or any such Days, we speak not in this Argument; Because though the
particular Duties are diverse, on such a Day and some to be repeated twice, or
oftener, as prayer; Yet this in the whole is counted but once, one Continuance,
because no worldly thing, unless by reason of present necessity (for which a
reservation is made) may come in, and interrupt the Continuance at all. But now
therefore when we speak of twice a Day, we speak of those Days which are
mainly for worldly businesses: that even notwithstanding that they are so by
Gods allowance and appointment, N. B.
(whether in Nature or Scripture,) yet the Law of Nature does determine, a
double Frequency of Religious services, every such Day, of every man's life.
Only we say not, that any Continuance is strictly determined with this
Frequency, that so long a man must continue at his devotions twice every Day.
But that so often, at least for the Frequency, the Law of Nature commands, we
thus in a word further make plain.

XXXIII. Confirmed by reason.
[ If it be sin against the Law of Nature not to worship God every Day twice,
then the Law of Nature determines to every man the Frequency of every Day
twice. But it is a sin against the Law of Nature not to Worship God every Day
twice: Ergo.] The consequence has been confirmed by like Arguments. The
Antecedent is also certainly thus made good. [ That which is contrary to the
acknowledgement of Gods being the Lord of all our Time, and our happiness, is
a sin against the Law of Nature, but not to worship God every day twice, is
contrary to those acknowledgements, Ergo.] The Major cannot be denied, and has
often been proved. The Minor is also infallible, because that acknowledgment,
calls for as Frequent Worship of God as Nature can possibly point out, and
possibly give to God: But we have already showed how Nature does point out
clearly, and distinctly two Revolutions of Time every Day, and that it is
infallibly possible to apply both of them to give God some Worship, at least in
a short Continuance, as a minute, or half a minute together. Therefore not to
give God so often some Worship, is against that acknowledgement, and so a sin
against the Law of Nature, which also it is more then probable, God meant to
teach his people, by the appointment of the daily morning and evening Sacrifice.

And this Frequency of twice every Day for some solemn Worship of God, though
it primarily respect Solitary Worship, XXXIV. 1 With respect to solitary
worship.
which is (as we said in a former Chapter) the most Essentially and Properly
Morall-Naturall solemn Worship, and Perpetually necessary, as being
perpetually possible; for even while a man is in the midst of a crowde, it is
possible for him, to present to God such solitary and secret Worship as we have
described to be solemn, even the whole man being intent on no other thing for
that while, how short so ever the Continuance prove: So that we cannot possibly
conceive what can hinder a man (and so what can excuse him) from such tender of
some solemn Worship to God solitary and single by himself twice every Day,
Namely between morning and noon, and between noon and his sleeping at night:
Yet withal, 2. As also to family worship.
we wish all those that have, or may have company to join with them in Family
Worship, to consider seriously between God and their consciences, whether the
forementioned grounds for solemn family Worship, be so far forth also
Morall-Naturall, as it is possible to be performed with any convenience; and
then the Argument but even now mentioned, laid together; will not also evince
it to be Morall-Naturall, for such to perform solemn family worship, as
often, namely twice a Day, once in the morning, or toward noon, and once in the
evening, or at night. We are very sensible, That this will be a very harsh pill
for many Readers to swallow: family Duties being so exceedingly neglected, and
even disputed against by very many, as no where commanded in Scripture.
Therefore we only propound it again to all consciences to weigh in sobriety,
what just hindrances they can have, and so what excuses they can possibly
plead, which God will accept of, if they tender him not such Worship so often,
they and all their families ordinarily? And whether a quarter of an hour, or
half a quarter at a Time, can be refused by any, but minds forgetful of the
Sovereignty of God; and the obligation they owe to Him for His Protection and
Blessing Night and Day, preserving from dangers, and prospering endeavors; and
the dependence they have upon Him continually, without whom, sin and misery
will at all seiasons seze upon them; and again forgetful, that their
Spiritual Happiness lies in Him, conversing with Him, and pursuing, and
enjoying His Favor? And then we suppose, the issue of their religious and
conscientious thoughts will be no other; then that rather more and oftener,
then seldomer and less, is due to God and necessary for them and their
families for their own good, of soul and body, spiritual, and even
temporal; namely, to secure a blessing upon themselves every way Daily.

XXXV. Nature cannot make a conclusive determination of the Frequency.
But to return to our Question, whether thus often by a Conclusive
Determination of the Frequencie for Solemn Worship, and that the Law of Nature
does require no oftener then twice a Day? Besides, that if that be good which we
have but now discoursed, of twice required for solitary Worship, and twice for
family Worship also, we have already gotten to four times a day, instead of
twice; we add yet further, that we cannot absolutely rest here for a certain,
definite and determinate number, or Frequency. For if we speak still
Practically (as we must in matter of Religion) These determinations of twice
(or four Times) every Day will not infallibly satisfy the Law of Nature: Nor
indeed any other number of Frequency that can be named. And so in a word we
say, [That the Law of nature cannot possibly make a Conclusive determination of
the Frequency of Time, considered simply, for Gods Worship;] that is, That so
often should be peremptorily necessary for all men, and no oftener; and so that
so often should be sufficient for all men generally considered, The reason of
it.
although some particulars might be yet obliged to some what oftener. The
reason hereof is plainly this, That Practically it is possible to observe a
revolution of Time wherein we may, if we have hearts to it, set our selves to
Worship God even solemnly, as often as our minds cease from being taken up
wholly with any worldly business, and that such business will by any means
admit an interruption of a minute, or half a minute, to lift up the soul to
God in Prayer or Praises; and this may possibly be manifold Times in a Day
(even innumerable before hand:) And now the Law of Nature, from those often
mentioned (and ever to be thought on) acknowledgements of Gods being our
Sovereign Lord, and of all our Time, and our happiness; and so to be
infinitely preferred before our selves and all our worldly businesses, will be
constantly calling upon us in all those Revolutions of Time, to ^ender to Him
some Worship, how short soever. And from this, no consideration of Gods (not
only dispensation, but) command, to employ our selves in worldly callings, and
perform such worldly businesses as are necessary accordingly; can be pretended
to be a sufficient discharge, absolutely, and always. For we have before
proved, in the Chapter of Solemn Worship, and it is not denied by any that we
know, [ That it is oftentimes a Duty, (which we now say, is according to the
Law of Nature) not only in the midst of Worldly businesses to tender some
Ejaculatory Worship to God, namely, Prayers and Praises; But even upon sundry
occasions, to interrupt for a little while our Worldly businesses wholly, to
pray to Him, and praise Him somewhat solemnly.] Therefore we say again, that
these occasions being impossible to be numbered beforehand, for any one man,
(and much less for all generally) there can be no certain Conclusive
Determination of the Frequencie, by the Law of Nature; that just so often, and
no oftener, should be necessary for solemn worshipping of God by all men.

And now from this we go on to our third Question propounded, XXXVI. Nature
cannot make a conclusive determination of the Continuance and Frequencie
jointly.
concerning the joining of these two Respects of Time, the Continuance and
Frequencie, both in one Conclusive Determination: that is, [ Whether the Law of
Nature can possibly make a Conclusive Determination of both these Respects of
Continuance and Frequencie jointly, and so do make up the chief solemn Time
for Worship? And if not, yet whether the Light of Nature will not then tell us,
that there must be such a Determination necessarily made for Religion? and what
conditions and qualifications it must have? And so consequently, where we are
to seek it, and may be like, or certain to find it.

In answer whereunto, 1. Confessed by the adverse party.
we have in the first branch of this Question, (though it be so but in a few
points besides, about the main matters in the whole Argument) our
Anti-Sabbatarians full and constant agreement with us; Namely, in resolution of
this Inquiry, in the Conclusion, (though not altogether in the Argument
proving it:) [That the Law of Nature does not make any such Conclusive
Determination of both the Respects of Time, the Continuance and Frequencie
jointly, for Gods worship.] So we suppose, that it does not, nor cannot: and so
they say the same in sense, with much earnestness; in as much as they make it
their principal argument against the fourth Commandments being Moral for one
Day in seven; because (say they) the Law of Nature does not command any such
thing. Which Argument of theirs, as appliable against the Morality of one Day
in seven, though we deny the Consequence of, (as taking Moral to be that which
is Universal and Perpetual, though it be not of the Law of Nature; whereas
they by Moral will only understand Morall-Naturall, as we have showed in the
first Chapter) Yet we take hold of the Antecedent, [That the Law of Nature does
not command any such thing:] neither the Determinate Proportion of Continuance
in such a Frequencie, nor any other; that is, not distinctly, strictly, and
conclusively. And that they not hereafter recede from it, we will make bold
with the Readers patience, to prove it our selves also, upon our own grounds;
that so, hoping to build very considerably upon it by and by, we may not lay
the weight of our fabric, in any matter of importance, merely upon their
grants (as we said but a while ago) or build, as it were, upon another man's
foundation. Thus therefore we argue --

XXXVII. 2. Proved by strong reason.
[ If man, by the light of Nature, cannot judge any Continuance, and Frequencie
of Time jointly, to be sufficient to be bestowed in Gods worship, unless it be
the whole of a man's Time, that is, the whole Continuance of every Day; then the
Law of Nature does not make any such Conclusive Determination of the
Continuance and Frequencie of Time jointly, for the worship of God. But man, by
the Light of Nature is not able to judge any Continuance and Frequencie of Time
jointly determined to be sufficient to be bestowed in Gods worship, unless it
be the whole of a man's Time, that is, the whole Continuance of every Day.
Ergo.] The Consequence is certain: 1. From the description of such a Conclusive
Determination, formerly given; Namely, that as it requires strictly so much, so
often, and so often so much as is expressed: so it requires not any more so often, nor
so much any oftener, then is expressed. 2. From the Light of Nature, being the
ground of the Law of Nature: and so the Law of Nature requires no greater
proportion of Continuance and Frequencie jointly, then the Light of Naaure must
needs judge is sufficient: For if it judge that unsufficient, then the Law of
Nature accordingly straight would require more, and oftener. And so the
Conclusive Determination is not made, till the Light of Nature have judged the
proportion sufficient; and that being not to be done, there is no such
Determination made by the Law of Nature.

The Antecedent is easily proved, by appealing to the former principles of the
Light and Law of Nature: Of Gods being the Sovereign Lord of us, and all our
Time, and our happiness. For what can be said to satisfy these principles,
and to argue that sufficient Time is given to God, unless He have all? Where
all that a man has is due to another; that debt is not satisfied, neither can
it be judged to be satisfied, unless all be tendered to him. Also where a man's
whole happiness lies, less then all his time cannot be judged sufficient to
be employed toward that; for what can be pretended to draw a man away from his
happiness, when all that a man does is but toward that? The light of Nature
then cannot judge less then all a man's Time to be sufficient to be given to
God, and bestowed in waiting upon Him, and conversing with Him.

If it be said that the light of Nature will tell every man, XXXVIII. An
objection Answered.
that he cannot live, if he devote all his Time to wait upon God solemnly.

We answer, 1. This will infer no more, then that the Law of Nature upon that
ground, makes a Reservation for Natural necessities of sleep and eating, and
such like, and so providing necessaries merely for preservation of a man's
bodily life; and still calls for all the rest of the Time.

2. That it being altogether uncertain, by any rules, or principles of the
light of Nature, how much Time is altogether absolutely necessary for those
natural necessities of the body, it helps to make it impossible for a man, by
the light of Nature to say, that such Continuance and Frequency of Time
(whatsoever can be supposed) is sufficient for God: For if Nature can give
more, this is not sufficient: and it is still uncertain whether Nature can
give more, or else it will be uncertain whether Nature can give so much,
leaving room for those Natural necessities of the body. We conclude then, that
the Law of Nature neither does, nor can Determine the necessary sufficient
chief Time, for Continuance and Frequency jointly. And so that we are so far
from Asserting, That the Law of Nature Determines us to one in seven (or that
one day in seven according to the fourth Commandment is Morall-Naturall) as the
sufficient Time conclusively determined for Religion, That we say the Law of
Nature would rather command more often a day, or more then that proportion of
fourteen, or sixteen hours of a week; and call for one day of every six or
five, or four, or three, or each other day; or half, or more of every day: But
indeed none of all this certainly or conclusively; because (as we said) the
light of Nature can in no wise Determine, how much is sufficient for Religion,
or how much worldly necessities can possibly admit. Our
Antisabbatarian-Adversaries therefore may hereafter spare their Arguments,
whereby they labor to prove the fourth Commandment for one day in seven, not
to be Morall-Naturall. For we also avouch it, and have helped to prove it,
though little to their advantage (as we suppose) as we shall show them anon.

XXXIX. Yet Nature says a Determination of a chief time is necessary.
We pass then to the second branch of our Inquiry about this chief Time, and a
conclusive Determination of it: Of a necessary and sufficient Continuance and
Frequency jointly [Whether the light of Nature will not tell us that, There
must be necessarily such a Determination made for Religion? and what conditions
and qualifications it must have? Confessed by the adverse party.
] Now here again, if our adversaries authority were sufficient to satisfy
consciences; or that we durst trust them, that they would be constant to their
noted Assertions; we might save the labor of proving generally, that there
must be such a Determination of a sufficient Time. Forasmuch as it is very
frequent with them, To make this the Morality, and the whole Morality of the
fourth Commandment: To require a sufficient Time for Solemn Worship: A set
regulated, stinted, sufficient Time, say they every where, is of the Law of
Nature, and Morall-Naturall, for all men. But these confessions or professions
of theirs, do in no wise satisfy us, so as to rest upon them simply; and that
for diverse reasons: 1. Because they are not constant to them, but in stead of
this they as often make the Morality to be only Public Worship, (which they
only call Solemn Worship) and then the Time is required only by consequence,
and as a sequel of a Morality, wherein Place is as much Moral, as Time; and
accordingly so they usually Assert Time and Place to be equal circumstances in
Religion: And yet they do not usually speak out, concerning Place [That a set,
stinted, regulated place should be Morall-Naturall.] And much less do they, or
indeed can they say any thing of the Sufficiency of Place toward Religion, as
of Time they do and must. Therefore their inconstancy makes us, that we dare
put no weight upon their acknowledgement. 2. Because though in talking of the
sufficiency of this Time, they sometimes speak Rationally concerning the
Frequency, and [That less Frequent then the Jews had, we Christians must not
have our solemn Times] (Though to this also they are not constant neither, for
sometimes they seem to argue for more often, as one in six or five, and
another Time, they reason, that one in seven is not more necessary by the Law
of Nature, then one in eight or ten, of both which more hereafter:) Yet we
cannot observe that they offer to speak any thing distinctly about the
sufficiency of the Continuance to be determined, no not for the public
worship: But leave it all uncertainly to the Churches determinations. The
Historian, he seems to approve most of those Churches that have it only in the
forenoone. The Author of Sunday no Sabbath, speaks some what, only of two
hours in the whole. Others also keep aloof from any clear expression of
themselves about this sufficiency for the Continuance; which yet is the
Principal controversy of all the dispute; and for the sake of which all the
other disputes are started by the Antisabbatarians, as we have formerly noted,
and which we desire much may be remembered. 3. Because also, though some of them
seem now and then, as if they would gratify us with a little proportion also
of Continuance for private Duties, and so improving of the public by
meditating and conferring of those things they have been publicly conversant
in, afterward for their benefit; Yet this is so seldom, and so faintly and
fearfully (least they should endanger their whole Cause, with being too
liberal in their grants, as in very deed they do for all that, if they would
but hold to them, as we hope to show them in due Time;) and the thing is of
such importance, that we must be feign to trust to our own Proofs and
Arguments for every thing; laying as strong foundations as we can, all the way
we go; and particularly in this matter of a sufficient Time necessarily to be
determined: which is one of the maine corner Stones, upon which the weight of
our whole Fabric must rest and be settled. But part hereof we have already
said in the foregoing Chapter about a general Necessity of determination for
Religion, particularly the profitablenesse of such a determination: Unto which
now we add what more properly inferres the necessity of it. XL. The
qualifications of the Conclusive determination.


And here, that we may be the better understood, and may proceed more
convincingly; we will first state our Assertion, and set down the
qualifications and conditions which this Conclusive determination of both the
Continuance and Frequency of Time jointly must have; (as we suppose) and so the
Nature of this chief Time necessary and sufficient for all men ordinarily; and
then we shall labor to prove it both generally, and particularly according to
those conditions expressed. 1. Then we say, It must be of so large Continuance;
as to afford Time, not only for public Worship, but also for family Worship,
and solitary Worship too; and so the determination must not only allow liberty
to the willing so to employ the whole Continuance, in all the varieties of
these, and all the while in one or other of them (always excepting, as before,
Necessary Reservations, wherein yet God and the soul are still to have as
great a share as may be, namely at meals and the like) But also necessitate
every one so to do; which is the primary end of a determination or command
about Time, specially strict and Conclusive, as has been showed.

2. The Proportion in the whole, of the Continuance and Frequency joined, is to
be but so large, as that it may be demonstrated; that with less, God is not
sufficiently honored, nor the good of men's souls sufficiently secured and
advanced; and so that such a proportion in the whole is infallibly necessary to
Religion: As also that that Proportion may undeniably be spared ordinarily from
worldly businesses by all mankind; (with admission still of reservation,) and
so no sober conscience, even though somewhat unwilling to spend so much Time
upon Religion, can reasonably deny it to be necessary; or challenge it to be
too injurious to necessary worldly businesses.

3. That the distribution of that whole proportion, between the Continuance and
the Frequency, be so wisely ordered; as that there may be a certainty, that
men's worldly businesses be not unsufferably disappointed, by too great
Frequency, how short soever the Continuance be, which yet must have space (as is
said above) for Worship, not only public, but domesticke, and even solitary.
Whereunto is to be also added, That the authority or at least the wisdom of
the distributer and determiner, be so undeniable in the case, as that hereby
again the unwilling (either in regard of themselves or theirs) be necessitated
to yield to such determination and distribution, as necessary (or most fit,
which in practickes is all one with necessary, upon the supposition,) and the
willing be able to plead it for themselves, and theirs also, against all
disputers and gainsayers.

4. That the whole proportion, and the distribution of it, between the
Continuance and Frequency, be so largely and wisely determined, as that it may
be certainly sufficient (namely for the chief Time) ordinarily for all men;
and that in three regards. 1. of Gods acceptance, that he is pleased with such
a proportion and such a distribution of it, and would not have more (ordinarily
of all men) for the general proportion, nor that otherwise distributed. 2. Of
the souls benefit withal, in necessary knowledge, and for spiritual
affection, to the attainment of Salvation. 3. Of a consciences security, which
may be apt to doubt, either whether the proportion be sufficient in regard
either of Gods acceptance, or the souls Good; or whether it be sufficiently
and rightly distributed between the Continuance and Frequency, so as to
satisfy those ends of it.

5. It must ever be remembered that this is but a Conclusive determination, and
not Exclusive; and so though this be the chief Time (and sufficient as such a
Time) yet not the only Time determined; by God, who by the Law of Nature (and
insinuation also of the word) has besides determined the Frequency of twice a
Day, at least, (of the working Days) both for domesticke Worship, and solitary
Worship; and by His providence does still now and then determine to this or
that Nation, or Church, or Family, or Person, a Day of Fasting and Humiliation
or Thanksgiving extraordinarily; and besides allows them liberty to determine
to themselves (and theirs) some other Times, as also to employ some
voluntarily, so far forth as may, and will stand with their worldly necessary
callings, and that they do not impose or observe them as equally necessary
with those of Gods own determination. We say then the sufficiency of this Time
we now dispute of, is not absolute, but for such a kind of Time, for the chief
Time, or which fully includes the whole Nature of it, for the necessary and
ordinarily sufficient chief solemn Time of Worship for all men. All other
Time being either 1. Less necessary, as all Times, merely of man's appointment,
or 2. Less ordinary, as the extraordinary Days of humiliation, or
thanksgiving, which Gods providence may sometime determine: or 3. Less
solemn, as the Daily Frequencies determined by the Law of Nature, which have
no determination of any Continuance express with them; and 4. Finally all also
together, are less chief and sufficient; because this is to have the chief
strength both of Continuance and Frequencie jointly, to such a sufficiency, as
is before expressed. Which we desire may be remembered; as well to distinguish
this Time, from all other Times: as also that to spare unnecessary repetitions
we may be allowed to call this Time, the necessary and sufficient Time; or the
ordinary sufficient Time; or barely the sufficient Time, or the chief Time of
Worship; and may not be mistaken in these expressions; but understood, as we
have here delivered our selves.

XLI. The necessity of such a determinati^^ proved.
Now for the proof generally, of the necessity of the determination of such a
chief Time for Religion, we propound this one maine and General Argument:
[That without which Religion cannot certainly stand among all men, is necessary
to be determined for all men: But without such a chief Time determined for
solemn Worship, Religion cannot certainly stand among all men. Ergo, Such a
chief Time for solemn Worship is necessary to be determined for all men.]

The Major needs little proof to any conscience, For as Religion is necessary
to all men, So must needs be the means and helps, without which it cannot
stand among all men. The means and the end so far as they are conjoined, are
equally necessary in Natural and Theological reason. So that among whomsoever
of mankind, Religion cannot stand without such a chief Time determined; It is
all one to leave them without such a Time, and to leave them without Religion.
As then no man is left without a necessity of being Religious, so no man is
left without a necessity of a chief Time to be determined.

The Minor, before we offer to prove it, we crave leave to explain and clear
two expressions in it. One is the Word (certainly;) The other the phrase
(Among all Men.) 1. By the Word Certainly, we mean according to the certainty
of ordinary means and helps; Among which we affirm such a determination of
such a sufficient Time to be; not denying but extraordinarily, and by a
singular grace and blessing of God, a man may attain to Salvation, though he
never observed or never heard of such a Time determined. God can plant
Religion, how and in whom He pleases, and preserve it without ordinary means
if He see good: But we can see no certainty ordinarily, how mankind should
preserve Religion in their souls, without such a determination of Time for it,
and a suitable observation of it, with as much care and conscience, as other
ordinances and means, and helps of Religion. 2. By the phrase, Among all men,
we mean, that the greatest part of mankind cannot maintain Religion in their
souls, without such a determination of a sufficient Time for it; such namely,
as have a constant and full employment in a worldly calling, whether inferiors
(specially) or even superiors and Governors of families, or of Towns, or
Countries and Commonwealths: Religion cannot ( Certainly, that is, Ordinarily)
stand among them, who are far the greatest part of minkind, without a
sufficient Time determined and conscionably observed. Though we grant, that
among some of mankind, who have no great business in worldly employments, but
have leisure much, even every Day, ordinarily, to bestow diverse hours upon
Religion, Gods Worship and their souls good, and to Frequent the public
Worship where ever it is near them: Such might perhaps keep up Religion in
their consciences, though they were not under (or did not know themselves to be
under) any such determination of a sufficient Time necessary to be observed for
Religion. As also more specially, those whose callings, and particular
employments are properly within the sphere of Religion, as Divines and
Ministers of the Word of God, may much more easily be Religious in their own
Persons, by their daily and continual employment in the study, Meditation,
Writing, and Speaking of Matters of Religion, even though they should have no
sufficient Time solemn determined to them with others (that they knew of and
did own,) but only the Times of the Public exercises of their Ministry,
which we say, and shall prove anon, is greatly unsufficient for the general of
mankind.

And this very thing we are persuaded has been an occasion, XIII. A profitable
digression about a daily Sabbath.
whereby, at least in part, sundry Divines, even of prime note, in the Reformed
Churches abroad, who have spoken and written (seemingly at least)
over-injuriously against the fourth Commandment, injoining perpetually one
whole Day of seven to be employed merely for Religion; have been deceived in
the point of the Necessity of the Perpetuity of the Commandment in that sense;
and have spoken so much of making every Day a Sabbath, and so keeping a
continual Sabbath: because themselves did so very much, by the advantage, and
even necessity of their Callings, being spiritual, and in the road of
Religion, and their minds withal full of zeal and religious affections. And
thus we are the more inclined to believe, because the very same Divines, when
they think of other men, speak very fairly toward the Perpetuity of a seventh
day Sabbath, as necessary for all men: As may be seen, among others, by that
one place of him, who is esteemed the chiefest of the Disputers against it, of
Mr. Calvin, we mean, in his Commentary upon Genesis 2.3. who thus speaks:
Benedictio ista nihil aliu^ ^est, quam solemnis consecratio, qua sibi Deus
studia and occupationes hominum asserit die septimo. Est quidem legitima hac
totiua vitae meditatio, in qua se quotidic exerceant, immensam Dei bonitatem,
justitiam, virtutem, sapientiam in hoc magnifico coeli terraeque theatro
considerare: verum si fortominus sedulo quam par esset ad came intenti essent
homines ad supplendum quod assiduae meditationi deerat, septimu^ quisque dies
peculiariter delectus est. Primum ergo quievit Deus: deinde benedixit hanc
quietem, in soeculis omnibus inter homines sancta soret; vel septimum quemque
diem quieti dicerit, ut suum exemplum perpetua esset regula. --

Denique sacra est ista vocatio, quae homines mundi impedimentis eripit, ut
totos Dei cultui addicant --

Praetereasciend^^ est, non (...) tantum vel atatis vel populi, sed totias
humani generis commune esse hoc exercition. --

Quies spirituisis est carnis mortificatio, ne ampliussibi vivant filli Dei,
aut propriae voluntati indulgeant. Quod eam Sabbathum figuravit, temporale
fuisse dico. Quod autem ab initio mandatum fuit hominibus, nise exerceant in
Dei cultu, me^ito ad mundi finem usque durare oportet. Calv. in Genesis 2.


[That Blessing is nothing but a solemn Consecration, whereby God challenges to
Himself the cares and employments of Man.] And afterward, [To supply the
defects of Daily Meditation, every seventh Day was peculiarly chosen: First,
GOD rested, and then He blessed this rest, that it might be holy among Men, in
all ages: He dedicated every seventh Day to rest, that His example might be a
perpetual rule.] And again, [This Vocation is sacred, which takes men off from
Worldly impediments, to give themselves wholly to GOD.] And yet further, [VVe
must know, that this is the common exercise, not of one Age or People only, but
of all Mankind.] And finally, after he had mentioned another end afterward
added to the Sabbath under the Law to the Jews, namely typical of Christ; he
remarkably concludes with these words: [That the Sabbath did figure that, ( sc.
our Mortification) it was temporary: But that it was given to Men from the
beginning, that they should exercise themselves in the Worship of GOD,
worthily it ought to endure to the Worlds end.] Thus he. Than which (and so
the whole of the matter in that place) nothing can be spoken more judiciously,
or more Orthodoxly. But other where, he, and others, (forgetting, we believe,
the necessary Worldly businesses of other men) seem to speak, as it besides a
time for Public Worship, there were no other Sabbath now, but a continual
every-dayes Sabbath; It being (as we said) very much so with themselves; and so
they not finding a special need of a seventh Day wholly to be a Sabbath, in
regard of themselves, spoke more unwarily of the Commandment, than, we are
persuaded, they would now have done, if they had lived in our Time, and seen
their own, and other people, undone by prophanations of it. (Which has made
also diverse Divines of those Parts, to speak more fully for the fourth
Commandment of late, then formerly; as we shall note hereafter.) But this by
the way, and in a kind of digression, not unusefull, we hope. And so having
cleared our meaning in the Minor of our Argument, we come to prove it, Namely,
[That without a Chief Time determined sufficiently for Solemn Worship,
Religion cannot certainly stand among all men.] Thus we further argue:

[If without a sufficient Time determined, both for Continuance, XLIII. The
Minor confirmed.
and Frequencie jointly, no sufficient Time will be generally observed among
Mankind, for Religion: Then, without such a Time determined, Religion cannot
certainly stand among all Mankind. But without such a sufficient Time
determined, no sufficient Time will be generally observed. Ergo, Without such a
sufficient Time determined, Religion cannot certainly stand among all Mankind.]
The Consequence of this Argument may be undeniably made good, by the
consideration, that without a sufficient Time observed for Religion, Men who
are borne void of the knowledge of God, and unapt enough to learn it, will
never attain a sufficiency of knowledge for the honoring of God in their
hearts and lives, and saving their own souls: Nor is it imaginable, that they
can possibly come to such knowledge, either by the Continuance of one whole Day
once in their lives, (of which we disputed before) or by the addition of a few
Minutes, twice, or thrice, or four times every Day, by snatches and sudden
fits. Man's nature is too froward, too much corrupted, to learn the mystery of
heaven and salvation so by the by; as experience superabundantly proclaims,
even where there is a great deal more Time then so allotted to it, and
observed for it. Also, 2. without such a sufficient Time observed for Religion,
The great duty of love to God, which is the fundamental affection, and even
the sum of all Piety, can never, in an ordinary course, be attained, or
preserved, or exercised and expressed. Men are as averse from Gods love, as
ignorant in the knowledge of Him: And even though they have a knowledge of the
Doctrine of God, (as many have, not only competently, but even eminently, by
having been trained up to it, and having spent much time upon it, from their
youth up) yet they may be Atheists in regard of affection, and wholly devoid of
all love to God. And there is no ordinary means to work their hearts to such a
holy love, but by their being busied a convenient space of Time, and that
frequently, in the services of God, hearing of Him, and meditating of Him, and
the like; whereby they may come to be convinced of the reality and certainty of
those divine truths which they have learned to know, and see a necessity of
loving and embracing them, and God in them, above all. Acquaintance breeds
love, between those that were strangers: So does acquaintance with God, by the
observation of sufficient convenient times of attendance upon His Ordinances.
Also, if in any, some beginning of love and affection be bred, there is no
preserving of it from decay, but by frequent and conveniently continued
intercourses and converses in holy duties. Any man, that disuses these, or
curtals the Times of them, will, and does find in himself, (if he consider
himself at all) a sensible coldness, and a strangeness grow upon him, to the
utter endangering of all the love of God in his soul, which in the mean time
the World in general, and particular Creatures, which have encroached upon his
Times, have stolen also away even all the love from God; which can never be
regained, unless by renewing (even with enlargement oftentimes) the former
Continuances and Frequencies of Times observed for Religion and Devotion.
Withal there is not any so kindly or proper an expression or exercise of love
to God any other way, as this of observing convenient Times of Continuance and
Frequencie in spiritual converses with Him. Love, where there is not a violent
detention from the object, or party loved, admits not a forbearance of
attendance long, neither can it content it self with sudden snatches; a word
or two, and away; a secret whisper, and no more: But though it is glad of these
occasionally, and, as it were, by way of overplus to solemn converses; yet
cannot be satisfied upon those terms; but must, and will observe just
Continuances, and those frequently, so as to make up a convenient sufficiency
of Times; and where this is not, there is no general and ordinary way for men
to exercise and express any love to God: But the love, and all the main
exercise and expressions of it, will go away after the World, pleasures,
friends, honors, riches, as they that wallow up all the Time, in a manner. And
upon this, the World is so universally and perpetually a real Comment, that
it is needless to discourse further of it. The Consequence then of our
Argument is sufficiently settled, That without a sufficient Time observed,
Religion cannot certainly stand among all men.

The Antecedent, XLIV. The Antecedent confirmed.
That [without a sufficient Time generally determined for all men, no
sufficient Time will be generally observed by all men] may also be certainly
evinced from the discourse in the former Chapter of the Necessity of some
Determination of Time for Religion, specially in reference to men's general
unwillingnesse to be conversant in duties of Religion; and the many
interruptions of worldly businesses, seeming continually necessary, one day,
and hour, and time after another, so as to leave no room at all for any
considerable solemn worship of God (by men of full worldly employments) unless
there be an antecedent Determination of Time, necessitating them to lay aside
such worldly businesses, to attend on God. And without this, not so much as an
hour in a twelve-moneth, would many a man, even many thousands of men, neither
be willing to attend upon God and his worship; nor even find leisure, through
one business or other still following in the neck of another: And therefore
much less would they else observe any tolerably sufficient Time for
Continuance and Frequencie, without some Determination of it to them
beforehand. Witness many men's total and perpetual neglect of all Times of
Devotion, which they are not fully convinced, that either God, or such
Superiors among men, whom they dare not disobey in the particular, have
infallibly determined unto them, and enjoined them to observe. Children,
servants, parents, masters, men, women, young, old, great and small, manifest
this more then enough, to them that have but any will to take notice of it. We
conclude then our general proof of the Necessity of a sufficient Time to be
determined for Religion, [That it is no less necessary for the general of
mankind, in an ordinary course, then Religion it self.] And that, as without
Religion, (we mean, Religious performances of holy duties first; and then, from
the strength of them, a Religious Conversation in all matters) no honoring of
God, nor no salvation for men: So without the observation of sufficient Times
for Continuance and Frequencie in duties of Solemn Worship, no Religion: and
without the Determination of such sufficient Times, no Observation of them
generally by all men. And therefore such Determination of them is unavoidably
necessary for the general of Mankind. Now for the particulars.

XLV. The first qualification of the Determination proved with respect
The first is, that of this sufficient Time, (or these sufficient Times) of
Continuance and Frequencie determined jointly, The Continuance must be so
large, as to afford Time not only for Public Worship, but for Family Worship
also, and likewise for Solitary Worship; and so, the Determination must command
the Practice of each of these, as they are possible to be had, and the whole
Continuance to be employed in one or other of them, excepting necessary
Reservations, etc. This is a main and most important Point to be cleared. For
as our Assertion is universally held by all that plead for the Morality of one
whole Day in seven for a Sabbath, according to the Commandment: So is it
universally denied by all Anti-Sabbatarian Disputers, who wholly confine the
sufficiency of the time to be determined, to the Public Worship; even making
the Public Worship to be the very Morality and Substance of the fourth
Commandment; and Time but as a circumstance of it, or adjunct; Necessary
indeed, but only as it is necessary to any other business; and so someties
they call their sufficient Time, but only the Sequel of a Morality. We
confess, some of them do so far forget themselves for all this, as to let
fall now and then a word toward Private Worship also, as part of the duty of
the Day to be determined. But this is so seldom and so faintly, and is so
contradicted by their own Tenets, that there is no trusting to their
concession. But what we assert, must be proved as strongly as may be: And that
done, there will be more done, then perhaps many Readers are yet aware of. ^.
To the public worship.
But first we will begin, even with that which they are so much for, the
Public Worship; for the sake of other Readers, of whom some perhaps may be apt
to question even the necessity of Solemn Times to be determined in a constant
Frequencie so much as for that, (the rather because of late we have heard the
whisperings of some such opinion, among some Anabaptisticall and Antimonian
spirits) with that then we begin, we say. And shall make use of our general
Argument before used, and apply it respectively to this and the other kinds of
Worship. Thus then we argue:

[1. If Religion cannot certainly stand among all men, without a convenient
space of Continuance frequently observed in public Worship: then a
sufficient Time must necessarily be determined for all men, wherein they both
may and must exercise themselves in public Worship. But Religion cannot
certainly stand among all men without a convenient space of Continuance
frequently observed in Public Worship. Ergo, A sufficient Time must
necessarily be determined for all men, wherein they both may, and must exercise
themselves in Public Worship.] For the clearing of this argument: By the
words, Certainly, and among all men, we understand as before, Ordinarily,
according to Gods usual working in all sorts: and not as things may be by his
extraordinary grace to some that can have no help from any public ordinances,
nor as some extraordinary persons may shift without them. Also by Public
Worship, we understand, not that which is presented only in a public place,
as in Churches, where there is public and free liberty to serve God, without
fear or danger of persecution: But such Worship as is tendered by an Assembly
of Christians of diverse families, wherein some Minister or Ministers of God
are employed between God and His People, to dispense to them His Word and
Sacraments, and present to Him their Prayers and Praises: in whatsoever place
this be, in a Church, a private house, a field, a wood, a cave, a ship, or the
like: So that the term of Public, relates to the persons, and not to the
place, in this argument. The Consequence of which, is, we suppose, sufficiently
confirmed before in the general argument, in the necessity of using all
ordained and possible means of advancing and preserving Religion among all
men; and the necessity of such a Determination of such Times, as are necessary
to be observed; by reason of men's unwillingnesse, and interruptions.

The Antecndent may certainly be evinced, by Gods frequent and earnest charges
to His Ministers to preach His Word, and be instant in season and out of
season: and to His people, to assemble themselves together, not forsaking the
practice of it, (as the manner of some was) and to be swift to hear, and not
to despise Prophesying; telling them, that Faith is begotten (ordinarily) not
without hearing, and that of a Preacher sent of God, for such public service;
and that they are blessed, that wait at the gates of Wisdoms house, and at the
posts of her doors, and the like. All which show, that it concerns the Honor
of God, in such a sort to have His people assemble themselves to worship Him,
particularly by hearing of His Word preached to them; and accordingly by
Prayer:, and administration of the Sacraments. Neither is God sufficiently
honored by such persons, as having opportunity of joining in His Worship in
this sort publicly with others, restrain themselves constantly within their
own families, upon what pretense soever. But the necessity of this is yet more
clear, from the consideration of the good of men's souls, which do extremely
stand in need of it. In the most families all the world over, the abilities of
private Christians (even of governors of families) are not such, as will
ordinarily suffice to build up themselves and their families in the faith and
fear of God, without the help of a constant public Ministry. And by reason
of their manifold worldly employments and businesses, they have not leisure to
apply themselves much and often to study the Scriptures, and matters of
Religion and Conscience, no not for themselves sufficiently, and much less for
others; and so cannot but be ignorant of many things, and mistake and
mis-understand many others even of special importance for Gods honor, and
their own and others salvation; which again calls for as necessary, their
attendance upon a Public Ministry, whose gifts and studies are distilled for
their benefit, and whose Sermons clear truths, and urge practice of duties,
and avoidance of sins; and present comforts to them, with much more evidence
and strength of Divine reason, then they could of themselves have lighted upon,
or by any private help usually have attained unto. And this has been so
universally acknowledged by all Christians, in all Ages and Countries, that
where there has been any number of them near one another, they have had their
Church Assemblies, or Public Worship, though forced to be in private houses,
and even in fields, and woods, and caves; and to observe the times in the
nights, or in the morning before day, to avoid the rage of Persecutours, as
much as might be: and yet choosing rather to hazard the exposing their bodies
and bodily substance to their fury, if they were surprised, (as sometimes they
were) then to neglect such a joint serving of God, and hazard their souls for
want of such public ordinances and means of Grace. Add hereunto the contrary
experience in our Kingdom and Nation; that where any, (as too many in diverse
places) whether poor or rich, servants or others, upon any considerations
whatsoever, do usually neglect the public assemblies, and so come to no
Church, nor public Ordinances ordinarily, they are either grossly ignorant,
or profane, or both: in a word, at the best, but civil Atheists, devoid of any
true sense of Religion, or regard of God, or their souls. And so we suppose
the first branch concerning Public Worship, is sufficiently confirmed, That
the ordinary solemn Time for all men must extend to that, and determine a
convenient Continuance for that: But not for that alone, but for domestique and
family worship also;

Which is our second branch, now to be confirmed, XLVI. 2 To Family Worship.
That the sufficient Time must be of so large Continuance, as to extend also to
that, and require men that live in Families where they have others to join
with them in the Worship, to tender such conjoined Worship, (besides the
Public) in their several Families respectively.

To prove this, we resume again our former Argument in this manner.

[ If Religion cannot certainly stand among all men, without a convenient space
of Continuance frequently observed for Family Worship, over and above the
Public Worship, Then the chief Solemn Time of Worship is not sufficiently
determined for all men, unless the Continuance of it, be so largely extented,
as to require Family Worship over and above the public. But Religion cannot
certainly stand among all men, without a convenient space of Continuance
frequently observed for Family Worship, over above the Public. Ergo, The
chief Solemn Time of Worship, is not sufficiently determined for all men,
unless the Continuance be so largely extended as to require Family Worship,
over and above the Public.] The Consequence of this Argument is partly
confirmed before; There needs only this to be added for the clearing of the
Necessity of the Determination of such Time, to the observation of it: That
otherwise, 1. Men and Women of other Families, would interrupt those that were
willing to tender such Family Worship, oftentimes by visits of respect and
complement, and by coming to discourse with them about worldly businesses,
bargains, news, or any thing; and they should not be able to avoid their
importunities many times: only a tie of a determinate Time upon all sorts, may
and will suffice to keep or send away such unnecessary interruptours of
Religious Services. 2. Covetous or Profane Governors would else never look
after their Families at all, but let them work or play, yea make them Work,
after the Public Worship ended; Who yet may be awed to the contrary (as much
as to any other Duty) by a certain and clear determination of Time to be
employed in Family Worship, as well as Public. 3. Profane Servants and
inferiors will not be brought into order, to join in Family Duties, unless
they conceive the Time determined to them for it, at least, by their
Superiors. That Family Worship then may be observed, there must be Sufficient
Time determined for it.

The Antecedent may be made good, partly by what we discoursed Chap. 6. about
Family Worship in Genenall, the Necessity of it, for Gods Honor and the Good
of Souls; and partly by the adding of a fourfold Consideration briefly
applied to the case in hand. 1. Experience shows, that in most Families, their
worldly businesses are so many and pressing, that they have, (and can have) but
short and scanty Times of Continuance on the ordinary working Days, for their
joint Family Worship: Many pretend they cannot have any at all, for all their
Families, and specially not twice a Day, according to what was discoursed
before. Though this is but a worldly pretense, if it be meant ordinarily; and
will hardly we doubt serve for an excuse, when God shall come to judge men for
their worldly mindedness, as well as others sins, and preferring the World,
getting goods, and following pleasures and the like, before conversing with
Him, and their own souls, and the souls of their Families. But however, this
confirms, that ordinarily such Times can be but scanty and short. Therefore
there is the more need that upon the chief solemn Time, the extent of the
Continuance be sufficient to afford a convenient space for Family Worship over
and above the Public; and to take away all excuse of want of leisure from
every one.

2. The need that all stand in to have their minds prepared, and put into frame
for the Public Worship, calls for the same also. If men come rawly and rudely
from worldly thoughts and businesses, into the Church and to the Public
Worship, they will be in a great deal of danger to take Gods Name in vain in
it, specially at the beginning, and to lose a remarkable part of the benefit of
it, by the unpreparednesse of their minds; specially such as are of less
knowledge and less affection toward godliness. And this cannot in reason be
prevented any way so surely, as by some Family Duties preparing every one for
the Public, and taking them off from worldliness and secular cogitations, and
possessing them with an awe of the Duties they are going to perform more
publicly.

3. No less, but rather much more, the improvement of the Public Worship
necessarily calls for consequent Family Worship; for memory and further
affecting of every one, by Repetitions, and Prayers, and Conferences. Every one
has needs of this, the best memories and the most zealous hearts, how much
more the weak in both respects; and if any be able and zealous, it is so much
the more a necessary Duty in them to help others as much as may be. This also
(we mean particularly repetitions) will quicken the attentions of all sorts.
Neither the servants, nor yet the Governors, will afford themselves leisure to
sleep, or gaze, or muse of other matters during the Public Worship; if the
one must give account, and the other must be able to require it and take it,
which he cannot, if he himself have not given good attention.

4. Finally, the need that most have to labor with their Families to put more
knowledge in them, then they have particular help for in the Public Services
of the Day: I mean the need of continual catechizing of them, (even beyond
what is publicly done to those of their Family) makes up yet further the
necessity of having and observing sufficient Times for Family Duties of
Worship, besides the public, how long (or how well) soever continued.

And all this, is so confirmed by the unhappy experience of those Families,
where this is not regarded, not observed, that consideration of it is more
necessary, then a prolixe discourse upon it. He that looks advisedly upon such
Families, shall see them come dropping in, one after another, late to the
Public Worship; and when they are there, sleep oftentimes, even in the
morning, or otherwise behave themselves so rudely, as a man may be assured,
they neither honor God, nor benefit their Souls by such services; And after,
even though they seemed to be attentive and observant, they have learned little
or nothing at all; oftentimes have forgotten the very Texts, and the Chapters
or Psalms that were read, and can tell nothing at all of what they might have
learned; and if they could remember somewhat for the present, yet it is for
want of whetting (as the original word is Deuteronomy. 6. in the charge given to
Governors of Families toward their children, and so servants) for want of
giving or taking account of it, for want of repetition and conference, all is
lost, or most of it, and specially all affection is dulled and abated, which
had a little edge perhaps by the Public Ordinances: And this most of all,
through the diversions of their minds as soon as the Public Ordinances are
ended, to sports and play, or to worldly work and business; which must needs
succeed, with the most, if they be not determined to Family Duties afterward.
In a word, look upon such Families, where the Lords Day is not observed by
them within doors, in such divine exercises of devotions before, and specially
after, the Public Worship; and there will be found in the most very little
sense of Religion, of conscience toward God, or their own Souls. So that we
conclude this branch also, [That in as much as Religion cannot certainly stand
among all men without Family Worship, the chief solemn sufficient Time, must
extend among all men to Family Worship over and above the public, affording
space for it, and requiring that it be so employed.] But this is not all yet.

XLVII. 3. To solitary worship.
The third branch must be added, which concerns Solitary Worship, over and
above both the other: The sufficient Time we say, must extend to that also,
besides the conjoined worship, public, domestical. To confirm this, our
former argument will once more stand in stead, in this sort.

[ If Religion cannot certainly stand among all man, without a convenient space
of Continuance frequently observed for Solitary Worship by a man's self alone,
over and above conjoined Worship with others, then the chief solemn Time of
Worship must necessarily be determined so largely for the Continuance, as that
it may extend to Solitary Worship, besides conjoined Worship. But Religion
cannot certainly stand among all men, without a convenient space of Continuance
frequently observed for Solitary Worship by a man's self alone, over and above
conjoined Worship with others. Ergo, The chief Solemn Time of Worship must
necessarily be determined so largely for the continuance, as that it may extend
to Solitary Worship, besides conjoined.] The Consequence of this argument, has
strength afforded it from the former confirmations of like Consequences. Yet
may it admit this further descant, upon the necessity of the Times being
determined, that it may be infallibly observed: Namely, that here there is need
of the most peremptory determination of all other: as well, 1. to prevent all
unnecessary interruptions, which yet, without this, every man is exceedingly
liable unto, and that from all sorts of persons, Superiors, Inferiors,
Equals, within doors, and from abroad: they are liable to offer many
interruptions and interpose many hindrances, with their hands and even with
their tongues, unless both be charmed by a sufficient determination: and every
man and woman is liable to admit such interruptions, unnecessarily from others,
unless they be themselves forbidden by the tie of such a Determination lying
upon them, which even they may be able to plead against the over-pressing
importunity of such Interruptors. 2. Also to secure the performance of such
necessary Solitary Worship, against the general unwillingnesse that is in men's
hearts against it of all other duties. And this nothing can possibly secure,
but a peremptory Determination, awing the conscience, because of the secrecy of
the duty, which no man is or can be witness to constantly, nor take steadily
an account of; there must be therefore necessarily, a strict Determination of
Time for such Solitary Worship; or else infallibly there will be none such
constantly observed by the generallity of men.

The Antecedent, That there is a necessity of a frequent observation of a
convenient Continuance for solitary Worship, is proved not only from what was
said of its being Morall-Naturall, Chap. 6. but by what was even now argued to
evince the necessity of observing Family Worship applied to this; As 1. That
experience shows, most men, specially of the inferior sort, servants and
children, and the poor that are feign to work hard for their livings; and
even superiors, if men of trade and well customed, or otherwise if persons of
business, All such have but little leisure on the working Days for any
solemn solitary Worship. And upon that pretense, we doubt not, but diverse
Readers have been already grieved, that we have seemed a while ago to urge
them to at least, twice every Day, (though Daniel was a man of business
enough, and yet he kept himself constantly to his three times a Day, and so
did David too, Psalm. 55.) Therefore there is unquestionably the more need,
that the chief solemn Time, should sufficiently determine a just space for
this solitary Worship (besides conjoined*) to supply somewhat those defects and
take away all excuse of want of leisure, from every one. Thus Calvin in the
place before cited [To supply the defects of daily meditation, Calvin in Genesis 2.
every Seventh Day was peculiarly chosen of God.] 2. A solitary preparation is
needful, both for the Family Worship, and for the Public Worship; and without
this, neither are like to be reverently performed, or improved. A man's own
mind, is the only commander of it self, and if it neglect it self by it
self, others conjoined helps will work little upon it. 3. But specially
after the Public, or Family Worship, or both (and so between whiles, if there
be space between,) The improvement of the other, mainly, if not wholly,
depends upon the solitary Worship a man (or woman) presents alone; in
recalling, and working upon their own souls, what they have been conversant
in with others; by solitary Meditations and Prayers. No tongue or hand of
another can reach their heart to apply home the necessary truths. Neither is it
any time so sufficiently done with others speaking, or even with ones own
speaking from God, or to God in conjoined prayers (although so, often, a good
beginning is made) but still there wants a further application to more inward
and particular cases, and more matters, a further preaching over (repeating
over) to ones own heart the Doctrines of Faith and Practice, and a further
praying them over, out of ones own inmost and secret thoughts powered forth
before God. I add, the more fully any one is affected by the Public (or other
conjoined) Ordinances, the more they are (and will be) desirous to carry those
thoughts alone into the presence of God, and beg of Him to write and imprint
them yet more firmly upon their hearts. So far is the Public Worship from
discharging a man from solitary Worship, that we dare be bold to say (and
appeal to all experienced consciences for the truth of it) that [That man, or
woman, never thoroughly profited by that Word read or preached, or other
Ordinance of God in Public, (or in a Family) which they did not care to think
of by themselves alone, with the first free leisure they could have] neither is
there a better sign of a true profiting by the Ordinances of God, and the
Worship of Him tendered with others, then the riveting the strength of them into
the heart by solitary prayers and meditations, without delay.

4. There is also no soul, but if it be observant of it self, will find it
self to have need of more knowledge, then the Public Ministry, or any Family
Devotions besides do expressly offer to it; and need to be remembered of more
things, then are in those performances dilated upon; and so has need of as
much Time as may be, (and as its natural spirits are able to hold out unto) to
read the Scriptures, and other godly books; and to consider its own
conscience, even in matters perhaps not named (or but named) in all the
Ordinances that Day wherein they have joined with others; and so to meditate,
and read, and pray, and give thanks, concerning those things, for its necessary
edification and comfort. In all which respects, when specially it can have but
very little on the Working Days, it has need of the more on the chief
solemn Time, the ordinary Day for Gods worship, even the most large
Continuance that Nature can afford to give.

5. Add hereunto, That the Solitary Worship a man or woman tenders to God, is,
in the nature of it, the most conscientious, and the most undoubtedly godly of
all other; as having least of man, (if any thing at all, when it is inwardly
performed, without using the voice) to recommend, encourage, or help it. It
comes specially from the Spirit of God, and is carried on by the Spirit of God;
and in it, if ever, is the soul in Heaven, while it is upon Earth.

6. Insomuch as a man may truly say, that it, of all the rest, is the best
character of a Christian, or faithful servant of God; A man may, for want of
opportunity, be deprived of the society of others to join with him in public
or domestique devotions; and he may by sickness, or by lamenesse, or the like
accidents, be debarred from going to the public worship, and yet be never the
less godly, if he supply those wants in personal and solitary devotions
constantly: But without the practice of this, (as he has Time and spirits) he
cannot be a Christian, whether he frequent and use conjoined services, or no.

7. Finally, because those conjoined devotions are not certainly possible to
all men, a great part of their lives; and may many ways be hindered from time
to time; Therefore the sufficient chief Time does first and originally respect
the solitary worship, from which no man can be at any time hindered, being
awake, and not in extremity of sickness or pain, which almost takes away all
spirits and senses, unless by particular pressing necessities (which are the
reservations often mentioned before) and which are many times short; and diverse
of them admit a great deal of freedom to renew such solitary worship, as
tending a sick body, or a child, at home: And but secondarily takes in
family worship, as far as it is possible, (and it is possible to many, to whom
public conjoined worship is not possible) and then in the third place, public
worship also, as far as it is likewise possible. And so all the three together
are included (and to be included) within the extent of the Continuance of this
chief solemn Time necessarily and ordinarily sufficient for all men. And so
we hope we have sufficiently and fully asserted the first Qualification and
Condition formerly laid down concerning the Determination of this chief
solemn Time we have in hand.

From which, before we pass to the next, let us but in a word remember the
Reader to be think himself, whether the Continuance that must be extended to
all these various kinds of Worship, Solitary, Domestic, and Public, for all
the purposes mentioned in the grounds laid down about them; can be less then a
whole Day, how seldom, or how often soever the Revolution be concluded to be.
And if so, then we believe we shall find an easier work then has been
imagined, to prove the perpetual sanctity of one whole Day in seven, according
to what we say is the substance of the fourth Commandment. But of that more
hereafter.

XLVIII. The second Qualification
We proceed now to the second Condition or Qualification, that we have delivered
about this necessary sufficient chief Time to be determined for all men: and
that is, [That the proportion in the whole, of Continuance and Frequencie
joined, is to be no longer, then is certainly necessary for Gods honor, and
the good of souls, and compatible with the necessary worldly callings of every
one of mankind:] that so it may be undoubtedly called, the Necessary Time for
all men: (admitting still, even within it, Reservations for present Necessities
interrupting) and that no sober Conscience, (however unwilling otherwise to
spend such a proportion of Time constantly in Religion, or to allow it to
others) can reasonably deny it to be necessary for Religion, or challenge it as
injurious to necessary worldly affairs.

In this Point we shall not have our Adversaries gainsaying us earnestly,
though some of them have spoken sometimes, 1. Confessed.
as though the greater part of all our Times were to be given to God in duties
of Solemn and Religious worship. Witness one, whole words our margent refers
to. What he meant by it, we cannot, Primt. part. 2. c. 7. S. 4. There should
be more justice to bestow more days upon God, yea all, etc. N. B.
for our parts, tell. But we mean to assert no such thing absolutely, as the
state of man is in this world; but the contrary, by reason of Gods indulgence
of six Days, that is, the greatest part of them ordinarily, with reservations
for some Solitary and Family Worship, at least twice a Day, as we argued
before, (and reason good, if God allow reservation for some worldly matters,
constantly, out of His one Day, as for meat, and sleep, and for extraordinary
occasions also; that there should be reservations for Religion, and His Honor,
and the Good of Souls, in the six working Days, both ordinarily, and
extraordinarily.) But now we are but in the way to prove that Indulgence of six
Days for worldly matters, and Determination of one in seven for Religion: we
say then, that the whole proportion (within the revolution of a Week of seven
Days, or any other number of Days) is not to be so large, but by just proof
it may be demonstrated, that so large a proportion (and no less) is certainly
necessary for all men.

And the proof of this, in a word, is this, 2. Proved.
that hereby men's consciences will be awed with the Determination, as
altogether uncontrolable, and their mouths will be stopped, that for shame, (if
they have any shame in them) they will not dare to say, that the commandment
is a heavy yoke, or a burden really grievous, who ever be the Determiner
immediately, God or men, superiors, or ones own vow; And this, if any thing,
will help mainly to secure the observation of it, by all, and among all; who
else would be perpetually quarrelling and grumbling against it. And so what
ever became of the Public Worship, to which they might perhaps be ordinarily
awed by the Magistrate, and the Family Worship also, where the Governor were
strict: Yet to be sure they would never be tied to the performance of Solitary
Worship; but reject it, as an unreasonable and intolerable imposition, and so
much too of either or both the other, as they durst for fear of men,
Superiors and Neighbors. We know, that how little so ever be required, by the
most undeniable Authority of God Himself, yet every one of mankind will not
regard it: but this is yet greatly different, to reject a commandment out of
mere profaneness (as they do, any of the rest, and for which their consciences
give them many nip now, and will gnaw upon them eternally, if they repent not,)
and to reject it, as an unsufferable burden, which the Commandments of God now
under the New Testament cannot justly be said to be. And so, what ever Time is
pleaded for, as Gods Commandment now, we grant and assert, that the proportion
of it, as we said, must appear to be undeniable necessary. And accordingly,
though in another place we shall more fully argue it, yet here we propound
again to the Readers Conscience, this Question, [VVhether out of the proportion
of seven days, which contain 168. Hours, the waking Time of one day, which
is ordinarily with most men, but fourteen or sixteen hours, (or suppose it
eighten or twenty, or even the whole twenty four) is too large a proportion for
the chief solemn Time for all men, to attend the worship of God, and the good
eternal of their own souls and others? And whether such a proportion, at
least, is not necessary for all men, to employ, and also compatible certainly
with any worldly businesses?] We do not now argue, how it should be distributed
between the Continuance and Frequency, (whether all the Continuance to be in
one day, or two, or more; or every day to share alike) that we have already
done Chap. 8. and showed the whole proportion to be best all on one day; But we
say, [Whether less then such a proportion in the whole, can be sufficient for
Gods Honor and the souls salvation, or this can be justly excepted against as
unnecessary and injurious?] If sober Consciences put but this question home to
their own souls; perhaps they will yield us the whole cause, and dispute no
further, though they have heretofore. But we go on to a third qualification or
condition of our sufficient Time to be determined for all men; that is:

XLIX. The third qualification proved.
3. That the distribution of the whole proportion between the Continuance and
Frequencie, be so wisely ordered, as there be no unsufferable prejudice to men's
worldly businesses by too short Continuance, and too great Frequencie; and that
even the unwilling may be forced to yield to the wisdom (together with the
authority) of the determiner in it, and the willing be able to plead for
themselves and theirs also against all disputers and gainsayers, that it is
necessary to observe this distribution, without variation or alteration.

The necessity of this condition may appear partly by what was said of the
foregoing qualification, to acquit this chief solemn Time from all aspersion
of intolerable burden; which would lie upon it among many, and even all, if it
could not be showed not to be prejudicial beyond sufferance to men's worldly
occasions by over great Frequencie, as well as by too great a proportion in the
whole: otherwise they who conceived themselves so grieved by it, would make
bold to reject it as no commandment of God; neither could they be blamed,
unless there were sufficient ground to convict them of the wisdom of such
distribution. And then it had been as good, that no Determination had been made
at all; or rather better: For if none at all had been made, a more equal one
might now be made; Whereas a Determination supposed to our hands, does greatly
bind our hands from alteration, even to the better. But perhaps this condition
needed not have been put in neither, in reference to any danger, that our
Antisabbatarians will offend in, in being so injurious to man's worldly
occasions; (toward which they are over favorable and partial) at least those
of Foreign Churches. But for our own, if they do really intend to charge upon
men's consciences all the Church Holy Days, (besides the Lords days) according
to the strictness of the Canons of the year 1603. and the practice of
Ecclesiastical Courts, as often as any complaints came in that kind, they would
indeed be too injurious to men's worldly occasions: and accordingly the people
every where (specially in the country) do without any scruple reject them, for
the most part; Even let the Minister do what he can, to keep them up in credit,
by Prayers, Preaching, and the like; yet they will go to Faires and Markets,
and to Cart often, and do any work, within doors specially, and not so much
as come to Church to the public worship, unless they be both altogether at
leisure, and have some willingness besides to it. Therefore because we dispute
of a chief Time necessary to be observed, being determined, We must put in
this, that the Revolutions be not too frequent and too many, so as to bring a
remarkable prejudice and burden upon men's worldly businesses, which would make
it certain not to be observed, and so render it altogether vain. As also, we
insert the mention of this condition, to show how equally we desire to carry
our selves in this controversy, and that we are sensible, as well as others,
that men's worldly necessary businesses must not be incroacht upon, no more then
they may incroach upon the businesses of Religion; which is indeed a main end
of the determination we are now arguing about, [To set the limits wisely and
equally for the ordinary chief solemn Time for all men, leaving enough for
worldly matters, and yet withal determining enough for Religion.] And to this
our next qualification, under the term of sufficiency, (as the two foregoing
ones under the term of necessity) speaks.

L. The fourth qualification the Time determined must be sufcient in regard.
Our fourth condition then (or qualification) of the chief ordinary solemn
Time to be determined, is [That it must be sufficient: And this sufficiency
must be in three regards. 1. Of Gods acceptance. 2. Of Souls benefit. 3. Of
Consciences security and satisfaction] we suppose there needs not many words to
prove this condition to be not only reasonable, but necessary. Every one that
speaks of this chief solemn Time of Worship, gives it the term of
sufficient, and under that title was our general Argument proving a necessity
of such a sufficient Time to be determined. And it may be demonstrated, we
think, that that Time is not sufficient, neither can deserve to be so called
or counted, that is not sufficient in all these three regards.

1. Of Gods acceptance.
First, we say, It must be sufficient, (both for the whole of the proportion,
and for the wise distribution of it, between the Continuance and Frequency) in
regard of Gods acceptance, He requiring of all men, generally, and ordinarily,
no greater proportion in the whole, not no other distribution of that
proportion, then such a determination expresses and concludes: But is
graciously pleased, with so much, so often, and accepts it, as a right and
orderly service of Him, if accordingly observed and presented. Unless it
reaches to this, To what purpose is all, or any thing? What end or use of any
determination or observation of Time at all? God has no need of us, our
services, our Time, or any thing; Yet He requires all this, that we present
souls and bodies to Him, and this and that solemn service, and observe
sufficient Times; It must then be meant of such sufficiency, as He will accept,
whose all Time is, and whose we are, and all things. To give Him then
determinately, (or determine for His solemn Worship,) less or otherwise then
is acceptable to Him, is as good (or as bad) as to give Him nothing at all, to
determine no Time at all for His service. We need say no more of this: this
being the ultimate and supreme end of all religious services, and so of all
determinations for Religion, to please God, and do that which is acceptable to
Him.

2. But we must add, 2. The souls benefit.
that the sufficiency of this chief solemn Time, must extend to the benefit of
men's souls. For as much as God is so gracious toward mankind, and so much
intends their good in all the services and Duties He calls them unto; that He
accepts of no services as sufficient toward Him, which are not in their nature
and degree also sufficient to men's souls, their salvation, by the attainment
of necessary knowledge, and answerable spiritual affections. If then the Time
determined, for the chief solemn Time for Religion, be not fairly
sufficient, in the nature of the ordinary chief Time, for the getting and
preserving of knowledge of Religion in all men, and the working and maintaining
of all godly affections in them; by the advantage of a just proportion in the
whole allotted to it, and a wise distribution of the Continuance specially so,
as there may be, upon every revolution, a reasonable space to obtain and
confirm knowledge, and to enkindle and augment affections toward God and His
Commandment: If this be not sufficiently ordered, the Time cannot be counted
sufficient. And here again it must be remembered, N. B.
of how stupide and ignorant, and weak, and froward spirits the generality of
mankind are; and so need the more Time to learn and be persuaded unto any
thing that concerns, even their own spiritual and eternal good: As also how
little Time they can generally redeem on the working Days, from their worldly
businesses to look effectually after their souls, either in point of
knowledge, or of affection; and so again they need the longer Continuance, in a
conveniently frequent revolution, to make somewhat of it, when that chief
solemn Time comes about; that it may be to them a true spiritual market Day,
wherein they furnish themselves with the maine of their spiritual provision
for their souls, till that day comes about again: that they may not starve,
nor pine, and languish for want of sufficient provision. The souls benefit
then being the secondary end of all religious services, and determinations,
(and perpetually concurrent with the former of Gods acceptance, He does
accept, when the soul is truly and sufficiently benefited, and not otherwise,)
The sufficiency of this chief solemn Time for Religion, must of necessity be
in regard of the souls being thereby sufficiently provided for.

3. To securing of men's consciences.
3. But the third thing is not to be neglected in the desciphering of the
sufficiency of this chief Time: Namely, [That it must be sufficient, (both in
the whole of the proportion, and in the wise distribution of it) to secure and
satisfy consciences, that may be apt to doubt of either, in reference to Gods
acceptance, or the good of souls, their own, or others.] We do not say or
imagine, that it is possible to satisfy all the scruples, that every
conscience (that is weak) may have about the sufficiency of this Time,
through the weakness of their judgment, and strength of their affection to
Religion: But that the determination ought to be so well grounded, upon
religious reasons, for the sufficiency of it, both in regard of Gods
acceptance and men's salvation, as that there may be a sufficient bottom to
settle consciences upon, and a just foundation of arguments to batter down any
scruples, and satisfy any doubts about it: there being a certain Rule whereby
such Time may be rightly judged sufficient, as the ordinary chief Time, for
such purposes. And without this be, we say, the Time ought not to be counted
sufficient. For we must not go blindfold in expectation of Gods acceptance,
or our souls spiritual and eternal benefit: To say, peradventure God will be
contented with such a proportion, in the whole, and with such a distribution of
it for Continuance and Frequency; and it may be possible, that thus much, so
and so ordered, may be sufficient for men's souls: This is a very unsufficient
determination, so to grope, as in the dark, and so to go by wild guesses, and
put to a venture and hazard the most important and necessary things in the
world, Gods acceptance of us, and our souls good, which go in separably
together. Nay, we say further, that such an uncertainly grounded determination,
which a sober conscience cannot find firm footing to rest upon, for its
sufficiency; its not fufficient, neither in regard of Gods acceptance, nor of
men's salvation. We are not allowed to put either of those upon doubts, and
perhaps, and probabilities. Neither has God been so wanting to His people, to
whom He vouchsafes His Word, as that they should be left without all sufficient
ground whereon to stablish their consciences in point of His acceptance, and
their own salvation; and so it must, and may be found in this matter of the
determination of the chief solemn Time sufficiently, Romans 12.1.2. Ephe. 5.10.
2. Pet. 1.10.
(those general sentences of presenting our bodies an acceptable Sacrifice;
and proving what is acceptable unto the Lord, and what is that good, and
perfect, and acceptable will of God; and of giving all diligence to make our
calling sure, and many such like, must needs suppose Rules in Scripture to
satisfy in these things) accordingly then to the grounds of Gods Word,
sufficiently to secure and satisfy consciences, (whom grounds of Gods Word
will satisfy) must this determination be, that we are all this while talking
of, of the chief ordinary solemn Time for Religion. And without this, it is
not, not is not to be thought sufficient.

The 5. and last Qualification, LI. The last qualification.
or Condition of this chief Time must not be forgotten, though a few words may
suffice for it. [That it is but the chief Time, not the only Time, (and the
determination Conclusive, not Exclusive,) and so the sufficiency, not absolute,
but respective, together with the other Times determined by God ordinarily for
all, (as the daily Times forenoted) and the extraordinary Times which His
providence (according to general Rules in His Word) determines to particular
persons, or numbers of men, occasionally.] All these together make up the full
sufficiency; which is not made up, but by all these. But yet the chief Time
(rightly determined upon just grounds, as we shall see in the next Chapter)
may, and does deserve the name, of the ordinary sufficient Time, namely, We
say, sufficient, in its kind, Illustrated.
for the chief Time. And of its sufficiency, it is to be noted further. 1.
That hereby there is no need of the Continuance to be determined to all men,
for their daily Frequencies morning and evening alone, or in Families: But God
is content to leave that to their several affections, (according to more
general Rules) and to their occasions also: Because there is so solemn a
Continuance determined for them upon the chief Days. 2. Again hereby there
is also no need of any particular Rules for determining extraordinary Times, to
this or that particular person, or business, occasionally. Only for the
solemn service of Fasting and Humiliation, there is both special examples
seeming at least to determine the season for them, as at the ordination of
Ministers, and in instant dangers, as also for the Continuance, not to be less
then a whole Day. But for other extraordinary occasions, there is less
direction, and more left, as before, to men's particular affections, and
conveniences, and safely enough; because of the strict determination of the
Continuance, and Frequency of the ordinary chief solemn Time; which keeps
all right and straight in a special manner, (and directs to right affections
for particular occasions,) if carefully and conscionably observed. 3. To which
we may in the last place add (in a word now, for happily we may be necessitated
to say a little more of it hereafter:) The sufficiency of the Continuance of
the ordinary chief Time, being rightly and wisely determined and settled; there
is no need of an universal, or peremptory determination of this Continuance
distributively, between the Solitary Worship, the Family Worship, and the
Public Worship: that is, there is no need, [That all men should be bound, to
such an exact or strict Continuance, in each of these single.] But so the whole
Continuance be shared between all three, and the Public be not so short, as
to afford no remarkable space for an affecting, prayer, and preaching, and the
like, and so no remarkable benefit to be gotten by it; nor so long as to tire
out the spirits, and disappoint those that dwell far off, of convenience of
return to their family, and solitary, devotions, (besides the regard of bodily
necessities) It can hardly be blamed, though some be longer, and some shorter
in public, and so in the rest. For as much as God still has (and so also
every ones soul has) the full Continuance determined, and allotted; which
conscionably observed in the varieties of those Duties, may be, and will be
ordinarily sufficient for their consciences, and souls good, and so acceptable
to God; though sometimes more of the Time be spent in public, and sometimes
more in private.

And so at last we have done with the proof of the necessity of such a chief
solemn Time to be determined, for the necessary and ordinarily sufficient Time
for all men. It remains that now in the last place we come to argue, [By whom
this determination must be, or may be made?] But for that, the next Chapter is
purposely reserved; this having been already drawn out to a more then ordinary
length, through the necessary dependence of so many matters contained in it.

And yet there is one thing behind for the close of this Chapter. LII. How
far the Law of Nature commands about the Quando, or season.
And that is, a brief discourse about the Quando, season, or order of
beginning, when once the former determination is Conclusively settled for the
Continuance and Frequency of the chief solemn Time. How far the Law, or
light of Nature will guide or command about this, or any general Rules of
Scripture. Leaving the question, by whom it also is to be determined, unto the
following Chapter, and here only, touching in a few words, (for many will not
need about it; It having no such substantial profit, as the Continuance and
Frequency, toward Religion, but only accidental, as is needful to be again
and again inculcated to our adversaries, who would cast off all that was
heretofore determined by God, because this is taken away:) Touching we say, how
far it is necessary that there be any determination strictly and
conclusively, of the Quando, season, or order of beginning: that is, for the
particular Day, of that number that is determined, for the chief Time of
Worship; and even of the beginning of that Day, sooner or later, at evening, or
morning, this, or that hour. Now this I shall dispatch in four Propositions.
1. There is a necessity that some particular Day (of such a number determined)
be determined before that number can be constantly observed. 2. There is a
necessity, that to all that live within the reach one of another, and so may
possibly be helps one to another, or hindrances one to another, the same
particular Day, of such a number be determined; and so far at least the same
season of beginning the Day, that all may afford convenient help to each
other, and none prove hindrances one to the other. 3. It seems most consonant
to the Law and light of Nature, and Scripture-reason, that (unless God
determine it otherwise Himself) the beginning of the Day should be in the
morning, that is after midnight, rather then in the evening before. 4. It
seems greatly conducible to the honor of God from all mankind, and to the
general Communion of Saints all the world over, that the same particular Day
(of such a number) should be determined to all men of the same age, (that is,
from Adam to Christ; and the same from Christ to the Worlds end) all the World
over; to observe it, according as that Day begins with them in the Countries
where they live and are.

LIII. 1. It is necessary that some Day be determined.
For the first of these, It may easily be made good, even by this one
Consideration; That making the instance in any one number, as suppose one Day
in ten be determined; it thence inevitably follows, that the very neglect of
determining another particular Day, makes the Determination fall upon the last
of the ten: For when all the other nine are slipped over, and none of them
determined, the last of the ten unavoidably must be observed, the first
revolution; and withal remains for ever after determined; unless a new Day
be afterward determined by as sufficient authority, as was in the determiner of
the number; and then also, without an alteration of the determination of the
number, the new determination can only be placed upon one particular Day,
namely the first of the ten. And so if it be done by sufficient authority, it
may be done without any violation or alteration of the determination of the
number at all; For the strength of the determination of the number lies in
these things. 1. That there should be but one Day for Religion, to nine for
worldly business: and again, but nine for worldly business, to one for
Religion, (and neither more nor less either way, ordinarily.) 2. That those
nine Days, being the number of working Days, should come all together; and
the Day for Religion not come between them; for then sometimes there would be
less then nine together, and sometimes more. Now this is observed plainly and
undeniably in both respects, in the instanced change from the tenth Day, to the
first Day. For in those two Revolutions of twice ten Days, there are but two
Days for Religion, the last of the first ten, and the first of the latter ten:
and there is twice nine Days for worldly business; and in each Revolution,
either number of nine worldly Days are entirely all together, and the Days
for Religion come not in to break the number, as they would do, if the second
Day were determined; for then there would be one Day for work only, and the
next for Religion, and so not nine work-dayes together: and again, if the ninth
Day were determined, then there would have been in that Revolution but eight
Days together for work, and a ninth (not a tenth, Objection.
according to the determination formerly settled for the number) observed for
Religion. If any say, that this would be how ever but for once, and that were
no great matter, specially if Religion lose nothing by it, as by bringing the
Day sooner, it would not: We answer, It is true, if the authority be
sufficient, Answer.
to change the number, the matter is not of importance: But if the authority,
that would change the order of the particular Day from the tenth to the ninth,
or so, (and ever after keep a tenth from that) yet has not also an authority
sufficient to change the number; that one alteration would make them guilty of
transgression of a Moral Commandment of God, namely in the point of the
number, which even once must not be done by men, under any pretense whatsoever.
To apply this now in a word to our business in hand, as God unquestionably
determined for the Jews, (and we say, for the old world) the last of the
seven; so upon the supposition of one Day in seven, perpetually determined, as
we say, in the fourth Commandment: And supposing also that the Church had
power, after Christ's resurrection and ascension, to change that Day to another
Day of the seven; Yet by this argumentation, they will be found to be
determined to the first Day of the Week, and to no other, (whenever they
should make the change) for else, do what they can, they would the first time
break the number, which without special allowance they might not do without
sin. And so in conclusion it will come to this pass, that it must be
acknowledged to be Gods own determination, even by virtue of the number
remaining perpetually determined in the fourth Commandment: And so in that
sense (supposing the old seventh Day abrogated) we may both truly and properly
say, The first Day of the Week (the Lords day) is determined to us, and must be
observed by us, even by virtue of the fourth Commandment: N. B.
which is a thing most worthy of a special note, and may perhaps afford a more
satisfying reason, why there is no express institution mentioned of the first
Day of the Week in the New Testament, then usually has been thought; Namely,
because the virtue of the fourth Commandment does of it self fall upon that
Day, supposing the former void. And no other Day could have been chosen by the
Church, (even in the silence of God) without violation, for once, of the fourth
Commandment, in the number. For though God, we doubt not, might have altered
it to any other Day, and even have wholly altered the number, and taken one of
six, or five, or one only of eight, or ten, at His pleasure, whose all Times
are, (as we have often said, and desire often to remember:) yet He perpetuating
the number, no man, or number of men in the Church could by humane authority
determine any other Day for order; but the first, in stead of the last, must
succeed; besides the high reason for that Day, from Christ's resurrection, and
resting from the work of our Redemption: of which hereafter in due place.
Enough of our first Proposition.

LIVE. 2. The same Day is necessary to them that live together.
The second is, [There is a necessity of the same particular Day, and particular
beginning of the Day, to all within reach one of another, to prevent mutual
hindrances, and secure mutual helps in public, and in families.] Without
this there would be nothing but confusion, and God would not be rightly served,
jointly, nor certainly by each one solitarily. But still one or other would be
interrupting and disappointing those that were near them. A man finds this very
often in Family Worship, on the Week-Dayes, and in Solitary Worship also, that
neighbors, friends, strangers, have come and put him much by; One while
delayed his devotions, another while forced him to abridge them, and sometimes
even to omit them altogether for that time, through their importunities and
businesses. And the like experience a man meets with much more, if he use to
set apart a Day any thing often, (whether for himself alone solitarily, or
with his family) he shall be diverse times interrupted and hindered, and forced
to break off, do he what he can, sometimes. All which makes it necessary to
have the beginning of the Day, and so the ending of it, and in a word, the
whole particular Day, to be the same to all that are within the possibility of
helping or hindering one another in Religion, and the services of God, public,
domestic, or solitary. And this may serve rationally to answer a difficulty, A
difficulty dissolved.
supposed to be insuperable, and opposed by the Historian, expressly to
overthrow the Lords day; namely, What is to be done by such, who traveling
East or West to such Degrees, come to find, that they have lost, or gained a
Day in their computation, and so to question what Day they should observe; and
accordingly, what beginning of the Day, because the Climates vary so much, that
when it is morning in one, it is noon in another, and night in another, and so
proportionably, as they travel. The answer may be plainly and briefly this: [
That such as travel by Sea, are to observe the Day, and the beginning, as they
did when they set forth, (that is, as near as they can, in the morning, as the
morning falls out to them:) But if they come to Land, and find, that those to
whom they come, are (by the great variation of the Climates through which they
are passed) a Day before them, or a Day after them, they are to observe it as
those do to whom they come: that so all may mutually help, and none hinder one
another.] only by the reason of the former Proposition, it seems fair to affirm
that it is necessary for them, if they find the Country to which they come, a
Day after them, that they observe their own Day first, and then the next Day,
with those of that Country; and so God nor their souls shall be no losers,
neither yet their worldly occasions; Gods providence having made the change to
them for that once, but without prejudice to any thing for which the Number and
Day was appointed. And here is indeed no inconvenience, nor any thing to bogle
at, by such as count Gods service, and the good of their souls, and
participation of His Ordinances orderly with others, matters of more
consequence then the nicety of Astronomicall observations of minutes, and
hours, and Climates, and the like. God certainly is not the author of
confusion, neither would have his servants in the same Country be divided in
their Solemn Times, by the occasion of a long journey that some of them have
taken, (though for once it may be with some, as those in a journey at the
season of the Passover, were to keep it that year, the month after; but not
so the next year, but with their brethren) And much less may it be imagined,
that God sets so light by His Solemn Times, as that such a nicety as this
occasional accident (or any other variation of Climates, and long time of
Light or the like) should disanull His Commandment about it. Which as often as
we read urged in any of our Adversaries books, (as most of our English
Antisabbatarians make maine matter about the long time of Light in some
Countries, as an unanswerable Argument against the Morality of the fourth
Commandment for one Day in seven) We confess, we stand amazed at their
presumption, so to trifle with God and Religion, and make, as it were, nothing
of His service, and of solemn Times for it. But of this more in another place.
LV. 3. It is most consonant to Nature, to begin the day in the morning.


We proceed to the third Proposition about the beginning of the particular Day;
and that is, [It seems most consonant to the Law and Light of Nature, and
Scripture reason, that (unless God otherwise determine it himself) the
beginning of the Day should be in the morning, that is, after midnight, rather
then the evening before.] We put in that Parenthesis, (unless God otherwise
determine it himself) As well that we may never, neither by way of
consequence, nor so much as in appearance, dispute against any appointment of
God: acknowledging everlastingly, that all His determinations, (what ever we
may surmise or argue) are wisest and best, so long, and so much, as He will
have them stand: As also for that it is commonly taken for an undoubted and
undeniable truth, [That the old Jewish Sabbath did begin (and so end) at
Evening.] Whether it did so certainly, or no, perhaps we shall consider more
particularly hereafter. But for the present, we cannot forbear to say, that we
are no way convinced that it ended in the Evening, (though we will not now
neither dispute that in point of fact.) But all we will do for the present
about it, is to show our grounds, why (under favor of Gods not determining
otherwise, as we said) we conceive it most suitable to Religious reason, that
the chief solemn Time should not end, till our waking Time ends, or till
Midnight: and so consequently, if it must be a whole Days continuance, (as we
suppose it must) the beginning must be at Midnight, The reason of that
assertion.
and not the Evening before. Our reason is, That if we consider the Evening
before, or the Evening after, there will be perpetual danger of incroachment
either upon the Religious Time, or the Worldly Time, to the prejudice of one of
them; but specially of Religion in most men. 1. Consider the Evening before, In
winter time, it is Evening with us at five a clock, a good part of the Time,
and at four, for a week or two, or more. If now as soon as it grows dark, the
Time for Religion begins; They must, to observe it aright, and have their minds
in frame, lay aside their worldly businesses a while at least before; and this
will at least seem to incroach too much upon their businesses, and disappoint
Markets on the Day before, and Journies very much sometimes: Or rather the
hazard will be, that worldly things will stick to men's fingers, and businesses
in their minds, so long, that what with Supper time, and other Night-businesses
before they go to bed, and many hasting to bed, under pretense perhaps of
earlier rising in the Morning, (though likely enough they mean nothing less,
nor do they rise the earlier for it:) God and the soul would have very little,
even of those hours, after four or five a clock, (besides what conscientious
men use to give Him every night) and so scarce worth the while of reckoning the
Religious Time (or Day for it) to begin at Evening, specially considering the
great loss that would in all likelihood be by the ending of it at Even; which
is the second Consideration. For supposing the Day ended at four, or five, or
six a clock: either men would still continue their Religious thoughts, as to
close fairly their waking Time with them; and this would be again thought too
much, because the former Evening was challenged as Gods due, (whether He had it
or not,) Or else, which would be infallibly with the most of men, they would
instantly, when it grew dark, or at Sunset, (which I take it was the Jews
Evening, ending those Days that did end at Even, as the Day of Expiation, Lev.
23.23.) throw away all thoughts of Religion, and fall to work, or buying and
selling in shops, or to sports and play: which cannot possibly but be
prejudicial to Religion, by weakening the good they had received before in the
Day: and even making them lose any godly affections they had gotten, by a cold
dampe, deading any spiritual heat that might be put into them by the
ordinances and services of God, public, or domestic, or solitary, by one, or
all. Hereunto we may add, that upon the knowledge of this ending at that
hour, there would be beforehand matches made of meeting to make bargains, to
game and play, and perhaps to drink and carowse, (the Day being now over) and
then even before it were over, the minds of most worldly people would so run
upon those things, even while they were in the exercises of devotion, that they
will make very little benefit by them; but they will, as it were, sit upon
thorns, in the public Ordinances, and rather then fail, go out in the midst
of them, if they misdoubt or discern that they are like to trench upon their
worldly times. And for this we would but appeal even to sober consciences,
when they sometimes hear a Sermon on the Week-dayes, after which immediately
they have worldly businesses, (or even but a meeting of pleasure) to attend
upon; Whether those things do not much run in their heads, and make them sit
in pain and fear, and long that it were done; and even tempt them to go out
(unless shame hold them) and leave it before the end, or specially before the
end of Prayer, Psalm, and Blessing. And then it would be undoubtedly much
worse with ordinary people, as appears but too manifestly by their goings out
both morning and afternoon, as soon as they think the Sermon should end, (the
glass being run) or that it is ended, and they hasten to their dinner, or to
serve their cattle, or the like.

But now by the beginning and ending at Midnight, (or the Morning, which is
ordinarily all one) so as one wakes in the Religious Day, and lies down to
sleep in it; All the inconvenience on both sides is prevented. Men may follow
their businesses the Night before, that they may the less disturb them on the
Day for Religion; and their Night-devotions may settle their minds against the
next Day: and then on that Day, all the waking Time being determined for
Religion, it will plainly secure very much all the good gotten, and keep out
all mischievous disappointments by worldly thoughts and discourses; and to
settle a man's spirit excellently, by lying down with those thoughts of God and
Religion; and so sleeping as in Gods arms, may make all singularly happy to
him. And if this be so, they are surely not so well advised, that have so
ridgedly urged the beginning of the Lords day to be necessarily at Evening, (as
they suppose it was with the Jewish Sabbath.) But we have somewhat further to
say to them about that, from our Saviors Resurrection in the Morning. Of which
we shall discourse hereafter.

LVI. 4. The same day to all mankind, is conducible
And now we pass to our fourth and last Proposition, about the particular Day
to be determined for the chief solemn Time, namely, [That it seems greatly
conducible to the honor of God from all Mankind, and to the general
communion of Saints all the world over, that the same particular day (of such a
number) should be determined to all men of the same age (that is, from Adam to
Christ, and the same from Christ to the worlds end) all the world over; to
observe it according as the Day begins with them, (sc. from Midnight) in the
Countries where they are and live.]

1. To the honor of the one God.
That this is so in reference to the Honor of God, may be showed from Gods
being One, and so the greater unity and uniformitie there is in His Worship,
among all His servants in all places of His Dominion, the greater is His Glory.
Now all the whole earth is His Dominion, Neither is there any other Lord in the
whole World that has supreme authority over any of mankind, but Himself
alone. And therefore, as much as is possible for all His Subjects to join
together in worshipping of Him, it cannot be denied, but it is an advancement
of His Honor. Now this cannot be in regard of Place; they are too many, and
dwell too far asunder to join together in Place: but in Time they may,
namely within the same 24 hours all the World over: how far distant so ever
they be one from another, and though Antipodes one to another; or how many so
ever they be in number, yet they may at the same Time, on the same Day
Natural, be every one of them every where worshipping God in the most solemn
manner, publicly or privately, with others, (as they can have others to join
with them in Place) or at least solitarily and alone: And tender to Him not
only the same proportions of Time for Continuance and Frequency, the same
number of Days, one as well as another, every where, Namely, their waking
Times (as was said before) but also the same particular Day, according as the
Day falls out with them. Then which of all things, that are any way belonging
to the outward Worship of God, there is not any one thing, as we conceive, that
can make His Worship more solemn and celebrious: Nor redound more to His
Honor; striking all men, that are yet but strangers to Him, (and much more His
professed servants) with a mavelous awe of His service, and that none should
dare to rob Him of His sacred Time, which He so universally requires of all
mankind, not only for Continuance and Frequencie, but also for the season and
order of the Day, and beginning of the Day. An objection prevented.
And if any shall now object that this reason would enforce, (or infer) the
same particular Day from the Worlds beginning, to the Worlds end; and that
there should not be one particular Day, or beginning of the Day, from Adam to
Christ; and another particular Day, or beginning of the Day, from Christ to the
Day of judgment. To this we answer, First, that we never did, nor never do
intend to dispute against God; and therefore whatever we argue for this or
that, we mean it never no otherwise then so far forth as He has not
revealed His will and pleasure to the contrary. And therefore for the
particular Day under the old Testament (what ever may be said of the beginning
of the Day) it being clearly the will of God that it should then be the last of
the Seven; and now under the new Testament the first of the Seven, it is
unquestionally the fittest for His Honor, and all things, that it should so
be, (besides the particular reasons for the change of the Day to be discoursed
of fully in their proper Place hereafter.) But this being said, we answer in
the second place, that Gods determining to all mankind, one and the self same
Day, from Adam to Christ, (as some of our disputers grant, and some of them
deny, and which we doubt not but to prove sufficiently, partly in the next
Chapter, and partly in a Chapter express for the antiquity of a Seventh Day
Sabbath, and so of that Seventh Day from the Creation;) confirms very fairly,
that it is His pleasure it should be so under the new Testament also, neither
can we conceive any reason, why it should be otherwise, being as possible now
to be observed every where, (when once it is made known to men by the
preaching of the Gospel) as it was of old for that Seventh Day; there being
such fair reason for it, in reference to Gods Honor, as we have said.

^. To the Communion of Saints.
The like may be said also, of the Communion of Saints all the World over: which
can no way be better, no way so well exercised externally, as by having not
only the same number of Days determined to them for the chief Time of
Worship, but the same particular Day (and beginning of the Day) as near as is
possible, by reason of the variety of the Climates. That as often as that
particular Day comes about, every one of them where ever they are, or with
whomsoever, do either publicly in congregations, if it may be, It is certain
a day ordinary and frequent, is necessary for maintenance of the true Religion
and godliness, of union and Christian society, among the fathfull, etc. prim.
p. 251. see also, p. 59. C. G. Irons. p. 8.
or if not that, then in families; or at least in secret, each one in solitary
devotions, send up their Prayers, and Praises, and Services together unto the
Throne of Grace, remembering one another in those Prayers, and Praises. There is
no man will doubt or can question, but if they all were so near together, and
voices and ears were proportionable, that all could join together, in one
Place, at one Time, it were to be done. That therefore which can be done, in
the exercise of the Communion of Saints, seems to be most requisite to be
done, Namely that they all have, and observe the same particular Day, even all
the World over, for their solemn Time of Worship. And this the rather, because
this solemnity so determined and so observed, will be a most lively visible
representation of that great (...) that Great Assembly of the Saints and Angels
in Heaven, spoken of Heb. 12.22. As if for that Time or Day, the World were
turned into Heaven; Or Heaven come down into the World, As Saint John says,
he saw the new Jerusalem descending thence. It is true (as has been more then
once touched before) all the World cannot begin and end their solemn Worship,
even if they should count the Day to begin at one and the same instant as near
as they could, and so some at one hour, and some at another; yet none could
tender their solemn Worship, but in their waking Times, which by the diversity
of the Meridians, must needs be diverse one from another, according to the
distances of Places. But yet they may be truly said to observe the solemn
Time, upon that same Day; some beginning a little before others; and so
successively one after another, to the end of the 24 hours of that Day, one or
other would be still employed in the solemnity of Worship, according to the
Days determination. And so an amends (as we may say) would be made for not
beginning all at an instant, in that hereby, the Holy Time, N. B.
should be observed actually, and continued in actual services full 24 hours,
and so no part of it wholly shrunk up by sleep or other interruptions. For
still in one part or other of the World, whole Countries would be in their
waking Time, and so in the solemnity of their devotions. For demonstration of
this; suppose at such a Place the Day begins an hour before at another (as it
is really so, every Day, in point of light, and so of midnight, and noone, and
evening, etc.) and this other Place sees Day an hour before another; yet more
Westward; and so of the rest (as between Dover and the West of Ireland, they
say there is an hours difference,) Now by that Time the first Place has
begun, and gone on in solemn Worship an hour, the next begins and joins with
them, and so the next till it be gone round. So that by the twelft hour, half
the World are in their solemn Worship, Public, or Private, And then the other
half takes the turn in their order, till the twentifourth hour. There cannot
then, we say, be a better way to exercise the Communion of Saints upon earth:
Nor is there upon earth imaginable a fuller resemblance of the great and
solemn Assembly which is constantly kept in Heaven. And let that be further
noted in a Word, that the forementioned respects of Time, Continuance,
Frequency, and Season, are not in Heaven distinguishable. For they in Heaven,
do keep a constant and everlasting solemn Sabbatisme (as it is called Heb. 4.)
whereas we poor snakes on earth, are forced to wait the returns of solemn
Times. The reason is, they above have no other work to do; but to serve and
Worship God, they are spirits without bodies: we on earth have bodies to care
for as well as souls; we have other callings commanded us, to attend on, as
well as on Gods solemn Worship. But yet it is fit we should as near as we can,
conform to them above, which we say, is chiefly, by this joint observance of
the same particular, Day and number, and length, all the World over for our
chief solemn Times. Whereunto may be added for a conclusion, that otherwise,
every sover all dominion (as there are many, in Germany, and Italy, and other
Countries, not subordinate to one Prince or State with their neighbors, but
small principalities and free States) might vary the particular Day, were it
but to show their liberty; and so such as had occasion to travel among them,
would be very often, either forced to break the number determined to all, or
else keep within doors upon their own solemn Day, and so want the help of
others, and be in danger to be interrupted by others. And so every where upon
the borders of Countries this hazard might be. All which is prevented, (and
only so) by having all, in all Countries, of the World, the same particular
Day, and beginning of it, as we have said. And so we have, at length,
dispatched the whole of what we judge considerable about the profit and
necessity of solemn Time generally, and of the chief Time for Religion in
special Except by whom the determination of this chief Time is to be made,
which now follows in the next Chapter.

CHAP. X.
The Determination of the chief Solemn Time of Worship for all men, necessary
and ordinarily sufficient for the chief Time; as also of the particular day
for it: belongs not to men, but to God.

1. The question explained.
HItherto in the former Chapters, particularly about Time, we have been laying
foundations of fortifications, where withal to defend the Perpetuity of the
fourth Commandment for a seventh Day Sabbath, and the Divine institution of
the Lords Day, the first day of the week for the particular day: and to batter
down the opposite Mounts of our adversaries, both Sabbatarians and
Antisabbatarians. And as we have built upward, we have planted some Pieces, and
discharged them against their works in such fort, as we are persuaded the
judicious Reader already discernes them to shake and totter. But now we are
about to erect a Principal Tower, which if we can firmly and strongly do: All
men will see, that we have sufficiently secured our selves and our cause from
any fear of future assaults from the Antisabbatarian party. And as for the
Jewish Sabbatarians, we doubt not but we shall also quit our selves from them
in the latter parts.

The matter we propound to be strengthened, is the position, expressed in the
title of the Chapter [That the Determination of the chief Solemn Time for all
men, necessary and ordinarily sufficient for the chief Time; as also the
particular day for it, belongs not to men but to God.] To state this clearly,
we must needs repeat a little of our foregoing discourses, and add a few
words more for full understanding of it.

1. By the chief Solemn Time, 1. What is meant by chief solemn Time.
we mean the Continuance and Frequency jointly, that is, so much at once, so
often, and so often so much, Time, to be observed for Religion, Gods honor,
and the souls good, in Solemn Worship: and that in a convenient large
Proportion in the whole, and a convenient large Continuance, for the various
kinds of worship, public, domesticke, and solitary, and a convement space for
serious performance of several duties in each kind; together with a convenient
Frequency of Revolution of such continuance: So as no other proportion of Time,
is, or can be of Equal profit with this: All other being less large for
Continuance remarkably, or remarkably less frequent; and so cannot attain to
that substantial profitablenesse to the general of Religion, that there is in
the chief Solemn Time we speak of.

2. By the Determination of this chief solemn Time, 2. What by determination.
[Necessary for all men,] we mean, The appointing it so to all men by a law,
as that thenceforth, all men that have this law given them, and their posterity
to the worlds end, are bound in conscience to observe it, and cause as much as
lies in them, others also to observe it, as necessary to Religion, so as they
sin, that observe not the whole proportion, or that observe it not according to
the distribution of the Determination; so much Continuance together in one day,
and no less, and that days Frequency so often returning, and no seldomer,
then is expressed in the Determination. Only still admitting a reservation (as we
have often touched before) for necessary worldly occasions, 3. What by ordinarily
sufficient
ordinary or extraordinary.

3. By the Determination of this chief Solemn Time, [as ordinarily sufficient
for the chief Time,] we mean, that the Determination is only conclusive,
that no greater proportion in the whole, nor longer Continuance so often, nor
oftener so much, need ordinarily be determined or observed by all men for the
chief Time of Worship: and not, that this is to be the only time to be
observed, (which were to make it an exclusive Determination) or the only Time
to be determined, for any of mankind, what occasions so ever may be. But this
is sufficient, we say, for the chief Time, in reference 1. To Gods
acceptance. 2. To the benefit of souls. 3. To sober consciences, 4. How it
belongs not to men, but to God.
security and satisfaction.

4. By the Determination not belonging to men, but to God, for this chief
Time, (as also for the particular day of it,) we mean that all the authority
that men have about it, is but declarative and obedientiall, not legislative or
decisive. Men have only to exercise their Wisdoms to find out what
Determination God has made of it in his written word, and how much reason
there is to acknowledge the wisdom and graciousnesse of Gods Determinations in
all the respects: And not to set their wits a work to find out of themselves,
or from any general grounds of nature or Scripture, other Times, as necessary
and sufficient for this chief Time for all men, (or any other particular day,)
which God has not appointed. Again the Authority that any of mankind have,
(even Princes and Magistrates, the Church Synods, and Counsels,) is only to
cause their inferiors (as much as in them lies) to observe, together with
themselves, Gods determination of these Times, and not to take upon themselves
the Authority, of determining any other proportion, Continuance, or Frequency,
for the necessary and ordinarily sufficient chief solemn Time, then God has
Determined to their hands already in His holy Scripture. For to God, we say,
this Determination, even now belongs, and ever did, since Time was: that is,
God, who is undeniably and originally the sovereign Lord of all men and times
(of the times of all men) has reserved to himself, as a parcel of his
prerogative royal, from the worlds beginning to the worlds end, the
Determination of the chief solemn Time for all men, necessary and ordinarily
sufficient for the chief Time; and of the particular days for it. And
accordingly, these are to be found in His writter word, namely an express
Determination of the chief solemn Time for Contiunance and Frequency, and a
sufficient designation, of the particular days for it, in both ages of the
Church. II. The question confirmed.


The question thus stated, we shall propound sundry sort of arguments to
confirm our position, some against men's authority, whether taken severally, or
any number of men together; and some expressly for Gods authority. Again, some
concerning all the respects of Time together; others concerning the Continuance
and Frequency jointly, which make up the chief Time, and that both in
reference to the necessity of so much, and so often, and to the sufficiency of
it, for the chief Time: others concerning either of those respects in
special, the Continuance and the Frequency, and finally, some which refer
specially to the particular days.

And first we begin to oppugn Men's authority generally, III. It belongs not to
men to determine it, the first argument, no such authority is given them.
and to show that it belongs not to them to determine the chief solemn Time
of Worship for all men. Thus we reason [ That Authority which neither the law
of nature grants unto men, nor the Scripture any where expresses, or gives the
least intimation of, is not to be rested on, or believed, in a matter of such
importance in Religion, as the Determination of this chief solemn Time is.
But neither the law of nature grants, nor the Scripture any where expresses, or
gives the least intimation of any such authority granted unto men, to determine
the chief solemn Time of Worship. Ergo, Such an authority is not to be rested
on or believed, in a matter of such importance in Religion, as this
Determination of the chief solemn Time is.]

The Major we may easily confirm; 1. Hist. Sab. part 2. page 20.
From the words of one of themselves in another case [Non credimus, quia non
legimus.] But more from the nature of conscience, which can have no other rule
or ground in matters of importance, but either the law of nature, or the
Scipture, which latter indeed alone is so complete a treasury of all the will
of God toward us, as what is not at least insinuated there, is in no wise to
be admitted in any matter of importance in Religion, whether of belief or
practice: For as much as it contains (at least, we say, by way of insinuation)
all that the law or light of nature does or can say toward Religion; and having
expressed many things more, which the light or law of nature is not able to
discover or speak to. And therefore a Conscience dares lay no weight upon what
the Scripture is wholly silent in, and much less when the law of nature does
not pretend to speak for it neither. Now that this Determination of the chief
solemn Time of Worship for all men, is a matter of mainest importance in
Religion, we suppose we have abundantly showed in the two former Chapters,
beyond the denial of any Conscience; unto which we may breefly add, that it
is a thing of singular weight in reference both to superiors, and inferiors;
those that may pretend, or offer to make this Determination, or neglect to make
it: and those again that obey, it being made by others, or obey it not. For on
every hand there is sin unavoydable, if we follow not the will of God revealed
in nature, or in His Word. 1. If they take upon them to make this
Determination, to whom God has given no such authority, they grievously sin to
usurp upon his Prerogative Royal, or to usurp authority not granted them. 2.
If they neglect to make it, to whom God has granted the Authority, they sin
also, in being wanting to so necessary a duty, and business of Religion; or
perhaps also to the rectifying the superstitious conceit of those that think it
determined by God, when it is not. 3. If those that have Authority, make it too
large in the whole proportion, in that they sin, in being over burdensome to
men, and rendering the service of God tedious and irksome, and making men to
throw it off for the burdensomnesse of it, even beyond that proportion, which
perhaps they would have been contented to have observed, if it had been more
moderately appointed. 4. If they distribute the proportion too unequally,
between the Continuance and Frequency, here again they sin, in prejudicing
either Religion, by too short continuances, or too seldom revolution; or
worldly businesses over much, by too frequent revolutions specially: which
again will redound to the prejudice of Religion, as before. 5. If they make the
proportion, too scanty in the whole, they sin unquestionably, against Religion,
Gods honor, and the souls good. 6. If they find a Determination made by
others, wisely, they sin if they offer to alter it any way, that is, to the
worse. 7. If they find it unfitly made in any respect, they sin if they alter
it not, for the better. And the reason is the like for those that are to obey
the Determination, they sin if they ascribe Authority, and yield obedience to
those to whom God has given none; and they sin on the other hand, if they
deny Authority unto those to whom God has given it, or if they deny their
obedience, specially in a matter so nearly concerning Gods honor, and the
good of their souls. (Besides what is to be said of the proportion, or
distribution appearing equal, or notoriously unequal, of which anon.) So that
in all this, there is nothing for the consciences of all sorts of men, that
meddle, or meddle not with this Determination, obey it, or obey it not, to rest
upon: but a certain Authority to be pleaded from the law of nature or
Scripture for those that offer to make it, or obey it. Or a certainty, that men
have no such Authority left them by God. And that our minor expresses, which we
believe we shall sufficiently confirm.

1. For the Law of Nature; we have already noted. 1. IV. Neither by the law of
nature.
That originally God is unquestionably the Sovereign and absolute Lord of all
Time, and so that it primarily belongs to Him to determine the chief and
necessary Times of His own Worship. 2. That the Law and light of Nature does
not determine, nor cannot help men to determine Conclusively the Continuance
and Frequency jointly, and so not the chief solemn Time of Worship for all
men. 3. And this is both confessed (and urged against the fourth Commandment,
being Morall-Naturall for a Seventh Day Sabbath) by all our adversaries that
dispute about these things. From all which it plainly follows, that the Law of
Nature does not, nor cannot grant unto men the authority of determining this
chief Time of Worship necessary for all men: But rather denies it them: As
being a thing against the light of Nature, that they should have the authority
of determining that which they have no light in Nature for the porportion of.

2. For the Scripture, there is as little for this authority there, V. Nor by
the Scripture.
as in Nature, for we challenge our adversaries or any for them, to to produce
the Book, Chapter, or verse, of the Bible, that gives any so much as an
intimation, that God has put off this authority to men, which was originally a
part of His own Prerogative Royal. Is it any where said, in express Words,
or to any such effect, [That God, though He determined the Times of His Worship
to His Church of old, yet He will not do so to His Church now, under the New
Testament. Or that He will not have any one of His Ancient determinations to
stand in force in any respect, But, though it be still as necessary as ever to
have solemn Times determined for Religion unto all men, specially a chief
Time, to be ordinarily sufficient, yet He utterly refuses to meddle any more in
determining, or distributing the proportions of it, but leaves it wholly to
men, they may and shall, and must determine it.] Is there we say, any the least
intimation, of Gods putting this authority out of His own hands into men's, in
the New Testament? Or any thing like it, of His not meddling with determining
any Times to mankind, till He had brought Israel out of Egypt: But that Adam,
notwithstanding the contrary intimation (to say the least of it now, which we
shall particularly discuss hereafter) Genesis 2. was wholly left without any
determination from God, for any solemn Times; and so all the Patriarchs, Noah,
and Abraham, and the rest, till Moses his Time, and till the fall of Manna. Is
it any where said, or any reason of it to be gathered from Nature or Scripture,
that these had the whole authority, of determining this necessary chief
solemn Time for all men, or that any else had it of mankind. Some must have
it, God still, or men, We refer it then unto any conscience to judge, whether
it is fit to say or believe, without any Scripture, or Reason, that God, to
whom it originally belonged, and whose Honor and Service it so mainly
concerned, (besides His care of men's souls) did put it over to men, we knew
not to whom? nor why?

All that can be pretended, is, that some of our adversaries say, that there is
no mention of Adam or the Patriarchs, keeping the Seventh Day Sabbath. No more
say we, is there of their keeping any sufficient Time, any such, chief Time,
as is proved and confessed, to be necessary to be determined, and observed for
Religion. We now argue not of the proportion, but who determined it, determined
it was, being so necessary to Religion for all men. And it originally belonged
to God. Let them then that list or dare, believe, without the Scripture, and
against the light of Nature, that He put it over to men: We dare not. And this
may suffice for our first, and general Argument. For as for that which is
alleged for the Churches Authority now under the New Testment. We shall come
to consider it in the prosecution of our second Argument, which is this.

[If God have given to men this Authority to determine the chief solemn Time
of Worship for all men, VI. 2. Argum. this Authority is given.
necessary and ordinarily sufficient for the chief Time: Then either He has
given it to every man single, or to some special men for all the rest: But He
has not given this Authority to every man single, nor to some special men for
all the rest. Ergo, He has not given this Authority to men at all.] The
Consequence of this Argument is most clear, and cannot be denied. The
Antecedent has diverse branches in sight, and more that will appear anon, we
must consider them severally and distinctly.

1. For this Authority to be given to every man single, 1. Neither to every man
single.
to determine the chief solemn Time, necessary, and ordinarily sufficient for
Himself, It will, we doubt not, sound so unreasonable in every ear at the
first, that sundry Readers will be ready to blame us, as wasting of Time
unnecessarily in the very mention of it, and much more in going about to
disprove it. Yet for all that, we cannot but take notice that some of our
disputers, though we verily believe they mean no such thing, as to assert it,
(but reserve the Authority to the Church, the Governors of it, as they
abundantly proclaim:) Yet sometimes speak very suspiciously toward it. Thus
speaks one of them [" The equity of the reason (in the fourth Commandment)
is, that if a man, Prim. part. 2. c. 7. Sect. 4.
have many days for his own work, It is reasonable He (mark it, He)
consecrate one among many for Gods service.] And again in another place [The
Commandment obliges us always, to appoint an ordinary Day for Gods service.]
And is not the Commandment in that sense Moral to all men? Therefore it
commands all men to appoint a Day, that is, every man for himself: (of which
more by and by.) Not much unlike another, [He sins, C. D.
that does not separate some Time for God.] And the great Schooleman, in the
place formerly cited, seems to speak this language also [It is Moral (says
he) that man should depute some Time of his life for the service of God.] Which
seems to imply, that it belongs to every man single. And if any man wonder,
how such learned men, should let fall such Exoticke sentences (and so contrary
even to their own assertions, other where, of the Churches authority herein:)
We desire such to take notice, that for any thing we can see, our Adversaries
own grounds do necessitate them to speak thus, and to believe so too, if they
understand themselves: Which that we may evince, and withal prosecute our
Argument above, against them; we propound this Confirmation of our Antecedent
generally.

VII. This is proved absurd, by
[If in reason it be necessary, that the authority being left to man to
determine the chief Time of Worship, it should be given to every man single;
and yet that be absurd: then the authority is not left to every man single, nor
yet to some special men for all the rest. But it is necessary in reason, that
the authority being left to man, it should be to every man single: yet that is
absurd, that it should be so left. Ergo, The authority is not left to every man
single, nor yet to any special number of men for all the rest.] The
Consequence again needs no proving. The Antecedent requires a double
confirmation, as having two members: whereof the first is, [That it is
necessary in reason, that the authority of determining the chief solemn Time
being left to men, it should be left to every one single.] This may be cleared,
by considering, that the observation of such a Time being necessary to all men,
at least to be employed in Solitary Worship, if they cannot have the
opportunity of Domestic and Public Worship also, as has been proved before
in the foregoing Chapter: This cannot certainly be observed by all men, unless
every one have power and authority in himself single, to determine it for
himself, in case others will not, or do not. And it is undeniably certain,
that in many places in the world there are none to determine to others a
sufficient solemn Time for the worship of God; as in all Pagan Countries: In
those places therefore, either men must have authority to determine for
themselves sufficient Time single, or they shall have none determined to them:
and so it shall be left to the will of other men, whether they shall attend
upon God, and the care of their own souls, sufficiently. Ob. If any would say,
that such may attend upon God, and the care of their own souls sufficiently,
without any antecedent determination of their own, or others. 1. This has been
already showed to be false (for the generality of mankind) by their being
liable to so many interruptions from worldly businesses; particularly, being
servants, and under the authority of others, and even from their want of steady
wisdom to allot, without an antecedent determination, sufficient Times for
Religion. 2. Besides, that this perverts the state of the Question; for we are
now supposing, a determination must be made, (the authority is left to some
men, or else it is still in Gods hands, and His determinations already made
must stand, that is, some of them.) It must not then be answered, that any may
sufficiently observe Time for God, without a determination. It remains
therefore, that Time being to be observed, and determined that it may be
observed, even a chief and sufficient Time for Continuance and Frequencie both
jointly, and that for all men; It must be left to all men severally, if to men
at all, that so (at least in the neglect of others) God nor their souls may
not want their sufficient Times determined. And this is enough for the first
member of the Antecedent.

2. The second is, [That it is absurd, VIII. 1. The importance of it.
it should be left to every man single, the authority to determine the chief
solemn Time of Worship, necessary and sufficient, for himself:] may be
demonstrated, 1. By laying together, 1. the unwillingnesse that is in the most
to be bound to, or by any determination of such necessary and sufficient Time
for Religion: unwillingnes to observe it, even though themselves deny not Gods
express determination. 2. The interruptions manifold, that many are liable to,
by reason of worldly affairs; and even their not being masters of their own
Time; as is specially the case of servants, children, wives. 3. And the want of
wisdom in all sorts, to judge of the necessity and sufficiency aright. All
these, we say, laid together, will give assurance, that if it were left to
every man single, in most men it would be all one, as to suppose it not at all
necessary to have any determination of such sufficient Time: For there would be
no hopes of any at all, or any to any purpose. And these three would be sure to
be laid together in the minds of very many of mankind, as thus. 1. Their own
unwillingnesse would make them backward to determine any Times at all,
specially when no man could show them out of the Scripture, that God had given
them any such express command to make such determination to themselves. 2.
They would think themselves a great deal the more excused, or excusable, being
servants or inferiors, and so not masters of their own Time; and their
superiors not so much as allowing them to make any such determinations of Time,
nor scarce to observe any; as would be, and is the case of thousands and
thousands. And if men now dispute, that the Israelites were bound to no Sabbath
in Egypt; and that the Commandment is not given to servants; because of the
inconvenience of sufferings, and the necessity of obeying masters, commanding
work, (though we shall refute these sufficiently in due time:) much more would
servants, and such persons under subjection think themselves not tied to
observe any considerable proportions of Times as necessary, and much less
determine any to themselves, which would bring such hazards upon themselves,
and the Scripture being so silent in bidding them determine any such Times, as
it is plain it is; and having determined none to them, as is supposed and said
by our Disputers. 3. All this would be much more strong in their conceit, and
hinder them for any such sufficient determination (or observation) by their
want of wisdom, and want of a rule, to determine the sufficient and necessary
Time by: They will think, that if it were the will of God to have us determine
for our selves any necessary and sufficient Times (the observation of which
will be so prejudicial and hazardous to us) He would have given us a rule to
go by, and not put us to trouble, and danger of sufferings, in a business
where we must grope in the dark, and know not whether we go too fast, or too
slow, determine too much, or too little at once, too often, or too seldom.
(And this want of wisdom, and want of a rule, is a most convincing argument
that God has not left it at all to men, as we shall show expressly anon.) And
what any of our Adversaries, or any other could plead against such a man's
allegations, that this determination, for these reasons, was not, nor is not
left to him for himself; but either there is to be none, or some other have
the authority, (or rather God himself still:) We know not what to imagine, in
such silence of the Scripture in it; nor how they could urge his conscience,
and convince him of sin, upon their Tenets, for not determining, or even not
observing such sufficient Times. Let them consider it. The same also would be
the case with manifold Superiors, unwilling to observe Times for Religion, and
being men of much worldly employments; and having no clear rule to go by,
what is necessary, or what sufficient. The issue would infallibly be, that they
would never determine any Time to themselves at all, or never sufficient Times.
It cannot then be imagined, that God should, upon these terms, leave the
authority to determine the necessary and sufficient Times for His Worship, and
Religion, to every man single. Let us sum up this proof of our Antecedent in
this branch, in the ensuing Syllogism:

[That which supposes God to leave a thing of exceeding importance in Religion,
to the consciences and judgments of every unconscionable man to determine, is
not to be credited or admitted. But to say, that God has given the authority
to every man single to determine for himself the necessary and sufficient
Times of Worship, is to leave a thing of exceeding importance in Religion, to
the consciences and judgments of every unconscionable man to determine. Ergo,
That He has given them any such authority, is not to be credited nor
admitted.]

The Major is certain, as well because, 1. No Instance can be given of any
other matter of like nature so left to every man's conscience to determine. 2.
As also because it seems a formal contradiction, [That any thing of exceeding
importance in Religion, should be left to the conscience and judgment of any
man to determine, much less of every man for himself, (specially when it were
so certain, that nothing would be done by the most, or nothing to any purpose)
It being the nature of Religion, to be a binder of men's consciences.]

The Minor cannot be denied, by that which has been often discoursed of the
importance and necessity of such determination for Religion: and by the
undeniable unconscionablenesse of many, even of the most of men. The Conclusion
then will follow, [That God has not left it to every man single.]

2. We add a second proof hereof, IX. 2. Their manifold interruptions.
from the hindrances that the most willing and conscionable man that could be,
would inevitably meet with, to the exceeding prejudice of his devotions, even
though he were not a servant, or such a like inferior; but much more, if he
were. In that again, for want of express proof of the authority given him to
determine his own Time, and for want of a clear rule to measure his
proportions of necessary and sufficient by; he would infallibly and unavoidably
be so interrupted and checked in and for his observations, which he could not
justify by a particular rational plea, that he would often be even forced to
intermit and omit his determined Times; and even in those that he did observe,
be often unquiet in his mind and spirit: sometimes doubting he observed not
enough, and sometimes perhaps too much, and so too seldom, or too often; and
even on unseasonable Days, (as they would often prove by men's interruptions
and businesses) And by all, miss of much good, and of much comfort which he
might have had, in despite of all men, if these Times had been unquestionably
determined by God himself to him. A Syllogism shall close this: [That which
supposes God to leave a thing to His servants to determine, of which their
determination will be with less honor to Himself, less good to their
souls, less comfort to their consciences then if Himself had determined it
for them; is not to be credited or admitted without express Scripture for it.
But to say, God has left to every man single the determination of his own
necessary and sufficient Times for Religion, is to suppose (and that without
express Scripture) that He has left to His servants to determine a thing, of
which their determination will be with less honor to Himself, less good to
their souls, less comfort to their consciences, then if Himself had
determined it for them. Ergo, without express Scripture for it, (which is not
to be found) it is not to be credited or admitted, That God has left this
determination to every man single.] There needs, we conceive, no further words
of this proof. We have yet one more:

X. 3. The impossibility of agreement.
3. Which is taken from what we have formerly proved, That [It is necessary for
all that dwell near one another, and within the reach of helping or hindering
one another, That they be all bound by one and the same determination for
Continuance and Frequencie jointly.] And even for the particular Day, and
beginning of the Day, so far as to secure the help, and prevent the hindrance
of each other. And withal, that it is very conducible to the honor of God
from all mankind, and to the exercise of the Communion of Saints all the world
over, [That all men should have the same determinations for Continuance and
Frequencie, and even for the same particular Day (as near as may be) all the
world over.] Whence we frame this Syllogism:

[That which supposes it extremely improbable, if not altogether impossible,
That either God should be generally honored by all mankind on the same days,
and in like proportions; or the communion of Saints exercised so as it might be
among all Gods people all the world over; or even that the help of those that
are near one another should be secured, and the hindrance prevented, is not to
be credited or admitted. But to say that God has left to every man single the
determination of the necessary sufficient Time for Religion, of even of the
particular day for it, is to suppose such an improbability, or even
impossibility, Ergo.]

The Major has been confirmed before. The Minor is easily cleared. For how can
it be imagined with any probability, or even possibility, [That every man
having these Determinations left to him, all men every where will agree upon
that same Continuance, Frequency, and particular day for Worship?] In what one
thing do all men in all parts of the world agree, that is any way contrary to
corrupted nature, as this determination of necessary and sufficient Time is:
that is, contrary to the wills and carnal affections of men? Nay we need not
travel so far for this, as all over the world. Take but any one country, city,
village, house, and let it be but once known, that [None has authority over
another to determine times to him, but that it is left to every single man for
himself:] And it cannot resonably be hoped, that there would be a complete
agreement in the same Proportions, Continuance, and Frequency, or the same
particular days constantly. Some out of frowardness, because they would not
join with such or such, and would not have them join with themselves, would
have their days and times by themselves. Others out of mere prophannesse,
would shift and shuffle the times and days, that they might overslip as much
as they could. Others through covetousness and worldly mindedness, love of
pleasures, and the like, would not think it fit to determine themselves long
before hand, or to a constant proportion, or day: as not knowing what worldly
occasions they might have, which they had rather attend upon (though of no
necessity) then upon Religion. And specially, when by others being also left to
their own determinations, they could not be certain, whether they should be
interrupted by their coming to visit them, or trade or traffic with them.
And so by the shift, besides great neglect of Domesticke and Solitary Worship,
there would be in many places, even where Christianity were professed, no
Public Worship, at all: or at least, many would never come to it at all; or
not in any constancy. And so this (together with the forenoted hindrances of
the willing, by the interruptions of the untoward) would fill all places with
nothing but confusion and irreligion. And therefore cannot be supposed to be so
left by God.

XI. Except. 1. answered.
If any man shall now object against all this kind of argumentation generally,
as unsufficient: because even though it be granted that God Himself has fully
determined all the times in question, yet the unwilling will still be untoward
and neglectfull, and men will still interrupt and hinder one another; Sol.
and so the same inconveniences will remain that are alleged. We answer, That
it is one thing to have irreligion be among men for want of a law, by leaving
them to themselves to make laws, in matter of greatest concernment, in
Religion; and another thing to have irreligion be among them, that will not be
obedient to a law made for them. The former we conceive altogether contrary to
Gods honor, His holiness, and justice, and revelation of His will, and law in
His word. The other we know to be permitted in His providence, and out of which
He will fetch Himself honor, and vindicate His holiness and justice, even
according to His truth, the truth of His threatenings (added to the
transgressions forbidden by His law:) in His due and appointed Time. 2 Pet. 2.9.

XII. Except. 2. and Except. 3. answered.
If it be further objected, that [to many nations, God has certainly not
declared any particular law concerning the Times of His Worship:] As also that
whereas we speak so much, and so often of the good of men's souls toward their
eternal salvation, requiring such a determination (and observation) of
sufficient times for Religion: This were to no purpose, even were it revealed
to many nations in the world, who have not the knowledge of Jesus Christ,
without which there is no salvation. We answer:

He showed His word unto Jacob, His statutes and His Ordinances unto Israel, He
has not dealt so with any nation, and as for His judgments they have not
known them. Psalm. 147.

God has not revealed Jesus Christ to many Nations, Yet that is unquestionably
necessary to salvation, and was revealed to Adam and Noah: But their posterity
generally lost it, and God revived it not unto most of them. And so (though in
a far different degree, and even kind of necessary) was it with the Sabbath,
the chief Time of Worship.

Also many Nations whose Ancestors had the Gospel preached to them, and all
the Precepts of the New Testament, now have them no more, which yet are
necessary to Gods Honor, and the good and salvation of men's souls.


1. To the first of these. No more has He many other particular laws, which
yet were and are His Commandments undoubtedly, both in the New Testament, and
in the Old, and specially in the matters that concern His Worship, His
Ordinances for His service. 2. Yet these He undoubtedly declared to Adam after
his fall to communicate to his posterity, and afterward to Noah for his
posterity, before and after the flood; And when the succeeding generations,
growing wicked, lost and forgot them, or corrupted them: He in justice left the
greatest part of them without diverse particular Laws belonging to His Worship,
(and even some belonging to the second Table, in diverse Countries) and among
the rest, that of the chief solemn Times of His Worship. For. 3. It may be
fairly answered, that to such as were corrupted so far, as to Worship
plurality of gods against the first Commandment; and make and Worship Images
against the second, and their whole Religion, was superstition and wilworship
in a manner: There was no proper use of the particular express Law for the
chief solemn Time of Gods appointment: which being to be kept to Gods Honor,
and not to the Honor of Idols, God did not vouchsafe to revive among them
particularly, that particular Law; which they had profaned, if they had
observed it to their Idols. And this apprehension we have the Prophet Ezekiel
for our instructor in, who in the name of God, complains of the Jews, for
profaning His Sabbaths, as well as defiling His Sanctuary, in that the same
Day (that is, on the Sabbath) when they had slain their children to their
Idols, they came the same Day into Gods Sanctuary, into Gods House. Ezekiell
23.38, 39. See, how God accounts, worshipping of Idols a profaning of His
Sabbaths, when done upon that Day. N. B.
Therefore we need no longer wonder, that God also never reproves the Gentiles
by His Prophets, for not observing the Sabbath, which some of our Adversaries
think to be a demonstration, that the Sabbath was not given to Adam, neither
concerned the Gentiles at all, but was peculiar to the Jews, because (they
say) the Gentiles are reproved for other sins, but not for not observing the
Sabbath. They were not, we say, reproved for not observing it, because to have
observed it to their idols, and the honor, and worship of false gods, had been
to have profaned it, as Ezekiel has told us. Therefore also they are not
reproved for not observing any times at all; Yet doubtless many of them were
so Atheistical and irreligious, as they observed not the times of their own
Superstition: Yet to observe some times, our adversaries (and all men)
confess, is [ absolutely Moral Natural, and bound all the Gentiles in all
ages. But because they observed not those, they did observe, unto the honor of
the true God, but of Idols, therefore we say they are never reproved for any
neglect or inobservation of Times at all. But on the otherside, when God
mentions by His Prophet Esaias, Chap. 56. [The son of the stranger joining
himself to the Lord,] He again, and again calls such to the observation of
the Sabbath, with most ample promises, as a most essential part of Religion,
and most necessary to every Servant of God. A Law then from God Himself, is
most necessary for His Honor, and for Religion, concerning the chief Time for
His Worship. Though to those Nations that have cast off His true Worship, He
has not particularly revived it, not having given them His written Word.

good of men's souls, 1. We say not, that the observation of the Sabbath, or
any sufficient Times in Duties of Religion, will save men's souls, or benefit
men's souls, without the revelation and Faith of Christ. 2. But we say, that a
Law from God Himself concerning a Sabbath, or the necessary and sufficient
chief Time for Religion, is necessary unto every man, as a Moral means
toward the attainment of salvation, and the good eternal of men's souls, as
well as toward the right honoring of God. And therefore God has not put over
the making of such a Law unto men, whether Christ be revealed to them, or not
revealed to them: neither to every man for himself single, or to any special
men, or number of men for all the rest.

XIII. Nor 2. is this Authority given to some special men for the rest.
And now having proved this sufficiently enough, concerning its not being put
over to every man single (and we suppose not too prolixly, considering how we
argued withal, that if it belong to men, it must belong to every man single;
And our largeness about this may stand us instead an on also;) We proceed to
the second maine branch, of our second Argument: Namely, [That God has not
given Authority to any special men, or number of men, to determine the chief
Time of His Worship, for all men.]

This question is disputable in three several distinctions of Time, or Ages of
the World: The first we make, for this matter, from Adam, to the mention of the
Sabbath to Israel, Exodus 16. The second from thence, to the making void of all
the Jewish Days, the particular Seventh Day Sabbath and all; by the
Resurrection of Christ, and preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles: The third
from the making void of the old Seventh Day Sabbath to our Times, and so to
Christ's second coming. And in each of these Periods of Times, Two sorts of
Persons are generally considerable, 1. Those that were out of the Church, by
the revolt of their Ancestors from Gods Covenant made with Adam after his fall
(intimated Genesis 3.15.) Namely, Cain and his posterity, and those that fell off
to them, Genesis 6. and those of Noah's posterity, that fell from the Covenant
renewed with him, and Sem, (according to the intimations of Genesis 9.) Namely,
the race of Cham, and even of Japhet, and Sem also, the most of them turning
Idolaters, (as is said even of Abraham and his Progenitors, before God called
him, Jos. 24.2.) and so the greatest part of the World remained, and does
remain out of the Church, and Covenant of God to this Day, 2. In all ages from
Adam, even until now, God has had a Church; some (though at Times very few)
He renewed His Covenant with, and made them His peculiar servants: And so were
outwardly the whole Nation of the Jews, the seed of Israel, particularly from
their coming out of Egypt, till the destruction of Jerusalem, after their
rejection of Christ their promised Messiah. And ever since, and a while before,
He has had a Church, chiefly out of the Gentiles, who have received His
Gospel, and the Faith of Christ; Now we are to take a view of both these sorts
of men, the Pagans (so lets us for distinction sake call the former sort) and
the Church, in the three Periods of Time forenoted. In all three of them it is
controverted concerning the Pagans, what sufficient Times they were obliged
unto, or are, and by what Law, by whose determination. And for the Church or
servants of God, in the first, and the last; for in the middlemost, it is
beyond all peradventure, that God determined the Time to the Jews, and left it
not to them: But yet even during that Time, because there might be, and
doubtless were in some part or other of the World, still some few servants of
God among the Gentiles, It will be justly questionable; by whose Authority the
determination of the necessary and sufficient Times was made even for them
where ever they were, and what proportion soever was determined, though never
so small a Continuance and seldom revolution. These things thus premised, we
thus propound our Aurgument, [against any special men having this Authority
for all the rest.]

XIV. If so, then either to Pagans, or to the Church.
[If God have given it, (now or heretofore) to some special men for all the
rest of mankind, Then either to some special men among the Pagans for all
within their Countries; and to the Church for all their known members: Or to
the Church generally for all mankind, both the members of it, and all others.
But neither has God given this Authority to some special men among the
Pagans, for all within their Countries, and to the Church for all their known
members: Nor yet to the Church generally for all mankind, both its members and
all others. Ergo, He has not given it to some special men for all the rest of
mankind.]

The Consequence is undeniable, the enumeration being sufficient. The
Antecedent has three branches considerable. In the scanning of which we will
begin with the first, and next take the third, and leave the second to the last
Place. Which will appear to be the convenientest method of proving them;
though the Argument could not so well be contrived in that order.

XV. 1. Not to Pagans: This is proved absurd.
First, then we reason against this Authority being left to any special men
among the Pagans, in any Age of the World, whether Governors of Families, of
Towns, or Countries, or Kindomes. [That they should have in their hands the
determination of the necessary and sufficient Times for Religion, for
themselves, and all under their Authority.] And we say, that God Himself did
determine it to Adam, and so to his posterity, and that the loosing it among
the Pagans, does not acquit them from sin, (though their sin be but of
ignorance) in not observing it still. And that they have not, nor had not any
power to determine the sufficient Time, having lost the knowledge of Gods
determination. And so for any servants of God in those Paganish places, that
they were not to expect the determination of the sufficient Times for Gods
Worship, and their souls good; from their Paganish Superiors: But that God
Himself did vouchsafe it to them by revelation, or by His Word after it was
written, and His determinations therein expressed; and that to those only they
were to hold.

And now against the Paganish Authority thus we dispute. 1. XVI. 1. By the
importance.
By an Argument formerly used [That which supposes God to leave a thing of
exceeding importance in Religion, to the consciences and judgments, of men
devoid of conscience, or true knowledge of God, to determine, not only for
themselves, but for all that are under them, is not to be credited or admitted.
But to say that God has given to any Pagan Governors Authority to determine
the sufficient Time of His Worship, is to suppose that He has left a thing of
exceeding importance in Religion to the consciences and judgments of men
devoid of conscience and true knowledge of God, to determine not only for
themselves, but for all under them. Ergo, That God has left this Authority to
Pagan Governors is not to be credited or admitted.] Both the propositions of
this Argument have been formerly confirmed, Only there is a clause in this,
which being illustrated, will make it of much greater force. And that is, (The
determining the sufficient Time of Worship, for all those that are under them.)
Concerning which, letting pass the consideration of their Paganish inferiors;
let us put the case (as it is the case really at this Day with sundry Christian
Captives among the Pirates of Algiers) of any servant of God, living in a
Paganish Country, and under the tyranny of an infidel Master or Governor. Can
it be supposed, that such are bound to serve God and attend solemnly on Him,
even in solitary Worship, (no other being to be had) and take care solemnly of
their own souls good; no other Time then their infidel and Pagan Masters and
Governors determine to them? Nay, we say rather, are they free and at liberty
to attend on God and their souls no other Time, then what their Infidel and
Pagan-governours determinations allow them? (As suppose Joseph, sold to
Potiphar, and afterward the Jaylours servant in the prison.) They know
themselves bound to serve their Masters and Governors in all worldly service,
and bodily work, and labor, every Day, and all the Day long, except the
necessary Times of natural refreshing, by sleep, and eating, and the like; and
the Times that must be tendered to God, (and for their souls good) in solemn
Religious worship. Now if there be no such determination of any sufficient Time
for Religion to them, but only according to the pleasure of their ungodly
superiors: Is not this a bondage worse then all the residue of their outward
bondage? That though they have never so great desire to wait solemnly upon
God, they can have no sufficient Time for it? Or though their souls need it
never so much, (as they cannot, without miracle, but need it extremely, where
specially they have never any help from any public or domestic worship, but
all their good and comfort must come from solitary worship) yet they cannot be
allowed it? Because God, upon this supposition of putting it over to their
Pagan and profane masters, has in effect debarred them from taking any (and
much more from determining any) to themselves, without their Pagan-Superiors
allowance. And if they should offer it, they might be challenged with
disobedience, for not working continually, every Day, and all Day long, (as
much as their natural spirits could hold to) at their Superiors command: and
might be urged with better reason, then Pharaoh did the Israelites, Exodus 5.
[You are idle, you are idle; therefore you say, let us go and sacrifice unto
the Lord our God] For they had Gods express command to warrant them: and
Pharaoh could not gainsay it, though he would not obey it. But here
Pagan-Superiors have the full advantage of them, and have the Law (in a manner)
wholly in their own hands, as having authority to command in all things, even
this not excepted; Because God has put over this authority of determination
expressly of the Time sufficient for His worship, to them. Now, unless we can
imagine, that God will so far ratify this supposed authority of Pagan
Governors in this matter, as to accept as sufficient for His honor, and
bless as sufficient for His servants souls, any pittance of Time that they
shall allow and determine, or rather which His servants can redeem in any
breathing times that they afford them in natural respects; and so make any the
least proportion sufficient: how can we say that God has left the
Determination of this sufficient Time to Pagan Governors?

But we add further, we must not admit the state of the Question to be varied:
We propound the present Dispute about the detetmination of this sufficient
Time, to whom it belongs; as supposing it must of necessity be determined to
Religion. Because therefore, it is not to be believed, that Pagan-Governours
will make this determination for their inferiors which are Gods servants, (as
experience also shows in places where Christians are now slaves) this
determination must belong to some other then to them. And we before gave some
Reasons, why single men should not have this authority to themselves, whereof
one was (which is specially appliable to this case) [That it would be less
honor to God, less good to their Souls, less comfort to their Consciences,
then of God himself should determine it for them.] For in the case in hand, if
the determination were Gods own, they might have more confidence to plead it to
their Pagan-superiors; and hopes, by their faithfulness and diligence at other
times, to obtain liberty to observe it: Or if they could not, yet they might
comfortably suffer for it, in refusing any work contrary to it, [Suffering
according to the will of God, they might (as S. Peter speaks, 1 Ep. 4. ult.
who, we verily believe, includes this case in that sentence) commit their
souls (and lives and all) unto Him in well-doing, as unto a faithful
Creator.] Whereas if they had no express determination from God, they could
not so plead His Honor: And they would be apt, for the saving of their skins
and bodies, to neglect their souls often, having no certainty what they ought
to observe, but their own conceits, and determinations upon it: and so their
comfort, both in waiting on God, and following their Superiors work, and in
suffering, or scaping, would be wavering and disturbed; in that they would be
perplexed with manifold distracting doubts, whether they had determined too
much, or too little Time for attending on God and their souls, too often, or
too seldom: or even perhaps whether the particular Days were, or could be
seasonably determined or observed conveniently. A Conscience, that must
venture, and suffer for a practice, is in a miserable condition, if it have no
certainty that God requires what it does, and forbids what it forbeares. And on
the other side, the necessities of the soul, and its eternal state, to be
above all worldly things regarded, (and manifold sentences in the Scriptures to
that effect) and Gods honor and service to be preferred before men's, and
before any thing that can concern ones self; will never suffer any Conscience
to be at peace, that observes not sufficient Time for Religion constantly. And
both together show there had need be another authority determining it, then
their own, which, we say, can be no other but Gods. How our Adversaries will,
or can satisfy themselves or others about this Case, we do not well conceive.
Somewhat it is that they offer to say toward it, which we will here briefly
touch, because we shall be forced to consider their sentences again elsewhere.

XVII. Some Exceptions to this answered.
1. One while they tell us, that the fourth Commandment is Morall-Naturall,
only for Public Worship. 2. Another while, some of them say, that the
Commandment is not given to servants, (and so by consequence, not to any that
are not Lords and Masters of their own Time, in respect of men, as children,
wives, and any inferiors set to work by superior authority of Governors.) 3.
And some again say, that Christians in Pagan Countries ought to keep the
Sunday, as having been appointed by the Christian Church. A little for present
answer to each of these.

The two first directly pervert the state of the Question, and affirm no
determination, no observation lying upon their consciences, who are under
others authority, unless their superiors have determined Times for them, and
Times for public worship: But our Question supposes, that sufficient Times are
to be determined for all men, by one or other, and that for solitary worship,
where there is or can be no public. 2. For this also we have proved to be
Morall-Naturall, and necessary to Religion, that there be such determinations
of sufficient Time for all men. 3. Even themselves, at times and by fits, make
it Morall-Naturall in the fourth Commandment, to have (and observe) sufficient
Times determined. 4. And is it now a manifest contradiction, to say, a
Commandment is Morall-Naturall, that is, necessary to all men: and yet, that
if there be no public worship, a man is free? (as one of them expressly
speaks.) Can the neglect of others free me from a Moral Commandment totally?
We say totally; for they make this public worship the whole Morality of the
fourth Commandment. Again, is there any other Commandment of the Decalogue,
from which any man can at any time be said to be totally free? Father or Mother
may dye; But there are other superiors still alive (or even inferiors) to
whom the fifth Commandment continually binds to afford some honor, and so of
the rest. Again, Moral Natural is by themselves described to be universal
and perpetual. How is this so, if the command extend to no more, but that
which is neither universal nor perpetual? Not universal, because not to
servants at all, if their Masters order otherwise; and will not let them
forbear work? Not perpetual, when there may, all the Time he is in such a
Country, a Captive, be no public worship, with in his reach. But such
contradictions men must needs run into, that leave the roade-way of the
Scriptures, the Kings high way, the way of Gods Commandments (the Royal Law,
as Saint James calls it, Iam. 2.9.) to follow the bypath of their own, or
other men's devisings.

And as for that one of them says [That because Sunday has been established
and used in the Christian Church for aday of divine service, Prim.
a man (namely in a pagan country) ought to apply himself privately to
religious exercises with greater assiduity then on other days.] We desire him
to satisfy us, whether by the words, (he ought) he means, that he ought in
conscience, as a necessary duty of Religion, he ought in obedience to the
Moral Natural law of God, for having and observing a determinate Time, to do
thus, though his Pagan Governor, Master, or Prince, forbid him; and to keep
him from it, set him all day long to some hard bodily labor, and that from
week to week, allowing him neither that day, not any other for his devotions
and private exercises of Religion? If he say, no, this is not his meaning, as
not thinking it reasonable to put a poor captive to venture upon the rage of
his profane Master, or Governor: Then his answer is but a collusion, and
nothing at all to the purpose of our case. If he say, yes, he ought to do so,
and venture to suffer for it (though not the whole of the day, but only some
part of it;) we reply 1. Who shall determine how much of the day? If he will
take but our Churches Homily of the place and Time of Prayer, he will find the
whole day called for; If the Canons of 1603. there is little less. If he take
but even the practice of any Christian Church in the World, even during the
Public Worship: Yet 2. this is more then he shall be allowed by his Pagan
Superiors, and so must resolve to endure sufferings (even to extremity
perhaps) for it. And in this case, is not here a very goodly ground of
encouragement to suffer upon? The Churches establishment, or usage of a day?
Whereas when we urge the Commandment of God, it is usually by our disputers
thought most unreasonable to lay such a yoke upon poor Christian captives. And
therefore, we remember not that they ever durst any of them to put any
conscience upon sufferings, in their way, for their sufficient Time, or even
their Public Worship Moral Natural, and the Churches determination of
either. But we must needs profess for our parts, that we dare do no other; for
a weekly Sabbath and the Lords day particularly as determined by God. And
whatever they think of this hazard or choice, and that our Doctrine thrusts
such poor captives into miserable straites, [That either they must sin against
God in breaking the Sabbath, or provoke their ungodly superiors desperately
against them by keeping to it:] We cannot but say, that we esteem such
captives happy rather, that have the doctrine of the Sabbath in their hearts,
to warrant their sufferings; much more then such, who, according to their
opinion, should think, they were bound, (by their captivity and the Command of
obeying their Governors, though Pagans and profane,) to keep no fourth
Commandment at all, no Sabbath at all, nor ordinarily sufficient Time for Gods
Solemn Worship, even solitarily, and the taking special care of their own
souls good. And if ever it should be our lot to be so captivated, we hope we
should bless God, for His command of the Sabbath, and comfortably bear
witness to the truth of it, (even before those that are altogether strangers
and enemies to God and His true Religion and Worship:) as well as to any other
part of the Truth, and Word, and Commandment of God. And again, that this
Commandment of His, were incomparably more advantageous to our comforts, then
if the determination of the Time were left either to our selves, or to the
Church. Suffering for Gods Commands, gives assurance of encouragement and
comfort, in suffering to bear a soul out; as all His servants have found, (and
even the Maccabees did for refusing to eat Swines flesh, while that
Commandment stood in force, though but ceremonial,) But to suffer for the
Churches determination in any thing (specially being out of her precincts, and
in an Infidel Country, of which we shall say a word more anon) as it has no
peculiar promise to it. So we remember not any credible example of those that
have done so among Orthodox Christians, or much less any, that have had any
spiritual comfort in so suffering.

We expect therefore, of our disputers, XVIII. The adverse party pressed.
or the next for them that shall undertake the defense of their cause, which of
the forenamed sentences they will stand to 1. Either that the morality of the
fourth Commandment is only for Public Worship, and for Solemn Time, but
consequently for it; and then a resolution how this can be called a Moral
Natural Commandment: which is not, not can be possible, for so many of
mankind to observe? Or whether this be not a formal contradiction, that any
man is totally f^re from a Moral Natural Commandment. 2. Or that the
Morality is for a sufficient Time to be determined by men? and then by whom?
Whether by the Pagan Governors in their Countries? and if they do it not, then
by whom; whether by a poor captive, for himself? Or the Church Christian for
him? And in both cases, whether be may and must venture upon all the rage of
his cruel and ungodly Master for it. 3. Or if in neither of these (as we
conceive not any great pleasure they can take in asserting any of them) whether
then (as Master Broad has already dared to do) they will venture to lay the
fourth Commandment wholly level, and raze it out of the number of the moral
commandments, making no more a decalogue, but an Ennealogue, no more ten, but
nine Commandments, and some of them speak suspitiously enough that way, though
yet for shame or fear they dare not speak out? And if so, yet then again,
whither they will admit no necessity neither of any sufficient Time to be
determined for Gods Worship and men's souls (how little, and how seldom
soever) and how Religion can (except by miracle or extraordinary divine
dispensation) possibly stand without it? 4. If they will have such a
determination still, under what command it comes? Who must make it? and 5.
Finally what the poor captived Christian, shall do, or may, or must do, when
his barbarous, and tyrannous Master, will not allow him to keep any such
sufficient proportion, what ever it be? If the Lords day may be but
conscionably observed, till they give the world a rational answer to these
necessary questions, we suppose we shall need trouble our selves no more to
dispute for it, whilst we live.

A second argument we have (suitable also to a former) against Pagan Governors,
XIX. 2. The impossibility of agreement.
having this authority to determine the times of Gods Solemn Worship, that is,
[There is no probability or possibility, that the several Pagan Governors,
will agree in the same proportion, number, and length of times, or of the same
particular day, neither among themselves, nor with the Christian Church] Which
yet we have argued greatly conducible to the honor of God for all mankind, all
the world over; and the general exercise of the communion of Saints. This we
will only prosecute, by putting one question to our adversaries (and so to the
Judgment of the Christian reader) concerning the particular day: (suppose the
number and continuance, were agreed on.) And that is, suppose the Great Turk,
or Governor of Algiers, or the King of Persia, who are all Mahometans, would
offer to any Christians within their Territories, liberty to Worship God one
day in a week, only they would determine them for the day, to Friday, which is
the day appointed by mahomet, and observed by all that profess the Mohammedan
religion (we will not instance in Saturday, which is the day observed by the
Jews still, because our adversaries would say perhaps that this day being
rejected of God, might not of all others be taken up again: at least for fear
of breeding superstition again in men toward it as necessary: But we instance
in Friday, a day not forbidden by God any where, no more then not commanded:)
Will they now say, that Christians, whether Captives, or others inhabiting
those countries, might lawfully, or must necessarily accept and observe that
day, and relinquish the Lords day? This they must say, if even the particular
day be but left to the determination of Pagan Governors; And if they would
say, that the Church Christian having determined the Lords day, it may not be
relinquished at the command of a Pagan Prince, we ask again, will they put
such Christians then upon the necessity of extreme sufferings, for such a
circumstance, as they usually make this day to be? God not having determined it
in His Word, as they say; if they say yes, Pagan Governors in this case are to
be obeyed, (even with thanks for allowing the liberty of any day so
frequently;) and the particular day not to be made a matter of persecution
without cause, and without profit. We desire them to consider, how a sober
conscience reading the story of the Apostles observing of the first day of the
week (the Lords day) for the day of public meeting, and with an intimation,
of the general meeting, and the Sacrament deferred till that day, Act. 20.7.
And again reading the intimation of an Apostolical precept for that day; and
express mention of observation of it for collection for the poor, (which was
wont to be in the public meeting, or aft^^ 1 Cor. 16.2. and again the title
of the Lords day given to it by the Holy Ghost ( Rev. 1.10.) as a day for the
Lords Honor, His day by way of possession (as the word Lords is a plain
possessive term, belonging to the Lord) expounded by the Church in the next
Age, and ever since (till this quarrelling age, which denies all things) to be
meant of that first day of the week, observed from that Time to this by the
Christian Church; we say how a sober Christian, reading all this in Gods word,
dares let this day go, and make the Lords day a common work-day, and entertain
another, invented by a mere man? Even by such a wicked devilish Impostor as
Mahomet, the veriest villain, one of them that ever lived in the world: If
they shall say, that this day of Mahomets invention is to be abhorred indeed,
in token of detestation of his impiety: but some other day might be yielded to.
We reply. 1. That still then Christians must suffer for that nicety of a day.
2. That it is scarcely imaginable that any Pagan Governor would allow any
other day, then what they observed themselves; for the first would be double
against their profit, in that, 1. they could not have their servants labor,
when they were at leisure to join with them, and over look them; and when they
were absent, they would fear their work would be done but untowardly. 2.
Besides, that whosoever observe a day, does it in some reference to their own
Religion, and so would rather tie them to that, then let them have another,
specially 3. When they might be able to tell them (out of our adversaries
suppositions) that their Religion, their Scriptures did not determine them to
any particular day; but left it to their Governors to determine; And so still
they must observe a day, invented by wicked men. 3. However, what day soever
they took up, a sober conscience would (we think) shrink to throw away the
Lords day at a Pagans command. Let this we say, be considered. We on the other
side being persuaded, that God has not only determined us to one day in seven
by the fourth Commandment, but to the Lords day, for the particular day, by
those designations of His word: as also that in this day (and this only) the
number was exactly preserved, of one Day a Sabbath, and six Days work, even
at the very Time of the change of the Day (as we showed in the former Chapter)
and that by this means God may have the same Day all the World over, ^des
other Arguments (of which in their due Place) We, we say, upon this persuasion,
can answer the question readily, that we must hold to this particular Day, the
first Day of the week, the Lords day, and no other, whoever commands or
forbids, offers or threatens. For that Gods will must stand and be obeyed,
before men's, against men's, and He must be trusted, to maintain us (our souls
at least, which is enough, and the most we can be assured of in a hundred other
cases) in maintaining His Ordinances and appointments.

XX. 3. They know of no such authority.
We have yet one Argument more to urge against this Authority of Infidel and
Pagan-governours, for the sufficient Time for Religion, and the particular
Days for it. [If Pagan-governours have this Authority put into their hands by
God, Then it is reasonable they should know that this Authority is committed to
them. But Pagan-governours (so far as we remember in any story) never knew of
any such Authority committed to them. Ergo, It is not probable that any such
Authority is put over to them.] The consequence of this Argument may be
confirmed: by the necessity of a determination to be made, (proved and
confessed to be Moral Natural.) And that it cannot be imagined such Princes
should take this upon them, and exercise this Authority, unless they have some
knowledge or persuasion, that this Authority belongs to them. The Antecedent
may also be fairly argued, from the silence of all books in this point: For
though we know that Pagan Princes and states did appoint some days
extraordinarily, yet we find not that they did so ordinarily, nor ever thought
they might do so. But what was done in this kind, was from Oracles (or
pretenses of Oracles) of their gods, by their priests, or otherwise. And the
greatest flatterers of Pagan Princes, never did (that we remember) ascribe this
Authority to them, as given them by their gods. It were wonderful then, that
we Christians should find out this Authority given by God to Pagan Princes, of
which (as we said before) there is not the least word, nor intimation; nor
shadow of any such thing in Scripture; and the Law of Nature also is
sufficiently clear against it. We conclude then, here the Authority is not,
and yet upon diverse suppositions of our Adversaries touched already, and to be
touched hereafter, here it must be, or no where, among men, for those that live
in Pagan Countries. For to come to the other sort of men --

That is, the Church of God, Of which we say, as before, XXI. 2. Not to the
Church for all mankind.
[God has not given to it, the Authority of determining the chief solemn
Time, necessary and ordinarily sufficient for the chief Time, unto all
mankind.]

Mankind in referrence to the Church is again distinguishable, into Pagans,
and Members of the Church. Of the latter fort we shall dispute more at large,
of the former, a few words may suffice: which yet added to the former
discourses, will carry the Cause clearly and undeniably, [That it being Moral
Natural to all men, to have, and observe a sufficient Time determined for
Religion, This determination, does not, nor cannot, belong to men, but to God
himself.] Thus we reason, concerning Pagans. [If the Church universal has no
Authority but ever her own Members, Then the Authority of determining the
necessary and sufficient Time for Religion, unto all men belongs not to the
Church. But the Church universal has no Authority but over her own Members.
Ergo, The Authority of determining this Time, unto all men, belongs not to the
Church.] The Consequence of this Argument cannot be denied, Unless any would
offer to say, that all mankind are Members of the Church universal; which is
most absurd. The Antecedent is easily proved, As well. 1. The Apostle denies
any such Authority to be in the Church of [ Judging those that are without, 1
Cor. 5.] And if they cannot judge them, then not determine any thing to them:
For this and that Authority go together, in things determinable by the Church;
Though the Church may judge, in things wherein it may not determine (in the
sense we now take determination) that is, the Church may censure, which is the
judging there meant, offenders against Gods Law, as the incestuous Person
spoken of. But it may not determine that to be incest which God has not made
so, nor determine any to be lawful (or dispense with it) when God has
forbidden it, however presumptuous the Church of Rome has been in both. It is
less then to determine and make Laws, then to judge and censure offenders.
The Church therefore having no power of censure, of those without, those that
are not her Members, can have no power to determine any thing unto them. They,
who are out of the Church, are already in as bad a condition, as the Churches
censure can make them, that can but deliver them to Satan, and Satan undeniably
has them already. The Churches Authority is apparently, but the Authority of a
mother, now a mother, as a mother, has no Authority over children, not her
own. 2. As also, because it is, and would be extremly derogatory to the
Authority God has given to Princes, Parents, Masters, though Pagans; that any
other men should have (or be said or thought to have) Authority to take away
their subjects, children, servants, from their work, under pretense of
Religion, so many hours in a Day, or Days, in a Week, Month or Year. If
God will do it Himself (as we say He has) there is no just ground of
gainsaying, But for men to do it, specially who can show no Title of any such
Authority committed to them, in their great Charter, of the holy Scriptures
over Pagans, how unreasonable is it to maintain? Therefore the Church has no
such Authority to determine Time for all men. And in conclusion there is none
among mankind found, that have this Authority, for all men (for Pagans
particularly) not every man single, not Pagan-governours, for all under them:
not the Church, for all men. Ergo, It belongs not to men, but to God.

And here if we did stop, we suppose, upon the former proofs (and confession)
of such a Time Moral Natural, necessary to be determined for all men, and to
be observed by all men for Religion; That we have carried our Cause against all
gainsaying.

XXII. Arguments against the Church having authority to determine the chief
Time for all its members.
But because our Adversaries, mainly build their conceits upon the Churches
Authority over her own, Members. And of this they mainly dispute, and so do
we, We will encounter them there also. And doubt not to prove, what we have
before asserted, [That the Church has not this Authority given her by God, no
not over her own Members, to determine to them the chief Time of Worship,
necessary and ordinarily sufficient for the chief Time.]

Our Arguments for this are diverse. We begin with one general one, bordering
upon our foregoing proofs, and resting in part on them;

Argum. 1.
[If the Scripture contain the determination of God at least for all mankind
that are out of the Church, Then God has not left that determination of this
Time, unto the Church for its Members: But the Scripture contains the
determination of God at least for all mankind, that are out of the Church.
Ergo, God has not left the determination of this Time unto the Church for its
Members.] The consequence, we conceive to be certain; For that the Scriptures
are principally written to be Rules and Laws to the Church; and so if they
contain any Laws for all the residue of mankind, then much more shall the
same Laws extend to them, and bind them. Many Laws given to the Church in
Scripture did not bind the rest of mankind absolutely, that is, not till they
entered into the Church, and so into the Covenant of God. They were not bound to
the Passover, (nor admitted to it) till they yielded themselves, and all their
males to be circumcised: And no law commanded strangers to take circumcision
upon them. Cornelius the Centurian did not, though a man that feared God, Acts
10.11. And it is generally held, that the Ceremonials and Judicials delivered
particularly to Israel by Moses, (and not to other men before) bound only the
Church of the Jews, and willing Proselytes to them: But no man ever said yet,
[That the Laws expressed in Scripture, binding all the rest of Mankind, left the
Church free, and bound not them: or that any one Law did so.] The Consequence
then is cleared.

The Antecedent we take also to be undeniable upon the grounds laid: namely,
[That the determination of this Time was not left to man, to every man single,
or any number of men for all the rest: and so being to be made of necessity to
Religion, by some or other, it was made by God.] And if made by God, then
either 1. in Nature, (which we have also disproved, and showed, even with our
Adversaries consent, who urge the same to serve their own turn, That the Law
of Nature does not make this determination:) Or else, 2. in Scripture; which
then we say was, and is, Genesis 2. to Adam, and to all his posterity, all mankind
after him. And who will, or can deny it to be expressed, Genesis 2. if it were made
to Adam? Or else, 3. men must fly to, we know not what, wild imaginations, of
some revelations, no man can tell when, nor of what, to Cain and his
apostatizing posterity, and so to the rest of Adams posterity which fell away
from the Church, (which continued chiefly in the race of Seth) and again
afterward a new revelation to Cha^ and his posterity, and the rest of Noah's
posterity, who revolted from the Church, and remained out of it: Revelations,
we say, to these, of a determination made by God, of a proportion of Time, that
even they were to observe: though no man can guess any thing, what, or how, or
when this was. Which is so Exotic a fancy, (having so plain a story as Genesis
2. before our eyes) as we suppose no man would believe himself, if he should
offer to affirm it: and much less hope that any other would believe him, that
believes the book of Genesis to be the word of God. To that then, we must have
recourse to know what Time God originally required of, and determined unto all
mankind; though revolting afterward from the Church most of them, and so
neglecting and forgetting it, He vouchsafed not again to revive it to them
particularly, for the reasons we gave but awhile since. And so this Time given
to them for the chief solemn Time necessary and sufficient, was also given to
the Church, (who were also Adams posterity) or rather it was first given to the
Church, in which at first outwardly all Adams posterity were, till they
revolted: and so still remains to the Church. As also that Time is still the
Time which all the rest of mankind stand bound to, to this day, though now they
know nothing of it.

XXIII. An objection answered.
If it be objected, That this Argument will prove indeed, that the Time
mentioned Genesis 2. was determined to Adam, and all the Church under the Old
Testament: But not that it remains Gods determination under the New Testament:
because with the determination of the chief solemn Time for Continuance and
Frequencie, namely, one whole Day in seven, to make up the chief Time
necessary and sufficient for all men; there was also unquestionably determined
withal the particular Day, the seventh Day from the first Creation: and we do
not urge that particular Day upon the Church; and therefore no more may we the
other determination of one Day in seven for the chief Time.

We answer briefly, 1. We deny not, but the Pagans, those that are out of the
Church, and so know nothing of the change of that particular Day, stand bound
still to that particular Day, as well as to one Day in seven. 2. But yet we
deny that Christians do so; because they know, (and can show) Gods express
repeal in His Word; in the New Testament, of that particular Day; (we say, of
that particular Day, but not of the Continuance and Frequencie of one Day in
seven for the chief Time) Of which we have already intimated fair Reasons
some; and shall handle it fully in its proper place. And withal they find a
designation in Gods word, in the New Testament, of a new Day to Christians:
which Day also, by the former Arguments, of the Determinations belonging to
God; and not to men; the Pagans, those that are yet out of the Church, are
bound to yield to, as soon as they know it out of Gods word. And therefore, 3.
Also that Church, that has the Word particularly written for them, are bound
to the determinations therein expressed; both for the chief Time necessary and
sufficient for Continuance and Frequencie, which is one whole Day in seven,
according to the fourth Commandment: and for the particular Day, which is the
first Day of the week, the Lords Day, according to the New Testament. We
proceed to another Argument.

And come more pressely to oppose the Churches authority in this Determination.
XXIV. A caution premised.
And if herein we shall seem by some Arguments to shake the authority the
Church is esteemed to have in other things, or to favor the authority which is
challenged by some to belong to particular Churches or Congregations. We desire
not to be mistaken. For as we shall argue nothing upon this occasion, but what
we esteem to be both true, and necessary to secure fully this mainest
concernment of Religion, about the Determination of this chief Time for Gods
honor, and the good of all men's souls: So to prevent all causeless
suspicions, we profess beforehand, fully and freely, 1. That we neither take
the authority of the Church to reside chiefly in particular Congregations,
(though somewhat more, we believe, belongs to the Ministers of particular
Congregations, then they have in some places been suffered to exercise) much
less that all the people have the rule in their hands, as the Separatists say;
and least of all, to take in women also, as the Anabaptists do. Though in the
point in controversy, we must needs assert the authority to determine this
chief Time for Religion, rather to belong to every particular Church or
Congregation for themselves, then to any superior Governments or Governors to
determine it for them; As we have already argued, that it rather belongs to
every man and woman single for themselves, then to any number of men for all
the rest. Therefore again we profess, that in those matters wherein the
Church has authority, the authority is in the Church Governors, not in the
whole body; and greater authority in superior Governments, as in Synods
Provincial and National, together with the authority of the Christian
Magistrate; most of all in General Councels, (or such a Council as is of many
Christian Nations together) called by the consent of Christian Princes and
States. 2. That we are persuaded, the Governors of the Church have some
authority, even legislative, in some matters (as far as the Scripture-rules
admit) namely, [That all things be done to edification, and decently, and in
order, and with charity, and which may make for peace:] that is, in matters
indifferent (as they are commonly called) in things wherein God has not
determined this way, or that way precisely; and so are matters of smaller
concernment, which may admit of variation in diverse Churches at the same time,
and in the same Church at diverse times; and wherein the main concernments of
Religion, Gods honor, and the souls good, or even men's outward bodily
necessities are not prejudiced: as they may be on either hand, undeniably, by
an unnecessary or unsufficient determination of the Time we are speaking of.
These things thus cautioned, we proceed to our Arguments, which will be
numerous, and we suppose weighty, every one of them: whereby we shall evince
both the falsenesse of our Adversaries assertion of the Churches authority in
this matter: as also discover unto the observant Reader, how negligently and
carelessly they have hitherto handled this point about the determination of this
necessary-sufficient-chiefe Time for Religion by the Churches authority; as if
they had had to do with men that would take their dictates for oracles, and
never require satisfaction in most important difficulties, which attend their
Positions and Conclusions. Our next Argument is this.

XXV. Arg. 2. The Church cannot make Time necessary to Religion.
[If the Church have authority to determine unto its members the necessary and
ordinarily sufficient chief Time for Religion, then it has authority to make
that Time necessary to Religion, by virtue of its determination, which was not
necessary before us determination. But the Church has not authority to make
that Time necessary to Religion by virtue of its determination, which was not
necessary before us determination. Ergo, the Church has not authority to
determine to its members the necessary ordinarily sufficient and chief Time
for Religion.] The Consequence cannot justly be rejected: For the authority we
are disputing about, is a legislative authority, and that concerning a Time
necessary for Religion: which authority God had unquestionably in His hands of
old; and whatsoever Time He determined, was necessary unto Religion, even by
virtue of His determination. Now we say, we are disputing of this authority,
Whether this be put over to the Church, or not, because such a determination
must be (as we have showed) of a Time necessary unto Religion: Therefore if the
Church have the authority to determine this Time, (to make this determination)
It has authority to make that necessary by virtue of its determination, which
before its determination was not necessary. For if it were necessary before,
then the Church does not make the determination, or exercise a legislative
authority; but only do a prudentiall act, or ministerial, to declare and
preach to its members, what Time God, in Nature or Scripture, has made
necessary; not determining, we say, any thing, by virtue of any authority given
to it in that case.

The Antecedent is no less certain diverse ways. 1. Because, if the Church
could make a Time necessary, which was not before necessary by virtue of its
determination; then it could make any Time it should determine, necessary by
virtue of its determination, (for, A quatenus ad omus valet consequentia) the
authority, To the purpose of this Antecedent, See hereafter a distinct Argument
proving those Times only necessary to Religion, which G^d himself appoints.
Sect. 62.
and so the virtue of it, being the same in one as in another: And then not
only one whole Day in a Week (which is so burdensome to our Adversaries even to
think of) should be necessary, if the Church should determine it; but even two
whole Days in a Week, or three whole Days; two whole Days still together, or
three, or any other proportion or number that they should think good to
determine, should be necessary to Religion: which all men would confess to be
absurd. Therefore it remains, that the Church cannot make a Time necessary to
Religion by virtue of its determination, which was not necessary before. 2. To
make a thing necessary to Religion, which was not before necessary, is to have
power upon the Conscience: But the Church has no power upon the Conscience, to
make Laws, and impose them upon men's Consciences: Ergo, the Church cannot make
a thing necessary to Religion, which was not before necessary; and so not make
Time necessary. 3. The Churches authority, generally is acknowledged, not to
extend beyond things indifferent: But to make a thing, or Time, necessary to
Religion, which before was not necessary, is to go beyond the limits of things
indifferent. Ergo, the Churches authority extends not, to make a Time necessary
to Religion, which before was not necessary: and so not to meddle with
determining this necessary chief Time, which must be determined for Religion.

XXVI. Argument third. The Church cannot make Time ordinarily sufficient to
Religion.
A third argument follows parallel to this [If the Church have authority to
determine to its members the necessary, and ordinarily sufficient chief
Solemn Time for Religion; then it has authority to make that Time, ordinarily
sufficient, for the chief Time for Religion, by virtue of its determination,
which before its determination, was not sufficient. But the Church has no
authority to make, by virtue of its determination, that Time sufficient
ordinarily for the chief Time for Religion, which before its determination was
not sufficient. Ergo, the Church has no authority to determine to its members,
the necessary and ordinarily sufficient chief Time for Religion.] The
consequence is again clear from the former grounds. We are now arguing about a
sufficient Time to be determined, ordinarily sufficient, 1. for Gods honor, in
His approbation and acceptance; 2. Sufficient for men's souls, in Gods
blessing: And 3. Sufficient for sober consciences satisfaction, in reference to
a just ground of persuasion of both the former. Now God had of old in His
hands, authority unquestionable to determine such a sufficient Time; and to
make any Time sufficient, so far as His determination intended it; even by
virtue of His determination of it. And, we are, we say, disputing now: whether
this authority be put over to the Church or not? Because such a determination,
must still be (as we have also showed) of a chief Time, sufficient unto
Religion; that is, ordinarily sufficient, and for the chief Time, in all the
forenoted regards. Therefore if the Church have authority to determine this
chief Time, (to make this determination,) it has authority to make that Time
sufficient by virtue of its determination, which before was not sufficient. For
if it were sufficient before, then the Church does not properly make the
determination, but only declare it; It does not exercise any legislative act
but only prudentiall and ministerial; It only preaches to its members what
Times God in nature or Scripture has made sufficient: not determining any
thing decisively, by virtue of any authority given it in the case.

The Antecedent is also again diverse ways confirmed. 1. Because if the Church
could make a Time sufficient unto Religion by virtue of its authority or
determination, which before was not sufficient; then it could make any Time,
that it should determine, sufficient by virtue of the same authority and
determination; (for again A quatenus ad omne valet consequentia;) the
authority, and so the virtue of it, being the same in one determination, as in
another. And then one hour in a week, or two hours in a Month, or in a
year, or any other proportion or number, would be sufficient unto Religion, if
the Church should so determine it. But this also, cannot be denied to be most
absurd. Therefore it remains that the Church cannot make a Time sufficient
unto Religion, by virtue of its authority and determination, which was not
sufficient before. 2. To make a Time sufficient to Gods honor, in His
acceptance, is His own Royal Prerogative: according to his own expression of
His approbation. But this He has not communicated to the Church in any thing
whatsoever, Of Gods blessing required to make the Time sufficient, see
afterward a distinct proof. Sect. 71.
for the maine and chief part of it. And therefore not in this matter, has he
given the Church authority; having no where confined His approbation to the
Churches determination. 3. To make a thing sufficient to the souls of men in
Gods blessing, is also a peculiar of His Almighty grace. And He has not given
the Church power, to convey in any other thing, His Heavenly Grace, at their
pleasure. And therefore not in this matter of Time. 4. The Churches authority
(as we said before) is generally acknowledged not to reach beyond things
indifferent. But to make a Time sufficient for Religion, which before was not
sufficient, exceeds the limits of things indefferent. Ergo, the Church has no
such authority. 5. To make a thing sufficient to satisfy sober consciences, in
reference to a just ground of persuasion of Gods acceptance and blessing,
there can be no less then an impossibility of error, in the determining the
proportion, and the distribution of it, between the Continuance and Frequency.
But this God has no where promised to the Church in any matter (that is, to no
number of men, outwardly professing themselves to be the Church) except only to
the Apostles. Neither do our Adversaries in this point so much as pretend an
impossibility of the Churches erring, (as appears even by their arguing that
the Church may alter the determination, after it is made.) Therefore we say
again, and conclude, that the Churches determination or authority cannot make
a Time, which before was not sufficient, to be sufficient to satisfy any sober
conscience; and so no way sufficient for Religion.

XXVII. An Exception answered.
We are not ignorant, that to both these foregoing Arguments about the
necessity and sufficiency of this chief Time, there may be some kind of
Answer made out of the Adversaries books: Namely, that they argue not, that the
Church has authority to determine so excessively much, or so remarkably
little. But they come, for the Frequencie, toward one Day in seven, and
sometimes almost home to it, saying, it must not be less then one in seven.
Only they still keep aloof off in the point of Continuance, which yet (as has
been often noted, and has need to be often repeated and remembered) is the main
subject of all the dispute and quarrel between them and us: In this they dare
not yet, at least have not spoken out, what Continuance, or near what, the
Church should determine, no not for the Public Worship, (except the Author of
Sunday no Sabbath, that mentions two hours.) But even about the number of one
Day in seven, they are not constant, but fly off again sometimes a great way,
as afraid to grant so often by way of necessity or assert so often by way of
sufficiency, lest they should be put to prove it; and then the fourth
Commandment (which they like not, because it would tie them to a whole Days
continuance) would be their only sufficient refuge. Therefore also their
Reasons are very doubtfully and waveringly propounded. And so we esteem, that
such an Answer is over ambiguous to be sufficient to satisfy either of our
Arguments. And if they will hereafter (or any for them) offer to make an answer
definitely and clearly, either to the necessity or sufficiency of the
proportion; Let them have but one Day of ten, or twenty as necessary, and two
hours of that Day; or nominate those, or any other proportions of Frequencie
and Continuance as sufficient: Whatever they instance in, (and whether it be
well or ill) yet will it suffice for our Arguments, to justify them, and
confirm, that the Church has no absolute, or legislative authority to
determine this chief Time necessary and sufficient to Religion. But that
Nature, and Reason, or Scripture, some, or all of these, do beforehand
determine the necessity and sufficiency of it. And that the Churches office
herein is no more but of a Crier, or Preacher, (as our Divines urge against the
Papists, in point of the Churches authority to determine what Books are the
Word of God) to declare and pronounce, and then consequently to use her
authority over her members, to urge them to the observation of it, as much as
may be: and not at all of a Lawgiver, to determine it. And thus much, we verily
believe, these Arguments have evinced undeniably. Which therefore we again
desire our Readers to observe, that so the Churches absolute and unlimited
authority may be no more urged in this controversy, no not in general (and so
deceivable) terms. And then we doubt not, but many Readers will soon see a
necessity to have recourse to the fourth Commandment, as Gods own
determination of this necessary and sufficient chief Time for Continuance, a
whole Day, for Frequencie, one in seven, as the only sure ground for
consciences to rest upon in so important a matter. And that many more, (not to
say all, that are not swallowed up with prejudices) will be of the same mind,
when we have expressly discussed, whether the Churches wisdom will or can
suffice to determine from Nature and Reason, and any thing in Scripture
(besides the precise determination of one Day in seven, according to that
fourth Commandment) the just proportion of necessary and sufficient Time for
Religion. Which we shall take to task, ere we make an end of this question in
this Chapter. In the mean Time, we go on to a fourth Argument.

[ If the Church have Authority to determine the chief Time for all its
Members, XXVIII. Argument 4. The Church cannot determine Time for family, or
solitary Worship.
then it has Authority to determine the Continuance so laregly to extend
beyond the Public Worship, even to take in both domestic Worship where it may
be had, and specially solitary Worship, by every Christian apart, before and
after the Public Worship. But the Church has no Authority to determine of
Continuance so largely, as to extend beyond the public Worship, even to take
in both family Worship where it may be had, and specially solitary Worship by
every Christian apart, before and after the public Worship, Ergo, The Church
has no Authority to determine the chief Time for all its Members.] The
consequence has been proved before at large, in the former Chapter, that the
Continuance of the chief Time must be so large, as not only to allow, but to
necessitate before and after the public Worship, family Worship also, where it
may be had, and however to necessitate, as well as to afford liberty for
solitary Worship by every one apart.

The Antecedent may be thus strengthened. 1. It is usually said [That the sword,
nor the keys, meddle not within doores] that is, Neither the Civil
Magistrate, nor the Church Governors, take upon them to make affirmative Laws
for private families (for negative they do) in reference to what they do
among themselves, not directly concerning the service of the Church or State:
And least of all, do they meddle with their Time; of which every governor of a
family is counted Lord and Master, or Lady and Mistress, for themselves and all
under their authority. Even when a man is bound by Indentures to teach his
apprentise his trade, yet not at this Time, or that Time, or so long together.
Therefore we find not that any Church, or Christian Magistrate, though
forbidding work to all even within doors, upon such and such Days, has yet
commanded Parents or Masters to catechize their children, and servants, within
doors on those Days precisely, or pray with them, or examine them what they
have learned in public, or any such like Duties of Religion. 2. But specially
in reference to solitary Worship, secret prayers, secret thanksgivings, secret
meditations of the word heard, or of any other heavenly and divine matter,
concerning God and the soul; The Church has no authority to determine any
Time, which necessarily must be spent in any of these Duties, or any other in
secret. Of which we conceive a double reason. 1. Because no authority of man is
supposed to reach to that which neither themselves nor any other man living can
ever come to know, whether it be observed or not. Which is the case plainly
here, No man can know (nor all the men in World) when I retire my self any
Day, and shut my self up in my chamber, whether I pray or meditate, or
perform any other solitary Worship to God, or not: Unless I tell them
afterward, or speak so loud, as that they over-hear me, which I am not bound
to do, or rather, am bound not to do. It is altogether vain (to say no more)
to determine and command that which no account can be taken of by those that
command it, or by any man else, whether it be obeyed or not. 2. But further,
secret Duties, and so Time to be necessarily employed in them, are immediately
Duties of conscience, even the most inward and spiritual that can be. Now no
authority of man, of the Church, or any other, reaches immediately to the
conscience, and the inward and spiritual part of Duties; But only the
Authority of God alone. Here again the Church or any superior may give
Counsel, or declare the will of God about such Duties, or such Time to be so
employed; But cannot command or determine it, Whereas we are speaking of a Time
that must be determined, of which therefore the Church has no Authority.

If it be objected, that the Christian Magistrate, XXIX. An Exception answered.
or the Church has authority to appoint a public Day of Fasting and
Humiliation, and this to be spent in Religious Duties, as well private as
public, till the end of the Day; and if so, why not for the ordinary chief
solemn Time?

We Answer in a word, Sol.
that the Continuance of a public Fast is before hand determined by God in
Scripture, and in the Nature of the business, to a whole Day, and no less
Continuance, (neither did ever any Orthodoxe Church speak otherwise of it,
though we know the Popish mock-fasts, or fool fasts, end often at noone) so
that all that the Church does, or the Christian Magistrate, is to appoint and
determine the particular Day, or the Frequency of Days, upon some special
occasions; and to declare that the Continuance is to be extended so long, with
penalties Civil or Ecclesiastical on them that shall be known to transgress
it, even within doors, otherwise they do not command properly any particular
family, or solitary Worship at all: Or if they did, were it not for those
intimations of Scripture, and the Nature of the business of solemn
humiliation, (and the prevention of all tolerable ordinary excuses by the
public appointment) no man's conscience were bound to observe the whole Day, at
home, and in solitary Worship, before and after the public, because of the
Churches, or Magistrates authority and determination, for the reasons before
set down. Another Argument follows, which is a fifth, against the Churches
authority to determine the chief solemn Time.

Even against that authority which our Adversaries think most infallibly
certain to belong to the Church; namely for the public Worship. Against
which, thus we argue.

XXX. Arg. 5. The Church cannot command a^l her members to observe the time in
public worship.
[If the Church have authority to determine the chief Time of Worship for all
its members, in reference to the public Worship: Then it has authority to
command all its members, constantly to observe that Time in the public Worship
which it determines for it. But the Church has not authority to command, all
its members constantly to observe that Time in the public Worship which it
determines for it. Ergo, The Church has not authority to determine the chief
Time of Worship to all its members in reference to the public Worship.] The
consequence is certain, from the state of the question, formerly laid down.
1. That the determination discoursed of, makes the Time necessary to Religion,
and so commands all unto whom it is made, to observe it constantly. 2. Also our
Adversaries do every where make it Moral Natural to observe public worship,
and contend that it is the whole morality of the fourth Commandment, to
command public worship, and consequently a necessary and sufficient Time to be
(by the Church) determined for it. So that the determination of the Time for
such public worship, is an express command of a constant observation of such
public worship, even by virtue of the Law Moral Natural, and the whole
remaining force of the fourth Commandment. 3. Likewise it were a mere vanity,
and ridiculous folly, to dispute for authority of determining Times (and so a
folly to determine them) if men be not thereby bound, as by a command, to
observe those Times once determined, constantly; except in the particular case
of reservation, of which we have often given touches before.

XXXI. This is confessed by the adverse party. G. Irons.
Now for the Antecedent, It will be made good. 1. By our Adversaries own
conceits, contradicting themselves (as we touched a while ago in a like
Argument) Namely, Though they make the public worship Moral Natural; Yet do
they so far forget themselves, as to exempt shepherds, diggers in mines,
servants, (sundry sorts of them at least, as cooks, and others, and diverse
other people) from any necessity of constantly observing the public worship.
Insomuch as the translatour of Doctor Prideaux Lecture, imputes it as strange
superstition, that a Town of his acquaintance had not a piece of roast or
baked meat to a Sundaies-dinner, throughout the whole year, which must needs
be because all the servants went constantly to the public worship. An
imputation (to say no less of it) worthy the pen of one of those S. Paul
speaks of, Phil. 3.19. whose God is their belly: otherwise, how durst he that
would carry the face of a Christian, reproach the Ministers of Christ (as he
there does) for teaching the people, both Masters, and servants, to prefer
the public worship of God, before the sacrificing to their own bellies, and
so to take more care, even of every poor servants soul, by carrying them
along to the public worship of God, then to provide for the pampering of their
own guts, though with the pinching or starving of their servants souls. But
to let him pass, we urge all of them, (and specially those that dispute, that
the fourth Commandment was not given to servants) whether they will aver,
[That a servant is bound by the Churches determination, to keep constantly to
the public worship, from the first to the last of it, every time that there is
any] Notwithstanding any Commandment to the contrary? If their (perhaps
profane) Masters, though they bear the names of Christians, and that, upon no
allowable necessity, will charge them to stay at home altogether, or part of
the Time before they go to Church, or come home, before it is ended; and
specially if such ungodly Masters (or parents) shall threaten, or beat their
inferiors if they do otherwise then they charge them? We say again, what
will they say a servant or inferior is bound to in these cases? (which are
every day one where or other:) Nay, what is an inferior free to, in these
cases? Who has a soul to save, and so to look after, and a desire to use the
means for it, specially Gods public worship; having little or no help at all
(but hindrance rather) in the family, and exceeding little time for any
solitary devotions? They cannot here answer either way, but they overthrow
their own Principles. For either 1. They must say, [Servants and inferiors
may, and must keep strictly to the Churches determinations for public
worship, notwithstanding any contrary command, or threatening, or cruelty of
their ungodly superiors;] Which they will not allow us to urge men to, upon
the Commandment and determination of God Himself; and for this, they deny
this Commandment of the Sabbath to have layen upon Israel in Egypt; and that
the Lords day was strictly observed by the Primitive Christians under
persecution. If these things be urged against us, they cannot reasonably urge
servants and inferiors, now to cross their superiors upon the Churches
determination, even for the Public Worship. 2. Or on the other side they must
say, that servants and inferiors are not bound, (nay that they are not free)
by the Churches determination, to the Times of Public Worship, because of
these inconveniences. And then they grant our Antecedent, [That the Church has
not authority to command all its members constantly, to observe that Time in
Public Worship, which it determines to them.] Of will they say, that
servants and inferiors, are not members of the Church? or that the Churches
determinations reach not to them, (but so far forth as their Masters and
Parents will give them leave;) and that they are free, (or rather not free,
since the service of God is our perfect freedom, if our Church say true in her
prayers) and are not to give God attendance constantly in Public Worship, and
so constantly look after their souls? And then what becomes of the Morality of
the fourth Commandment for Public Worship? and what of Public Worship,
and a sufficient Time, at least for it, Moral Natural? It is beyond our wits,
how our adversaries can expedite themselves out of the intanglements of these
contradictions, whereas in our way, all is plain in three words. [God
determining the Time to all, all, even sevants and inferiors are bound to
observe it to His honor, and the good of their souls and so to be willing and
careful of it (and they are free to observe it, being willing,)
notwithstanding any opposition of men, Masters, Parents, or others.] And though
they may and must regard Gods reservations, and so stay at home, to tend a sick
person, and do any thing which is truly necessary; yet not upon slight
pretenses, or trifling occasions; and when they are at home, they are to
redeem all Time possible, to serve God, and look after their souls by
themselves. And if for this, they incur their superiors displeasure, they
must trust God in that, as well as if they would urge them to lie, or do any
other wickedness.

XXXIII. Proved by reason.
2. Another proof of our Antecedent against the Churches authority even for the
Public Worship, in a word, (according to what has been touch^ in a former
argument) is, that [If the Church has authority to commanded all its members,
to observe constantly that Time in Public Worship which it determines to
them: It may command them 2, 3, 4, 5. Days in a Week, and 5. or 6. or 8.
Hours of each of those Days, both Masters, and Servants, Inferiors, and
Superiors: and call them from their works to public Worship so often, and
so long.] But this must not be, therefore the Church has no such authority,
even for the Public Worship, and the Times for it.

A sixth argument is this. XXXIIII. Argument sixth. The Church cannot make a
perpetual determination.
[If the Church has authority to make this determination of the chief solemn
Time necessary and sufficient to its members for Religion; Then it has
authority to make a perpetual determination. But the Church has no authority
to make a perpetual determination. Ergo, The Church has not authority to make
this determination.] The Consequence may be thus confirmed: that proportion of
Time, which is both necessary for Religion, and sufficient for Religion, (for
the chief Time of Worship) is in reference to men (not to say in the nature
of) Perpetual. For nothing can be taken from that which is necessary, nor added
(by man's authority) to that which is sufficient. So that if the determination
of the Church has made the Time necessary and sufficient to Religion, it has
made it withal perpetual and unalterable.

The Antecedent, that the Church cannot make a determination perpetual; Is
partly proved by the confession of the adversaries in this case in hand. For
they dispute and argue (diverse of them) for the Churches authority at this day;
to alter and change the Time, the Lords Day, not only to some other Day of the
week, but to some other number, greater, or smaller. Partly by the general
confession of all Orthodoxe Divines (even the Heretical Papists also,) that
all institutions and determinations and law^ of men (even of the Church
universal,) are in their own not ^e alterable; and at least the Church
universal may alter them in a general Council: And so that it belongs to God
only to make laws perpetual and unchangeable. And therefore, say we, it
belongs only to Him to make this determination of the necessary and sufficient
chief solemn Time for all men, and particularly for all the members of the
Church: which doing, it is unquestionably, in reference to men, XXXIV. Argument
seventh.
perpetual and unalterable.

A seventh Argument thu^ proceeds, [If God have given the Christian Church this
authority to determine the necessary, sufficient chief solemn Time for
Religion, It is a burden to Christians, that the Church have this authority.
to all its members: Then it is by way of spiritual privilege and liberty for
Christians. But it is not a spiritual privilege or liberty to Christians to
have this authority given to the Church. Ergo, God has not given to the Church
this authority.] The Consequence is not to be denied. 1. Because our
adversaries do so much, and so often, urge the notion of Christian liberty, to
prove Christians free from all Gods former determinations of Times, even that
of one day in seven for a Weekly Sabbath in the fourth Commandment, and to
prove that the Church is to determine the necessary and sufficient Time now. 2.
Indeed there can be no other reason imagined, why God should set His Christian
Church to make this determination, or make void all His own former
determinations, but in favor to His people now, for a spiritual privilege,
and Christian liberty. The Time of the Gospel being a Time of spiritual
freedom, above the Time of the Old Testament.

The Antecedent may be verifyed several ways. 1. By the confession of the
adversaries, who say sometimes (and offer at some reasons for it) that the
Christian Church may appoint and determine, more and oftener days than the
Jews had determined to them by God himself. (And if it be absolutely left to
the Church to determine, they may determine as many as they will,) And so there
will be less liberty, in that sense they plead for it, less freedom for
worldly occasions, work, and sports, then the Jews had, or then we urge from
the fourth Commandment, for one whole Day in seven. For two Days in a week;
or even twenty seven Holy days in a year (besides the Lords days weekly;)
which are in our Church, if they must be observed at least by abstaining from
all work, as some urge in their books; and to be sure, the Ecclesiastical
Courts did urge in practice, punishing all those that they could prove did work
on any part, even of a Holy day; This we say, was (and would be) less freedom
then the Jews had, or then we would have, if the Lords day were wholly
observed, and no other days strictly besides. But they may determine (as has
been said) even twice, thrice as many more days, if they have such authority
as we dispute of. Where then is the liberty talked of? 2. If the Church had not
such an absolute authority to determine but as much as was of old, one whole
Day in seven (And without an express prohibition, or pregnant reasons to the
contrary, which our adversaries in their way, have not yet alleged, this
cannot be denied by them:) And so keep the number and continuance still, and
only change the Day; (as we say is done, but by God, not men:) We ask again,
where is the liberty talked of? unless they will say it is more liberty to be
bound to the Churches determination, even of the same proportions of
Continuance and Frequency, then to be bound to a Commandment of God.

If they shall say, XXXV. Some Exceptions answered. Sol.
that the Church was at liberty whether it would have determined so much, or
not. We answer, This is indeed something in respect to the Church Governors,
those that have this supposed authority of determination. But it is nothing at
all of liberty, in respect to the ordinary members of the Church, to the
greater part of Christians; they are as strictly tied by such a determination
to one whole Day in seven, by the Churches authority, as the Jews were of old
by Gods authority, or as we say, Christians are now. And if they would say,
Excep. 2. Sol.
the tie were less strict: Besides that they have not showed wherein,
supposing such a determination, we say, then the determination were vain; For
it is vain to make a Law (to determine a Time, or any thing else)
authoritatively: and then for those to whom it is made, not to be tied strictly
to it, particularly in a Law of this nature for a necessary and sufficient Time
for Religion, which supposes a firm obligation to observe it, being once
determined by just authority. We say therefore again, where is the Christian
liberty? 3. Even the Governors liberty were but for the first turn, if that
be true which we have argued before, that this Time being once determined by
whomsoever, is unalterable by man: And even if the Church universal had power
to alter it, yet till such an Assembly as did properly represent the Church
universal, all Churches had no liberty at all; and however, much less the
members of the Churches. 4. Except. 3.
If they place the freedom and liberty in determining a less Continuance than
a Day, (as indeed this is the maine thing they drive at) We answer, 1. that our
Church in practice, Sol.
against work, has determined no less then a Days Continuance wholly; and
the 13. Canon of 1603. speaks no less (affirmatively) for the observation of
the whole Day, though in some general terms. 2. And then they must say, that
it is unlawful for the Church to determine a whole Day: which they cannot well
do, considering 1. that a whole Day may be lawfully observed, by their own
confessions; and they usually hold, that what a man may do voluntarily, the
Church may enjoyne to do. Also, 2. we have argued one Day at least in ones
life to be Morall-Naturall, and therefore God does not, in likelihood, refuse
the determination of a whole Day in a convenient Frequencie. As likewise, 3. We
have showed, that a whole Days Continuance, in a convenient Frequencie, is
clearly the most profitable distribution of the proportion for the chief Time,
and far more advantageous both for Religion, and worldly business, then a
less Continuance with a more Frequent Revolution. There is no probability
therefore at all, (unless there were a certain word for it in Scripture,
which there is not) that God should allow the Church liberty to determine the
Continuance any other way, and not allow the determination to a whole Day. 5.
Yet again, if so, This may be satisfied with determining it to begin within a
quarter of an hour of every ones waking, and to continue till within a quarter
of an hour of their lying down to sleep, (or of midnight) and what remarkable
liberty were this, to be granted as a spiritual privilege, and purchased by
the blood of our Redeemer? (as they sometimes speak to us in scorn, when we
name some few restraints on the weekly Sabbath to the Jews, which we are now
freed from.) 6. But above all, we desire the Christian Reader to consider two
things more: the one is, how that can be called a spiritual privilege, or
Christian liberty, if the Church have authority to determine remarkably less
Frequencie, or specially less Continuance then God determined to the Jews?
Remarkably less then a Day? When the souls of Christians are toyled with
worldly businesses all the week long, and almost over grown with the thorns of
worldly cares and distractions, through multitude of employments, specially
being servants and inferiors, or men of great trading, or of much business,
even in public affairs, as great Statesmen; and they long for the Sabbath,
the chief solemn Time, that they may have leisure to breath toward God, and
refresh their souls with converse with Him, in Public, Domestic, and
Solitary worship; and so provide for Eternity, specially that Day, all other
Days being so much taken up with temporal and earthly matters: And now the
Time is so short by a scanty determination, that specially as soon as the
Public Worship is over, they are again called upon by their earthly
businesses, and forced to their worldly drudgery again (as their spiritual
souls will call it) even by others importunities and haunting them, specially
themselves being inferiors. Is this, we say, a spiritual privilege, a
Christian liberty, for which the blood of the blessed Redeemer was (in part)
shed to purchase it? What our Adversaries consciences (when they do more
seriously to consider it in cold blood, then perhaps they ever yet have done
hitherto) will judge of this, we know not. But for our own parts, we are so far
from counting or calling this a Christian liberty, that we esteem it were a
miserable slaverie and bondage to souls and consciences. And so contradictory
expressly to the gracious intents of our most gracious Redeemer, whose blood
has procured us all advantages to our souls that can justly be desired, and
in no wise left us in worse condition for our souls good, then the Jews were.
And we doubt not but the conscientious Readers will be greatly of our minds. We
wish our Adversaries sadly to consider it. 7. The other Consideration is, That
if a Christian upon this supposition of a scanty determination of the Church in
the point of Continuance, whether superior or inferior, (but specially if an
inferior) Or even in the case of observation of whatsoever Time determined by
the Church, be it more or less, oftener or seldomer; shall in their voluntary
observation of any other Time, or in their obedientiall observation of their
determined Time, be encountered with froward interruptions, (though not of
necessity sufficient to be yielded to by Gods reservations) or specially be
commanded, or threatened, or misused by Masters, or Parents in opposition to it;
Were it to be counted a spiritual privilege to have no better ground of
suffering, then the Churches determination? Were this to be reputed a Christian
liberty purchased by the blood of our divine Redeemer? (by the blood of God, as
it is Act. 20.) Or rather an unhappy want of a firm foundation of confidence
in suffering? Wherein Christians having the express word of God determining
them to this (whatever it be) of Time which they observe, they may justly
triumph and rejoice in any loss, or reproach, or suffering whatsoever. We
conclude then, We discern nothing less then a spiritual privilege or
Christian liberty, for this chief necessary and sufficient Time for Religion
to be left to the Churches determination. And therefore we say, doubtless,
such authority of determination was not left to the Church.

XXXVI. Arg. 8. Then a matter of great importance were left to great
uncertainties, As
We argue yet again in the eighth place, [If this authority of determining the
necessary sufficient chief solemn Time for Religion, unto its members, be left
to the Church; Then is a matter of greatest importance in Religion left by God
to manifold great uncertainties, even among Christians. But a matter of
greatest importance in Religion cannot be supposed to be left by God to
manifold uncertainties, even among Christians. Ergo, This authority is not left
to the Church.] The Antecedent needs little proof, considering the perfection
of the Scriptures, and the singular love of God toward His Church, His
Christian Church specially. Whom though He has favored with not prescribing
to them many particularities, to which He obliged His Israel of old, Yet it is
not to be believed, that He would leave them at manifold uncertainties in a
matter of greatest imporatnce to Religion, His own honor, and their souls
good. For this were no favor to them, but a token of disfavour rather. This
will be cleareer, when we have illustrated and proved our Consequence, which we
thus endeavor.

XXXVII. 1. What is meant by the Church.
1. It is uncertain, even to many Christians, whose piety is not to be
despised, nor their learning neither: what is meant by the Church, to whom the
authority is given in any matter by God? Some pleading for particular Churches
or Congregations, to have it in themselves, even Independently: Others are for
Classical and Presbyteriall Assemblies of diverse Churches, and so higher,
Synods of Provinces, and of a whole Nation. Others again are for Bishops, and
the authority to be in them, and Synods of them, and Delegates under them, and
Archbishops, and Primates, etc. above them: Also all (but those that are of the
Independencie) do ascribe a chief authority (the chiefest that the Church
Chhistian has) to a General Council, representing the Church universal. (We
name not here the Popish plea for their universal Bishops authority, as beyond
a question among Orthodox and Reformed Churches, among whom our present dispute
is.) Now we say, that even this Uncertainty, and the disputes about all these
things, do so exceedingly enervate the strength of any Churches
determinations: as that it is apparently enough seen and known, that they are
scarce any where further obeyed, then men stand in fear of the
Church Censures; and not always then neither, many choosing to incur the
censures, rather then be tied to such observances as they think God has not
tied them unto. Which Principle would be sure to make any determination, that
any Church should make, (except only a General Council of the whole Church;
Of which yet we have diverse things to say by and by) little better then none at
all, with many, perhaps with most; specially if the Church should pretend to
determine the Time to extend to domestic, and most of all to solitary worship;
as we have showed it ought so to extend.

2. Again, where this is agreed, XXXVIII. 2. What persons have any votes.
that the Churches authority belongs to this or that Assembly, Instance in any,
or all: Yet is it not agreed, nor certain, in many minds, (who again, we say,
are not to be despised) what persons in these Assemblies have votes and
suffrages to determine any thing by way of authority, in those matters wherein
that Church or Assembly has authority. Even those that are for Independencie
of Churches, agree not all in this. Some plead for all the People (that are
Men:) Others only for the Officers, Ministers, and Elders, and in some matters
taking in the Deacons also. Those that stand for Classes, Presbyteries* and
Synods. Some admit all the Ministers of a Province to the Provincial Synod;
Others, a less number chosen out of the several Classes, or Presbyteries.
Again, some admit their Lay or Ruling Elders to have decisive voices in points
even of Doctrine, as well as Discipline. Others restrain matters of Doctrine
only to Ministers, Pastors and Teachers. Those that plead for Bishops, some
argue for their sole authority without the suffrages (decisive at least) of any
Presbyters. Others require a joint consent of a competent number of Presbyters;
and they again are divided: Some standing for a set Presbytery, in or near
the City; Others for all the Diocese, which therefore they would argue, ought
to be but of a narrow extent. Again, when they come to speak of a Provincial,
or National Synod of Bishops, It is disputed, whether any Presbyters ought
there to have decisive voices; and if so, how many, and by whom, and in what
manner they are to be chosen; whether by Proxies, or not. Also of what validity
any such determinations by any of these Assemblies, Provincial or National
for instance, shall be of, before or without the consent of Secular Princes and
States, specially being Christian? And once more, for General Councels, what
persons have right to vote there, (we mean not from humane custom, or the
like, but divine authority, of which we now dispute) whether only Bishops, as
some say; Or Presbyters also, as others maintain; or also Laymen; as not a
few do likewise plead? And which way soever we take it, What numbers to be
chosen for each Nation? And by what way and consent? And when met; whether to
vote by Nations, as in the Council of Basil? or by the major part of the
whole Council? Now all this, we say, renders our determination in hand,
exceedingly the more uncertain; which would be argued by some to be a point of
Doctrine, by others to be a matter of discipline; and by Princes and States to
be a thing specially concerning the Civil State also, by reason that men that
while, must be ordinarily forbidden all Civil businesses; and so they are to
have a share in this determination, if in any at all. And the issue must needs
come to this, that none would think themselves bound to hold such
determination necessary, or themselves or theirs bound to observe it
necessarily, if the whole way of the determination were not according to their
opinion about the authority. Besides, that as much question would also be made
by diverse others, about the sufficiency of the Time. And so, we say again, The
determination could not be but unsufficient, and unsatisfying greatly, to great
numbers of Christians.

XXXIX. 3. Whether they do not err, in their determination.
3. Suppose a full agreement about the persons to whom the authority belongs:
Yet no man holds that all the decisions, even of general Counsels, are
infallible. The Major part may err, about the necessary proportion, and
determine too much, about the sufficiency, and determine too little. The
general Council of Ariminum erred about the dinivity of Christ, much more may
a general Council err about this necessary and sufficient Time. Having
specially no certain Rule to go by, (as cannot well be denied, and shall be
proved fully anon) when the fourth Commandment for one Day in seven is made to
be out of date. And now what certainty have Christians, or can they have, that
there will be no error? Or that there is none in their determination, when it
is made.

4. XL. 4. Whether their votes were free.
Suppose the determination of the Major part of a general Council freely
voting, be infallible: Yet how uncertain is it, whether the votes have been
free? Whether the Major part were that way, that is, delivered for the
determination? Whether there were no forcing of men's voices, by instructions
from Princes and States, and threatenings, and the like? We read of such things
in the Acts of Counsels. And we read also, of Canons pretended to be made by
the great Council of Nice for the Popes Supremacy, which yet were proved to be
foysted and supposititions. And what then can or shall secure remote Nations;
and specially succeeding generations, that the proceedings were regular, the
votes rightly given? And this the certain and infallible decision and
determination of the Council? What can do this latter but a most exact and
complete expression in writing, authentically sealed, and so preserved, and
after multiplied by copies most carefully examined? But for the former, we know
no security suitable to the stresse that consciences must be put upon often for
the observation of the Time as necessary; and the satisfaction requisite to
make it be acknowledged sufficient.

5. Suppose the determination, XLI. 5. Whether the determination be too strict,
or too remiss.
undoubtedly made by the Council, and clearly and fully expressed: Yet what
uncertainty were Christians yet left unto? If by the strictness of the
determination requiring a large Continuance and often, any shall judge, that
the Major part of the Council were too precise, and carried away with an
excess of zeal, and so have made a determination too burdensome to
Christians, prejudicial to their Christian liberty, and to their worldly
businesses; and so that they have laid as necessary upon them, a proportion
unnecessary, (set aside their authority) we would feign know of our
Adversaries, what such, who so judge, are likely to do in point of
observation? (Specially when they are out of sight of those who would censure
them for omission?) Or even what a Nation were bound to do, when their
deputies were returned from the Council with so unnecessary and burdensome a
determination of Time to be observed as necessary? Again on the other side, If
by the slenderness of the determination, requiring but a short Continuance and
seldom revolution, any shall judge that the Major part of the Council were
too Worldly; and carried away with principles of libertinisme, and so have made
a determination prejudicial to Religion, and unsufficient for Gods Honor and
the good of men's souls in reference to the chief solemn Time: we would feign
know again, what is like to be done upon this? Or what a Nation were after the
Council, bound to do^? Shall they, or will they (or even any particular
Churches, or persons) hold to such an unnecessary, or unsufficient
determination? Or if they should, or may, make another, how was the authority
in the general Council? And again, by what rule shall they make another? And
if the National Church shall make another, are not they liable to the other
extreme? (Nay, if they may wave the authority of the general Council, is it
not possible themselves may be the mistakers, and the general Council was in
the right?) And then who shall, or who may, or must judge of that? What may or
must particular Churches do in this case? And even particular persons who are
so immediately concerned in it, (as we have showed in the beginning of the
Chapter;) Will it not finally result into the authority of particular Churches?
Which most of our Adversaries will (we dare say) not yield to, and we shall
bring an Argument also against by and by. Are not then all things upon
uncertainties in this greatest matter of importance to Religion? How can it
then be imagined, that God has so left it, under the New Testament, who so
fully prevented all under the Old Testament, as cannot be denied, at least, in
reference to His people of Israel?

XLII. Argu. 9. It makes the Church to this Day guilty of sin in not
^etermining it.
We proceed to a ninth Argument, which we thus deliver against the authority of
the Church universal, in this matter. [That which makes the Church universal,
and all general Counsels to this Day, to be guilty of grievous sin, is not
to be believed or admitted. But to ascribe this authority to the Church to
determine the necessary and sufficient Time for Religion unto all its Members,
makes the Church universal, and all General Counsels to this day to be
guilty of grievous sin. Ergo, The ascribing this authority to the Church, is
not to be credited or admitted.]

The Proposition needs little proof. He should be very audatious, that should
offer to condemn, not only some General Counsels, but all; and not only in
one age, but ever since the Apostles Times, and the universal Church withal,
as not endeavoring the amendment of a notorious fault, as we shall see.

The assumption may be verified, by declaring 1. That if the Church universal
have not by some General Council, made a clear and express determination of
this necessary sufficient Time, It cannot be excused of grievous sin, upon this
supposition of this authority belonging to the Church. 2. That the Church
universal has not to this day, in any General Council made any clear and
sufficient determination in this kind.

The first of these cannot well be denied. For this were to be wanting to a
duty most mainly concerning Religion, and the Worship of God, and His honor
throughout the Church, and the good of all Christians souls, and to a law
Moral Natural, as appears by what our adversaries confess of the morality
of a sufficient Time to be determined, (even suppose, but for the Public
Worship,) and as we have proved the necessity of such a determination to
Religion to be made by some or other; and so by the Church, the Church
universal, if the authority belongs to them. And to omit it, though upon
mistake, and not thinking it to belong to them, were to be guilty of sin,
though a less sin (namely, only of Ignorance,) then if through negligence, or
any other respect, so many General Counsels have forborne to make it: For
that were to slight Religion, the honor of God, the souls of Christians,
exceedingly: which doubtless, the Christian Church, and the first General
Counsels were not guilty of.

But yet the second is evident enough, that no General Council has made this
determination: Not only because no such Canon is to be found in any of them to
this purpose, no not so much as for any thing of it; not for the particular
day; (though of this, the Laodicean Council, which was provincial, speaks
plainly, as we shall hear hereafter,) much less, for the Frequency, and least
of all for the Continuance. As also because our adversaries who ascribe much to
General Counsels, yet dispute one while against the Day, as changeable by the
present Church, another while against the number, that it may be one of eight,
or of six, or of some other number: But specially against the Continuance
(against which indeed their greatest spite is.) And when we allege any
Provincial or National Counsels, averring the Divine authority of the Lords
day, and the total sanctification of it, and so making Canons, not to ordain,
but to confirm those determinations, they reject them as but partial
Authorities, and not as speaking the sense of the Church universal. Therefore
we say again, the Church universal, either took it for granted (in all the
General Counsels) that those determinations were already made to their hands
by God and His word, in the Old and New Testaments; and that Christians
generally did acknowledge and observe them: or else it sinned in not
sufficiently discharging the trust committed to it about this determination, in
not making it expressly, or not transmitting it clearly to posterity. If they
took the matter to be of no importance, they sinned undeniably in so
undervaluing it. If they took it to be of importance, and yet took no care of
it, they sinned yet more. What remains then, but that the very silence of the
Church universal in so many General Counsels as have been held from
Constantines Time, proclaims that they esteemed it (as sundry provincial
Counsels speak, we shall hear) concluded before by God and Christ and the
Apostles in the word; and found it in the common acknowledgment and practice of
Christians. Which as it decayed any where, the provincial and national
Counsels took order to declare the truth; and make sanctions for a more
conscionable observation. And we for our parts cannot think otherwise, but that
God in His providence so disposed of it, that no General Council should take
upon them to meddle with this determination; least their Injunctions, only for
confirmation, should be misse-interpreted to be an institution, and a
determination: (as some of our disputers do almost make as much of a
constitution of Constantines, for the observation of the Lords day;) But hereby
he has the more fully and manifestly reserved the authority to himself, and to
be sought for in His written word.

XLII. Arg. 10. Even the Apostles themselves.
And being come thus far, let us with our Readers good leave make bold to carry
this argument one step higher, even concerning the universal Church in the
most ancient and primitive, Apostolic Times, taking in the Apostles and all;
or rather make a new argument for clearer distinctions sake: Thus,

If the determination of the necessary sufficient Time for Religion belong to
the Church, then it belonged to the Apostles and the primitive Church
Governors, to make it for all Christians. But it belonged not to the Apostles
and Primitive Church Governors, to make it for all Christians. Ergo, It
belonged not to the Church.] The consequence cannot be denied, for no
succeeding generation of the Church can have this authority, no not for their
own age, if the Apostles and Pimitive Church Governors had it not.

The Antecedent is thus confirmed. [That authority which they did not practice
in a matter of greatest importance to Religion, the Apostles and Primitive
Church had not. But they did not practice the making of this determination.
Ergo, They had no such authority.]

The Major cannot be denied without charging the whole Primitive Church, and
then all the Apostles also with grievous sin. The Minor is thus further
confirmed. [That which the Apostles did in all matters of great importance to
Religion, they left clear and sufficient record of, for the practice of
Christians. But there is not left any clear and sufficient record of the
Apostles determination of the necessary and sufficient Time for Religion unto
Christians, Ergo, The Apostles did not make this determination.] Again, the
Major connot be gainsaid without charging upon the Apostles that guilt of sin,
even of great neglect: So many of them writing Gospels and Epistles for
Christians, to put in no word, in an authenticke record, to let Christians in
all succeeding generations understand what they had determined, according to
the authority wherewith they were entrusted by God, concerning the chief Time
for Religion necessary and sufficient for Frequency and Continuance. The Minor
is no less clear. Our adversaries take pains to prove (and we stick not to
grant them) that the Apostles have not in Scripture, nor any where else, left
any clear sufficient authenticke record of any determination of theirs in
either of these respects. Nay they will not so much as yield, that the Lords
day (for the particular Day, and for Frequency every week,) was certainly and
infallibly so much as practiced by all the Apostles. For diverse of them
quarrel and dispute against all the places that mention any thing of it in the
New Testament: Therefore say we again, the Apostles were far from determining,
either the Frequency, or the particular day, or the Continuance specially, (of
which the greatest controversy is) yet this (or namely the Continuance) they
ought to have determined as carefully as any thing, if it had been left to
them. It being of greatest Importance; as appears (besides all that we have
formerly discoursed of the differance between two hours, or an hour, or half
an hour (or less) of a Day, and the whole Continuance of a Day for Religion:)
even by our adversaries eagerness against us, for urging the necessity of a
whole Days Continuance; and our complaints of them for their scantying of God,
and souls, by disputing for less. To avoyde then superstition on the one
hand, and profaneness on the other, the Apostles (and Primitive Church) if they
had had the authority of determining the Continuance, ought to have determined
it, and would have determined it, if it had belonged to them; and would have
made an authenticke clear and sufficient record of it, if they had determined
it. But they have done none of all this, as both our adversaries and we also
jointly say. Ergo, we conclude (and we cannot imagine how they can possibly
avoyde the dint of this argument, besides all the other;) [That the Apostles
and Primitive Church had no such authority to determine this necessary and
sufficient chief solemn Time for Religion unto Christians.] But that the Word
of God, even in the Old Testament, that is, in the fourth Commandment for one
whole Day in seven, had done it for perpetuity, and they acknowledged it and
observed it, and meddled not with any alteration of it, or making any new
determination. And that, as for the particular Day, they preached the old Day
abrogated by Christ, and then as we have employed heretofore (and shall again
urge further hereafter) the first Day of the Week came, even by virtue of the
determination of one in seven, in the room of it immediately; Besides what may
be argued for Christ's justification of it, when we come to handle that question
against the Jewish Sabbatarians. And this being of less importance then the
determination of the Continuance and Frequency; God in His unsearcheable
wisdom thought fit only to afford some designations of its observation, and
His owning it as His in the New Testament, and not any peremptory command, like
to that of the Decalogue. Of which also more hereafter.

XLIV. Arg. 11. Then it should belong to every congregation.
We proceed in our arguments. The next is this, [If the authority of determining
to Christians the necessary sufficient chief Time for Religion, belong to the
Church; Then it belongs to every particular congregationall Church to determine
it unto its members; But it belongs not to every particular, congregationall
Church, to determine it unto its members. Ergo, It belongs not to the Church at
all.] The Consequence has been partly made good already. But we must repeat
those things briefly, and bring them under one view together, and add some
other things to them for fuller confirmation. 1. The practice and observation
of a necessary and sufficient Time for Religion immediately concerns every
particular Church, (even every particular conscience, as we have said) for Gods
honor among them, and the benefiting of all their souls. 2 The Time must be
determined, and that as necessary and sufficient, that it may be so observed by
that particular Church, and all its members. 3. It has been already showed the
great uncertainties that there are, about the determination of this Time,
belonging to a Church National or Universal, and the Possibilies of their
erring either in the point of necessity or of sufficiency, through want of
zeal, excess of zeal, and want of prudence: In all these cases, what can be
said, but that the authority must be devolved to each particular
congregationall Church for its members; that so God may have His honor among
them, though he has it not aright among others; and their souls may be
benefited, and their consciences not over-burthened, however it be in other
Churches? 4. In case any particular Church be in a Paganish Country, converted
and gathered by means of some captive Christian, or the like; who yet is able
to show no authenticke proof of any determination of the universal Church in
this point, nor of any National Church, which this particular Church should be
bound to, by virtue of their authority over it; It is of necessity that that
particular Church determine the Time for it self and its members. 5. To this
Day, as we touched before, the universal Church has not (nor scarce any
National Church, of late) made a clear determination, (or declaration) of the
Continuance, of the Day which is by practice every where weekly observed. How
much, we say, of the Lords day, is to be kept holy and strictly for God and the
soul? Yet this is necessary to be determined. Therefore the authority to
determine it must needs be devolved to every particular Church, through the
defect of the universal Churches determination of it, and so of National, and
Provincial, or Diocesan, or Classical Churches. As also (as was argued
formerly) in particular Churches default in like sort; to particular Persons
for themselves, and their own souls and consciences single. 6. Finally, the
Scripture, upon our Adversaries suppositions, is undeniably (we think) for
this: And so is the practice of the Christian Church. 1. The first certain
intimation we have in Scripture of the new Day observed by Christians for
Religion, (though this also, some quarrel with, and question) is Act. 20.7.
which was in a particular Church, at Troas; and our Adversaries will not allow
us to infer from St. Paul's presence, and observation of it with them, that he
instituted it there; and much less among all Churches. It was then (as they
contend) the particular institution of that particular Church of Troas; and so
the determination of the particular Day and Frequency (whatever was, or was
not, of the Continuance) belonged to particular Churches. 2. Our Adversaries
refuse also the intimation of 1 Cor. 16.2. (notwithstanding the mention of an
Ordination, at least, about the Collection) that either to Corinth, or to the
Churches of Galatia, the Apostle did institute or determine the first Day of
the week to Religion. Yet it was observed then (as they do not deny in their
good moods, though they can find in their hearts to dispute against that place
also; Therefore the institution and determination was made by those particular
Churches, for the Day, and the Frequency at least. 3. The practice of the
Christian Church will say the same too. For 300 years after Christ, there was
not (neither could there be till there was a Christian Emperor) any general
Council. So that the universal Church determined it not, neither could it.
Nor do we read any National or Provincial Council that seems to determine
it, till that of Laodicea, which was near 300 years after Christ's
resurrection; Whereas the Lords day was practiced and observed by that name,
and the name of the first Day of the week, in every age from the Apostles
Times, as we shall show hereafter. It must be then instituted and determined by
some particular Churches, and imitated by others, and so came to be universally
practiced: Unless the Apostle instituted and determined it for all, (which our
Adversaries admit not, and we have disproved in their sense,) or that God and
Christ ordained it (whether immediately or mediately by the Apostles, it
matters not greatly) and so certainly it was.

XLV. Which is disproved by many reasons.
For now to prove our Antecedent, [That it belongs: not to every particular
congregationall Church to make this determination.] 1. It is not credible that
all particular Churches, if the power were in themselves, would determine the
same Continuance, nor the same Frequency, nor so much as the same particular
Day. For to speak of the first, do not our disputers now argue one while for
Thursday to be as fit a Day, in memory of Christ's Ascension, as the Lords day
in memory of His Resurrection: Another while for Friday, in memory of His
death? How would this then be, if they, or such as they, had the authority in
their own hand, (much, if not altogether) being the Ministers, and so at least
the chief in authority in the particular Congregations? should we not be
likely in a great City, as London, but specially in a Nation, or Kingdom, to
have all the Days of the Week determined by one or other particular Church,
namely one by one, and another by another, and so others by others? Again, in
such diversities of tempers, differences of zeal, or worldliness; wanting a
steady Rule (as we shall see) and so a ground of wisdom, would there not be
greater danger of variety about the Frequency and Continuance? 2. In all
Churches, that were near one another, diversities of Days would breed great
disturbance of one another, and the members of each from others, and hindrance
also to traffic, and journies, and all business; and in a word, introduce
nothing but disorder and confusion. Which yet would be more increased, by a
diversity in regard of the Frequency and Continuance, whereby those that
observed and were tied to more and oftener, would be reproacht by others as
over-precise, and would be apt to grumble at their own bondage; And they that
observed and were tied to less and seldomer, would be censured as profane and
careless of Religion; and perhaps would be in doubt of the sufficiency of
their Churches determination; and so be apt to make a schism in it, or from
it. 3. If it were resolved once, that this authority did certainly belong to
every particular Church, it would hardly be agreed among them unto whom it did
belong. Whether to the Minister (or Ministers) alone, as some would think? Or
to them and the Ruling Elders together, as others would say? Or to the whole
people with them, that is, all the men grown, as others would maintain? Or
even taking in women also, as the Anabaptists do, in matters of
Church Government? And in this, the difficulty would be the greater; because
(as we have urged before) the thing concerns the consciences of every one
exceedingly in a point of necessary practice for Gods Honor, and their souls
good; and necessary freedom for their souls benefit, and necessary
satisfaction for their consciences. We say, this concerns people as well as
Ministers or Elders, and women as well as men; and therefore all must have some
share in the determination: So far, as if it be not at all determined in any
respect (as even for Continuance) they must determine it for themselves; And 2.
If it be too burdensomely and unnecessarily, they may and must ease themselves
of that burden; And 3. If it be unsufficiently, they must provide better for
their consciences, and souls, and Gods Honor; And so in effect it would
devolve to every particular person, for themselves single; which we have before
disproved, as that which would infallibly fill the World and the Church with
irreligion, disorder, and confusion.

4. Place this authority where you will, or can, in a particular Church; Yet
considering the small number of Ministers, and Elders, (take them together) in
particular Churches; and the weakness, and corruption that even they are not
free from, and specially the people are liable unto, suppose them as good as
can be supposed: Upon how slender a pin does Religion, Gods Honor, and the
good of those souls depend, if so important a determination for Religion, be
altogether trusted in their hands; specially having no certain Rule to make it
by, as we shall see straight way?

5. Last of all, can it with any reason be imagined, That the Church of Troas,
or that of Corinth, or those of Galatia, (all founded by Saint Paul, unless
that of Troas were by any other Apostle) would have offered to have made so
important a determination, without the Apostle, or some other of the Apostles?
For what least matter can be produced, that any particular Church in those
Days did ordain by their own authority? And much less then, would they have
meddled with this. Neither can it be supposed (as was noted before) that the
Apostles preaching the Abrogation of the old Jewish Day, the Saturday-Sabbath,
(and as our Adversaries imagine also, the cessation of the whole fourth
Commandment in regard of the words of it) would not have determined, to the
Churches where they preached these things, or at least with them, this great
matter which must of necessity be observed, and so determined, for the honor
of God, and the good of every Christian soul; namely, a new proportion of
Continuance and Frequencie for the chief Time to Religion, and a new Day for
it. Yet we showed in a former Argument, both by evident reason, and our
Adversaries assertions, that the Apostles did not meddle to make any of those
Determinations any where. Therefore we suppose it to be fully clear, that the
Particular Churches did not make those Determinations to themselves, neither
had they authority so to do. And so no Church had, or has. But it ever
belonged to God, and was by Him done for all succeeding generations of His
Church in the fourth Commandment, for the Continuance of a whole Day, and the
Frequencie of one in seven: And by virtue of this, and other intimations in the
New Testament, for the Lord's Day, the first Day of the Week, to be the
particular Day.

And so we have, as we are persuaded, XLVI. Arg. 12. All men want wisdom to
determine it.
sufficiently and clearly refuted the supposed authority of the Church, and of
all men [about the Determination of this chief solemn Time, necessary and
sufficient for the chief Time of Religion, unto all Men and Christians:] that
is, in point of Authority properly. But we conceive, all will be much more
strengthened, which we have argued, by the addition of another general
Argument, against any man's, or number of men's determinations of it, even the
Churches, whether in times of the old Patriarks before Moses, or the Christian
Church of the New Testament; and that is in point of Wisdom: As having no
Rule, whereby possibly to guide themselves steadily in the making of this
determination of the chief Time necessary and sufficient. For, whatsoever we
take into consideration, that may seem to make toward a Rule; will and does
render it more perplexe; Either calling for so much, as men will never be
willing to grant necessary; or leaving them altogether uncertain, whether that
they would pitch upon, were sufficient, both in reference to the whole
proportion of the chief Time; as also the distribution of that proportion,
whatever it be, between the Continuance and Frequencie, save only in case they
would pitch upon a whole Days continuance, to which Nature inclines very much,
as we have intimated before, and must again further urge.) Thus we reason:

[If there be in Men no sufficiency of wisdom to make this Determination of
the necessary sufficient chief solemn Time for Religion to themselves and
others; Then this Determination belongs not to Men. But there is in Men no
sufficiency of wisdom to make this Determination. Ergo, It belongs not to
Men.] The Consequence needs no great labor to prove it. God is too wise, too
jealous of His own Honor, too full of love to His peoples souls, to leave
such a matter as this is so important to Religion, to be determined by such as
have not a sufficiency of wisdom for it.

XLVII. Having no rule to guide them.
The Antecedent is further proved in this manner. [If there be no Rule whereby
Men may guide them steadily, about the Proportion necessary and sufficient for
the chief solemn Time for Religion, or the distribution of that proportion
between the Continuance and Frequencie, (except only for a whole Days
continuance, which is refused) Then they can have no sufficiency of wisdom to
make this Determination. But there is no Rule, whereby Men may guide themselves
steadily about the Proportion necessary and sufficient, or the distribution of
it, except, etc. Ergo, Men can have no sufficiency of wisdom to make this
Determination.] The Consequence again is evident enough. For what is wisdom,
but to do a thing steadily by a sufficient rule? Whatsoever then is done
without a sufficient rule, cannot be said to be done wisely, whatever other
commendation may be given to it. Neither does the Exception interposed weaken
the Consequence, because (as is expressed) the Continuance of a whole Day is
refused, and so refused by all the Adversaries, as that this is the maine and
original quarrel that has bred all the rest: and therefore that cannot be
pretended by them on their part, as possible to be determined by any rule of
wisdom: Though we, for our parts, may (and must) enforce it so, as most
apparently wise, and by the perfectest rule of Nature and Reason; against which
there is no just gainsaying, unless God himself did utterly reject it: And
they that say He has, have then (we say) no rule of wisdom to go by. For
our Antecedent in this, and in the whole, will be abundantly cleared by a
serious considering whatsoever may be pretended, either generally or
particularly, in whole or in part, to be a rule in these cases. Generally there
can be no rule, but either, 1. The Law and Light of Nature; Or, 2. some
general expressions of Scripture: We say, some general expressions of
Scripture; For all the particular determinations there mentioned, are expressly
disputed against by the Adversaries, as no necessary obligations or rules to
Christians. Again, for particular rules, total or partial, There are none
proper to this Question, but one of these four Considerations. 1. The Nature of
the Object of Worship, and the primary end of all Religious Time determined or
observed; Namely God, whose nature is unquestionably infinite. 2. The nature of
the prime Subject of Worship, and the secondary end of all Religious Time
determined or observed; namely, the Soul of Man, which in the duration of it
is ordained to be infinite, and in the necessities of it toward the provision
for Eternity, is next to Infinite. 3. The nature of the Duties of Worship, in
which, that is, in the variety of some or other of them, all Religious Time
determined is to be employed: whose nature will appear to be generally (except
in one case or two) indefinite. 4. The nature of the secondary Subject, and
usual and certain Impediment of Religious Worship, (that it cannot have all
Time allotted to it) namely, the body, and bodily and worldly businesses; which
allow not, we say, all Time to be devoted to Religion and Solemn Worship: but
call for a share of Time from every man, both for Continuance and Frequencie,
all his life long. The nature of which businesses will appear to be, 1.
Suitable to corrupted Nature. 2. Exceeding various, numerous, and uncertain;
and capable also of taking up all the Time of life, if they might be suffered.
3. At the best but secondary and inferior businesses. And these four
Considerations were all the rules, that Adam, or any of the old Patriarks could
have to look to, toward the making of this Determination of the necessary and
sufficient chief Time for Religion; if it had been (as is supposed by our
Disputers) left to them to make for themselves and others. And they are all
also that the Christian Church can well pretend to, supposing the Determination
left to them. Only to gratify our Disputers, who seem often to fancy, as
though the Proportion the Jews observed, (or rather, we say, which God
determined to them) of one Day in seven, may serve for some kind of rule to
estimate this necessary and sufficient Time by; Though by no means they will
yield that particular proportion (and distribution) to be necessary and
sufficient now; For that were to yield, in effect, the whole Cause: We will (we
say, to gratify them) take this also into consideration. And so with the best
skill we have, examine and set before our Readers all these five, severally and
distinctly, according both to the Law and Light of Nature, and general
expressions of Scripture: And see what will come of it; And whether, after all,
men will not fall short of a sufficient Rule to make this Determination wisely
by, if it were left to them.

XLVIII. 1. Not the Nature of God himself.
1. We begin (and worthily) with the Consideration of the Nature of GOD, the
sole object of Worship, and primary end of all Religious Time; to whose Honor
all Solemn Time, and so this chief Time, and all Worship tendered in it, is to
be observed. Now we say, The Nature of GOD, (whether we hear Scripture speak,
er even Natural Reason) is unquestionably infinite: And so it cannot be
possible to make a definite determination of any Time proportionable to that.
If you ask, What Time is necessary for the Honor of GOD in it self
considered? The answer can be no other then, All Time is necessary. Or again,
If you ask, What Time is sufficient for the Honor of GOD? The answer will
still be, Less then all Time cannot be sufficient. [Who can declare the mighty
acts of the Lord? who can show forth all His praise? says the holy Psalmist,
Psalm. 106.2. [Thy glorious Name is exalted above all blessing and praise] say
the holy Levites, Nehem. 9.5. who afterward, in the same confession,
remarkably, bless Him, as for a singular favor, for making known to them His
holy Sabbaths, (the chief solemn Time of praising Him) v. 16. Here then is
nothing to proportion out only a parcel of our Time for Religion, and leave
the rest for other purposes; to scanty God, as if He were not worthy of all our
Time, and afford the world, and worldly businesses, what is not allotted to
Him. The question is not here, whether a man may not employ some Time upon
worldly businesses, by Gods allowance? For we are far enough from denying that.
But whether the majesty, glory and honor of the eternal God, the Lord of us
and all our Time, in and by it self considered, can afford to spare any Time
from His attendance? and specially which way it can be possible, that the
thoughts of His incomprehensible Excellency and Glory, should direct us to
share Time between His immediate service, and worldly matters? The holy Angels
in heaven keep an eternal Sabbath, without intermission, interruption or end.
We shall do so too hereafter with them, if we rightly and faithfully serve Him
upon earth. And without all controversy, such an eternal Sabbath, swallowing
up all Time, is not over-sufficient to give attendance upon Him and His
praises. Nor could be sufficient, if any thing could be added to it. That then
all our Time is not so taken up with His immediate worship, even upon Earth; no
reason can be sufficient, but His own will, declared to be otherwise then to
require the whole from us. His will alone is that which abates of the necessity
of any one minute or moment of Time in our whole lives, from our particular
attendance upon Him: and that makes any jote less then all, to be in His
acceptance sufficient. His will then we must seek further after, in some of
the other Considerations. For here we are undeniably at a loss; and can make
nothing of our thoughts toward a Determination.

2. Take we a view then, in the next place, XLIX. 2. Not the nature of the
Soul.
of the nature of the Soul, the prime subject of Worship, and secondary end of
all Religious Time; for whose benefit properly it is to be employed. And this,
we say, both Scripture chiefly, and Nature also, (at least not reasonably
contradicting) proclaim to be infinite in duration, appointed to an Eternity
of happiness, or misery: and its necessities to secure this happiness, and
avoid this misery, (considering what corruption it has) are next to infinite.
Which way then can that which is infinite (or next to infinite) afford a
direction to judge any proportion definite to be sufficient for it? Or measure
so much as necessary, and leave any out, of all the Time that any Soul has in
this life? And if the inevitable necessities of Nature for eating, drinking,
and sleeping, etc. be pleaded: yet we doubt not, whether the Soul would not,
or should not, grudge even at these, as endangering to hinder that which is of
more importance than meat, or drink, or sleep, or even than the bodily life
and subsistence it self. Not that we imagine or dream, that God has not
allowed (even by the light of Nature, and much more by Scripture) sufficient
Times for all these bodily necessities. But yet we know, that both God
sometimes commands to fast, and forbear all meat and drink for a space, and
so to watch even whole nights, for the good of Souls, our own specially, but
also even of others: As likewise, that when a Soul grows extraordinarily
sollicitous of its own salvation, (and sometimes even of others) It cannot
afford to eat or drink, it cannot sleep, ready sometimes even to starve it
self, or kill it self with over-watching; but that it is forced up do
otherwise even by Gods command, urged upon them by friends, and the fear of
prejudicing their very salvation, if they should be causes of their own death.
And moreover, it is usual with many Christians to think much and repine at all
the Time, wherein they are not spiritually employed for their souls; even
though they cannot deny, but God has not only allowed, but even commanded them
to employ hours, and days, many and many, upon worldly businesses: which
command and allowance of His, is the only thing that satisfies them; or else
they could never, so far forth as they think of their souls, be willing to
allow any Time at all to any other thing. And therefore there is no manner of
help from hence for any shareing of Time, between the soul, and worldly
occasions. The rather, because a soul awakened with sense of its own good,
becomes apprehensive, 1. That there are yet manifold things in Religion, which
are greatly necessary for it to know, what ever knowledge it has already
attained to; and these call for a great deal of Time to learn them; 2. And
how forgetful they are from Time to Time of the things they have learned; and
that calls also for much Time to preserve them in memory, and recover any they
have lost; 3. Withal the faintness of their godly affection; 4. And the
strength of their corruptions; which require still much and often Time to
strengthen the one, and combat, and mortify the other; 5. And finally, their
being assaulted daily and hourly with temptations and afflictions, and their
peace and comfort further wasted by sins and corruptions; which makes them
stand in need of Time: Yet more, to regaine that peace and comfort when it is
gone or wasted; and to enjoy spiritual refreshings in the bosom of Gods love.
All this together cannot but make a soul think no measure of Time, less then
all, necessary and sufficient, for attendance upon Him, whom it is bound to
love with its whole self, mind, heart, strength: and so to work upon it self,
that it may love Him, and be sure of His love: And when it has once attained
to this love of Him above all other things, and to an assurance of His love to
it, it cannot but still think, all Time is little enough, and too little, to
serve Him in thankfulness for His love: and to enjoy His love, and its own
happiness in attendance upon Him, and converse with Him. It must then again be
Gods will, declared, that men should spend their Time in this world, otherwise
then wholly upon the immediate care of their souls in His immediate service,
that must discharge any proportion at all from being necessary to the souls
good; See Sect. 71.
and so His promise of blessing upon some proportions of Time orderly observed
for the chief Time (together with other Times to be redeemed as they can) that
makes any proportion to be sufficient for the chief Time. But for this we must
still seek further: For we have yet met with no manner of intimation of Gods
will how to regulate or determine our proportions.

3. To come then to the third consideration, that is, L. 3. Nor the nature of
the duties themselves.
of the nature of the duties of Worship, in the varieties of which (of some or
other of them) the chief Time we are discoursing about, is to be employed. And
they are all (except the Sacraments) apparently indefinite, and so still
incapable to direct to a definite determination of Time necessary and
sufficient to be allotted to them, either for Continuance or Frequency. Indeed
the Sacrament of Baptism, is, in it self, soon dispatched; and in the nature
of it, not to be reiterated to the same person. And the Lords Supper also is
soon dispatched, by each particular Communicant. But then it (as well as any of
the other duties of Prayer, Preaching, Reading the Word, Praises, Singing,
Meditations, Conferences, Catechisings,) is capable of a Daily Frequency. And
all those may be reiterated oftener, even every new minute, after an
interruption; and that every Day of ones life. We mean, the nature of them
admits it possible, and no way forbids it. Again, they may be prolonged, any of
all these, and much more diverse (or all) of them one after another, diverse
hours, even a whole Day unquestionably: and any one of them a whole life
together, if the bodily spirits could hold out so long, and no necessary
interruption did call off. On the other side, they may any of them be suddenly
dispatched. If a man did preach but half a quarter of an hour, or a minute
(as Peter's Sermon related Act. 10. exceeded not a minute, or very little, when
the falling of the Holy Ghost on all them that heard the Word, made an
interruption, proclaiming withal a sufficiency of acceptance and blessing,
for that Time, of his speaking and their hearing;) it might be a true service
of God, acceptable to Him, and profitable to souls: And so the reading of a
verse, or sentence of the Scripture; Or the singing of a verse or line: Or the
praying* as long only, as the Publicans [God be merciful to me a sinner.] And
so a word or two of conference: and a very speedy thought of meditation. Any of
all this might and would (if want of affection to the duties, were not the
shortner of them) be pleasing to God, and beneficial to souls, in its degree.
There is nothing then (on no hand) in the nature of the duties of Worship, that
can possibly be a rule to say, [Such a proportion of Time is certainly
necessary, and such a proportion is certainly sufficient: Or the distribution
must be so and so, to so much Continuance and no less, and so much Frequency
and no seldomer.] Neither can we run back to the considerations of Gods honor,
or the souls good, to measure these by. For they have already refused any
absolute direction. But still some other thing must estimate, or help to
estimate the due proportions of Time for the severalls of these. And again,
only the will of God, some other way declared, is that which must teach us to
conclude, that for the chief Time to be employed in them, any of them, or at
least all of them together have been sufficiently prolonged in a just
Continuance, on any Day; or sufficiently frequently reiterated: As also, that
all of them, or some of them, are necessary to be so long continued together,
or necessary to be so often reiterated, nothing can justly determine, but the
express will of God; which yet we are to proceed in the search of, as being
hitherto never a whit nearer the finding of it, then we were, when we begun to
inquire after it.

LI. 4. Nor the nature of the body, ot bodily necessities.
4. And now we are arrived at our last Consideration (specially for the world
before Moses.) The nature of the body, and worldly business, The body being
the secondary subject of religious Worship, joining with the soul in some sort
in all solemn Worship, of which we now discourse. And yet it, and specially
worldly businesses are certain impediments of Worship, denying at least, [That
all Time should be solemnly allotted to it, or spent in it: And so call for,
and challenge a share and proportion of all men's Time, both for Continuance and
Frequency.] But here also, we are not like to find any better help toward the
dividing of our Times between God and the World, the soul and the body, then
before; and that in the three regards forenoted. 1. The businesses of the body,
and of the World, do greatly border upon corrupted Nature; and so to look at
them chiefly to discover a Rule to proportion our Times, is to be sure to be
misled. For the issue will undoubtedly be, that the proportions for the body
and the world, will be taken too largely, and too slender pittances left for
God and the soul: As is more then apparent in many, who, though their
consciences cannot deny the fourth Commandment to concern them and theirs,
even for a whole Day in a week; yet do not, nor cannot afford God and their
souls half the Day, because their minds are so set upon pampering their
bellies, and giving way to their laziness, by lying longer in bed that morning
then all the week besides, and going sooner to bed that night then any other,
besides sleeping, sometimes in the very Day time (not to say, in the very
Church, and at the solemn service of God;) also finding sundry pretended
necessities, of this, or that worldly business for themselves and theirs: And
much more is this evident in those, who have learned the confidence to deny the
Commandment for one whole Day of seven, and only pretend to acknowledge (with
our disputers) a sufficient Time that God must have. But there is so much
correspondency and sutablenesse between their bodily or worldly occasions, and
their carnal corruptions, that they make a shift to shuffle God and their
souls off with a very lean and thin allowance of Time, sufficient indeed
for nothing, but to render them the more inexcusable, that making show of
acknowledging a sufficient Time to be necessary to Religion, they allot such a
miserable insufficient parcel to it. And there is no reason to expect it will
be any better ordered, while men's corrupted nature has no better counselors,
then the body and worldly occasions, (under the name of necessities) to help
to divide and distribute the proportions of His Time for Religion. 2. This the
rather, because the businesses of the body, and of the world toward the bodily
life, are so numerous and various, and uncertain, running round throughout the
whole year (as is said of a husband-mans work, that it is never done; and so
it is with all worldly businesses in one regard or other) and capable also of
engrossing the whole of every day; which is most apparent in servants, and
those that spend their Times chiefly at the pleasures of other men: So that
there is no possibility of concluding before hand, with respect to worldly
businesses, [I may certainly spare for Religion so many Days of a year, or of
a month or week, or so many hours of a week, or Day; because I shall have
nothing to do about worldly affairs, but may be free to attend on God.] We
say, this can never be said in reference to all mankind, (of whom our dispute
now is) and so we should have most wild determinations, if men take their
aims, only, or chiefly from the considerations of bodily and worldly
businesses, in the proportioning a necessary and sufficient chief Time for God
and the soul. 3. For also, at the best, the bodily and worldly occasions are
but secondary and inferior matters, far beneath in worth, not only the
Honor of God but the good of souls. And it cannot be fit, or agreeable to
wisdom, that inferior matters should give a Rule to superior; or be a
measure to them, that is, for the maine and chief part of our Time. It is true
indeed, That Gods gracious indulgence to man's bodily life, and outward
comforts, does allow interruptions in some reserved cases from His solemnest
services, and so from His own most solemn determined Times, as we have often
said. But without such indulgence printed in Nature, or expressed in His Word, no
conscience might, no good conscience would dare so to interrupt His Times and
services. Much less then, without His indulgence, may any conscience conclude,
and determine, [That such bodily and worldly business as falls within the
compass of every man's calling, may be allowed to be the divider, and the
distributer of the chief Time of all men, and so God and the souls of men
have no other allowance for the chief Time to Religion, then what those
worldly considerations shall allot.] This thought about Gods indulgence is a
most weighty and most necessary consideration in this dispute. But it does not
seem to be at all taken into consideration by our disputers in this question.
We shall therefore anon make a distinct argument of it, that we may be sure,
they, and all Readers that will take the pains to view those discourses, shall
not be able to miss it, or pass it slightly over: But we must first make up
this Argument, and another in the mean Time. We say then, that by all this
discourse, of the Nature of God, the Nature of the Soul, the Nature of the
Duties of Worship, the Nature of the Body, and worldly occasions: Take any of
them single and apart, or join any of them or all of them together in the
consultation; and we are as far as can be from any guess how to proportion
the Time, between Religion and other matters; except that we ought undoubtedly
to say; (if we have nothing but these to direct us) [That to Gods honor, and
the souls benefit, the far greater proportion of Time is necessary, and that
it cannot be sufficient to let the world possess the largest share.] And if
this be true; (as we cannot see how it can possibly be denied, and we shall yet
further confirm it in a following argument;) our Adversaries have made a
goodly purchsse, by disputing the abrogation of the fourth Commandment for one
Day in seven: In as much as in stead of their pretended Christian liberty not
to be tied to such a proportion; all other rules call for twice, thrice, as
much; and rather for six Days of seven, and leave but one for worldly
businesses. And if they shall object, Excep
that men's bodily lives could not be preserved with so little a proportion for
worldly businesses and trades. We Answer (set aside the Wisdom of God, Sol.
and His allowance of six Days Work, in the fourth Commandment) it is not
possible for any man living, or any number of men, to assign certainly, how
much Time is to be spent in worldly businesses for the preservation of mankind
in a bodily life. If there were that simplicity of Diet, of Apparel, of
Buildings and all other things, that there was in the first Ages of the world,
and is yet in some Countries (though our pride and curiosity call them
Barbarous for it,) certainly a great deal less Time would serve then now
does, for worldly matters. And though, as the constitution of the world now is,
we are far from blaming such Trades and Manufacturers, or the using of them, as
sins, because specially we believe God to have allowed six Days in a Week,
mainly for worldly business according to the fourth Commandment: Yet we say
still, that if this allowance were not, we see not any warrant, to employ
mankind so much in these businesses (which, as we said, have been spared of
old, and are spared in other places at this Day,) to so notorious prejudice and
undervaluing of God and His honor, and the good of souls. And so still we are
altogether at a less for a rule of wisdom, how to determine, our necessary
and sufficient chief Solemn Time for Religion. And therefore this
determination could not be, nor was ever left to man, to Adam, or the
Partriarkes before Moses (Much loss to the Gentiles and Heathen for themselves
and theirs,) nor yet to the Church of the New Testament; LII. 5. Nor the old
proportion of one Day in seven in the fou th Commandment.
But remained ever in Gods hand, which is the thing to be proved.

But we must not forget our fifth Consideration mentioned in reference to the
Christian Church: That our Adversaries, in their best moodes, when they say,
The Church must not offend in excess or defect; not render the yoke of
Christians too heavy by appointing too much, nor slight, or seem to slight the
service of God, and render it contemptible by appointing too little; They seem
to fancy, that the proportion of one Day of seven. (though by no means
necessary to be perpetuated) may be a convenient direction, that thereabouts it
should be among Christians; and accordingly in the Christian Church, ever one
Day in a week has been observed, which with the addition of Holy days more
rarely appointed, they count a sufficient Time for Religion, equal, if not
superior to the Time that God had from the Jews under the Old Testament.

Now to this, we have diverse things to say, though we will not offer to follow
their extravagancies in and out (step by step) in this dispute, but only show
somewhat the insufficiency and absurdity of this pretense.

LIII. This is proved absurd.
We say then 1. That for other Holy days, besides the weekly Solemn day, they
come not properly into this dispute, about the ordinary chief Time for
Religion. They are 1. Extraordinary Days, of which kind the Jews also had
some of Gods appointing, and some of their own, more then many Christian
Churches have, though not so many as some others. Also 2. These are taken up
without any such rule, as may either urge the conscience to judge them
necessary; or conclude them together to be sufficient. Therefore 3. Also herein
the Christian Churches greatly differ, which as we have argued before, must not
be in the proportions of the chief solemn Time necessary and sufficient for
all Christians. Likewise 4. No Church Reformed, that has retained Holy days,
has spoken fully and clearly about the Continuance of them, and how
necessarily they are to be observed to Religion, and employed wholly in
Religious duties or not. And so they come not properly into this dispute about
the necessary chief Time for Religion.

2. Leaving these out, and considering the weekly solemn proportion, it was
of old determined to the Jews in the fourth Commandment: One whole Day of
seven. Both which (as well as the particular seventh Day, the Saturday Sabbath,
which they pin to the Commandment: But we shall show their error in it
hereafter,) our Adversaries make to be now abrogated by Christ, that is, both
the number, one Day of seven, and the Continuance, one whole Day. Of both
these, we must now argue the case with them; how upon the supposition of Gods
making these void, they can find out a rule for the Christian Church to make a
determination of the chief Time for Religion, for Frequency and Continuance.

And first we must discourse of the Frequency, LIVE. 1. With respect to the
Frequency: For,
the number of one Day in seven, which is from Christ's Time to this Day,
observed and perpetuated among all Christians, by all confession. Some kept (as
is said) more Days, but all kept the Lords day, the first Day of the Week; and
so one Day in seven. Now the perpetuating of this number of one Day in seven,
we say is by Gods determination of the fourth Commandment still in force. They
say, only by the Churches Authority, freely taking it up again, after it was
made void. But against this we argue, That the Church having in their opinion,
authority to choose another number, more Frequent one of 6. or 5. or more rare
(though sometimes they deny this,) as one of 8. or 10. It cannot by any just
reason be justified or excused in determining again one Day of seven, nor can
any rule of wisdom plead for the observing of that number, if cast by, by
God. But rather all things are against it, proclaiming, that that number of all
other was the most unfit to be taken up again by the Christian Church, when as
God had rejected it, upon so great an occasion as the Death of Christ, His Son,
and our Savior. And for this we have diverse particular reasons.

1. What is this but expressly to cross the Wisdom of god? LV. 1. It is cross
to the wisdom of God.
who by His abrogation of this number, from being any more obligatory, has
manifested His dislike of the number, (whether as too often, or too seldom, or
as typical, or for what ever other reason can be imagined or surmised;) The
Church having power and authority to choose another number, there being still to
be a revolution of Days for Religion, What could be more absurd, then to choose
again this rejected disliked number?

2. LVI. 2. The particular seventh Day, may as well be reassumed.
What can be alleged for the reassuming of the number of one Day in seven, and
rejecting the particular seventh Day, if they were both alike Ceremonial and
Typical, and so abrogated by Christ's Death? Or may not the particular Day be
reassumed again, or any of other Jewish Ceremonies, Circumcision, Sacrifices,
difference of meat, as well as this number of one in seven? If this number be
included within the reach of Gal. 4. Romans 14. Col. 2. which lay level the
Judaicall days; How can it be retained, without contradicting those Texts? Or
may not all the rest of the weak and beggarly elements and rudiments of the
world be reassumed and maintained as well as this? If this be one of them? Is
this the liberty Christ's death has purchased, to give His Church leave to
continue those Ordinances (any one of them) for so many hundred years, which
He has disanulled? and to continue them to the same purpose for which they
were of old, (as this to be the number for the chief Time necessary and
sufficient for all Christians) when they had choice enough besides? To bind
Christians to that number again, by virtue of their Authority left them, to
settle the weight of the Law of Nature, and continuing Morality of the fourth
Commandment for a necessary and sufficient Time, when God and Christ had set
them loose and free from it? For our parts, we can think no otherwise, but
that this number is unlawful to be observed for the chief Time, if God have
disanulled it; and that the Christian Church had sinned in all Ages, in
determining or observing it. Which because we cannot believe, we doubt not but
they believed themselves still bound to it by virtue of the fourth
Commandment, and not of any new determination of the Church at any time; and
so we believe our selves, and all Christians still to be.

LVII. 3. It has been the cause of scandals to Christians.
3. The retaining or reassuming of this number has apparently done hurt, by
giving scandal to the Sabbatarians, pleading for the particular Jewish day to
be still to be observed, as well as the number of one Day in seven. Also by
giving scandal to us, (whom our Adversaries also, in courtesy, nickname
Sabbatarians) misleading us into superstition, if we be misled, as they say we
are, for urging the observation of this number, (and of the whole Day withal,
as a Sabbath) by virtue of the fourth Commandment still in force; and so as
necessary to Religion by Gods command: Which neither the Saturday-Sabbatarians,
nor we much less, could ever have dreamed of, or have pretended any thing for,
no more then for the Jewish new moons, or other festivals, if the number had
been altered to one Day of six, or of eight. How easily had this great and
multiplied scandal been prevented? and how necessarily, upon the foregoing
Reasons specially? Whereas grant the fourth Commandment perpetual for one Day
of seven, upon just grounds; and though the Saturday-Sabbatarians stumble then
at the particular Day, yet we doubt not but to remove that sufficiently; and
God has done it in His Word, as we shall show: though still some will stumble
at most plain truths. But this the Church should prevent in her
determinations; and is most justly blamed for not doing, upon the supposition
that It might. For further --

4. If the Church had power to take one Day of six, LVIII. 4. It argues want
of zeal in the Church not to determine so much
or one Day of five, and determine that number in a Revolution for the chief
solemn Time: Where has been the ^eale of the Christian Church all this while,
ever since our Saviors time, that they have never pitched upon such a
determination, as might have been remarkably advantageous in a year, and much
more in a life, for the good of Souls, and so for the honor of God? Which had
also taken away and prevented quite all the forementioned inconveniences.
Could never any General Council, or National Church bethink themselves of
this? But they must cling still to that most inconvenient and scandalous number?

5. If it be said, It was to comply somewhat with the Jews, LIX. 5. It is also
scandalous to the Jews.
that this number of one Day in seven was still retained. We answer, 1. That
somewhat was nothing, since the particular Day was cast off, which the Jews
still hold to, and blame as much the neglect of, as they could or would for
altering the number. 2. Rather this is also a scandal to the Jews, that we
Christians keep the number still, and reject the particular Day; which though
it be not of importance unto those that know they have the will of God for
keeping that, and rejecting this: 1 Cor. 10.32.
yet it falls heavy upon those who unnecessarily scandalize even the Jews, by
retaining this number of one Day in seven, and rejecting that particular Day;
while yet they say, they were both together in the fourth Commandment, and are
both now together abrogated, as are all the words of the fourth Commandment;
and yet in the mean time, It, as well as any of the other ten, is written upon
Church-walls, and read, and taught to children, and ignorants, even the very
words of it. 3. If this number of one Day in seven had been a while retained
for the Jews sake, yet it ought to have ceased long since. The old particular
Day was retained a while, at least in public, among the Jews; and so were the
forbearance of things strangled, and blood, (even ordained so) and Circumcision
it self, and Sacrifices were practiced a while; But after a while, all left;
and by Divines called not only dead, but deadly. So by the same reason, after a
while, a new number ought to have been taken up by the Christian Church, as is
apparent a new particular Day was, even in full opposition to Judaisme; as upon
this ground the Council of Laodicea anathematises those that should keep the
old Jewish Day. So should it have been for the number, if it, as well as the
other, had been merely Judaicall, and both together cashiered by God. Let it be
considered.

6. But we have yet one thing more to urge: [That looking to the number of old
determined to the Jews, LX. 6. The old number can give no direction to the
Church.
if it be now made void, can afford the Christian Church no direction at all
toward the settling of a new number.] For as much as, 1. there is no Argument
sufficient to convince or satisfy a Conscience, whether that number was
rejected by God, as too often a revolution, or too seldom. Themselves, in
their Disputes, discourse ambiguously of it, and with their argumentations
contradict themselves, (as it is usual for Errors to do.) One while they
say, [The number may be oftener, but it may not be seldomer.] Another while
they urge, [That it is a part of our Christian liberty, not to be tied to that
number of seven.] But these destroy one another: For if we ought to have an
oftener number, (as they also plead sometimes, because we are more beholden to
God, then the Jews were, and freed from many other burdensome Ceremonies)
where then is our Christian liberty? Are we not, in the particular, in more
straights then the Jews? And by the Churches tying us again (as they say it
has) to the number of one in seven. Is not our Christian liberty infringed,
it being liberty not to be tied to that number? Unless they will say, It is
liberty not to be tied by Gods express commandment of that number, and yet
liberty still to be tied by the Churches command, who has authority from God
to determine the Morality of the fourth Commandment, and lay the strength
even of the Law of Nature upon us for the number, which is to make it as
necessary as ever. Contrarily, if it be Christian liberty, not to be tied to
this number, then we ought not to be tied to a more frequent number, nor yet to
the same number again, as we are. Some of these things we had before in a
former Argument: But the nature of the thing in question did in a sort
necessitate a repetition. Else we do not delight to burden the Readers with
the same Notions again. 2. But suppose it were clearly certain, on which hand
the scale should now weigh, to a number more frequent, upon the reason of our
greater obligation to God, and greater means of grace to improve the Times to
better purpose then they, (which our disputers also discourse by fits) or to a
number less frequent, upon the reason of Christian Liberty: Yet now is there
no rule to satisfy a doubting conscience, or convince a disputer, (though no
wrangler) how near to the number of one in seven, the number should be kept and
settled. For if it be one of three, or four: Or even three, or four, or five
of seven; still here is the more for God and the soul. And if it be but one of
ten, of twenty, of thirty, or a hundred, here is the more liberty; (such as it
is, for we are not willing to call it Christian.) In a word, the seldomest
number will hardly be proved necessary to those that offer to dispute the
contrary: Or if it may, yet will it be as far from appearing sufficient to a
zealous or doubtful mind: nor indeed any number, how frequent so ever, that
can be determined, can by any argument be demonstrated to be sufficient to such
a conscience. Or if it be, then again, on the other side, it will be more
impossible to prove it necessary to an unwilling or worldly mind. Either way,
both ways, we are all altogether upon uncertainties; and so this old number of
one Day in seven, determined to the Jews, can stand us in no stead at all,
toward the determination of the number for the chief Time now.

2. But we shall also be as much at a loss, if not more, LXI. 2. With respect
to the Continuance, for a whole day: For,
about the Continuance, In which we disagree most, and is (as we have often
intimated) the mainest thing in dispute which we plead for, and they most
oppose. But if they come not home to us, and to the fourth Commandment for a
whole Day, they will be farther to seek for a Rule to direct them and us in
this determination then in the former. To which purpose;

1. We observe, 1. They do not express how much time is necessary and
sufficient.
that our disputers in this point of the Continuance (that is most of them) do
not so much as offer to express, how near we Christians must necessarily, and
may sufficiently, come to a whole Days Continuance, which was determined to
the Jews, and by them observed, when they made any conscience of the
Commandment. Only they sometimes vouchsafe to grant, [That they do not sin
who observe the whole Day for Religion, rather that they do well and
commendable] And now and then they even say, [They do best who so observe it.]
But they will not yield that it must necessarily be so observed, (for this were
to yield all) [That they say, is superstition to think, and judaizing, and
tyranny to urge others unto.]

2. Nor can, if it be not for a whole day.
2. Therefore we make bold to u^ge them, to tell us at last, what Continuance of
Time, on the Lords day is certainly necessary, and certainly sufficient: To
convince the unwilling, to whom a very little while together is irksome and
tedious; and to satisfy the godly, who may be apt to think, less then the
whole Day too little? And that for all the pretense of Christian liberty, the
respect to Gods Honor, and their own souls good, (which undoubtedly concern
Christians as much, at least as the Jews) The Continuance of a whole Day
should have been kept, as well as the number of one Day in Seven. Let them
venture upon any proportion of Continuance that they will, or can, and what can
the example of a whole Day in the fourth Commandment direct them to, If they
refuse a whole Day? Will they leave out, an hour at night, and as much in the
morning? Or only at night? Or two hours? Or half an hour? How will they
argue so much as they determine to be necessary, and not the rest which they
leave out? Or how will they prove so much sufficient; and yet not to be more
then necessary? Both ways they will be tossed from post to pillar, or between
two rocks, either of which will suffice to split this assertion, whenever
they lanch it forth.

3. Nor can they satisfy all with any determination.
3. Nor will they be able to help themselves, if we should grant them what we
never must, because we have proved the contrary as of necessity to Religion,
[That the Continuance of this chief Time is only to be extended to the public
Worship.] And that if it be wisely determined for them, It is well enough
determined for the chief Time of Religion. For even upon this supposition,
take but the two hours (that the author of Sunday no Sabbath vouchsafes to
name as the just allowance) or any other proportion more or less; And they
shall never be able to avoid dashing either against the Scylla, of the
unwilling, [That so much is not necessary] or against the charity of the
zealous, [That so much is not sufficient.] And whatsoever they would put forth
to save themselves from the one, will thrust them on the other. What necessity
(will the one say) of so much Prayers, or Reading, or Singing, or so long
Sermon? Specially when men's minds are upon the World, businesses or sports,
which would detain them or call them off from the public, How shall such be
convinced, that such a proportion is necessary? Here it must be remembered, that
there is no help to be had, from any pretense of the Churches authority to
command the proportion, for that we have already abundantly confuted. But we
are now, upon the point of wisdom, by what Rule to make the necessary
proportion, of which we say, there is none, nor can there be, to such as refuse
a whole Day. Or if there should be somewhat imagined, yet then come the other,
and they plead. [What sufficiency in so sudden or short a dispatch of the
whole?] Specially since there is no Time determined wherein our souls can have
liberty, (being servants, or men of business) after the public? Is not God
worthy of more Time then thus? Are our souls of so little regard, that such a
pittance once in a week should suffice them? Here again the Churches authority
cannot be pretended: But we are upon a Rule of wisdom, which is no where to be
found, no not for the public; if there be no more Time to be determined, but
the public Time only. We foresee an objection concerning this, which we shall
meet with anon in a place no less fit.

4. But this difficulty about the Continuance, 4. Unless there be Time
sufficient, for family, and solitary worship.
will be much more increased, when we tell our disputers again, [That the
Continuance of our chief solemn Times, is not sufficient, if it extend not
beyond the public, even to family Worship where it may be had; and infallibly
to solitary Worship, both before and after the public, for preparation for it,
and improvement of it; and further gain in spiritual matters besides] as we
have formerly proved at large. And then what can satisfy, that such a
proportion (as is less then the whole of that Day) is sufficient for the
chief Time for Religoin? They cannot deny, but it is as possible for us to
observe a whole Day as it was for the Jews; themselves confess we have more
helps then they, clearer Scriptures, a greater measure of Grace powered on
Christians. They acknowledge also, it is not a sin to observe a whole Day,
but lawful, commendable, best. How then can less then the whole be sufficient
to be determined for the Continuance? What rule or reason can abate any of it?
and if any, how much? And how is it demonstrated then, that so much is
necessary and no more, and so much sufficient and no less? Is it not strange
that the Church should have (if the Church have done it, as they say) retained
the number of one in seven, which there is nothing for in nature and reason:
but all against it, being made void by Christ: And refuse the Continuance of a
whole day, for which there is so much even in nature, and nothing rational
against it; nor for any other proportion of Continuance imaginable so much as
for it? We doubt not then to say, that all is impossible to be satisfied by any
thing they can allege; and that while they deny Gods determination perpetual
for one whole Days Continuance in the Frequency of seven, expressed in the
fourth Commandment, [They bring themselves (and all that adhere to their
opinion) into an inextricable labyrinth of uncertainty and confusion.]

Hitherto we have oppugned the Churches determination of the necessary
sufficient chief solemn Time for Religion, and withal, all other men's, both
in point of authority; and in point of wisdom; and by both have asserted it to
God alone. But for its belonging only to God, as also the particular Day for
it, we have yet some other arguments behind; which we must also produce for the
further propugnation of our position, and so a complete discharge of all men
from pretending to it any more. Our next argument proceeds in this manner.
LXII. The second general: It belongs to God alone, to determine the chief
time. Aug. 1. This is the scope of one Commandment of the decalogue.


[If it be the general meaning, or part of the general meaning of a
Commandment, of the decalogue, that these Times, and those only should be
observed as necessary to Religion which are appointed by God Himself: Then the
Determination of the chief Time necessary to Religion for all men, belongs to
God alone and His peculiar appointment. But it is the general meaning or part
of the general meaning of a Commandment of the decalogue: That these Times
and these only should be observed as necessary to Religion, which are appointed
by God Himself: Ergo, The Determination of the chief Time necessary to
Religion for all men, belongs to God alone, and His peculiar appointment.] The
Consequence of this argument cannot reasonably be denied. The general meaning
and scope of every Commandment of the decalogue, is without controversy
perpetual and moral. Our Adversaries every where speak to that purpose, when
they fly from the words of the fourth Commandment to a general meaning and
moral equity, and the like; Which sometimes they make to be sufficient Time
(to be determined by the Church) and usually, Public Worship. That neither of
these is it, we shall prove hereafter. But we take in the mean Time their
grant of a general meaning moral and perpetual, Though this be no great
liberallity of theirs: For it is no more then they (and all Divines besides)
usually ascribe to the Festival Sabbathes which are in their particularities
undeniably ceremonial. And usually also even all the rest of the ceremonialls
(and so of the judicialls too) are acknowledged to have some general morality
in them, which is perpetual. Now this general meaning and moral scope, we are
speaking of, restraining all Times necessary to Religion, to Gods own
appointment, it does by a sure inference, from the general to the particular,
restrain the chief Time necessary to Religion for all men, to Gods
appointment, and peculiar determination, infallibly.

The Antecedent, that such is the general meaning, or part of the general
meaning of a Commandment of the decalogue, we thus make good. Namely by a
twofold instance of sin charged upon the observation of Times appointed by
men as necessary to Religion. 1. The Scripture charges upon Jeroboam sin for
determining to Israel, and so observing a Feast like the Feast that was in
Judah. That in Judah was the Feast of Tabernacles appointed on the fifteenth
day of the seventh: Ieroboams was on the fifteenth day of the eighth month;
The month (says the text, De cord suo mentitus est. Pet. Mart. in Locun page
95.
noting thereby his sin) which he had devised of his own heart; and ordained
a feast unto the children of Israel (1 Kings 12.32, 33.) so making it necessary
to Religion among them, as the Feast in Judah; appointed by God, unquestionably
was, So then his fact is plainly condemned to be sin. Now every sin is a
transgression of the law, of some commandment or other of God: either of a
particular command, concerning the particular fact, or some general command,
within the general meaning, of some or other of the Commandments of the
decalogue. But against this particular fact or day of Ieroboams, there was no
particular command forbidding it; It must then be a transgression of the
general meaning of some Commandemnet of the decalogue, or part of the general
meaning of some Commandment restraining all Times necessary to Religion to
Gods own peculiar appointment, which is the thing to be proved. 2. Another
instance may be, That our Divines usually charge sin upon the Papists for their
Holy Days, not only as some of them are Idolatrous, being intended to the
honor of Saints and Angels, and so to the worship of Creatures; or as their
number is excessively burdensome to the common sort; But as superstitious, as
they make all of them matters of necessity to Religion, upon the Churches
command; and so their Canonical hours to some men: which, we say, only the
command of God can do. Now if these Days and Hours thus determined and
observed as necessary to Religion, be sin in them; It must also be against some
commandment of God: Particular command there is none, forbidding those Days
and Hours to be observed as necessary to Religion. It must then be against a
general commandment, against the general meaning, or part of the general
meaning of some Commandment of the Decalogue. Importing those Days and Times
to be only necessary to Religion, which God himself appoints. Which is our
Antecedent to be proved. LXIII. An Exception answered.


If now our Disputers, or any for them, say, That the Papists sin is not
against any Commandment of the Decalogue, but against the New Testament; which
making all Days and Times equal now, allows none to be appointed or observed
as necessary

1. This Exception reaches only the second instance of the Papists sin in
appointing and observing their superstitious Holy Days, and Canonical hours,
as necessary to Religion: and touches not the former sin of Jeroboams devised
Festival; which must needs be against some Commandment of the Decalogue, not
only for his rejecting the Feast Day appointed by God, (which is not mentioned
in the Text, though it may be gathered from thence) but for his positive
ordaining a day by his own authority, as necessary to Religion: And this were
sufficient to prove our Antecedent

2. We suppose (and so do some of our Adversaries, if not all of them,
specially the foreign Divines) that all the practical precepts of the New
Testament are reducible to the generall-meaning of some or other of the
Commandments of the Decalogue; and that the Decalogue is the sum and
substance of all Gods Moral and Perpetual Law. And if any would deny it, we
think it may be evinced by the Decalogues being called originally and
emphatically, and every where, The Covenant, and the Testimony: and from thence
the Tables in which it was written, The Tables of the Covenant, and the Tables
of the Testimony: and the sacred Ark wherein it was kept, The Ark of the
Covenant, and the Ark of the Testimony. Which titles, what can they note, but
that therein was contained the whole sum and substance of Gods Covenant with
His people, and the whole Testimony of His will toward them, in reference to
what He would have them do, or not do, in all Ages to come. And so generally
all Divines that expound by way of Comment or Sermons, the Decalogue, do
include within the compass of the Commandments of it (of one or other) all
Gods Moral and Perpetual Law, even the Moralities of the Judicial's and
Ceremonials, and all; and so bring all sins to be within the compass of the
prohibitions contained in one or other of the Commandments. Whence it follows
that the making of Times necessary to Religion, which God has not appointed,
being sin, both of old, as appears in Jeroboam, and now in the Papists; It
must be against a Commandment of the Decalogue, as was said before. And so
still our Antecedent stands firm, and our whole Argument with it.

3. Whatever might be said of other sins (in the Papists, or any) Moral and
Perpetual Law within the Decalogue; For being, in Jeroboam, against a
Commandment of the Decalogue, and the sin being the same in the Papists, the
general meaning is declared to be Perpetual and Moral in either Age of the
Church, in the Old Testament, and in the New; Namely, [That those Times, and
those only, are to be observed as necessary to Religion, which God himself
appoints.] The Papists sin therefore is properly against a Commandment of the
Decalogue, whatever the New Testament say against it besides. And this is as
much as our Antecedent says, or our Argument needs. It is to no purpose then
to allege, that the Papists transgress against the New Testament, unless
there had been no such sin at all under the Old Testament.

4. Besides all this, we must tell them that their Assertion, [That is a false
and fallacious assertion, if understood generally, as we shall expressly and
fully show in the next Chapter, where we shall take that Position to task, and
answer what they bring to prove it: Mean time, we say in a word, 1. that we
having already in the former chap. proved a necessity of the determination of a
chief Time necessary to Religion for all men; they apparently beg the
question, if they only answer, that there is now no Times necessary to
Religion: And so in stead of answering our Argument, which proceeds on that
supposition, they wholly pervert the state of the question now between us. 2.
That this Assertion of theirs is expressly contradictory (as we conceive) to
their own Tenets, so often set down in their Books, [That some sufficient
Times, a Day, or Days, to be observed and even determined for Religion, is
Morall-Naturall:] that is, necessary to Religion for all men by the Law of
Nature. How they will reconcile these two, let them consider, till we have
leisure to speak more of it in the promised place.

LXIV. A Question answered.
If any now ask, What Commandment we mean all this while, within whose general
meaning this is which we have spoken of? We answer, 1. If we could not assign
directly and certainly the particular Commandment; yet would the thing, upon
the foregoing grounds, be no less certain; There being diverse other matters
which are undoubtedly within the Decalogue, about which Divines differ, in what
Commandment they are; as appears by comparing the Expositions of the
Commandments in almost any two Authors. 2. Yet we say, that for our parts, we
suppose, [That this is properly belonging to the fourth Commandment, and is
indeed the whole and entire general meaning thereof.] The words proclaim,
That the object of the Commandment is Time necessary for Religion, and Gods
honor. And therefore we are persuaded, that the general meaning and scope of
it is as we have expressed, [That those Times, and those only, should be observed
as necessary to Religion, which God himself appoints.] And so, though we
prove (as we doubt not but we shall in the next Part) [That the words of the
4th. Commandment are only for one whole Day in seven, and not for the
particular Day of the seven, last or first*] Yet the particular Day (both of
old the seventh in order from the creation, and now the first of the seven)
come within the compass of the fourth Commandment, within this general
meaning, because they were appointed by God, though elsewhere, and not in the
formal words of the Commandment. And so also the other Jewish Festivals
appointed by God, shall properly belong to the same fourth Commandment,
falling under the general meaning mentioned. And indeed they are usually by
Divines reduced thither; Who yet can no ways defend their assigning them to
that (predicament or) place, if this be not assigned to be the general meaning
of the fourth Commandment.

3. Yet if any will not admit this, then we say, we know not how they will be
able to deny, but that this is, [Though not the whole, yet a part of the
general meaning of the second Commandment:] Which under the prohibition of
Worshipping God by an Image, and promise of a blessing to them that keep His
Commandments, (namely that Worship Him with that Worship, that He has
commanded) carries this general meaning certainly, [That God should be
Worshipped with those things, and actions, and those only, which Himself has
appointed.] And so, as under this, all the Ceremonial Worship of Old,
Sacrifices, and other Rites and Laws belonging to Gods Worship; and our two
Sacraments now are comprised; (and so the prohibition of all superstition and
will worship invented by men) by the usual vote of Divines, and cannot indeed
come properly under any other. So, the observation of any Times as necessary to
Religion, and Gods Worship, and of those Times and those only, as so necessary
which God Himself appoints, must needs fall under the same General meaning of
the second Commandment, if it belong not peculiarly to the fourth, as was said
before. And perhaps how ever, if an exact inquiry be made into the Latitudes of
the Commandments of the first Table, they will all be found in an
subordination, the latter more particular then the former, and partly at least
included in it. Undoubtedly the first, concludes with in it the three latter,
even all the second Table also; and we think the second contains some part of
the third, and fourth also; and again that the third, does contain part of
the fourth; namely the manner of the observation of the holy Time, that it be
not in vain, etc. But we leave this Notion to the juditious Readers
consideration, and maintain our Argument sufficiently without it, whether the
general Law about Time we are now scanning, be in the fourth, or part of the
second, or even belong to the first, (as so much as is Moral Natural
difinitely, concerning Time for Religion, we have formerly asserted to be
within the first Commandment) still as long as it is within the Decalogue our
cause is safe. And if it be referred to the second Commandment, then we shall
have gained this particular advantage certainly, and clearly (though we
suppose we shall anon prove, it will follow from any of the rest of the
Commandments of the first Table, within which it unquestionably comes;) That
then the necessary Times of Religion, and Gods Worship are not merely
circumstances or adjuncts of Worship; but proporly parts of Worship, and are to
be observed as parts of Worship;] as all other specialties of the second
Commandment are. But we must now proceed to another Argument in our present
business. Thus we frame it --

LXV. Arg 2. All Time is Gods to dispose of.
[If all Time is Gods, and none men's own for worldly business but by Gods
indulgence, Then the determination of the necessary sufficient chief solemn
Time for Religion, cannot belong to men but it is Gods own peculiar: But all
Time is Gods, and none men's own for worldly business; but by Gods indulgence.
Ergo, The determination of the necessary sufficient chief solemn Time for
Religion, cannot belong to men but is Gods peculiar.] The Antecedent cannot
reasonably be denied by any conscience that acknowledges God, the Creator of
all men, and all Time, and so the undoubted, and absolute Sovereign and Lord
of all; and that considers that, even the most necessary worldly Times, as for
sleeping, eating, and the like, are no otherwise, Ours but by His indulgence,
granted indeed in Nature ordinarily, and so manifested sufficiently by the
Light of Nature. Yet can it not be denied, but even these Times are still
subject to His pleasure which may make exceptions against them, as indeed He
sundry times does: enjoining men (as we formerly noted) by His providence (and
by general Rules of His Word) to watch whole Nights and Days; and to Fast
likewise, in Religious references to Him, and their own, and others souls, to
perform solemn and extraordinary Duties of piety and charity; and sometimes
even with respect to the bodily lives and comforts of themselves or others.
Moreover, it cannot again be denied, but if it pleased Him, He might command
men altother to forbear their meat, and wait upon Him for a miraculous
preservation, (like that of Moses and Elias, and our blessed Savior, for whole
forty Days, and forty Nights together, and as it shall be with us all
eternally in Heaven;) and even appoint men to die, for very want of meat or
sleep; rather then intermit, or interrupt their solemn attendances upon Him.
So that it is every way clear [That no Time at all is ours for any worldly
business, but by Gods indulgence,] which is our Antecedent of the present
argument.

Now for the Consequence, that thence it follows, LXVI. Confirmed by 4 reasons.
[That the determination of the necessary sufficient chief solemn Time for
Religion, is Gods own peculiar, and belongs not to men.] This, we suppose,
will be manifest, by considering, 1. That the determination of this Time for
Religion, does in the Nature of it, carry along an allotment of the residue of
men's Time mianly for worldly businesses. (We say, mainly, because still,
according to what has been before discoursed, God in the very Law of Nature,
calls for some Times every Day, even out of the Work-dayes; besides all
extraordinary Times for Religion; but the determination of the chief Time for
Religion being set, the residue is mainly for worldly businesses, even allotted
to them by that very determination of such Time, as sufficient ordinarily for
the chief Time to Religion.) 2. Therefore to ascribe to men the determination
of this chief sufficient Time to Religion, is to ascribe to them the allotment
of their own Time for worldly businesses: As contrarily to ascribe to God the
allotment of men's Times for their worldly businesses, is to ascribe to Him, the
determination of this sufficient chief Time for Religion. 3. Now that it is
not in men, but in God (not only originally, which the Adversaries cannot deny,
though perhaps they think not enough of it, nor speak enough of it; but also
Practically) to allot to men the main Time for their worldly businesses,
(whether they be Inferiors, or Superiors, Pagans or Christians, worldly or
godly) may be made good by four Demonstrations, as we conceive them to be,
drawn from the Light both of Nature and Scripture. Although we cannot here
forbear to say, (and refer to the Readers to judge what cause we have for
it) [That our disputers in this whole controversy about religious Time, seem
absolutely to be of the mind; that however all Time be originally Gods, and He
may still challenge what He pleases by an express Law; Yet in practice, He
has rather given over Time into men's hands; and made all Time ours, rather
then His owne] (except only what He challenged from the Jews by express Law)
even from the beginning of the world, and so since the Gospel, referring to men
(the superiors at least among them) the allotment of their own Times for
their worldly businesses; and consequently they to allot to Him back again,
(and to their souls) some pittances to be spent in religious Duties, according
to their affections and discretions; there being only General remembrances,
and Rules in Scriptures of not neglecting God, and their Souls, but none
obligatory, descending to particular proportions, dividing between worldly
businesses and Religion. Now this kind, of making all Time ours chiefly and
principally for worldly businesses; We take to be their capital and
fundamental Error, in the whole dispute about the Sabbath and Lord's Day. And
cannot sufficiently wonder how it should settle in the minds of considerate
Divines. But the greatness of the Error of this conceit, we hope to represent
to all Readers; and even to our disputers own consciences by these four
Arguments following.

LXVII. 1. Otherwise no Time should be Gods, but by man's indulgence.
1. Is not this to reduce all Time from being Gods originally, and none ours for
worldly business but by His indulgence; to no Time being Gods practically, but
by men's indulgence, as we may say? And again all inferiors Times for their
Souls, to be neither at Gods appointment, nor their own dispose, but at their
superiors; (how profane and godless so ever) and by their indulgence? Which
although we grant, that if God had any where said in His Word, expressly, or by
undeniable consequence, [I will leave all Times to you, and so I did before
Moses his Time to all mankind.] There had been no reasoning against it, nor
finding fault with it; Yet without any such syllable or shadow (either in the
New or Old Testament) of leave, and General indulgence from God, to conceit
and conclude thus, [Our Times to be generally ours,] We cannot but judge a high
presumption; not paralelled by any child or servant among men toward their
Masters, or Parents; who further then they can plead their superiors
allowance of such Times for themselves, dare not challenge, any Days or Hours
as theirs; and much less the principal of their Time to be their own; and
their attendances on their superiors, to be but when, and how long, and how
often they themselves, (who are inferiors) do or shall appoint, or tender
voluntarily. Even retainers, though no ordinary servants, have some set Times,
by their superiors appointment, to present themselves, and all is not merely
at their discretion. And we are sure, we are, or should be, more then retainers
to God.

2. LXVIII. 2. Else man should be his own end, even in worldly respects.
To assert Time to be generally Ours (without express general indulgence from
God) for worldly businesses, is it not to savor too strongly, of [Making man,
even in worldly respects, and as employed in worldly businesses the principal
end of man] that is, man himself to be the end of his own being, even in an
earthly consideration, and not God? And again, superiors among men, to be the
principal end of their inferiors being, and not God? (much less the souls of
the one, or the other, which are poor contemptible things, and very seldom
mentioned by our disputers in all their discourses about necessary and
sufficient Times?) and so Religion, Gods Honor, and men's Souls, as mean and
secondary things, of an inferior Nature, to have no other Times, then what men
can spare (or determine to spare) from their worldly businesses and pleasures,
etc: And so notwithstanding, that God, took an other order with His Jewish
Church, exacting from them for Himself (and their souls together) a weekly
Sabbath, besides sundry other Times: Yet to imply, there was no need of His
doing any such thing either before or since, Notwithstanding man's fall, and all
men's corruption (even under the Gospel) and their misdevotion, to Religion, and
their own, and others souls good; but all Times to be referred to men wholly,
to give back what they should think fit unto Religion, like a poor secondary
inferior, indifferent matter, as we said before? Which how repugnant it is to
the high honor of Almighty God, our Sovereign Lord, and Creator, and to the
welfare and dignity of men's eternal Souls, We dare appeal to the very Light
of Nature, even before a Pagan Judge, deliberately pronouncing, and according
to those undeniable principles of Gods Sovereignty, and the Souls immortality.
LXIX. 3. Scripture seems to leave very little to men's worldly businesses.


3. But we believe, we shall put it past a reply, specially, by taking into
consideration, some general sentences of Scripture, which call for so much
Time for Religion, and so often, and with such Arguments; as seem to leave
then so little for worldly businesses; as the wisest among men cannot tell
which way to satisfy those sentences, and his worldly occasions both; unless
he have the help, of a particular indulgence from God, for so much, and so
often Time ordinarily for His worldly businesses; which expressly, as we said,
involves Gods particular determination of the chief Time for Religion,
necessary and sufficient for the chief Time, and so a division of every Time
(or the maine part of it) distinctly between Himself, and worldly matters.
Consider, we say, the great Commandment [To Love God with all our hearts, with
all our souls, with all our minds, with all our strengths. (And how love
commands the Time every one has to employ, specially such a high love as
this.) On the other side, the charge, of not loving the World, nor the things
that are in the World; and that upon this ground, If any man love the World,
the love of the Father is not in him. (Such an one has not a jot of love to
God; so far is he from loving him with all his heart, and strength, as
before) again the precept of Christ is, not to labor for the meat that
perishes, but for the meat that endures to eternal Life, (does not this call
for our Time for the Soul, much beyond the Body, and worldly matters?) Also
lay not up for your selves treasures on earth, but in heaven: And set not your
affections, on things on the earth, says the Apostle; They are enemies to the
Cross of Christ, and their end is destruction, who mind earthly things; To be
carnally minded is death: And he that sowes to the flesh, shall of the flesh
reap corruption; our Savior seems to go yet further, when He allows not to
take thought so much as for the morrow, even what we shall eat, or drink, or
wherewith we shall be clothed, but to seek first the Kingdom of God, and
speaks of praying always, and so does His Apostle often, even of praying
without ceasing, and continuing in prayer, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance:] And many more such like places. All which though we abundantly
acknowledge, that they must not be interpreted strictly according to the
express letter and phrase of them. For then they would wholly shut out all
worldly businesses, and turn us altogether into an angelical manner of
devotion, and to wait for miraculous sustentations (as we touched before,)
which crosses diverse other sentences of Scripture, ordering about worldly
businesses; and particularly charging Servants to be diligent in their earthly
Masters work; Yet for all that, they do undeniably prefer in dignity, and
commend to all men's care, the honor of God, and the respect to men's souls, to
be attended upon in Religious duties, above the respect that men are allowed to
have to the world, or worldly matters, or even their bodily lives. And this
would necessitate undeniably the greatest part of every man by far, if there
were no particular indulgence of such proportions, to be (ordinarily and for
the maine of them) allotted by God Himself, to our worldly occasions.

For it would be nothing to say, in general, LXX. An Exception answered.
God has allowed me Time for worldly businesses; and appointed me (by His
providence) to such a worldly employment of a lawful kind, and profitable for
men; and it is not possible for the generality of mankind to subsist without
miracle, (which God now allows not to expect, and it were to tempt him, to
expect any, in a neglect of a worldly calling,) unless the greatest part of
men's Time be employed about worldly businesses, and so it is necessary, that
the greatest part of Time be so allotted and determined. For to all this, Sol.
from the sentences forecited, an invincible reply might be made. God has
commanded, His own service and the good of men's souls to be looked after, as
matters of infinitely more absolutely necessity, to look after them: We say,
first, and far above the other, in a manner wholly rejecting and forbidding the
other in comparison of these; and the necessities of the soul (as was in part
urged before) cannot, according to reason, be satisfied with less then the
greatest part of our Time: (or even with less then all) And in the comparison,
between the soul and the body, earth and heaven, this world, and that to come
for eternity; These alleged Texts do incomparably prefer the soul, heaven,
eternity, the world to come, as the things to be loved, cared for, pursued,
waited upon; and so the greatest part of Time (to be sure) must be alloted to
Religion for these ends, unless we say, a particular indulgence of God
Himself, and so a particular ditermination of a sufficient chief Time for
Religion be to be found and acknowledged. Here then we appeal again to the
consciences of all that will consider God, and men's souls in one balance, and
men's worldly businesses in another: How has the Christian Church dared to take
six Days ordinarily, to themselves, and leave God but one of seven? how has
it dared to take six days ordinarily for the world, and leave but one of seven
for the souls of men? We add, how dare our disputers quarrel with that one
Day of seven? and scarcely yield to the number, but only from custom? but
specially quarrel with our challenge of the whole Day for God and men's souls,
as though it were too much; and a heavy yoke, which Christ must dye to free us
from? We ask them, how can they, or any conscience say, so much, so often is
enough? Sufficient for the chief Time, but by Gods indulgence in the fourth
Commandment of six Days (ordinarily and for the maine) for worldly
businesses? And what could Adam or any of the Patriarchs even according to the
law and light of nature, without such indulgence particularly expressed to them,
conclude, lawful for them to employ in worldly businesses, and count the
residue sufficient for God and their souls? For those sentences named, though
recorded in the New Testament; yet cannot be denied to be dictates of the very
law of nature, in Adams heart, and all others, that acknowledge a God to be
worshipped, and souls to be immortal. Who then might dare of old, (or may now
be so hardy) to take six Days of seven for worldly occasions, or five, or
four, or three, or two, or one of seven without out Gods express leave? and
where is there any such leave but in the fourth Commandment, and the parallel
places to it, Genesis 2. and elsewhere? Let our Disputers now turn themselves
which way they will or can, we cannot for our parts imagine, how they can wind
themselves out of the cords of this argument: But that instead of one Day in
seven for Religion, and six of seven for the world, we must rather yield God
and our souls six of seven, (or more, even all) then rest in such a scanty
proportion, and give the world so much; but by virtue of the Indulgence in the
fourth Commandment, which without all question cannot be longer lived then the
Commandment it self; let them consider it, and tell us their minds when they
are resolved of an answer: Mean while, LXXI. 4. There is a blessing of God
required, to make any proportion of Time sufficient.
we entreat them to take a fourth consideration along with them, or a further
confirmation (as we may call it) of this last, though it has somewhat
distinct, as will appear. For --

4. Besides the Commands requiring the mainest part of our Time for Religion,
and God, as we have seen; There is to be considered [a Blessing, necessary to
make any proportion (and distribution) of Time, less then all, to be
sufficient for men's souls.] And this we are put in mind of by the very first
mention of Gods determining a particular Time, Genesis 2. under the term of
Blessing: which also the Commandment emphatically repeates, and Esaias
particularly comments upon, as we shall see. We say, whatsoever Time is taken
out of the whole, and allotted by Indulgence to worldly business, does not
(nor cannot) leave the residue, how great soever the proportion be, sufficient
for men's souls, but by virtue of special blessing upon that proportion of
Time which is determined for souls, be it more or less. And this Blessing
coming only from God, the determined proportion must be also from Him for
Religion, which of it self gives assurance of an answerable blessing according
to the intendment of that Time, even though there should be no distinct mention
of a Blessing; which yet (as we said) God has annexed to His determination of
a Weekly Sabbath for the chief Time for Religion, even from the beginning. But
without such express and particular determination from God, (or an express
promise of Blessing on the proportion which men, or the Church shall determine,
whatever it be; which is no where to be found in Scripture:) We have no manner
of ground to conceit a Blessing on any proportion of Time that can be
determined by men for Religion, to make that sufficient for men's souls. A
Blessing, we say, beyond the proportion of that which might be expected from so
long and so often attendance on Religion; a multiplying Blessing, in the nature
of Christ's blessing the five loaves, and two fishes, to feed more (by many)
then the natural proportion could possibly give hopes of. So that the
attendance on God one Day in seven (which is the Time in question) shall be
blessed beyond an ordinary Days service, (if it were not specially appointed
by God) and have a stronger influence on all the other six Days of the Week
following, then could be expected from so much Time spent in Religion, simply
considered, as so much Time. And without such a Blessing, (upon the consecrated
solemn Time) the soul would still be lean, hungry, and even starve for want
of a sufficient proportion of Time, by reason of its manifold continual
necessities, faintings, decays, and temptations. So that whatever our
Adversaries dispute against the Commandment of God, we conceive they dispute
against their own participation of a Blessing upon whatsoever Time is
determined and observed by men, themselves or others; And that a certainer
Blessing may be rested on, in the observation of one Day in seven, as from Gods
determination, then in two Days in seven, three Days, nay six Days in
seven, at man's appointment. For here still would be uncertainty, whether this
proportion were sufficient: But Gods command (which in all His Ordinances has
eternally a Blessing annexed to the right observers) is sure and certain to
convey a Blessing, and make a sufficiency for the chief Time; in which
Consciences may abundantly rest and satisfy themselves. And this we are fully
persuaded, God meant to signify to us, when, Genesis 2. at the first mention of
His consecrating a solemn Time, He says, [The Lord blessed the seventh Day,
and sanctified it.] A Day, (or any other such creature) is capable of no other
Blessing, then to be made a means of Blessing to the right users of it
according to Gods command. And observe, that because God saw, that the
encouragement of a Blessing was greatly necessary in this matter, He says not,
[the Lord sanctified the seventh Day, and blessed it; But, the Lord blessed and
sanctified:] First blessed, and then sanctified. Though we cannot tell how to
conceive the Blessing, without the Sanctification going before, or at least
concurrent: yet God to show more abundantly his goodness and graciousnesse
both in challenging this proportion to himself of one Day in seven, and
allowing by His indulgence six Days of seven for worldly occasions, He puts
the Blessing foremost; and so He does also remarkably in the fourth
Commandment: where having expressly allowed the indulgence of six Days for
worldly work; after He had challenged a seventh Day for a Sabbath for Himself,
He repeats His own example of six Days work, and then His blessing a Sabbath
(a seventh Day) and sanctifying it. Why so? but to assure us, that a happy
Blessing should attend the conscionable observation of this Sabbath of one Day
in seven, that though it were so little a proportion, yet it should be
ordinarily sufficient for the chief Time; And all the six Days between the
revolutions of this Sabbath one Day in seven, should taste of the good gotten
on that Day; The strength of it lasting in men's souls from Sabbath to Sabbath,
(with a little of each Day besides, as was said formerly:) and they should by
it principally grow in grace, and spiritual comfort in God toward eternal
life; notwithstanding all their ordinary and great interruptions of worldly
businesses on the Working Days.

And upon this, we have, as it seems to us, LXXII. The Text of Isa. 56.2.
expounded.
the Evangelical Prophet Isa. a clear and pertinent commentator and interpreter
(as we touched before) and that in two Chapters of his Prophecy, toward the
latter end; where he is much, if not altogether, upon the Times of the Gospel.
Let us see what he says to our purpose, c. 56. and 58. In the former place,
calling all sorts to Gods Covenant, and particularly to the observation of the
Sabbath, he begins with [ Blessed is the man that does this, and the son of man
that lays hold on it, that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, v. 2.] Then
encouraging the Eunuchs, though persons under a kind of legal curse in those
days, to this observation; he promises them from God, [an everlasting name,
(better then of sons and of daughters) a name which should not be cut off:]
that is, a spiritual blessing on their souls, and an owning them for His true
and faithful servants, v. 3, 4, 5. And again, encouraging the strangers (the
Heathen, outwardly as yet without the Covenant of Grace) to come in, and
sanctify the Sabbath; he promises (in Gods name) [ That they should be made
joyful in Gods house of Prayer, and their services accepted by Him, v. 3, 6,
7.] So that spiritual comfort in God, and His gracious acceptance of their
services, is the blessing promised to the faithful observance of this Time
appointed by God for the chief solemn Time of His Worship.

Neither can this be eluded by our Disputers, (as they offer to typical of
Christ, and our spiritual rest in Him from sin; or else that it belonged
only to the seventh-day Sabbath, which the Jews observed; and so either way
(and both ways) we have naught to do with it. For we have proved
sufficiently, Solut.
that a solemn proportion of Time determined for Religion, for the necessary
and sufficient chief Time, (as the Weekly Sabbath then was undeniably) is no
typical matter, but a substantially-necessary thing to Religion, and that
there is need of a Blessing upon such Time, whatever the proportion be,
(unless it were all our Time) or else it will not be sufficient. And so the
Blessing here cannot be to the Sabbath in any typical respect; but as that
proportion of Time determined by God for the chief Time for Religion, His
worship, and men's souls.

Inst.
And though they may happen to object the mention of Gods accepting of their
burnt offerings and sacrifices upon His Altar, which, Sol.
if referoed to our Times, must needs be meant typically. 1. This will not hurt
our interpretation of this place, since the difference is apparent enough,
between His calling for the observation of that which is so substantially
necessary (in the kind of it) to Religion; that is, either this Proportion
determined for the chief Time, or some other; and that which is plainly a
figure and a type, as all burnt offerings and material sacrifices were, Of
which kind there are now none such under the Gospel. So that in this the
Prophet only speaks in the language of the present time, that while sacrifices
were offered and burnt upon Gods altar, by the conscientious observers of His
Sabbath, according to His command; those services should be accepted; and
after they were ceased, their spiritual services of prayers and thanksgivings,
which are in stead of them under the Gospel. Like unto that of David, Psalm. 51.
who first says, God would have no sacrifices from him, but a broken and
contrite heart: yet afterward he says, God would accept young bullocks from
him, Sol. 2.
v. ult. And as for the seventh Day they urge so much, we deny the emphasis to
lie at all upon that, (though it were the particular Day then to be observed)
but wholly upon the Proportion, though taking in that seventh Day, because then
in being, and then only commanded by God. But we have showed our grounds of
difference, enough, between these two, in point of substance and necessity to
Religion, one Day in seven, and that seventh Day. And what needs more to be
said, we shall add, when hereafter we shall come to show (as we have promised
it, and are forced to repeat it, oftener then we would) that the seventh Day
was not directly commanded in the words of the fourth Commandment, nor at all
as the substance and particular matter of them. But only within the general
scope, as then appointed by God (elsewhere) and so our Lord's Day comes equally
within it, and is now become successor to it in the particular title to the
Blessing, as we shall see. So that this place stands good for our having a
Blessing on Gods determined Time, His Sabbath, observed both by Jew and
Christian.

The other place is Isa. 58. Where, LXXIII. Another text, Isa. 58.13. expounded.
after he had called to a most careful observation of the Sabbath, both
negative and affirmative, and that both outwardly in deed and word, and
inwardly in thought, v. 13. he promises in Gods name a remarkable spiritual
Blessing, v. 14. [Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord:] that is, God
will so afford thee His divine Blessing upon thy conscionable employment, with
joy and cheerfulness, (calling the Sabbath a delight) of that Day of Gods
solemn appointment for the chief Time of His worship; that all the week after
thou shall find a delight in the Lord; thou shall have a heart often to think of
Him even in the midst of thy worldly businesses; and to redeem Time also ever
now and then from thy worldly businesses, to converse voluntarily with Him, and
be glad of all opportunities so to do; not willingly missing any time any day,
when thou can have freedom to converse with Him, and attend upon Him. And
that this is the meaning of this Promise and Blessing, (understanding it
Evangelically, and not to an absolute perfection of delight in God, in this
world, which is not to be found in sinful man:) We desire no other proof,
than the Consciences of Christians that keep the Lords day as Gods Sabbath by
Him commanded; and their very manifestation of it in the eyes of their very
adversaries: Namely, that such as delight in the strict and exact observation
of the Sabbath, do answerably delight (or seem at least to delight) in
conversing with God at other times, and every Day gladly wait upon God some
time, morning and night, even they and their families too, and at extraordinary
times: they delight to hear and pray publicly, and to converse with
Christians in a spiritual manner privately, and to attend upon God by
themselves alone, when they can get leisure: Which is, (unless men will say,
that all such are wilful and gross Hypocrites) a real Comment upon this
Promise of the Prophet of delighting in God, increased in men by the Sabbaths
observation. And on the contrary, it is more then evident, that the most of
those that make no conscience of the Sabbath, of the Lords day, do express
very little or no delight in God, or any true spiritual converse with Him, at
any other Time; They care little for any other Opportunity of hearing His word;
they worship Him, not at all, or seldom, or very slightly with their families;
and less perhaps (if the truth were known) in their own solitary devotions. In
a word, the one sort, though Gods commandment and indulgence together,
satisfy them, that one Day in seven is ordinarily sufficient for the chief
Time for God and their souls, yet they cannot satisfy themselves, their
consciences toward God, nor their longings after Him, unless they besides
both daily and extraordinarily redeem what Time they can possibly, or at least
conveniently, redeem to wait upon Him, and satiate their souls more and more
in enjoying a spiritual converse with Him, like a friend, or lover, whose
felicity is to be with the party loved as much and often as may be. The other
sort, though they have no ground to think that Time sufficient, (not regarding
the Commandment) yet they hardly or not at all allow it in their minds, to be
necessary; specially not the whole Day in any wise; but even scarcely the
public hours of it, and much less do they think any other Times to be
necessary, or scarcely so much as convenient to be ordinarily bestowed upon
Religion, as not delighting in God; and so the Time they attend upon Him, is
rather a Penance then a delight, a torment then a comfort to them. As their
language and carriage do more then enough proclaim. The blessing then of this
Text, is happy, and clear also, as we suppose. Let Consciences judge.

LXXIV. An exception answered.
But ere we part with this last place, besides the former cavil of a typical,
mystical, or spiritual sense; and that seventh Day-Sabbath, (which from the
former answer may be sufficiently satisfied, considering still the nature of
the chief solemn Time,) we must not miss taking notice, that some even of
our Orthodox Divines, in point of the Sabbath, do interpret this place Esaias.
58. of a Fast which they say has the nature of a Sabbath, (and indeed the
yearly fast of Gods appointment, Lev. 23. the Day of Expiation, is called a
Sabbath,) and they give this reason, that in the beginning of the Chapter the
Prophet speaks of a Fast, and so they judge he does here at the latter end. D.
Ames Medul. Theol. lib. 2. c. 15. Sect.
And one (of chief note in this matter of the Sabbath) seems somewhat
strangely to enervate the strength of that 13. ver. which we have alleged for
the strict observation of the Sabbath, leaving doubtful whether it be meant of
the ordinary Sabbath, or a solemn Fast; and as far as we can understand, even
contradicting himself within a few lines, in the explicating that thirteenth
verse, as the judicious Reader may observe.

But to answer to all this briefly. We say 1. That these Divines, Sol.
though they think the Sabbath secured, for all this interpretation of this
Text by a Fast: (and even by it) For say they, [Such strictness belongs to a
Fast, but as it is a Sabbath, and so if it be to be so observed; a Sabbath much
more;] Do yet afford a wrangler too much advantage, in that they wave the
clearest place against worldly words and thoughts on the Sabbath, that is any
where in Scripture. And if an opposer should say, (as they will) that a Solemn
Fast is to be more strict then a Sabbath (that very fasting being a strictness
which includes diverse things in it, from which eating, and specially dressing
any meat on the Sabbath, loosens a man;) they would not so easily convince
such, as they think, that all this belongs to an ordinary Sabbath, but only an
extraordinary, which is also a Fast. Although for our parts we hold that the
nature of Religious Time, as the Sabbath was, does infallibly extend both as
words and thoughts. But this is not usually taken notice of.

2. But further, for the thing it self, as it is no argument, Sol. 2.
that because the Prophet speaks of a Fast in the beginning of the Chapter,
therefore he does so in the end also. For it is most usual in Scripture, and
particularly in the Prophets, to go from one matter to another, without any
solemn preface: So,

3. It seems to us to be clear, Sol. 3.
that the contents of our last translation of the Bible, do rightly and
distinctly analise this Chapter, and lay out the parts of it, to be evidently
four several matters. 1. A reproof of Hypocrisy, verse. 1.2. 2. An
expression of a counterfeit fast, and a true, verse. 3. to 8. 3. Promises to
godliness, in general, verse. 8. to 13. 4. Lastly, Promises to the keeping of
the Sabbath, verse. 13.14. Or if any list to extend the promises in the former
verses to a right Fasting, Yet is there no reason to confine these two last to
that matter; For,

4. It is not likely, Sol. 4.
that having before vilified a Days Fasting verse. 5. even though with outward
strictness and afflicting the soul too; he would make such splendide
promises, as verse. 14. contains again to that Days observance, specially not
intituling it by its ordinary Name, but borrowing the Name Sabbath for it.

Sol. 5.
5. But above all; if it be rightly considered, what glorious promises are here
made (as we said) and that emphatically to the keeping of a Day, named Gods
holy Day, (or a weekly Sabbath usually bearing the title of Gods Holy Sabbath,
and Gods Sabbath every where) and to the calling it (the Day) a delight, the
Holy of the Lord, honorable, etc. It is no way probable, that this can be
meant of a Day rarely coming about, when there was a weekly Day, to which all
these Titles properly belonged; and that it is ten times, twenty times, more
sign of godliness to sanctify the Sabbath constantly weekly, then to observe
an extraordinary Fast Day once in a year, (and God had appointed no more) and
if in Time of special fear or danger, Gods providence (or Prophets also)
called to another Day, yet still this was but a small matter, compared with the
piety and devotion of a constant weekly Sabbath. A worldling, in fear and
distress, may possibly call one such Fast Day a delight, etc. but not a
weekly Sabbath; whose sudden revolution (over-suddaine a great deal for
worldly minds to delight in its coming) will try the best spirit that is: And
while worldlings language, at least in their hearts, is, When will the Sabbath
be gone, He had need be a godly man in earnest, that can in the presence of God
constantly call it a delight, wish it come, and delight in it being come, and
observe it as is here expressed: (with supposition too of humane frailties) And
therefore there is much more reason, to take it properly for the weekly
Sabbath, then improperly for an extraordinary and seldom observed Fast.

Sol 6.
6. Whereunto we may in the last place add, that the 14 verse does not only
continue the spiritual blessing forenoted upon particular persons; but a most
high, and rich, and full promise unto the whole Nation, that should observe the
Day there spoken of. Now what likelihood is there that a whole Nation should be
so remarkably encouraged to observe one particular single Day in a year, or
so, (for still, we say, the emphasis in the 13. verse is clearly to observe
the Day spoken of, what ever it be;) and not rather to observe the weekly
Sabbath; Of which both our Prophet, and Jer. c. 17. and Ezekiel. c. 20.22, 23. and
other places of Scripture speak so much, with all earnestness of promises,
and threatenings, and mentions of judgments even relating to the whole Nation;
as we have formerly touched in our Epistle Dedicatory; where also we have given
a memorandum of Gods most gracious fulfilling this promise to our Nation, ever
since we held forth the Doctrine of the Sabbath professedly: Which blessing we
trust (and heartily pray) we shall never be so unwise and unhappy as to forfeit
by our forsaking the doctrine or practice of this Day of blessing, as we there
said.

And now the error imputed by the Author, Sol. 7.
quoted in the objection, will fall upon himself, who can no way make good his
own assertions of the Holy observation of the Lords day, the Sabbath, unless
he grant, all actions, words, and even thoughts, merely humane, which are not
necessary, (for of necessities we have, as all agree, granted reservations) to
be sins so far forth. For that, this were to take so much, (how little
soever) from God, whose Day it altogether is, and from the soul for whose good
it is; to bestow it, and that (we say) unnecessarily, upon the World, and a
man's self in earthly respects. And then also, how shall the magnificent
promise be fulfilled to those, that allow not God the whole of His own (twice
called holy) Day. We would not have touched this slip of so reverend an Authors
pen, but that we have met with it objected against us; and his testimony
against us might sway with others, if we had wholly passed it over in silence.
But now we are persuaded, we have made good this text also for the securing of
happy blessing, both personal, and national, to the observers of Gods
determined chief solemn Time or Sabbath. And so our whole Argument, taken
from His indulgence of the Time for our worldly businesses.

And so we pass on to some special Arguments, LXXV. God must determine the
particular day. Arg. 1. for Gods determination of the particular day, all time
and days are his, none ours but by his indulgence.
vindicating the determination of the particular Day for the chief solemn
Time, as well as the chief Time it self. But in a very few words, in
comparison of our former great length. Thus we reason:

[If all Time be Gods, and none ours for worldly employments, but by His
indulgence; Then the particular Day (or Days) for the chief Time to Religion,
belongs to Gods peculiar determination, and not to men's. But all Time is Gods,
and none ours for worldly employments, but by His indulgence. Ergo, The
particular Day (or Days) for the chief Time to Religion, belongs to Gods
peculiar determination, and not to men's.]

The Antecedent cannot be denied, and has been sufficiently illustrated in the
foregoing Parallel Argument.

The Consequence of this may also be cleared: If we consider, 1. That how ever
this be no such matter of importance in Religion in the essential part of it,
as the former was; yet even this concerns in some sort the Soveraignity of
God, so far as we can conceive of it: Unless He had fully and clearly expressed
himself (which we no where find in His Word) to have put over the
determination of this Particularity to men. 2. That an indulgence to men, of so
much Time, so often for their worldly employments, (as of six Days in seven)
does not yet, in the nature of it, allow them to be their own Carvers in the
particular Days: But they must wait upon Gods particular allowance of the
particular Days, before they may presume to employ any of them at all to their
own worldly occasions. The order, as well as the proportion, is in Gods hand
originally, and He puts not the disposition of that out of His hand, without an
express declaration of so much, particularly, or at least generally. (As
Lawyers say of the King, that He passes away none of his rights, in any grant,
by doubtful and ambiguous words.) If but a master say to his servant or
scholar, or a parent to his child: I will allow you so many hours for your
self, (your own business, or sport, etc.) and so much Time you shall attend
your book, and my business, this Day, or any Day: Will any conclude, that
such servant, scholar, or child, may take those hours to himself, when he
lists himself; though he should attend on this master or parent the rest of
the Time? For this would show, that himself, rather then his superior, were
the Lord and commander of his Time; and so be an act of presumption; as if also
his superior were rather beholden to him for affording to give such attendance
upon him at all, then he to his superior for his indulgence of so much Time,
(when he could have challenged none at all; all being his superiors, none his
own) for his private occasions. Let this be thought upon, and it cannot well be
denied, but it is a proper piece of soveraigntie, (even of all superiority) to
retain the appointment of the particular Times for the chief attendance of
inferiors upon them, in their own hands; and a part of the natural homage such
owe to their superiors, to depend upon their express pleasure for the
particularities of the chief Times of such attendance, as well as for the
proportion of such Times. A Lord even of a Manor uses to reserve this
authority in his own hands, That his Courts, when all his homagers shall be
bound to do their suit and service to him, shall be at his calling, and not at
the Tenants pleasure, either extraordinarily or ordinarily. How much more is
this a Royalty beseeming the LORD-Paramount of Heaven and Earth! We conclude
then this Argument with this admonition, That our Disputers would but root out
that pernicious thought, which we fear they are deeply tainted with, That Time
is now rather our own, than Gods. And then we make no doubt but they will
readily yield both the chief Time for His Worship, and the particular Days
for it, to belong eternally to His determination, and all disputes between them
and us will suddenly be at an end.

We confirm this Argument by a second, LXXVI. Arg. 2. Upon that determination
depends Gods blessing.
near of kin to the former, suitable also to our foregoing discourses for the
chief Time.

[If we stand in need of a Blessing from God upon the proportion of Time which
we observe for the sufficient chief Time for Religion: Then the determination
of the very particular Day belongs to God peculiarly, and not to men. But, we
stand in need of a Blessing from God upon the proportion of Time which we
observe for the sufficient chief Time for Religion. Ergo, The determination of
the very particular Day belongs to God peculiarly, and not to men.]

The Antecedent has been sufficiently confirmed before. The Consequence may be
proved, by considering, 1. That the Proportion cannot be regularly observed,
but by the determination of a particular Day for it. 2. That men have no power
to annexe Gods blessing to any determination of theirs. That comes freely from
Gods own will and pleasure, from His mere grace, which men cannot so much as
know, without He reveal it himself by way of Promise or Covenant; which He
does to His own ordinances, but no where to men's ordinances, that is, to any
such determinations of men, as are intended obligatory to others, N. B.
or for any permanencie. We add this explication, because we find, that God
did, for a single act, allow His people, even after His own Altar was made, to
build an Altar for sacrifice to Him upon a special occasion, of earth, or of
whole stones. But they were not to make a custom of using that Altar, and
therefore the materials of it were to be loose. Also in the Passover, Exodus
12. God allowed particular persons (according to their store) to take a Lamb,
or a Kid; but not that He allowed the Elders to enjoyne all to one sort, nor
was he that now used a Kid obliged to it the next turn. But here the
particular Day in question is to be determined for many, (indeed for all
mankind, as the next Argument will offer proof of) and so to be oligatorie,
and accordingly to be at least for some while permanent; For it were both
altogether ridiculous, and would bring forth manifold confusions, to be every
2d. or 3d. turn or revolution, changing the particular Day. Therefore we say,
no such permanent and obligatorie determination has any promise of Blessing,
unless it be the determination and ordinance of God himself. Now upon the
particular determination of the Day, or the particular Day determined, the
Blessing does fall (though not properly for the particular Days sake, but for
the Proportions, to make that sufficient to be observed for the chief Time, as
has been said.) Accordingly then, that particular Day, to make it capable and
susceptible of the Blessing; that is, that the observers of that particular Day
may enjoy the Blessing promised to the observers of the chief Time, that
particular Day must not be determined by men, but by God.

LXXVII. Arg. 3. It is very fit, all the world should have one and the same
day, as near as may be.
A third Argument to like purpose, (of which also touches have been formerly
given, but we conceive it convenient to be here expressly handled) is from the
more then conveniencie, (near to a necessity, if not altogether so) that
there should be one particular Day, as near as may be, according to the
variation of Climates, even the selfsame Day, all the world over, for the
Honor of God generally from all His servants together at the same time; and
for the general exercise of the Communion of Saints also all the world over.
Thus we propound it:

[If all the world over there is to be, as near as may be, one and the
self-same particular day for the chief time to Religion: Then the determination
of this particular Day belongs to God peculiarly, and not to men. But there is
to be all the world over, as near as may be, one and the selfsame particular
Day for the chief Time for Religion. Ergo, The determination of this
particular Day belongs to God peculiarly, and not to men.]

The Consequence of this Argument is evident, 1. By the constant necessity of
having a particular Day determined for the chief Time to Religion; so as, if
any such particular Day which was once determined for it be abrogated (upon any
grounds whatsoever) there must without delay be a new particular Day
determined, as without which the chief Time necessary to Religion cannot be
observed by all those whom it concerns, by all Christians. 2. By the
Impossibility, that without a Divine determination, or at least a divine
revelation, all Christians could so much as come to know what Day,
particularly, were determined by all, that know of the abrogation of the former
particular Day before them: As suppose, the Apostles going into several
Countries, and preaching the abrogation of the old seventh Day, and that a new
Day was to be determined by the Church: and that Matthew goes first, and Thomas
after him, and Bartholomew after him; how can the Christians, to whom Thomas or
Bartholomew preach thus, know, without divine revelation, what Day is
determined by the Churches that made the first determination, namely those to
whom Matthew preached. 3. By a like impossibility of their knowing what the
Churches that should receive the Gospel after them, would determine concerning
the particular Day; as namely, to whom (suppose) Philip, and Andrew, and Simon
should preach, after the others. 4. The impossibility, that they would all
agree upon the same Time, though they did know one another minds; unless some
command from God did necessitate the latter converted Churches to consent to
the determination of the first Churches; and this supposed, would to them be in
the nature of a divine determination, and would suppose an inspiration from God
to have assisted the determination by those Churches. 5. Of this, the great and
violent difference, even presently after the Apostles times, about the keeping
of Easter day, (upon the particular Day of the Week, or the particular Day of
the Month) between the Western and Eastern Churches, shows proof
sufficient, namely, how little hope or possibility there would have been even
in the Primitive Times, of the agreement about the particular Day for the
chief Time to Religion, (and so much rather now) if wholly left to the
determination of men, of the Church, Particular, or National Churches, or any.
6. Finally, if it may be imagined, Except.
that an Universal Council (representing the whole Church) might sufficiently
have agreed upon the particular Day for all Churches, and so for all Christians
all the world over: We desire it may be considered. general Council
representing the whole Church in the first Times, when the Lords day, Inst. Sol.
the first Day of the Week came first to be practiced. 2. If any shall say,
that of Act. 15. was such an one, he must yet remember; there was no such
determination made, For if it had, the Holy Ghost would have recorded it, being
so necessary a thing: determinations there, were the determinations of the Holy
Ghost, as is expressly said in the Synodicall Epistle v. 29. delay, after the
abrogation of the old seventh Day Sabbath preached. And the conversion of
Churches so late, one after another, made a general Council of all the
Churches in several Nations of the World impossible, till the Gospel had been
planted in all Nations. From all which, it follows undeniably, that if one and
the selfsame Day were, or were to be determined, in the Apostolic and first
Times; for the particular Day unto the chief Time for Religion unto all
Christians, all the World over, it could be no otherwise then by a Divine
determination, either by Christ himself while He conversed with His Disciples
after His resurrection; or else by the Apostles divinely inspired, and
commanding in the Name of God and Christ, which comes all to one pass, for the
point in hand.

The Antecedent, [That there is to be all the World over, as near as may be,
One and the selfsame particular Day, for the chief Time to Religion, among
all Christians,] has been declared in the former Chapter. To which may now be
added, That we remember not to have ever read or heard, in any Religion, but
those that professed the same Religion, observed the same particular Days for
the chief solemn Times belonging to their Religion. It was ever so in the
Jewish Religion, and is so still; and the like was done by all that became
proselites to their Religion. Also, all Christians, at this Day do; and have
ever done so far as any records lead us, observed actually the same
particular Day for the chief Time to Religion, the Lords day the first Day of
the Week: even those that joined some other days with it, as some did a while
the Old Sabbath, and others, other Days, yet this was ever the chief Day, as
is learnedly showed by a late Author, in his elaborate collections from
Antiquity, expressly concerning the Lords day. Neither did ever the Church of
Rome, as presumptuous as she has been in other matters, even to control the
undoubted Laws of God and Christ: (as about incestuous marriage, and the Cup
in the Lords Supper) dare to try or practice her authority upon the Lords day,
in changing it to any other Day; Which is also so much the more remarkable,
because of the impetuous fierceness of the Romish Victor even in the second
Century after Christ, (and hard after the Apostles Times) about the particular
Day for Easter, mentioned before. And that in the very Council of Trent, some
alleged (upon some occasion) that the Lords day stood but by the Authority of
the Church: Yet for all that, The Romish Church never durst venture upon it, to
alter it to any other. (The more impudent slander therefore we esteem it to
be, and without all shadow or color, which Barclay (as the Translator of
Doctor Prideaux his Lecture quotes him, with an accent of credulity) reports,
that Master Calvin should consult of changing it into Thursday. To which we
only say thus much, If to accuse without proof shall be sufficient, who can be
innocent? And the World has been enough abused with notorious untruths
concerning that man of God, both since he is dead, and even when he was alive:
which also have been sufficiently refuted by undeniable proofs. Therefore we
wish also the relatour of this sleevelesse tale, to consider whether he be any
better then the delatour, If those sentences of Solomon be true, Prove. 10.18.
and Pro. 17.4. But we have somewhat more to say in the matter in hand: that is,
the very Professors of the Mahometane Religion, though some of them differ
among themselves (even to an abhorring one of another) in some other matters,
as the Turks, and the Persians, Yet they all agree in the keeping of the same
particular Days for the chief Times of their Religion, namely the Friday, as
we noted before. And so it was also among the Heathens, they had multiplicities
of Religions: But we find not among those that professed the same Religion with
others, any disagreement, or variety, about the particular Days of their
chief Times of solemn Worship. So that it seems a kind of consent in Nature;
and very agreeable (to say the least of it) to the very Law of Nature that it
should be so. Which makes us the more admire, at some (at least) of our
Adversaries disputing, as if the present Church had power to alter the Lords
day, to any other day of the Week, And what Church they mean, National? or
Universal? (which, to be sure, will never meat so much as representatively,
if we include all Christians of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America within the
universal Church) Or what they intend by it? And whether they would be glad to
see any National Church (or all the Western Churches together) to take in
hand such a thing, to show their authority; as Lords of the Lords day, and
silence all future disputes by whose authority the particular Day stands? What
ever their thoughts be, We for our parts hope, we shall never live to see, any
National Church, much less ours, and least of all many Nations to rush upon
so desperate an adventure. And so we conclude this argument, with this note,
That as we suppose, the ground that has made all the World thus consent in the
same particular Days according to their several Religions, was immediately
their persuasion, That those Days are determined to them by their gods, and
that it was so delivered by those that commended to them, those particular
Days: So this persuasion was built upon another original principle, that the
determination of them did properly belong to their gods.

LXXVIII. Arg. 4. from the consent of the heathen.
And this may make up another argument, (briefly) of great probability, (at
least) not only for the particular Days: but also and principally for the
chief Time to Religion: namely, The universal consent of Heathens, and
misbeleevers, (whose practice is, by some of our adversaries, delivered us, as
the best Comment upon the Law of Nature or Morality of the fourth Commandment)
practicing and observing their chief Times for their Religion, as determined
to them by their gods; and so owning the determination of them to belong to
their authority only. This we say, has not only seemed reasonable to the
Mahometans, as we showed, but to the very Heathen of old. Among whom, as their
Priests, or Lawgivers, the immediate institutours of their Religion, feigned
the other matters of their Religion and Worship to be prescribed by their gods,
in Oracles, Visions, Dreams, and the like, according to that natural
principle, which is the general, affirmative, part of the second commandment
[God, every God, is to be worshipped with His own prescribed Worship] So,
according to the general meaning of the fourth Commandment or at least
according to part of the general meaning of that second forementioned: They
ever ascribed the institution of their chief and ordinary Holy Days, and
solemn Times for their Religion, and the service of their gods, Dij miserati
laboriosum a natura genus humanion, remissiones laborum ipsi constituerunt. de
leg. 2.

LXXIX. The 5. general Arg. from confession of the very adversaries. C. D.
page 21.


unto their gods themselves. Hear Plato speak for them all. [The Gods
compassionating the laboursome life of mankind, themselves, appointed remission
of their labours] that is, Days, or Times, of remission from their labors,
which were their Holy Days. Specialties of these may be found in other Authors.

But now, after all, what will our Readers say, if some of our greatest
adversaries in this question, have themselves confessed, as much as will
necessarily infer, All this determination about the chief Time and
particular Day for it, to belong to God, without peradventure or long dispute?
Hear them speak. Thus one delivers his opinion [Men may by the Light of
Nature from the Creature; climb up to the knowledge of the Creator; and from
the Nature of God, conclude His Worship; and from the Nature of His Worship,
conclude a Time (as to all other things) to be due to it. But to go further,
and determine, what part of our Time (is due, he means) we cannot: For it will
not follow, that because some Time is due, Ergo. The seventh more then the
eighth of every Month, or any other Day, above or under that number,] So he.
Whence we infer our former conclusion, [ If men cannot determine what is due,
(some being due) God must determine it. Except.
] If he say, he only means, men cannot determine it by the Light of Nature;
but by other Rules they may. We reply. 1. Then God confession must determine it
for all the Heathen, for all that have no other Rules then the Light of Nature.
2. Besides that we other Rules as unsufficient, let him try if he can prescribe
any sufficient Rules for it. Till when we must say again; since man cannot
determine it, God must, that is, God has. But hear another. [To offer
sacrifice Abel might learn of Adam, Hist. sab. part. 1. page 35.
or of natural reason, which does sufficiently instruct us that we ought to
make some public Testimony of our subjection to the Lord. But (says he)
neither did Adam observe the Sabbath, See Prim. p. 8. sect. 3.
nor could Nature teach it.] Now mark what follows, If Nature could not teach
it, then Adam could not determine it; and if not Adam, much less, any man,
Except.
or men now. Therefore again, God must, and did. If he say, Adam might
determine another Time, but not this. We a Rule, he might stumble upon this
number, and day, (for any thing this Author knows) as well as any other; and
specially since we hear some notice taken of a Week, or seven Days, before
Moses was borne, (of which more Rule, and had no Rule, nor could have any
certain (as has been proved) then he might not determine any. Yet some Time
must be determined. Therefore it was by God himself; Prim. p. 3.
add but one more. [Adam neither had, nor should have had any knowledge of
keeping a seventh Day, if God had not enjoined it to him hy a particular
Commandment.] And yet, Page 127. None can institute a day as Moral, but God
alone. Prim. p. 160. see. p. 249. It is Gods prerogative, exclusively to men
and angels, to sanctify a thing, to be an essential part, and properly so
called, of Gods service.
says he, [A stinted Day is necessary.] Ergo, say we, God must determine it.
For what could Adam have more, for any other time or Day, then for a seventh
Day, without Gods particular Commandment? And consider but the Similitude
between the second and the fourth Commandments; the Matter and the Time of
Worship. [Adam, (say they) or natural reason might teach Abel to Sacrifice.
But what? Whether a Sheep rather then a Lion, or a Swine? and how much? Whether
one Sheep, or two Lambs? a quart, or pecke of fine flower, etc? Neither Adam
knew, nor could Nature teach either Abel, or himself, Therefore God must
direct them.] So say we, of the Time of Worship, (the chief solemn Time) That
some Time be so set apart for Gods Worship Adam knew; and Nature might teach
both him and us. But how much at once? or how often? or when? that is either
the length, number, or order, (the Continuance, Frequency, or particular Day)
Neither Adam, nor Nature, nor all the men in the World could, or can, determine
without Divine authority; we say, not any one of these, (unless they will
yield the Continuance of a whole Day, to be the determination of Nature, as we
discoursed before) and much less all of them: Therefore we say still, it must
necessarily belong to God. Which things being thus evinced in reason, and from
their own confessions in part; We cannot but wonder, they should so soon
forget themselves, as to resolve upon the contrary. C. D. page 39.
[That however it be necessary that some Time be dedicated to Gods service: Yet
the determination to this, or that particular Day is not necessary to be
designed by Scripture.] And they say the like with more earnestness, for the
Continuance and Frequency of the Days, which they will have now left to the
Church. The clean contrary whereunto does necessarily follow from their own
grants, as we have showed. That some sufficient Time being necessary to be
determined for Religion; and some particular Days also, that the sufficient
Time determined may be constantly observed; And that no man can determine, what
is that sufficient Time, or what Day will please God; all must necessarily be
designed by Divine authority: And that now in the Scripture: Or else he must
needs run upon the same absurdity, that he would put upon us, That the
Scripture is deficient in things necessary; and so forsake his colors of
Reformation; and pass over into the Camp of the Romanists. If he be ashamed
of this, let him learn and confess, that it is necessary, That God in
Scripture, do define the chief Time of His own Worship, in all the respects
of it; and accordingly that He has certainly so done, for Christians now, as
well as for the Jews of old. LXXX. The 6. general Arg. from confession of the
Romanists. Al. Halens. Sum. Theolog. p. 3. q. 32. n. 2. Aquin. 1.2. q. 91. a.
4. c. secundo, etc.


And why should he, or any of his fellows, be ashamed to confess that which
some of the Romanists themselves have ingenuously confessed? Who yet are known
to be men not apt to offend in over much modesty, where the authority of the
Church comes in competition. One has thus resolved plainly, [When we must rest
to God, it belongs not to man to determine.] And again, [By the written Law it
ought to be determined, when men must rest to God.] And even Aquinas himself,
though he yield not the particular Thing in question, Yet he lays down a
general Truth which is justly applyable to the very case in hand, He gives
this for one reason, why it was necessary, that besides the Natural and Humane
Laws, we should have a Divine Law: [Because (says he) of the uncertainty of
man's judgment, specially about things contingent and particular; It happens
that men are of diverse judgments concerning humane acts: Therefore that man
might without any doubting, know what he was to do, and what to avoid; It was
necessary that in his proper acts, he should be directed by a Law Divine, which
cannot err.] Now seeing the observation of the chief Time for Religion, is a
thing of so great moment, as has been demonstrated; and that the judgments of
men are so different; and so unable to determine, what is necessary, and what
is sufficient, for the chief Time, and which particular Day is fittest, It was
therefore, and is ever, very necessary, that God by His own Law and Word,
should determine all; and so without all doubt, then He has.

And now it remains that we should examine the Arguments or pretenses for the
Churches Power to determine this chief Time for Religion in all the respects,
or in any. But we can find none particular, and proper to the matter in hand;
but only general presumptions, upon the supposition (which they will needs
suppose) [That God has made void all His own former determinations, and so
left in His Word all Times and Days equal under the Gospel.] As also that
assertion comes most frequently forth, [That Time and Place are equal
circumstances in Religion.] And so Place being left to the Churches
determination, Time is so too, in like sort. All which we shall encounter more
particularly in their proper station, and namely in the next Chapter, by way of
corrollary to our whole discourse about religious Time, we shall endeavor to
manifest distinctly. 1. That all Times and Days are not equal in Religion
under the Gospel. 2. That Time and Place are not equal circumstances in
Religion. And therefore the leaving of the one, that is Place, to the Church,
will infer nothing at all for the Time to be so left. And then we shall
conclude all our general discourse, and first part with asserting, That this
chief Time, thus determined by God, is not a mere circumstance or adjunct of
Worship, but a proper and essential part of it, a part of Religion, to be
observed with the same mind, that any other part of Religion is: which will
help (we hope) not a little to the conscionable and careful observation of it.

LXXXI. An objection answered.
Only one Objection, though of two branches, we have met with, against the
necessity of the determination to be made by God, which we must give a
particular satisfaction unto, least some Readers should yet stumble, or be
gravelled at them; but briefly, for many [It seems to be necessary that God
should determine the sufficient Time for His public And again, the sufficient
Times for family and solitary Worship every Day: as well as the determinations
we have all this while been arguing for. And seeing it is clear He has not
done those; it may seem not necessary He should do the other.]

We answer. 1. Supposing that God has determined the chief There is no such
necessity, that out of that He should determine particularly a proportion for
the public Worship: For when men know they must spend the whole Continuance of
the Time, the whole Day, in Religious Worship, either public or domesticke, or
solitary, The Governors of the Church may now be well enough trusted to
determine the hours for the public Duties. Their wisdom (unless in perverse
spirits, that would purposely shut out some of the Ordinances, of Prayer, or
Preaching, or the like, or curtall them, that men might be sure to have no
benefit by the public) will easily suffice to allot convenient proportions for
these, from experience how long men may ordinarily hold out in such Duties,
whether Ministers or People with edification; and herein also to refer it
partly to the discretion of Ministers; There being a possibility of variety in
several particular Churches, in the same Church at several seasons of the
year, and the like, without any remarkable prejudice to Religion, Gods honor,
and the good of men's souls any where: Because still the residue of the Day,
before and after the public, remains devoted to Religion: Whereas there would
be manifest and certain danger of prejudice to Religion, (even the ruin of
it) as we have showed, if the whole of the chief Time were left to men's
discretion, to any number of men whatsoever.

2. We say the like for the Continuance of Time for Religion on domesticke, or
solitary Worship: That God having strictly determined the chief Time (namely
one whole Day in a week according to the fourth Commandment) there was no
such necessity that He should determine, besides, the Continuance of the
Week-dayes devotions. He might have done these also, we confess, if it had so
been His pleasure. But we have intimated formerly fair reasons which we may
conceive, why He would not; namely. 1. His gracious indulgence, to try men's
affections, and zeal, and spiritual wisdom, in redeeming of Time ordinarily,
and extraordinarily, on those Week-dayes, for their families, and themselves to
wait upon God, and their Souls: with which they might be conveniently
trusted, if they conscionably observed the chief Time (the Sabbath) of Gods
own peremptory determination. Specially remembering what we said a while ago,
of the Blessing made over to such, that they should thereby come to delight
more and more in the Lord: and such then will not be wanting to God and their
souls, (or others souls) even on the Week-dayes, when they conveniently can
redeem any Time. 2. As also, To make evil men the more inexcusable, who being
not tied so strictly on the Week-dayes, will yet rob God, and their souls, and
the souls of others under them, of the Time of the Sabbath, the Time that God
himself has made to be the necessary and ordinarily sufficient chief Time
for Religion to all men. Such, we say, would never have obeyed any
determination on the Week-dayes for any Continuance, if they should have been
tied to that also; which think the Sabbath, one day in seven, so intolerable a
burden, now that they are so much at liberty on the other Days: For also such
on the Week-dayes do scarce give God any Time at all, many, or most of them,
with their families, or alone. Therefore, we say, we can see reason why God was
pleased not to tie men in all the parcells of Time, when yet He would, and has
in some, in the chief. And like unto this, He has done (at least in the
opinion of all (or most) of our English Adversaries) in another Point, namely
in matter of our goods. All our estates and goods are His, as well as our Time.
Therefore out of them, out of the increase of Corn, and Cattle, and the like,
He has by an express determination challenged to himself a portion, by way
of tribute or homage, namely the Tithe, the tenth part, It is the Lords, Lev.
23. (which afterwerd Himself diverse years after bestowed upon the Levites and
Priests, His Ministers; to whom He says, Himself would be their portion and
inheritance, Number. 18.) Now this Law, we say, our English Disputers believe to
be perpetual. Notwithstanding which strict tie for that part of our goods, a
tenth part; All acknowledge somewhat more to be due to God, for pious uses, and
for the maintenance of the poor: and yet in neither of these has God made any
particular determination; but left it to every ones discretion and affection,
according to occasions ordinary and extraordinary. When (without all
controversy) God determined to the Jews the chief solemn time, the weekly
Sabbat^, yet He did not the h^ures of public moral worship: much less the
continuance on weekdayes.
And it was so even of old, when that Law of Tithes was undeniably in force. So
there is no manner of necessity or reason, to infer, That if it please God
(and it appear necessary to us for Him so to do) to determine one thing, a
chief thing, the chiefest in the kind: Therefore He must also do all of the
kind: Or that, because He has not determined all of the kind, or not this, or
that; Therefore we have no need that He should determine at all any of the
kind, not so much as the chiefest. For --

3. We add, that Gods not determining the Continuance of Solemn Days, nor
yet of Family or Solitary Worship on the Work-Dayes, is so far from arguing
that He has not, or need not (for our sakes) determine the chief solemn Time
for Religion, His own Honor, and men's souls generally; that it rather
strongly confirms that He has, and that we needed He should; As being the only
certain and sufficient obligation to hold men to necessary, sufficient, just,
and profitable attendance upon God and their souls; and to supply the defects
that are, or may be, in scanty performances on the Week-Dayes, and to scour
off the rust and filth then contracted by much handling of worldly matters; and
to make up a full advantage, beyond that which the nature of the Public
Services, whether shorter or longer, could of themselves merely reach unto.
God, we say, saw it necessary, (and we can, by His showing, see it too) that He
should not leave all Time to men's determinations; and yet convenient, He should
leave some undetermined strictly. Therefore accordingly so He has done,
determining the chief Time, with the particular Day for it, expressly in His
Word, (and somewhat of each Day by the very Law of Nature, as we have showed)
and leaving the rest undetermined to all men, in regard of any strict
determination; and referring it to the various occasions and affections of
every one for themselves apart, and of superiors for themselves and their
inferiors, both ordinarily and extraordinarily, according to general rules of
the Scripture, speaking of His Honor, and the good of souls. And all this
most wisely and graciously; as we trust, hereafter, every Conscience that duly
waighs the premises, will confess with us. Unto which acknowledgment yet, all
our following Discourses will not be unprofitable, for the fuller removing of
all objections and scruples in any part of the whole Question; and the settling
of men's judgments in all the maine matters belonging to this great
Controversy; as we hope will appear in the sequel.

CHAP. XI.
Two Corollaries from the former Discourses about Solemn Time. 1. All Times and
Days are not equal under the Gospel. 2. Time and Place are not equal
circumstances in Religion.

IT is found by experience, That Truth sometimes is as much (or more)
prejudiced by some common Sentences, which have some show of probability or
verity in them, as by the strongest Argumentations against it. Because these
are only confined to the Discourses and Writings of learned men, and are
formally and sufficiently opposed by the Patrons of Truth: But those are
usually tossed up and down among all sorts, and pass for the most part without
examination, and so do great hurt insensibly. Therefore it is, that those who
would effectually vindicate an opposed Truth, must as well take some pains to
encounter such common sayings, even distinctly and expressly as any other
contradicting Arguments: applying to them (without fear of being counted
Tautologists) such Reasons as are laid down even in other places, with the
addition of any other that are particular and proper; so to discover fully the
falsitie and danger of those vulgar Conceits and Expressions.

I. Two Corollaries from the former Discourse.
The thought of this has made us esteem it necessary to bestow this Chapter
entirely upon the examination of two common Assertions, which serve our
Adversaries at every turn almost. 1. [That all Days and Times (they say) are
alike, and equal under the Gospel. 2. That Time and Place are equal
circumstances in Religion.] Which have been so commonly agitated, not only in
all Writings of theirs in this Subject, (though without any judicious and exact
scanning) but in vulgar discourses; that they are grown to be in a sort
Proverbs among them: Insomuch as we find, that the latter of these has in some
sort tainted some, even of those who yet are Orthodox, in the maine, about
Solemn Time: so that even they speak the same language, now and then, of an
Equality of Time and Place. All which constrained us to take in hand a
Particular Consideration of both these forementioned Assertions: And though we
must of necessity say over some of those things we have spoken already; and
touch some others beforehand, whose proper place to argue fully comes
hereafter: yet we rather choose to do so, (though some should call it
tautologizing) than for want of a formal setting our selves against those
fallacious Principles, to leave such prejudicial conceits in the minds of any
Readers. To begin with the first then --

Our Position is, II. The first. All Times and Days are not equal.
[All Times and Days are not equal under the Gospel.] The Contradictory
whereunto had wont to be exploded as an Anabaptisticall fancy: But now of late,
among the Disputers concerning the Sabbath and Lords day, it has gotten some
more venerable fautors. And which adds to the strangeness, even those that
cry it down in the Anabaptists, say as much as they in sense, and near their
very words. So that there is little or no difference between them, and the
other, whom they would seem to oppose; Except it be, that our Disputers give
somewhat more to the Churches power about Times and Days, than the Anabaptists
allow. But that we may refute both the one, and the other, III. The question
stated, by showing,
in their erroneous expressions, or meanings; We will first a little state the
Question now before us; and then declare our Grounds opposite to their
Assertions; and finally, give a touch of Satisfaction to their chiefest
strength from the New Testament, which may seem to favor them. But all briefly.

1. It is true, [That all Times and Days, in themselves, 1. Our consent.
as Times and Days, materially considered, are equal, and of the very same
nature.] One not more excellent, more holy, more necessary to be observed to
Religion, than another: that is, antecedent to all determination of God, or in
sensu diviso. So that the learned Bishop speaks right in this, [Every day of
the week had one and the same efficient cause, namely, Divine creation: B. of
E. p. 34.
And all times and things created by God, were very good.] But if they so state
the Question, the Anabaptists, and they, and we, are all agreed; They have no
Adversary in this Cause. But yet this is nothing; For they may as well say this
of all Times and Days under the Law, as under the Gospel; That all were
materially equal, and in themselves considered. By the Sunrising, or setting,
no Theological difference appeared in any of them, no more than now. Here then
lies no scruple.

Ames. Medal. Theol. lib. 2. c. 15: sect. 50.53.
2. It is also granted, [That the Church may set apart some Times and Days for
public Worship.] But with some limitations before insinuated. 1. That they be
not accounted as necessary to Religion, or as essential parts of Gods Worship.
2. That they be not esteemed and used as properly Holy, so far that it should
be unlawful to change them, or to employ them in any but sacred uses. 3.
Lastly, that they be not esteemed as efficacious means of Holiness and
Blessing, (in reference to the particular Times, Days, or Hours) to the
observers of them. But in this sense again, nor we nor the Anabaptists we
think, will much contend with them, For the Anabaptists, granting a public
Worship, by Assemblies; must needs confess [ That there must be some Times or
Days set apart for orders sake to that use, and that every one may know when
to join with the public Assemblies. B. of E. p. 132.
] Yea we are told, that some of them did judaize, and kept the
Saturday-Sabbath, as instituted of old by Divine authority; and not the Sunday,
as being, in their opinion, (and our disputers too) but of humane institution.
There was therefore no reason to quarrel with the Anabaptists, concerning the
inequallity of Days, if this be all the difference. Rather it seems the
Anabaptists were offended at this, that those Days which man only had
instituted, were called Holy days; and observed (as they conceited) in that
manner, and with that opinion of Holiness, etc. as those of Gods institution
were to be observed.

3. Nor is there any question made by any side, [Whether Divine institution
(alone) do not make any Times, this or that particular Day, or Hour, properly
Holy, and necessary to Religion.] For this is granted, there were some Days so
made Holy under the Law. And the reason is the same under the Gospel; If God
institute, or perpetuate any.

2. Our dissent. Our opinion explained.
4. But herein as we conceive, lies the business and difference between us;
That we say, [All Times under the Gospel are not equal in reference to
Religion;] But that some Times: (in the several respects of Time) some
express and definite Continuances; some express and definite Frequencies, or
Revolutions; and some express and definite Seasons, or particular Days; are
necessary to Religion; and properly Holy: so as they may not be changed,
abrogated, or otherwise employed, by man; and so necessary above others; (in
sensu composito) not by a Physical necessity of ordinary nature; but by a
Theological necessity, Consentancum est rationi naturali, vel potius moraliter
necessarium est, ut fasti sint dice Suarez. lib. 2. de Relig c. 2.
or Ethicall and Moral, as some other (besides us) have expressed themselves.
And that so, it should be sin in all men (except in the cases of reservation,
admitted by God to interrupt solemn Times) not to observe those particular
Times and Days, which is not to be said of other Days and Times. Our
disputers contrarily do maintain, That no express or definite Continuances,
or express and definite Revolutions, or express and definite particular
Days, 3. The contrary opinion explained.
are so necessary to Religion, as that all men, or all Christians, should be
guilty of sin, for the in observation of them, more then of others.] This, we
say, is that which many of their reasonings apparently tend unto, and which
they must mean, if they understand themselves: Also we cannot deny, but that
at other times they say that which will not stand with this; as we shall even
here by and by show them. But we cannot help that, if they contradict
themselves; (as they do in more things than one) but only by showing it them,
and our Reasons on the one side; As we shall here now do for our Assertions,
to win them fully to them, if it may be.

We say then, for the confirmation of our Position, IV. Confirmations of our
Assertion. Arg. 1. Nature determines a whole day at least once. Ergo.
and refuting of theirs: 1. [If the Law of Nature determine, at least once in
every man's life, a whole Days continuance expressly, as necessary to be
altogether spent in Religion, (as we have argued in the ninth Chapter) then is
not all Time equal under the Gospel, in respect of Continuance for Religion.]
No other proportion will satisfy the Law of Nature; no, not two, or three
Halfe-Dayes, in stead of one whole Day. And so this Continuance of a whole Day
may not, by man, be abrogated, altered, or alienated; and is more properly
Holy, than any other Continuance of Time for Religion; that is, than any other
that is less; For greater there can be none in Nature, as has been showed.

2. [If the Law of Nature determines for every Work-day of a man's life, at
least a double Frequencie of attendance upon God, V. Arg. 2. Nature determines
for twice every day. Ergo.
as necessary unto all men: (which we have also argued in the forenoted place)
Then is not all Number or Frequencie of Times equal in Religion; Or all Times
equal in respect of an express Frequencie or Revolution so often.] Half the
Day spent in Religion, will not suffice to discharge from the second due
attendance: nor ten times upon the Day before, or the Day after, compensate for
that neglect: Because the Continuance being not here determined, the Service
may be so suddenly dispatched, as nothing but want of Will and Devotion can be
assigned as the cause of not tendering that double proportion on the most busy
Day that any man has in his whole life.

VI. Arg. 3. Nature requires a determination for Continuance and Frequencie.
Ergo.
3. [ If the Law of Nature require any determination of Time at all for
Continuance and Frequencie jointly, (as we have also proved at large, and all
our Adversaries also acknowledge, under the terms of a Sufficient Time to be
Morall-Naturall:) Then, whosoever be the determiner of this sufficient Time; or
whatever the proportions be, though but an hour in a year: yet is not all
Time equal in Religion under the Gospel, for Continuance and Frequencie both.
For this hour in a year is necessary to Religion, and so properly holy, and
unchangeable by man, (who may not take a shorter Continuance, or less
Frequencie, because this is necessary; not a longer Continuance, and greater
Frequencie, because this is sufficient for the chief Time:) less, and
seldomer being against the Law of Nature; which cannot be said of other
Continuancies and Frequencies more large: Yet again, more, and oftener, being
not so necessary, and so burdensome. And therefore still, this hour in a
year, (or any other Continuance in any other Frequencie pitched upon) is above
all other Times for Religion; no other being equal to it.

VII. Arg. 4. Nature requires a determination of a particular day. Ergo.
4. [ If there must necessarily be, together with the determination of the
Continuance and Frequencie for the necessary sufficient chief Time: also a
particular determination of the particular day and hour, wherein this hour in
a year must be observed; (or else it is impossible to be observed by a whole
Particular Church together constantly: and much more impossible in regard of a
whole Nation; and most of all for all Christ^ans, and men, all the world over.)
Then, when that particular Day and Hour is once determined (by what authority
soever) in any Church, (as it must necessarily be, as soon as the old
seventh-day Sabbath was known to be abrogated) All Days and Times are not
equal in Religion under the Gospel, even in regard of the particular Season,
or Order, Day or Hour.] No other Day or Hour is equal to this determined Day
or Hour, but It above them all: That particular Day, wherein that Hour is to
be observed, is above all other Days: and that particular Hour of that Day is
above all other Hours even of the same Day. As a King once chosen, (in an
elective Kingdom; and chosen he must be, as soon as possible may be) is above
all other men in that Kingdom or Nation, and none equal to him from
henceforth, whatever they were before his election. And in reference to this
election necessary to be made of a King, that State is called properly a
Kingdom, even during the inter-regnum or vacancie: and it cannot be said
properly, that all men are equal in that State, because the Fundamental Law
of the State requires, that one be above all the rest as King. So that from the
Law of Nature, and the confessions of our Adversaries themselves, It cannot be
properly said, that in any one of the Respects of Time, (Continuance,
Frequencie, or Order) all Times or Days are equal in Religion, under the
Gospel. For that, 1. The Law of Nature requires a determination of all the
three Respects, that so a chief Time may be observed. 2. It then requires
(upon the supposition of Gods not determining now) an undelayed immediate
determination of all of them by the Church. 3. It binds consequently (upon the
supposition of this determination left to the Church) the Consciences of all
under the Churches authority, to that determination in all respects, as well,
and as strongly, as if God himself had expressly made it. And so to all
inferiors in the Church, (and superiors too, unless endued with clear
authority to alter what is once ratified by God) that Time so determined, for
Continuance, Frequencie, and Order also, is necessary, and unalterable, and
above all others.

5. If God, in the New Testament, VIII. Arg. 5. God ownes one day as his viz.
the Lord's Day. Ergo.
have owned one particular Day in a Revolution, as His calling it the Lords
day, (as He has undoubtedly, whatsoever ridiculously D. Gomarus has fancied,
that it signifies only the day of the vision to John, and no more) Then, how
seldom soever it come about, be it but once in a year; Or whatever be meant
by it, whether the day of the Lords nativitie, Christmasse day, as it is
called; or of His resurrection, Easter Day, or any other day; and how little
soever be to be observed of it as holy, and spent in Religion, two hours, or
one hour, or less: Yet still, in as much as it is entitled the Lord's Day,
(by the Spirit of God guiding St. John's pen) All Days and Times are not equal
in Religion under the Gospel, for Frequencie, and the particular Day in that
Frequencie. For this Day, in its Frequencie, is above all other; It alone (and
no other with it, or besides it) is honored and graced with that Majestic and
glorious title.

IX. Arg. 6. The Church in all ages has owned the Lords day. Ergo.
6. If the Church in all Ages from St. John's time, be a sufficient Interpreter
(or living Dictionary) of a word or phrase in Scripture, (as a man would think
no man would offer to contradict that) Then the Lord's Day signifies both a Day
in a Weekly revolution, (and not an Annual Day) and the first Day of the Week,
the Day after the old Sabbath, which was the last Day of the Week. On which
first Day of the Week, S. Paul being at Troas seven Days, kept a special
meeting, and administered then the Sacrament: and on that first Day of the Week,
he appointed at least the charitable collections to be; taking it for granted,
that that Day was weekly observed; as undeniably it was in the next Age, and
ever since. Then also, again, All Times and Days are not equal in Religion
under the Gospel: But the Lord's Day, the first Day of the Week, for Order and
Frequencie, is above all other Days, and numbers of Days. One Day in seven,
and the first of the seven, have that dignity in the New Testament, to be owned
as Gods, as the Lords own time, which no other Number or Day can pretend unto:
None so necessary as this to be observed.

X. Arg. 7. The Lords day, in all the three respects of Time, most necessary to
Religion. Erg. (...), Perrincus al Dominum Scap.
7. If whatsoever God ownes as His possession, by way of discrimination or
difference from other things of the same kind, uses to be wholly His; no part
or parcel of it for worldly use, as it was with the Lords house, and the like:
Then is the Lords day wholly the Lords, wholly sacred; the whole Continuance of
it being the Lords possession, to be wholly employed in His immediate worship
and service: [The Greek word for it, (...), being plainly a Possessive
belonging to the Lord.] And then also again, All Times and Days are not
equal: in Religion under the Gospel, even for Continuance, as well as for
Frequencie and Order. But the Lord's Day is in all the 3. Respects of Time more
necessary to Religion than any other, and so above all other Days and Times:
There being none, besides this, ennobled with such a relation to the Lord, to
be styled by Himself, His. None so every way, or any way, the Lords day, as
this. For also --

XI. Arg. 8. The Scripture ownes the Lords day, as of his institution. Ergo.
8. If Scripture may be safely interpreted by Scripture, even about the nature
and reason of a phrase or term, (as that uses to be a general rule among
Divines, except there be in the Text it self an evidence, that it cannot be
here taken as it is elsewhere; or that it oppose some other undoubted truth.)
Then, besides all that has been already noted of the Lord's Day, it is hereby
also entitled to an Institution from the LORD Himself, from CHRIST: The
Primitive Church seems to bear witness to this, calling the Prayer
instituted by Christ, by the same term (...), Oration Dominica, neither can it
signify any thing but the Prayer of the Lords institution: Though the
Generations after, weakened the Testimony, by calling Churches so.
As being parallel in phrase with the LORDS Supper, which beyond all
peradventure, had no other Institour but Christ. The Spirit of God, who
directed the two Apostles. Paul, and John, in these two titles, (which are
neither of them used in Scripture but once a piece,) never vouchsafed the term
to any other thing in the New Testament: but only to the Supper and the Day
[(...).] He had his choice of words, and spoke nothing, but upon admirable
reason. And no other good reason can be imagined why he would match these two,
(and these only) in this appellation, If they both had not had the same Author
and Institutour: And if he had not intended to insinuate so much unto us, and
teach it us even by the phrase particularly, giving first the term to the
Supper, and when we could not mistake that, matching the Day with it, that we
might not mistake that neither. Then also, once more, All Times and Days are
not equal in Religion under the Gospel. The Lords day is above all other
Days and Times, in regard of its Author and Institutour. No Day is equal to
this in this highest dignity and prerogative, (whence its being His peculiar,
His possession, wholly His, sacred to Him, infallibly flows, unless He had
said the contrary,) having its authority and institution from the Lord himself;
and so being then unquestionably necessary to Religion; and most properly Holy;
and beyond control altogether unalterable by man: None of which can be
alleged with any the like pretense from Scripture, for any other Day under the
New Testament. We are not ignorant, that exceptions are made by our disputers
against these things that we have represented concerning the Lords day; But the
special answer to them we reserve to its proper place, where we shall (by His
assistance, for whose Commandment, Day, and Honor, we argue in all this,)
take all that they say against it, into consideration; and give, we hope, a
satisfactory discharge to all their objections. In the mean Time, upon so just
an occasion, in this place, we thought it requisite to give our Readers a
brief of what we shall more at large then discourse of, whereby we doubt not,
but even without the help of our solutions, diverse, will be able, by the innate
light of these considerations here presented, to discover the adverse
exceptions to be but frivolous; and no way enervating our assertions about it.
But we have one proof more of the inequality of Times now --

XII. Arg. 9. God retains the determination of Times to himself. Ergo. all not
equal.
9. If God himself retain in His own hand, even under the Gospel, the
determination of the Continuance and Frequency of the chief Time necessary and
sufficient to Religion for all men for the chief Time; and that it is not put
over by Him to men, the Church, nor any other; (as has been at large proved in
the forgoing Chapter:) Then the fourth Commandment is unquestionably, that
determination, expreslly for one whole Day in seven, and the Lords day, the
first Day (of the seven) of the week; is the particular Day, and all that we
have here now said of the Lords day is undeniably true, unless our
Antisabbatarians will turn Sabbatarians, and plead for the Saturday-Sabbath,
as still in force by the fourth Commandment: (from which Hold, we yet doubt
not but we shall beat them hereafter, and all that argue for it:) But
howsoever: then still it follows most certainly, that all Times and Days are
not equal in Religion under the Gospel. But that there is still as great an
inequality of some Days (though not of so many) as ever there was under the
Old Testament (except the typical use of the particular Days then appointed)
even upon the highest ground of Divine command; which lifts up the Lords day
for the whole Day in a constant weekly revolution, above all other Times and
Days, now whatsoever, as certainly, (and only) necessary to Religion, and
sufficient for the chief Time, unto all Christians, and men all the world
over, and properly Holy, and unalterable by man; and honored with the blessing
mentioned in the fourth Commandment, and needed by men, as we have discoursed
before.

XIII. Objections answered.
And now from all this, will follow a certain, and easy Answer to those places
of the New Testament, which seem to favor the adverse opinion; and to lay all
Days and Times level now. As Gal. 4. Blaming the observation of Days, and
Months, and Times (or seasons, (...) is the word) and Years. And Romans 14.
making stronger Christians to pronounce, every Day alike. Sol.
These places, we say, must of necessity be interpreted of the Jewish Days and
Seasons, the particular Days which they observed for the Weekly Sabbath; and
the New Moons; These texts and Collections are often earnestly urged by our
disputers: therefore we shall in another place more fully sift and scan them,
and the objections raised from them: But here it was necessary to touch them in
brief.
and the seasons for their Yearly festivalls; the Passover, feast of Weeks,
Trumpets, Tabernacles; and their Sabbaticall Years, every seventh Year; and
Years of Iubilee every 50. Years, of these Seasons and Days, speaks the
Apostle, which the false Apostles would still obtrude upon Christians, and
weak ones still made conscience of. Of all these Days and Seasons, it is most
true, that they are all alike under the Gospel: and none higher then others,
none of them to be observed with any religious respect to the Day, any more, or
as Holy-Times: as being made void by Christ, and laid level with all ordinary
Days and Times. But these cannot be extended to all Days and Times
universally. If but any one of the former positions in this Chapter be true;
and much less can they be urged against us, if all our reasons here expressed,
be good, as we believe them to be: And specially the third, and the last. For
which, without more ado now, we appeal to the consciences of all readers;
[Whether they will admit of our interpretation of these places, or make void
even any necessity of any sufficient Time at all for Religion (and so hazard
the loosing of all Religion for want of a sufficient Time) so much as one Hour
in a Year, or any day at all to be certainly determined for Religion, Gods
Worship and souls good?] Which whatsoever it be, or by whomsoever it be
determined: All Days and Times are not equal: but the determined sufficient
Time must be above all other Times, and the Day for it above all other Days.
And if they grant such a determination necessary, then whether, notwithstanding
all our Arguments, they will still ascribe it to men, or to God? And if to God,
then all Days and Times are again (more certainly) not equal. But Gods
determined Times and Days must be above all others, for necessity,
sufficiency, holiness, blessing; which is enough and enough for their
assertion. And so we leave it, to the consciences of our readers: And proceed
to our other position: which is --

XIV. The second Corollarie. Time and place are not equal circumstancies in
Religion.
[Time and place are not equal circumstances in Religion,] For the
demonstration whereof, we need use no other arguments then such as may be drawn
from what we have already discoursed concerning the profitablenesse and
necessity of Time toward Religion, specially the Continuance and Frequencie
of. Time largely employed to Religion, even indeterminately and voluntarily;
but more, determinate and solemn. Whereunto when we go to seek a parallel in
place, we shall find the distance and difference so unmeasurable, as we cannot
forbear saying, that we know not how to wonder sufficiently, how confidently,
and continually, the equality of Time and Place is inculcated upon all
occasions. And were it not for that confidence of our adversaries in this
assertion, we should even be afraid, our Readers would think us fools, or
that we wanted work, to busy and trouble our selves to declare a thing so
evident and plain, as this will anon appear to all that exercise either
conscience or reason in the comparing these two one with another.

XV. Place may be considered.
To which purpose we must needs first begin with a little philosophical
discourse of Place relating to humane actions, and businesses; as we had before
of Time, but with much more brevity. And then we shall make up, (but briefly
also, for a few words will make it plain enough,) the vast disproportion and
inequality between them in Religion.

1. In quantity, or in Vbi.
We say then first, That as Time, so Place, in Philosophy, is considerable in a
double Predicament, one of quantity or proportion, room or space; which also
has three respects (or dimensions, as they are called, whereas the proportion
of Time has but two.) 1. Of Length, 2. Of Breadth. 3. Of Height, which is so
termed as it tends upward: but as downward, is termed depth. The other of Vbi
which has not an English substantive proper for it, only, we must english it,
the place where a man is, or does such a thing.

2. Naturally, artifically, or accidently.
Again, Place (as well as Time) may be denominated, according to nature, or art,
or accident: 1. Naturally, as to be in or upon the earth or water, or air, 2.
artificially, as to be in a house, or room closed round, and covered over head;
or open above, or on the sides. 3. Accidentally, to be where such a thing
happened, or together with such company and the like. Each of these may admit
many varieties of distinctions, which it is not to the purpose to reckon up,
though some artificial ones we must a little more look at by and by.

Moreover Place (as was said of Time) how ever denominated, 3. As Indeterminate
or determinate.
is considerable two ways: Either as Indeterminate, and unregarded; or
determinate, definite, and appointed. The first is, such Place, where a man is,
or where he does any thing, without choice of that Place, for that action or
business, either by himself or by any Superior; and only some consideration
moves him to that action or business at that Time; and so he performs it in
that Place where he happens to be at that Time; and possibly does not so much
as think of the Place at all; but merely of the business in hand, and the
occasion of it. The other is such Place, wherein before hand a man purposed and
resolved, either by his own choice, or Superiors command, to do such an
action, or pursue such business. And so the Place is part of that which he
takes upon him to regard in the performance of such business; and part of that
which is charged upon him by the command of his Superior, what ever be the
Motive, or Cause, of such undertaking of charge.

And now, that we may the more speedily come to out Parallel, we will forbear
any distinct consideration of Place in reference to civil business, as
waiting on a Superior, getting of Learning, or the like: and without more ado
fall upon the business of Religion for Gods honor, and the good of souls,
though we shall illustrate that a little now and then, by instances also in
civil matters.

Place, then in reference to Religion, has generally, XVI. Place in reference
to Religion is either common or Consecrated.
as it was with Time, a twofold consideration. It being either some common
Place, usually and ordinarily employed in worldly businesses, as a hall,
parlour, chamber, yard, or field, etc. (which for distinction sake, not
rigorously, are termed profane places,) or else Consecrated Place, set apart
purposely for Religion: and that either wholly and perpetually; or but in part
and for a Time, or at some set Times, again that which is perpetually
Consecrated may be exclusive, either of all worldly matters from being
transacted in that Place, or of all other Places from being capable of those
services for which that Place was Consecrated, as in both respects, the Temple
of old, was by Gods appointment a Consecrated Place, exclusive from all worldly
businesses, and from any other Place being capable of Sacrifices and other
typical services for which it was ordained. Also Place, whether common or
Consecrated, may relate to Ecclesiasticke (or public) worship of diverse
families together; or domesticke worship by those of a particular family, or
solitary worship, of each person by themselves.

Here now we are to take a view, how far Place in any respect is profitable or
necessary to Religion? And whether it can match Time in it? Or comes short of
it? And if it do, wherein? So that we may do our Adversaries all the fair
right that may be in the point, we will first of all scanne, all the profit or
necessity that can possibly be pretended to be in Place, some Place, or any
Place, toward Religion, wherein it equallizes Time any way. Whereby also they
(and all Readers) we hope, will see by how slender matters they have been
abused, to make them proclaim in such sort, as they do continually, the
equallitie of Time and Place in Religion.

XVII. Place how necessary to Religion. 1. Naturally or Physically.
The necessity of Place may be reduced to three Considerations, all respecting
properly the body, and none of them the mind directly, which yet is principally
employed in Religion. Frrst, there is a Natural, Physical necessity of some
Place for every Religious action, or rather for every bodily creature to be in,
during its actions. Even Spirits and Angels being creatures and finite, though
not corporeal, have their Place, (their Vbi as Philosophers call it) wherein
they are; and out of which they are not at that Time.

And all bodies have besides, both Locum Internum, which terminates their
bodies, as also an Exterior Place, within the air or water (or viz.) which by
a natural physical necessity they do require and take up and fill; namely a
Place proportionable altogether to their own bigness, for length, breadth, and
height. And this they never change, while the bodies are the same; This
proportion of Place is immutable, being naturally fitted to their bignesses,
how ever the bodies move from Place, to Place, in regard of their Vbi. Now if
we take Place in this consideration, there is indeed an equallity between it
and Time in Religion (or any other business or action,) both are necessary,
physically, as we say, that is, inevitably, whether we think of them or no,
whether we will or no. No man (no creature) can rid himself of the company of
Time and Place. (Esse cum tempore, and Esse in loco; are as inseparable
adjuncts, as their own very being.) But this is such a weak consideration, as
we should be ashamed to mention it in a serious discourse, but that we find our
Disputers, even seriously holding this forth, as a remarkable equallity between
Time and Place in Religion, that nothing can be done without some Place, as
nothing without some Time, and that this should insinuate them both alike, and
of equal importance. Whereas in true and sober understanding neither the one
nor the other, come at all into a Religious consideration in this sense. Virtue
nor Vice, Ethically or Morally, (and much less Theologically or Religiously)
having no manner of relation to such Time or Place, or such Time or Place to
them. Therefore we dismiss this consideration as unworthy of any Time or Place
in our discourse: but that our Disputers wisdom, or Philosophical natural
(not moral) reason has laid a necessity upon us to say thus much of it, that
it may no more hereafter be talked of in this controversy.

There is a second necessity natural of Place to humane actions; XVIII. 2.
Vitally.
Religious, or Civil, which we may call vital, or medicinal, that is, that
the proportion of the Place, wherein one Prays (or many) or tenders any
service to God, be of so large a compass for length breadth and height, as
that a man may have room to breath, and that his limbs and members of his
body be not so crushed or crowded, as thereby his life or health should be
violated and endangered. From whence follows a necessity of a larger Place for
many, then for one, or few. Now in this consideration also, we will not deny an
equallity between Place and Time. Place must not prejudice the life or health
by the straightness. No more may Time, by its over long Continuance, or too
much Frequency, for any Religious duty, or any thing toward it, watching,
fasting, or the like. But this kind of necessity is rather Negative then
Positive, in true construction, and is not for Religion properly in a Moral or
Theological consideration, as was noted before, but only natural, vital,
medicinal, respecting the bodily spirits, and but indirectly the mind or soul.
And therefore we need not multiply more words of it.

Mean time we have a third natural necessity to consider, XIX. 3. Animally,
or sensitively.
which we may call animal, or sensitive; namely, that the Place where one is
met with others to worship God, be so large for room, and so ordered for
neernesse to him that is to speak, (whether in Prayer to God for all the rest,
or out of the Word, by Reading or Preaching to all the rest) as that all and
every one may be able to hear, whatsoever is spoken. And this consideration
once more equallizes Place and Time. This being like to the necessity of light
Time, (whether Natural of the Day light, or artificial of Candles, Lamps,
Torches, etc.) that all may both read, that can read, and besides may know to
behave themselves orderly in the service of God, and may partake of the
Sacraments in a fitting and decent manner. But again this consideration, is
rather Negative, or Privative, then Positive; and though drawing nearer to
Religion then either of the two former; yet being not properly a necessity
Theological or Moral, but animal and sensitive, the Senses not serving but
within such a distance, and with such help: Whereas Religion is chiefly
exercised in the mind, and may be (solitarily) without any present use of the
Senses; and when publicly, the Senses are accomodated with fit Place, and
Time, the mind perhaps is wholly irreligious. So that here is a very small
matter toward Religion, affirmatively and certainly, by all this necessary
Place had and observed. And yet this is all the necessity to Religion, that we
can conceive, that Place in it self considered, (and Antecedent to all command
of God, of which by and by) is capable of, in any respect relating to Gods
Worship, and the good of men's Souls: as we shall see more anon.

XX. The profit of Place is accidental, in regard,
Suitable hereunto, somewhat also may be said, of the profit of Place, as it may
be thus, or thus diversified, toward Religion. But whatever it is, it will be
found only accidental, and not any way affording any substantial profit, like
that which we have before noted (and must now again for this purpose repeat)
of the profit^blenesse of the Proportion of Time both for Continuance and
Frequency, in a substantial manner as we may call it.

1. Of fitnes.
First, then there may be an accidental profit (or rather convenicy, for that
here is the more proper phrase) in Place, when well contrived for the
largeness of it according to the company, and for the coolness in hot
weather, and warmth in cold weather, and shelter from rain, and wind, and the
like. Yet this, it is not amiss to observe, is so little toward Religion, that
the Jews had not by Gods command any such thing in that Court of the Temple
where they met, but were in the open air, liable to rain and storms, as
appears (besides the evidence of other proofs) by Ezr. 10. verse. 9.13. Though
it is also true, that some of the godly Kings provided somewhat toward it,
called a covert for the Sabbath, which wicked Ahaz is branded for taking away;
(as in spite to the Worship of God) a Kin. 16.19. Whereunto we may add, the
convenience of fitting seats, and galleryes, and windows for more light, and
such like accommodations; and the Places of public Worship being not too far
from the dwellings of those that are to have recourse to it. And like unto this
accidental profit of Places, is the accidental profit of Time heretofore
noted, namely the seasons of Time, as that the public Worship, particularly be
not too early, nor too late, in the morning, or at night, whereby men would be
apt to be sleepy, or drowsy, nor too long continued in the extremities of heat
or cold, which would dull men's devotions, or that persons could not come from,
and return to their dwellings, in convenient times. Here now again Time and
Place are equal, But these things are still rather removalls of impediments,
then any formal furtherance, when they are at the best, as reason and
experience shows. All this may be observed, and yet little or no Religion
gotten hereby.

2. Another accidental convenience (or profit, XXI. 2. Of gracefulness.
if any will still call it so) may be in reference to the fancy, when the
Place is so gracefully shaped, whether in the greatness of it, beyond any
necessary use, or in the littleness of it, yet capacious of all the company;
and otherwise artificially adorned, both in the fabric of it, and other
adventitious ornaments: as that it pleases the fancy of such as come into it,
which oftimes such things do, even more then enough. But this conveniencie
such as it is, (though if it be soberly and rightly used, may add a little
cheerfulness to the Spirits at the first beginning) oftentimes, if not for the
most part, and with the most men, proves an inconvenience, and a great one, by
distracting men's minds, with looking upon those fancies, and so occasioning the
neglect of the religious and solemn actions, they come (or pr^^^^d to come)
for. In so much as the wife and severe Lawgiver of the Lacedaemonians Lycurgus,
Plutarch. in vita Lycurgi.
appointed the Place for the public meeting of the Senate for State affairs,
rather by a River side, then in any house: Because he said, In a house, men
would often be gazing upon the fashion of the building, or some other
beautifyings of the room where they were, and so many times neglect the
minding of the businesses in hand. How much more is this like to be, If Places
for religious meetings, be curiously adorned with Paintings, and Stories, and
such like gawderies, as some would have them now adays. So that, though here,
we offer not any parallel of Time to Place in this consideration, because Time
being not so founded in a sensible object as Place is, it is not capable of
artificial ornaments, or pleasure to the fancy, yet Place has got little
pre-eminence of Time in this, being more liable to abuse then Time, and its
conveniencie very weak. Therefore for this particular, we will refer it to
the Readers, to pronounce concerning their equality toward Religion, and
proceed to a third consideration.

XXII. 3. Of decency, or civil respect.
3. Some kind of profit, or convenience, may further be in Place, namely of a
set determinate Place, even Consecrated: (we mean not, with this or that Rite
of Consecration, for which we know no warrant in Scripture, no such thing being
related of the Synagogues, beyond which, our Places of Worship can with no good
reason pretend, if so far) But we say there may be an accidental
conveniencie of Consecrated Places, built purposely, and altogether reserved
for religious Duties, as our Churches, and the Chapels of great men. Which
profit, or conveniencie, we may call a Civil Testimonial of respect to the
Worship of God, and business of Religion.

That as it is a piece of Civil decency, and expression of respect, to have
rooms reserved for serious businesses: As the Townehouse for every
Corporation, the Shire-house, the Parliament-houses, and the like. Even every
man that has room enough in his private house, has several Places, to
lodge, to eat, to dress meat, etc, and other things are not usually done in
those rooms: So in Times of Peace and Plenty, it is fit there should be for
all public assemblies, Places built and reserved for Religious use. And to
apply these without any necessity to mere secular purposes and businesses, may
be a breach of decency: Although all sober and serious businesses, wherein the
Parish generally are to meet, may happily pass for a sufficient necessity, if
there be no other Townhouse wherein they can meet. Also to keep a school in
some part of the Church (as it was wont to be, in all villages, till of late)
where there is no school house built, may also pretend to a necessity, But
out of these cases, and for the constancy of meeting, It is fairly convenient
to have public places so set apart for Religious services. But this
convenience is again but a weak matter. For he that prays in his hall, or
parlour, may, and often does serve God as Respectively, Decently, Devoutly in
his mind, as he that has a Chapel in his house: and so Soldiers that hear
Prayers and Sermons in open Fields, where ever their Camp is, may be as
devoutly affected, as those that have the most convenient Church to meet in.
And so it was unquestionably, with the Primitive Christians, who met any where,
in private houses, in caves, in woods; and had certainly no set Places at the
first; notwithstanding all the pretended allegations that some have made of
late for this; Cameron de Eccles. p.
Of which the most material are answered by the learned Cameron. Now the
parallel of Time set apart, to match or exceed this, we forbear at the
instant, because by and by, it will come more properly. Two other
considerations of the profit of places remain, which as they were ordained of
God of Old, drew nearer to Religion, then all that we have yet mentioned:
Though still their profit was but accidental as we shall see: And now in one
of them, it may be a little still, though very little: and in the other none at
all, but contrary: For --

4. There may be an accidental profit of places set apart, XXIII. 4. As a
memorial of some work of God.
that is for memorial; When public worship is performed in places, where, or
whereabouts, some famous act of Gods providence has been showed, or which are
built merely in remembrance of some such thing. So of old, God appointed some,
as the Temple to be built on Mount Moriah, where Abraham offered his Son Isaac.
And ratified others, as he sent Jacob to Bethel, when he had had his vision,
and where consequently he had vowed to serve God. And according to this, men of
their own choice, lawfully built the like altars; namely the places of
sacrifice in memory of some notable work of God; till God, by the building of
the Temple, commanded them all away; and after that, they proved occasions of
much Superstition and sin. And so did the making the Sepulchers of the Martyrs
(some while after the Apostles) the places of Christians meetings, prove
occasions of Superstition and Idolatry too, ushering in praying to Saints, and
worshipping their very Images, and the like. And herein Time has matched
Place, both for the profit and disprofit. For though of old we read of no
abuse of Times set apart for memorial by the Jewish Churches, or any of the
old Patriarchs; yet we have before noted, that not only God did appoint some
Days and Times of Memorial, as the Passover, and the Feast of Weeks and
Tabernacles, though they had also another use, namely Typical as we have also
noted: But the people of God ordained some likewise, as the Days of Purim, and
Feast of the Dedication. And as for the Christian Church, they by degrees grew
to observe sundry Days of memorial in a year; and happily made good use of
them in the Innocent Times, but afterward these also degenerated into
Superstition, and burden, and even proved matters of Idolatry, as that Papists
Days formally dedicated, not to God but Saints, Angels, and the Virgin Mary;
In which they pray solemnly to them, and worship their Images, and Relics
above all other Times. Here then they may go again for equal (Place and Time)
a small profit, and some danger of disprofit. Only the Continuance of Time well
employed, may be, and is, a real and substantial profit (so far forth) as our
Anniversary Time of thanksgiving for deliverance from the Powder Treason, in
experience and reason is. Also Gods Day of memorial, sets Time above Place, he
having now ordained no Place for that end: So that the advantage here is for
the Time, of which a great deal more will come to be showed now straight way.

XXIV. 5. As Typical.
5. The last kind of profit, that we can think of, which Place can afford to
Religion, is still accidental, namely Typical, serving by the command of God,
for a Ceremonially Spiritual use. Such was the Place of the Tabernacle and
Temple, which related to CHRIST (whose humane nature was the true Temple,
wherein dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead bodily) and directed to expect
all the acceptance of our services, our spiritual sacrifices, from their
being presented in Him and in His name to the Father; and the unlawfullnesse of
presenting them otherwise. And answerable hereunto Time: the seasons of Time
(as we have formerly discoursed,) even all that God of old appointed, all the
particular Days, He set apart for His worship, he made (first or last) to be
typical and to have a Ceremonially Spiritual use, relating to Christ, as
Saint Paul tells us, Col. 2. In this again then, Time and Place of old were
equal; And so are they now too: Not that there is any such use of them in the
Christian-Church now: But that there is no such use of either of them any more.
We will not urge, or plead for a Ceremonial, or Typical use of a seventh
Day-Sabbath under the Gospel. (However some friends seem a little to do so;
by some phrases, perhaps unwary, certainly unadvised) Nor of the Lord's Day;
though it is a strong memorial, as appointed by God in memory of Christ's
Redemption by His resurrection on that Day of the Week. Also no Place now does
or can inherit such a Typical profitablenesse. Men never having power to
invest it with it; and God having divested it by the coming of Christ in the
flesh, and the consequent destruction of His Temple at Jerusalem.

We say then, That in this respect, as well as the former, Time and Place have
been, and are equal in Religion, one as profitable as the other. But we have
now done with all their equality, and with all the necessity, or profit, that
can be in Place, this or that, or any Place, toward Religion: Of which we have
had nothing properly Theological, or Spiritual, but this last which was
merely accidental, by Gods absolute pleasure and institution; and the rest
only properly for the bodies convenience, and very little or nothing to the
mind, except accidentally to the fancy, or memory; But nothing substantial, or
in the nature of the thing it self, toward the Soul, its inward good, Gods
glory, and so the advancement of Religion.

And now there are yet behind manifold considerations of Time, the proportions
of it, the Continuance, and Frequencie, wherein it is Ethically, and Morally,
substantially and materially profitable, and even necessary, in the most
Theological respect that can be, for the securing and advancing of Religion;
Wherein it will undeniably appear to be, beyond comparison, superior to
Place, and that Place in those most important respects, XXV. Three differences
in nature, between Time and Place toward Religion
can in no sort pretend to be equal to Time in Religion.

Only first, let us but premise two or three differences, even in Nature,
between Time and Place: which though perhaps at the first view they may seem
but slight; yet upon second thoughts, they may possibly be counted worthy the
noting, as foreboding (as we may say) the greater and more remarkable
differences in Religion. First then, Place, our Place, is terrenum quid, an
earthly kind of thing; we being on earth, its foundation is on earth, and is
defined by an earthly body, of which it is the superficies: And accordingly, as
we have already said, it has only properly relation to the body, and bodily
conveniences. But Time is coeleste quid, a kind of heavenly thing; whose
foundation is in heaven, being derived from thence, from the motion of the
celestial orbs and heavenly lamps of light; being measured by them, and
being the measure of them. And accordingly, it is proper to help us forward
toward heaven. 2. Place is, quiddam crassum and materiale, a kind of gross and
material thing; and so only concerns the bodies convenience directly, which
is a material substance. But Time is quiddam immateriale and spiritale, as we
may say, a kind of spiritual and immateriall thing; and so has a more proper
influence into the mind, soul and spirit. 3. Place is in its own nature,
fixum and immobile quid; a fixed, settled, steady thing, which moves not; and so
less care is required about it, the same Place that serves conveniently for
one business, will often without any care taking serve for another, the same
Hall or House for diverse kinds of Counsels at several Times. But Time is
mobile and fluidum quid, a fleeting fleeing thing, that slides away silently
like a river without noise; and so the same particular Time, in any of the
respects, is irrecoverably lost, if slipped and neglected; and accordingly if
good care be not taken about Time, the whole action or business comes thereby
to be disordered and marred. So that even in Nature (to begin with) the
differences are apparent between these two, Time and Place; and so in Civil or
Artificial actions they are not equal.

XXVI. In Religion, at least 20 differences. 1. Time indeterminate is of great
importance, not so Place.
But much more manifestly, and importantly in Religion, in very many
Considerations, which we now proceed to enumerate and weigh.

1. We have noted of Time, even indeterminate, [That it is a circumstance of
much importance toward any business that admits variety of degrees, as getting
Learning, and Religion does.] Both the proportion of Continuance, and of
Frequency, even either of them, is very material, and a substantial advantage
or disadvantage toward Learning and Religion, (according to the largeness or
scantinesse of it) and that in an Ethicall and Theological Consideration. But
of Place we now say, there is no such thing to be affirmed; of the proportion
of Place in any of the dimensions, or all of them, or of the ( Vbi of) Place
where one waits upon God, in it self considered, and in reference to a man's
own particular devotion in solitary worship, or even to domesticke or public
worship, after the bodily conveniences forenoted be satisfied. A little, low,
narrow closet, is equal to a large, high, wide room. And the open field of
many miles, long and broad; which has no limit but the air within the reach
of the eye on any side; nor no other covering or bound of height but the Canopy
of Heaven, is equal to either. And a cave or grot under ground, equal to them
all, and none of them more or less conducible toward Religion then other. Time
therefore and Place are not equal circumstances in Religion. But this must be
showed more particularly --

2. By observation of any ones progress in Learning, XXVII. 2. Proficiencie in
Religion, argues a longer Time employed; nothing of Place
or Religion, above another of equal capacity, and other helps; A man may
certainly judge, even without being told, that the best Proficient has
employed (at least indeterminately) larger proportions of Time, for Continuance
or Frequencie, or both, toward Learning and Religion, than the other who is
behind-hand. But who can say so of Place? Who can judge, whether he has been
in a wide room, or a straight? within the house, or in the field? in a Church,
or besides the very High Altar? (as the language has been of late, and the
devotions of some, even wherever they have traveled.) He had need be a
Prophet, that could tell where such an one had prayed or read; for it can never
be gathered from his Piety gotten, or not gotten. Therefore again, Time and
Place are not equal circumstances in Religion.

3. The like is evident, XXVIII. 3. Longer Time employed, argues greater
proficiencie: not so Place.
in judging of proficiencie in Religion or Learning, (other things being
equal) by the Proportion of Time spent and observed toward it. Who so has
observed most, and oftnest Time, may infallibly be judged to have advanced
more, than he that has observed less, and seldomer. And again, a man may by
the like reason certainly foretell, without a Prophetic spirit, [That he that
observes two hours for another one, and so proportionably a greater
Continuance and Frequencie remarkably, will make a remarkable benefit above the
other, answerable to his Time.] But can any man so judge, or so foretell by the
Place, the Room where a man studies, or prays, or the like? If he would offer
to speak so superstitiously of a Church, or Chancell, or the very High Altar;
yet rationally he cannot; neither will the event or examination credit his
confidence. Therefore still Time and Place are not equal circumstances in
Religion.

XXIX. 4. A longer Time employed voluntarily, argues greater affections to
Religion. No place does so.
4. A man's employing voluntarily and indeterminately, much or little, often or
seldom Time, upon study or devotion, God and his soul, is a clear
demonstration (supposing no accidental hindrances) of his greater and
earnester affections, than another man's that does otherwise: and that other
man's slight and faint affection to spiritual things. But does the Place a man
is in, or goes to, show any such thing, unless that it declare a care of being
free from accidental hindrances, for which sometimes a wide field is the best
security: Or of having accidental helps, as in a Library, or the like? And
yet in that Field, or Library, a man may be idle, and slight, and heartlesse;
even scarce pray, or study at all, though that were his errand thither. But so
it is not, if a man observe Time; For then he cannot but pray, and the like,
and continue his affection in some sort; Or else he altogether loses his Time,
and observes it not. Again then, we say, Much Time employed in Religion,
demonstrates, beyond denial, much devotion and affection to it: And little,
proclaims it to be little. And so, often, or seldom. But what does the
largeness of the Place commend? or the narrowness disparage? What does the
frequent return to the same Place, or the change of Place, discover of a godly
disposition, or a worldly? Again then, Time and Place are not equal
circumstances in Religion.

XXX. 5. There is wisdom in redeeming Time to Religion, not Place.
5. He is a wise man, that orders his Time aright for his most important
businesses, as Study to a Scholar, Religion to a Christian: that though he
could not determine the Proportion beforehand, yet redeemes Time with the
greatest largeness that may be for these things, for Continuance and
Frequencie both. But what wisdom is there, or can there be, about the
largeness, or frequent reiteration of Place, unless merely accidental? Or
can a man be properly said to redeem Place, that is, more quantity and room
for study or devotion. The Philosopher said of old, [Solius Temporis honesta
est avaritia:] It is only commendable to be covetous of Time; of large
proportions of it, to redeem it, and employ it to the most useful and
important purposes. The very Sentence excludes covetise of Place, and
largeness of that, or any thing of it. Reason and Religion say the same.
Perpetually then the Conclusion is to be repeated: Time and Place are not
equal circumstances in Religion.

The evidence of this will yet be more clear, if we come to compare
determinate Time, solemn, consecrated Time, with determinate or consecrated
Place, toward Religion, the profit and necessity of either, generally and
particularly, both with reference to Solitary Worship, and Conjoined, whether
Domestic, or Ecclesiastic. Which will afford us many more differences. For,
to begin with the general --

XXXI. 6. A Time determinate is morall-naturall: So is not Place.
6. A determinate Time for Religion is required by the Law of Nature; And the
Law of Nature does (at least initially) determine an express Continuance and
Frequencie both, that it may be no less, nor no seldomer, as we have formerly
argued. Also without a Sufficient Time determined for all men, We have proved
from the Light of Nature, That Religion cannot stand among all men. (We put all
these together, for brevity sake:) But is there any such thing in reference to
Place? A determinate Place? That there should be a Law of Nature,
(Theological, not Physical) commanding a determinate set Place for Religion,
for any man's single and solitary Worship? or for Domestic, or even for
Ecclesiastic? What Religious moral necessity can there be in it? Since we saw
before, There is not, cannot be any substantial profit toward Religion, in the
proportions, or reiterations, or variations of Places. One room is as good as
another, and no better; and an open place as good as a closed room, and no
better: Paul's Cross, and Paul's Church are equal: Norwich Green-yard, and the
Cathedral. Also, when men go about to build a Place for conveniencie and
decency, the Law of Nature (Theological) is still silent, and says nothing
of the Proportion, (not so much as initially) that it must be at least so high,
so broad, so long; Neither does it necessitate men to come to that Place, after
it is built; as appears by the fore-noted instances of Paul's Cross, and
Norwich Green-yard Sermons. It is true, one man alone may not absent himself;
but that is in reference to the assembly, not to the place: For if the Assembly
be by any occasion transferred to another place, he is bound by the Law of
nature to forsake the former place, and follow the assembly. Neither again does
the light of nature afford any shadow of a reason, to say, that without a
sufficient place (sufficient theologically; with reference to Gods acceptance,
Souls good, and Consciences security, as we saw concerning sufficient Time,)
determined for all men; Religion cannot stand among all men? Where then is the
pretended clamoured equality between Time and Place in Religion? But this also
must be deduced more particularly:

XXXII. 7. A (...) determinate is necessary to Religion, not to Place.
7. A determinate Time is necessary to Religion; because Solemn worship of God,
in the nature of it, cannot be performed, in the Time that a man is busied in
worldly matters. But there is no necessity of a determinate Place for Religion.
For the self same individual Place, in every respect, without stirring a foot
or an inch out of it, will serve to perform Solemn Worship and worldly
business, namely at several Times, even one immediately succeeding the other:
either first the Worship of God; as in the Parliament Houses, they first begin
with a Prayer, and then they proceed to worldly businesses. Or first the
worldly businesses, and then the service of God, as our Thansgivings, sitting
at table after meat. The same may be every where. All Places are capable of
being employed to Religion, by the Apostles sentence; [I will that men pray
every where.] Therefore there is no such necessity of a determinate Place, as a
determinate Time. And so again, Time and Place are not equal Circumstances in
Religion.

XXXIII. 8. The unwillingnesse of men necessitates a Time determinate, not a
Place.
8. The unwillingnesse of men to attend at all upon Religion, necessitates some
determination of Time for it: Or else it is certain, that there will be no
Religious performances at all by most men. But there is no necessity of a
determinate Place for Religion in this respect. It neither can awe men, nor
take excuse from them, and so be no remedy of unwillingnesse, as it is with
determinate Time. Even Time alone will command Public Worship; as to say,
[Let all such a Village meet to worship God, on such a day; and let every one
be sure to meet when the assembly is, at such an hour.] This would call them
who are near together, to any convenient Place, and the rest to them. But
Place alone appointed or determined, commands nothing. All the year long the
Place (once built) is appointed; but never used, till some determined Time
come. Place then is nothing to remedy unwillingnesse, without Time also. But
Time without Place is sufficient, at least for Solitary Worship, and even for
Conjoined; unless all people be mad to keep asunder, because they will not
yield to meet in any Place but one of their own choosing. And the least
superiority that can be, is sufficient to draw them to some one Place for that
Time, if that Time must be jointly observed by all together. And any Place will
serve, as was said before. Time therefore determinate does all, and Place
nothing, Therefore still Time and Place are not equal Circumstances in
Religion.

9. XXXIV. 9. The interruptions of business necessitate Time determinate, not
Place.
The interruptions of worldly businesses do further necessitate a determinate
Time, which shall forbid the admitting of any such, during the Continuance
determined, and as often as the determined revolution comes about, and at the
particular season determined. (Ever excepting reservations of necessity, etc.)
And these determined Times, will certainly call upon every man, after they are
once settled, if he live, and so long as he lives. But there is no such
necessity of a determinate Place. For if there be no Time determined with it,
it helps nothing at all against interruptions, or hindrances, or
disappointments. It may be built and appointed, and yet never be used (as
appears all the week long) and that without fault, if there be no Time to
spare, or if the Time be observed in another Place. But the Time determined,
(if by lawful authority) must so far forth be observed, notwithstanding
ordinary interruptions, or else there is a fault, and sin. Religion then is
secured by the determination, and command of Time, even alone; But not by the
determination of Place alone, at all, without Time. Time then is the more
necessary. And Time and Place still are not equal Circumstances in Religion.

10. XXXV. 10. Want of wisdom necessitates a Time, not Place determinate.
To remedy men's want of wisdom suddenly without deliberation and
predetermination, to share Time constantly between God and the world, the soul
and the body; either of which call for a proportion, both of some Continuance,
and of some Frequency; there is a necessity of some determinate Time to
Religion. But there is no such necessity of some determined Place: For there is
no moral or theological wisdom to be exercised about it, as was intimated
before. The same proportion of Place, the same particular and individual
Place, Room, Fabric, House, Hall, Temple, Church, is capable of serving both
purposes, without seeking a new one, upon any Religious necessity or
consideration. It follows then again, that Time and Place are not equally
necessary, not equal Circumstances in Religion,

XXXVI: 11. Larger Time promotes Gods honor, not any Place.
11. The larger for Continuance, and the more frequent for Revolution (so as the
body, and bodily occasions can bear it,) the determination of the Time be; the
more is Gods honor promoted, and the good of men's souls advanced by the
observation of it. But by the largenes of a Place determined for Religion, and
the constant keeping to that Place, God has no more honor, neither the soul
any more benefit. The least Chapel, that will hold all the company, is equal
to Paul's Church, or the largest Church in the World. But so is not an Hour
equal to a Day, for Continuance of the proportion of Time; not once a Month,
equal to once a Week. There is not then an equality between Time and Place.

XXXVII 12. Men may be trusted with determination of Place, not of Time.
12. And now from all this it follows, that men cannot be trusted with the
whole determination of Times for Religion. But men may be trusted better with
determining the Places; that is, There needs be now no express determination
from God, of Places of Worship, to be here or there, or thus big, or thus
little, or the like, (nor indeed ever was there but the typical Tabernacle and
Temple) but they may well enough be left to the general rules of Convenience,
according to natural reason.

Against which yet (to say so much by the way) some of late among us have been
bold to transgress, by pulling down Galleries, even in place where the whole
Congregation could not hear without them: And worse, in enjoining the
Ministers to read part of the Divine Service at a place, where they knew
beforehand, he could not possibly be heard by all the people. But these
(though the men that cried loudest for order and decency in the Church) could
not but know they offended against the general rule of doing all things to
edification, that is, the spiritual benefit of Consciences. Which, unless by
such wilful opposites of Conscience, cannot be prejudiced (as we said) by
leaving the Determination of Places to men exercising reason. Whereas we have
showed it to be contrary of Time, that men's reason, helped by all general
rules of Scripture suffices not for the making the whole Determination of Times
for Religion, and namely, not for the chief sufficient Time for all men.
Therefore it will still follow, that Time and Place are not equal
circumstances in Religion. But this also we will a little show further in
particulars --

13. The want of a Rule to judge of the necessary sufficiency of the chief
Time for all men, XXXVIII. 13. Want of a rule to determine Time, necessitates a
determination of it: Any understanding man may order Place.
proves it not left to men's determination; who could never be able to satisfy
their own consciences in making it, or the consciences of others that would not
be content with any thing. For they would be so tossed between Necessity on the
one side, and Sufficiency on the other, as they could have no rest, nor means
of steering a right course. But there being no Spiritual necessity, nor
Religious sufficiency in Place, but only for bodily conveniencie; An ordinary
understanding, even from the experience of the capacity of the Place for
worldly meetings, is abundantly able to order that well enough. And besides the
skill of Architecture, which is common and certain enough for such a matter,
in many Places there are Rooms used to worldly purposes, which might suffice
for Religious meetings too. Therefore these Places may well be left to men, to
the Church, to any Magistrate, not a Persecutor, (who yet could but hinder open
public assemblies) but not Times, not the necessary sufficient chief Time.
Again then, Time and Place are not equal circumstances in Religion.

14. If the chief Time were left to men, to the Church, XXXIX. 14. Great
hazard to Religion, if Time were not determined: none in Place
either the major part of the Determiners would prove zealous for Religion, the
Honor of God, and the good of their own and others souls; and then having no
indulgence that they could securely plead, of so much Time for worldly
businesses, as six Days of seven; they could not but determine more than one
Day of seven: which, all that are of our Disputers minds, will cry out upon as
an intolerable burden, worse than Pharaohs taskmasters: For this is their
language of Gods determination of but one in seven; whereby they would persuade
themselves and others, that it is not any longer His determination. And to all
such men, it would be a vain determination, not regarded. Or else the major
part would be more remiss, and less zealous: only taking care, that there
might not be too much allotted to Religion, or too little for worldly
businesses, and pleasures, and the like. And then those that were conscientious
and zealous, (inferiors specially) would never be able, without enduring
persecution, to observe any tolerably sufficient proportion of Time for
Religion. And in suffering inconvenience or persecution, they would greatly
want a steady comfort, having no certain rule to measure their own time by. But
there is no such matter of hazard about Place, let it be but convenient for all
to hear, (which, unless the Determiners be wretchedly careless, or wickedly
tyrannous, it will infallibly be) It may, and will satisfy both sorts, all
sorts, as experience shows. Men may then have Place left to them, but not
Time. Time, therefore, and Place are not equal circumstances in Religion.

XL. 15. Solitary worship requires Time determined: not Place.
15. No man can determine to another, Time for Solitary Worship, to tie his
Conscience to observe that Time so Religiously. Also no man can sufficiently
and constantly secure Time determined by himself, if it be of any Continuance
remarkable, and any thing Frequent: but he shall be interrupted and hindered,
specially being an inferior: And no unwilling man may be trusted with
determining his own Solitary Time. Yet such Time is necessary to Religion; and
part of the chief sufficient Time to all men, is to extend to Solitary
Worship. All which pleads for Gods determination of the chief Time. But there
is no such care to be taken for Place for Solitary Worship. Any Place will
serve, or may, where one is alone, or not talked to by others. And the
commanding of Time for Solitary Worship, sends to a Solitary Place, if it be
possible; or commands a man's silence, and forbids others to, interrupt him: and
so if there be not wilful disobedience, Solitary Worship is sufficiently
secured by the Time determined, but not at all by the Place; For a man may be
in a solitary Place, and sleep, or muse of the World, and that without blame,
unless within the Time determined for Religion. While therefore God determines
the Time, the Place may without prejudice be left to men. XLI. 16. One
commandment of the Decalogue requires that God determine Time not Place.
And so Place and Time are not equal circumstances in Religion.

16. As the words of one of the Commandments of the Decalogue, expressly
determine the chief Time for Religion to be one whole Day of seven. So the
general scope of the same Commandment (or part of the general meaning of
another Commandment of the decalogue) requires, that no Time be observed as
necessary to Religion, but what God himself appoints. Yet the chief Time is to
be observed as necessary to Religion, even by all men, and so cannot be
appointed by men, but only by God himself. But no Commandment of the
Decalogue mentions Place for Religion, neither does the general meaning of any
Commandment, suppose any Place as necessary to Religion, in a moral sense. Or
any Commandment of God appear any where in Scripture about Place for moral
worship, no not for public, much less for domesticke, or solitary: that it
should be so or so, here or there, according to any of the natural
considerations of Place; But all is wholly left to men, (and ever was, we say,
for Moral Worship.) Place then again and Time are not equal circumstances in
Religion.

17. As all Time is Gods, and none ours for worldly business, XLII. 17. All
Time is Gods, all Places are ours.
but by his indulgence. And indulgence of his we have none, that we can
securely challenge (sufficient for worldly occasions) but the six Days in a
week mentioned in the fourth Commandment; which indulgence cannot be
perpetuated without the perpetuating also (and first) of the command of one Day
of seven for God and Religion. So that without this Commandment and
indulgence, we trespass upon God continually, in following our worldly
businesses. But as for Place, though the whole earth be Gods, yet in express
terms, He has given it to the children of men, Psalm. 115. by a general
indulgence. Neither calls for any of it back under the New Testament, (as he
did a little spot for typical use of old,) any place is convenient for so many
bodies, serving all the necessary turns for Religion. And so there is no
Trespass upon God, in point of Place; if there be but an observation of his
appointed Times in any Place. Whence still the same conclusion rises, Time and
Place are not equal Circumstances in Religion.

18. Men's souls need a singular blessing, XLIII. 18. There needs a blessing to
make sufficient, not so for place.
to make any Time less then all, sufficient for their souls, which have so
manifold necessities, and are so infinitely more worth then all bodily
occasions. Which blessing as none but God can bestow, so is there no ground to
expect it, but to his own appointments and determinations. And such blessing He
annexed to His determinations of Time, Genesis 2. and Exodus 20. But there being no
influence of Place into the soul; any Place is sufficient, which is sufficient
for the bodies convenience; And so no blessing is to be expected with relation
to the Place. But only to the meeting, and to the observation of the Time so
appointed by God, neither did God ever bless any Place for Religion, but only
typically. In this then also Time and Place are not equal Circumstances in
Religion.

XLIV. 19. The necessary Time for Religion, is properly holy, so is not any
Place.
19. The Necessary Time for Religion, is properly holy, and the sufficient Time
acceptable to God (or else it could not be counted sufficient.) But no Place
is, or can be now properly holy, or acceptable to God. Nor was ever any Place
so of old, in a moral sense, or with reference to Moral Worship; But only
typical. The Synagogues are no where called holy Places in Scriptures: No not
the very court of the Temple where the people meet to pray, and hear, and the
like. Neither were they suffered to go at any Time into that holy Place, but
the Priests only, and only the High Priest, and but once a year into the Holy
of Holies on the day of Atonement. All to teach the people, that all the
holiness (and acceptance of service) in the Temple, was only typical, which
when it should cease, all holiness of Places should withal cease, and no more
acceptance to be expected from the service presented in any Place, with
reference to the Place, or any consecration of it to Religion. So though we may
now consecrate, or set apart Places for Religion, (as the Centurian, a Gentile,
of his own accord, and in love to the Jewish nation, as themselves say, and not
as an act of devotion, built them a Synagogue, Luke 7.5.) Yet can we neither
make them Necessary, Holy, nor Places of acceptance. Place and Time therefore
are not equal circumstances in Religion.

XLV. 20. The New Testament honors a Time, viz. the Lords Day: no Place as the
Lords house.
20. Finally (to wind up diverse things in a few words) The New Testament honors
a Time, with the glorious title of Gods possession, the Lords day, which Day
for Continuance, Frequency, and Order, may be observed all the world over (with
but a little difference, according to the climates,) how many millions soever
of Christians there be in the world. Which joint serving of God, eminently
redounds to his great honor; and is the greatest exercise of the Communion of
Saints upon earth; from which no persecution, imprisonment, or the like can
hinder them, so long as they have but spirits enough to lift up their souls to
God. But the New Testament dignifies no Place now, with the title of the Lords
house, His possession. Neither can all Christians now, because of the Churches
amplitude, meet in one Place. And if any would say, all their places of meeting
might be of the same proportion all the world over. We Answer, It is indeed
possible in nature; but altogether improbable, (and next to impossible) in
practice, that it should be so, without a divine command: For it were
altogether ridiculous in reason, as it would be, to have all men wear clothes
of the same bigness and length. Besides this would only be public Places,
not domesticke, much less solitary. And again, persecution and imprisonment
might hinder from using these. Once more then, Time and Place are not equal
circumstances in Religion, nor fit to be equally left to men, to the Churches
determination, or any other.

And so we doubt not but we have sufficiently evinced this assertion, as well
as the former. If any think, XLVI. The conclusion.
we have spent too many words about it; let him thank our disputers confidence
on the contrary side, which has in a sort forced us to it, while withal we
have given a kind of recapitulation of some principal heads in the foregoing
Chapters, which some Readers perhaps will not be sorry for. We end with this
advertisement, That if we had listed to make our Selves or our Readers merry,
in so serious a subject as our general matter is, we would not have wished for
a handsomer subject then this paralelling of Time and Place as equal. But we
durst not be light in so weighty a cause. And now we have a third Corollary to
add, That the chief Time is a part of worship, and not a mere circumstance,
which will be yet another proof of its being above Place. But this is for the
next Chapter.

CHAP. XII.
The necessary sufficient chief Time for Religion, together with the
Particular Day for it, is a Part of Worship, and not a mere Adjunct or
Circumstance only.

I. A third Corollarie: The necessary sufficient Time is a part of Worship.
THis Assertion we conceive to be a necessary Corollarie from our foregoing
Discourses: Yet is usually denied, even by some who differ not from us in the
maine grounds of it. Therefore we judge it expedient to be subjoyned, and
cleared; Because also we are persuaded, it will not only add a little more
light to some things already laid down; but likewise somewhat more awe the
Consciences of every one in the point of strict observation of the whole Lords
day in a weekly revolution. For if men be once fully convinced, that not only
the performance of such particular Duties, as that Day is usually spent in, by
these that are devout, whether in public, or in the family, or alone, (as
Prayer, for instance, and reading the Word) are Parts of Divine Worship; But
even that the observation of this particular Day, and that weekly, all of it,
in varieties of Duties of Religion, one or other, all our waking time, is also
it self a Part of Divine Worship, and beyond the nature of a mere Adjunct or
Circumstance of Worship: We doubt not, but they will be a great deal the
more careful and conscionable in the observation of the whole Day, and every
part and parcel of it.

II. The question explained.
To effect this, we must first clear what we mean by a part of worship; and
what by a mere adjunct or circumstance of worship: and so state the question
between us and those of the contrary opinion, and then bring our arguments, and
vindicate them and our assertion from the contrary exceptions and objections.
We say then --

1. What worship is, and what a part of worship.
1. Worship, generally, is the tender of our homage to God, and giving Him
immediate honor. Accordingly, a part of Worship, is whatsoever is presented to
God, (whether thing or action) as a special homage, and as an immediate honor
to Him. Or at least ought to be so, if it be not:

2. What an adjunct* or circumstance of worship.
2. An Adjunct or Circumstance of Worship, (which is merely such) is, That which
is not (or ought not to be) presented to God, any special or immediate Honor
to Him: but only serves and is used as an accommodation to the performance of
some thing or action which is properly Worship, or perhaps is only an unthought
of accident, naturally or occasionally accompanying that thing or action which
is Worship.

3. Withal it is to be considered, 3. The same thing may be both a
circumstance, and part of worship.
that the self same thing which in one case is but an Adjunct barely, a mere
Circumstance, and ^o way a part of Worship, may in another case be more then a
Circumstance; and a proper part of Worship, being specially, and immediately
tending to Gods honor, and tendered with that intention, and to that end. Some
instances will clear all this. 1. The sacrificing of a Bullock (or Sheep) was
a part of Gods worship under the Law. 2. The Sex, that it was male, or female:
The Age, that it was so many months, or weeks, or years old: The Color, that
it was red, or black, or white; Was in many cases a mere Circumstance, not
regarded, nor to be regarded. 3. Yet in some cases it must be a male, not a
female; in others, a female, not a male. So, in some cases, so young, and no
elder; in others, so old, and no younger, (as in the firstling males, it was to
be seven days with the Dam, nor more, nor less; Number. 19.2.
and the eight day to be offered.) And in the Water of Expiation, the ashes of
the burnt Heifer was to be of a red Heifer, of such an age precisely. In all
which, those very circumstantiall considerations were properly parts of
Worship, Of the Homage to be tendered to God, and immediately to His Honor.

4. Furthermore it is to be observed, how any thing, III. 4. How any thing
comes to be a part of worship.
whether seeming to be substance, or circumstance, comes to be a part of
Worship. Which may be resolved two ways. 1. As Worship comprehends under the
term, both true worship, and false worship, or Right worship, and
Will Worship; So the cause of it is our intention, to present it as a special
homage (as was said) and an immediate honor to God. Such intention, we say, is
the formal cause, that such an action is Worship, in him that presents it, 1.
The formal cause is our intention.
or such a thing, in him that tenders it. And without such intention, no action
is formally Worship in any man, however it be in the nature of the action, or
in any other person that presents it. As for instance; The repeating of any
sentence of Scripture, or the Lords prayer, intending thereby to honor God, is
a part of Worship: But to repeat it, to teach a child to spell, or read, or to
understand a language, or to use it as a charm, or the like is certainly no
Worship, because it wants an intention of immediate honoring God by it. So, to
kneel down before an Image or Crucifixe, with intention to honor God by that
action, is Worship, (though false and idolatrous:) but to kneel down before
it, not seeing it, nor thinking of it; Or to pull out a thorn out of ones
foot, or the like, is no Worship: because, again, here wants an intention of
honoring God by such an action. 2. The efficient cause is Gods command.
2. But now, as Worship denotes only true and right Worship; So the proper
efficient cause, and that which both legitimates and necessitates such
intention, is the command of God. What He commands to be presented to Him,
whether seeming substance, or circumstance, has the nature of a special
Homage, and immediate Honor to Him, and ought to be presented (as often as it
is presented) with such intention. From which command also flows an answerable
acceptance of such a commanded thing or action, when accordingly performed
with that intention: And with that intention there may, and should also be an
expectation of such acceptance; whereby the intention is proved in a man's
conscience, whether the matter be commanded or not. For Will-worshippers expect
an acceptance, though without warrant. And profane Hypocrites, though they
pretend to worship God, yet when they intend it not, they expect no
acceptance. We say then, our expectation of acceptance, declares whether we
tender such a thing as a part of Worship, or use it as a mere circumstance.

IV. Gods command is either particular or general.
5. Yet again, Gods command of any thing, as Worship, is either express and
particular, of such a special thing; or general, of such an affection; which,
according to an allowance of presenting some kinds of things to Gods honor,
does present such particulars, or such a proportion, suitable to the degree of
the affection, and other occasions. Instances of the first, were the daily
sacrifices, expressly commanded of the second, Free-willing offerings, and
Vows: As we read of Salomons thousand burnt-offerings on the Altar at Gibeon;
and his mighty number of Peace Offerings; two and twenty thousand Oxen, and an
hundred and twenty thousand Sheep. Even these being acceptable, fell under the
general command, of Honoring the Lord with his substance, which Solomon
himself records, suitable to those Times, and his incomparable wealth, and the
like Considerations, as of the great Solemnity of dedicating the house of the
Lord, etc.

6. Once more, the Command of God of things for His honor, V. Gods command is
either. 1. By the Law of Nature.
may either be. 1. By the Law of Nature, that is, of things which in a
Rational and Ethicall Consideration, according to the Light of Nature, may be
and are to His honor, either constantly or accidentally, as Prayer to Him,
Swearing by His name, 2. Or by positive Law in Scripture.
and calling Him to witness, or appealing to Him. 2. Or by Positive Law, in
Scripture (which is the only way now; Or of old by Dreams, and Visions, and the
like) altogether by virtue of His divine institution and appointments. As the
use of Water in the Sacrament of Baptism, and of Bread and Wine in the Lords
Supper, which being things of common use for worldly purposes, have no other
aptitude to be immediately to His honor, But from His own Command.

7. These things thus premised, VI. The question stated first by us.
we shall briefly state our question thus, We say, the necessary sufficient
chief Time for Religion, together with the particular Day for it, is a part of
worship, and not a mere adjunct and circumstance only. Hereby we mean, that
that Time observed for Religion, is a part of our special homage to God, and
an immediate honor to Him; And that it ought to be presented with such
intention, as being specially commanded by God, partly in the Law of Nature,
namely the Continuance and Frequency being to the honor of God only in a
Rational and Ethicall Consideration, and partly in Scripture, (as has been
showed, Chap. 10.) And accordingly, is specially acceptable unto God, and such
special acceptance may be and ought to be expected from God; And so the
Duties of Religion are then doubly worship, and doubly acceptable, both in
reference to the Duties themselves, and to the Times wherein they are
performed. (Only still it must be remembered, that all our acceptance is in and
through Jesus Christ.) We say, they are doubly Worship, and doubly acceptable,
or trebly, or four fold, as filling up together, the whole Continuance
commanded of a Day, and answering the required observation of such a frequent
Day, and being presented upon the appointed particular Holy Day. Like unto
which there is now no other Time under the New Testament in this complete sort,
Worship, or so greatly acceptable: Though there be some other Times that may
have a little share also, as we shall see anon. In the mean time, all our
indeterminate and voluntary Times (in any respect) so far as they are
voluntary, are mere Circumstances of Worship, and no way to any special or
immediate Honor to God in their observation, nor any matter of special
acceptance, and so not to be presented with any such intention or expectation.
This is our opinion and meaning.

VII. 2. By others.
8. But now on the contrary, others deny, that under the Gospel any Time or
Days at all are parts of Worship; or that the Worship of God consists now at
all in the observation of them. Thus one resolutely, O.R. p. 202.2.
[We deny that the worship of God can be placed in the observation of any Day,
unless we speak improperly. Yet we acknowledge, That in the Holy Days there
is a kind of worship of God, as far as they are instituted to the Honor of God
alone, and the faithful are congregated to them to holy performances.] But
this is very improper indeed; For besides that by being instituted to the
Honor of God alone, he means not, that the Days instituted or observed, are
any special or immediate Honor to God positively: but only, that negatively
they are reduced to His Honor, when they are not instituted to the Honor of
Creatures, Saints or Angels, among Orthodoxe Christians, though they are among
the Idolatrous Papists: But besides this, we say, If the Faithful congregating
can make a Day a part of Gods worship, then any Day, or every Day of the Week,
or Year, may be a part of Worship, when the Faithful meet to that purpose;
which no man affirms. p. 204.1.
But hear him once again. [The worship of God ought to be the end of the
indiction of such Days: But the Days themselves are no part of worship, but
an adjunct only, or circumstance of worship.] If any man shall say, The learned
Professor speaks it only of the Holy Days appointed by the Church. We answer,
We know he does so: But then he must remember, that he makes the very Lords
day to be of Ecclesiastical constitution only; which cannot make a thing a
proper part of worship; and so the same is appliable to the Lord's Day also: But
he is not alone in this Assertion: his Fellow- Professor is of the same mind,
(which we wonder at) for the Lord's Day; when he puts this difference between
the Jewish times and ours, [That the very Days, D. Wall. de Sab. p. 93.95.
and the Rest upon them, was a part of worship to the Jews: But ours only a
necessary circumstance thereof.] Another follows thus: [To speak properly, a
Day makes no part of Gods service, Primr. p. 250. and 278.
under the New Testament: but is only an accidental circumstance thereof.] And
again: [Times appointed now, make no part of Gods service, and are not
appointed, but relative, to the public exercises, p. 287.
etc.] We need say no more for the stating the Question: The difference is
apparent; They say, The Time is only a necessary circumstance; We say, it is
more than so, a special part of worship. Which thus we come to manifest by
these ensuing Arguments:

[That Time which the Lord requires out of all our Time, VIII. Arg. 1. It is
Gods portion Ergo, a part of worship.
as His peculiar portion, is a part of worship. But the necessary sufficient
chief Time for Religion, together with the particular Day for it, is that Time
which God requires out of all our Time, as His peculiar portion. Ergo, It is a
part of worship.] The Proposition is made good by instances of other things,
which being challenged by God as His peculiar portion, became thereby parts of
worship, parts of the special Homage due to Him, immediately tending to His
Honor. As, 1. The Place which God did peculiarly choose out of all the Tribes,
to set His name there, (as the Place often is) the Lords House, the Lords
Temple, was by virtue of such Divine challenge of it, a part of worship, (sc.
of the Ceremonial worship) undeniably; and the presenting there their
services, was a special part of the Jews homage to God, and an immediate
honor to Him; as also a matter of special acceptance with God, (even so far,
as that no other legal services were otherwhere acceptable at all, except upon
extraordinary command, as Elijahs was, 1 King. 18.) And if it were so with
Place then, there can be no reason but it is so with Time now, though not now
in a typical respect, but moral, whether natural, or positive, it is all
one. 2. So was it also of old with the Tithes, which God challenges as His
peculiar portion out of every man's substance, Lev. 27.30, 32. It is said, They
are the Lords, His part, His tribute. And so the payment of them was a special
Homage to Him, an immediate Honor, a part of worship. And that (which is
specially to be noted) antecedent to any particular use which He meant to put
them to, and whereto He did afterward apply them, sc. the maintenance of His
Priests and Levites. For this we read not of, till Number. 18. which was diverse
years after. Whereupon it is there (and elsewhere) said, That the Lord is the
portion of Levi; that is, Levi should enjoy the Lords portion of Tithes, as
also of Offerings. But this use of them was secondary, and we do not say, that
in this considration the payment of them was properly Worship. For it was not
immediately to Gods honor, but only mediate, in as much as those Levites that
were maintained by them, were Gods Ministers. That which made them Parts of
Worship, was antecedent, as we said, to this; Namely, Gods challenging them as
His portion, His own primarily and originally, (though now making the Levites
His receivers.) Hence the witholding them, is called robbing of God, (not
defrauding or robbing the Levites) Mal. 3. And if we understand aright, This is
that Sacrilege mentioned Romans 2. where, after the Apostle had twice said, Thou
breakest the same Commandments thou teach others not to break; Stealing,
and committing Adultery: he adds, Thou that abhorrest Idols (or Images) do
thou commit Sacrilege? Do thou break the same Commandment, viz. the second,
robbing God of part of His Worship, by detaining His portion of Tithes?
However, to be sure, they were His portion formerly, and so a part of His
worship. 3. And so was that share which God reserved to Himself out of the
Midianites spoils, The Lords Heave Offering, v. 29.41.
Number. 31. which is called the Lords tribute, the Lords portion: And was His, a
part of homage to Him, a part of His worship on that occasion, antecedently to
the special use. He afterward allotted that also to be disposed of by Eleazar
the Priest, as we there read. Now if these things by this means became parts
of Worship: So is it in reason, with that Time which God challenges as His
tribute or peculiar portion out of all our Time; It must be a part of Worship,
in that it is His, allotted to His Honor, antecedent to any particular uses
which it is put to, to any particular Duties of Worship, which yet become the
employment of it; Namely one or other of them, or more than one, even all the
varieties of Duties, do actually employ this Time unto Gods Honor. But
antecedent, we say, to any particular Duties, the Time being Gods, His portion,
is to His Honor immediately, and a part of Worship, and consequently calling
for some particular Duties of Worship, to help employ it to Gods honor. In a
word, Though it cannot be actually employed to Gods Honor, without some
particular Duties; yet has it a distinct consideration abstracted from the
Duties: As requiring and calling for, and even commanding (as we said formerly
of Solemn Time in general) Duties to attend it, some or other. And so is
distinctly, by, and of it self, to the Honor of God immediately, as well as
the Duties themselves, though not actually separated from all. For that is a
contradiction in Religion, to say, [That a Time can be to Gods honor, and not
be employed in some Religious Duties or other.] But we have said enough, as we
conceive, to illustrate and evince the Proposition of our Argument, That the
Time which is Gods portion, is a part of Worship.

The Assumption, [That the necessary sufficient chief Time for Religion, is
the Time, which (together with the particular Day for it) God requires out of
all our Time, out of all men's Time, as His peculiar portion] that is, above all
other Time, has been proved abundantly in the foregoing Chapters, 9. and 10.
And this we also conceived to be meant in those words of the fourth
Commandment, The seventh Day, or a seventh Day, one Day of seven is the
Sabbath, or a Sabbath of the Lord thy God, or to the Lord thy God; namely, That
he being the Lord of all thy Time, (as of all things else that are thine.) has
reserved to Himself, and challenges for Himself, (while He allows thee six
Days mainly for thy wo^ldly business) this proportion of Time, of one whole
day of seven, The Lords Day, if from Divine Authority must needs be a part of
worship, and more holy then other Days. G.I. page 16.9.
as his peculiar portion to be sanctified, employed to His immediate honor.
And like to this, as we conceive, is the meaning, in the New Testament, of the
term of the Lords Day, it is the particular Day which he has taken and
challenges to Himself, as His peculiar portion, out of all the Days of the
Week, to be sanctified wholly to His honor, whence the conclusion follows
inevitably, That this Time, in all the respects of it, is a part of Gods
worship, a part of the special homage and tribute due to Him from all men; and
specially accepted by Him.

We proceed to another Argument, IX. Arg. 2. It is the observation of a moral
Commandment of the first tab. e. Ergo.
properly respecting the necessary sufficient chief Time, for Continuance and
Frequency jointly. Thus --

[The obedience to, and observation of, a moral Commandment of the first
table, is a part of Gods immediate worship. But the observation of the
necessary sufficient chief Time for Religion, is the obedience to, and
observation of, a moral Commandment of the first table. Ergo, The observation
of this Time, is a part of Gods immediate worship]

Both the Propositions are confessed and granted by our Disputers. Prim. p. 2.
Therefore they must own the child issuing from such Parents. The Major is thus
expressed, [Whatsoever is moral is universally an essential part of Gods
service.] The Minor thus [The moral substance of the fourth Commandment is to
have a Time regulate, frequent, etc.] And generally they all speak of a
sufficient Time as moral natural. It is then a part of worship, a proper and
essential part of it, by their own sentence. But we will a little further
prove and illustrate it also by our own grounds, and not depend upon them.

1. For the Major, we say, That the Commandments of the first Table, do all of
them plainly concern the immediate worship and honor of God; and all the
objects of those Commandments, namely the things and actions outward or inward
commanded in them, are matters of Divine worship. Therefore the obedience to
those Commandments, the observation of them must needs be a part of worship,
of our Homage to God, and redound to His immediate honor.

For 2. Whatsoever is to be presented to God, by virtue of a moral
Commandment of the first table, is to be Presented to Him, by all men, as a
special homage they all owe to Him, (as when a Landlord keeping court,
requires all his tenants, to attend him such days in a year, from such an
hour to such an hour till he dismiss them, this Time as a part of their
homage to him their Landlord,) and as an immediate Honor to His Divine
Majesty, being so presented; and accordingly it is certainly, specially
acceptable to Him. Therefore it is most properly a part of worship, and far
beyond the nature of a mere adjunct or circumstance: in that the description
of a part of worship, formerly given, fully agrees to it.

3. If Gods Ceremonially positive command can make a thing, any thing, Number.
19.2. etc. Heb. 9.13.
a part of worship, as a bunch of Hysope, a thread of Scarlet or Purple wool,
dust of the Tabernacle, the Ashes of a Red Heifer, and the like, as no man can
deny but it was of old, of which yet no Moral or Rational cause can be given,
but only the Sovereign will of God requiring such things as a part of His
worship: much more must it be acknowledged, that a moral command of God
(whether natural or positive) for which a clear, and moral reason may be
alleged, that such a command is to Gods special Honor (as also to our great
good,) must needs make the obedience to, and observation of any thing so
commanded, a part of His worship, without control; unless any will say, that
a moral command has less force in it then a ceremonial.

2. For the Minor, 1. That the necessary sufficient chief Time for Religion is
moral, even moral natural; namely, that the law (and light) of nature
commands, there should be such a Time observed, A Frequent Time of convenient
Continuance necessary and sufficient for the chief Time; that is, we all must
observe no less so often; and no seldomer so much; But so much so often is
necessary: Again we need observe no more so often, nor no oftener so much for
the chief Time; But so much so often is sufficient: All this we have proved at
large Chap. 9. And this cannot but be within the compass of one of the
Commandments of the first Table, which comprise among them all that concerns
Religion, as our adversaries confess often, and we have also proved Chap. 10.
The observation then of this Time, is certainly, the obedience to, and
observation of a moral Commandment of the first Table. 2. We have also proved
Chap. 10. that this chief Time, can be determined by none but by God himself;
and if that be so, then unquestionably the words of the fourth Commandment
contain that determination of God for the chief Time; and one Day of seven is
it, and is moral in that Commandment: And so the observation of it, is both
the observation of the chief Time for Religion; and the obedience to, and
observation of, the morality of the fourth Commandment: And thus both our
Propositions being confirmed, the conclusion follows assuredly, That the
observation of this chief Time, is properly a part of worship, of Gods
immediate and essential worship.

A third Argument proceeds concerning the particular Day for the chief Time,
that it also is a part of Worship, X. Arg. 3. It is commanded by God for His
worship. Ergo.
as our assertion holds forth. [Whatsoever is certainly commanded by God for
his Worship, is a part of his Worship. But the particular Day for the chief
Time, is certainly commanded by God for his Worship. Ergo. The particular Day
for the chief Time is also a part of Divine Worship.] The Major cannot be
denied; it being the command of God that makes any thing, (and every thing) a
part of Worship, nothing is so, without His command in nature or Scripture; how
important or necessary it else seem to be: And nothing but is so, upon His
command, how flight soever it seem to be, as we showed before of a bunch of
Hyssop etc.

The Minor we had also proved in the tenth Chapter by diverse arguments, and in
the ninth Chapter there was this, which we think it not amiss breefly to
repeat.

[That the number, (or Frequency) of Days being once commanded by God, as
namely a seventh Day in the fourth Commandment; If the particular Day come to
be changed, or to cease and be out of date, the immediate next Day, does by
virtue of that Commandment of the number, of one in seven infallibly and
presently come in Place of it (as heir at the Common Law, and as the
successor of a successive Kingdom, immediately upon the death of the former
King,) unless any new one should be expressly set up, by the same authority
that commanded the number of one Day in seven.] So that God having commanded,
the number of one Day in seven for the chief Time to Religion in a constant
revolution, which is to leave six Days still together for work, and a seventh
Day to be a Sabbath, Immediately upon the change of the particular Day for the
chief Time, which of old was the last of the seven: Immediately (we say) upon
the ceasing of that, and its growing out of date, the very next Day, which is
the first Day of the next week comes in the stead of it, even in the silence
of God, as being already commanded by the fourth Commandment, which determined
the number, and so remains as commanded by God; and is therefore a part of His
Worship now, as well as that former particular Day was; which none denies.

XI. The objections answered. Except. Prim. p. 2.
Now these Arguments a man may think were clear enough to carry this cause. Yet
some thing is pretended against them, at least against our assertion. Let us
therefore now consider it. Thus one excepts:

[The Time under the Old Testament, made a part of Gods service, not of the
moral, but of the Ceremonial and Typical service, established then in the
infancy of the Church, which was not to continue, but ^ring the Time.]

To this we answer. 1. That though this be true of the other Festivalls, yet we
deny it of the weekly Sabbath, one Day of seven. For as much as it cannot be
denied, but it was then (and we have proved, and shall do yet further in that
next part, that it is still) the chief Time determined by God for all men, and
so morally commanded to all men, from Adam to the worlds end; and as such, it
was (as we have now argued) and so is still, a part of Gods worship, of his
moral worship, and in no respect ceremonial.

2. As for the particular Day, which then was commanded for that chief Time;
though we grant it was not Moral, that is, perpetual, but only Temporary, for
that world from Adam to Christ; as also we deny not but God to the Jews
annexed some Ceremoniality to it, which use made it more a part of worship for
that Time, viz. of the typical worship: Yet forasmuch as that which generally
and properly made it a part of worship, was not this or that particular use,
but the express command of God: In like sort, though the particular Day now
have no Typical use under the Gospel, Yet being commanded by God, and being
His peculiar Portion, It also is a part of His worship, as we have said.

But we have an other Objectour, who more largely prosecutes the Negative
against us, and the most largely of any that we have seen; and that is the
learned Professor, D. Walaeus. And we cannot wonder so much (as we said) at
any, as at him; For he grants two things, which most of the rest of the
Disputers deny. 1. That one Day in seven is Moral, that is, perpetual, by the
fourth Commandment. 2. That the Lord's Day is of Divine, though Apostolical
institution. Now say we, the observation of a Moral Commandment of the first
Table, and of a Divine institution, according to that Commandment, is (as we
have argued) a part of Worship. This he did foresee would be objected against
himself, and therefore he prevented it as well as he could; Thus he frames the
Argument; [All obedience yielded to the Commandment of God is religious:
Therefore if one Day in seven be to be observed by Divine command (which is his
own opinion) it is also religious, and so a part of Worship.] Let us see how
he will avoid this Argument. Thus he says, [This hurts them also, D. Wall. p.
95.
that hold some Time to be observed by the Morality of the fourth Commandment.
For that Day or Time once appointed (be it what it will) is religiously to be
observed, and consequently a part of Divine Worship.] This witness is true,
and the argument of force against them all. Thus far therefore he has answered
nothing, but against himself.

XII. Object. 1. Answered.
He comes therefore to loose the knot; and to object against the contrary
opinion. [The religiousnesse of this Day of ours (one Day in seven) or the
Lord's Day, is to be measured, by the intention of the Commander, that is, God.
For if He command any Day to be observed as a part of Worship, or as a
Sacramental Type, then it is so to be observed with that religiousnesse, as it
is commanded. But if only as a necessary and determined circumstance of
Worship, or necessary policy in the Church, then it is only in that manner and
intention to be observed.] To which we answer many things.

different intention of the Lawgiver appear in the Old or New Testament; That
He will have the Times of the Jews observed as Parts of Worship; Ours only as
necessary Circumstances thereof? Certainly, according to himself, one and the
same fourth Commandment is Moral for the observation of one Day in seven,
both then and now. But there is not the least appearance of this difference in
that Commandment. If one Day in seven was commanded as a part of Worship then,
It is so now: Or if it be now only a circumstance of Worship, it was so then;
for ought appears, either there or any where else that we know of Nay his own
first argument is yet unanswered: All obedience yielded to the Commandment of
God, is religious. Therefore the very command of God, of it self, makes the
observation of one Day in seven a part of Worship.

Sacramental Type) as if that made it a part of Worship; which being wanting,
our Day is not a part of Worship; as he would seem to infer. We answer, 1.
The Sabbath, according to his opinion, was instituted from the beginning, even
in innocence, and therefore could have no Sacramental Type annexed to it. Yet
then it was a part of Worship commanded to Adam by God himself. 2. Again, a
Sacramental Type, may perhaps make a thing more a part of Worship; But a thing
may be a part of Worship, that has no Sacramental Type annexed to it. For the
command of God alone, without any Typical respect, may and does make any thing
a part of Worship (as singing, for example, against which if it were not
commanded, a man might perhaps except somewhat as unseemly for sober men. One
Day in seven then, being still commanded by God, in a Moral Commandment of
the first Table, It remains still a part of Worship, the Type removed from it,
or rather from the particular Day belonging to it.

3. Whereas he says, we observe our Day, not as a part of Worship,
circumstance of Worship; he seems to think, that a thing cannot be both a
necessary circumstance, and also a part a Worship. Whereas a Day may be, and
must be both of these, if commanded by God: A necessary circumstance to those
Actions or Duties of Worship, which are actually performed on it; and a part of
Worship in regard of the Divine command of the Day or Time it self. Yea, D.
Wall. p. 95. and 63.
himself at least twice calls the seventh Day of the Jews a circumstance, So
that their Day also was a necessary circumstance of Worship, and yet a part of
Worship. Certainly, a necessary circumstance of Worship commanded by God
himself, is a part of Worship. But (says he) one Day in seven is a necessary
circumstance of Worship, commanded by God himself in the fourth Commandment:
Therefore it is a part of Worship.

4. It may not be amiss to add a few words more about the necessary
circumstance of worship: Because it is often used by diverse, and usually
mistaken, and misapplyed. We have formerly touched it, yet it may be convenient
to do it again, It may signify a naturally, or physically necessary
circumstance to this, or that, or any action of worship: and then we easily
grant, that such Time, so considered, is no part of worship, no more then the
Place wherein one is by a like natural and physical necessity, at the Time
that he performs any action of worship. But this is not the Time we are
disputing of, for this is only indeterminate and common Time, as we have spoken
heretofore. But we are now disputing of solemn and determinate Time, and that
in the highest rank of solemnity, determined not by man, but by God himself,
both in Nature and Scripture, for the chief Time, and in Scripture for the
particular Day. This therefore may be, and must be a part of worship, though
the other is not, nor cannot be. Or secondly, a necessary circumstance of
worship, may signify a circumstance, Morally or Theologically necessary to
worship. And so worship, does not signify this or that pacticular Duty of
worship, but generally Religion and the honor of God. For under the Old
Testament, indeed, some Times were Theologically necessary to some Duties of
worship, namely, by Divine express command, as the 14. Day of the first month
yearly to the Passover, (unless in the reserved case of uncleanness, or a
journey, and then the 14. Day of the second month) and so the other
Festivalls, The Festivity and worship was to be necessarily performed on such
Days yearly; and the particular Days, and yearly revolution, were
Theologically necessary to such particular Duties of worship. But under the New
Testament there is no such thing, there is no Duty of Religion, no particular
Duty of worship, that Morally and Theologically must necessarily be performed
on the Lord's Day; and on no other Day: Neither is there any particular Duty of
worship, ( Prayer only excepted, which can never be wholly excluded, when we
have to do with Religious Times, or Duties of worship) necessary to the
observation of the Lord's Day, absolutely or infallibly. So that in a
Theological or Moral sense, it is not proper, nor true to say, that either
the continuance of a whole Day, or the revolution of that whole Day once in
seven Days, or the particular Day, the Lord's Day, is a necessary circumstance
to any particular act of worship; But only to worship, to Religion in general,
in the manner forenoted, as commanded by God for the chief Time, according to
the Law of nature and Scripture, and for the particular Day according to both
Old and New Testament; And in such a sense being Morally and Theologically
necessary, this Time, in all the respects of it, (call it a circumstance, or
adjunct, or what you will) cannot be avoided, but it will have the nature of a
part of worship; according to any right description of it.

XIII. Obj. 2. Answered.
But he still goes on, striving rather to explain, then to deliver himself from
his former Argument, by instances; [As courser fare, or meaner apparel, in
time of mourning, has no more holiness in it then any other; but only is
subservient to worship, and holiness: And as a Day of Fasting is no more holy
then another, but serves to holiness, etc. Lastly, as the hours of the
morning and evening sacrifices, every Day, were not more holy then other hours
of the Day, but as circumstances only to be observed.] So, (for so he would
infer, as we conceive) the Days of the New Testament are but circumstances
of worship, not any parts of worship.

To this we answer, First, the difference between the things compared Divine
institution, and the want thereof. For he confesses, that one Day in seven is
moral, and commanded by God in the fourth Commandment: But as he seems to
take the other things, we have no command for them. Otherwise, when God ever
did, as of old, command the abstinence from some kind of meats, from some kind
of apparel, and commanded sackcloth, etc. Those observations were a part of
the legal worship. And when God ordained an annual Fast, that very Day, in
its observation, was a part of worship, as well as the Sabbath. But when men
voluntarily set apart Days to Fasting and Prayer, the particular Days are no
parts of worship, but only means subservient to the worship of God, because
they have no Divine command concerning those particular Days. So when men
appoint Holy Days (as they are called) they are no parts of worship, but only
circumstances, subservient to it. But if God have appointed any Time, (as even
according to this Author, He has one Day in seven by the fourth Commandment)
that Time must needs be a part of worship, as well as a necessary circumstance
to Holiness and Religion. And this his third instance does help to manifest.
For though the precise point or minute of Time was not commanded for the
Morning or Evening sacrifice, yet the Time was within a latitude; It might not
be before such an hour, nor after such an hour, (as the Jewish Authors
expressly name the bounds, understood by them:) So that we may also well say,
that the observation of them within that latitude, not sooner, nor later, was a
part of Worship, part of the Jews special homage, part of the immediate
honor they owed to God, and whereunto they were infallibly bound by Religion,
and conscience of Gods command, namely to observe such seasons of Time strictly
in such revolutions. And to have performed the same services, sacrifices: which
neglect of those special respects of Time, had made them guilty of violation
of Gods worship. Also from hence they had intimations at least of promises of
blessing and acceptance special, even with relation to the very Times
observed, besides the particular services presented on them. And the services
then presented according to those times, were more acceptable than others
presented at their own voluntary times Therefore Elijah waits for the Time of
the offering the evening-sacrifice, 1 King. 18. Even when he was to present his
extraordinary sacrifice and worship. And David mentioning acceptance, says
not barely, as a sacrifice, but as an evening-sacrifice, Psalm. 141. There came
a special blessing to the three Kings distressed for water at the Time of the
offering the meat offering, 1 King. 3. And even in Daniels Day of solemn
Humiliation and Fasting, the Angel comes to him with a gracious and comfortable
message at the Time of the evening sacrifice, Dan. 9. All these intimations
show, that there was a peculiar respect had to those Times, those Hours, both
by men, and even by God himself. They were then specially acceptable, and parts
of worship. The chief Time then, the Sabbath, much more.

Author do not make all Days under the Gospel equal, and so in the issue
contradict himself. For if Times and Days, now, be not parts of worship, but
only necessary circumstances of worship (in his sense) then the LORDS Days are
no holier, no better then other Days, on which any worship is performed; For
they are also necessary circumstances of that worship performed on them. But to
say, and hold, that one Day in seven is moral by the fourth Commandment, is
to say, that all Days are not equal; and if now this be not a contradiction,
let the Readers judge.

XIV. Obj. 3. Answered.
He has only one thing more to object [That in the New Testament no such
promises are made to the observation of our Day, as were to the seventh Day of
old; but only to the exercises of piety and public worship.] And hence he
would, it seems, infer, that it is no part of worship.

express promises made to the seventh Day, in the beginning, when it was (as
he holds) given to Adam: Yet no doubt were employed in Gods blessing and
sanctifying the Day, and so it may be now.

promises were not made (to speak properly) to the seventh Day, but to the
Sabbath, or rather to the observation in duties of piety and Religion, which is
the employment of the Sabbath. And if one Day in seven be required now, (as he
holds) the promises do in like manner belong to it.

What command of God, or Ordinance of Religion is there, nature of the thing,
with promises? As godliness in general has all the promises; So every duty
of godliness has its share; This Day then being commanded, being Gods
ordinance, a duty of godliness in its observation, is not without promises.

It was less needful to make new promises to this Day in particular, Genesis 2.
Exodus 20. Esa. 58. as we have seen) unto Gods Day, His Sabbath, the Day of His
appointment for the sufficient chief Time of His Worship. Look therefore as
the duties of the Day (a holy rest) fall on our Day by virtue of the fourth
Commandment: So by the same equity and analogy, the Blessings annexed to that
Day, fall on our Day, on the right observers of it. And so all his Objections
are satisfied; And our Conclusion good, [ The chief Time, and the particular
Day for it, is a Part of Worship, not a mere Circumstance.

We will now close this Chapter, XV. The testimonies and confessions of the
adverse party Hooker Eccles. Pol. lib. 5. p. 378.
with some Testimonies and Confessions. 1. The judicious Hooker, holding one
Day of seven to be moral, and of perpetual obligation by the fourth
Commandment, (as we shall hear hereafter) thus delivers his Judgment
concerning the nature of this Time: [It cannot (...) denied, but the very Law
of Nature it self requires the sanctif^^ation of Times. -- For which cause, it
has pleased God heretofore (...) exact some part of Time by way of perpetual
Homage.] Where by Homage, he means a piece of part of service which we owe to
God, the Lord of time, and us, by the fourth Commandment. 2. Hear our
Adversaries. G. Irons. p. 88. Chalenging a tribute of our Time. p. 70. G.D. p.
21. There ought to be a certain part of our Time given to God. p. 59. B. of E.
p. 121.
[That God should have a Tribute of our Time for Public Worship, was never by
any man denied to be Moral and Natural.] By Tribute, he means, we suppose, a
Part of Worship; as Tribute paid to Kings, is a Part of the Homage and Honor
due to them. 3. Another thus: [The Heathens had their Feasts and set Days
consecrated to the worship of their gods.] That is, (as we think he cannot but
mean) Not only they did worship their gods on those Days, but did observe
those Days as a part of worship, in honor of their gods. 4. This follows
also upon that of the learned Bishop. [The Religious observation of holy times
is reduced to the fourth Commandment, as a special to a general.] But say
we, The Religious observation of holy times, by the fourth Commandment, is a
part of worship. 5. For this was preached at Court, and not long since printed
by Command. D. Turners Sermon at Whitehall March 10. 1635. p. 19. Statut. 1
Carol.
[The Religious observation of the Lord's Day, who doubts but it is a part of
Gods immediate worship?] 6. Finally, The King and State have proclaimed as
much. [Forasmuch as there is nothing more acceptable to God, than the true and
sincere worship of Him, according to His holy will; And that the holy keeping
of the Lord's Day is a principal part of the true service of God.] We have what
we have argued for; And with this we rest, and end our first Part.

FINIS.

