Certain considerations wherein the Prelates do acknowledge that they stand
by the mere mercy of the King and Parliament; not having any foundation in
Scripture. And that the King and Parliament may dispose of them, at their
pleasure.
WHAT the reason or cause should be, that subscription unto this book of
consecration and ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, has been of
late years so hotly and egerly pursued by the Lords of the Clergy, is a
mystery, perhaps, not of many of the layty well understood. And howsoever under
color of the maintenance of obedience to the statute of the Realm, whereby
this book is confirmed, the same subscription may seem to be pressed:
nevertheless if the maine drift and reason of this pressure, were well boulted
out, it is to be feared, that not only the unlawful supremacy of an Archbishop
is sought to be advanced above the lawful supremacy of our Sovereign Lord King
James; but also that the Synodals, Canons and Constitutions made by the Clergy,
in their convocation, are intended if not, to be preferred above, yet at
leastwise to be made equal to the common law and statues of the Realm.

By the ancient laws and customs of the Realm, one parcel of the Kings
jurisdiction and imperial Crown, has evermore consisted in granting
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, unto Archbishops, Bishops and other Prelates. For
the maintenance of which imperial jurisdiction and power, against the usurped
supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, diverse statutes, not introductory of a new
law, but declaratory of the old, in the time of King Henry the eight, King
Edward the sixth, and of our late most noble Queen deceased, have been made
and enacted.

Yea, and in a book entitled The Institution of a Christian man, composed by
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, Edward Archbishop of York and all the
Bishops, diverse Archdeacons and Prelates of the Realm, that then were, Cook
de jure regis eccle. fol. 8 fol. 53. fol, 55.
dedicated also by them to King Henry the eighth, it is confessed and
acknowledged, that the nomination and presentation of the Bishoprics,
appertained unto the Kings of this Realm. And that it was and shall be lawful
to Kings and Princes, and their Successors, with consent of their Parliaments,
to revoke and call again into their own hands, or otherwise to restrain all
the power and jurisdiction which was given and assigned to Priests and Bishops,
by the license, consent, sufferance and authority of the same Kings and
Princes, and not by authority of God and his Gospel, whenever they shall
have grounds and causes so to do, as shall be necessary wholesome, and
expedient for the Realms, the repressing of vice, and the increase of
Christian faith and religion.

Ever since which time (until of late years, the late Archbishop of
Canterbury, with the counsel of his College of Bishops, altered that his
opinion, which sometimes in his answer made to the admonition to the Parliament,
he held) it was generally and publickely maintained, that the state, power and
jurisdiction of Provincial and Diocesan Bishops in England, stood not by any
divine right, but merely and altogether by humane policy and ordinance alone.
And that therefore according to the first and best opinion and judgment of the
said Archbishops, Bishops, etc, the same their jurisdiction might be taken away
and altered at the will and pleasure of the Kings of England, whenever they
should have grounds and causes so to do.

Now since, when as the Discipline and government provincial, and diocesan
ministered and exercised by the late Archbishop deceased, and his Suffraganes,
was diversely handled, disputed and contraverted, not to be agreeable, but
repugnant to the holy Scriptures, and necessary also for the repressing of
vice, the increase of faith and Christan religion, to be changed; they hereupon
justly fearing, that the most virtuous and Christian Queen deceased, upon
sundry complaints made in open Parliament, against the r many unjust
greevances, would have reformed the same their manner of government; they then
presently upon new advise and consultation taken, D. Sutclif. D. Bilson.
boldly and constantly avouched the same their government, to have bin from the
Apostles times, and agreeable to the holy Scriptures; and therefore also
perpetual, and still to be used, and in no case to be altered, by any King, or
Potentate whatsoever.

By means of which this their enclining to the Popish opinion, and holding
their Jurisdiction to be de jure divino, and professedly mainteining in the
Homily (whereunto also subscription is urged) that the King, and all the
Nobility, ought to be subject to excommunication, there is now at length grown
such a maine position, 2. part of the right use of the Church.
of having a perpetual Diocesan and Provincial government in the Church, that
rather then their Hierarchy should stoop, they would cause the Kings
Supremacy, which he has over their said Jurisdiction, to fall down to the
ground: Insomuch as by their supposition, the King has no authority no not by
his supreme power, to alter their said government at all. And to this end and
purpose (as it seems) in their late Canons have they devised and decreed,
this book of ordination, to be subscribed unto. Which subscription cannot but
quite and clean overthrow the Kings supremacy and ancient jurisdiction, in
the most dangerous degree. For if their Provincial and Diocesan orders and
degrees of Ministry, together with their jurisdiction, be to be used, (as
established and derived unto them by the holy scriptures) how then can it be in
the power and jurisdiction of the King, to grant, or not to grant the use of
Provincial and Diocesan Bishopisme and jurisdiction? Or how may the Provincial
Bishops, with their Diocesan Suffraganes, be called the Kings Ecclesiastical
officers, if their jurisdictions be not derived unto them from the King? For if
they be called Gods Bishops, or Bishops of Gods making, how then may they any
more be called the Kings Bishops, or Bishops of the Kings presenting,
nominating and confirming?

Nay, besides, who then can alter them? who can constrain them? who can revoke
or recall their power and jurisdiction? who can resist them? or what King of
England may pluck his neck from under their yoke? Nay, how should the Kings
supremacy (as by the ancient Laws of the Realm it ought) remain inviolable,
If Diocesan Bishops be Scripturely Bishops, them may they stan^ without the
King. Diocesan Bishops hitherto upheld only by the laws of the Realm.
when his Royal person, whole Nobility and Realm, is subject and liable to
the censure of the Canon law, excommunication? Which law the Provincial and
Diocesan Bishops to this day, in right, and by virtue of their Provincial and
Diocesan jurisdiction, and none otherwise, do still use, practice, and put in
execution?

Besides, if Bishops Provincial and Diocesan (as they be described in that
book) be commanded in the Scriptures, and were in use ever since the Apostles
times, then ought they to be in the Church of England, though the King and his
law never allowed, nor approved of them. But to hold this opinion, as it will
uphold the Popes supremacy (because the general reasons which uphold a
Provincial Bishop, will uphold a Pope) so will it once again, not only
impeach the Kings supremacy, but also be repugnant to the laws and customs of
the Realm. By which supremacy, laws and customs only, the provincial and
diocesan Bishops have been hitherto upheld. For seeing the laws and customs
of the Realm, do make the Kings nomination, presentation, and confirmation,
the very essence and being of a Provincial and Diocesan Bishop with us. So
that these offices ought to be held only from the authority, gift and grant of
the King: how ought not the Kings nomination, presentation, authority and gift,
yea and the law it self, in this case wholly cease, if the order, degree,
ministry and jurisdiction of a Provincial and Diocesan Bishop be founded in
holy Scripture? Unless we shall affirm, that that was in the Apostles times,
which was not, or that, that it is to be found in holy Scripture, which is not
namely, that there were in the Apostles times, and that there be in the holy
Scriptures, no Bishops but Provincial and Diocesan Bishops to be found. And
that by the law of God and the Gospel, every King and Potentate, has supreme
power to suffer none but Provincial and Diocesan Bishops to be in the Churches.

So that by subscription to allow, that Provincial and Diocesan Bishops be
Scripturely Bishops, and that their jurisdiction and power, is a Scripturely
jurisdiction and power, is to deny that their jurisdiction and power depends
upon the Kings jurisdiction and power, or that by the Kings gift and authority
they be made Bishops.

But now does subscription (you will say) to the book of Ordination, approve
the orders and degrees of Provincial and Diocesan Bishops to be by divine
right, rather then by humane ordinance? How? Why thus: It is evident (says the
preface of that book) to all men diligently reading holy Scripture and ancient
Authors, that from the Apostles times, there have been these orders of
Ministers in Christ's Church, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Yea and by the
whole order of prayer, and of Scripture read and used in the form of
consecrating of an Archbishop, or Bishop, it is apparent that the order of an
Archbishop or Bishop, consecrated by that book, is reputed and taken to be of
Divine institution. And therefore seeing the names of those orders of
Ministers, must necessarily be taken and understood of such orders of
Ministers, as be set forth and described in the body of that book, it must
needs be intended, that the Ministers by their subscription, should approve the
order of Ministers, mentioned in that book, to be of Divine institution, and
consequently, that provincial and diotesan Ministers, or Bishops, have not
their essence and being from the nomination, gift and authority of the King.

Besides, if we should understand by the word (Bishop) him that has the
Ministry of the word and Sacraments, as the Pastor and teacher; and by the word
(Priest) the Presbyter, that is the Governing elder; and by the word (Deacon)
the provider for the poor, then for the Ministers to subscribe to the book of
ordination, would no way justify those officers or degrees of Ministers, which
are described in that book, but would indeed utterly subvert and overthrow
them. Because the orders and degrees of a provincial and diocesan Bishop, of a
Priest and Deacon mentioned in that book, be of a far differing nature from
those orders and degrees of Ministers, which are mentioned in the Scriptures:
because they only agree in name, and not in nature.

Wherefore seeing there be other orders and degrees of Bishops then Provincial
and Diocesan Bishops found in the holy Scriptures, and seeing also Kings and
Princes being Vicarij Dei, be commanded to authorize all things for the truth,
and nothing against the truth: it seems necessary that his Majesty should not
only restrain the Provincial and Diocesan Bishops, from urging subscription
to this book of ordination, (being so derogatory (in their sense and
construction) to his supremacy as nothing can be more,) but also to keep the
Bishops themselves within the tether and compass of the word of God. For if
the word of God, do approve amongst the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments,
a primacy of order only, and denies unto them any primacy of jurisdiction and
power in ecclesiastical government, (as the learned Protestants have proved
against the Papists touching Peter's supremacy) then will it follow that ours
also ought to be reduced to the same compass, both for the Kings Majesty's
safety, and the Churches good. Least Princes giving them more then God allows
them, they should themselves loose that right and authority, which they ought
to retain in their own Royal persons.

Now that it may not be objected that we beg the question of Scripturely
Bishops, not having any primacy of jurisdiction and power in ecclesiastical
government, (to let pass all particular reasons of the Protestants against the
Papists in this point) it shall suffice in this place to produce for witnesses
six and forty Jurors, against whom no challenge or exception can be taken;
Namely, the said Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, Edward Archbishop of
York: John Bishop of London: Cuthbert Dun^lmen: Steven Winton: Robert
Cariolen: Io. Exon: John Lincoln: Rowland Coven, and Lichfield: Thomas Elien:
Nicholas Sarum: John Banger: Edward Herefordien: Hugh Wigornen. John Roffen.
Richard Cicistren. William Norwicen. William Meneven, Robert Assaven. Robert
Landaven. Richard Wolman, Archdeacon of Sudbur. William Knight, Archdeacon of
Richmond: John Bell, Archdeccon of Gloucester: Edmond Boner, Archdeacon of
Lecester: William Skipp, Archdeacon of Dorset: Nicholas Heath, Archdeacon of
Stafford: Cuthbert Marshall, Archdeac^n of Nottingham: and Richard Curren,
Archdeacon of Oxford: Together with William Cliff, Galfrid Downs, Robert
Oking, Radulf Bradford, Richard Smith, Simon Matthew, John Fryn, William
Lukemaster, William May, Nicholas Wotton, Richard Cox, John Edmonds, Thomas
Robertson, John Baker, Thomas Baret, John Hase and John Tyson, Sacrae
Theologiae, juris Ecclesiastici, Civilis Professores.

All which Archbishops Bishops, Archdeacons and Prelates, having with one voice
and accord showed unto King Henry the eight, that diverse good Fathers, Bishops
of Rome, did greatly reprove and abhor (as a thing clean contrary to the
Gospel and the Decrees of the Church) that any Bishop of Rome, or elsewhere,
should presume, usurp, or take upon him the title and name of the universal
Bishop, or of the head of all Priests, or of the highest Priest, or any such
like title; proceed further, and in the end conclude, and give up their
verdicts thus. For confirmation whereof, Fol. 59.60
it is out of all doubt, that there is no mention made, neither in Scripture,
neither in the writings of any authentical Doctor or Author of the Church,
being within the time of the Apostles, That Christ did ever make, or institute
any distinction or difference to be in the preeminence or power, order, or
jurisdiction, between the Apostles themselves, or between the Bishops
themselves; but that they were all equal in power, order, authority and
jurisdiction: and that there is now, and since the time of the Apostles, any
such diversity or difference among the Bishops, it was devised by the ancient
Fathers, etc. For the said Fathers considering the great and infinite multitude
of Christian men, and taking examples of the old Testament, thought it
expedient to make an order of degrees to be amongst Bishops and spiritual
Governors of the Church; and so ordained some to be Patriarchs, some to be
Primates, some to be Metropolitanes, some to be Archbishops, some to be
Bishops, etc. Which differences the said holy Fathers thought necessary to
enact and establish, by their Decrees and Constitutions, nor for that any such
differences were prescribed and established in the Gospel, or mentioned in any
Canonical writings of the Apostles, or testified by any Ecclesiastical Writer
within the Apostles time. And thus far their verdict.

But let us grant, that orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons be contained in
the holy Scriptures, yet if those orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, which
are established in the book, be not the same orders of Bishops Priests and
Deacons, which are authorized by the Scriptures: then (through the
aequivocation of these words: Orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons) there
being a falacie: how should this form and manner of subscription be lawful?
viz. that the book contains nothing contrary to the word of God, and that it
lawfully may be used. For only such orders of Bishops, Priests and Deacons,
ought to be acknowledged, subscribed unto, and used, as by the holy Scriptures
are warranted. And therefore such as are contained in the book, if so be they
be diverse from those which are approved in the holy scriptures, how should they
without sin be subscribed unto, and used? Unless we shall affirm, that
Ministers of the Gospel of God, may rightfully approve of such orders of
Ministers, as the Lord and Lawgiver of the Gospel never allowed ne approved.

And thus much have we spoken touching not subscription, touching the not exact
use of the order and form of the book of Common prayer, and touching the not
precise practice and wearing of the rites, ceremonies and ornaments of the
Church.

Wherein, if we have spoken otherwise then as for our speaking we have warrant
from the Kings laws, our earnest desire is, that it may be showed unto us
wherein we have erred. For if there be any thing whereof we be ignorant, we
shall be willing to be taught the same, and having learned it, to yield to the
practice thereof.

In the mean time, seeing not to wear a Surplice in the ministration of divine
service, not to make a cross in Baptism, and not to subscribe, etc. in it
self, it not a sin against any commandment of God nor a thing scandalous
unto the people: and seeing also that Parsons who refuse to wear and use the
same, be in every respect men of good note, condition, fame, quality and
behavior; yea, and such as against whom no misdemeanor for doctrine or life,
which might aggravate their offense, can justly be objected, we may lawfully
(as we think) conclude in their behalf, that de aequitate and misericordia
juris, they ought to be respected and tolerated, rather then for their refusal
merely standing upon their consciences, (whether erroneous or not erroneous, it
skilleth not) de rigore juris, (if there be any such rigor) to be suspended,
excommunicated or deprived; yea, and in so general and doubtful a case of
conscience, upon so slender a ground of perjury and contempt, upon persons
every way so peaceable and well qualified, and wherein no scandal has ensued,
we suppose it cannot be showed among all the decrees and sentences recorded,
among all the Popish Canonists, that ever any Popish ordinaries, in any age,
have used the like judicial rigor against any their Popish Priests.

It is to be noted, that the foreign Canon law, is none otherwise in any part
of this treatise intended to be the Kings Ecclesiastical law, then only upon
a false supposition of the Archbishops and Bishops: Because the same law is yet
used and practiced in their Consistory, notwithstanding it has been long since
abolished by Act of Parliament.


