The Prince of Wales His Coming to YARMOUTH, With 19. Sail of Shipping, and
landing an Army for the Relief of COLCHESTER. Also a Fight between them and
the Parliaments Forces; some of the Princes men taken Prisoners, and rescued
again by the town of Yarmouth, who join with the Prince, and keep out the
Parliaments Forces.

WITH A list of the Lords, Knights, and other Commanders come over with the
Prince.

And Sir Charles Lucas his men roasting a whole horse, for joy of the Prince
his coming.

Certified in a Letter from a Gentleman of Quality in the Army.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Austin. July 27. 1647.

decorative top border piece with a central fleur-de-lis flanked by a Tudor
rose and a Scottish thistle
A LETTER Certifying the Prince of Wales His Arrival at Yarmouth, with
nineteen Sail of Ships, and store of Men.
SIR,
ACcording to my promise, I shall as often as may be, given you such
intelligence as we have at the Leaguer.

This morning a Trumpeter went into the Town about the Exchange of Mr.
Ashburnham for Sir William Massam; the chief thing in difference about this
Exchange is, those in the town would have the Lord General give Mr.
Ashburnham a Pass to go whither he pleases, and they say, they will give one
to Sir WILLIAM MASSAM to go all England over.

We have cut off all their pipes for water, by which means we have not only
prevented them of good water, but have furnished our selves with good store of
lead; they have very little water in the town but what is muddy, or annoyed
with dead horses.

The Common Soldiers have now lived upon horseflesh, for the most part, five
days together.

The other night they roasted a whole horse at one of their Courts of Guard:
the Foot are very merry at it, but the Troopers are discontented for the loss
of their horses, not knowing how to get others, nor well likeing the service of
mowing with their new devised long sithes, which weapons are put into the hands
of such as were Troopers.

They turned forth to graze under the walls about 40. horse, which our men
fetched away; they are altogether unserviceable, for that they are almost
starved.

The Lord General being desirous to gain this place without shedding any more
blood, (if it be possible) thought of a device to let the Soldiers in the
town to know what was thought hitherto to be concealed from them, viz.

That if they would deliver up the Lord Goring, the Lord Capell, the Lord
Loughborough, and some other of the chief in the Town, the rest should have
Quarter and Passes to go to their own houses: and Papers signifying thus much
were sent into the Town upon the head of an Arrow, of which we hear nothing yet.

To morrow we expect the other great pieces and the Ammunition from London to
come up to us, and then you will hear more, if they yield nor before, which
can hardly be expected, for that certain intelligence is come, that the Prince
and the Duke of YORK are come to Yarmouth with nineteen sail of ships, in
which are thought to be about 2000. men; some of them landing near the town,
were set upon by a few of our horse which were there, and after a little fight
with them, we took seven prisoners, the rest getting into the town, from
whence a party of Townsmen issued out, and rescued the prisoners from us, and
placed a Guard at the Turnepike.

There is great division in the Town, some are for the Prince his landing
there, and others against it; but we may guess by this act of theirs in
rescuing those prisoners, which side it is that is most prevalent, and what we
may expect further from them; the design of the Prince his coming thither is
undoubtedly for the relief of Colchster, (if possible) for it is not above two
days march from thence: Colonel SCROOP with eight Troops of Horse and
Dragoones is ordered by the Lord General to march from the Leaguer toward
Yarmouth, and attend the motion of the Prince, if he land with any forces
there, with whom it is said a thousand of the Norfolk Foot will join, and if
need be, we shall spare more Forces from hence, and yet be able to make good
the Leaguer.

Letters from Major General LAMBERT certify, that he is come to Bows, and
Duke HAMILTON at Applebey, they have had several skirmishes in parties, but
not many men lost on either side: Yorkshire Horse, and a thousand of
Lievtenant-Generall CROMVVELLS Foot are by this time joined with him, and being
thus united, he will be in a very good posture to give the Scots and LANGDALES
Forces a Field fight. I pray let him hear from you by this Messenger, that is

From the Leaguer 25. July, 1648. Your assured Friend, W. C.

A List of the Princes, Lords, Knights, etc. which come along with the Prince
of Wales.
Duke of York. Prince Rupert. Prince Maurice. Lord Gerrard. Lord Culpepper.
Lord Jermyn. Lord Ruthen. Sir John Berkley. Col. Bamfield, with feverall other
Commanders. 2000. Men. 19. Ships, and great store of Ordnance.
FINIS.

