CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS TOUCHING The two great Offices of the Seneschalsey or
High-Stewardship, and High-Constableship of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for L. Chapman: October. 17. 1642.

CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS TOUCHING The two great Offices of the Seneschalsey or
High-Stewardship, and High-Constableship of ENGLAND.
THe Seneschalsey or High-Stewardship of England is known to be the greatest
Office in England by reason of the authority it has over all other Officers,
which since the Norman Conquest has long continued by descent inheritably in the
Family of the ancient Earls of Leicester, was after translated to the house of
Lancaster, and by K. Henry the fourth, of that stock, when he had obtained the
Crown, was incorporate into the same, as all other the honors, Lands, and
hereditaments of that house were. For the plainer manifestation thereof, it
will serve well to the purpose, before the Office it self be described, to show
the first institution thereof, and to recount in order the succession of the
Officers whilst it passed inheritably.

It is therefore to be understood that amongst the persons of chiefest account
which entered this Kingdom with D. William of Normandy, and were assistant unto
him in the conquest thereof, one Hugh Grauntmesuell a Baron of Normandy was of
special reckoning, whose father Robert of Grauntmesuell, one of the chiefest
Noblemen of all Normandy retained at home with him for his own comfort, and for
the preservation of this stock, the elder of them named Robert, who succeeded
him in all the inheritance of Normandy: but sent with the Duke his second son,
called Sir Hugh of Grauntmesuell, who so demeaned himself in the enterprise,
that when by conquest and strong hand the whole Kingdom was subdued by the
Normans, their Duke regarding the good service of those that adventured and
labored with him, forgot not the praiseworthy desetts of this Nobleman, whom
therefore he rewarded liberally with sundry great Territories and portions of
Land in many shires of the Realm; as namely with those great Lordships
Peberworth, Merestone, Quenington, Weston and Wileot in Glocestershire, with
diverse Lands in Ferendow, Meristow, Thorp, Welington, Staverton, Mereford,
Newbottle, Middleton, Sutton, Biveld, Wodeford, Edgdow, and Ceroilton in
Northamptonshire, with Wichingston and Hinkley in Leicestershire, with diverse
Lands in Edwolton, and Sandy-acre in Nottinghamshire, and with Ley in Suffolk,
as appears by the record in the Exchequor commonly called Domesday. Moreover
he made him high Seneschal or Steward of the whole Kingdom according to the
Norman usage, a dignity never heard of in this Land before, did further advance
him in marriage with a great Lady inheretrix of sundry possessions, named
Adalisa or Alice, on whom he gat two daughters, his heirs, the elder of them
called Petronelle or Pernell was married unto Robert Earl of Leicester,
surnamed auecles blanches maines, that is, Robert with the white hands, that
was the son of Robert le Rossa Earl of Leicester, who was son unto Robert of
Beanemount Lord of Pont Adomare and Earl of Mellent in Normandy, brother to
Sir Henry of Newburgh the first Earl of Warwick after the Conquest, unto whom
the said Pernell brought the one moyity of her fathers possessions, and withal
for increase, because she was the eldest daughter, together with the honors of
Hinckley, the Office of Seneschalsie or Highstewardship of England, which were
not partable as the other inheritances were.

The younger of the said Sir Hugh Grauntmessuels daughters called after her
mother Adalisa was given in marriage unto one Roger Bygot a Norman with the
other moyity of her fathers possessions; unto whom she bare diverse sons and
daughters, from the eldest whereof named Hugh Bygot, that was the first Earl
of the East Angles of this family, containing Norfolk and Suffolk, the other
Bygots that were after Earls of Norfolk are lineally descended: between which
two families contention had often been about the Office of Stewardship, whereof
in this place to note what is set down in the record of the Exchequer called
the red book is not impertinent to this purpose, where it is said, that on the
Sunday before Candlemas-day, in the 20, year of the reign of K. Henry the son
of K. John, commonly called K. Henry the third, at the Coronation of his wife
Q. Elenor that was the Earl of Provinces daughter, Simon of Mountford then
Earl of Leicester and high Steward of England, lineally descended of the
before-named Parnell, being ready the day of the Coronation to execute his
Office of Highsteward, which by right appertained unto him, was forbidden and
gainsaid by Roger Bygot then Earl of Norfolk, who being descended from the
before named Adalisa, the younger of Sir Hugh Grantmesuels daughters, alleged
that it was his right to exercise that Office, which controversy (as also
diverse others then moved) was heard judicially before the King, unto whom Earl
Simon replying answered, that it was true that contention had been heretofore
moved between their Ancestors for the same matters, in the days of King John
the Kings father, which was compounded and pacified for the service of ten
Knights, or rather ten Knights fees, given by the Earl of Leicester unto the
Earl of Norfolk, who therefore released all his title and right to the
Highstewardship.

Whereunto because Earl Roger of Norfolk alleged that there rested of these
Knights feet, two and a half to be assigned unto him, Earl Simon made answer
that he might well recover them with the Arrerages by the Laws of the Land, in
the Kings Court, and ought not therefore to hinder him in the execution of his
Office, seeing he acknowledged the former accord; and by virtue of the same was
already in quiet possession of seven Knights fees and a half. And so was Earl
Simon by the Kings own doom and sentence admitted to the quiet exercise of the
Seneschalsie at the same Coronation.

And now to return where we left, Robert Earl of Leicester that wedded Dame
Parnell, was high Seneschall or Steward of England, and was the man for whose
greatness of stomach the walls of the Town of Leicester were rased to the
ground because he took part with the young King Henry against his father K.
Henry the second, as histories make mention, begat on her sons and daughters,
and after in K. Richards days, the first, warring in the holy Land, was slain
at the siege of Acon, in the year of our Lord God 1190, whose eldest son
Robert, su^mmed after his mother Fitz-Parnell, was after his death Earl of
Leicester, and high Steward of England, of whom many worthy acts are by
histories remembered, both of his prowess in the field, and fidelity to K.
Richard the first, with whom he continued as a most faithful companion during
the Palestine wars, was partaker of his evil fortune by being taken there
prisoner, compelled to pay for his redemption 1000 Marks of Silver, and
therefore constrained to sell his Castle of Plasey in Normandy.

But to be brief and not to stay upon the Narration of these things. It
serves only to the purpose, to note that he was one of our high Seneschals,
and dying without issue of his body, in the year of our Lord God 1204. was
buried in the Abbey of Preux near Leicester, leaving his two sisters to be his
heirs, between whom the whole inheritance was divided, in the days of K.
John. Amicitia the eldest sister was married to Simon of Mountford younger
brother to Almarick Earl of Eureux in Normandy. And Margaret the youngest was
wife unto Saher of Quencie, whom K. John made Earl of Winchester, unto whom
she brought the one half of the Earldome of Leicester, and of the honor of
Hinckley; and among other Lands, the Manor of Grobye, Quitwicke, Shepeshend,
Hales, Brackly, South-Keston, Timisbury, and Chimnomere. Simon of Mountford
according to the Law and custom of the Land, was in the right of his wife,
being the elder sister, made Earl of Leicester, and high Seneschall of
England, in the days of K. John, but he enjoyed not long those honors, being
for his contumacy and disobedience, both he and his children shortly after
banished the Land, and his honors and possessions bestowed on Earl Randolph
of Chester, who held them a great time, except only the Patronage of the Abbey
of Preux near Leicester, and the Office of the Stewardship of England, which
the King kept in his own hands.

This Earl Simor, a great warrior, was head and leader of the young French
King Lodowicks Forces, fighting against the Albigenses about the City of
Tholose where he was after shine. These Albigenses because they began to smell
the Popes treachery, and to control the inordinate proceedings and discipline
of the Sea of Rome, the Pope therefore accounting them as people heretical,
excited the French King to lay siege against the said City of Tholoso to
expugne those Albigenses his enemies: But such was the mighty protection of God
fighting for his people against the might of man, that the French could do no
good with all their Engines and Artileries against the City but were forced to
retire with great loss of people: among whom this Earl Simon of Mountfort
general of the Army, to whom the Pope had given a little before the Earl of
Tholosas Land, was sl^i^ with a stone before the gate of the City in the year
of our Lord God 1219. as likewise was a brother of his besieging of a Castle
near unto Thotosa at the same time; he left two sons of great fame, Earl
Alt^arick of Mounfort, Constable of France, that was taken prisoner in the holy
Land, and after his redemption in returning homeward dyed at Idruntum in Italy,
Anno 1241. And Simon the younger that after obtaining the good grace and favor
of K. Henry the 3. whose sister he married, was restored to the Earldome of
Leicester, and to the integrity of his fathers lost honors and patrimonies in
England: a man was he of great courage, and renown, well experienced in the
wars, and in matters of government, for long time had he been Seneschall and
Governor of the Country of Gascoigne, for the King of England his brother in
Law, which of his own accord he resigned contrary to the Kings mind, that
greatly desired to retain him in good affection toward him, both because he
was a man of great power, wise and valiant, and for that the French labored to
make him their Seneschall; but such was the Earls hap that in the new begun
variance between K. Henry and his Nobles for not observing the Laws of the
Land, especially such new decrees as had been made at Oxford for the expelling
of strangers out of the Realm, he was chosen chief Captain and leader of the
Nobility, and for the time so much prevailed in the enterprise, that the King
was by them taken in the battle near Jews in Sussex, together with his
eldest son, and the King of Romans his brother, howbeit Edward the Kings eldest
son escaping out of their hands, renewed the war, and at Evesham in battle
slew this Earl Simon, and delivered his father from the hands of his enemies
in Anno 1265 which was the 48 year of the reign of K Hen. 3.

Those that took part with Earl Simon were disinherited, and their Lands
given to such as stood with the King; diverse fled the real^^e, and amongst them
Simon and Guy, and the other sons of this Earl, which escaped into France,
leaving no posterity in this Land.

The King afterward gave the Earldom of Leicester to his younger son Edmond
that was the first Earl of Lancaster, and to his heirs, which ever afterward
cont^nued in the house of Lancast^r, who bear the title of Leicesters
Earldom, and withal held and enjoyed the office of the high Stewardship of
England, until the same, with all other the honors, Lands and hereditaments
thereunto belonging, was united to the Crown in the days of King Henry the 4.
being of that stock, till that now of late it pleased the most Noble and
virtuous Pri^cesse Q^eene Elisabeth our gracious Sovereign to revive the
honor and title of Leicesters Earldom in the person of the right noble Lord
Robert of Dudley younger brother and heir to the right noble Lord Ambrose
Earl of Warwick and Viscount Lisle, both sons to the high and mighty Prince
John late Duke of Northumberland, lineally descended and heir in blood of the
bodies of Robert of Beaumount Earl of Mellent auncestour to the
beforementioned Earls of Leicester and of Hen. of Newborough Earl of Warwick
Ancestour to the Earls son, both brethren as before has been declared, and
living in the time of the Norman conquest, as more plainly is showed by
Pedegrees deduced.

Thus much declared by way of preface or ingression to the matter in hand, and
to show that the office of High Stewardship of England has heretofore passed
inheritably in diverse families, as other great Offices have done.

It remains now to declare what these Stewardships are, with the authorities
and prerogations to them belonging, and to produce such notes and observations
as are extant touching the same.

And to begin with the chiefest, Seneschall.
the Seneschalsey or Stewardship of England, as it is not to be doubted of, but
that it took beginning from the Normans, and was by them, first established in
this land after their great conquest, and victory over the English Saxons in
the year of our Lord God 1066 by their example of their home government in
Normandy, where the Duke had under him for his chiefest Officer a Seneschall or
Steward, so cannot the right of this office be better or in briefer sort
described then by setting down of the Dukes Steward faithfully in such sort,
as it is to be seen written in the old customary book of the Duchy of
Normandy in these words following.

In times past there was to wander throughout Normandy a certain Justicie^
greater then these before mentioned, who was called the Princes Se^eschall or
Steward he was wont to perfect and amend that which the other Justiciers had
left undone, he kept the Prince, his land, the laws and rights of Normandy he
caused to be observed and amended, all that was not right done by the
Bailiffes, whom he removed from the Prince his service, if he saw it expedient
so to do.

He was once to visit the Prince his forests and enclosures, to keep Courts
of the forests, to enquire how they were used, their customs he commanded to
be observed delivering right to every one as the same by antiquity grew due,
or by Charter had been confirmed unto them, so discreetly conserving the Prince
his rights that in the observation of them he notwithstanding hurt none of his
subjects. Such as upon diligent inquiry he found faulty and to forfeit,
within the forest, either in trees, or in wild beasts, or in free foul, he
was wont to punish by the purse, or for want of ability that way by long
imprisonment. He chiefly gave his mind to keep the country in peace, and so
wandrlng hither and thither throughout Normandy once every three years did
visit all the parts and Bailiages thereof. To him it belonged to make enquiry
in every Bailiage of the excess and wrongs done by the under Justiciers, and
likewise of common robbers, of violent deflowrers of Virgins, of murders, of
burnings, and of all those things which belong to the pleas of the sword,
whereof peace and reformation had not been had in courts. Of all other
criminal facts he likewise diligently searched and upon enquiry caused justice
to be done throughout, he caused enquiry to be made of treasure dug under
ground, of wrekes cast upon sand, and other the Prince his rights, the removing
of waters, and the stopping and hindering of their courses did he reduce unto
their old form, so as their passage might be hurtful to no body, if any man
were minded to turn the course of any water running through his own grounds, the
banks, whereof on either side were siituated within his own fee he might
lawfully do it, so as the said water when it passed out of his ground might be
co^veyed into his old channel without any man's hurt or hinderance. It is to be
understood notwithstanding that none may stop the course of any ordinary
running streams within his banks or ditches longer then from the rising to the
going down of the sun. Neither may any one stay the course of waters with any
new ponds diches or sluices, but shall permi^ the^ to run their course, lest the
mills standing upon their streams And Or men in their affairs, Tanners, Diers,
and such like should thereby suffer loss and detriment. If any shall stay them
for the filling up of his pools or ponds, they shall be bound to restore such
losses as the Milners or others living by the passage of those waters shall
have sustained by the withholding of them, and waters shall be suffered to run
their accustomed course. No man may erect a Fishing, or build a Mill, unless
the water-banks on either side be within his own Fee, wherein he has
Liberties, Wears, or other such like things: for fishings may not be made in
running streams, because by them oftentimes the waters are corrupted, yet
notwithstanding they may bring the waters by Ditches and Trenches out of the
running River into their grounds, so as the same return not back into the
running stream.

It belongs also unto the Steward to cause the bounds and limits of Towns and
Villages the streets and paths to be revoked to their ancient state and to see
that old accustomed highways be opened; for no man may in these cases allege
for excuse any let or hinderance, wherefore he ought not to make amends unto
the Prince. As for town ditches and common streets, which serve to no private
persons possessions, but are common unto all. If they be by any usurped or
incroached upon, they ought to be restored to the common benefit, and they that
do occupy them, ought not to escape punishment.

All these things appertain unto the Office and charge of the Seneschall, for
the due execution whereof there needs not neither plea nor assise, but
wheresoever he found cause, and he did therein, and provided as he saw needful
and expedient.

This farre-forth is the High Stewards office described in the old customarie
book of the Duchy of Normandy, from whence came the first institution of the
same with us in this Kingdom, established no doubt with no less authority
and privilege here under the Kings of this Land, then the same was then
practiced under the Dukes of that Duchy, whereof there is an especial title
written, though nothing Clerke-like among other matter in an old book of
Parchmine belonging as it is said unto the learned Lawyer and skilful
Antiquarie Master William Fleetwood Esquire, one of the Sergeants at the Law,
and Recorder of the City of London, which word for word follows.

Here is showed who is to be High Steward of England, and what his Office is;
THe Seneschallie or high Stewardship of England belongs to the Earldom of
Leicester, and of old time did thereunto appertain; And it is to be
understood, that it is his Office under and immediately after the King to
oversee and govern the whole Kingdom of England, and all the Offices of the
Justice within the same Kingdom in all times both of Peace and War in manner
following.

The manner how and when the Lord High Steward ought to exercise his Office by
duty and Oath of Fealty is such.
Whensoever any man or woman shall come into the Kings Court in whatsoever
Court it be and possibly unto the K. himself to seek for redress against
injury done unto them, and he or she be not able in due season to obtain
remedy. Then the High Steward of England ought and is bound to receive their
Petitions and complaints, and to keep them until the next Parliament then
after to be holden and to assign unto such Complainants if he think good, a
day wherein they may exhibit and prosecute their Petitions, and in full
Parliament in the presence of the King to reprehend and blame that Officer or
those Officers, who ever they be, that so have failed in doing of Justice, and
those thereof call to account unto whom in such cases every one throughout the
Kingdom is bound to answer, the King only excepted.

If the Chancellor of England have failed of making original remedy, and
amends, and the Justices. Treasurers, Barons, and Chamberlain of the Exchequer,
Steward of the Kings house, Escheators, Coroners, Sheriffs Clerks, Bailiffs and
other officers of what places and respects soever they be in their Processes
Judgments, Executions of Judgments, and Justice to be made to the favor of
the one and loss of the other party, for gifts bribes or other procurements shall
fail or give over at the leastwise if any Justicier, when as both parties
pleading before them shall stand in Judgment, shall by such false procurements
defer judgment, contrary to Justice, and the Laws and customs of the Land:
If then the Chancellor of England, or any other of the Kings officers in such
case shall allege in Parliament and say for their excuse, that in that case
such hardness and doubtfulnesse of the Law and rights did arise, when the same
was heard and propounded before them that neither he nor the Court of Chancerie
or any other Court wherein he is an Officer, were able or knew to attain unto
the safe determination of the right; Then shall he open and declare the same
Ambiguitie and doubt in Parliament; then if it be found that the Law was
doubtful in that Case, the Chancellor or other Officer shall be held excused,
and then shall the high Steward of England, together with the Constable of
England in the presence of the King and other of the Parliament make choice of
twenty five persons more or less, according as the case shall require,
together with such other cases in that Parliament rehearsed, amongst whom shall
be Earls, Barons, Knights of the Shire, Citizens and Burgesses, who there
shall ordain, agree upon and establish remedy by Law in all such Cases, for
ever after to endure; And those Laws shall be recited written and allowed in
full Parliament, and sealed with the great Seal, and delivered forth to all
places of Law and Justice from thence forward to be holden for Laws and in
public places, where it shall be thought expedient, they shall be proclaimed
and divulged, whereas all other common Laws, and chiefly Statute Laws
throughout all the whole Kingdom, ought to be publicly proclaimed.

If so it happen that there was in such like case either Common Law or
Statute Law, so that the Kings Steward, and others of the Parliament may
understand and perceive, that such default and delays in Processes and
Judgment do happen by such Officers, when as the deceit and malice of such
Officer has openly and often before been apparent, then shall he be removed
out of his Office, and some other fit officer shall be put in his place; If
they shall presume against the Justices and such other Officers, as by excusing
themselves shall say, that they have not heretofore known themselves and the
Courts, whereby they are in such Cases to deliberate and take advisement; Then
shall they be admonished by the Steward, on the behalf of the King and the
Parliament, to study and search better the Common Law, that no such ignorance
or negligence be found in them in the like Cases afterward.

If they shall happen to offend in the like again; they then to be put out of
their offices and other discreeter and more diligent persons shall by the King
and his Counsel be assigned to their rooms.

Likewise it is the Stewards office, if the King have evil Counselors about
him, that advise him to do things, tending openly and publicly to his
dishonor, or to the dis-inheritance or public hurt and destruction of his
people.

Then the Steward of England, taking with him the Constable and other great
estates, and other of the Commonaltie shall send to such a Counselor,
forbidding him in such sort to lead and counsel the King, and of such his
evil Counsel shall make rehearsal, enjoining him to depart from the Kings
presence, and longer not to abide with him to his dishonor; and the public
hurt, as is aforesaid, which if he shall not do they shall send unto the King
to remove him from him, and to give no more ear unto his Counsel, for that
amongst the people he is esteemed to be an evil Counselor to the King
against his Subjects.

If hereupon the King do not put him away, again and often shall they send
as well unto the King as unto him.

If at the last neither the King nor such Counselor of his have regard unto
the Messages and requests made unto them, but shall refuse to do thereafter;
Then for the Weal Public it is lawful for the Steward, Constable of England,
noble men and other of the Commonaltie of the Realm with Banner in the Kings
name displayed to apprehend such Counselor, as common enemy to the King and
the Realm, to commit his body to Ward until the next parliament, and in the
mean time to seize upon all his goods, lands and possessions, till Judgment
be pronounced of him, by the advice of the whole Kingdom in Parliament, as it
happened unto Godwine Earl of Kent in the days of King Edward the Confessor,
next predecessor to William Duke of Normandy, Conqueror of England, who for
such ill Acts and Counsels of his, was deprived of his Earldome, Escheted to
the aforesaid King, notwithstanding at the Kings and Noblemens permission,
Godwine came again into England, and did after forfeit as before.

And as it happened likewise to Hubert of Burgh, Earl of Kent, in the time of
King Henry, that was Son of King John, who for his evil deeds and bad
Counsel was apprehended, and by the high Seneschall, and other Peers deprived
of his Earldome, by the allowance and consent of the whole Parliament.

And likewise did it befall unto Pierce of Gavestone, who in the days of King
Edward, the Son of King Henry for such his evil Acts and Counsels was
banished out of all the King of Englands Dominions, as well on this side, as
beyond the Seas, which Pierce of Gaveston afterward by the Kings means, and by
the favor and permission of the Nobility returned into England, and had of
the Kings gift the Earldome of Cornwall, yet was he after that for his evil
deeds and Counsels banished the Realm again by the Nobles and Commons, and
his aforesaid Earldome Escheated to the King, but returned afterward without
the Noblemens leave and consent, and did resort and associate himself unto the
King as before he had done, which when the High Steward, Constable, and others
of the Nobility understood, he was by them apprehended, and beheaded at
Blacklow in VVarwick-shire, as a public enemy to the King and to the Realm.

So have you as much as in the said old Book is to be seen touching the
Office of the High Steward of England,

After the death of any King or Queen absolute of this Land the high Steward of
England, by virtue of his Office sits judicially, and keeps his Court in
the Whitehall of the Kings Palace at Westminster, near unto the Kings
Chapel, and there receives the Bills and Petitions of all such of the
Nobility and others, as by reason of their tenure as, or otherwise claim to
do services at the new Kings Coronation, and to receive the Fees and
allowances therefore due and accustomed. As did John Duke of Lancaster, Earl
of Leicester, high Steward of England, etc. at the Coronation of King Richard
the second, and Tho. Pierce Earl of Worcester, who exercised the same Office
of the Coronation of King Henry the fourth as substitute and Deputy to Thomas
the Son of the said King Henry then being very young, unto whom his Father
had assigned that Office, being parcel of his own inheritance, who before he
had obtained the Crown, was not only Duke of Lancaster, as his Father John of
Gaunt had, but also was Earl of Darbey, Lincoln, Leicester, Hereford, and
Northampton, and by the Earldom of Leicester, inheritably also Lord high
Steward of England.

And since the time that the said Office has been extinct in the Crown by
the Descent of the same unto King Henry the fourth, as heir to Dame Blanch his
Mother, Daughter and Heir to Henry Duke of Lancaster, Earl of Leicester, and
high Staward of England: experience shows that upon the Arraignment and
Trial of any Peer of the Realm; that is to say, Duke, Marquess, Earl,
Viscount, or Baron, or any of their Wives or Widows upon Indictment of Treason
or Felony, the shows to grant the Office of the high Stewardship of England
(pro illa vice tantum) to some Peer of the Realm by Letters Patents, the
tenor whereof hereafter ensues, who instead of the Lord high Steward, that by
ancient Law has been holden for a competent and indifferent Judge between the
King and such Peers, ought and always has used to be Judge, and give sentence
of Acquicall or Condemnation upon the Peer arraigned.

The tenor of the Patent.
Regina etc. Praeclarissimo Consanguineo and Consiliario suo A.B. etc. saltem
sciatis quod cum G. D. Marchio E. indictat. existit, etc. ac pro eo quod
ossicium Seneschall. Angliae cujus praesentia pro administratione justitiae and
executionis ejusdem in hac part facienda requirit, ut accepimus jam vacat: de
strenuitate, fidelitate, provida circumspectione and industria vestris plurimum
confidentes, ordinavimus, and constituimus vos ex hac causa Seneschallum
Angliae, ad officium illud cum omnibus eidem officio in hac pante debitis sive
pertinend. hac vice gerendis, occupandis, and exercendis. Dantes and
concedentes vobis tenore praesentium plenam potestatem indictam entum
praedictum cum omnibus idem tangendis a praefat. justitia nostris recipiendis
and inspiciend, ac ad certos diem and locum quos ad hoc providerit^sipsum
Marchionem, eetc. coram vobis evocandum and ipsum superinde audiendum,
examinandum and respondere compellendum ac sine debito terminandum, Nec non tot
and tales Dominos Proceres, and Magnetes hujus regni nostri Angliae; ejusdem
Marchionem, etc. and alios pares per quos rei veritas in hac part melius scire
poterit, ad diem and locum praedictum ex causa praedict. coram vobis comparere
astringerdum, etc.

Thereupon the Lord High Steward directs forth a precept to the Justices
before whom the Indictment is taken, willing them to certify the same
Indictment at a day and place by him assigned.

And does likewise direct another precept to one of the Sergeants at Arms, for
the Summonition of the Peers against the day of trial in these words.

A.B. comes, etc. I. N. servienti Do nini Regis ad Arma salutemetibi praecipio
quod summon. tot and tales Dominos, Proceres, and Magnetes, hujus regnt Angliae
praedict. C. D. Marchionis: E. etc. and aliorum pares, per quos rei veritas
melius scire poterit, quod ipsi personaliter compareant coram me apud Wostmon.
1 die Junii, etc. ad faciend. ea quae ex part Domini^ Regis, tunc thidem in
praemissis injungent, etc.

The like precept does he also send to the Lievenant of the Tower of London,
for bringing forth the Peer, being prisoner to his trial and judgment.

It appears that at the Common Law, before the twentieth year of King Henry
the Third, a Subjects having title to lands, which are in the Kings possession,
might have a Writ to the Sheriff of the County, where the Land does lie
against the King after this manner.

Praecipe H. Regi Angliae quod reddat S. L. centum acras ter. in D. etc.

But whether the Writ should be a Ward under the Test of the High Steward or
Constable of England, that is to be doubted of.

Touching the Office of the Lord Steward of the Queens House.
OF the Lord Steward his Office of the Queens House, being thoroughly well known
to the chief Officers of the Household, It seems needless to set down any
notes, or observations, at all by reason of the daily and continual execution
thereof still in practice, howbeit because there is left unto us from elder age,
a form thereof, is greatly to be regarded in these our days, this place
serves fitly for the exemplification of the same, so in such sort as it is set
down in an old Book of Record, called Domus Regis Angliae, preserved in the
Countinghouse of the Household, wherein the whole State of the Kings House is
orderly described. And this Office amongst the rest after this manner ensuing.

The Steward of the Kings Household.
THe Steward of the Kings Household receives his charge of the Kings high and
proper person, and the Household staff in those words following. Seneschall
venetz le Baston de nostre Maison, By which forthwith he is also Steward of the
Marshalsey, that is the Court of Household, of which he is a Judge of Life and
Limb; and except those cases, the Treasurer, Comptroller, Cofferer, two Clerks
of the Green-cloth, and the chief Clerk of Controllment, for any matters else
done within the Household, or appertaining thereto, they fit with him at the
Board of Doom, that is at the Green-cloth in the Compting house, as Recorders
and Witnesses of the Truth.

The state of all this excellent Household is wholly committed to be ruled and
guided by his discretion, and all his commandments in Court to be obeyed and
observed.

Also within the Household except the Kings Chamber, always to be observed,
covered out of the Kings presence, what great estate else that be present, as
for a cup, a cupboard, and dishes, but none assay.

Also while he is present in Court, there ought no new commandment, charges of
Officers, or any other person be made without commandment first of his person,
for the Offices more sure discharge.

Also in the Household rules and judgments he represents the Kings estate,
his staff is taken as for a Commission,

Also he may in household of his power, adnull any custom not meddled with
worship and profit; or change it, and erect a new, such as shall seem to his
wisdom by advise taken at Compting board, for the better, and to the King and
his Household of more honor and profit.

And in that he is head Officer, he gives example to all others to be of
Governance with inordinate rule to be contented with moderate Costages within
the Court in Liveries and Services taking Dinners and Suppers in the Hall and
in his Chamber, or in any other Office as often as it pleases him to search
and see the good said rules, and the directions in them.

He has daily in the Hall eating one Chaplain two Esquires four Yeomen, and
in his Chamber daily for his breakfasts, and his Chamberlains meat at Supper
and Livery for all night, eight Loaves, four Messes of great Meat, two rewards
of Roast, two Pitchers of Wine, six Gallons of Ale from Hollandtide till
Easter, one Torch to attend upon himself, one Tortays to fetch his Livery by
three Perches of Wax, six Candles of Wax, eight Candles per 5. viij Tallow,
four Faggots, Litter and Rushes all the year, of the Sergeant Usher of the
Hall and Chamber, and after Winter season, four Shyddes, two Faggots, and when
him likes to have more largely in any thing then his Chamberlain that does
fetch it, or receive it, must record thereof by Tail or Bill into the Compting
house.

Also the Steward takes of the Compting house for his Fee at Easter and
Michaelmasse, twenty Marks, and for his Robes for Winter and Summer at the
Feasts of Christmas and Whitsontide sixteen Marks, and for his Napery at the
four Feasts of the year by even portions, three pieces of Linen Cloth in the
great Spicery, or in money therefore of the Compting house, in all 13 l. 1 s. 4
d.

And he has one Yeoman of his Chamber still abiding, whilst himself is out of
Court to keep his Staff, taking for his Livery daily one cast of bread, two
messes of great Meat for noon and night, one Gallon of Ale.

The Steward and Treasurer of this honorable Household, represent within it the
State of an Earl.

Item, The Steward or Treasurer, or one of them is bound to be at the Compting
house, at the awayt of the daily Accounts of Household; and by the writing of
Noble King Edward the Thirds Statutes. In case it pass for lack of them three
days unaccompted, that then they two shall acquit the Costages of the Kings
Household for one day of their own proper costs.

The Steward and Treasurer make a Warrant yearly at Michaelmas to the chief
Butler of England, assigning him for how much Wine, and in what places of the
Kings House, he shall lodge the same for the year following. For the daily
expense of his Household, which has and must with good oversight be sure of
three hundred Tuns, And for other things look the Statute of noble Edward, Anno
15. Edw. 3. cap. 21.

Thus much out of the Book called Domus Regis Angliae. Sir William Stamford the
Judge in his Book of the Pleas of the Crown under the title of qui Iudgera
treason, etc. who shall judge of Treason and Felony, by reason of their Offices
without Commission, and who not, mentions the Statute made, Anno 33.44. 8.
cap. 12. Whereby it is ordained that the great Master or Lord Steward of the
Kings House only, and in his absence, The Treasurer and Controller of the
Household with the Steward of the Marshalsey, or two of them, whereof the
Steward of the Marshalsey to be one, may without Commission hear and determine
of Treasons, of misprision of Treasons, of Murders, Manslaughters, and
Bloudsheds perpetrated within the Kings House; for these, says he, are great
and chief personages in whom the King reposeth such trust, that he has
ordained them especially, for the safety and good Government of his Realm and
Household.

More hereof is to be read in the Volumes of the Statutes, 25 of Edw. 3. cap.
21, 3 H. 7. cap. 14.33. H. 8. cap. 12. Wherein the preheminences of the Lord
Steward of the Kings Household are rehearsed, needless therefore in this place
to be recited.

FINIS.

